THE Rights, Powers, and Privileges, OF AN English Convocation, STATED and
VINDICATED.

IN ANSWER TO A Late Book of Dr. Wake's, Entitled, The Authority of Christian
Princes over their Ecclesiastical Synods asserted, etc. AND TO Several Other
PIECES.

And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he
shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the House of my Friends.

Zech. XIII. 6. Ea Tempestate facies Ecclesiae foeda and admodum turpis erat:
non enim, sicut prius, ab Externis, sed a Propriis vastabatur.

Ruffin. Eccles. Hist. L. 1. c. 21. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Bennet at the
Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

THE PREFACE.
BEtween three and four Years ago came out A Letter to a Convocation-Man,
concerning the Rights, Powers, and Privileges of that Body; which, together
with the Replys that were made to it by Dr. Wake, and some Other Writers, led
the Author of these Papers to consider the Point in Debate with a Particular
Care and Application. He confesses he came to Dr. W's Book, with expectations
of finding there whatever was necessary to set this matter in a clear Light;
The Bulk of the Work, the Appearance of Learning it carried, and the Great
Authority by which it endeavored to recommend it self, All seemed to promise
Exactness. But upon perusing it, to his Surprise, he found, that it was a
Shallow, Empty performance; written, without any Knowledge of our Constitution,
any Skill in the Particular subject of Debate; upon such Principles as are
destructive of all our Civil, as well as Ecclesiastical Libertys; and with such
Aspersions on the Clergy, both Dead, and Living, as were no less injurious to
the Body than his Doctrine.

The Love I bear to Truth, to my Church, and Country, soon gave me Resolution
of stating this matter anew, and of taking off the slight Colors under which
Dr. W. had disguised it: if at least, I were not prevented by some Abler Hand,
particularly by the Author of that Letter which first gave rise to this Debate;
and who, it was expected, would have appeared once more upon it, and freed what
he had advanced from all Exceptions. This, and some other Accidents were the
Cause that the following Papers, though prepared early, saw the Light no
sooner; and have indeed been deferred so long, till it is now grown absolutely
necessary to say something in Defense of the Churches Rights, or to sit down
contentedly under the Loss of them. For by this time Dr. W's Book, Weak as it
is, has yet, by not being opposed, gotten strength, and made its way into the
good Opinion of many who wish not ill to the Order. A Learned Adversary indeed
has taken him to Task upon the General Principles of Church Discipline and
Government: but in the Domestic Part of the Dispute, which relates to our Own
Laws and Usages, nothing has been said. For which reason, even from well
meaning Men, we every day hear this Language, If the Dr. has indeed
misrepresented the Constitution, why does not some body set it right again? If*
he has given up the Libertys and Privileges of his Church, how comes the Body
to be silent? They understand their Own Rights sure, and will not suffer
themselves to be writ out of them: we must believe therefore, that they have 'em
not, if no body thinks fit to claim them. This indeed is the Natural
Construction, which People must, and do make of our silence; and his Principles
therefore must either quickly be disproved, or prevail. Nay upon these
Principles, a suitable Practice may soon establish it self; and as Some New
Customs first made way for his Doctrine, so the Doctrine it self may make way
for Others; which when once taken up, will be difficultly laid down: for it is
much easier to preserve a Constitution, than to retreive it.

Already, since he wrote, it has so happened, that, upon the Calling of a New
Parliament, the Writ for the Province of York has been dropped; through
Forgetfulness, no doubt: however, for the same reason, it may so happen again,
when another Parliament is called, that the Writ for the Province of Canterbury
shall be forgotten too. And if it should withal be forgotten to be Claimed, as
well as Issued, We should then be in the same case with our Neighbors of the
Church of Ireland; among whom, as I am informed, Convocation-Writs are now
grown out of Date; two New Parliaments having been successively summoned,
without them.

And by the same Degrees that the Convocations of the Established Church have
declined in both these Countries, those of our Brethren of the Separation have
begun to revive. The Summer after Dr. W's Book came out, a General Meeting of
the Dissenting Ministers was appointed here in London, as appears by the Date
of the Newbury-Letter, printed in the Appendix Numb. 11.
: and it is not long ago, since the Irish Nonconformists met publicly at
Dublin, and printed a Sermon preached at the Opening of their Synod; though I
think the Established Clergy there have never been Synodically convened, since
the Revolution. And how affairs stand in Scotland, with relation to these
matters, the Reader, if he desires Information, may in the 25th. Page of the
following Papers, find it.

Nor is it to be forgotten, that since this New Doctrine came abroad, a New
Definition of Convocations has obtained; which we are now told, are only
Occasional Assemblys, for such Purposes as the King shall direct Nicolson Hist.
Lib. Vol. 3. p. 200.
. And even the New State of England- Man has upon it varied his Phrase: for his
last Edition says, that they are to meet now and then, in Time of Parliament
Meige. N. S. of E. part. 3d. p. 64.
. It may seem not Material to observe any thing that falls from such a Pen: but
it shows how Common Opinion runs, as much as if a Wiser Author had said it.

It was High time therefore to assert a Right, which was so far endangered. And
this, unequal as I may be to the Task, yet rather than it should remain undone,
I have resolved to do: not led so much by Inclination to studys of this kind,
as pushed on by an Hearty concern for the Interests of Religion, and of my
Order (as far as the Latter of these is subservient to the Former), and by an
Eager Desire of doing somewhat toward supporting the Good Old Constitution I
live under: which Dr. W. has, both in Church, and State, done his best to
undermine. His Blow indeed is directly levelled at the Rights and Libertys of
the Church only; but it glances often on those of the State, and wounds them
sore, as far as His Arm was capable of putting strength into it: The Argument
of his Book throughout turns upon such Maxims and Grounds, as equally affect
Both of them. And because I am not willing to say any thing against him without
good Proof, I shall here give the Reader a short Taste of his Principles, to
prepare him for the larger Entertainment that follows.

P. 84. He proposes this Question, Whether the Prince should be allowed a Power
to alter, or improve, what a Synod has defined, to add to, or take from it? --
and thus he resolves it -- Sure I am, that this Princes have done; and so I
think they have Authority to do. For since the Legislative Power is lodged in
their hands, so that they may make what Laws or Constitutions they think fit
for the Church, as well as the State: since a Synod in matters relating to
Discipline is but a kind of Council to them, in Ecclesiastical Affairs; whose
Advice having taken, they may still act as they think fit: seeing, lastly, a
Canon, drawn up by a Synod, is but as it were Matter prepared for the Royal
Stamp; the last forming of which, as well as enforcing whereof must be left to
the Princes Judgment: I cannot see why the Supreme Magistrate, who confessedly
has a Power to confirm, or reject their Decrees, may not also make such other
Use of them as he pleases; and correct, improve, or otherwise alter their
Resolutions, according to his Own Liking, before he gives his Authoty to them
P. 85.
. He is speaking here, I confess, of the Power of the Prince, at large, without
pointing his words particularly on England: but since he asserts this Power to
every Prince, and does not except Ours, it is manifest he means him as much as
if he had particularly mentioned him. And this he himself is not shy of owning:
for before the End of this Chapter, he in plain terms tells us, that by Our Own
Constitution, the King of England has all that Power over Our Convocation, that
ever any Christian Prince had over his Synods P. 98.
. And goes on afterward P. 136.
to show, that H. the VIII. did this very thing in 1536; correcting, and
amending with his Own Hand, the Articles of Religion then drawn up, before they
were published. He does not indeed expressly Justify this Act of H. the VIII;
but which is all one, he mentions it, without a word to show that he
disapproved it.

I will be bold to say, that were this single Doctrine true, the Late King
might have gone a great way toward subverting our Religion, without breaking in
upon the Constitution, or doing any thing Illegal. He might have assembled the
Clergy, and commanded their Judgment upon such and such Points, and then
altered their Resolutions to his Own Liking; and so have set up Rank Popery
under the Countenance of a Protestant Convocation. Especially if he had called
this other Principle of Dr. W's into his Aid -- Some of our Princes (he says)
have not only prescribed to our Convocations what they should go about, but
have actually drawn up before hand what they thought Convenient to have
established; and have required them to approve of it, without submitting it to
their Judgments, whether they approved of it or not [P. 110.]
. Which Fact also he gives us as a Right, without insinuating the least Dislike
of it. And a very Convenient Right it is for Princes, that meditate New Schemes
of Church Government. Twelve Years ago, enforced by the Pen of a Parker, or a
Cartwright, it might have done great Service: it would have helped on all the
Pious Designs then upon the Anvil; and if the Asserter of it had not been a
Bishop, to be sure it would have made him one. Can such Doctrines ever be
Serviceable (I say not Grateful) to This Government, which would have ruined
our Established Religion, under the Former?

But his Conclusions are not worse than his way of coming at them; which is, in
this, and in every case, first by showing what has been practiced by the
Emperors, and other Absolute Princes, and by asserting the same Power to belong
to Our King, as a King; not by virtue of the particular Laws and Usages of this
Realm, but by the Right of Sovereignty in general See Appeal p. 111.112.
, upon which he expressly owns himself to found the Authority of our Princes in
Matters Ecclesiastical See Appeal p. 111.112.
; and says therefore (as we have heard) that they have the same Power over Our
Convocations that ever any Christian Prince had over his Synods: And
accordingly makes it the whole Business of his second Chapter (that is, of a
Fourth part of his Book) to set out the Powers exercised by Absolute Princes,
and particularly by the Roman Emperors, over their Synods, in order to warrant
the Use of like Powers here at home. I know not how this Doctrine may relish
now: but in the 7th. Mr. Nicholson ( See Hist. Libr. part 3. p. 177.) according
to his Exactness in Dates, places this 3io Iacobi, whereas the Book it self was
not set out till two Years afterward; as, if he had seen any Edition of it, he
might from the Date of the Preface have known. But he unluckily met with a
false Print to this purpose, in the Posthumous part of Spelman 's Glossary (in
Voce, Tenura) and he is always an Implicit Transcriber.
Year of King James the I. (as high as Prerogative then ran) it did not, I am
sure, go down well with the Parliament: for then Dr. Cowel's Interpreter was
censured by the Two Houses, as asserting several Points to the overthrow and
destruction of Parliaments, and of the Fundamental Laws and Government of the
Kingdom. And One of the Articles charged upon him to this purpose by the
Commons, in their Complaint to the Lords, was (as Mr. Petyt Miscell. Parl. p.
66.
says out of the Journal) this that follows.

4thly, The Doctor draws his Arguments from the Imperial Laws of the Roman
Emperors, an argument which may be urged with as great reason, and with as
great Authority for the reduction of the State of the Clergy of England to the
Polity and Laws in the Time of those Emperors; as also to make the Laws and
Customs of Rome, and Constantinople to be binding and obligatory to the Citys
of London and York.

The issue of which Complaint was, that the Author, for these his Outlandish
Politics, was taken into Custody, and his Book condemned to the Flames: Nor
could the Dedication of it to his then Grace of Canterbury save it; who did not
think himself concerned to countenance whatever Doctrine any Indiscreet Writer
should take the Liberty to ascribe to him.

He that thinks a Prince Absolute in Spirituals, thinks him, no doubt, as
Absolute in Temporals, and will, when a Proper time shall come, not stick to
say so. Dr. W. has given some significant Hints that way in the words already
produced from him: for what else can he mean by the Legislative Powers being
lodged in the Princes hands, so that he may make what Laws he pleases, for the
Church as well as the State; if we consider him to speak, as he does, of the
Prince, exclusively to the Three Estates of the Realm? And when he adds
therefore, a few Lines afterward, that a Canon is only matter prepared for the
Royal Stamp, we are not at a loss to know, what further he aims at: This is
doctrine, that at a Convenient Season, will serve as well for Acts of
Parliament, as Canons. Let us hear some more of it.

One great Position of Dr. W. is, that the Convocation cannot move a step, but
as they are directed by the King, or debate of any thing but just what he
impowers them to consider. And thus far he is safe in his Assertion, for
un^itting Assemblys may be insulted at pleasure. But when he tells us further,
that the Parliament it self is as much directed by the King in the main part of
their Debates as the Convocation is P. 289.
, the Comparison begins to be saucy, and may prove Dangerous. He would seem to
qualify it indeed by saying, that the Parliament are as much, though not as
necessarily directed: but this does not much soften the Expression; for still
it leaves the Parliament as much (though not as necessarily) Slaves in the
Point of Freedom of Debate, as Convocations are said to be; and is, I dare say,
such an Instance of Free Speech as was never yet practiced toward a Parliament.

Another of his Maxims is, that whenever a Synod meets, the King may give
Direction for the Choice of the Persons that are to compose it, that so he may
be satisfied, that they are such whose Piety and Temper has fitted them to
serve the Church, and in whose Prudence and Conduct he himself may safely
confide P. 42.
. And then, by virtue of his General Rule, [that gives to Our Princes all that
Power which ever any Christian Prince had over their Synods] he brings it home
to us, and says, that the Choice of the Persons composing our Convocation is
thus determined by the King's Writ P. 103.
: which implys, that his Writ might determine the Choice otherwise, that he
might order more, or fewer to be sent up; or New ones to be returned in the
Room of those whose Temper he shall not approve of, and whose Prudence and
Conduct he cannot safely confide in. And if he can deal thus with our
Convocation-Writs and Members; what hinders but he that may deal thus also with
those of Parliament? for his Writs alike determine the Choice, as to Both these
Meetings; and then there is an End of our Constitution, whenever a Prince arises
that has any Ill Designs upon it.

The laying aside of Convocations is thus justified by Dr. W. in diverse parts
of his Book Pp. 107.227, 250. etc.
, that the Great and almost Only Use that has been made of them, was to raise
Money; and that Use therefore being now out of Doors, there is no need of
regularly assembling them. Let us apply this to Parliaments, and suppose, that
the King's Revenue was so settled, and the Public Debts so far discharged, that
there was no occasion for them to sit for the giving of Money; would there be
no occasion therefore for their sitting at all, in order to assist the Crown
with their Counsels, or to redress Grievances? This is unavoidably the
Consequence of Dr. Wake's way of arguing; and he seems not to be ashamed of it:
for p. 207. he thus accounts for the Rise and Birth of Parliaments, as now
settled: They were to meet, he says, when required, and that as often as the
Prince wanted Money, or expected a Supply from them. Can a Man talk at this
rate, and pretend to be an Englishman? Or can true Englishmen stand by, and
hear him talk thus, without resenting the Indignity?

The Clergy therefore are not the only Persons concerned in this Dispute, the
Laiety too have their share in it. For besides that, if Slavery be once
established in the Church, it will quickly spread it self into the State, Dr.
Wake's Principles, we see, are such as have an Immediate Tendency toward
subverting Liberty in General; and would, if pursued through their just
Consequences, give the Prerogative as high an Ascendant over Parliaments, as
Convocations. And when such things are said therefore, not the Men of the
Church only, but every Freeborn subject of England ought to take the Alarm; for
their Birthright is endangered.

The very best Construction that has been put upon Dr. W's Attempt by Candid
Readers is, that it was an Endeavor to advance the Prerogative of the Prince in
Church Matters as high, and to depress the Interest of the Subject Spiritual as
low as ever he could, with any Color of Truth. But surely this it self is no
very creditable account of it. Those Casuists that have taken pains to instruct
men, how near they may possibly come to a sin without actually sinning, have
not been reckoned the honestest part of their Profession. And those Divines,
who read Lessons to Princes, how to strain their Ecclesiastical Power to the
utmost without exceeding it, and oppress their Clergy legally, are not surely
the best Men of their Order. They are Church- Empsons, and Dudleys; and usually
find the fate of such Wretched Instruments, to be detested by the One side, and
at last abandoned by the Other.

Were all that Dr. W. says strictly true and justifiable, yet whether the
laboring the point so heartily as he does, and showing himself so willing to
prove the Church to have no Rights and Privileges, be a very Decent Part in a
Clergyman, I leave his Friends to consider. The World, I fear, is so ill
natured as to believe that seldom any Man is over busy in lessening the Public
Interests of that Body to which he belongs, who does not hope to find his
Private Account in it. But when all a Man advances is not only ill designed,
but illgrounded, and his Principles are as False as they are Scandalous (as I
have evidently proved his to be) there are no Names, and Censures too bad to be
bestowed on such Writers, and their Writings.

Will it be said, in his Excuse, that he wrote his Book in the Dark, without a
Competent Skill in the subject of it? and that his Mistakes therefore are the
Effects of Pure Ignorance? allowing it; how came he then to write at all in a
Matter that he was not (and could not but know, that he was not) Master of? How
came he to express himself so peremptorily in such Tender Points, wherein the
Great Privileges of his Church, and the Chief Interests of his Order are
concerned? Was there less of Wisdom, or Honesty in endeavoring to write down
these, without being sure that he had good grounds for it?

In truth, though the best thing that can be said for Dr. W. is, that he wrote
at this rate, because he knew no better; yet I fear, that even this it self
cannot be justly pleaded. For as little as he knows of these matters, he seems
to have known yet more than he was willing to own; and enough to have kept him
from engaging on that side of the Question he has done, if some very Powerful
Motive had not come in to determine him. Those little shifting Equivocal Forms
of Speech he is so full of, th^se savings and softnings he throws in every
where, show, that the Thistles he was mumbling did not pass easily; and that he
had not only no Assurance that he was in the Right, but a Shrewd Guess that he
was in the Wrong; and laid in matter therefore for Evasion against he should
have need of it. So that whenever he thinks fit to make a Reply, I question not
but this will be one main part of it, That He, Good Man, is much misunderstood,
and his Opinions ill represented; which are, at the bottom, and taken together,
very Innocent and Blameless: since whatever he has said that may sound harsh,
in any one part of his Book, he has unsaid again, explained, and qualified in
another. I will not deny him to have, in several Instances, a Right to this
Plea, such an one as it is: But He who makes use of it does, in effect, own,
that he had taken upon himself the hard Task of maintaining a Point, which yet
he saw was not defensible; and that his Conscience star'd him in the Face,
every step that he took: nevertheless, being in, he was resolved to go through
with it. And if this Excuse will be of any service to him, by my Consent he
shall be allowed it.

Could we excuse his III Principles, yet what shall we say to those Injurious
Reflections that accompany them? Those Slights, and Reproaches, he so Liberally
casts on his Order, when it has the Ill Luck to come in his way? Many Actions
of the Old Popish Clergy ly open enough in Conscience to censure: but he is
sure always to give the Worst and most Invidious turns to them. He never
distinguishes between the Men, and their Popery; but censures them in the
gross, and in such a Manner sometimes as to leave the Reader in doubt, whether
the Function it self were not in fault.

The Clergy of his Own Time are dealt with yet worse by him. That part of them,
which desire a Convocation (that is, by his Leave, the far Greater part of
them) are so represented by him, as if they were Irregular in their Lives,
Violent in their Tempers, and Factious in their Principles That Little, Noysy,
Turbulent Party, that now set themselves up as Judges amongst us Ap. p. 119.

Some Hot Men, for ought she knows her Enemies. Ib. p. 119.

What shall we say of the Conversation and Examples of some of those who wait
at the Altar? -- Pride and Peevishness, Hatred and Evil Will, Divisions and
Discontents prevail among those who should teach and correct others: and
instead of improving a Spirit of Piety and Purity, etc. we mind little else but
our several Interests and Quarrels and Contentions with one another, etc.
Authority, etc. p. 333.

Some there are of those that wait at the Altar, much fitter to be cast out of
the Church, than to Officiate in it. Pref. p. 8. Men, notorious for their
Irregularitys, -- who have scandalously departed from the Rules of their Holy
Profession. Ibid.

By these means the Busy Tempers of some Forward Men may be restrained. -- But
they are such Men and such Tempers, that make these Restrictions necessary. And
their Unwillingness to submit to them, shows but the more clearly how fitting
it is that Princes should have all that Power, to prevent them from doing both
Themselves and the Church a Mischief. p. 43.

It is probable, had not the Prince had this Ty upon us, we should before this
time -- in all appearance have exposed both Our selves and the Church for a
Prey to the Common Enemy, p. 271.

I am fully persuaded, that nothing at this day preserves us from Ruin and
Desolation, but that we have not Power of our selves to do the Church a
Mischief. Ap. p. 211.

A new sort of Disciplinarians are risen up from within our selves, who seem to
comply with the Government of the Church much upon the same account that others
do with that of the State; not out of Conscience to their Duty, or any Love
they have for it: but because it is the Established Church, and they cannot
keep their Preferments without it. They hate our Constitution, and revile all
such as stand up in Good Earnest for it: but for all that, they resolve to hold
fast to it; and go on still to Subscribe and Rail. App. Ep. Ded.


: and the Government is, in the very last words of his Book, excited to take
Vengeance upon them, as Men embarked in a Separate Interest, and averse to all
the Methods of supporting it The only way to deal with with some Men is to
treat them as they Deserve; and to let them know, that those are unworthy of
the Protection of the Government, who are Embarked in an Interest different
from it, and Refuse to contribute to the Necessities of it. Authority, etc. p.
355.
. In a word, so Contumelious is his way of treating them, that had he not
informed us who he was in his Title Page, we should have guessed him rather to
have been of the Cabal against Priests and Priestcraft, than One of the Order.

And this he has done at a time, when Religion is struck at every day, through
the sides of its Ministers, and he could not but know that such Reflections,
from such a Pen, would be greedily entertained, and ill employed. Can a Man
pretend to Principles, and act at this rate? The very Swiss, that fight for
pay, will not march against their Own Country; but whenever it is attacked, go
home and defend it.

Must we believe that the Friends of Convocations have been represented under
the same Colors to his Majesty that they are to the Reader? as Enemies to his
Government, Hot, Immoral; considerable neither for their Merit, Interest, nor
Number? If so indeed, we have here an Easy account of the Distinguishing steps
that have of late Years been taken. But sure they who talk at this rate, do not
believe themselves. Hot, Busy men would not have sat still, and cool thus long
under the Want of what they so earnestly desired; would not have waited the
Good Pleasure of their Superiors, with so much submission and silence, in a
Point of such tender Concern to them; but have taken other kind of steps than
any that have been yet made use of toward obtaining it. Were a Convocation the
Desire of a small Despicable Party only, and not of the Generality of the
Clergy, how come such Assemblys to be laid aside, where a few Men, though never
so furious, would make no figure, nor be able to disturb measures?

And as to the Charge of Immorality, it runs high indeed; but it is to be hoped
that it is groundless. For were there so many Men of scandalous Lives among the
Clergy, sure the Fathers of the Church, who have the Inspection of their
Manners, would ere this time have made Public Examples of several of them. I
cannot think that their Lordships have been so far wanting in their Duty to God
and the Church, as not to have let the Laws loose upon such Offenders, if they
knew them. And till they do so, this Censure of Dr. Wakes must pass for a
Scandalous Reflection both on their Lordships and his Brethren.

But this is the Ordinary Cry of Designing Writers, who from hence raise to
themselves a Character of Impartiality, of a singular Integrity, and Courage.
Their Own Virtues also shine to advantage upon such a Comparison: and withal
they intimate by it, how fit they are to be advanced to a Post, wherein they
may correct such Enormitys. And when that happens, it will make some Amends, or
Excuse for their not effectually doing the Duty of their station, if to their
Complaints about the Lives of Churchmen they add others concerning the Church
it self, and say that even her Canons and Constitutions want reforming.

Dr. Wake seems to have hinted His Opinion in the case already, where he says,
that the Church of England has a Peculiar Veneration for the Discipline and
Doctrine of the Primitive Church, beyond most Churches in the World Pref. p. 4.
. Beyond most Churches! why, what Churches in the world have more, or so much?
where are they planted? what are their Names? Is it the Scotch, the French, or
the Dutch Church, he means? is it a Church, with Bishops, or without them? Let
him speak out, and tell us the Church that has ( a truer, or even) so true a
Regard for the Doctrine and Discipline of the Primitive Church, as the Church
of England has: and then we shall know, by what Model she is to be reformed,
and withal be let perhaps into the secret Reason of the Present Disuse of
Convocations. Grotius, though a Forreigner, would have taught him better
Language: Nullibi atque in Angl^ (says he) tantus honor piae defertur
Antiquitati Ep. 2.
. Should not an English Divine speak of our Constitution with at least as much
respect as a Dutch Layman?

The Liberty Dr. W. has taken in his Censures, is, considering his Present Rank
in the Church, a little too early; nor will the Pattern, he follows in it,
justify him. My Lord of Sarum indeed may freely have taxed the Vices of the
Clergy, even in Books where he was defending the Orders of the Church of
England, or the Truth of the Christian Religion: His High Station is his
Warrant for whatever he has done of this kind lately, and a Bar to all manner
of Reply. And his Former Reprehensions, should they have been somewhat too
Free, are capable of this Excuse; that being a Stranger, he might not then have
thoroughly acquainted himself with the state of our Church, or the Characters of
its Members: And if he saw faults in them, it was not to be expected that he
should conceal them with the same Tenderness, as if he had had his Birth and
Breeding amongst them. But Dr. Wake is neither Above those he reproves, nor has
drawn a different Air from them; He was Baptized and Educated in Our Communion,
and received his first Impressions of Men and Things in an University, a Place
that has not been thought apt to instill into its Members a Disesteem of their
Holy Mother, or a love of blackening and betraying their Brethren. Methinks
Men, who talk so much of Moderation and Temper, would do well to show it, in
allowing a Common share of those Good Qualitys to some of their Neighbors, who
can be contented well enough without Titles; but are however very loath to be
stripped of their Good Names. The Comfort of such Good Men, whom his General and
Undistinguishing Censures have thus aspersed, must be, to say to themselves, as
St. Cyprian once did; Neque nobis Ignominia est pati a fratribus quae passus
est Christus, nec illis Gloria est facere quae fecerit Judas.

It was the Abhorrence I had of this Unworthy Treatment which the Reputation
and Rights of the Order have found from Dr. W. and of the Slavish Tendency of
his Principles, in respect both to Church and State, that gave me Resolutions
of exposing the Weakness and Insincerity of his Attempt, and of doing Right to
Truth, and an Injured Constitution.

He has modestly wished this Argument a Better Hand, and a Better Head Pref. p.
VI.
than his Own. How far in these respects I am fitted for the Service, I cannot
say: However One Quality there is, unmention'd by Him, but no less requisite
than either of these; a Better Heart, I mean; and that, I am sure, I have
brought along with me to the Work: and should there be further Occasion for it,
I trust, that it will not fail me. The Dr. I do not doubt (considering on which
side he wrote) thought himself as secure in his Defyance as a Crown-Champion at
a Coronation; and that No body would have been hardy enough to take up the
Gaunt let he threw down. Something of this kind seems to have been in his
Thoughts, when he said, that the Gentleman he attacks, had written in such a
manner, as would not, he supposed, at all encourage any one to stand up in
defense of him Ib. p. 1.
. But in this, as well as in a Thousand Other things, he finds his Mistake.
There are, he sees, Those, who will not desert Truth when it grows out of
fashion; and have Courage enough to espouse a Good Cause; though Great Names,
and Great Interests are made use of to discountenance it. Not that the Author
of these Papers is concerned any ways to vindicate the Manner of that
Gentleman's Writing, whom the Doctor engages; it is his Argument only that he
undertakes to defend: in which he thinks him to have dealt both Skilfully and
Honestly, professes himself freely to be of his Opinion, has reasserted it here
in this Book, and will, by the Divine Assistance, go on to maintain it.

He matters not what Dirt may be thrown at him on this account; he expects to
traduced by little Officious Pens (and by Dr. Wake's, the least of them) as
Disaffected, and Undutyful. But as he is satisfied of the Uprightness of his
Intentions, and knows how full his Heart is of Duty and Respect toward Those,
whose Characters ought always to be, and shall ever be Sacred with him; so he
thinks he has taken a very proper way of expressing it in what follows; where,
it seems to him, that he pleads for his Majesty's Honor, and my Lord
Archbishop's Interest more effectually than they can pretend to do who differ
from him. It is certainly for the Honor of the Crown to be attended always with
the Great Council-Spiritual of the Realm, as well as Temporal; and my Lords
Grace of Canterbury is never so Considerable, as when he is at the Head of the
Clergy of his Province. The Author is persuaded that he cannot make a more
welcome Present to good Governors, either in Church or State, than by
affording them a True Account of the Wants and Rights of such as are entrusted
to their Care; and an Opportunity, by that means, of exerting their Power to
the Good Ends for which it was designed. And They who shall represent him as
Disaffected, on this account, do not sure consider what a kind of Compliment
they make to Those for whose Interests they pretend to be so warmly concerned.

Disaffection to the Government, as the Charge is commonly managed, is a Word
only, made use of by those that are in favor to keep others out; it is a
Reproach taken up on purpose to justify premeditated Designs of oppressing Men:
For so the Soldier said, that the Countryman whistled Treason, when he had
resolved to plunder him.

For my part, I am not shy of Owning to Dr. Wake my naked Thoughts on this
Head; and he may make what Use he thinks fit of them. If then, to be a True
Lover of England, its Monarchy, and Episcopacy; if, to have the Utmost Esteem
for the Heroic Qualitys and Matchless Merits of our Prince, and to think no
Instance of Respect and Duty that Subjects can pay him, too great, while they
take care to preserve their Own Rights and Privileges; if to prefer the True
Interests of the Protestant Religion, and the Preservation of our Civil
Libertys, to all other Considerations, and for these (among other) Ends to pray
heartily for the Continuance of our Present Government, both in Church and
State; if these be Instances and Marks of Disaffection, then the Author of
these Papers must own himself disaffected, and not otherwise.

No, the Imputation is more justly to be laid at Their Door, who are for such
New Methods and Practices, as naturally tend to alienate the Hearts and
Affections of Subjects, and make Governments uneasy; who blast great Numbers of
Good Men with Ill Names, and endeavor to make them (what they are not)
disaffected, by so representing, and using them, as if they were: And at the
same time that they would have others thought Unwilling to serve the Crown,
take care effectually to disable themselves from serving it, by forfeiting all
the Credit and Interest they have among their Brethren.

For what can the Clergy think of such Men as bend all their Wit and Skill to
dress up Schemes for suppressing their Parliamentary Assemblys? and even their
Summons? for rendering their Body, as such, Useless to the State, and by
consequence Contemptible? in a word, for introducing the Portuguese Model of
Church Government; by which, a late Author tells us Account of the Court of
Portugal p. 22.
, the attendance of the Lower Orders is excused, and their Bishops, with the
Assistance of the Pope, act for them, and conclude them? Can any Member of the
Church, that has his Eyes open, think such Men Friends to it? or so treat them,
and speak of them, as if they were?

How is it to be expected that this Management should work on the Inferior
Clergy? What else can it produce in them but Distrusts, Uneasinesses,
Complaints, and Endeavors of Righting themselves as they are able? The
Projectors of such Schemes may fancy them proper Methods of laying Men's
Passions asleep, but will in the End find, that they are the sure Ways of
raising them. Nothing will by this Means be Effectually laid asleep, but the
Churches Parliamentary Meetings; and it is well if the Dose given them be not
so strong, as to make them sleep their Last.

Does it at all soften the severity of this Usage, to tell the Clergy, That it
is really for their true Interest and Service, if they would but understand it?
That they are a Number of Men, too Warm, Indiscreet, and Unpracticed in
Business, to be sa^ely trusted together? and were they indulged the Liberty
they claim, would soon ruin themselves by the use of it? These are Dr. W's
Thoughts upon the matter; and are they not decent ones? This is not only
oppressing, but insulting Men; the Reason given for the Usage is more provoking
than the Usage it self.

If, under a Sense of these Injurys, I have not so tempered my Pen every where,
but that an Hard Word may now and then have escaped me, I need no Excuse for
it. Dr. Wake's way of Dealing would, I am sure, have justified much rougher
Returns than any I have made him. But what ever of this kind the Reader meets
with, he may assure himself that it sprung not from any the least mixture of
Private Prejudice, or Resentment. For I have no Quarrel with Dr. Wake but on a
Public Account. On the contrary, the Good Services he did against Popery
inclined me always to wish well to him, and to esteem him: Or, had I wished him
ill, yet I would never have taken this way of expressing it: for Petavius
Petavius Croio responsurum se negat, ideo quod novit Annua augeri semper
Ministris contra quos scribitur. Grot. Epist, 1742.
has taught me long ago, that to write against some Men, is the Way only to
have their Pensions doubled. And the Experience of later Times than his has
showed, that it is possible to write a Man out of Reputation, into Preferment.

Much less can I be suppected to have engaged in this Design, out of Interest.
The way to That, is not, by appearing in behalf of Councils; which (as Johannes
Major Johannes Major (c. XVIII. Comment. in Evang. Matthew. Versus finem) ait --
Nemini mirum videri debere quod Plures Papam esse supra Concilium, quam contra
Concilium supra Papam esse doceant; cum Papa det Dignitates and Beneficia
Ecclesiastica, Concilium vero det nihil -- Richer. de Conciliis.
well observed) meet but seldom, and have no Dignitys to dispose of.

No, it is neither from these, nor any such Low Inducements as these, that I
have entered on this Work: but from a Desire only of Perpetuating to the Church
the Use of her Parliamentary Assemblies, and of that Free Debate, which is
inseparable from such Assemblys: Both which Rights were in great Danger of
being lost by Popular Misapprehensions, and a Discontinuance.

In the management of this Argument I have chiefly had an Eye to what Dr. Wake
has advanced; without neglecting however what has been offered on the same side
from Other Pens, particularly by the Author of the Letter to a Member of
Parliament: One, who, to do him right, saw where the stress of the Dispute lay,
and endeavored here and there to write up to it, though, for want of fit
Materials, he was not able. He has however in a Page or two of his Pamphlet
said more for the Cause, than Doctor Wake has done throughout his Mighty
Performance; which is really nothing more than a Series of Long, Flat,
Impertinent Accounts, attended with suitable Reflections; but without One wise
Word spoken, or True stroke struck in behalf of his point, from the beginning
of the Book to the End of it. And were it not therefore on some Other Accounts,
besides the mere Merit of the Work, it would have deserved no Answer but what
the Friar in one of our Historys gave, in a Certain Contest with his Prior. --
Et Frater Solomon de Ripple ad Monitiones dicti Prioris, respondit, sic
dicendo, And Old English word for Tri^^es.
Trufeles! Trufeles! Trufeles! Thorn. c. 2064.
If Doctor Wake then has (as he says) received great Satisfaction from his
Researches Pre^. p. 3
, he must needs be (what I had not thought him) very Easy to be satisfied: for
I do not find, that his Researches have operated thus strongly on any body
besides. Some Readers indeed have acquiesc'd in them, till they were better
informed; and for want of that Information, have at length been inclined to
think favorably of them: But Who they are, so near to Doctor Wake in their
Make of Mind, as to be completely, or at all satisfied with them, I am yet to
learn. And even as to him himself, whatever he may pretend, I dare say, a good
part of his satisfaction is still to come.

There is a Third Gentleman Mr. Nich^lson.
, who in a late Book of his has taken upon him to be a kind of Umpire in this
Controversy. By what secret Motive he was invited to Undertake this Office, he
best knows; sure I am that it was not out of any Peculiar Skill or Ability he
had to discharge it. Since he has gone out of his way to mix in a dispute that
did not belong to him, he must excuse me if I have not gone out of mine, to
avoid seeing his Mistakes; which I have taken notice of no otherwise than as
the Course of my Reflections, and the Particular Matter I was upon, led me to
observe them: And even at this Rate, the Crop of Errors was plentiful.

My Lord of Sarum too is a Name, that the Reader will find often mentioned in
these Papers, on the account of some Historical Mistakes; in which if I shall
seem to have acted too free a part, I must desire the Reader to remember, how
his Lordship justifiys himself for observing a slight Fault in Mr. Seldom,
This, says he, I do not take notice of, out of any Vanity, or Humor of
censuring so great a Man: my design is only to let Ingenious Persons see, that
they are not to take things on trust easily, no not from the greatest Authors
Hist. Ref. Vol. 1. p. 264.
. I desire to have the Benefit of this Excuse: especially since few or none of
his Lordships Oversights, marked by me, are of less moment than That of Mr.
Selden's, observed by his Lordship; and some of them are of very great
Consequence. Wherever I have dissented from his Lordship, I have done it, I
hope, with Good Manners; and I have taken care every where to produce my
Vouchers.

If in Reply to so many Writers I have drawn this Answer out to a great length,
at the same time that I blame Dr. Wakes Tediousness, I hope I have more to say
for my self than He had. Were I concerned with Him alone, it would have been
but the just Return of a Book for a Book; whereas He answered a Pamphlet in a
Volumn.

In the several parts of this Work, I have endeavored to carry my Enquirys as
far, and tread as surely as I well could with that Leisure, and those
Opportunitys I was master of. I wish the desire of being Exact and Full in my
Accounts, has not spread a Dryness sometimes over them, which may disgust
Readers not used to Disquisitions of this Nature. But I could with far less
Trouble have made them more Entertaining.

If after all my Care, some Mistakes have crept in (as I doubt not but there
have) the Reader will consider, that I am striking out Paths hitherto
untrodden, without Light, or Guide to direct me. Dr. Wake indeed pretended to
cut a Passage through this Wood; but upon Trial found it too full of Thorns and
Briars, to be cleared by his Hand: and therefore went about; leaving the direct
Way it self as Intricate and Entangled as he found it.

As to what I have produced from Registers, I did not always on this occasion,
consult the Originals themselves, for Reasons obvious to the Reader; but was
forced in several Instances to depend upon Collections, taken some time ago: in
which however there will, I hope, be very little reason to tax my want of
Exactness.

The Copys of the Rolls of Parliament I used, were such as had gone through the
Hands of Men very Skillful and Curious this way: Nevertheless a false Membrane,
or even Year, may possibly have slipped either into Their Transcripts, (...)
Mine: for which (if it should so have happened) I do here beforehand desire the
Readers Excuse. But wherever I cite the Abridgement of Records, I profess to go
no further than That, and am not answerable therefore for the Mistakes of it.

I have nothing further to tell the Reader, but that the Register of Henry de
Estre, the Prior of Canterbury, which I so often appeal to in what follows, is
a Manuscript in the Hands of my Lord Bishop of Norwich; and that I have used
the two last London Editions of M. Paris, in composing these Papers, without
saying, when I refer to the One, and when to the Other.

ERRATA.
PAage 5. l. 25. dele to. p. 12. l. 5. for They r. The Rural Clergy^ p. 26. l.
17. for Holy r. Hally. p. 27. l. 28. for that meeting r. such meetings as that.
p. 39. l. 25. for milibus r. militibus. p. 45. l. 5. for or r. and. p. 47. l.
23. for repugnant r. repugnant' in Marg. l. 13. add. Abr. of Rec. p. 48. l. 27.
after all, put a Comma. p. 54. l. 29. for 5 th. r. 7 th. p. 56. l. 11. for
Extraordinary r. Occasional. l. 34. for ceased altogether r. grew into Disuse.
p. 70. l. 4. for quoque r. quoquo. p. 92. l. 30. dele s^on. p. 125. l. 11. for
Lambert r. Lambard. p. 127. l. 24. for Labbee r. Labbe. p. 167. l. 29. r.
Antenicene. p. 170. l. 14. for New r. View. p. 231. In Marg. for N. XV. r. N.
XIV (a). and so again p. 232. p. 235. In Marg. for N. XVI. r. N. XIV (b). p.
244. l. 19. for always r. sometimes. l. 22. for always r. often. p. 245. l.
13. dele besides. p. 257. l. 26. dele just now mentioned. p. 276. l. 3. after
us, add whether. p. 282. In Marg. dele Malmsbury, etc. p. 284. for consider r.
conclude. p. 298. for Monarchici r. Monachici. p. 330. l. 3. for Henry r.
Hervey. p. 342. l. 11. for 1391. r. 1421. p. 345. In Marg. for n. 19. r. n. 29.
to 50. E. 3. n. add 198. ll. 25, 26. dele. Prove. Cant. p. 346. dele. ll. 21.22.
p. 347. l. 6. for at length transcribe r. transcribe at length. p. 348. l. 4.
for 50. E. 3. r. 51. E. 3. In Marg. for n. 18. r. n. 24. p. 352. l. 19. for
Council learned in the Law r. Attorney General. p. 356. l. 4. for gratify r.
qualify. p. 376. l. 17. for Cranmer's r. Parkers. p. 413. l. 8. for as r. has.
p. 457. l. 24. for owning r. owing.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Clergies Right to Frequent Synods, by the Canons and Practice of
the Universal Church, admitted and approved in this Realm. Page 4. Chap. II.
Their Legal Right of holding these Assemblies concurrently with every New
Parliament. p. 28. Chap. III. Their Right, when met, to Treat, Resolve, and Act
in all Instances, and to all Degrees, under that of Enacting a Canon; without
Qualifying themselves for it, by a Royal License. The sense of the 25* Hen. 8.
c. 19. carefully inquired into. p. 78. Chap. IV. Some General Reflections on
Dr. Wake's Way of managing this Controversy; which set aside so much of his
Book as is Immaterial and Foreign to the Point in Hand. p. 118. Chap. V. An
Answer to some Objections made to the Clergies Right of meeting with every New
Parliament: where the Rise, Nature, and Force of the Clause Praemunientes in
the Bishops^Writ, and of the Convocation-Writ, that goes out with the Summons
for the Parliament, are fully considered. p. 212. Chap. VI. Dr. Wake's
Distinction between a Right of being Summoned, and a Right of Meeting and
Sitting, Examined: together with a Reply to his Objection drawn from the
Convocation having now left off to give Subsidies. p. 263. Chap. VII. An Answer
to what is objected from their being now no Member of Parliament: and an
Occasion taken from thence to deduce an Account of the Lower Clergies Interest
in the Great Councils of the Realm, through the several Periods of Time, from
the Earliest Saxon Ages, downwards. p. 273. Chap. VIII. The Second Point [of
the Clergies Right of Treating, etc. without a License] strengthened against
the Exceptions that are made to it, from Parallel Instances of a Like Restraint
practiced toward Other Bodies, from the Perpetual Practice of Convocations
since the 25 H. 8. from the Opinion of Dr. Cousins, and the Resolution of the
Judges 8vo. Jacobi, etc. p. 356. Chap. IX. Some Instances of Dr. Wake's
Extraordinary Skill in the Subject of Debate.
Lately Printed for Tho. Bennet.
A Complete History of the Canon and Writers of the Books of the Old and New
Testament, by Way of Dissertation: with useful Remarks on that Subject. In Two
Volumes. By L. E. Du Pin, Doctor of the Sorbonne, and Regius Professor of
Philosophy in Paris. Done into English from the French Original. An Account of
the Court of Portugal, under the Reign of the Present King Don Pedro the
Second, with some Discourses on the Interests of Portugal, with Regard to other
Sovereigns: Containing a Relation of the most Considerable Transactions that
have passed of late between that Court, and those of Rome, Spain, France,
Vienna, England, etc. Campania Foelix: Or, a Discourse of the Benefits and
Improvements of Husbandry; Containing Directions for all manner of Tillage,
Pasturage, and Plantation; as also for the making of Cider and Perry; with some
Considerations (1.) upon the Justices of the Peace and Inferior Officers, (2.)
on Inns and Alehouses, (3.) on Servants and Laborers, (4.) on the Poor. To
which are added Two Essays, (1.) of a Country House, (2.) of the Fuel of
London.
THE Rights, Powers and Privileges, OF AN English Convocation STATED and
VINDICATED.
THE Little Book which gave occasion to Dr. Wake's Voluminous Answer, proposed
to Consider, First, What Need there was of a Convocation; and then, What were
the Rights of the Clergy of the Church of England in relation to it: Presuming,
I suppose, that a Claim of Right could never come so decently from Subjects to
their Prince, as after showing, that they were under a Necessity of making that
Claim. Dr. Wake, who is a great Master of Method, has thought fit to change the
Order of the Questions; and to enquire first into the matter of Right, before
he allows the Point of Expedience to be Debated. I shall be forced to dissent
from this Gentleman so often in very concerning Points hereafter, that I will
not give my self the trouble of disputing a Trifle with him here; and shall
therefore take the Method He has Prescribed me. I am so fully satisfied of the
Truth and Reasonableness of what I contend for, that I care not at which end of
the Argument I begin.

The Two great Convocation-Rights chiefly insisted on in that Paper, and
endeavored to be set aside by Dr. Wake in his Answer to it, are these: I. A
Right of Meeting and Sitting in Convocation as often as a New Parliament Meets
and Sits. II. A Right of Treating and Deliberating about such Affairs as lie
within their proper Sphere, and of coming to fit Resolutions upon them, without
being necessitated antecedently to Qualify themselves for such Acts and Debates
by a License under the Broad Seal of England.


Indeed these Rights of the Clergy do, at present, lie under some Disadvantage;
both, because they have not, of late years, been duly Claimed and Exercised;
and because Some even of the Clergy themselves have freely given them up, and
publicly owned and maintained the Church to be at the Absolute Mercy of the
Crown in these Particulars. But, whatever Prepossessions Men may be under on
this account; yet, if the Cause may be allowed a fair Hearing, I doubt not but
in the following Papers clearly to prove, That the Church's Rights are, in both
these Instances, plain and indisputable; and that therefore, whatever
Concessions some of her Unwary or Designing Members may have made to her
Prejudice, they must be accounted for on some other Bottom, beside that of the
mere force of Truth; and how silent soever She her self may have been in the
Vindication of these Rights, yet the reason of that silence was not, because
she had nothing to say.

CHAP. I.
THE Way in which I intend to proceed, is, First, To State and Confirm the Two
Points in Question, showing upon each of them, wherein the Right claimed seems
to consist, and what I take to be the chief Evidences and Proofs upon which it
is founded. After this I shall consider the Exceptions of all sorts that have
been taken to this Claim by Dr. Wake, or any other Writer, who has appeared on
the same side; particularly by the Author of the Letter to a Member of
Parliament.

Upon the first of the Two Points, in order to give our selves a clear Account,
What the present Right is, it will be requisite to step back a little, and
enquire, What the former Usage has been; What the Custom of this particular
Church and Realm in relation to such Assemblies; And what also the general
Practice of the Church of God in all Ages.

A Convocation, or Provincial Synod, (for so we now use the Word) may be
considered, either Simply in it self, or as Attendant on a Parliament. I shall
take these Two several Views of it; and the first of them in this present
Chapter.

That such Assemblies have been held frequently from the very beginning of
Christianity, and under Heathen Emperors, appears abundantly from Eusebius L.
5. c. 23, 24.
, St. Cyprian Ubique.
, and De Jejun c. 13.
Tertullian. They were necessary for deciding the Differences that might happen
between one Diocese and another, or between those of the same Diocese, if they
could not be composed at home; for the maintenance of sound Doctrine, and
wholesome Discipline, and for the promoting of the general good of Christianity.

The Authoritative part of these Meetings was composed of the Bishops and
Presbyters, who sat; Conc. Eliberit. in Proaem. Greg. L. 4. Ep. 44. 4. Conc.
Tolet. Capit. 3.

Cypr. Ep. 1. Graviter commoti sumus Ego and Collegae mei qui praesentes
aderant, and Compresbyteri nostri qui nobis assidebant.


the Bishops (in a Semicircle) foremost, and the Presbyters behind them; before
whom the Deacons and the People stood, being little more than Witnesses of what
passed at the Synod.

The Presbytery were in every City, a necessary standing Council to their
respective Bishops; (whose Power in the Church was much like that of a King in
one of our mixed Monarchies:) and together with their Bishops therefore they
met in a Diocesan Synod, upon all great Causes; and without their Advice and
Consent, nothing of Importance was, or could be determined. This was the
settled Rule of the Primitive Church, and was kept up to here in England, when
it had declined almost every where else; as the Constitutions of Egbert Can.
44, 45, 46, 47, apud Spelman. Conc. T. 1. p. 258.
Archbishop of York, made in the middle of the Eighth Century, declare. And
some Remains of this Ancient Discipline are yet visible in those Capitular
Bodies planted in our Cathedral Churches; who, as they were Originally intended
to be a Select Presbytery to the Bishop for all the Affairs of his Diocese; so
have they still a Restraint upon his Authority in several Cases, by the known
Customs of this Church, and Laws of the Realm.

Some of their Presbyters the Bishops were obliged to carry along with 'em to
the Council of the Province; and there, I say, they Sat, Deliberated, and Voted
upon all Matters that came before the Assembly. Indeed to General Councils, the
Inferior Clergy came not ordinarily in their Own Right; but as the Proxy's only
of absent Bishops: which was necessary to hinder those Meetings from being too
numerous, and to prevent Confusion. However, even the Bishops that were present
in General Councils, were deputed thither by Provincial Synods; See the
Emperor's Letter to St. Cyril. Conc. Ephesians. Part I. as also The Epistle of
Capreolus Bishop of Carthage, excusing himself for sending no Bishops, because
the War, which had broke out in those parts, hindered him from calling ^
Provincial Synod, from whence they were to be deputed. Ib. pars 2. Act. 1.
and brought along with them the Resolution and Consent, of the several
Churches from which they came: and the Presbyters therefore, having Voices in
those lesser Synods, their Consent was also in the Definitions of the Greater
presumed, and included.

In one of these Provincial Synods, held in the Second or Third Century, was
that, which is since called the 37th Apostolic Canon framed; which orders,
that there shall be two of these Assemblies yearly, one in Spring, and the
other in Autumn. The same thing (with some small variety, as to the exact time
of Meeting) was by the Great Council of Nice decreed more solemnly; Can. 5.
and their Decree enforced by the Council of Antioch Can. 20.
first, and then by the Fourth General Council at Chalcedon. Can. 19.
Afterward by reason of the difficulty of convening in times of War and
Confusion, these Synods were ordered to meet but once a Year, by the Sixth Can.
8.
and Seventh General Councils Can. 6.
in the East, and this Order was renewed here in the West, by the Fourth great
Lateran Council, held under Innocent III. at the beginning of the Thirteenth
Century. Can. 6.
And thus the general Law of the Church stood in succeeding times; as to Us at
least: For the Decree of the Council of Basil, Sess. 15.
which made these Meetings Triennial, was not, I think, received here in
England.

The Rule set by these General Councils All of ^em ( but that at Antioch)
reputed such.
was prescribed also by the Roman Law, Justinian. Nov. 123. c. 10.137. c. 4.
received into the Capitulars of Charles the Great in Germany, Lib. 1. Tit. 13.
and provided for very early by special Canons in the Churches of Spain and
France, 3. Conc. Tolet. c. 18. Conc. Regiens. c. 7. 1. Conc. Araus. c. 29. 2.
Conc. Aurel. c. 2. 2. Conc. Turon. c. 1.
and of those lesser Kingdoms that arose out of the Ruins of the Roman Empire;
and particularly here in England, by a Canon of the Council of Herudford, Beda*
I. 4. c. 5. Placuit convenire nos juxta morem Canonum Venerabilium.
held Anno 673 under Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, and which took care
not only to establish the Practice for the future, but also to affirm the
ancient Usage; it being at the very entrance of the Acts of it, expressly said
to assemble in Virtue of the Old Canons, as it was held also much about the
Time, that those Old Canons prescribed. Sept. 24.


The Lateran Canon, that revived the use of Yearly Provincial Assemblies, was
in force here (as John de Athon tells us Proaem. Othob.
) though not so well observed, he says, as it ought to have been, for a Reason
too reflecting to be Qualia Concilia Provincialia singulis annis celebrari
ponitur sub praecepto: quod non est ergo negligendum -- Sed hodie de facto
praetermittitur, quia forte Lucrum Bursale Praelatis non acquiritur; sed potius
tunc Expensae apponuntur.

He gives I find, the same free Reason in another place, for the neglect of
some Provincial Constitutions. De facto perraro servantur, quando servando
Constitutionem Bursae Praelatorum vacuarentur. Sed aliae Constitutiones; quae
Praelatis Bursales sunt, satis memoriae commendantur, and exequuntur ad unguem.
Ad Constit. de Hab. Cler.


Englished. This must be understood of the time when Athon wrote, which was
somewhat above an hundred Years after For Pitts 's Account, which has been
taken all along upon trust, (viz. that he Flourished in 1290) must be a
mistake; since Athon was made Prebend of Lincoln in 1329, and died in 1350, as
I find by unquestionable Authorities.
; when in France also it was grown into neglect; as appears by Durandus's
Complaint De modo Conc. Genesis cel. Rubr. 11.
: But at first, no doubt, both here and elsewhere it was more strictly kept:
and to it we owe that Body of Provincial Constitutions which we have; the
earliest of 'em, those of Stephen Langton, bearing Date 1222, a few Years after
that Lateran Council.

Innocent III. in his Rescript to the Archbishop of Sens Decr. Greg. 3.10.10.
Ecclesiarum Cathedralium Capitula per Procuratores suos admittidebent ad
Tractatum in Concilio Provinc^ali.
, directs, that the Proctors of Cathedral Chapters should be summoned to these
Provincial Synods: From whence alone, without further enquiry, we might be
satisfied, that the Priors of Cathedral Churches, Deans, and Archdeacons, those
Praelati Inferiores, had been admitted before; as indeed the Capitular Clergy,
and even the Rural Presbyters had been; though the Practice might be now
discontinu'd. For, 700 Years before the Date of this Rescript, in a Spanish
Council at Taragone An. 517. Epistolae tales a Metropolitanis sunt dirigendae,
ut non solum de C^thedralibus Ecclesiis Presbyteros, verum etiam de Diaecesanis
ad Concilium trahant. c. 13.
, we find it particularly provided, that the Bishops should bring along with
them to these Synods, Presbyters from their Cathedral Churches, and from the
other Churches of their Dioceses.

And in the account of a Domestic Council of our own, not full an hundred
Years Elder than the Lateran, the Persons summoned to it are thus reckoned up
by the Saxon Chronicle Regis Consilio and Venia misit Willielmus Archiep.
Cantuaraebyrig per Totam Anglorum Terram, and jussit Episcopos, and Abbates,
and Archidiaconos; cunctos item Priores, Monachos, and Canonicos, qui essent in
omnibus Cellis intra Anglorum Terram: omnes denique quorum Curae Religio erat
commissa interesse Londini ad Festum Michaelis, ut ibi colloquerentur de
omnibus Negotiis ad Deum pertinentibus, etc. Chron. Sax. ad ann. 1129. The
Saxon is, Ealle tha thet Cristendome ha^don to begemen, and to locen.
, Bishops, Abbots, Archdeacons; all the Priors, Monks, and Canons, who were in
all the Religious Houses of England: Finally, All that had the care of Religion
committed to them, i. e. I suppose the Parochial Presbyters.

The Decree of Innocent was so well obeyed in France, that in a National
Council, which met there about Ten Years afterward Anno 1226. Vide M. Par. ad
ann. p. 329. where he has these Observable Words. Dedit Legatus in dolo
Procuratoribus Capitulorum Licentiam ad propria revertendi, retentis tantum
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and Abbatibus, and simplicibus Praelatis. Unde non
immerito timuerunt, ne procurata eorum absentia qui majoris Prudentiae erant
and Experientiae, and prae Multitudine potentiores ad contradicendum, aliquid
statueretur in praejudicium, etc.
, the Proctors of Chapters were Numerous and Resolute enough to quash an
oppressive Demand there made by the Legate, and to rescue the Liberties of the
Gallican Church, for that time, from Papal Encroachments. In England the way
was, for the Dean, or Prior, to bring up Instruments of Proxy to the Synod,
which enabled him to act for his Chapter, or Convent Priores Installati tam sub
Conventus ^ui, vel Capituli, quam suo nomine Literas Procuratorias deferentes.
M. Par. ad ann. 1237. p. 446.

Priores Majores cum Literis suorum subditorum Procuratoriis. An. Burt. ad ann.
1258. p. 389.


in the same manner as the Archdeacons Archidiaconi cum Literis Procuratoriis
factis ex part Clericorum qui subsunt eisdem-Ann. Burt. ad ann. 1257. p. 382.
vide etiam pp. 373, 374, 355. and M. Par. p. 920.
also were empowered to represent, and conclude the Diocesan Clergy; who were,
in those Days, when Synods were frequent, willing enough to be excused the
Expense and Trouble of Attendance. And this method was often practiced
throughout Henry III. his Reign, till the Council of Reading in the Seventh
Year of Edward I. ordered Item praecipimus, ut -- veniant duo Electi ad minus a
Clero Episcopatuum singulorum, qui auctoritatem habeant una nobiscum tractare
de his quae Ecclesiae communi utilitati expediunt Anglicanae, etiamsi de
Conturbatione aliqua vel Expensis oporteat fieri mentionem.

In Cap. de Exeq. Epise. ad Finem Lynwood. p. 25.


, that the Clergy of the Diocese should appear by two Proctors of their own;
which I suppose has ever since been constantly practiced.

Thus have much the same Persons been summoned all along, as now: But to what
Ends, and with what Authorities they came, may be questioned. The Canonists,
who never fail to depress the Bishops for the Service of the Pope, would make
them some amends, in giving them as extravagant an Authority over their
Inferiors. Lynwood therefore, in his Gloss upon that part of a Constitution of
Archbishop Arundel, where mention is made of their Concurring to it Constable.
^inaliter. p. 300.
, is trying how little he can make of them. The Words of the Constitution are
these. [ Ad supplicationem igitur Procuratorum totius Cleri nostri Cant. Prove.
de Consensu and Assensu oranium Consratrum and Suffraganeorum nostrorum and
aliorum Praelatorum, in hac Cleri Convocatione praesentium, and Procuratorum
absentium, etc. Statuimus and Ordinamus.] And his Comment upon them runs thus,
Aliorum Praelatorum, sc. Abbatum, Decanorum, and Archidiaconorum: Praesentium,
non dicit, Vocatorum: quia ad Provinciale Concilium non sunt Vocandi, ex
necessitate, nisi Episcopi. Si tamen alii veniant, Admittendi sunt: imo vocandi
sunt, quando de eorum Factis agitur, vel quia eorum Consilium est necessarium.
Now here one cannot but observe, how small an occasion he takes for this
strange Doctrine. For Praesentium in the Text, belongs as well to the Superior
as the Inferior Prelates; and gave no room to him therefore thus to refine upon
it. And then, when he has delivered it as his Opinion, Non alii sunt vocandi,
etc. he is afterward forced to retract it; Imo vocandi sunt. This indeed he
would fain qualify, with a quando de eorum factis agitur; but is immediately
obliged to add, vel quia eorum Concilium est necessarium. So that, at last, the
Inferior Prelates are allowed by him to be Necessary Counselors in the
Assembly; and to have not only Opportunity of Petitioning, but also Power of
Advising: which however is not so much as the Text it self allows them;
expressing the Assent and Consent of both sort of Prelates jointly, without any
manner of Distinction.

And though the Chief Business of the Proctors of Chapters and Dioceses was, to
Petition for the Redress of Grievances; under which they chiefly groaned: yet
that they came from the very beginning, with larger Powers, appears from the
Constitution of Reading lately cited Qui Autoritatem habeant una Nobiscum
tractare de hiis quae Ecclesae. etc.
, and from the Ancient Forms of the Archbishop's Summonitory Letters, which
ran, ad tractandum una Nobiscum, exactly as that Constitution prescribes: An
Instance of which I have seen, in an Old Register, as high as the 18 E. 1. that
is, Eleven Years after the Council of Reading was held.

Nay, even at such times, when they had no distinct Proctors of their own to
represent them; but sent up only Procuratorial Instruments by their Archdeacons
(as the Custom was in the preceding Reign) yet still the Synodical
Constitutions ran in their Name, and expressed their Consent and Approbation.
Thus in the Council of Merton 42 H. 3. the Constitutions there made are said to
have passed, de Unanimi Assensu and Consilio Praelatorum Religiosorum, and
totius Cleri Ecclesiae (Additamenta ad M. Par. p. 204.) and in the Close of
them yet more plainly. Archiepiscopi and Episcopi de Consensu and Approbatione
Inferiorum Praelatorum, Capitulorum Cathedralium, and Conventualium, nec non
Universitatis totius Cleri Angliae haec praedicta communiter and concorditer
providerunt. Ib. p. 209. See also Ann. Burt. p. 389. As also Constit. Provinc.
ad ^inem Lynwood p. 15. where they are by mistake, placed at the Year 1261
instead of 1258. Lynwood has inserted some of them in his Provincial; and there
in his Gloss upon the Preface to them, tells us, that by Inferior Prelates, are
to be understood Abbots, Priors, Deans, and Archdeacons: ( p. 314.) and the
Universitas Cleri therefore must signify the Lower Secular Clergy of the
several Dioceses.


Nor was this any late Privilege, but what was always understood to belong to
their Character, even in the Saxon times; when mere Presbyters, we find,
subscribed frequently to Councils, and sometimes in great Numbers: Witness the
Synod of Cloveshoe in 803 Apud Spelm. Conc. Vol. 1. p. 325.
, the Subscriptions of which Mr. Wharton, (a diligent Examiner of these kind of
things) thought Authentic Ista non inanem Veritatis speciem prae se ferunt,
and prae aliis omnibus fidem meruerunt, De Episcopis Londinens. p. 23.
beyond Exception: And there we find besides Twenty Six Abbots, near Forty
simple Presbyters, Ranked regularly under their several Bishops according to
the Dioceses from whence they came: And with them, some few of a Lower Order;
who were admitted also, it seems, to these Synodical Debates, according to the
moderate and gentle Form of Church-Polity which obtained in those Times. And in
the Preface therefore to the Canons of an Elder Synod An. 747.
held at the same place, we meet with these remarkable words: Sacri Ordinis
Praesules, cum plurimis Sacerdotibus Domini, and minoribus quoque Ecclesiastici
Gradus Dignitatibus, ad Locum Synodalem, cum venerabili Archiepiscopo Cudberto
convenerunt, and de Unitate Ecclesiae, and Concordia Pacis tractanda,
confirmandaque pariter Consederunt. Spelm. Conc. T. 1. p. 245. E Codice, ut
inquit, vetustissime MS.


Nor had the Inferior Clergy less Interest in the Convocations, even of
Arundel's immediate Successor (and Lynwood's Patron) Archbishop Chichley; who
in his Letters Mandatory to the Bishop of London, says, Regiis and Regni
Incolarum hortatibus excitati, Confratrumque nostrorum and Cleri Provinciae
nostrae ducti consiliis, quinimo and nostri Provincialis Concilii Robore ac
Decreto suffulti, de expresso consensu Confratrum nostrorum and Cleri
antedicti, Volumus, Statuimus, and P. 69.
Praecipimus. In another, De Fratrum nostrorum and Cleri in eadem Convocatione
praesentium Voluntatibus, Consilio. and P 70.
Assensu. In a Third, De nostrorum Fratrum ac Cleri Provinciae Consilio and
Assensu P. 72.
: In a Fourth, De Venerabilium Confratrum nostrorum aliorumque Praelatorum, and
Cleri Provinciae Consensu pariter and Ibid.
Assensu. And lastly, Nuper in Concilio nostro Provinciali celebrato ^oram
Nobis, Vobis, Caeteris Confratibus and Coepiscopis nostris depositum fuit per
Clerum nostrae Provinciae and graviter qu^relat^m quod, etc. Quare ex part
Cleri praedicti fuimus cum Instantia non modica requisiti, quatenus hos Casus
and Articulos Authoritate dicti Concilii public proponi and exponi debere
decernere dignaremur. Nos idcirco ex Assensu vestro and aliorum Confratrum
Coepiscoporum and Suffraganeorum nostrorum exponendos fore decrevimus prout
etiam decernimus in P. 73.
praesenti. This last Form agreeing exactly with those of the Acts of
Parliament of the same date; where, Our Lord the King, by the Advice and Assent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the special Instance and Request of
the Commons, Ordains and Establishes.

Thus did the practice of Lynwood's own time, and the Style of those
Constitutions, some of which probably he himself Penned, overruled the
Assertion of his Gloss. But he seems to have been led into it, as other
Canonists might be, by his knowing no more of Provincial Councils, than what
was to be found in his Gratian (whom he there Cites in Did. 18.) where Bishops
only are mentioned. And from thence he might be induced to think, that the
latter practice was from Condescentiion, and that even Pope Innocent's Decree
was an Abridgment of the Episcopal Right, and to be Interpreted as strictly as
possible. Whereas the Writings and Usage of the Primitive Church, and even the
Elder Records of our Own, would have informed him, That this was no new
Concession to the Presbyters, but an Affirmance only of their Original Right;
as Gerson, and others of that Age knew very well, who therefore style them
Hierarchae Minores; and as Lynwood himself might have reflected, where he
observes, That in our Church-Constitutions the Word Praelati was applied often
to some of the lowest, even of the Lower Clergy, the Presbyteri Plebani, or
Rectors of Rural Parishes De Sacr. iter. vel non. c. Ignorantia. v. Praelati De
Foro Competenti c. Circumspecte. v. Item si Praelatus.
. I have made the best Excuse that I can for him; for I am not willing to
believe, that the Dedication of his Book had any Influence upon the Doctrine of
it; or that he studiously fell into such Opinions, as he knew would be grateful
Above; though I must needs say, That he has decided in this Case more like a
Dean of the Arches, than a Prolocutor of the Lower House of Convocation, which
he sometimes was Tit. de Decimis. c. quoniam. v. Provinciam. speaking of
something done in a Convocation held under Chichley, he adds -- Me tunc
existen^e Prolocutore ipsius Cleri.
: And perhaps One, that had less regard for his Character than I have, would be
ready to suspect, that he might by this time have his Eye upon the Bishopric
of St. David's.

But our Bishops themselves have been more just to the Rights and Interests of
the Inferior Clergy, allowing them not only a Consultive, but a Decisive Vote
also in Synods, and that derived from Primitive Practice; for thus I find it
laid down in a Paper Signed by Four of them, under Henry the Eighth's Reign; In
all the Ancient Councils of the Church in Matters of Faith, and Interpretation
of Scripture, no Man made Definitive Subscription, but Bishops and Priests;
forasmuch as the Declaration of the Word of God pertains unto Hist of the
Ref. Vol. I. p. 174.
them. A Testimony, that, being given by those of the Higher Order in the
Church in behalf of the Powers and Privileges of the Lower, must be allowed
Considerable.

In the course therefore of our Provincial Synods, the Inferior Clergy's
Consent was expected, and not that of the Suffragans only. But still, as we may
observe, the Archbishop alone is said to Decree and Ordain; which is a style of
Authority peculiar to him Here, and beyond what belonged Originally to his
Character. Indeed by the ancient Rules of the Church, the Metropolitan's
Consent was nenessary to make the Ordinance, and He had the (...): But the
Style and Power of the Archbishop of this Province might in this respect run
higher, because he challenged to be looked upon as something more than a simple
Quasi velitis ( says Peckam in a Letter to the Bishop of London) Jura
Cantuariensis Ecclesiae -- ad Simplices Metropolitani Limits Coarctare. Whart.
App. ad Hist. de Ep. Land. p. 270.
Metropolitan, and had the Title of a Legate Born; and in virtue of that
Character he might take upon him to Decree and Ordain, as the Pope did in
Foreign Councils, and as the King here at home used to do i^ our elder
Statutes. And as these, at the end of every Session of Parliament, were used to
be Enacted by the King; so the Provincial Constitutions were published on the
last Day of the Synod, by the Archbishop. He also, some time afterward,
enjoining the Bishop of London, and by him, as Dean of the Episcopal College,
the other Bishops, to see them Promulged and Executed; as Acts of Parliament
were ordered to be Proclaimed, by the Comes at first, and since by his
Vicar General the Sheriff.

This was the manner of holding Councils, and making Canons; neither was it
necessary to have the King's, or Pope's leave, to hold the one; nor was their
Authority requisite for Decreeing the other. The Clergy were only to take care
that they did not exceed their Limits, either in the Matter or Manner of their
Decrees, and that their Constitutions were such, as would not be Revoked and
Annulled by either of those Supreme Powers.

The Metropolitans were by the Canons (and by the Roman Law Nov. 123. c. 10.
where it had force) Obliged to call those Synods Yearly. Neither was Leave to
be asked for their Summoning such Assembl^es then, any more than there is now
for a Bishop's Convening his Clergy and Church Officers to a Visitation: Not
because those Canons were above the Law of our Country; but because they were
received into it, and made a part of the Constitutions and Usages of the
Kingdom.

It Is true the Archbishop called them sometimes at the King's Instance,
signified to him by a Royal Writ: Yet even then, not in Virtue of (...) Writ,
but by his Own Authority; By which also (whether called at the King's Instance,
or not) he always Dissolved them; And of this we have a very remarkable proof
in the last Convocation under Henry the IVth Hen. IV. Writ for the Calling it,
bears date, Jan. 19. 1412. It met ^n the 6 th of March. He Died on the 20 th,
but the Convocation sat on to the 10 th of May; when it was Dissolved.
; which, though Meeting at his Writ, was yet so little thought to be held in
Virtue of it, that it Sat for near Two Months under his Successor, Henry the
Vth, without a Dissolution.

Till Archbishop Chichley's time, Convocations were frequently held, even while
Parliaments were sitting, without any other Writ from the King but what was
contained in the Bishops Summons, with the Clause Praemunientes. After the 8.
of H. VI. the Clergy, if they met by the King's Letter, had the benefit of the
Act of Parliament of that Year; and therefore, I suppose, usually de^ired it to
gain the Parliamentary Protection; not, as Fuller idly Conjectures Ch Hist.
Book 5. p. 290. and Dr. Wake from him p. 230.
, to avoid a Praemunire.

When they met, Mr. Nicolson (Eng. Hist. Lib. part 3. p. 196.) says, They were
Inhibited in their very Writs of Summons from Decreeing any thing to the
Prejudice of the King or his Realms: And for this, he refers us to Dugdale 's
Summons in the Reigns of E. 1. and E. 2. where there is not a word to this
purpose; nor can there be; for Dugdale has no Writs for Convocations, but only
for the Parliament. When the next Edition of his Work comes out, he will be
pleased to tell us, from whence he drew this curious Remark. I have seen many
Convocation Writs, but never, that I remember, one with a Prohibition in the
Belly of it.
Writs were often sent to them by the King, Forbidding them to attempt any
thing against his Crown and Dignity; and these Prohibitions are allowed to have
been Tacit Permissions of such Assemblies, provided they kept within their
Bounds Bishop Stillingfleet 's, Duties and Rights of the Parochial Clergy, p.
371.
. And so indeed they certainly were, for otherwise it had been as easy for the
King to forbid their Meeting and Sitting, as their Acting in such and such
Instances; which yet he appears very rarely to have done; and to have been yet
more rarely Obeyed when he attempted it The Oldest Instance insisted on, is a
Prohibition of Geofry Fitz-Peter, Lord Iustitiary to Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury: But how it was obeyed, the Annals of Lanercost [in Bib. Cott.
Claud. D. 7.] declare, Hub. Arch. Cant. celebravit Council. contra Prohibitionem
Gaufridi, etc. in quo Concilio Archiepiscopus Subscripta promulgavit Decreta,
(Ann. 1200.) The Oldest Writ produced is, 9 Joh. Ann. 1208. See it in Pryn. 3.
Tom. Eccl. Jurisd. p. 10. Whether complied with, or not; I do not find: But
suppose it was, for it Issued out upon a Complaint of the whole Parliament. A
Third Instance I find in the 41 H. 3. Rot. Cl. M. 6. dors. when the Convocation
was forbid* meeting at London, because the King had at that very time Summoned
all the Members of it, that owed him Service, to Attend his Army in Wales. [
See the Writ, Pryn. Ibid. Vol. II. p. 890.] But though this Prohibition was so
reasonable, yet it was not Obeyed. On the contrary, when Archbishop Boniface,
at the Opening it, proposed this Question to them, among others; Item, Cum
Dominus Rex Prohibuerit Praelatis Ecclesiae sub forisfactura omnium terrarum
suarum quas de eo tenent, ne venirent ad hujusmodi Convocationem Auctoritate
Domini Archiepiscopi factam; an liceat, and deceat, and expediat tractare in
hujusmodi Convocatione de Negotiis Ecclesiae, vel potius (quod absit)
Prohibitioni Regiae parere, etc. [Ann. Burt. p. 383.] it was carried, that they
should proceed notwithstanding: and so they did, as appears by the Roll of
Grievances then drawn up, and presented (M. Par. Addit. p. 199.) But afterward
in the 20 E. 2. the Archbishop having called a Convocation to meet at London in
Quind. Mich. and the King a Great Council, at the same time, at Sarum; a Writ
went out to the Archbishop in this Form, Vos rogamus ex affectu, Vobis
nihilominus in fide and dilectione quibus nobis te^emini firmiter injungentes;
and upon this he Prorogued the Convocation for a Fortnight.
.

When therefore Archbishop Stratford An. 1341.
held a Provincial Council on purpose to oppose some Arbitrary Proceedings of
Edward the IIId. (who pretended, by the Advice of his Great Council only, to
Revoke what had been Enacted in Parliament) we find not that the King forbad
the Assembly, but only their Treating and Agreeing of such things as were to
the hurt of his Prerogative Royal; Prohibitions of this kind were sent to every
Bishop of the Province, (Tested on the same day with the Writ of Revocation to
the Sheriff, which is Printed very unbecomingly, I think, with our Statutes)
and one of these Forms, for the Honor of that Archbishop, and the relation it
has to the Point we are upon, I shall present the Reader with in the Appendix
See Numb. I.
.

The King had also his Proctors Pat. 37. H. 3. m. 19. apud Pryn. Eccl. Jurisd.
T. 2. p. 807.
, or Commissioners, sometimes in these Meetings, who Proposed, Protested, and
Appealed on his behalf; but they were ever Men in Holy Orders. His great Lay
Lords, and Ministers indeed, carried frequently his Commands thither, but none
staid there 21. H. 3. Concilio jam incaepto, missi sunt ex part Domini Regis,
Comes Lincoln. Johannes, and Johannes Filius Galfridi, and Will. de Rale
Canonicus S. Pauli, ut dicto Legato ex part^ Regis and Regni inhiberent, ne ibi
contra Regi^am Coronam and Dignitatem aliquid Statuere attentaret. Et remansit
ibi, ut hoc observaretur, Will. de Rale, indutus Cappa Canonicali, and
Supellicio, aliis recedentibus. M. Par. p. 378,
to Act for him, but Clergymen only: Though sometimes the King himself has
vouchsafed to Appear and Sit in Convocation; as in Arundel's In Conv. habita 23
Jul. 1408. in Causa Unionis.
Register, Henry the IVth is once remembered to have done.

In these Assemblies, the Gravamina Cleri, or Articuli Reformationis were
constantly expected from the Lower House; and ran so high sometimes as to
propose Reformanda per Dominum Papam, per Archiepiscopum and Suffraganeos, per
Convocationem, per Parliamentum: And Solicitors were Appointed to prosecute
such Reformations in Parliament. These the Organum Vocis suae, their
Prolocutor, or Referendarius exhibited in a Schedule: and their Petitions had
answers as those of the Commons were used to have from the King anciently.
Harpsfield, and Antiquitates Britannicae, afford us many Instances of this
Kind; but the Manuscript Acts of those Synods more; and this is one of them,
Inter alia propositum fuit a Clero, ut Episcopi dignentur Canones executioni
mandare. Imprimis, de Professionibus vestris, quod legantur coram vobis ad
minus bis in Anno. 2. De Visitationibus. 3. De Residentia and Regimine
Episcoporum. 4. De Regimine, Gestu, and Vestitu Familiarium vostrorum: Which
Instance is not given so much for the Articles, as for the Answer to them;
Omnia ista sunt ^romissa, statuta, ac concessa: and fiet Executio ^er
quemlibet, ad quem pertinet, prout respondebit ^oram Deo, and proximo Concilio
Provinciali Regist. Arundel.
. And ^n that very Convocation which submitted to H. the VIII. the Lower House,
as dispirited as they were, took heart to complain to the Upper of the Practice
of some Bishops, in those ^ays, who took Bonds of Resignation of all the Clerks
they preferred in their Dioceses, in ^rder, as they said, to oblige them to
Resi^ence Item petunt, quod Praesentati ad Ecclesiasticum Beneficium non
ar^entur per Dioecesanos Scripto aliquo Obligatorio aut Poena Tempo^li ad
Residentiam -- Acta Conv. incaeptae Nov. 5. 1529. in ^ess. 91.
. The End was very good, but the Means was thought unjustifiable; and the
Cler^y in Convocation therefore thought it worth ^^eir while to endeavor a
Redress; though I and not whether they effected it, or what Answer was returned.

But among all their Grievances I have never ^bserv^d the want of Convocations
mentioned (...) one of them. The Clergy indeed complain some times of their
being called together too often, and kept sitting too long, and beg a
Dismission; and the Archbishop excuses himself frequently on that Head in his
very Letter of Summons. But I have seen no Intimation any where that they
wanted an opportunity of Meeting; which is a certain sign that they never
wanted one: never I believe from Anselm's days (who by the favor of H. the
Is It. revived those Meetings, that had been suppressed by W. the IId. Concilium
non permisit [Rufus] celebrari in Regno suo ex quo Rex factus est jam per 13
Annos, says Anselm to Pope Paschal, L. 3. Ep. 46. And what the Consequence of
this Intermission was, the Synod which met at the beginning of H. I. declares,
-- Multis vero annis Synodali Cultura cessante, viciorum vepribus
succrescentibus, Christianae Religionis Fervor in Anglia nimis refrixerat.
Eadmer. p. 67.
) down to the very times that we live in.

No more than this needs be said to furnish the Reader with an Account of
Provincial Synods, and their Rights, as allowed and practiced in this Realm:
Such an Account, I mean, as is necessary to set the General part of this
Dispute in a true Light, and to lead the way to matter which is more Pertinent
and Particular; and which I shall go on to suggest, after I have added a
Reflection or two that arise from what has been already delivered.

It is plain that the Power lodged in the Metropolitan of calling together such
Members of his Province, is likewise accompanied with a Right in those of his
Province to be so called; and that the Vis Praecepti, of which Atho speaks In
Proaem. Othob.
, lies as well upon the Superior, as on his Inferiors: The Bishops, for
Instance, having as much Right by the Canon Law to demand such a Meeting for
the Good of the Church, as the Metropolitan has Authority to Assemble it; and
the Obligation running reciprocally, though the Power does not. It is indeed
not so much a Power, as a Trust that is lodged in him; and for which therefore
by the Ancient Canons of the Church 7. Genesis Conc. Can. 6. (...), Canonicis
poenis Subjiciatur.
and by the Imperial Law Nov. 123. c. 10*
he was made accountable. It Is in this case, as in that of our great Lay
Conventions, the Assembling of which is not only part of the Prince's
Prerogative, but of the Subjects Right; and matter of Duty as well to those who
Call, as those who are Called to them; and would oblige therefore, though there
were no positive Law that fixed the times of such Meetings.

Indeed Either of these Assemblies, in State, or Church, may sometimes have
been intermitted for emergent Reasons, and such as the Members themselves that
composed 'em might be presumed willing to allow; yet those Intermissions must
not be supposed to take away the Right of meeting, except they are withal
supposed to take away the Right of Convening. So that the Provincial Inferiors
may well demand to be Assembled, as soon as those Reasons Impedient shall
cease; and much more, when stronger Reasons shall arise on the other side, such
as would justify the Clergy's desire of an extraordinary Convention, if they
had not an ordinary one to claim.

And among many other Reasons which may occasionally move Inferiors to claim
the Recontinuance of these Meetings, this may be one, That their Right begins
to be questioned by the Discontinuance; especially if the Superior shall take
care to assert his Own, at the same time that he sets aside Theirs; and
Commanding them to Come, shall yet not suffer them to Assemble in Form; nor let
them, instead of being a Convocation Legally to confer together, and to frame
their Requests to their Lordships, the King, or Parliament, be so much as a
Congregation, once to say their Prayers together, and hear a Sermon.

Now as it is manifest that this Right of Assembling is Attested by the usage
of our Church, and founded upon the Canon Law; so may it be remembered, that it
is no Papal Grant, but derived from very ancient Christian Practice,
established by the great Council of Nice, and other succeeding General
Councils, and adopted particularly into the Body of the Canons of Most (I might
say, All) Christian Nations. The Disuse, indeed, and Suppression of Synods, has
been frequently charged upon the Arbitrary Proceedings of the Papacy; but no
Primate need fear lest he should be thought to take too much of the Legatus
Natus upon him, if he pleases to convene them.

For so far are the Clergy of England from being Unreasonable or Singular in
their Desire of such Meetings, that there is no part of the Reformed Church
beside, that does not duly hold them. They are constantly kept up in the United
Provinces; and even in France they were never denied the Protestants by this
King, as long as the use of their Religion was allowed them: These Assemblies
having been always esteemed by all Christians as the best and most proper means
for the Preservation of Unity, and suppression of Errors and Disorders in the
Church of God.

To draw nearer home; what we plead for has been allowed the present Scotch
Kirk; nay, and something more than we plead for. I hope it will not be thought
foreign to my Subject, if I stop to give some short account of it. Their
Assembly has sat often since the Revolution, and done business, with a witness:
if a thorough purging of Churches, and Universities; if exercising their
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over the whole Kingdom (as well over those who
renounced their Government, as those who owned it) be, doing Business. If to
Excommunicate, Suspend, and Deprive at Pleasure; if to be Patrons General of
all the Livings of the Kingdom, and to Induct, as well as to Eject what Persons
they thought fit; if by an Act of theirs (for so the Style runs) to appoint
National Fasts, and to settle General Rules for Church Discipline and
Government, without so much as asking leave of the Civil Power, be doing
Business, then, I say, the Scotch Assembly have within these ten years last
past effectually done it. They have acted up to the utmost Extent of their
pretended Divine Charter of Privileges, and have scarce been withstood in any
one Branch of it: for though the King's Commissioner has sat with them, yet has
he not been allowed either to interpose in their Debates, or to have a Negative
upon their Resolutions; no nor so much as to confirm them. And when he
pretended to adjourn or dissolve the Synod, they protested against it; and
appointed a New Meeting by their own, without any regard to His Authority: and
in the Intervals of their Sessions they have had a standing Committee of their
Members, who have been, as it were, a Perpetual Assembly. These are the High
Favors and Indulgences, that have with a Liberal Hand been bestowed on our
Neighbors in Scotland; to the utter Abolishment almost of the Civil
Magistrates Supremacy in Church Affairs. Shall they who deny the Prince his
Due, have more than their Due allowed them? and shall not those have so much as
their Due, who allow him every thing that either the Law of God, or the Law of
the Land allows him? Shall not the modest Claim of an Episcopal Church, which
professes all due Subjection to the State, put in for as fair an Hearing, as
the Unreasonable Pretensions of an Holy Kirk, that acknowledges no Superior but
Christ Jesus?

Nor have those of the Presbyterial and Congregational way been less indulged
here at home: for that They too have their Convocation in as Regular and Full,
though not in so open a manner as the Members of the Church of England desire to
have, appears from that Circular Summons, which about Eighteen Months ago was
issued out, and casually came into an Hand that it did not belong to. The World
has already had a sight of it: however it may not be amiss once more to Print
it in these Papers See the Append. N. II.
.

Nay the Privilege we claim is not denied to any the most Wild and Extravagant
Sect among us: even Quakers themselves have their Annual Meetings for
Ecclesiastical Affairs; and are known to have, and allowed to hold them. Shall
Schism and Enthusiasm (to say no worse) have the free Liberty of these
Consults, for the Propagation of their Interests? and shall an Apostolic and
Established Church want it? God forbid!

In Popish Countries indeed these Synods are discountenanced, and out of use;
notwithstanding the late Decree of the Council of Trent, which orders that they
shall be Celebrated once at least in three years. But this Decree stands in the
Acts of that Council to no other purpose, than as it is a Testimony of the
sense that even that Corrupt Body of Men had of the necessity of these
Assemblies; for the force of it vanished almost as soon as it was made: The
Undersharers in Spiritual Dominion secretly agreeing to lay it asleep; and his
Holiness (who alone can awaken it) conniving at their Neglect; because the less
such Meetings as these obtain in the Church, the greater recourse will there be
to his Chair, and his Empire will be the more Absolute.

In France, particularly, though this Decree has been Authorized by the Edict
of Blois, and by several others, yet have there not been any Provincial Synods
held in virtue of it for above these Threescore and Ten Years last past; that
is, ever since the Council of An. 1624.
Bourdeaux; unless we should call that Meeting of a few Prelates the other Day,
to Condemn the Archbishop of Cambray's Book, a Provincial Council: And, if I
mistake not, they called themselves so; by the same Figure, as my Lords the
Bishops, who are of the Commission for Ecclesiastical Preferment, may be styled
a Convocation.

But true Protestants, and true Englishmen will like this Fashion the worse for
being of Popish and French Extraction; and for coming from a Country, where
both Civil and Ecclesiastical Liberty have expired long ago: As they are not
any where observed to live long after one another.

CHAP. II.
THus does our Right to these Assemblies stand by the Law Ecclesiastical: Which
Law has been considered by it self, for the clearer Evidence of the Argument,
and not in any opposition to the Temporal Government: It not following from
hence that such Assemblies should be held, contrary to the Will of the
Sovereign Power; but that the Sovereign Christian Power should be desired to
permit, or rather to encourage them: If in this Request we were not already
prevented by the Law of the Land, which not only allows, but commands them; as
will appear, if, as hitherto I have inquired only into the Rights of a Synod of
the Province of Canterbury at large, so I go on now to consider it as Attendant
upon a Parliament of England. For so the matter at present stands, and has
stood for 400 Years and upwards; to speak at the lowest: Though in the Elder Ages
it plainly enough appears, that the Clergy came at once from both Provinces,
and joined Nationally with the Lay Assembly.

That this was the usage of the Saxon Reigns is acknowledged from the remaining
Monuments of those Times: But what the Order of these National Assemblies was,
is not, as I see, yet clearly discovered. As therefore the most knowing and
exact of our Antiquaries have thought it proper, for the better understanding
of our Saxon Government, to go over into Germany, and consult the Laws and
Manners of those Places from whence we came; so possibly we might not be much
out of our way in this Argument, if we looked into France, and inquired how the
Franks there governed themselves; those Fellow-Germans, and near Neighbors of
our Ancestors; and who had much about the same time possessed themselves of
Gaul, as these had of this part of Britain; especially if we consider the times
of Charles the Great, that Renowned and Mighty Monarch; whose Example, had it
varied from the Common Original Practice, would yet probably have been imitated
by our Lesser Kings.

And here we may content our selves with what the judicious De Marca reports to
us of this matter in his Excellent Work De Concordia Sacerdotii and Imperii
L.VI. c. 24, 25.
: That in King Pepin's time, when the Kingdom began to recover it self from the
Disorders it suffered before, it was resolved that two National Ecclesiastical
Synods should be held every Year; the One in March in the King's presence, and
wherever he should appoint; the other in October, at the Place where the
Bishops, in their former Meeting should agree upon. That whereas this last was
a pure Ecclesiastical Council, the other was a Royal One, to which the Great
Men of the Kingdom resorted from all Parts of it, to take their Resolutions for
the succeeding Year: As there was also toward the Winter, another Royal, but
Privy Council, consisting only of the Great Ministers, and such others as the
King thought fit to call; in which Matters, were prepared, and digested into
Heads, to be proposed to the Greater Assembly in the Spring.

This General Convocation of the Spiritualty and Laity, which was after by
Pepin's Son, Charles the Great, appointed to meet on the first of May, was
called indifferently Conventus, Flacitum, Concilium, Synodus, or Colloquium;
and in Latter Times, Parliamentum, which word also is still retained. In it the
Clergy and Laity deliberated sometimes together, and sometimes apart, according
as the nature of the Business to be treated of was; whether purely Secular,
Ecclesiastical, or mixed. When they were apart, as well as when together, the
Great Persons; Earls, etc. were distinguished from those of a lower Degree;
sitting by themselves, and on Honorable Seats. These too managed the Debates,
and formed the Conclusions: the Commoners assenting, and sometimes speaking;
but so, as rather to signify their Opinion, than give a Vote. This we may
suppose to have been the Method also on the Spiritual side: And so Hincmar (out
of Adalbardas Cousin and Councellor to this Charles) expresses it. Ad Proceres
pro Institutione Ca^olom Regis. c. 29.
Generalias (says he) Universorum tam Clericorum quam Laicorum conveniebat:
Seniores [that is, the Magnates, whether Counts or Bishops] propter Consilium
ordinandum; Minores [that is, the Lesser Barons, and Inferior, but qualified
Clergy] propter idem suscipiendum, and interdum pariter tractandum; and non ex
Potestate, sed ex proprio mentis intellectu vel sententia confirmandum. And
after all, what was resolved on, in this Great Assembly, was presented to the
Emperor: And what he in his Wisdom approved, was to be observed by all c. 34.
.

Much after the same manner, I suppose, were the mixed Meetings of our Saxon
Kings held. They were called by the same Name; being styled Synodi Which the
Learned Mr. Nicholson, with all his Saxon knowledge, seems not to have
considered, where he asserts the Meeting at Twiford, in which St. Cuthbert was
chosen Bishop, to have been no Synod, but a Parliament. [ See his Notes on
Northumberland, in the Engl. Cambden p. 859.] An Instance, which shows how fit
he is for that Office he has taken upon himself of being an Umpire in this
Controversy.
, and Concilia; though Secular Persons joined, and Secular Affairs were
transacted in them. They were composed of the same Persons: For there sat the
Bishops, Counts, etc. and there attended the Lesser Thanes, and their Equals
LL. Athelst.. 71. Missae Presbyteri and Saecularis Thani Jusjurandum in
Anglorum Lege computatur aeque carum. LL. H. 1. c. 64.
, the Priests, etc. the Spiritual and Temporal part of the Convention
consulting together, or asunder See Council of Cloveshoe Ann. 747. where though
King Ethelbald his Princes and Dukes were present, yet are the Canons said to
be made by the Clergy alone; who went aside for that purpose. Spelm. Conc. I.
1. p. 245. And the same thing is observed in the Glossary, concerning the Laws
of Athelstan, in voce Parliamentum.
as they saw occasion. They were convened, in like manner, twice a Year, by a
Law of King Alfred's Mirror c. 1. Sect. 3.
and one of those Meetings was fixed (if not in his time, yet afterward) to
the Calends of May, LL. Edv. c. 35. Debent Populi omnes and Gentes Universae
singulis annis Convenire, scil. in capite Calendarum Maii.
as it was in Germany: And to this all the Proceres regni and Milites, and
Liberi Homines universi totius regni Britanniae LL. Edv. eod. cap. [Vide and
Spelm. in Gemotum.] and in such a full Folcmote as this Earl Godwin was
Out-lawed in the Confessors time: For so is Knighton's account of it. Edwardus
in Parliamento pleno God winum cum Filiis suis exlegavit. X. Script. p. 2331.

There was another Full Folcmote, which was a County Court only.


resorted, and it was styled Plenus Folcmote, and distinguished from the other
Folcmote where only the Episcopi, Principes, and Comites were present, which
was the foundation of that difference that appears afterward in our Records,
between a Great Council and a Parliament; (or Full Parliament, as it is often
Emphatically called) the one being a Select Convention of the Nobles and Great
Men, the other a General Assembly of all the States of the Realm: And both the
latter and elder Practice among us, as well as the Institution of Pepin and
Charles the Great, were originally derived from the more ancient Usages of the
Barbarous Germans, which Tacitus, in a well known passage thus describes; De
Minoribus Rebus Principes consultant, de Majoribus Omnes, and adds, Ita tamen
ut ea quoque quorum penes Plebem Arbitrium est, apud Principes praetractentur
De Situ Moribus and Populis Germaniae.
: which is exactly the same account that Hincmar has given us of the Custom, as
it stood revived Seven hundred years afterward.

The Members also of our Saxon Councils were alike distinguished into such as
had right of Suffrage and Subscription, and such as were present chiefly in
order to Thus a Charter of K. Ina is passed, Consentientbus omnibus Britanniae
Regibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Ducibus atque Abbatibus. And they
Subscribed and Confirmed it, Cum Praesentia Populationis. Monast. Vol. 1. p.
14, 15.

And so his Laws were made, Exhortatione and Doctrina Episcoporum and Seniorum
Sapientum. And in Magna Frequentia Servorum Dei. i. e. of Inferior Churchmen.
Jorval p. 761.

And in relation both to the Lower Clergy and Laity, that Passage in one of
Ingulphus 's Charters is very observable, Fidelium Infinita Multitudine, qui
omnes Regium Chirographum Laudaverunt; Dignita^^s ^ero sua nomina
Subscripserunt. p. 17.

I cannot bring my self to think that these and such like Phrases, signify only
a Rabble, or mixed Multitude that resorted to such Meetings as these of their
own Accord; but must, till I am better informed, (...) that some Order and
Method was observed in Convening them.


Approve. And some Footsteps there are of this Difference still visible in the
several Writs to the Lords, and for the Commoners; the one running, Quod
intersitis cum Praelatis and Magnatibus -- tractaturi, vestrumque Concilium
impensuri; The other Ordering them to be sent, Ad faciendum and consentiendum
hiis quae tunc ibidem de Communi Concilio contigerit ordinari de Negotiis
antedictis: as the Inferior Clergy's Summons also was anciently worded; tho
since the Complete Separation of the two Bodies it has ran, ad consentiendum
only.

And the same Distinction doubtless there was between their Manner of Attending
those great Councils, which was such, as showed regard and distance; and is
even now kept up to a Degree, when the Commons come to the Bar of the House of
Lords at the Opening and Dismission of the Parliament, and on other solemn
occasions. And so did the Inferior Clergy too; and that sometimes, even after
their Separation, as the Rolls of Rot. Par. 2. H. 4. n. 14.
Parliament, when produced in their proper place, will show.

To all which I shall add one Remark made on these Saxon Meetings by Mr.
Seldom, which will bring what has been said of them nearer home to our present
purpose. He observes Notae in Eadmerum. p. 167. LL. Edgari Polit. c. 5.
, That the Shire-Gemots, or Sheriffs Turns, were not only ordered by the Old
Saxon Laws LL. Ed. Conf. c. 35.
to be held Twice a Year, as Provincial Councils were by the Canons; but
punctually at the same Time also that those Councils were to be Summoned ( i.
e. after Easter and Michaelmas) as the Thirty fifth Chapter of Magna Charta
shows. And this he supposes to have been practiced on the State side, in
compliance with the Rules of the Church; That the Bishop and the Earl (or his
Sheriff) might have an Opportunity of sitting together in Court, according to
the mixed Policy of those times. This does not exactly square; because the
Canons related to a Synod of the Province, whereas this was only a County
Meeting: However I thankfully accept the Hint, and desire thus to improve it,
-- That the Two General Folcmotes, (not the Particular Shiremots) were adjusted
to the Canonical Times of Assembling. For one of these we find, was to be held
constantly at the beginning of May Vide Spelm. in Gemotum.
, that is, immediately after the Easter Turn was over (for at the same Time
both could not be held, since the same Persons were obliged to Attend both) and
therefore the other, we may presume, if it Met that Year, was held at the like
Distance from the Michaelmas Turn. These County-Courts being Preparative to the
National Assembly; either as to the Causes that were first to be Tried there,
and then finally determined here According to that Law of Canutus ( Part 2..
18.) which allowed the Plantiff an immediate Appeal to the King, if the
Shire-Gemot delayed his Remedy above Four Court Days.
; or (if the Antiquaries would give me leave to say so) for the Return of
Members. However that may be, certain it is, that in aftertimes, the Quindena
Paschae, and Quindena Michaelis, were Customary Periods of Assembling the
Parliament; and are so often mentioned as such by our Histories, as to give us
good ground to believe, they might spring from the old Saxon Usage, as That did
from Ecclesiastical Practice.

Thus our Church Then held her Synods concurrently with the Lay-Councils; not
indeed according to the strict Letter of the Canons (for both Provinces
Assembled together) but so however, as to satisfy the Intent of them, and to
prevent other Synods, that were purely Provincial, from Assembling so often as
they should, and would otherwise have done. And this therefore may be added to
the Reasons that the most Learned De Marca has given L. VI. c. 5.
for the Intermission of those Meetings here in the West; notwithstanding the
frequent Decrees of the Church for their Continuance or Revival.

The Norman Revolution made no change in this respect: for though the Conqueror
is known to have divided the Court of the Bishop and Earl, who before mixed
Jurisdictions; yet he continued still to Assemble the Clergy Nationally with
the Laity, here as in Normandy Vide Orderic. Vital. ad an. 1080. p. 552. ad an.
1095. p. 722. Where also it is said, Abbates totius Provinciae cum Clero and
part Procerum affuerunt.
; and united them more closely than before by his new Tenure of Knight Service,
which obliged all Persons that held of the Crown, whether Spiritual or
Temporal, equally to Attend his Great Councils. And to These therefore were
Summoned, not the Bishops, and great Abbots alone, but many others also of the
Lower, and even of the Undignified Clergy; who, as Doomsday Book shows, held
Lands of the King in every Shire 4711. Knight's Fees were Vested in Parochial
Churches, says the Author of Eulogium.
; and to be sure therefore were present, together with the other Crown-Tenants,
even in the Conqueror's Curiae, held acourse at the Three great Festivals; and
appeared no doubt in greater Numbers, at his more full and general Assemblies
of all the States of the Realm. At such only, Church Affairs seem to have been
Transacted; not at his Ordinary Curiae, (though some of the Clergy of all Ranks
might be present there:) unless when these Curiae, and those great Councils
were co-incident, and the latter Summoned to meet extraordinarily at the same
time that the former met acourse. As the Case was in that mixed Convention at
Winchester, where Stigand was Deprived; and in another at Gloucester, where
several Bishops were made.

How long exactly the Saxon Manner of Mixed Councils continued, is not easy to
say. However that for several Reigns after the Conquest it obtained, is
certain; and it is probable, that the Disuse of it might begin toward the
middle of H. II. when the Clergy, we are told, Disjoined themselves from the
Laity Post Turonense Concilium ( which was in 1163. about the Time of the
Council of Clarendon) cum Omnibus pene in Rebus Clerus se a Populo
disjunxisset. Antiqu. Britann. p. 131.
in every respect, and set up to be Independent; being encouraged in this
Attempt by the Pope (whose Power was then very great) and by the Success which
they had in their struggle with the Crown about the Affair of Archbishop
Becket, and the Articles of Clarendon.

And this Division of the Spiritualty from the Temporalty, which began in H.
the IIds. time, took Root under his Successors, and was settled more and more
by the Absence of Richard the First in the Holy Land, by King John's weak, and
H. the IIIds. troubled Reign.

Now therefore the Clergy seem to have declined Obedience to the Lay-Summons;
except such of them only as were obliged to attend the Great Councils of the
Realm by their Offices, or their Tenures; so that in the Sixth of King John,
when the King had a mind to have all the Abbots and Priors present in
Parliament, he was forced to Cite them by the several Bishops of the Dioceses
Cl. 6. Jo. M. 3. dors.
, and not by an immediate Summons. And in 49 H. 3. when every Abbot had his
Distinct Writ, they are said to have been Voluntary summoniti Pat. 26. E. 3.
PS. 1. M. 22. in Pryn's Reg. of Par. Writ. Vol. 1. p. 142.
, i. e. by their own Consent; not as of Right, or as owing the Crown any such
Service.

To this Recess a way had been before opened by the Dispute between the Two
Metropolitans, Thurstan Archbishop of York, refusing that Subjection to the Sea
of Canterbury, which had been paid to it by his Predecessors from Lanfranks
time; when in a great Council (held first at Winchester, and then at Windsor)
it was solemnly determined, That the Archbishop of York, and his Clergy, should
attend the Archbishop of Canterbury's Conciliary Meetings and Summons Diceto de
Archi. Cant. p. 685.
. But this Rule was broke in upon in less than Fifty Years after it was
settled; and the Sea of York, by the favor of the Pope made Independent. And
now therefore, the Archbishop of Canterbury's Authority being confined to his
own Province, and the Interest of the Crown in calling the Body of the Clergy
together, afterward lessening apace; the Affairs of the Church came at length
to be transacted in Two separate Provincial Synods, and the Clergy seldom to
Assemble Nationally, but at the Command of a Legate; who often called them
together in H. the IIId's Reign; and that (to bring the Observation nearer to
my Subject) at the very time of Parliament: And sometimes I find, that both the
Regal and Legantine Authority joined in Convening them. Compare M. Par. p. 915.
with the Ann. of Burt. p. 355.


But their ordinary way of attending the Parliament, was not in one National
Council, but in two separate Assemblies of the Province, as is manifest from
the Constitution of Reading formerly Cited; where Two Proctors are appointed to
be sent from every Diocese, to appear in proxima Congregatione nostra tempore
Parliamenti proximi Constit. Provinc. p. 25.
. Here we see the Provincial Synods of the Clergy (for the Council of Reading
was such) are spoken of in the 7th Year of E. I. (when this Council was held)
as Meeting acourse together with the Parliament. And we may be sure therefore,
that the Custom was of Elder date; though when it arose cannot be precisely
determined.

But this Wise and High-spirited Prince, finding the Clergy thus divided from
the Laity, and from one another, hard to be dealt with, resolved to restore the
old Practice, and to bring them Nationally to Parliament; which he did, by
inserting into the Bishop's Writ that Clause which begins with the word
Premunientes, and Summoning by the means of it, all the Secular Clergy under
Bishops, either in Person, or by their Proxy's; as also those Religious, who
were so far Secular as to be Chapters to the Bishops, and placed in the Heads
of the several Dioceses; such as the Priors and Convents of Canterbury,
Winchester, Worcester, etc. were. The Mere Religious, as professing to be out
of the World, had the Privilege also of being left out of those Summons; the
Crown contenting it self to direct particular Writs to all the great Abbots and
Priors, whether holding by Barony or not; without commanding the Attendance of
their Convents.

The Numbers of the Lower Clergy Cited by the Archbishop to his Parliamentary
Convocations had born some proportion all along to those of the Lower Laity
called at the same time to Parliaments For this Reason the Constitution of
Reading appointed two Proctors for every Diocese. And a Mandate of Peckam in
1290. (See his Register) Cited out of every Diocese, Duos vel tres
Procuratores, when the Commons Writ of the same Year ra^, Duos vel tres de
discretioribus milibus. Brady Introd. p. 149.
; and the Premunitory Summons therefore, when first practiced by this King,
still carried on the Parallel. By it some were ordered to appear for the
Diocese (the County Christian) and some for the Cathedral Clergy of those
Cities that sent Members to Parliament. And as the Welsh Shires returned but
one Knight apiece When this began I know not; for many Years after the Commons
were Summoned as they are now, I find the Community of Wales appearing in
Parliament, as those of Scotland sometimes did, by a certain Number returned
for the Whole.
, so their several Dioceses were to appear by a single Proctor So I gather from
the Usage of those Assemblies which were purely Ecclesiastical. To one of which
( An. 1302.) the English Clergy were Summoned by Two, and the Welsh by One
Proctor apiece. Registr. Winchel^ey. fol. 147.
. And beside all these, the Archdeacons M. Par. ad Ann. 1247. p. 719.
and Deans Idem p. 240. ad 15. Joh.
having been long before called to the Great Councils of the Realm, were not
omitted now, but comprised in the same Writ of Summons.

Nor were their Numbers only in some measure proportionable, but the Powers
also with which they came, Originally the very same; so that their first Writs
of Summons ran equally, ad Tractandum, Ordinandum, and Faciendum 22. E. 1. in
Registro Henr. Prioris.

23. E. 1. apud Dugdal. Summon.


; and when the one Summoned ad Ordinandum only Registr. Hen. Pr. Fol. 69. Dugd.
Sum. p. 13.
, or ad Faciendum and Consentiendum 17. E. 2. Dugd. p. 92. Pryn. Reg. Parl. Wr.
Vol. 2. p. 77. 5 E. 3. Dugd. p. 163. Pryn. Ibid. p. 86, etc.
, so did the other: The Minute Alterations of these Forms taking place in both
Writs at once, in various Instances; and the Procuratoria, which were framed
upon those Writs for the Lower Clergy, answering almost in Terms the Returns
that were made for the Pryn R. P. W. 4. Vol. p. 436.
Laity. To omit other Correspondencies which might be observed, if these were
not sufficient, to show, That the Clergy brought to Parliament by the
Premunientes, were to all intents and purposes, what they were long afterward
in the Rolls of Parliament called, The Commons Spiritual of the Realm.

This Clause, how much soever to the real Interest and Advantage of the Lower
Clergy, was yet thought a Burden by them, and an inroad upon their
Privileges; and they tried all ways therefore of withstanding or declining it;
but in vain: for the Genius of that mighty Monarch, who was not used to be
baffled in any Attempt, carried it against all their Opposition. And the Ground
he had thus gained upon them, he kept throughout all his Reign; as appears by
the Records of the last Parliament (but the First, whose Proxy Roll is
preserved) which Ryley has Printed at l^^gth in his Placita Parliamentaria P.
321.
. There the Proxy's are entered of every Bishop Abbot, Prior, Dean, and
Archdeacon, that did not Personally appear in Parliament, as also of the Clergy
of every Chapter and Diocese.

But a weak Prince, and a disorderly Government succeeding, they laid hold of
that favorable Opportunity to resume their pretenses to Exemption. The wise
Maxim was now forgotten by which they governed themselves, and made their stand
against the Pope in Henry the Third's Reign [ Regnum and Sacerdotium nullatenus
sint divisa An. Burt. P. 307.
]: A Maxim, that never hurt the Clergy when they stuck to it, as it has never
prosper'd with them when they departed from it; nor, I believe, ever will. They
liked not the Premunientes at first, and the severe Taxes they had smarted
under ever since it went out, made them like it still worse; and had quite
altered their Mind and their Measures: So that now they thought, their Interest
and Safety lay in Uniting as closely with the Pope, and Dividing as far as they
could from the Laity. The Archbishop, no doubt, favoring this Opinion, with a
prospect of sharing the Pope's Power over them; and under the Pretense that it
would be more for the Honor of him and his Clergy to be still by Themselves in
Two Assemblies of Convocation, answerable in some proportion to the Two Houses
of Parliament; according to Bishop Ravis's just and impartial In his Reasons
for a Reunion presented to Q. Eliz. Hist. Ref. Part 2. Coll. of Records, n. 18.
Observation. The Separation therefore was resolved on; attempted in Edward the
First's, advanced very far in Edward the Second's, and fully settled in Edward
the Third's Reign.

Even under the former of these Princes, though the Clergy obeyed the
Parliamentary Summons duly, yet were they backward to answer the Ends of it,
unless they might do it in their own Manner; and therefore referred themselves
more than once to a Fuller Assembly of the Province, to be gathered by the
Archbishop; where they knew they should be joined by All the Religious, and by
Their help be enabled either better to put off the Burden that might be laid
upon them, or better to bear it.

His easy Successor was prevailed with yet further, to mix Authorities, and to
take the Archbishop's Power along with him in Convening them; so that under him
the way was often, when the Bishop's Writ with the Clause Premunientes went
out, to send Two other Writs to the Two Metropolitans, directing them to cite
Those [and Those Only] of their Province by a general Mandate, which were
Summoned severally by the Bishops Writs. But because this, though a great
Condescension of the Crown, was still an Hardship upon the Archbishop, out of
whose Province the Parliament was held, who could not regularly bring his
Subjects to any place not within his Jurisdiction; and because it was known to
be more agreeable to the Rules of the Church, and found to be more conducive to
the Peace of the State In respect to the Controversy about the Supreme Bearing
of the Archiepiscopal Crosses; which never raged so high, as when the
Archbishops met one another at the Head of the Clergy of their Provinces.
, that the Clergy of each Province should Assemble apart; therefore this
Accommodation afterward took place; That the Premunientes should still Summon
them from the King to meet Parliamentarily, but that sufficient Obedience
should be understood to be paid to it, if the Clergy met Provincially, though
not at the same Place, yet about the same Time, and to the same Purpose, to be
ready to hear what should be Proposed from the King; to give their Advice when
asked, and their Consent when requisite; to offer their Aids, and their
Petitions; and, in short, to answer the necessary Affairs of the King and
Kingdom.

Not that the Clause Premunientes now grew useless and insignificant: for still
the Bishop (who executed the Royal Writs upon the Clergy of the Diocese, as the
Sheriff did upon the Laity of the County) when he received his Summons to
Parliament, transmitted it to those of the Lower Clergy concerned; and they
still made their returns to it: Such of them as were not to Attend in Person,
formally Impowering their Proctors to Appear and Consent for them in
Parliament, according to the Tenor of the Bishops Writ; though those Proctors
sat afterward and acted in Convocation. An instance of such a Procuratorium
for the Parliament, I have seen as low as 1507. and another of an execution of
the Premunientes by the Bishop; yet lower in the Reign of Edward the Sixth;
though Returns had then Ceased, or at least were not Entered. Thus the Forms
were kept up, and by that means the King's Right of Summoning the Clergy
asserted and owned: And, so the State-ends of Summoning them were also
answered, they were left to do it in an Ecclesiastical way; and to attend the
Parliament and the Business of it, not in One Body, as they were called, but in
Two Provincial Assemblies. This they did at first by the Connivance of the
Crown, rather than any express Allowance; the Archbishop of his own accord
sending out a Provincial Citation concurrently with the Bishops Writs of
Summons; which Method obtaining, and these Meetings of the Province being
tacitly accepted in lieu of the Clergy's resort to Parliament; it grew
necessary for the King to employ his Authority also in Convening them; for
otherwise it had been at the Archbishop's Discretion, whether he would have any
such Meetings or not; and so the Crown might have lost the Clergy's Assistance
in Parliament. This gave birth to the custom of issuing out Two
Convocation-Writs, when a New Parliament was to be Chosen; which though set on
foot before, yet settled not into a Rule till some Years after Edward the Third
was in the Throne; and then it was practiced as duly and regularly, and in much
the same manner as it is at this day: Take one Instance (and that not the
Earliest which might be given) instead of many.

In the Parliament Roll of his Eighteenth Year we read, That it had been agreed
for the urgent Affairs of the Kingdom, to hold a Parliament at Westminster [on
the Monday after the Octaves of Trinity] and that the Archbishop should call a
Convocation of the Prelates and others of the Clergy of his Province, to the
Church of St. Paul's, London, on the Morrow of Trinity, for the Dispatch of the
said Affairs. To which Convocation none of the greater Prelates came on the
said Morrow of Trinity, or in the Eight days ensuing, except the Archbishop,
[or Two or Three other Bishops there named] as the King was given to
understand; at which he much marvelled: As also that the Great Men were not
come to the Parliament upon the Day to which they were Summoned: -- And he
charged the Archbishop therefore to do what belonged to him, in relation to
those of the Clergy of his Province, who came not to the said Convocation, nor
Obeyed his Mandate: And the King would do what belonged to himself, in relation
to such as came not to Parliament, nor Obeyed his Commands. Rot. Par. 18. E. 3.
n. 1.


If we supply this Record with the Writs extant on the Back of the Roll, it
will appear that the Clergy were Summoned here just as they are now, by the
Archbishop, at the King's Order, or Letter of Request, as it was then deemed
and Even by the Crown it self; for in the 25 E. 3. a Writ to the Archbishop of
York, in the Close Roll of that Year recites, that the Archbishop of Canterbury
had called his Clergy in Quindena Paschae, ad Rogatum Nostrum.
styled; though it ran, as now, Rogando Mandamus, and though the peremptory
Time and Place of the Clergy's Assembling were prefixed by it: and we see
therefore that Punishment is Ordered in the Roll for their disobeying the
Archbishop's Mandate; but not a word of their not complying with the King's
Summons. But this was only the Language of Popery, by which they kept up their
pretenses to Exemption; and the Clergy were indulged in the Form, so the Thing
were but effectually done; which was, to have them Meet together with the
Parliament, and for the Dispatch of the same urgent Affairs of the Kingdom Pur
treter, Parler, and ordeigner ce que soit miet, affair pur l' esploit des dit
busoignes -- Are the Words of the Roll; and one of these words is that from
whence the Name of Parliament is derived.
; for which the Parliament Met. And this was no new Practice, but a Method now
Settled and Customary; of which, various Precedent Instances might, if they
were needful, be given; but it is a short and sufficient Proof of it, that the
Words of the the King's Writ to the Archbishop run, More solito convocari
faciatis.

We shall find also, that the Archbishop of York had a Writ for That Province,
as the Archbishop of Canterbury had for This; only he was to Convene his Clergy
about a Fortnight Later, than the other Province met Province of Canterbury met
on the Morrow of Trinity, i. e. May 31. Easter falling that Year on April 4.
That of York the Wednesday after St. Barnabas, i. e. June 16.
. And in this the way then taken varied a little from Modern Practice, which
has made those Two Meetings perfectly Coincident. But the ancient Usage was,
for the Clergy of Canterbury to Assemble first, in order to set the President,
which it was expected that the other Province should almost implicitly follow:
and with reason; since, if the Two Provinces had continued to attend the
Parliament in One Body, as they did of Old, the York Clergy would have had no
Negative upon the Parliamentary Grants of the Clergy; being a very
unproportioned part of the Assembly. When therefore they desired to Meet and
grant Separately, the Crown had reason to expect, that what the greater
Province did, should be a Rule to the less, or otherwise not to have consented
to their Separation. Very early in the Rolls therefore this Passage occurs,
That the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Nobles [the King's Commissioners
in his absence] should require the Archbishop of York to contribute for the
Defense of the North, as They [ i. e. I suppose, as the Archbishop of
Canterbury and his Clergy] had done 13 E. 3. n. 18.
. And even in Church Acts, as well as State Aids, what had passed the one, was
held to be a kind of Law to the other; so that in 1463 we find the Convocation
of York adopting at once all the Constitutions made by that of Canterbury, and
as yet not received Memorand. quod Praelati and Clerus in Convocatione 1463.
Concedunt Unanimiter, quod Effectus Constitutionum Provincialium Cantuar. Prove.
ante haec tempora tent. and habit. Constitutionibus Prove. Ebor. nullo modo
repugnant, seu prejudicial and non aliter nec alio modo admittantur. Et quod
hujusmodi Constitutiones Prove. Cant. and Effectus earundem, ut praefertur,
inter Constitutiones Provinciae Ebor. prout indiget, and decet in serantur, and
cum eisdem de caetero servandae incorporentur, and pro Jure observentur.
Registrum Both. Arch. Ebor. f. 143.
; a Practice that I doubt not was often in elder times repeated, and we know is
still continued.

And as the time of the Convocation of Canterbury's assembling was, in this and
in most oother Ancient Instances different from that of her Sister Province; so
was it, we see, different also from that of Parliament. Here it preceded, Seven
Days.
but generally it followed the Parliament a Week or two; on purpose, as I
apprehend, that the Bishops and Parliamentary Abbots might be at leisure to
attend both those Meetings. And this was the usual Distance throughout Edward
the Third, and Richard the Second's Reigns, till Henry the Fourth began to
enlarge it; in and after whose time the Clergy held their Assemblies during,
and near the Sessions of Parliament, but not thoroughly concurrent with them;
the Archbishop it seems, affecting Independency, and the King, who above all
things desired to stand well with the Clergy, favoring him and them in that
respect; and giving way to their being called later, or dismissed sooner than
the Laity, as having been already answered in his Demands, at that, or some
other Synod of the Province, called out of Parliament-time: Such Assemblies
being frequent in those days, and transacting all Affairs that belonged even to
Parliamentary Convocations.

But this was only an Interruption of the Old Practice for a time, not a
through alteration of it: for about the Entrance of the last Age, when the
Prerogative began to recover the Ground it had lost to the Church, we find
these Meetings of the Clergy and Laity more closely united; the Dates of Henry
the Eighth's Convocation being all one, or a few days before, or after, (if not
altogether the same with) those of his Parliaments: And from 1 Edw. 6. to this
Reign the Clergy have, I think, met always and parted within a day of the
Parliament; the day it self on which the Parliament sat and rose, being not
judged so proper for this purpose, because the Bishops were then to attend the
House of Lords. But since the late Revolution, the Business of these Two
Meetings not interfering, the same day has served to open both of 'em; or
rather to open the one, and shut up the other. There have been no Deviations
from this Rule that I know of, except in a Legatin Synod or two; (which are no
Presidents) and once in the Convocation of 1640: but that Experiment succeeded
too ill to be ever tried a Second Time.

The Clergy therefore, though by a Mistake in their Politics separated from the
Parliament, yet continued still to attend it, in Two Provincial Assemblies, or
Convocations: which, as they met for the same Purpose, and had the same Reasons
of State inserted into their Writs of Summons, as the Parliament had; so did
they (to manifest yet more their Origin and Alliance) keep closely up to the
Forms, and Rules, and Manner of Sitting, and Acting, practiced in Parliament. I
cannot do right to my Subject, without pointing out several Particulars,
wherein this Conformity was preserved; and I shall not therefore, I hope, be
misinterpreted in doing it.

The Two Houses of Parliament sat together Originally; and so therefore did the
Two Houses of Convocation: of which, to omit other Proofs, I shall mention that
only which may be drawn from the Inferior Clergy's being sent as Delegates from
the Bishops to represent, and act for 'em in Convocation: an Usage, which though
practiced long after the Greater Prelates divided from the Less, yet must, in
all Probability, have had its Rise, when they were together; as the like Custom
also in Parliament had: whither the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being used to
send Commoners to Vote for them, while the States were together, continued the
Practice also, long after they were asunder; as appears, on the Spiritual Side,
by Numerous Instruments of Proxy, yet remaining in the Bishops Registers; and,
on the Temporal, by some Probable Inferences of Mr. Elsyng Cap. 5. p. 126.
; though Direct Proofs of it are, together with the Proxy Rolls, lost One I find,
in the 5 H. 5. where Th. de la War, a Baron gives Letters of Proxy to two
Commoners; and those (which is very particular) of the Clergy: but his case was
particular for his Barony descended to him after he was in Orders; and he is
styled therefore constantly Magister, and not Dom. de la War in his Summons
to Parliament.


As the Commons in Process of Time withdrew from the Peers, so did the Inferior
Clergy from the Bishops and Abbats: Each having their Prolocutor in ordinary
(the very Word, that is used every where in the Latin Rolls And sometimes in
the English Iournals. See Sir Symonds d'Ewe^, p. 15. and p. 328, etc.
for the Speaker) and not withdrawing only from the Great Lords upon occasion,
for Liberty of Debate, and in order the better to agree, upon their Petitions,
and Opinions, as I presume they always did even in the Old mixed Assemblies; but
meeting together, at the very first in a Distinct Body, and joining with the
Upper House only on Great Occasions.

The Prolocutor was so chosen, as the Speaker, by the Body, whose Mouth he was;
so presented to the Archbishop, and confirmed by him, as the other was by the
King. His Office was much the same on either side; He moderated their Debates,
kept them to Order, and attended the Lords sometimes with the sense of the
House; and at the Entrance of his Office, disabled himself in form; several
Instances of which occur in the latter Acts of Convocation Act. MS. Conv. 1541
Sess. 2. and 1554. Sess. 3. and 1562. ad Ian. 16.
.

Bills of Money, and Grievances, (but especially the latter) began usually in
the Lower House, here, as well as there; had alike several Readings; and were
Enacted at the Petition of that House, as Statutes anciently were: and the
Successive Variations in the Enacting Forms of our Statutes were observed and
transcribed generally into the Clergy's Constitutions.

Their Subsidies were often given Conditionally, and with Appropriating
Clauses; and Indentures drawn upon those Conditions, between the Archbishop and
the King, if the Grant was to the Crown; or between the Archbishop and the
Prolocutor of the Lower House Scriptutura Indentata -- inter Reverendissimum
Tho -- ex una part, and Mag. Dogett Prolocutorem Cleri -- and eundem Clerum ex
altera testatur quod dictus Clerus -- concessit dicto Reverendissimo Patri
Caritativum Subsidium -- Registrum Wottonian. ad fin.

And so the Commons granted, per quandam Indenturam Sigillo Prolocutoris
Sigillatam.


, if to the Archbishop; just as the Way was in the Grants of the Commons.

In Matters of Jurisdiction the Upper House gave Sentence, the Lower House
prosecuted, as was usual in Parliament: for which reason the Act of H. 8. 24 H.
8. c. 12.
which in all Causes relating to the King or his Successors, allowed an Appeal
to Convocation, mentioned the Bishops, Abbats and Priors of the Upper House
only, because They only were Judges.

But over their Own Members both Houses of Convocation had Power, in like
manner as those of Parliament; which they exercised, either jointly, or apart;
by Mulcts See an Instance An 1462. in Anth. Harmar. p. 32.
, and Confinements If you will not give place ( quoth the Prolocutor to
Archdeacon Philpot; being Commissioned, I suppose, so to speak, by the House) I
will send you to Prison. This is not, quoth Philpot, according to your Promise*
etc. not denying the House's Power, but the Justice only of exerting it in his
Case. Fox.
sometimes: but chiefly, by inflicting Ecclesiastical Censures; by
Excommunicating See Instance of Bishop Cheyney, Excommunicated for departing
the Convocation without Leave. Hist. of the Troubl. and Try. of Laud. p. 82.
, Suspending See Bancroft' s Register, fol. 138, 139. for an Instance of a
Dean, an Archdeacon, and a Proctor suspended, for deserting the Synod --
Mandatis nostris licitis vel Prolocutoris dictae Convocationis minime
obtemperantes, -- As the Archbishop's Sentence of Suspension runs.
, Depriving See an Instance of Bishop Goodman, Sentenced to be deprived by the
Convoc. of 1640. for refusing to subscribe the Canons. Heyl. Life of Laud. Page
446.
.

My Lord of Sarum has suggested Hist. Ref. Vol. 1. p. 130.
another Branch of this Parallel; that as none were of the Lower House of
Parliament, but such as came thither by Election, and all that had Personal
Summons, sat Above; so the Lower House of Convocation was composed of those who
were deputed thither from others, and the Upper of such as sat in their own
Right. But this Conjecture contradicting not only the Records of the
Convocations in Henry the Eighth's Reign (to which my Lord applys it) but all
the Elder Accounts of our Synods in the Archbishop's Registers; where the
Deans, and Archdeacons are said always, as now, to sit together with the
Proctors of the Clergy; I am sorry, that I cannot fall in with it: the rather,
because it would give me an opportunity of adorning these Rude Collections with
something drawn from his Lordship's Exacter Works, and of making him my Public
Acknowledgments for it.

His Lordship would perhaps have omitted this Guess, had he considered, that
the Provincial Assemblies of the Clergy were (as I have shown) in lieu of that
Parliamentary Attendance which the Crown challenged by the Premunientes; and
their Session therefore in Two Houses was adapted to the Parliamentary Summons:
so that between Them and the Laiety the Parallel in this respect ran, that, as
all of the Laiety who were Summoned singly Singillatim and in Generali, are the
words of Art used to distinguish these Two sorts of Summons in K. John 's
Charter.
by the King, sat in Parliament as Peers, and all who were Summoned generally
by the Sheriff, as Commoners; so in the Convocation, all of the Clergy, who had
been called immediately, and by Name to Parliament, belonged to the Bishop's
house; but such as were used to be cited at second Hand only, and Mediante
Episcopo (as Deans, Cathedral-Priors These for a long time after the
Distinction of the two Houses of Convocation, sat in the Lower House; but
afterward with the other Priors and Abbats in the Upper.
, Archdeacons, and the Proctors of the Clergy) sat apart by themselves.

That which led his Lordship into this Opinion was it seems a Passage in
Ioscelin Ad Ann. 1532.
, where a Question About the Unlawfulness of the King's first Marriage.
is said to have been carried for the Crown by 216 in the Upper House; ( i. e.
by the whole Upper House, for there were none against it) whereas in the Lower,
23. only were present, and but 14. of those for it. Which Disparity of Numbers
his Lordship is at a loss how to account for otherwise than by the Supposition
laid down. But since that is plainly Erroneous, I may, I hope, without
Presumption, endeavor to solve the Difficulty another way. His Lordship knows
very well, that the Bishops with those Abbats and Priors, who were of some
consideration, amounted to several Hundreds in Number; out of which there is no
doubt but 216 might be got to do the King's Business; especially at that
Critical Juncture, when the General Dissolution of Monasteries was threatened,
and already in part begun For in June before this Convocation sat, the King
procured a Bull from the Pope to suppress several. Hist. Ref. 1. Vol. p. 121.
and the Regulars had no way to escape the Storm which they saw gathering, but
by complying with the King's Demands, though never so unreasonable: Whereas the
Inferior Seculars having no such Fears, and lying generally out of the Reach
either of the Awe or Bribes of a Court, were as backward to give their helping
hand in this case as the Religious were forward; and but 14. therefore of the
Lower House could be prevailed with to lend the King a Vote. This perhaps may
be no improbab^e Solution of the Difficulty, if after all it ^e not a Numeral
Mistake of the Transcriber, or Printer; such as I find sometimes in that Work
(I mean in the Hanover Edition of it, which alone I have): for instance, the
C^nvocation in 1536, is said to meet Nonis Iulii, instead of Nono [die] Iulii:
for it met not on the 5 th. but the 9 th. of July, as the Writ still extant
shows.

But enough of this: -- I return to those Marks of Resemblance which were
between the Parliament and Convocation long after they separated; and by which,
as by some common Ensigns of Honor, the One of these may be plainly discerned
to be of the same Family and Descent, as it were, with the Other.

The Instruments impowering the Proctors of the Clergy to act for the several
Dioceses were drawn up, I have said, in the same Form almost with those for the
Knights of Shires. I add, that they had equally Wages from those they
represented: and those Wages were laid on the Diocese with the same Distinction
that the Others were on the County; all such as came Personally to Parliament,
either as Counselors, or Assistants, being excused from contributing to em:
not to descend to yet minuter Differences, which were still on both sides alike
observed

And which is very Material, the Proctors enjoying these Expenses, are in the
Writs and Records of that time expressly said to be entitled to 'em, on the
account of their Service in Parliament: though, strictly speaking, they sat not
in Parliament; but only, as they do now; in a Convocation held concurrently
with it. Of which I will stop to give the Reader here two very significant
Instances: the One is, of a Discharge which the Abbat of Leicester obtained
from Personal Attendance on the Parliament, on condition, as the Patent speaks,
Quod dictus Abbas and successores sui in Procuratores ad hujusmodi Parliamenta
and Concilia per Clerum mittendos consentiant, and, ut moris est, expensis
contribuant eorundem Pat. 26. E. 3. par. 1. M. 22. See it in Selden's Tit. of
Hon. par. 2. c. 5. p. 607.
. The other is, of a Writ in Fitz-herbert Not. Prev.. 141.
, forbidding the Archdeacon to compel the King's Clerks in Chancery attending
his Parliaments, though Beneficed in the Diocese, ad contribuendum ratione
beneficiorum suorum Expensis Procuratorum qui ad dictum Parliamentum pro Clero
dictae Dioeces. venerunt, seu aliorum Procuratorum, quos ad alia Parliamenta,
etc. per nos nunc tenenda venire continget. This Writ issued by Authority of
Parliament; for it recites an Ordinance, made to this purpose in a Parliament
held 4 R. 2. Not 4 E. 3. as the Printed Writ in Fitzh. implys; for no
Parliament met at Northampton in the 4 th. Year of his Reign.
and is founded upon it.

And that the Levy of these Expenses continued throughout the succeeding
Reigns, to the very time of the Reformation, I have seen a good Proof, in a
certain Bishop's Mandate Anno 1543.
, for collecting a Penny in the Pound to this purpose: which, it says, De
laudabili legitimeque praescripta Consuetudine -- in qualibet Convocatione
hujusmodi contribui solebat, and solet, and ex aequitate, consideratis
praemissis, debet. How long afterward they were paid, or when first
discontinu'd, I know not; but suppose, that the Disuse of them, as to the
Deputed Clergy, might come on by much the same steps, and about the same time
that it did in the House of Commons.

In one thing however the Clergy Delegates differed from those of the Laity;
that the first, though Proxys themselves, could, upon occasion, appoint other
Proxys in their stead, if their Instruments ran, Cum potestate substituendi
alium Procuratorem, as they often anciently did And sometimes of late: for 1 E.
6. One of the Proctors for the Clergy of Hereford appointed Two others in his
room. [ See Synodalia.] And in his last Year the Procuratorium for the Dean and
Chapter of Paul 's had that Clause in it: for so it stands entered in Bishop
Ridley's Register. Fol. 294.
. Whereas I find no Instance, that this was ever practiced among the Commons:
The reason of which I conceive to be, that the Clergy were to attend the Call,
not only of the King in his Parliaments, but of the Pope, and the Archbishop
also in their several Synods; and having therefore a Greater Burden in this
respect than the Laity, were indulged also a Greater Liberty.

Further, the Members of Convocation had not only Parliamentary Wages, but
Parliamentary Privileges too; and those, I question not, from their first
Separation: though we find, that they were solemnly settled upon them, long
afterward, in the 8 H. 6. But that Act might be made, as well to affirm the Old
Privileges, which, after the Clergy had been dismembered so long, might begin
to be disputed; as to add the New, which had accru'd, since the Separation: and
withal to confer them both, not only on Parliamentary Convocations, but on
Convocations in general, whenever meeting at the King's Summons.

Nor was the Separation so complete, but that the Inferior Clergy joined
Occasionally with the Laity, and attended the King together with the States of
Parliament; either at the first Opening, or Dissolution of it, or at other
solemn times, when the King came to the House of Lords, and something was to be
done en plein Parliament, i. e. in a Full Assembly of the Clergy and Laity, as
that Expression sometimes in the Elder Rolls seems to imply 6 E. 3. n. 9.
Something is said to be agreed, per touz en plein Parliament; and those are thus
reckoned up before in the same Number, -- Les Prelates, Countes, Baronns, and
touz les autres Somons a mesme le Parliament: which includes the Inferior
Clergy, for They were Summoned this time by the Premunientes. See Dugd. p. ^67*
. That they appeared anciently in Parliament, the first day of its Session, the
Roll of the first Parliament held 6 E. 3. is a clear Proof: where, after Sir
Ieffery le Scroop, had in the King's Presence; declard the Causes of calling
it, it is said, that the Bishops, and Proctors of the Clergy, went apart to Si
alerent mesmes les Prelatz and les Procurators de la Clergy per eux mesmes, a
conseiler de chooses susdites. --
consult by themselves. That they came thither also on other Solemn Occasions,
during the Session, the following Passage implies; where, upon the King's
declaring the Bishop of Norwich's Pardon from the Throne, it is said, that the
Archbishop, with his Brethren, the Abbats, and Priors, and the Clergy, there
assembled Ft la (...) illoneques esteant^ -- (Rot. Parl. 2 H. 4. n. 14.) By
which, whether the Convocation-Clergy be meant, cannot, I think, well bear a
Doubt; it being very improbable, that those few Inferior Clerks, who were of
the King's Counsel, or otherwise called up to the House of Lords, should be
only intended.
, most humbly kneeling, thanked his Majesty for his Royal Grace and Goodness.
Which I mention the rather, because the Abridgement of the Rolls P. 405.
takes no notice of any but Bishops, on this occasion.

But these are rare Instances: we have oftener Accounts of the Lower House of
Convocation joining with that of Parliament, (not indeed in one Assembly, but
however) in the same Parliamentary Requests; and there are many Instances, by
which it appears, that they were in such Requests, and on other Occasions,
still reputed, and called a part of the Community of the Realm. Witness that
Petition in Parliament to Hen. the 4 th. which begins, The Commons of your
Realm, as well Spiritual as Temporal Supplien^ humblement les Communes de
vostre Roialme, si bien Espirituelz come Temporelz. Rot. Parl. 7, and 8. Hen.
4. n. 128.
most humbly pray. And here again the Abridgment is remarkably silent. And this
Style I can trace as low as the 35 H. 8. a Proclamation of which year recites,
that, The Nobles and Commons both Spyrytuall and Temporal assembled in our
Court of Parliamente have upon Good Lawful and Virtuous Grounds, and for the
Public Weal of this our Realm, by oone hole Assente granted, and annexed,
knytte and unyed to the Crown Imperyall of the same the Title, Dignitye, and
Style of Supreme Heed in Earth ymmediatelye under Godd of the Church of
England.

The Proclamation is in Bonner's Register Fol. 42.
, which though my Lord of Sarum perused, yet, it seems, he overlooked this Paper,
and the Passage I have mentioned from it: I must believe so, because it is upon
so Material a Point, and expressed in so Extraordinary a Manner, that, had his
Lordship observed it, he would, methinks, have given his Readers notice of it.

Many years therefore after the Clergy had submitted, they are, by their
Supreme Head himself owned, to be the Commons Spiritual of Parliament. And when
therefore in the O^d Rolls we find 'em not expressly mentioned as such, we must
believe, that they lay hid often under the General Denomination of Commons; as
the Case plainly was in the Petition just now produced, which is entered in the
Rolls among the Petitions of the Commons, though the Clergy joined in it; and as
it probably was in that mentioned by Mr. Elsyng ( page 275. but with false
Numbers) where the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Et autres Gens de la
Cominaltie d'Engleterre, pray that they may let out to Farm the Wastes of
Manors held of the King in capite, without his License, -- which being the
Case of many Inferior Clergymen, who held such Manors of the Crown, it is to
be supposed that they also joined in the Petition, and are under the [ Autres
Gens de la Cominaltie] included. But more express to this purpose is the
Statute of the Clergy, 18 E. 3. which recites I take the words of it from
Rastal, with the more assurance, because Pryn says he has compared the Print
with the Record, and that they agree. Abridg. of Rec. p. 44.
, That the Prelates, Great Men, and Commons, had advised and aided the King --
and afterward -- the Great Men aforesaid grant so and so -- and the said
Prelates and Procurators of the Clergy grant so and so: whereas there is no
Previous Mention of the Procurators of the Clergy, but under the Title of
Commons.

To these many other Records might be added, which mention the
Convocation-Clergy as of the Parliament, and in it: But, that I may not load
the Reader, a few of these taken from the Beginning, the Middle, and the End of
that Period, we are considering, shall suffice. The rest will find as proper a
place in another part of these Collections: and thither therefore I shall refer
the Reader for an account of them.

In the 10 E. 3. a Writ issued to the Archbishop of York, reciting, that the
Clergy of Canterbury-Province had given the King a Tenth in Parliamento nostro
Westminster, and exciting Him and his Clergy to follow their Example Cl. 10 E.
3. m. 36. dors.
.

The like Recitals are to be met with often in latter Writs, as particularly in
43 E. 3. Cl. m. 6. Dors. which begins, Rex Archo. Cant. salutem. Qualiter
negotia nostra tam Nos and Statum Regni nostri quam necessariam defensionem
ejusdem concernentia ac onera nobis per hoc incumbentia Vobis and Aliis in
ultimo Parliamento nostro existentibus before exposuimus vos non latet. Ad
quorum onerum supportationem absque adjutorio fidelium nostrorum non
sufficimus, sicut scitis; propter quod aliquod subsidium congruum in
supportationem tantorum onerum a Vobis and Aliis de Clero Dioeceseos and
Provinciae vestrarum in dicto Parliamento tunc existentibus nobis concedi
petivimus, etc. And the same Passage in Terms recurs in another Letter of the
same kind to the Archbishop two years afterward, Cl. 45 E. 3. m. 35. Dors.

The Great Deed of Entail in the 8 Hen. 4. by which the Crown was settled on his
Heirs male, and which was witnessed by the Great Men, and by Sir I. Typtot the
Speaker, in behalf of the whole Body of the Commons, recites, Quod in
Parliamento nostro apud Westminster, 7o. Die Iulii Anno Regni nostri 7o. per
nos de consensu and avisamento omnium Praelatorum Magnatum and Procerum ac
Cleri and Communitatis regni nostri Angliae fuerit Statutum and Ordinatum. --
And proceeds to make void what had been so ordained in these Memorable words,
Nos igitur -- ad instantem Petitionem eorundem Praelatorum Magnatum Procerum,
Cleri and Communitatis supradictae, and de eorum omnium and singulorum
Voluntate and Assensu expressis, nec non nostra and praesentis Parliamenti
nostri auctoritate Statutum and Ordinationem praedictam cassamus and adnullamus
-- Nec non ad eorundem Praelatorum Magnatum, Procerum, Cleri, and Communitatis
praedictae Petitionem and Rogatum, ac de E^rum Consensu concordi and
auctoritate, etc.

And this too Pryn has abridg'd See Abr. of Records, p. 454.
in his way, without taking notice of these Passages, which are so Material and
Instructive. The Original Record with all its appendant Seals entire, (though the
Deed it self be canceled) is preserved still in the Cottonian Library Inter
Chartas in Pyxide Galba.
; and affords a manifest Proof of the Interest which the Convocation Clergy at
that time had in Parliament: for it would be ridiculous to imagine that by
Clergy in this Instrument, thus placed between the Lords and Lay-Commons, any
other than the Convocation-Clergy are intended.

For near 140 years afterward, the Language I find continued the same in the
Bishops Mandates to their Archdeacons for the Collection of Subsidies: for thus
speaks one of Bonner's In Registro.
, Cum Praelati and Clerus Prove. Cant. in Parliamento hujus regni Angliae
nuperrime apud Westminster tento, and celebrato quoddam Subsidium sub certis
modo and forma tunc expressis Illustrissimo, etc. Ex nonnullis rationabilibus
causis dederint and concesserint, etc. Oct. 10. 1543.

And if I should beyond all this affirm, that the Convocation attended the
Parliament, as One of the Three States of the Realm, I should say no more than
the Rolls have in express Terms said before me; where the King is mentioned as
calling Tres Status Regni ad Palatium suum Westminster. viz. Praelatos and Clerum,
Nobiles, and Magnates, nec non Communitates dicti regni Rot Parl. 9 H. 5. n. 15.
. And when more than Three States are mentioned (as in the Ancient Piece of the
Manner of Holding Parliaments) the Inferior Clergy is still reckoned as one of
them. Judge Thirnyng therefore thus addresses himself to Richard the IId, at
his Deposition See the Roll of Parliam. Printed at the End of X. Script. p.
2760.
.

SIRE It is well know to zowe that there was a Parliament Somond of all the
States of the Reaume for to be at Westmynstre, etc. because of the which
Sommons all the States of t^is Land were there gadyr'd, the which States hole
made these same persons that been comen here to zowe now her Procuratours and
gafen him full auctorite and Power and charged him for to say the words that
we shall say to zowe in her name, and on their behalve; that is to wytten the
Bishop of Seint Assa for Ersbishoppes and Bishops; the Abbot of Gla^^enbury
for Abbots and Priours, and all other Men of Holy Church, Seculers, and
Rewelers, the Earl of Gloucestre for Dukes and Earls, the Lord of Berkeley for
Barons and Banerettes, Sir Thomas Irpyngham Chamberleyn for all the Bachilers
and Commons of this Land be south, Sire Thomas Gray for all the Bachilers and
Commons by North, and my Felawe John Markham and Me to come with him for All
this States; and so Sire these words and the doying that we sall say to zowe
is not onlych our words bot the words and doyings of all the States of this
Land, etc.

I desire not to be misunderstood in the Recital of these Testimonies: I have
no other Aim in 'em than barely to show, that the Inferior Clergy, though meeting
and consulting apart from the Parliament, yet were still reckoned to belong to
it, and to be (in some sense, and to some Purposes) a Member of it; and
together with the Prelates of the Upper House to compose (not indeed one of the
Three Estates of Parliament, but however) an Estate of the Realm, assembling
jointly with the Parliament, and obliged by the Rules of our Constitution to
attend always upon it. If my Proofs may be allowed to reach thus far, (and I
have no manner of Mistrust but that they will) I give up willingly whatever
beyond this they may seem to imply; which neither my Argument, nor my
Inclination any ways leads me to maintain. It is so far from being in my
Intention, that it is not in my Wishes, to set up a Plea for any of those Old
Privileges and Preheminences of the Clergy, which are long since Dead, and
Buried; and which, I think, ought never to be revived, even for the sake o^ the
Clergy themselves, who have thriven best always under a Competency of Power,
and Moderate Pretenses. The Present Rights they stand plainly possessed of by
Law, are sufficient to render them useful Members of the Commonwealth, within
their Proper Spheres, and that these Rights may be well understood, and
secured, is the great and only design of these Papers. To that end I have
vouched the Precedent Passages from the Records of Parliament and Convocation:
not to set up any vain Pretense, to the utmost of that Parliamentary Interest,
which the Clergy sometime had; but to secure only what remains of it to them,
by showing, that their Separation from Parliament, did not cut them off from
all manner of Relation to it; but that still, after that, their Convocations,
though held at a distance from the Parliament, were, in their own nature, as
well as in the Acceptance of the Crown, and in the Eye of the Law,
Parliamentary Assemblies.

These Parliamentary Meetings of the Clergy were at first Congregationes, or
Convocationes Cleri; but not therefore Concilia Provincialia: Which were
Extraordinary Assemblies for Church Business only; for the restoring lapsed
Discipline, and reforming Ecclesiastical Abuses: whereas the Others were
originally held for Civil Purposes alone, and the Common Affairs of the State.
And when Archbishop Stratford therefore called a Council of his Province By a
Writ dated 10 Kal. Aug. 1341. which begins thus -- Quamvis sit Sacris Canonibus
Constitutum quod Metropolitani, Archiepiscopi, and Primates annis singulis
Legitimo Impedimento cessante, pro Excessibus corrigendis, and Moribus
reformandis, debeant Provinciale Concilium celebrare.
, the Preamble of his Letters Summonitory owns, both the Obligation he was
under by the Canons of Assembling them Yearly, and his having omitted to do it
for Eight Years last past; though, doubtless, he had often in that time
Convened the Clergy of his Province to Parliament. However this Distinction
held not very long; the Business of Provincial Councils being in tract of time
done in the ordinary Congregations of the Clergy; and these and those being
promiscuously styled Convocations: Till at last Provincial Councils, properly
so called, ceased altogether; and Parliamentary Convocations came into their
room: The Frequency and fixed Certainty of which, gave the Clergy a Regular
Opportunity of doing all that for which the other Synods did but occasionally
serve. And when Warham therefore in 1509. did by his Own Authority call a Synod
for the Redress of Abuses, and Reformation of Manners, his Mandate warned it to
meet a few days after the Parliament Parliament Met, Jan. 21. Convocation, Jan.
26. See Mandate in Bishop Burnet 's Collection of Records, Vol. I. p. 6.
, and styled it, not a Provincial Council, but a Convocation of the Clergy: And
this Word therefore afterward in the Submission-Act (as I understand it) was
applied strictly to signify, the Clergy's Parliamentary Meetings: For
otherwise, it could with no color of Truth have been affirmed, as it is,
there, That the Convocation had always been Assembled by the King's Writ;
unless both the Submitters and Enacters had by the Word Convocation understood
the Consults of the Clergy in time of Parliament: which, in some sense, were
held always by the King's Writ, that is, by the Premunitory Clause in the
Bishops Summons: and, let me add, are so held still; as good Lawyers own
Bagshaw in his Argument about the Canons.
, and Bishop Ravis, in his Paper of Reasons to Queen Elizabeth 5.
, affirms; and the whole Lower House did to the same Queen upon occasion
solemnly declare, Witness their Remonstrance in 1558; to justify the Freedom of
which, they in the Preamble of it suggest the several Authorities by which they
Assemble. The Instrument is Printed in Fuller Chapter Hist. IX Book. p. 55.
, but with the Omission of some words, which in that part of it, which we have
occasion to mention may be thus supplied, -- Nos Cantuariens. Provinciae
Inferior [and] Secundarius Clerus in ano (Deo sic disponente, ac Serenissimae
Dominae nostrae Reginae [Iussu] Decani and Capituli Cantuariensis Mandato,
Brevi Parliamenti, ac Monitione Ecclesiastica sic exigente) convenientes,
partium nostrarum esse existimavimus, etc.

And this Opinion also that Parliament was of, which Voted the Canons of 1640.
Illegal, chiefly on this head, because they were made in an Assembly, which,
though it met by the Parliament Writ, yet Sat and Acted after the Parliament
was determined. Nor were they contradicted in it by the Famous Judgment given
under the Hands of his Majesty's Counsel, and other Honorable Persons Learned
in the Law, if the Words of that Judgment be well considered, which are these;
The Convocation being called by the King's Writ under the Great Seal, does
continue, until it be dissolved by Writ, or Commission under the Great Seal,
notwithstanding the Parliament be dissolved. ( Troub. Try. Laud. p. 80.) Which
is all very true; and yet it may be true too, that such a Writ, or Commission
ought of course, to issue from the Crown, upon the Dissolution of the
Parliament. But this Point is not touched upon in the Judgment given, and
seems to have been purposely declined: For otherwise, it had been a clearer and
fuller Determination of the Matter in Question, if they had said, That the King
might by his Prerogative keep a Convocation sitting as long as he pleased,
notwithstanding the Dissolution of that Parliament, with which it was called.

I will not say, That the Parliament of 1660. were certainly of the same mind,
though it is probable they were; and that this was One, if not the Chief
Reason, why in the Act 13 Car. II. c. 12.
Restoring Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction they so particularly, and by Name,
excepted those Canons from a Parliamentary Confirmation.

However that may be, sure we are, That the Convocation of the Clergy have (as
has been said already) for above 150 Years in every Instance (except that of
Forty, and the Synods Legatin) Met and Rose within a day of the Parliament. And
if Custom therefore be the Law of Convocations, as it is of Parliaments (and we
have Dr. Wake's Word for it, that it is Pp. 105, ^98.
) then is it Law, that the Convocation should meet Only, and Always in time of
Parliament. The Learned Mr. Cambden knew no better, whose Words are, Synodus
quae Convocatio Cleri dicitur, and semper simul cum Parliamento habetur
Britannia in Cap. de Tribunalibus.
. Thus stood Britannia Then; though a late Paultry Compiler of the New State of
England will have it, that it is an Assembly which now and then Meets, and that
in time of Parliament Miege 's New State of England. Part. III. p. 64.
: Thanks to Dr. Wake for furnishing him with the occasion for such a
Definition! which I trust however that the Doctor and all his Friends, shall
not, in the Event, be able to prove a True One; not even by that only Argument
which can ever possibly prove it so, Future practice.

The very Warrant to the Keeper of the Great Seal for issuing out Writs for a
Parliament, is a standing Testimony against these new Notions: It ran thus in
James the First's time, and I suppose, runs so still: Whereas we are resolved
to have a Parliament at, etc. These are to Will and Require you forthwith upon
Receipt hereof, to Issue forth our Writs of Summons to all the Peers of our
Kingdom; and also all other Usual Writs for the Electing of such Knights,
Citizens, and Burg^sses, as are to Serve therein; and withal to Issue out all
Usual Writs for the Summoning of the Clergy of both Provinces in their Houses
of Convocation. And this shall be your Warrant so to do H^c^er's Life of Bishop
Williams, p. 173.
. So that the Writs for the Convocation are, it seems, as Usual as those for
the Commons; and the One Assembly therefore is as Customary as the Other.

My Lord of Sarum seems to have had no other thoughts, where, in the Entrance
of his History of our Reformed Synods, (for such every History of our
Reformation is, or should be) he lays it down, That with the Writs for a
Parliament there went out always a Summons to the Two Archbishops for calling a
Convocation of their Provinces Hist. Ref. I. Vol. p. 20.
: Always, i, e. long before the times of H. VIII. of which his Lordship is
Writing. I doubt not but his Lordship's Meaning then was, That these Writs went
out to Purpose, and had their due and full Effect: for the Distinction, which
some State-Logicians since have Coined Dr. W. p. 106, 107, 14^, 141.
, between a Right of being Summoned, and a Right of M^^^ing in Virtue of that
Summons, was not then Invented. But I presume too far in venturing to guess at
his Lordship's Thoughts, when his Words are such as may indifferently serve
either Hypothesis, and can therefore, I must confess, be a good Authority for
neither. Let us have Recourse therefore to Those who are more determined in
their Expressions.

Archbishop Cranmer in that Speech by which he opened the first Convocation
under E. 6. affirms it to be MS. Acta Synodi incoeptae, Nov. 5. An. 1547.
, De more regni Angliae, primo quoque anno regni cujuslibet Regis citare
Parliamentum, nec non and Convocare Synodum Episcoporum and Cleri; sicque fieri
in praesenti de Mandato Regis. He speaks of a Custom only in the First Year of
every Reign, because That was the Present Case: whereas Cardinal Pool at a
Synod held in the latter end of Queen Mary, enlarges the Assertion, and says,
Act. MS. Syn. coeptae, Ian. 21. 1557.
Quod cum de antiquo more Rex Angliae ob aliquot arduas Causas Praelatos hujus
Regni ad Concilium sive Parliamentum suum adesse jubet propter Regis
Securitatem and Regni Statum -- Concilia and Auxilia sua imp^nsuros: Ita
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis Episcopos suos Suffraganeos, Praelatos, etc. ad
Sacrum Concilium evocare assolet, de iisdem Causis tractaturos, and auxilia sua
consimili modo daturos.

And to the same purpose the Good Martyr, Archdeacon Philpott, a Member of
Convocation, and well skilled in the Rights of it: He, in his Supplication to
the King, Queen, and Parliament, complains, That where there was by the Queen's
Highness a Parliament called, and after the Old Custom a Convocation of the
Clergy Fox. Vol. III. p. 587.
. Nor did those Lords of the Council, who disputed other Points with him, deny
this; but agreed in Terms, That the Convocation-House was called by One Writ of
Summons of the Parliament, of an Old Ibid. p. 552.
Custom. I lay no great weight upon their Opinion, because it was casually
given, and by Persons, who, though of the King's Privy Council, yet might,
perhaps, be as Ill informed of these Matters as Meaner Men: For a Seat at that
Honorable Board does not necessarily imply a thorough knowledge of this part
of our Constitution. I mention their Opinion, only to meet with Dr. Wake, who
has produced it on the other side with as much Gravity and Deference, as if it
were a Resolution of the Twelve Judges Assembled P. 251.
. He had been Reading, I suppose, in that Notable Book of the Law, The
Attorney's Academy, where he found it thus formally vouched P. 221.
: And he thought he might safely Write after so Worthy a Pattern.

To make amends for this slight Authority, I shall produce another of somewhat
more force; even the Judgment of a whole Synod in Queen Mary's time, who
introduce their Petition about the Confirmation of Abbey Lands to the Patentees,
with this Preamble; 1.2. P. and M. c. 8.
Nos Episcopi and Clerus Cant. Prove. in hac Synodo, more nostro solito, dum
Regni Parliamentum celebratur, congregati -- Where we see they lay claim to an
Old Immemorial Custom, not only of being Called, by the King's Writ, together
with every Parliament, but of Meeting also upon that Call, by the same Custom.
For unluckily it happens (to spoil Dr. Wake's New Scheme) that they place the
Usage, in their being more solito Congregati; not Convocati, or Summoniti; as
the Word should have been, to make Their Assertion consistent with His. But
alas! they knew nothing of this new Doctrine, and their Expressions therefore
are not so contrived as to favor it. They were then Assembled in a Synod, and
Acting as a Synod, when they drew up this Petition* And it is of a Custom
therefore of so Assembling and Acting that they speak; and not of being only
Summoned. Nor was this the Sense of the Clergy alone, but of an Whole
Parliament too, which recited this Petition Verbatim in a Statute; and by that
means set their Seal, as it were, to the Truth of the Suggestion contained in
it.

It would be needless after this to argue from the Old Parliamentary Practice
of appointing Convocation-days Elsyng. p. 112.
upon which the Temporal Lords Adjourned, that the Parliament-Prelates might be
at Liberty to Consult with the Inferior Clergy: Of this Custom we have an
Account, as high as the first Years of H. VIII. i. e. as high as we have any
Iournals of Parliament.

To as little purpose would it be to urge the Decision of the Committee of Both
Houses, 21 H. VIII. Moor. Rep. p. 781.
; and of the House of Commons, 10. Mariae Hist. Ref. II. Vol. p. 252, 3.
; that a Clergyman could not be Chosen into that House, They determined also,
That a Layman could not be of the Convocation: But in That, Practice is against
them. For the Chancellor of York, though a Layman, is Now, and has been long, a
Member of that Convocation: And whether Lamb and Heath ( who are Mentioned as
of the Convocation in 1640.) were not Mere Civilians, I leave to be considered.
Heyl. Life of Laud. p. 438.
Because he was Represented in another House: Which implies, I think, that that
other House was to sit concurrently with the Parliament; or else I see not what
force there is in the Reason given.

Much less will it, perhaps, after what I have said, be thought Material to
observe, that 24 H. VIII. c. 12. in Matters touching the Crown allows an Appeal
within Fifteen days, to the Upper House of Convocation, then being, or next
ensuing: which supposes this Assembly to Meet often, and to have its Regular
and Stated Returns; as the Parliament has.

These, though good Presumptions of the Truth I contend for, yet arise not up
to the fullness of several of those Proofs which I have before suggested: And
because they may admit a Cavil therefore, I hint them only, without dwelling
upon them. The Evidence already given is sufficient to clear the Practice, as
it stood 150 Years ago, and had then stood, Time out of mind. And that it has
not altered since, is too well known to need a Proof: There being no Instance
to be given, I believe, from the time of the Reformation down to that of our
late Revolution, wherein a New Parliament has sat, for any time, without a
Convocation to attend it: Nor any one Author of Note, I verily think, to be
produced, throughout that Period, who has given it as his Opinion, that the
Former of these Meetings might by the Law of the Realm be held without the
Latter. Dr. Wake is for ought I can find, the very first Writer that has ever
Taught this Doctrine; with how much Truth or Probability, the Reader by this
time begins to judge, and will, in the Course of these Papers more clearly see:
Wherein I hope to set the Clergy's Right to such Concurrent Meetings in so full
and clear a Light, that as no One ever denied it before Dr. Wake, so neither
shall any Man of tolerable Skill, or Honesty ever Dispute it after him.

I have been large upon this Head, and I fear, by reason of the variety of the
Matter, somewhat confused: It may be proper therefore, here at the close of it,
to recollect the several Branches of the Proof there advanced: They stand in
this Order.

That, as far back as we have any Memoirs of the Civil or Ecclesiastical
Affairs of this Kingdom, it appears that the Clergy and Laity Met together in
the great Councils of the Realm: That this they did, in the Saxon times, and
for some Reigns after the Conquest, Nationally; joining closely with the Laity
in Civil Debates, and taking Their Sanction along with them in all
Ecclesiastical Acts and Ordinances: That they divided afterward from the
Laity, and from one another; and attended the Parliament not in One Body, but
in Two Provincial Synods, held under their several Archbishops: That, though it
does not clearly appear, when this Practice first had its Rise, yet sure we
are, that it is between 4 and 500 years old, and has for so long at least,
regularly obtained; excepting only the Interruption that was given to it by the
Premunitory Clause, inserted into the Bishops Writs; which once again warned,
and brought the Clergy Nationally to Parliament: That a strict Compliance with
this Clause was at first exacted by the Crown, and paid by the Clergy; but that
they soon found ways of being released from the Rigor of it, and prevailed upon
the King to accept of their former manner of Assembling with the Parliament in
Two Provincial Synods, in lieu of that Closer Attendance which the Premunientes
challenged; the Forms however being still kept up, by which the King's Right of
Summoning them immediately to Parliament was declared all along, and their
Obligation to obey his Summons in the way it prescribed, was duly acknowledged:
That these Provincial Assemblies, though held apart from the Parliament, yet
belonged to it; Met by the Parliamentary, no less than the Provincial Writ; and
were State-Meetings, as well as Church-Synods: In them Parliamentary Matters
were Transacted, and Parliamentary Forms and Methods observed; the Members of
them were Entitled to Parliamentary Wages, and enjoyed Parliamentary
Privileges: That the Inferior Clergy, though divided in Place from the Lower
Laity, yet joined with them often in the same Acts and Petitions, and were
still esteemed and called the Commons Spiritual of the Realm; and what They and
the Prelates in Convocation did, was long after the Separation spoken of in our
Records, as done in Parliament: That these Parliamentary Conventions of the
Clergy were held at first near the time at which the Laity met; afterward with
a Latitude: But that This Irregularity was Reformed before the Reformation of
Religion; and their Meeting and Departing fixed, within a Day of the Assembling
and Dismission of the Parliament; and that this Custom has now for above an Age
and Half continued: That for so long therefore (not to say how much longer) the
Convocation has been a word of Art, which signifies a Meeting of the Clergy in
time of Parliament: That such Meetings have by All that understood our
Constitution been held Necessary; Dr. Wake being the First Writer, that has
ever asserted them to be Precarious, and put it in the Prince's, or the
Archbishop's Power, whether they will have such Assemblies, or no.

The Result of All is This, That, if some Hundred Years Custom can make a Law,
then may we, without Offense, affirm it to be Law, that the Convocation should
Sit with every New Parliament: If the True Notion of a Convocation be, That it
is an Assembly of the Clergy always attending the Parliament, then is it no
Presumption to say, That we have the same Law for the Sitting of a Convocation,
as we have for that of a Parliament. And by this Law the Clergy (as was said
before in relation to the Canons of the Church) are not only under a Duty to
attend, but have also a Right to meet; so that, as their Writs for Assembling
concurrently with a Parliament, are not mere Letters of Grace and Compliment,
but to be emitted ex debito Iustitiae, and whether the Government has any thing
to propose to them or no; so likewise are their Assemblies at such times to be
held by the same Law, notwithstanding it may be pretended that there is no
Occasion for them. For although their Consent may not be necessary, nor their
Advice seem wanting; yet, as they are bound to wait, if Either shall be asked;
So may the Clergy themselves have some Informations and Remembrances to offer,
and some Petitions to make concerning such things, as they may be supposed to
take more particular notice of, or wherein they may be more peculiarly
concerned. And this Liberty and Opportunity of representing what they may think
necessary, is to be esteemed by them as their great Parliamentary Privilege;
not to be Waved, like the Others, for the better course of common Justice; but
to be Asserted and Confirmed for the Good of the whole Kingdom.

Such a Liberty therefore and Opportunity is not only provided for by Canons,
but secured, I say, by the Law: Both by the Law of Custom, which is the Law of
Parliaments; and by Express Statute: an Act of Edward the Third appointing a
Parliament, and consequently Thus the Answerer of the Nine Reasons of the House
of Commons against Bishops Votes in Parliament Argued; alleging, That the
Bishops were by the Triennial Act obliged necessarily to attend the Convocation
once in Three Years: And the Examination of that Answer (40. 1641.) Printed by
Order of a Committee of the House, grants the Allegation. p. 16, 17.
a Convocation to be held just within the Canonical distance, Yearly; and the
present Law enjoining, That it shall be frequently held, and once at least in
Three Years: Held, I say, and not only Called; for that is the Right we speak
of: A Right, that has been all along owned by constant Practice; or, if
perchance not exercised at some Particular time, through Forgetfulness, or
Distraction (to allow the utmost, and more perhaps, than can be proved); yet
never Purposely, and, if I may so speak, Regularly Neglected till Now.

CHAP. III.
HItherto we have considered only the First of the Two Points proposed, the
Clergy's Right of Meeting and Sitting in Convocation, as often as a New
Parliament Sits: We will now address our Selves to the Second, which asserts
their Right (when Met) of Treating and Deliberating about such Affairs as lie
within their proper Sphere, and of coming to fit Resolutions upon them, without
being necessitated antecedently to qualify themselves for such Acts and Debates
by a License under the Broad Seal of England.

That this is the Original Right of all Provincial Synods, incident to their
nature, as such, claimed and practiced by them in all Ages of the Church, and
in all Christian Countries, and in our own particularly, from the time that we
have any account of our Synods, till toward the beginning of the Reformation,
is so certain, as to need no Proof; and Dr. Wake therefore is never more like
himself (that is, never more Absurd) than when he would insinuate the contrary
P. 48, 288.
. The only Question is, how far the Statute 25 H. VIII. has restrained this
Right, and made a License from the Crown necessary? It being there Enacted,
That the Clergy, ne any of them should from thenceforth presume to attempt
allege, claim, or put in ure any Constitutions, or Ordinances, Provincial or
Synodal, or any other Canons; nor should Enact, Promulge, or Execute any such
Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances Provincial, by what Name or Names they may
be called, in their Convocations in times coming; unless the same Clergy may
have the King's most Royal Assent and License to Make, Promulge, and Execute
the same.

Now that the Clergy are not by this Clause tied up altogether from acting
Synodically, is allowed generally by Those who desire most to abridge their
Powers. It cannot with any show of Reason be pretended, that the Convocation,
however under a Restraint by this Act, is become such a Lifeless Body, as to
have neither Sense nor Motion, till Animated by a second Royal Command:
Unquestionably, and according to common Opinion and Practice, they have, even
since this Statute, in virtue of the Writ by which they Meet, a Liberty of
Addressing, as they shall see cause either with Thanks, or Requests, or other
proper Representations -- But it is presumed also, that they may go a great
deal further, and that there is nothing in the Clause recited which hinders
them even from Devising and Framing the Draught of a Canon; so it be done only
in a Preparatory Way, and with Submission to the Royal Enacting Authority. This
is what has been laid down in a late Treatise Letter to a Convocation-Man.
, briefly indeed, but convincingly; and with so much force of Reason, as yet
has received no Reply: The Answerers of that Piece having slid over this part
of it, where the Act is Explained, with a Seeming Neglect, but with a Real
Distrust of their being able to say any thing to the purpose against what is
there advanced. When they come to this Point, as important as it is, they
dispatch it always in have: Even Dr. Wake can allow it but a flight mention or
two, in a Work, where he finds room amply enough to discuss every thing that is
not Material. But he did well to tread lightly over the Ground, which, if he
had stood never so little upon it, would have gone near to have sunk under him.
To make this Point yet more manifest, and not to leave the least pretense for a
Cavil, I shall here resume the Proof of it; bespeaking the Candor of those
Gentlemen, whose studies particularly lie this way, if, (as the general Fate is
of those that Write out of their Profession,) I express my self now and then a
little improperly. So the Thing I aim at be but clearly made out, though my
Manner of doing it be not strictly according to Art, it will not concern me. I
shall consider first the Occasion of the Act, and then the Act it self; and by
a short account of the One lead the Reader into the true Sense and Meaning of
the Other. Henry the VIIIth enraged both at the Pope and Cardinal Wolsey for
their Delusions in the Affair of the Divorce, resolved with the Ruin of the
Cardinal to lessen the Papal Authority. And for the better effecting this
Design, which could not well be accomplished, without striking a Terror into
Those who were then but too much the Pope's Vassals, the Clergy; especially the
Monks and Friars; he involved them All in a Praemunire for submitting to
Wolsey's Legatine Character, unauthorised by the Crown; not for Procuring, or
making Use of Provisional Bulls, as Dr. Wake, in his usual Kindness to the
Memory of the Clergy, and according to his deep Skill in English History has
represented it P. 248.
: Nor yet merely for Appearing and Making Suit in his Courts, as a Greater
Author Bishop Burnet 's Hist. of Ref. Vol. I. p. 106.
, (but in this Conjecture no less Unhappy) than He, seems to take it; for then
All the Clergy could not have been concluded under the Penalty, for All had not
Su'd there. But that which made the whole Body at once Obnoxious was, their
obeying his Mandates Rigida enim Provisionum Jura ( says Josceline upon this
occasion) non modo eos puniunt qui Romanas Legationes sine Regis Licentia
suscipiunt, sed qui iis parent. Ant. Brit. Eccles. in Warhamo. p. 325.
, and appearing in his Synods Legantine; which the Clergy had often, and lately
An. 1527.
done.

The Cardinal had been a Favorite beyond Example; the Sole, and Uncontrolled
Minister of his Prince: He was at that time Lord Chancellor by the King's
Commission, and had been made Legate with his Privity, and at his Special
Instance, as Bishop Gardener informs us In a Letter to the Protector. Fox Vol.
II. p. 2. col. 1.
. What he did in one Capacity, as well as in the other, was presumed to be done
by the King's Appointment; and whoever had opposed him, had certainly been
crushed by the Royal Power. The Subject neither durst, nor thought it necessary
to enquire, whether He had a License from the Great Seal, who had himself the
keeping it. However their Obedience to his Unlicens'd Authority was Criminal
even to the Loss of Liberty and Estate: And could they in any case have vouched
the King's Command for their Obeying it, the Command would have been said to
have been against Law, and no Warrant. Thus both the Clergy and Laity were
unawares at the King's Mercy, and the Clergy not admitted to pardon Gratis (as
the Laity afterward were); but forced to ransom themselves by a good Round
Sum 100000 l. for the Province of Canterbury, and 18840 l. 10 d. for that of
York; which was laid, as all other Convocation-Grants were, proportionably on
the whole Clergy; as appears from the Assessments to be seen still in the
Bishops Registers; particularly in that of Hereford, An. 1531. And I wonder
therefore that my Lord of Sarum should say, That he had not been able to
discover whether the Inferior Clergy paid their Proportion of this Tax, or not
( Vol. I. p. 115.) and again, That the Prelates had a great Mind to draw 'em in
to bare a share of the Burden, Ib. p. 114. [He speaks of the Time, after the
Convocation which made the Grant, was up.] For this was both Needless and
Impracticable: Needless, because the Lower Clergy had already drawn themselves
in, by consenting to the Grant in Convocation; and Impracticable, because if
they had not, there was no way left of drawing 'em in afterward.
for those times, and by an Acknowledgment in Convocation, that the King was
Supreme Head, together with the Submission, and Petition recited in the
Preamble of the Act we are discoursing of.

There the Clergy first knowledge [and the Parliament add, according to the
Truth] that the Convocation is, always has been, and ought to be Assembled by
the King's Writ. Which Acknowledgment however is not according to Truth, unless
understood of Parliamentary Convocations; that is, of those which were summoned
as well by the Praemunientes, as by the Archbishop's Mandate: And to Those
therefore it must be restrained. And they had reason to Own and Avow this
particularly, because the Cardinal had taken upon him to Convene Legantine
Synods by his own Authority frequently during his Ministry; and particularly
Once, (not long before his Fall, and the Time of this Submission) on Nov. 27.
1527. As I gather from a Printed Sermon of Longland 's said to be Preached on
that Day and Year, Coram Celeberrimo Conventu tum Archiepiscoporum cum
Episcoporum caeteraeque multitudinis in Occidentalis Coenobii Sanctuario juxta
Londinum. Though this Title, I confess, is somewhat Dubious.
: And that Practice of his therefore might be opposed by this Declaration which
prefaces the Submission.

In the Submission, which follows, the Clergy promise in Verbo Sacerdotii, that
they will never from henceforth presume to Attempt, Allege, Claim, or put in
Ure; Or Enact, Promulge, or Execute any New Canons, Constitutions, Ordinance
Provincial, or other, or by whatsoever other name they shall be called in the
Convocation; unless the King's most Royal Assent and License may to them be had
to Make, Promulge, and Execute the same: And that his Majesty do give his most
Royal Assent and Authority in that behalf.

Now here are Two several Things distinctly promised in Two Different Branches
of the same Sentence, divided from Each other by the Particle, Or; They will
not Attempt, Allege, Claim, or put in Ure, that is one part of their promise;
Or Enact, Promulge, or Execute, that is another. The First of these respects
Canons, as already made (whether by a Foreign, or Domestic Authority); the
Second, as to be made, here at Home: The Former part of their Assurance is
given in their Private and Ministerial Capacity, in relation to the Proceedings
in the Spiritual Courts; the Latter in their Public and Legislative Capacity,
as they were Members of Convocation. In their Private Capacity, as they might
be either Judges, or Litigants, they promise, not to Attempt, Allege, Claim,
or put in Ure [ i. e. not to be any ways Instrumental in acknowledging, or
promoting the force of] any Canons made without the Royal Assent; such as the
whole Text of the Foreign Canon Law, and all our Own Provincial and Legantine
Constitutions were: In their Public Capacity, they promise further, not to
Enact, Promulge, or Execute any such Canons for the Future, unless they may
have the same Royal License for it. But here is no promise couched in any of
these words, that they will not debate about the matter, or form the Draught of
a Canon, without such a License: None of the Words ( Enact, Promulge, or
Execute] which alone relate to their Proceedings in Convocation, including any
such Promise; and the only word which can be pretended to imply it, the word [
Attempt] being determinnd by its Situation to signify much the same thing as
Allege, Claim, or put in Ure; and restraining the Persons promising only as
they might Act in their Private or Ministerial Capacity, that is, out of
Convocation.

To Attempt a Canon therefore must signify to put it upon trial, or prove the
force of it; and is a word of Art borrowed from the Civilians: However we need
not go so far for an account of it; the very Act we are upon affording us an
undeniable Instance of its being thus used: as will appear, if we consider the
Petition of the Clergy which follows this Promise, and the Enacting Words in
the Body of the Statute, which answer to that Petition.

The Petition relates altogether to Canons already made, many of which were
solely from the Pope, and many more from the Archbishop, without the Royal
Assent; and the Clergy pray therefore that These may be Reviewed, and their
Authority Suspended, during that Review. Accordingly the Authority of all the
Old Canons was suspended; or rather Abrogated by this Act, as appears plainly
from the Proviso Which Dr. Wake in his pretended Recital of the Act, [N. 4. of
his Appendix] has suppressed, very disingenuously; considering of how great
Significancy this Proviso is, to lead us into the true Sense of the Word
Attempt in the Body of the Act.
, at the End of it, for their being in force, till such a Review, and from the
Express words of a Later Act, 37 H. 8. c. 17. Which says, That All the Decrees,
Ordinances, and Constitutions [ of the whole Canon Law] by a Statute made in
the 25 th of your most noble Reign be utterly abolished, frustrate, and of none
effect.
: And this Abrogation of the Old Canons was performed purely by those Words in
the Enacting part of the Statute, that they shall not from henceforth Attempt,
Allege, Claim, or put in Ure: All which words therefore the Parliament used
Evidently of Canons already made; and must, for that reason, have understood
the word Attempt, in the very sense that I have given it, for putting a thing
upon Trial, or proving the force of it.

No Restraint therefore is laid upon the Clergy in their Legislative Capacity,
by the word, Attempt in their Promise: How far the following Words of it, [that
they will not Enact, Promulge, or Execute any new Canons -- unless the King's
most Royal Assent and License may to them be had to Make, Promulge, and Execute
the same] may be supposed to restrain them in that respect, is to be the
subject of our next Enquiry. The word, Make, here in the Condition of the
Promise must have the same Sense as the word Enact in the Promise it self, to
which it plainly answers and refers: They will not Enact, Promulge, or Execute
any New Canons; unless they may have the King's Assent to Make [ i. e. to
Enact] Promulge, and Execute the same. This is what the Phrase it self in
Propriety of Speech implies: For to Make a Canon, is the same as, Canonem
Condere, to constitute it, and give it force: And so, Testamentum Condere, [to
make a Will] signifies not merely to prepare the Draught of it; but to make it
with the Legal Forms, and Circumstances requisite; that is, to Sign, Seal, and
Publish it. But (which puts this matter quite out of dispute) the Word is in
this very sense employed in Two several places of the Act it self, and can
there be strained to no other: For in the Entrance of the second Clause there
is mention of such Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances as heretofore have been
made by the Clergy of this Realm; and in the Last Proviso, of Canons already
made, which be not contrariant to the Laws. Canons heretofore made, and Canons
already made, must, I think, be such, as have been solemnly passed and Enacted,
and not mere Draughts of 'em, lying ready to be passed: And to make a Canon
therefore, does, in the sense of the Statute, signify to Enact it, and not
merely to draw it up, and to form it.

And this Way of Explaining the Act by it self, in the Use of the Present
Phrase, is, I conceive, much more Authentic and Proper, than that which the
Author of a Letter to a Member of Parliament P. 26.
makes use of, who wisely sends us to Tully, and to Mr. Hooker for an account
of it. Were not this Gentleman of the Law driven to very hard shifts, he would
never go to a Classick Author, or a Book of Divinity for the Sense of an Act of
Parliament.

To clear this Point yet further (if there were any Room for it, or any Need of
it) I might appeal to the several Forms of Submission which preceded this, that
the Act recites, and were agreed to by the Clergy, but not accepted by the
King; Copies of which, written in the very Hand of the time, are still
preserved: And in every One of them, but the First, their Promise stands
formally divided, in the same manner as I also have distinguished it, into Two
several Branches or Articles; See Appendix, N. III.
One relating to Church Laws that had been (as they there speak) already made,
the Other to such as were to be made hereafter. And of these last much the same
words are there used, as in the Form recited by the Statute; They promising,
That they will from thenceforth forbear to Enact, Promulge, or put in
Execution, any such Constitution or Ordinance, to be by them made in time
coming, unless his Highness by his Royal Assent shall License them to Make,
Promulge, and Execute such Constitutions; and the same so made shall approve by
his Highnesses Authority. But as to the Former Article about Canons already
made, none of their first Submissions were, it seems, thought full enough; and
they were obliged therefore to draw up a New one, wherein they promised not to
Attempt, Allege, Claim, on put in Ure the Ecclesiastical Laws then in force;
but so long only, as till the King, by his Commissioners, should have reviewed,
digested, approved, and Authorized them. It has happened odly enough, that
Those Forms of Submission, that were not accepted, are still in being; whereas
That which past, has, for ought I can find, perished Unless preserved in my
Lord Longvil 's Library, in the Printed Catalogue of which I find this Title,
Instrumentum super Submissione Cleri coram Domino Rege quoad celebrationem
Conciliorum Provincialium. Vol. XII. f. 63. and Lib. XXV. f. 141. But I have
not had the Opportunity of examining this Paper.
: For the Recital of it in the Act of Parliament is not (as I conceive).
Literal, but Imperfect, and somewhat Confused; mixing together all those Terms,
which the Clergy used in relation either to Canons made, or to be made; and
which, in all their other Forms of Submission, stand apart, and in Distinct
Clauses: for it is not conceivable, that their Last Form of Submission, in
which they were called upon to explain themselves yet further than they had
done, should be less Methodical and Distinct Archbishop Laud says (out of the
MSS Acts) that it was divided into Three Articles, which were Proposed and
Voted severally, (Try* and Troub. p. 82.) And if so, the Recital of the
Submission in that Act cannot be Literal: For there is no Distinction of
Articles in it.
than any of the Former.

The Words then of the Clergy's Submission, which are in the Preamble of the
Act, and have hitherto been the Subject of our enquiry, plainly amount to no
more than this; Either, (10) that they will not, as Private Persons look upon,
or make Use of any Canons as obliging, but such only as, upon a Review, shall
have the stamp of Royal Authority given to them: Or (2 dly) that in their
Public Capacity, they will not Enact or Publish any such Canons for the
future, without the same Royal Assent and Approbation.

And that this was all their Promise meant, is no new Opinion, but the sense of
Archbishop Parker, who understood these things as well as any Man: He in
Antiqu. Eccles. Britann. (A Book composed under his Direction) gives this
account of it, Totus in Synodo Clerus in Verbo Sacerdotii fidem dedit, ne ^llas
deinceps in Synodo ferrent Ecclesiasticas Leges, nisi and Synodus Authoritate
Regid Congregat^, and Constitutiones in Synodo Publicatae eadem Authoritate
Ratae essent P. 326.
. And in this Exposition he is constant; for again in another place he thus
expresses himself, Postquam Clerus in Verbo Sacerdotii Henrico Regi
promifissent, fi^e Authoritate Regid in Synodo se nihil Decreturos P. 339.
. With this agrees my Lord Herbert's Abstract of the Submission, by which, he
says, they promised his Majesty, that they would not Make or Allege any New
Canons, without his Highness's Assent, and License Life of H. 8. p. 399.
. And again, more clearly, they promised for the future to make no Constitution,
nor execute any without the King's Leave Ibid. p. 349.
. i. e. to make no New ones, and to Execute, or Allege, neither New nor Old
ones. To the same Purpose, my Lord of Sarum; They promised in Verbo Sacerdotii,
that they would never Make nor Execute any New Canons or Constitutions, without
the Royal Assent to them Vol. 1. p. 147.
; and before this, p. 113. of the same Volume, They promised for the future not
to Make nor Execute any Constitution without the King's License. None of these
Writers, it is clear, thought the Clergy restrained by their Submission from
any Debates, or Resolutions, which were previous to the Establishing a Canon;
for otherwise they would not, in their accounts of it, have omitted this
Particular, which was above all others to be taken notice of: And none of 'em
therefore, we may be sure, took the work Make in any other sense than to Enact;
or thought the word Attempt applicable to any but the Old Unauthoriz'd Canons.

And the Judgment of these Persons is the more to be depended on, because the
First of 'em lived at the time of the Submission* and must be well acquainted
with the sense then given of it; the Second was a Layman, and one who was
thought to have but little regard for the Priesthood; and the Third, though of
the Clergy, yet is observed throughout his Works, wherever the Interest of the
Order is concerned, to be under no degree of Partiality toward them.

More Authorities of this kind might be given, if either these were not
sufficient, or the stress of the Point lay upon the way of wording the
Submission; which it does not, but on the Terms used in that part of the
Statute, where the Submission is Enacted; and this we now come to consider.

For after the Submission and Petition of the Clergy are thus recited in the
Statute, it proceeds to Enact, that They, ne any of them from henceforth shall
presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put in Ure any Constitutions, or
Ordinances Provincial, or Synodals, or any other Canons: Nor shall Enact,
Promulge, or Execute any such Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances Provincial,
by whatsoever name or names they may be called in their Convocations in Times
coming, unless they may have the King's most Royal Assent and License to Make,
Promulge, and Execute the same.

Now whatever Ambiguity there may seem to be in the words Attempt, and Make, as
they lie in the Recital of the Submission, yet here in the Body of the Statute
it self it is perfectly cleared. For

1. The words [ Attempt, Allege, Claim, and put in Ure] are here manifestly
divided from those [ Enact, Promulge and Execute] and make a Distinct Member of
the Period, having Substantives of their own, [ Constitutions, Ordinances,
etc.] which they govern, and in which their signification is determined.

2. These words are plainly used to Enact the Petition of the Clergy, which
prays a Suspension of the Force of the Old Canons; and by these words, and
these alone (as I have shown) the force of those Canons is suspended: and
therefore to attempt, as well as to allege, claim, and put in ure must be
understood of Canons, as already made; and not of Canons, as [ in fieri, or]
making. And if so, then

3. The Exception afterward made, [ Unless the said Clergy may have the King's
most Royal Assent and License to Make, Promulge, and Execute] can no ways refer
to their Attempting, Alleging, Claiming, or putting in Ure: for a License to
be had in order to make Canons, cannot possibly affect words that are used only
of Canons already made. And therefore,

4. That Exception belongs purely to the words immediately foregoing, by which
they are forbid to Enact, Promulge, or Execute: Two of the words of this
Prohibition [ Promulge, and Execute] being repeated in the Exception annexed;
and the Third [ Enact] being expressed by Make, a word of the same force and
value.

Whatever sense then the Submission (made in those difficult Times, and under
so great a Terror The Gentleman that published, Some Thoughts on a Convocation,
insults the Learned Mr. Hill on this head, who had represented the Convocation
which submitted, as then under the Las^ of a Praemunire. But this ( says he) is
a Great Blunder; for the Praemunire was off at least three years before, and
released by Act of Parliament in the 22 H. 8. the Convocation-Act being not
till the 25th. (p. 8.) It seems, this Gentleman knows not (what one would have
thought every body knew) that the Clergy made their Submission s^^e years
before it was Enacted by Parliament, and that Then the Praemunire hung over
them: yet, as unacquainted as he is with things of this nature, ventures at
Random to bestow his Rude Language on the supposed Mistake of another Man.
Under so great a Degree of Ignorance, a little more Modesty had become him.

My Lord of Sarum's Expressions, I suppose, misled him, which ( in the Year
1534.) are, As the Parliament was going on with th^se good Laws, there came a
Submission from the Clergy then sitting in Convocation, to be passed in
Parliament, (p. 147.) But this is one of those Nods that Great Men in Long
Works are subject to: for his Lordship p. 113. of that Work seems to have soon
known that the Submission was made by the Convocation in 1531 and 2, however he
came to forget it here, and to place the Rise of it two Years lower. But
whether his Lordship were aware of this, or not, it is certain the Submission
was so much Older than the Act; as appears by the Iournal of the Convocation
that framed it still remaining; though his Lordship (Ib. p. 147.) complains that
it is lost; and excuses himself on ^his account for not being able to inform
his Readers, what Opposition it met with from the Clergy, ever it passed. I
have seen the Iournal of that Synod, it is not so Large indeed as those Records
of Convocation which Heylin saw, (Reformat. justified, Sect. 2.) and wherein,
he says, the whole Debate with all the Traverses and Emergent Difficulties
which appeared therein are specified at large: However, it is particular enough
to show with what Difficulty, and by what steps the Clergy were drawn into a
Compliance, and how Threatening Messages were sent 'em by the King before they
could be brought to it: And I have already, from another Manuscript, promised
the Reader the several Forms of Submission which they drew up, one after
another; but could not get accepted. There is no Reason therefore to complain
of want of Light in this case; for perhaps there is scarce any one thing done
in any of H. the 8 th's Convocations, of which we have a clearer and fuller
account than of the Opposition which the Court-Form of Submission met with from
the Clergy, before they came up to it. From the Inferior Clergy, I mean: for it
does not appear that the Prelates were so very hard to be dealt with. On the
contrary, it is said in the Acts, that but one Bishop [and not one Abbot or
Prior] disagreed to it: but of the Lower Clergy 18, or 19 Voted against it to
the very last; and 7. or 8. referred, that is, Voted neither against it, nor
for it. See Troub. and Try. of La^d. p. 82.


) may be drawn to import by the Ambiguous Relation of the word Attempt, as it
now stands there; yet the Parliament, it is plain, would take it, and
accordingly Enacted it, in no other sense than I have given of it; distinctly
severing it, in the Body of the Act, from all those words that have any respect
to the Making of a Canon, and confining it to that Branch of the Sentence,
which suspends all the Old Canons already made. Then comes the other Branch,
which prescribes the Method of making new ones; and forbids the Clergy to
Enact, Promulge, or Execute any without the King's Assent: leaving them in the
mean time to their Old Methods of Proposing and Deliberating; and reducing
their Power only to the same Level with that of Parliaments: over which they
had before great and sensible advantages; in as much as they Enacted Canons by
their own Authority, without the Royal Concurrence, and in Synods oftentimes,
which met without a Royal Summons.

This, I question not, is the true and genuine Exposition of the Act; and this
being the very Hinge on which the Second Article of the Dispute turns, I
thought my self obliged to consider it with a very particular care, and to
secure it, if possible, against all Exceptions. I hope, I have done so; and
that the Reader is, by this time fully satisfied, that no Restraint is laid by
it upon any Convocational Act of the Clergy, previous to the passing a Canon;
but that they have still as much Liberty to Treat, Debate, and Conclude (so
they do not Enact, Promulge, and Execute) since this Statute, as ever they had
before it. Sure I am, that it has been thus understood all along by those who
may be presumed to be best acquainted with its meaning; such as Poulton, and
Rastal were: The one, in his Abridgement, puts this Title before the Act, "
That the Clergy in their Convocations shall Enact no Constitutions without the
King's Assent: The other, in his Repertory, at the End of the Statutes, makes
this to be the Purport of it, That the Clergy in their Convocations shall Enact
nothing unless they have the King's Assent and License: Neither of 'em were
aware, it seems, that their Liberty of Debate was cut off by it.

My Lord Herbert took it just as they did, for his short Summary of it is, that
in Convocations nothing shall be Promulg'd and Executed without the King's
Leave P. 399.
.

Mr. Fox was of the same mind; for thus he abridges it, That the Clergy shall
not hereafter presume to assemble in their Convocation, without the King's
Writ, or to Enact or Execute Constitutions without his Royal Assent Vol. 2. p.
330.
.

Bishop Godwyn does not differ in his account of it, which is, In praedicto
porro Parliamento decretum est de abrogand^ Synodi Authoritate in Canonibus
Ecclesiasticis condendis, nisi quatenus Rex eos ratos habuisset Annal. ad Ann.
1534.
.

Francis Mason, the Eminent Defender of our Orders, represents it after the
very same manner in a small Piece of his about the Authority of the Church in
making Canons and Constitutions concerning things Indifferent: There he says,
It is Enacted by the Authority of Parliament, that the Convocation shall be
assembled always by virtue of the King's Writ, and that their Canons shall not
be put in Execution unless they be approved by the Royal Assent P. 15.
.

Nor had the Enemies of the Church any other Opinion in this matter than its
Friends: witness what the same Author in his Great Work mentions, as the sense
of the whole Body of the Puritans: Ostendunt Puritani, sub sinem sui Examinis,
Canones prorsus nullos vigere aut valere in Anglia, qui Regio Calculo ac
Sigillo non sunt muniti Fitz-Simon apud Masonum de Minist. Angl. p. 21.
.

And thus speaks one of them, in a Treatise of Oaths exacted by Ordinaries,
etc. and He no inconsiderable Writer: It is Enacted, he says, and Provided,
that no Constitutions or Ordinances should be made, or put in Execution within
this Realm, until, etc. P. 54.


Nay thus speaks Mr. Bagshaw himself in his famous Argument concerning the
Canons; where we may be sure he says nothing more to the advantage of the
Clergy than he needs must; and yet he represents the Act to be only, that to
the making of Canons there must be the King's Royal Assent P. 12.
. And when he is to produce the words of the Statute, by which the Clergy have
power to make Canons, he says they are; That they shall not Enact, Promulge, or
Execute any Canons or Constitutions, etc. unless they may have the King's most
Royal Assent to Make, Promulge, and Execute the same Ibid.
. But as to Attempting, Alleging, Claiming, and putting in Ure, he never
dreamt that These were in the Act applied, or were applicable to this purpose;
and therefore does not mention them.

Intruth he was a Lawyer, and a Man of Skill in his Profession, and so knew
very well, that in the Omission of these words, as having no reference to the
Clergy's Power of making Canons, he only traced the steps of the King's
Commissions to the Convocation^ in 1603, and 1640. One of these is Printed at
length in the P. 285, 290.
Bibliotheca Regia; and there, All of the 25 H. 8. which relates to the
Clergy's Power in Making Canons is inserted at large; and (which is very
remarkable) those words [ Attempt, Allege, Claim, and put in Ure] are not
recited: A sure sign, that the Attorney-Generals of those times ((...) those
Times had Attorney-Generals, that had both Skill, and Will enough to carry the
King's Prerogative as high as it would bear) did not think, that they could
colourably be made use of to this purpose; or that the Clergy were debarred by
this Act from attempting New Canons, to be made hereafter, but such Old ones
only as had been long ago passed and published. Dr. Wake therefore is
Disingenuous in the Highest Degree, where Append. Number. V. p. 371.
he pretends to Print this very Commission; and when he comes to the Act of
Parliament, which it recites, does not transcribe the Act as it is there
recited (which is in part only) but refers us to his Extract of it, Number. IV.
and assures us, that it is recited in the Commission, as in the Extract,
Verbatim; though the most Material words in his Extract, and such as would be
most Conclusive upon the Clergy's Convocational Acts and Debates, if they
really belonged to 'em, are, as I have shown, designedly omitted in that
Recital. Such poor shifts is he forced to, to maintain a Bad Cause; which
however, even by these Ill Arts, cannot be maintained.

The Proof drawn from these Commissions is farther confirmed by a Proclamation
of K. Charles the First in June 1644 See it Biblioth. Reg. page 331.
, which forbids the Assembly of Divines to Meet and Act, upon these, and these
Accounts only; Because by the Laws of the Kingdom; no Synod or Convocation of
the Clergy ought to be called and assembled within this Realm, but by Authority
of the King's Writ; and no Constitution, or Ordinance Provincial, or Synodal,
or any other Canons may be Made, Enacted, Promulg'd, or Executed, [it says not
Attempted, Alleged, Claimed, or pu^ in Ure; which were words known to belong
to Canons already made] Unless with the King's Royal Assent and License first
obtained: upon pain of every one of the Clergy's doing contrary, and being
thereof convict, to suffer Imprisonment, and make Fine at the King's Will, as
by the Statute of the 25 H. 8. declaring and enacting the same it does and may
appear.

Let me add to all these the Authority of the Convocation it self, which set
out the Institution of a Christian Man a few years after they had submitted. In
the Dedication of that Book the Prelates address the King after this manner,
Without your Majesty's Power and License, we acknowledge and confess that we
have none Authority either to assemble together for any pretense or purpose, or
to publish any thing that might by us be agreed on, or compiled. Which words
evidently imply a power of agreeing upon, and compiling, (though they deny that
of publishing) any Determination, or Doctrine.

It were endless after this to argue from the silence of the Authors of those
times; for then I must vouch All of them. Only the Reformatio Legum
Ecclesiasticarum, being a Book of Great Note, which was drawn up by
Commissioners appointed by the King, and where no Occasion is neglected of
setting out, and magnifying the Royal Power; it may be worth our while to
observe, that there is not however in all that Book, as far as I can find, one
Expression, that implies the Composers of it to have thought, that the Clergy's
Synodical Debates lay under any Restraint from the Crown; which is a very
strong Presumption that they did not think the Clergy to lie under any.

The Reader will forgive me for laying together this Great Heap of Authorities,
if he either considers, of how great Importance it is to my Cause, that the
sense I have given of the Act should be fully cleared; or how necessary Dr.
Wake has made such a Collection, by affirming, that this sense of it was never
allow^d of, or, for ought he knows so much as heard of, (I repeat his very
words) till the Gentleman against whom he writes enlightened the world with it.
P. 289.
The Accounts I have given do, I hope, both sufficiently expose the Rashness
and Vanity of this Assertion, and also sufficiently prove the Truth and
Justness of that Exposition. To return to it therefore --

The Statute (as far as it relates to the Power of the Clergy in Convocation)
plainly implies no more than that Canons should not from thenceforth pass, and
become Obligatory, without the King's Leave and Authority given in that behalf;
without his Le^ve, which was requisite to their Passing, and his Authority,
which was afterward to ratify, and give 'em force. And to understand the
words of the Law otherwise is, as has appeared, to understand them against all
Propriety, and the Rules of Construction; and which is still more unreasonable,
to do this in Materia minus favorabili, and where Ordinary Liberty is abridg'd;
and lastly, which is intolerable, where so grievous a Penalty as that of a
Praemunire is to follow.

The 25 of H. 8. then has not in the least altered the Law of Convocations, in
relation to any of the Powers or Privileges of the Inferior Clergy: They can
still freely Consult, and Debate, Petition, or Represent, propose the Matter or
Form of New Canons, and consider about the Enforcing or Abrogating old ones; in
a word, act in all Instances, and to all Degrees, as they could before the
passing of that Statute. Indeed my Lord Archbishop's hands are tied by it; for
he cannot now call a Convocation without the King's Writ, which before this Act
he might, and in Elder Times frequently did: He cannot now Enact and Constitute
any thing by his own Authority, as in Imitation of the Papal Power in Councils,
and of the Royal Power in Parliaments, it was usual for him to do: He must,
before he passes any Act of the Two Houses, have the King's Assent to it; and
after it is passed, there must be the King's License also to Promulge and
Execute it. In these several Respects the Metropolitan's Authority is
considerably lessened by this Act; the Exercise of which is now chiefly seen in
Moderating the Debates of the Synod, and giving his Vote last upon any Question
proposed there; as Dr. Cousins (Dean of the Arches to his Grace that then was)
does in his Tables express it Ejus est moderari Synodum, and ultimo Suffragium
far. Tab. 3.
. But the Powers and Privileges of All the other Members of Convocation
continue whole and entire to 'em, notwithstanding this Statute; and were so
understood to continue for a long time after it passed: the Methods of
proceeding in Convocation continuing the same for near Threescore and ten years
after the Act, as they had been before it; the Clergy going on still to
propose, deliberate, and resolve as they had been used to do, without
Qualifying themselves for it by any Precedent License under the Broad Seal; the
King, the Parliament, and People of the Realm allowing 'em so to do, without
opposing this Method as Illegal, questioning it in the least, or calling 'em to
an account for it. Indeed the Doubtful Wording of the Act might possibly give
the Clergy some Alarm at first, and put them under Apprehensions that their
Liberty of Debate was abridg'd by it; or at least that it might be construed so
to be by Those who in those Distressing Times were willing enough to take any
Advantage of them. But their Scruples (if they had any) cleared up in a little
time, and their Fears vanished; and they afterward fell to business with the
same freedom, and under as little Restraint (for ought appears to the contrary)
as any of their Predecessors had done before the Act of Submission. And thus
the matter stood till the very End of Queen Elizabeth's Reign: there being no
Instance, I believe, to be given of a Formal Commission to Treat and Debate,
Older than the Convocation of 1603, in the first of King James; which shall
hereafter be accounted for.

In the mean time, we will suppose the utmost, that can by the severest
Interpretation of the Act, be pretended; that the Clergy are by it cut off from
forming the Draught of a Canon, or even deliberating about one, without being
particularly empowered to that purpose; yet are they still in several Inferior
Instances of Acting left perfectly free. It is not to be doubted but that,
notwithstanding the Act, they may by an Humble Representation lay before my
Lords the Bishops, the King, or his Great Council, any Growing Inconvenicies
and Disorders in the Church, any Dangerous Errors that may happen to arise and
spread in their time, any Outrageous Excess of Vice and Impiety which they
shall observe to prevail: and having made their Representations, they may
venture to add their Requests for the Prevention or Suppression of such
Disorders, Vices, and Errors; and even to point out the Methods of doing it. If
they cannot move a step toward framing New Canons, yet at least they may
interpose in behalf of the Old ones, and pray, that they may be vigorously
Executed, and duly observed. In a word, whatever Hardships or Grievances they
may lie under from their Ecclesiastical or Civil Superiors (as it is possible
for 'em to suffer from either) they have in Convocation a Right, and an
Opportunity to declare 'em. These Complaints it was heretofore their Custom to
put up together with their Subsidies; and coming in such good Company
therefore, they were for the most part favorably heard. Now they have left off
to Tax themselves, they must no longer draw Occasions of Relief, from the Wants
of the Crown, but from the Goodness and Justice of Him that wears it. It will
be for the Honor of a Reign, founded in the Liberties of the People, and
secured by maintaining 'em, to suffer All Bodies of Men to enjoy their Rights,
though they give nothing for it: Nor will it be any Reflection upon our most
Excellent Prince, if the World shall see, that the Advice of so considerable a
part of his Subjects as the Clergy are, may be welcome to him, even without
their Subsidies.

It is the Opinion of some Men, that that Mystery of Iniquity, Popery, is now
at work, and carrying on among us in a very dangerous manner; and it is their
Fear, lest that which could never succeed, when it appeared barefaced, should
prevail by making secret and unperceived Advances upon us; whether their Fears
are just, or no, I shall not determine: but would it not be fit that the Clergy
should be left to their wonted Liberty of Assembling; that upon any such
dangerous conjuncture, they might join their Councels, Endeavors, and
Requests, to give a stop to the Growing Mischief? and by a Due Representation
of the Danger grounded on the sure Accounts that shall be brought to the
Convocation by the several Members of it resorting thither from All parts of
the Kingdom, excite the Civil Magistrate into a Degree of Care and Concern
proportionable to the Danger?

But should the Clergy have no Representations, no Complaints to make to the
King and Parliament, yet They themselves may be complained of to either: and it
is fit they should be ready to give answer to such Complaints. All other Bodies
and Communities of Men, if any thing be moved in Parliament to their Prejudice,
can immediately Assemble and Confer together, and lay before their Superiors
the Consequences of it, as far as their Particular Interests are concerned: The
Clergy alone have no such Liberty or Opportunity, if their Parliamentary
Assemblies are not observed; and are in this respect therefore in a worse
condition than the Pettiest Company or Corporation in the Kingdom.

It Is true, my Lords the Bishops are at hand always, to interpose in their
behalf: but as they are no standing Committee of Convocation, upon whom the
Care of the Clergy's Interest in Parliament has at any time been devolved; so
neither is it proper, that it should be altogether lodged in their Hands; which
are too full of other Business, to be able alone to discharge this to the best
Advantage. As quick-sighted as their Lordships may be to discern, and as
Fatherly a Concern as they may have to remedy the Grievances of the Inferior
Clergy; yet it is not to be expected, that they should either understand 'em so
well, or represent 'em so fully, or interpose so heartily for their Redress, as
those who feel 'em. Men's Interests have been ever best taken care of by such as
were most immediately concerned in 'em. Their Lordships, doubtless, want no
Zeal for the Good of the Church, and of every the smallest Member of it. But in
Men of their Age and Experience such Zeal is ever tempered with great Caution,
and managed with nice Regards to the Probability of Success, and to the
Passions, and Prejudices, and Various Interests of Men. Now these Restraints
might, it is hoped, in some measure be taken off, and their Lordships
encouraged into a Reasonable Prospect of succeeding in any Proposal they had to
offer on our Behalf, if they were backed in it by the Joint Advice and
Endeavors of the Clergy of the Province assembled. And as their Caution in
Interposing would in this case it is likely be less, so would their
Interposition it self perhaps be of somewhat greater Weight and Influence;
especially in Times, when their Lordships Actions may lie under any Prejudices,
and their Characters be misunderstood. At such Seasons, they will have enough
to do, to support and promote their Own Interests; and will not be able
(however willing they may be) to stand in the Breach, and be a Screen to their
Inferiors.

Besides, their Lordships Good Offices are confined to the Upper House, nor can
They take notice of any Parliamentary Matter, till it comes regularly before
'em there: whereas the Clergy, as well as all other Bodies of Men, ought to
have the Privilege of an Early Address to the House of Commons, where so many
Bills of Importance begin, that nothing may pass there to their Disadvantage,
without being opposed, or understood; since That it self would be a Misfortune
to 'em, though they were sure to have it quashed elsewhere.

The Bishops Interest, Authority, Eloquence, (...), sufficient to plead the
Churches (...) and secure her Interests in the House of Lords; where all the
Noble Members are under so favorable a Disposition toward Her, that they
would certainly do Her Justice, though they were solicited by less Powerful
Advocates: However, the Commons Spiritual think it very Proper and Reasonable,
that they should in these cases have a Recourse to the Commons Temporal; whose
Interests in the State running parallel with Theirs in the Church, and being
nearly link^d with them, seem mightily to encourage such an Application; and to
make it a Point of Prudence, as well as Duty, in the Clergy to practice it,
where it may be had.

The Commons have a considerable Interest in the Lesser Clergy, by reason of
their Patronage; They are their Protectors, and Guardians appointed by Law in
relation to one part of their Maintenance; and will be extremely tender
therefore of all their other Civil or Ecclesiastical Rights, and careful to
cover them from any Attempts that shall be made upon their Privileges: That so
they may be in Heart, and at Hand always, to stand up with them in behalf of
Liberty, when it shall be attacked, and to resist a Growing Tyranny either in
Church or State, as it may happen. For Arbitrary Government is a Spreading and
Contagious Thing; and when once it is set up any where, there is no knowing
where it will end.

My Lords the Bishops therefore must excuse us, if, as great a Reverence as we
bear to their Characters, and as high an Esteem as we have of their Personal
Qualifications, their Integrity, Capacity, Courage; yet we think it fit, that
other Helps should be called in (since All Helps are but little enough) to
support the sinking Interests of Religion, and the Clergy; and judge the Great
Concerns of the Church no where so secure, as, where the Wisdom of our
Constitution has lodged 'em, in the Hands of a Convocation of the Province. We
know the Enemies of the Church sleep not, though the Watchmen sleep too often --
are the words of one, once an Active Presbyter of this Church, now a Vigilant
Prelate Dr. Burnet 's Fast-Sermon before the House of Commons. Anno 1681. p. 25.
We cannot, God be thanked, apply 'em to the Present Bench of Bishops; and
would not, if we could, unless in a Case of the Utmost Necessity; because
nothing less than that would justify such a freedom in Meaner Authors. However
Times may come, that will deserve such Language; but when, if the Provincial
Assemblies of the Church be, together with its Watchmen, laid asleep, it will
be too late to use it.

The Right Reverend Author of that Discourse (who should understand the Frame
of our Church well, having written the History of it) observes, that it is
happily Constituted between the Extremes of Ecclesiastical Tyranny on the one
Hand, and Enthusiastical Principles on the other Hand Ibid p. 9.
. It is so; and the Happiness of this Constitution, in relation to one of these
Extremes, lies in the Interest which the Lower Clergy have in Convocation;
where they are associated with their Lordships in the Care and Government of
the Church: Whereas out of Convocation, they are not, I think, advised with;
and have little else to do, but to observe Orders: The Diocesan Synods of our
Church being not for Counsel now, but for the Exercise of the Episcopal
Authority. This Happy Frame therefore should by all means be kept up; and the
rather, because it suits very happily with that of the State, and with the
Constitution of Parliaments. And it is highly expedient for every Church and
State, that the Ecclesiastical Polity should be adapted to the Civil, as nearly
as is consistent with the Original Plan of Church Government; which, in our
Case, there will be no danger of departing from, by a Compliance with the
State-Modell: For I am sure, and am ready, when ever I am called upon,
particularly to prove, that the more our Church shall resemble the State, in
her Temper and Manner of Government, the nearer still will she approach to
Primitive Practice; and the nearer she comes up to Both these, the more likely
will she be to Endure and Flourish.

What the same Eminent Pen has said on this Occasion, I willingly subscribe to;
That as in Civil Government, a Prince governing by Law, and having high
Prerogatives, by which he may do all the Good he has a mind to, which yet he
cannot abuse to act against the Law, and who is obliged often to consult with
his People in what relates to common safety; by whose Assistance he must be
enabled to put in Execution the Good Things he designs; is certainly the best
Expedient for preventing the Two Extremes in Civil Society, Confusion and
Slavery: So a Bishop that shall have the Chief Inspection over those whom he is
to Ordain, and over the Labors of those already placed; whom he shall direct
and assist in every thing; and who governs himself by the Rules of the
Primitive Church, and by the Advice of his Brethren, is the likeliest
Instrument both for propagating, and preserving the Christian Religion Pref. to
the Hist. of the Regal.
. I add, and for the keeping up of this Particular Church in some Degree of
Repute and Authority; which have ever been best secured to it, when her Prime
Pastors have met their Clergy often in Synod, and by their Advice and
Assistance managed the Great Affairs of it.

But if that be thought too much, and sound too high for the Lower Orders to
pretend to; who must be contented rather to be the Subjects of Ecclesiastical
Government, than any Sharers in it; yet even Subjects themselves may Petition,
and make known whatever Grievances, or Requests they have to offer, without
Encroachment on any of their Superiors. And that the Liberty of such Addresses
and Representations is still left to the Convocation, (to the Lower House
alone, or to Both jointly) I have fully showed: The Statute of Submission, even
under the most Rigorous Interpretation of it, being scarce pretended to abridge
their Privileges in this respect. And because Practice in this kind is the
best Proof, I shall here add a few Instances of it.

In the Convocation of 1542 (33 Hen. 8.) the Acts say, that at the passing of
the Subsidy, Clerus exposuit 4. Petitiones [to the Upper House, who when they
presented the Subsidy, were to acquaint the King with them] 1. De Legibus
Ecclesiasticis condendis. 2. De Conjugiis factis in Bethlehem abolendis. 3. De
veneundis -- Beneficiis. 4. De Decimis solvendis. Act. MSS. Sess. 20.

The Two Petitions in the first Convocation of E. 6. (See 'em in Bishop
Burnet's Hist. Vol. 1. p. 118.) Collect. of Records, whatever force they may
have to prove a License necessary on other Occasions (which shall hereafter be
fully considered) do yet certainly prove it not necessary in order to Petition.

There are many Requests of the Clergy in Convocation to Queen Elizabeth.

One Anno 1580, in behalf of the Archbishop, then out of favor, that she would
be pleased to restore him. Fuller. IX. Book, p. 121.

Another Anno 1587, about the Act said to be intended against Pluralities.
Full. Ibid. page 191.

A third to the same purpose, in some other Convocation of her Reign; which
being yet unprinted, I shall insert in the Appendix Numb. IV.
. It is a Paper very Remarkable both for the weightiness of the Matter, and
closeness of the Expression; and for the spirit and freedom with which it is
drawn: which however I propose not as a Pattern; but as a Great Argument of
that Liberty they thought remaining to them.

A fourth from the Lower to the Upper House of Convocation, to be presented in
their Name to the Queen for the Pardon of Lapses and Irregularities. It Is in a
Cotton MS. Cleop. F. 2. f. 123. and from thence I shall Transcribe it. See App.
Number. V.


A fifth against the Encroachments of Chancellors upon Archdeacons. Ibid. p.
264.

A sixth praying many Regulations in very weighty matters. Ibid.

There is also extant in Fuller IX. Book, p. 55. See the Preface to it, p. 66.
of this Book.
a Remonstrance, of the Clergy of the Lower House, being a Declaration of their
Judgments, made indeed in the very beginning of Queen Elizabeth, when this
Statute was not yet revived, and about Popish Tenets; but which may, I presume,
be safely imitated for the Assertion of truly Catholic Doctrines.

Anno 1606, A Petition from the Lower House of Convocation to King James,
against Prohibitions. This too the Reader will find with the others in the
Appendix Numb. VI.
.

Nay, even the Assembly of Divines it self, though it was more strictly tied up
by the Ordinance of Parliament See it Rushw. 3. part, Vol. 2. p. 328.
, than ever any Convocation was by their Commission (for there were Negative
words in that Ordinance, which empowered 'em to Treat and Confer of such
Matters and Things as should be proposed to 'em, and no other) yet did not
think themselves restrained from Petitioning, and proposing several Heads of
Reformation to the Parliament. See 'em, Ibid. p. 344.

The Clergy in Convocation were not used only to be Petitioners themselves,
they were also some times addressed to in the same way by others; either by
their Brethren of the Established Clergy, or by those of the Separation.

Of the former I have seen an Instance in Manuscript, being a Petition from the
London- Ministers See Cat. MSS. in Bibl. Bodl. n. 8494.
. The Direction of it is, To the Reverend Fathers in God the Lords Bishops, and
the Rest of the Convocation. It is said in the Manuscript, to have been read
and committed, Febr. 10. 1580.

Of the Latter several Mentions, and Accounts remain, though the Petitions
themselves be lost. For Example,

In Queen Elizabeth's time those who were then called the Puritans, Petitioned
the Convocation, as appears from a Passage in one of their Books, thus quoted
by Bishop Bancroft Dang. Posit. L. 4. c. 4. p. 140.
, We have sought, say they, to advance the Cause of God by Humble Suit to the
Parliament, by Supplication to your Convocation-house, etc.

And whether it be this, or some other Petition of theirs that is referred to in
a Manuscript Justification See Cat. MSS. in Bibl. Bodl. n. 1987.
of the Mille-manus Petition to King James, I cannot tell; but these words
occur in it, -- We have often and in many Treatises declared, [our Objections
against the Liturgy] at large, and namely in a Petition, which Four Godly,
Grave, and Learned Preachers offered in our Names to the Convocation-house.

A yet greater Liberty than any I have mentioned was taken by the Clergy in
that Long Address [miscalled by Fuller P. 208.
the Protestation] which the Lower House offered to Henry the Eighth himself,
after the passing of the Statute; or in that other very long one to the Upper
House in Queen Mary's time Hist. Ref. part 2. B. 2. Coll. n. 16.
. In the first we have an Instance of very Free Convocational Representations,
and of yet freer Petitions in the Latter; for it attempts not only Canons, but
Acts of Parliament; and particularly prays Art. 10.
, that the Statute of which we have been speaking, may be repealed.

But the Clergy no more stand in need of these Instances, than they would join
in these Designs and Petitions. The Statute of Submission is none of their
Grievances, nor do they ask, or wish a Repeal of it: They desire only that it
may not have an Unnatural and Illegal Construction put upon it; and that they
may be bound up no otherwise by it, than the Submitters themselves were. They
know indeed, that the Reflection which a Right Reverend Member of theirs once
made upon this Statute was, That the Extreme of raising the Ecclesiastical
Power too high in the Times of Popery, had now produced another of depressing
it too much: So seldom is the Counterpoize so justly Balanced, that Extremes
are reduced to a well-tempered Mediocrity Bishop Burnet 's Hist. Vol. 2. pp.
49, 50.
. But as they are not sure that this is his Lordship's present Opinion, so they
are certain it is none of Theirs: for they think their Power as Great as it
need to be, if it be not made less than it really is. Had they lived indeed in
Henry the Eighth's time, they should not perhaps have humoured his Imperious
Temper so far, as to have made that mean Submission, or tamely to have given up
any one Legal Privilege, which belonged to the Body, and was not inconsistent
with the Good of their Country. But since it was made, and Enacted, they know
how, like Good Englishmen, and Good Subjects, cheerfully to obey it. Only they
can never submit to such a sense of the Submission as was never intended, nor
throughout that Age, wherein it was made, ever practiced. This would be a much
meaner part in them, than the first Act was in their Ancestors: whose Religion
was all Submission and Slavery; and it is no wonder therefore that the Fetters
prepared for them sat so easily upon them. But in a Protestant Clergy, the
professed Assertors of the Just Freedoms and Rights of Mankind in Religious
affairs, and who have been more than once Instrumental in shaking off Yokes of
every kind from the Necks of Englishmen, such Illegal Complyances would be
inexcusable. In short, they have, and they own that they have, great reason to
be content with the Privileges which the Law has clearly marked out to them;
and the Great Petition they have to offer is, that they may be permitted to
enjoy them. If their Predecessors were struck with a Panick Fear, at the very
sound of a Praemunire, in a Reign when the Laity too trembled at the Noise of
Thunder from Above; yet their Present Successors may not be ever the less
Dutiful, though they are not quite so much frighted: as having the happiness to
live in a Time when the Privileges and Rights of the English Subject are more
clearly understood, and much better secured.

Upon the whole then it appears,

That the Clergy Commoners have all along had an undoubted Right of being
frequently assembled, and particularly by the Law of England, as often as a New
Parliament is called.

That being assembled, they had anciently a Right of framing Canons, and doing
several Synodical Acts (not inconsistent with the Law of their Country) without
expecting the Prince's Leave for entering on such Debates, or making such
Decrees.

That the 25 H. 8. c. 19. has not in the least infringed this Right, as far as
the Lower Clergy are concerned in it.

That the Limitations there made to the Exercise of it chiefly concern the
Archbishop of either Province, who is now restrained, as from calling a
Convocation without the King's Writ, so from Passing or Ratifying any Canon
without the Royal License, and from Promulging the same by his Own Authority.

That the Inferior Clergy are no otherwise concerned, than to take care that
they give their Consent to no Canon framed by themselves, or sent from the
Upper House, otherwise than with Submission to the Royal Pleasure; if the
King's License and Assent be not before obtained.

That they are left therefore entirely at their Liberty to Confer and
Deliberate even about New Canons; and also to Devise, Frame, and Offer them to
the Upper House; if with a Protestation annexed, that they are neither intended
nor desired to be enacted without the King's License.

Much more, that there remains to 'em a Liberty of Petitioning, either that Old
Canons may be executed, or New Ones made according to Law, and to such Purposes
as the Petitioners shall suggest; or of representing their Humble Opinions
concerning the Affairs of the Church, and of Religion; and, if need be,
beseeching a Redress, at least in General Terms.

This, I take it, is their Undoubted Privilege, and would be used by them on
Great Occasions, with the same Prudence and Temper that their Predecessors are
known to have practiced; who, when they met without Interruption, were so
cautious of giving no unnecessary Trouble either to Church or State, that they
were more complained of, in some Reigns, for sitting still, than for stirring.

By this time the Reader sees, that the Reason given for the Clergy's not
Meeting, because, when met, and formed into a Body, they can do nothing, is a
strange one. For, supposing 'em to be tied up never so strictly in their
Decre^ing Capacity, yet surely it does not follow, that they can do nothing,
because they cannot Make or Attempt a Canon. Is it nothing to speak the sense
of the whole Clergy of the Kingdom in matters proper for them to intermeddle
in? is it nothing to Petition, Advise, Address, Represent; to give their
Judgment, where it may be desired, or their Censure where it may be needful? Is
it nothing, with a Dutiful and Discreet Zeal to suggest the fittest Methods of
securing the Christian Faith, of preventing the Revival of Old Heresies and
Errors, and the Growth of New Ones? Is it nothing to do that, which anciently,
when Bills began by Petition, was the Great Privilege of one Great Part of the
Legislature, the House of Commons? I had thought that, while they had this at
least (though they should have no more than this) to do, they had not nothing to
do; but rather a very Great and Necessary Work. And whether such Applications
are necessary, should, I suppose, be left to the Convocation it self, to
determine; though others afterward may either second, or reject these
Applications; who may in these Cases have the Power of Judging, but not of
Prejudging the Actions of a Lawful Assembly: much less have they the Power of
precondemning the very Being of such an Assembly, because they foresee not what
may be done in it.

In truth, whatever may be pretended of the Convocations being able to do
nothing, yet their not being allowed to Meet is a shrewd sign, that they can,
when met, do something; and that they of the Clergy, who oppose their Meeting,
are themselves of that Opinion: for were their Mouths really shut, and their
Hands tied to that Degree they are represented to be, there could certainly be
no Inconvenience in trusting such an Harmless Body of Men together, nor would
it be worth while to break through Ancient and Received Practice in order to
prevent their Assembling.

The Innovation made in these matters has begun within these Ten Years last
past. For though it has been usual to adjourn Convocations, a few days after they
had met and sat, when there was little or no business to do; yet it was never
till this time known that a Convocation was adjourned before it sat; that is
indeed, before it was a Convocation. This New Practice (which Dr. Wake, in my
Opinion, by as New Law justifies) we know the Date of; and have reason
therefore to obviate it, while it is New; and to take some care that it may not
in a little time be able to plead a Quiet Prescription.

The Clergy betray their Privileges, if they lie still under the Publication
of such Oppressive Schemes, without as Open a Disavowal of them, and without
expressing their Detestation of the Meanness of the Publisher. They deserve to
be used as ill as their Open Adversaries, or their False Friends would have
them used, if they can suffer their most Valuable Right to be thus torn from
'em, in Print, without the least struggle for it. The Virgin in the Law of God
was judged consenting to the Rape, who did not cry out, when Help was near, and
was ordered therefore to be stoned together with her Ravisher. To prevent such
an Imputation upon the Church, and the sad Consequences of it, her True Sons,
were they as Rash as they are represented to be, would ever this have showed
themselves against this New Advocate, in a more Open Manner, and in somewhat
Greater Numbers than they have hitherto done; and might perhaps, for that End
(could they no otherwise be heard) have interposed a Subscribed Protestation
from their whole Body. But if this way of gathering scattered Hands would seem
disorderly, and unsuitable to their Characters, and prove dangerous, it may be,
to the Persons engaging in it; the more reason still have they to esteem and
assert the Privilege of being Legally assembled, and put into such a
condition, as to be able duly and safely to make their just Complaints, and
represent their Grievances.

CHAP. IV.
HAving largely showed what the Two Great Convocation-Rights are, which I
proposed to Treat of, and withal offered the several Chief Evidences and Proofs
on which I build 'em; my Method laid down leads me in the next place to
consider the Exceptions of all sorts which have been made to this Claim, by
some Late Writers, pretending to answer the Letter to a Convocation Man;
particularly by the Author of a Letter to a Member of Parliament, and by Dr.
Wake, in his Book entitled, The Authority of Christian Princes over their
Ecclesiastical Synods asserted, etc. This Book being written by a Person of
some Station in the Church, and, as is pretended, under the Cover of a Great
Authority, deserves to be examined with a more than ordinary care; which
accordingly I have resolved to bestow upon it. Dr. Wake indeed has a Peculiar
Talent at enlarging on a Controversy; the shortest Point, when it comes under
his Fruitful Pen, immediately improves into a Volume. I shall not so far follow
his Example, as to trace all he has said* step by step, and Page by Page; and
take every Opportunity that he has given me of laying open his misapplied
Reading, and mistaken Reasonings: That would be an Endless Task, which I have
no leisure for, neither does the Cause require it, nor would the Reader bear
it. I shall endeavor therefore, as much as I am able, to shorten this Debate;
and in order to it, shall first of all make some General Reflections upon his
way of managing it: wherein I shall show, how very little there is in his
Tedious Work, that really concerns the Point disputed; and how much of it is
written against no body, and for no End in the World, that I can see, but the
Pleasure of Emptying his Common-Place-Book. I may very aptly apply to him, what
Bishop Andrews said of a much Greater Adversary: Etsi nobis lis nulla de Regia
in Ecclesiasticis Potestate -- tamen exorari non potest Tortus quin in Campum
exeat istius Controversiae; and, ubi quaestio nobis nulla de ea re, ostendat
tamen nobis Testes minime necessarios. Explicare scilicet voluit Opes suas, and
ostendere quae habebat in Adversariis suis. Habebat autem ad hanc rem nonnulla,
si incidisset alicubi: Iam quia non incidit, occasionem arripit non valde
idoneam ea quoquo modo proferendi. Vult enim Lectorem videre quam Cupressum
pingat eleganter Tortura Torti, p. 169,
. I shall not, I hope, be thought impertinent in displaying these Impertinences
of his; which I shall do in as narrow a compass, and under as few Heads of
Observation, as the variety of the matter will admit of. And

I. I observe, that Dr. Wake has put himself to a great deal of needless pains
to prove a Point, which he might, if he pleased, have taken for granted; that
every Christian Prince, and Ours in particular, has an Ecclesiastical
Supremacy; and that the Clergy are not, by a Divine Right entitled to transact
Church Affairs in Synods, as they please, and as often as they please, without
any regard to the Civil Christian Power that they live under. Many of those
numerous Instances he has produced of Princes intermedling with Church Matters,
here at home, or abroad, are designed only to assert this Great Truth: which
however is a Point that he needed not to have labored so heartily, because no
Church of England man ever denied it: not the Man he writes against, I am sure;
who says only (and what he says I shall not fear to say after him) that the
Civil and Spiritual Powers are distinct in their End and Nature, Let. to a
Conv. Man, pp. 17, 18.
and therefore ought to be so in their Exercise too. The One relates to the
Peace, Order, Health, and Prosperity of the Man in this Life, as a Sociable
Creature; the other concerns his Eternal State, and his Thoughts, Words, and
Actions preparative thereto: The first is common to all Societies, whether
Pagan, or Christian; the Latter can rightly be exercised among Christians only;
and among them, not as enclosed within any Civil State or Community, but as
Members of a Spiritual Society, of which Jesus Christ is the Head; who has also
given out Laws, and appointed a standing Succession of Officers under himself
for the Government of this Society. And these Ministers of his did actually
govern it by these Powers committed to them from him, for near 300 years before
any Government was Christian. From whence, says he, it follows, that such
Spiritual Jurisdiction cannot be in its nature necessarily dependent on the
Temporal: for then it could never have been lawfully exercised, till Kings,
States, and Potentates became Christian. And again in another place, -- This
Power having been claimed and exercised by the Apostles and their Successors,
without any Regard, nay in Opposition to the Heathen Temporal Authority, is
therefore, we say, not necessarily in its own nature dependent on such
Authority P. 19, 20.
. Than which Reasoning nothing certainly can be more just; nor could that
Writer have expressed himself with more Caution and Guard upon so nice an
Occasion. Dr. Wake seems here to have apprehended him, as if he had affirmed,
that Princes have nothing to do in Church Matters; the Management of which lies
without their Sphere, and no ways depends on Their Authority. But no Man living
could have struck this sense out of his words, that was not either very Blind,
or very willing, for some small End or other, to misunderstand him. Cannot this
mighty Controvertist distinguish between Denying the Exercise of Ecclesiastical
Power to be necessarily dependent on the Temporal, and affirming it to be
necessarily independent upon it? Does he not see a difference between saying,
that the Church may subsist without the State, and that the State has nothing
to do in the Government of the Church? If he does not, he ought to forbear
tampering in Disputes of this kind, till his Judgment is better, and his Head
clearer. But if, seeing this difference, he yet resolved to take no notice of
it; either because he had made Collections some time of his Life about the
Supremacy, and was resolved to take this Opportunity of giving himself the
Credit of them; or because he saw it would be of use to him, to have the Writer
he appears against represented under as Invidious Colors, and his Opinions
loaded with as much weight as was possible: if this were the Case, it must be
allowed him, that there was some little Art, though, I think, no very great share
of Honesty in his Management.

It Is true, the Letter to a Convocation-man, immediately after the last words I
transcribed from it, adds, And if we should say further, that this Society has
an Inherent and Unalterable Right to the Exercise of this Power; it would be no
more than what every Sect or Party among us claims, and practices, etc. But Dr.
Wake could not with any color lay hold of this Passage as asserting the
Independency of the Church on the State: for, besides that it is only a way of
arguing drawn from other Men's Principles; it is a few Lines afterward expressly
retracted, and qualifyed: But this, says he, is what at the present we neither
do, nor need say. Notwithstanding which Dr. Wake is resolved that this he shall
say, and maintain; and supposing it therefore to be his avowed Opinion, draws
down all his strength, and sets his Quotations in Array against it. From
Fathers and Councils, from Ancient and Modern Writers, our Own and Foreign
Historians he learnedly proves, that the Church Power in a Christian
Commonwealth is to be exercised in Subordination to the State; that Princes
have of right all along called Councels and dissolved them, have hindered the
Execution of some Ecclesiastical Canons which were prejudicial to their
Kingdom, and given the Civil Sanction to others -- and a great deal more of
this kind they have and may do; and must be allowed therefore a Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and over Ecclesiastical Persons. And what if they be?
Is there a Line in that Book he opposes, but what will stand good,
notwithstanding all this were made out never so irrefragably? This is bringing
the Great Engines of Battery against a Place, which he might have marched
directly into without Opposition (...) Enemy having never undertaken to defend
(...) Qui operose probant, etc. (says Grotius or some such sly Dealers in this
very Controversy) stultum sibi fingunt Adversarium, de quo facile triumphent De
Imp. Summar. Pot. circa Sacra.
. Dr. Wake, with great Modesty advises his Learned Adversary, Not to increase
the Necessary Bulk of their Dispute by alleging passages out of the Ancient
Fathers, to prove that which neither of 'em make any doubt of Appeal. Pref. p.
XXI.
. Had he given this Advice first to Himself, and taken it, his Huge Performance
had shrunk away into a few Pages, and been as inconsiderable for its Bulk, as
it is for the Importance of the matter contained in it.

II. A second Instance, wherein Dr. Wake has spent his Learned Pains to no
purpose, is in the Tedious Account he has given us of the Power exercised by
Princes, in relation to General Councils, and the Greater Church Assemblies.
These Researches (as he calls 'em) might well have been spared, upon a double
account; both because the matter of 'em lies not very deep, and can be no News
to any Man that has but once touched on this Controversy Veteramenta omnia,
detrita jam and repetita millies, says Bishop Andrews, (Tort. Tort. p. 173.) of
some of those very Instances, which 90 Years ago, it seems, were grown stale;
tho Dr. Wake produces 'em now with such Pomp and Pleasure.
; and because his Reading of this kind, though never so hard to come at, yet is
nothing to the purpose. For the Dispute turns on Provincial Synods only, and
the Rights which the Church lays claim to in relation to Them: and it is no
Proof, or Disproof of these Rights to show, what the Practice of Princes has
been in convening and presiding over General Councils, which are Meetings of
another Nature, and Original, and subject to quite different Laws and Usages.

By Provincial Councils the Church was governed, and in such Councils all the
Great Affairs of it were transacted for some hundreds of Years before the
Empire became Christian; whereas General Councils owe their very Being to the
Civil Power, without the Express Allowance and Encouragement of which, after
Christianity had once spread it self wide, they never did, or could assemble.

The Times when Provincial Synods were to meet, the Persons that were to
compose them, and preside in them, the Causes that were to come before them,
and the manner of deciding those Causes, and of enforcing Obedience to their
Decisions by Spiritual Censures, etc. these were all things fully agreed on and
determined by the Rules of the Church, while it subsisted independently of the
State: and when Constantine therefore by embracing the Faith became its
Protector, he only confirmed those Ancient Usages to the Church, which she was
in possession of; He left the Practice of the Church just as he found it: only
what was before an Ecclesiastical Rule, he made a Civil Right, and a Law of the
Empire.

Not so, as to General Councils; the Church had no Custom, no Prescription to
plead, in relation to Them; they were Then first to be set up by the Civil
Power, framed, and molded L. M. P. Proves a Convocation not to be incident to
a National Church, by a passage in the Preface to Aelfricus 's Canons; where he
finds it said, that the Christian Church for the first 300 years had no
Convocation, p. 46. Can one imagine it possible for a Man to be in the Dark to
that Degree, as not to know, that this was meant of General Councils? But his
Skill in Ecclesiastical History, it seems, goes no further than Lambert.
: and no wonder therefore if the Method of their Meeting and Acting was
regulated, in some of its chief Circumstances, by that Power which gave Birth
and Establishment to them.

The First of these Assemblies that ever sat, provided by a Canon for the
continuance of Provincial Synods upon the Foot they had always stood: and this
Canon was reinforced by several succeeding General Councils, was ratified by
the several Emperors, in whose Times these Councils were held, and inserted at
last into the Code of the Imperial Laws: and from thenceforth the Synod of
every Province was as Legal an Assembly as the Senate it self; had a right, at
stated Times, to be Summoned as duly, and to act within its proper Sphere as
freely, as any Civil Convention whatever.

But General Councils, even after they were set up, were not by any Law thus
provided for; they were in their nature, and Institution Occasional Meetings,
which had no fixed time allotted to them; but were to be called together in
Extraordinary Cases only, and when the Pressing Exigences of the Church
required them: And no Bishop Then pretending to an Authority over All the Rest,
even on that account it fell acourse to the Emperors share to Convene them.

The Assembling of so many Men of Rank and Character from so many Quarters of
the Empire was a Power that could safely be lodged in no Hands but his that
ruled it: He was to be Judge, when such a vast Confluence was fit to be
allowed, and how far it consisted with the Peace of the State; at what Place
and Time the Session should be opened, and how long it should continue. He by
his Officers provided for the safe Conduct of the Fathers going to the Council,
and returning from it; at his Expense they had Reception and Entertainment on
the way, and under the Security of his Protection they met and consulted. The
Debates of such a Numerous Assembly must have been very disorderly and
tumultuous, unless conducted by a Rule; which no single Bishop had a Right to
prescribe to the rest, and which could not therefore come so properly from any
one as from Him that Summoned them. And that this Rule might be sure to be
observed, it was requisite, that the Emperor should have a Place in their
Assembly, should preside over, and moderate their Debates, either in Person, or
by his Deputies, as he saw occasion. After the Fathers had come to Resolutions,
and framed their Canons, it was of vast Importance to 'em to have the Secular
Power ratify what they had agreed on. They could Authoritatively declare, what
was the General Sense of the Church on such and such Articles; but to procure
that these Decisions should be generally received and obeyed in all Christian
Countries, could no ways be so effectually brought about as by Civil Sanctions
and Penalties.

On all these accounts, and many more, it was highly reasonable, and just, nay
necessary almost, that the Imperial Power should exert it self in Appointing
the Meetings, and Governing the Debates, and Confirming the Acts of General
Councils. But was there the same Reason and Necessity for its interposing as
particularly in Provincial Synods also, which were Ordinary Meetings, of
perpetual and standing Use in the Church, not Numerous, or Composed of Equals,
but of Persons living at no Great Distance from one another, and all
Subordinate to one Ecclesiastical Superior? Dr. Wake knows in his Conscience,
that these Circumstances make a Wide Difference between them: and if so, why
does he amuse us with Large Accounts of what Emperors have done, and been
allowed to do, in relation to those Great and Extraordinary Meetings, the
Custom of which makes neither for nor against the Rule that was to be observed
in these Ordinary Stated ones? To what purpose was it for him nauseously to
transcribe Labbee for fifty Pages together upon a Commonplace, which has been
so often and so thoroughly exhausted by the Writers of the Last Age; and which
besides is of no manner of use toward determining the present Dispute? Does he
think to cover the want of proper and apposite matter by such loose and General
Reflections as these? Does he hope to make his Readers lose sight of the Point
they are in quest of, in that Mist of Impertinent Quotations, with which he
surrounds 'em?

The Learned Mr. Hill had rightly observed, that what Dr. Wake produces P. 10.
from Socrates Hist. Eccl. Praef. l. iv.
about the Emperor's interposing in the Greatest Councils, was of no weight in
the present Argument; where we are enquiring, what the Usage and Rights of the
Church are, not in the Greater, but Lesser Synods; which go by quite another
Rule, and are much more exempt from the Interposition of the Civil Authority.
Dr. Wake makes a Scornful mention of this Distinction in the Preface to his
Appeal P. xxi.
, without vouchsafing to give any Reply to it: which was discreetly done, for
it would not admit of any. The Distinction is just and well applied; and had it
been considered by Dr. Wake, when he wrote, must have prevailed with him to
withdraw above half the History that his first Chapter is filled with, and have
made that part of his Work look no more Learned, than it really is.

Socrates might well say, that the Greatest Synods were held always at the
Emperor's Direction; but he knew the Lesser were not, and therefore omitted the
mention of them. And the same Caution is observed in one of our XXXIX. Articles
Art. 21.
; where it is affirmed indeed, that General Councils may not be gathered [upon
any Occasion, in any Circumstances] without the Commandment and Will of
Princes: But of Provincial Councils nothing is said. However the Churches
Caution in Wording her Decision is not greater than Dr. Wake's in citing it,
who has, thoughout his first Book, made, as I remember, but one slight and
General mention P. 10.
of this Article, without producing the words of it; which he knew would go
near to suggest a Distinction, that it was not to his purpose to have observed.

Indeed the Canons of 1640 seem, and only seem, to go further; for in truth
they do not. Art. 1.
They affirm, that the Power of calling both National and Provincial Councils
is the true Right of all Christian Kings within their own Realms and
Territories; but say not, that this is the Right of Kings alone, so that no
other Person or Persons can in any Circumstances whatever claim or use it: on
the contrary, they plainly teach, that where the Prince is not Christian, the
Prelates of the Church may rightfully use this Power; so it be with Submission
to the Civil Penalties and Punishments that may attend 'em on that account! and
they intimate the Case to be the same under a Christian Persecuting Prince,
though it was not so Decent openly to express it. The Canon and the Article
therefore are perfectly consistent, and both are drawn up with that Moderation,
and Guard, as to give the Prince what is His Due, and yet not to deprive the
Church of what may be Hers; but to leave the way open to the Exercise of the
same Power that she claimed and practiced, before Princes came in to the Faith,
if there should ever be the fame Occasion for it; which I hope there never will.

And this Canon too was not, it seems, thought worthy to accompany Dr. Wake's
Other Collections; where Foreign and far fetched Authorities take up his Pen so
much, that he had not room to consider what had been said here at Home upon the
Subject; no, not in a Work written on purpose to clear and to assert the
Doctrine of the Church of England. But we are not to wonder at it: for the same
Happy Talent of Mind, which makes a Man abound in what is Trivial, makes him
Defective also in what is Material.

All that Dr. Wake can say for his way of arguing is, that he has in it traced
the Steps of some of our Greatest Writers, who treating of the Supremacy,
derive the Proofs of it from the same Sources he has done, and frequently give
Instances of the Powers exercised by Princes over the Greatest and most General
Assemblies; as appears from that Collection of Authorities which he has made in
his Appeal. But this will not justify him: for those Writers, whose Pattern he
pretends to follow, had to do with such Adversaries as quite shut out the Civil
Power from interposing in Church Matters: Most of them being engaged either
against the professed Defenders of the Papacy, [as Jewel, Bilson, Nowell,
Mason, etc.] or against those of the Rigid Presbyterial way [as Whitgift,
Hooker, Bancroft, Bramhall, etc. were] In Opposition to these therefore it was
proper to show, how far the Practice of the first Christian Emperors was
consistent with such Principles. And whether their Instances to this purpose
were taken from the Greater or Lesser Church-meetings, from Provincial or
General Councils, it was all one to the point in hand, and made equally against
Those whose Doctrine they were to disprove. Not so in Dr. Wake's Case, who,
when he wrote his First Book, had no such Adversary to deal with; but One who
argued altogether upon the Bottom of a Civil Right, and drew his Plea purely
from our Domestic Constitution, and the approved Laws and Usages of the Realm.
When Dr. Wake therefore by the Authorities produced in his Last Piece would
excuse the Doctrine laid down in his former, he deals unfairly with us: for
those Authorities justify only that part of his Doctrine which was foreign to
the Argument; they being Declarations chiefly of the General Rights and
Interests of Supreme Christian Powers in Ecclesiastical Affairs; without
entering into the Various Restrictions of that Right, which the Spiritual
Subjects may in several Places be entitled to by the Concessions of Princes and
States, and by their particular Privileges and Immunities; and without
considering nicely, Where that Supremacy may in different respects be said to
be lodged; and Who therefore must be taken in as Sharers in several Acts and
Branches of it. Which Considerations nevertheless are necessary to determine
the just Extents of our Princes Rights in this Case, and the Measure of our
Obedience; as will hereafter, in Due Place, more clearly appear.

In these Opinions our Old Writers had an Eye to the Act, and Oath of
Supremacy; to maintain which was the business of that Age, in which they wrote:
and their words therefore must be understood, as that Oath is drawn up,
Negatively, not Positively; that is, as denying the Usurpations in
Ecclesiastical Matters, that have been made, or attempted, from without, upon
the Crown of England, not as settling the exact Boundaries and Limits of that
Supremacy within, in relation either to those who are to govern, or those who
are to be governed by it: which is a Controversy, that there has hitherto been
but little said of, and indeed but little Occasion to consider; and which could
not therefore be settled and determined by such Writers, as lived and died
before it was started.

Dr. Wake's Cloud of Witnesses therefore, which he produces in his Appeal, are
very properly such; for they serve only to darken and confound the Point we are
in pursuit of, not at all to clear it. They are such a Nubes Testium as we had
in the Late Reign for Transubstantiation [and other Romish Articles] where the
Old Fathers were vouched by wholesale for a Doctrine, that came not upon the
Stage, till they were gone off it. And much the same Usage have the Fathers of
our own Church had from the Pen of this Appellant; who has cited 'em, if
pertinently, to Points that perhaps they never heard of, and to purposes that
to be sure they never dreamt of; and to which had those Excellent Persons
foreseen that their words would have been stretched, they would certainly have
renounced such Consequences, or rather have prevented 'em, by expressing
themselves more warily. They were to plead for the Supremacy of Princes against
Those who were for allowing them no manner of Interest in Church Matters: and
what wonder is it, if in the warmth of this Dispute they should, as the Fate is
in All Controversies, have sometimes a little over-thought or over-expressed
themselves, and have laid down such Positions, as, though of sound Sense, when
opposed to the Principles of those against whom they contended; yet when
applied in other Cases and Circumstances (then out of their Thoughts, and the
Debate) might need some little softning? Their Great Concern was to secure the
Royal Prerogative; and when that was done, they thought their own Rights and
Privileges would be secure under the Shadow of it. These they were then in a
full Uninterrupted Possession of, without apprehensions that a Time might come,
when they should be put to prove their Title to 'em; and when that Power, which
they so warmly, and with reason, pleaded for, should be turned upon them, and
made use of against the Maintainers of it. Much less did they suspect, that
ever any pretended Son of the Church of England would amass together all the
Highest Assertions of the Regal Supremacy, scattered up and down in their
Writings, in order to furnish out a Plea for suppressing the Liberties of that
Church; and on purpose to prove, that Convocations were (what the Letter to a
Member of Parliament sawcily says, P. 26.
Bishops are) the Creatures of the Crown; which therefore as it created, so it
may annihilate at its pleasure. Such kind of Books indeed were written Twelve
Years ago, by some False Members of our Communion, to make way for those Ill
Designs that were then on foot, but to the Eternal Infamy of the Writers of
them; who thought to find their particular account in the General Ruin of that
Church and Constitution to which they belonged; but were, God be thanked, every
way defeated in Their Expectations. There is not, it is true, so much Hazard
now, as there was then, in exalting the Regal Power; when we live under a
Prince, who is too Just and too Clear sighted, to be flattered into a Misuse of
his Authority. However, no Thanks are due for this to the Flatterers, who have
marked out the Arbitrary Scheme; and it is no fault of theirs, if it be not
afterward followed.

My Indignation at such Unworthy and Mean Attempts has carried me away into
Considerations, not so proper for this place, and led me a little from a strict
pursuit of my Argument. I left it, where I was showing, how weak Dr. Wake's way
of reasoning is, from the Powers exercised by Princes over the Greatest Synods,
to their interposing equally in the Less. He himself seems to be sensible of
it; and therefore, to prevent this Long Chapter of his being One Entire
Impertinence, has sprinkled up and down in it a few Instances of the Authority
of Princes over their Provincial Synods: which being the only Instances there,
that any ways affect our Argument, I shall not think much to consider 'em. And
in order to it, I observe,

III. That in those Few Historical Facts, which seem apposite and proper, he
either manifestly mistakes National, for Provincial Synods; or Extraordinary
Assemblies, for Ordinary and stated ones; or conceals some Circumstances
relating to the Story of those Meetings, which when known, give an Easy
Account how the Royal Power came so particularly to interpose in 'em. Several
of the Synods which he calls Provincial, were undoubtedly not so: Others, which
were, yet were called by Princes upon Extraordinary Emergences, and do no ways
prejudice the Right which the Church then had of assembling ordinarily at set
times, without a Lay Summons. For when Princes admitted the Canon of the Nicene
Council to take place in their Kingdoms, and allowed the Synods of every
Province to meet twice a Year in virtue of it, they did not by that preclude
themselves from calling those Synods together at other times, when the
Circumstances of the Church or State should require them. They parted with no
Power that they had to Convene such Assemblies, but only gave a Liberty to the
Clergy of the Province to meet at appointed Times, whether they had a Royal
Command for it, or no.

Besides, had Dr. Wake intended a fair state of this Point, he would have set
aside all those Instances of Provincial Councils Summoned by Princes, where
those Princes exerted their Power, only to make Metropolitans, who were remiss,
do their Duty, and obey the Canons: or, where they interposed only to revive
the Use of such Meetings, which had been under a long Discontinuance in their
Kingdoms; and when they had done so, lest them afterward to their Ordinary
Course. In these Cases, whatever the Prince did, he did in behalf of the
Churches Rights, and his Act ought not therefore to be alleged, and cannot
fairly be construed to their prejudice. Nay, in the most Ordinary and Regular
Assemblies of the Province, should any mention be made in their Acts of their
Meeting by the Civil Authority; yet it ought to be considered, whether at the
same Time, and in the same Acts their Right of meeting by the Canons also be
not claimed. For if it be, the Exercise of the Regal Power in such Instances is
no Bar to those Liberties of the Church, which are at the same time expressly
asserted and maintained. Kings may order their Bishops to meet, when those
Bishops would have met, though unordered: and all therefore that such Bishops,
when met, could do, to secure their Ecclesiastical Right of Meeting, was to
mention it together with the Royal Precept: and this we may presume 'em
purposely to have done, to prevent those Precedents being drawn into
Consequence, and under a Prudent Foresight of the Ill Uses that might be made
of them by such Betrayers of the Church-Rights as our Author, in Future Ages.
These Circumstances should have been considered by him; and, where they take
place in any of the Instances of Provincial Councils he alleges, acknowledged.
But it was not agreeable either to his Design, or his Temper, to enquire into
matters thus carefully, or to state 'em thus heartily and fairly. It was
enough, if upon a Superficial View of the Acts of Provincial Synods, or those
that passed for such, he found at the Entrance of any of 'em a mention of the
Royal Power: This he knew would have the Look of a Proof; and, whether it had
more than that, he knew not, and cared not, and hoped other People would not
give themselves the Trouble to enquire. To come to Particulars.

The First Instance he has produced of the Authority of Princes over Provincial
Synods, is this: When Theodoret (says he) began to be busy in calling the
Bishops together, Theodosius not only laid a Prohibition upon him; but confined
him to Cyrus, his own little See, as a Punishment for what he had done before.
P. 18. I question whether Dr. Wake ever gave himself the Trouble of reading
those three Epistles Epist. 79, 80, 81.
, which he cites on this occasion, though not with right Numbers. For there he
would have found, that Theodoret, when thus prohibited by the Emperor, was at
Antioch, where he had no more Authority to call the Bishops together, than at
Rome, or Constantinople. He had been called up thither from his Little See, to
reside with John the Patriarch; and whatever of this kind he did therefore, he
did by his Order, and as his Substitute. But Theodosius finding the Peace of
the East hazarded by these Assemblies, and the Nestorian Heresy favored by
them, sent an Order to Theodoret, upon whose Advice the Patriarch acted, to
retire to his own Diocese, and live there. This is the true account of that
matter, which how it makes for or against any Point in Dispute between Dr. Wake
and his Adversaries, is to me hard to apprehend.

The next Provincial Synod he mentions is that of Agatha, called by Caesarius
Bishop of Arles; but not (says the Dr.) till he had obtained the Consent of
Alaric the Goth for it; and it is expressly noted that it was held by his
Allowance P. 20.
. What if it were? was it not a mighty favor that thirty five Catholic
Bishops (for so many were present Vide Conc. Meld. c 73
) should be allowed to meet under an Arian Prince; though the Rules of the Church
were on their side? and was not this favor fit to be acknowledged in their
Acts? especially, since at the same time they took care to assert their
Ecclesiastical Right to such Meetings, and to ordain Can. 71.
that for the future, in obedience to the Canons, Provincial Synods should be
held yearly. The Permission of the Prince would be sufficiently accounted for
this way, had this Synod been both Ordinary, and Provincial; but it was really
neither: not Ordinary, for it was called after a long Intermission of Councils
in those parts, to restore the Decayed Discipline of the Church; not
Provincial, for De Marca has observed L.VI. c. 17.. 1.
that no less than five Metropolitans, and the Proxy of a sixth, subscribe to
it. But the Doctor found it styled Provincial in the Tomes of the Councils, and
he looked no further.

Such another Provincial Council is the very next he insists on Ibid. p. 20.
, that of Epaon: it was composed of the Bishops of Two Distinct Provinces,
those of Vienne, under their Archbishop, Avitus, and of Lions, under
Viventiolus; as the Subscriptions, if he had not been too much in have, would
have informed him.

Among the Spanish Councils, he meets with Two that were Provincial, the Synods
of Narbonne, and Saragosa: and of both these, he tells us, it is said, that
they met according to the Order of Recaredus. Page 23.
But by his favor, this is said of neither. In that of Narbonne, they affirm
Concilia Sanctorum Patrum vel Decreta observare cum timore Dei cupientes, Nos
in Urbe Narboni, secundum quod Sancta Synodus per ordinationem Gloriosissimi
nostri Recaredi Regis in urbe Toletana finivit -- in unum convenimus.
themselves to meet in virtue of the Ancient Canons, and of the Decree of the
third Council of Toledo, which met by Recaredus's order. In that of Saragosa,
they own themselves indeed to meet by the Permission, but not by the Order of
Recaredus: and this Permission might be, and probably was no more than what was
contained in the Canon of that Council of Toledo, which had revived the use of
Provincial Synods in Spain, but just before; and the Acts of which Recaredus
had confirmed.

In Gallicia he finds the Second Synod of Braga (which was Provincial) to have
assembled at the Command of Arianirus P. 23.
. It did so: but it must be considered, that no Synod had been held in those
parts for many years before Diu est (says the Metropolitan in his Speech by
which he opened it) Sanctissimi Fratres quod secundum Instituta Venerabilium
Canonum and Decreta Catholicae and Apostolicae Disciplinae, desiderabamus
Sacerdotalem inter nos fieri debere Conventum: quia non solum Ecclesiasticis
Regulis and Ordinibus opportunum est, sed stabilem etiam semper efficit
Charitatis Fraternae Concordiam, dum congregati simul in nomine domini
Sacerdotes ea inter se salutifera collatione requirunt, quae secundum
directionem Apostolicam Unitatem Spiritus in Vinculo Pacis obtineant.
. He restored the Catholic Faith, and the Use of Councils; both which were
lost in that Country by a Long Succession of Arian Princes (as both of 'em are
usually lost together.) And to this End he ordered his Bishops to meet, which
could be no otherwise than Provincially; for his whole Kingdom was then under
one Metropolitan. Is it any wonder, that after so long an Intermission, the
first Provincial Synod that met, should gratefully own that Princes favor, by
whom they were allowed and encouraged to assemble? which yet they do, in such a
manner, as to declare also, that by the Canons of the Church, they had a Right
to meet, and that their being debarred of that Right was a Violence upon 'em.

The Council of Lugo afterward (which sat in 569, or thereabouts; not, as Dr.
Wake says P. 23.
, in 607; mistaking grossly the Spanish Era, for the Year of our Lord)
professes it self to have met at the Command of Theodimirus; but it was upon an
Extraordinary Occasion, the Erecting the Sea of Lugo into an Archbishopric; in
which the Civil Power was nearly interested, and to which it was requisite
therefore that it should concur. But after that was over, the Two Metropolitans
of Braga, and Lugo, Convened their Provincial Synods apart, according to the
Canons, and without the King's Order, as far as appears; and needed his Command
only to unite these Two Synods into One National Assembly.

As to the Seven Burgundian Synods, whose Acts, he says, avow the Authority by
which they met P. 24.
; though he would insinuate, yet he does not directly affirm any of them to have
been Provincial; and I shall not therefore stay to prove that they were not so.
That Five of them were not, is certain; and that the Two Others were, if not
more than Provincial, yet at least Extraordinary, it will be time enough to
prove, when he has told us, which he gives up, and which he insists on.

But Page 35. he professes to speak only of the Power of Princes over their
Lesser Synods; let us see by what Instances he chooses to make it good. He
tells us, that when Wolfolendus Bishop of Bourges Summoned a Provincial Council
according to the Canons, yet having neglected to consult the King's Pleasure in
it, we find Sigebert, for that reason alone, forbad his Bishops to go to it.

This Story indeed would be something to his purpose, were it rightly
represented; but nothing can be more insincere than his manner of telling it.
For the proof of this I appeal to the account which De Marca has given us of
this matter, L. VI. c. 19. Sect. 5. there he informs us, that Bourges of which
Wolfolendus was Archbishop, was in Clovis's Realm, Neustria; not in Sigebert's,
Austrasia; which was all out of the Province of Bourges: That He nevertheless,
at the Desire of the Austrasian Bishops, designed to come with his Suffragans
out of his own Province, into some City of Austrasia, to have a Meeting there
with the Bishops of that Kingdom; and pretended to do this, by virtue of some
Ancient Canons, without so much as consulting Sigebert in it; who for this
reason resolved, as he justly might, to oppose him. We see here, that this
Synod was not Provincial, but the Meeting of an Archbishop and his Suffragans
of one Kingdom with the Bishops of another; and this appointed to be in the
Territories of a Prince, where that Archbishop had no Jurisdiction, and without
so much as acquainting him with it. What wonder if Sigebert made use of his
Royal Power to hinder such a Meeting? or what Instance could Dr. Wake have
pitched upon, less to his purpose; without it be that which follows?

When the Fifth Council of Paris, he says, had resolved it to be Expedient, P.
36.
that Provincial Synods should be held every year, according to the Orders of
the Church, and the Canonical Custom established in it: They made it their
Request to Lovis the Emperor, and Lotharius his Son, that they would consent
that at a fit season every year they might be assembled. This Request was again
renewed some years after in another Synod. Thus far he is of our side; for what
can be more to the advantage of Provincial Synods than this Decree of the
Council of Paris, and their Request in consequence of that Decree, to the Civil
Powers, that they would suffer it to take effect according to the Canons? It
follows, Yes, notwithstanding these General Permissions, before they did come
together, they were to have a particular Warrant for their so doing; as is
evident (says he) from the Acts of the Synod of Soissons. Which Synod of
Soissons, one would think now, was certainly Provincial* and yet it was
composed of the Bishops of no less than Five Provinces, as De Marca assures us
L.VI. c. 26.. 2.
; and the Names of several Metropolitans are now fairly legible in the Front of
it; which is that part of the Acts, with which Dr. Wake is usually best
acquainted.

I thank him here for mentioning this Decree of the Council of Paris; for it
gives me an occasion of supplying his account, and of adding the Reasons, by
which the Authors of that Decree governed themselves in the passing it, viz.
Because, if Provincial Councils were held Annually, the Honor of the
Ecclesiastical Order would be supported, Ill Clergymen would be discouraged,
many Offenses which escape now with Impurity, would be taken notice of, and
many Instances of Church Discipline, now superseded, would, by the blessing of
God be restored Quoniam si haec semel in Anno per unamquamq^e Provinciam
celebrata fuerint, and Honor Ecclesiasticus Vires Ordinis sui obtinebit, and
Impudentia quorundam Clericorum quae passim authoritate Canonica calcata
Auribus Imperialibus molestiam ingerit, ce^sabit; and Impunitas diversorum
Plagitiorum locum delitescendi quem nunc habet, non hab^bit; and multa alia,
quae hactenus secus quam Ecclesiastica Disciplina docet, incess^runt, ordinem
suum Deo Auxiliante servabunt. L. 1. c. 26.
. Which Reasons, whether they will not serve as well to prove the Expedience of
Convening frequently the Synods of Canterbury and York, I leave the Reader, who
understands the state of this Church and Nation, to determine.

These, I think, are all the Instances of Provincial Councils, which he
expressly produces as such, throughout his first Chapter: and I appeal now to
the most Partial of his Friends, whether any one of 'em does in the least
countenance that Extravagant Principle which he sets up for, That the Calling,
or not calling of Convocations ( i. e. Provincial Synods) the allowing, or not
allowing them to meet and sit, was a Thing always at the Free and Absolute
Pleasure of the Prince; even where the Nicene Canon was admitted, as a
perpetual Law of the Church. I do not wrong him, in representing this as the
Design of that large Historical Account of the Authority of Princes over their
Councils, which he has given us: for besides that he must either have had this
design, or none (nothing less than this being of any service to that side of
the Debate which he espouses); Besides this, I say, the very Terms in which he
expresses himself show this to be the true and only End he aims at: Though, Page
34*
says he, the Council of Nice first, and, after that, several other Councils
provided for the constant meeting of Provincial Synods every year; and these
being allowed of by the Emperors and other Princes who confirmed those Canons,
and approved of what they had defined, may seem to have put these kind of
Synods at least out of their power; yet even in These we find 'em still
continuing to exercise their Authority; and not suffering even such Councils to
be held, without their Leave, or against their Consent.

To confirm which, he produces two o^ three Stories, which I have shown to be
utterly wide of the mark; and then concludes: So entirely has the assembling of
[these Provincial] Synods been looked upon to depend on the Will and Authority
of the Christian Prince P. 36.
! A Conclusion that has no Premises, nor any one clear and full Instance in
all his Long Beadroll of Councils to support it.

The Doctor had kindly prepared us in his Preface, to expect Digressions; but
withal promised us, in his nice manner, that they should be rather not directly
to the purpose than altogether distant from it. However I find not that he has
kept his word with us, or that they deserve to be thus gently dealt with. In
the first of 'em, that meets me here, I have shown nine parts in ten of it [ i.
e. whatever he has said about General Councils] to be altogether distant from
the purpose; and that the other poor Scantling [about Provincial Synods] which
seems to be, yet is really not, to the purpose: and I conclude therefore that
the whole is not only not directly to the purpose, but altogether distant from
it. The Doctor must forgive me if I tell him, that these Historical Unedifying
Accounts of his put me in mind of the Honest Confession of William Caxton the
Chronicler; the words of which will become Dr. Wake's mouth as well every whit
as they did His; and I cannot help thinking that I hear him in the close of his
first Chapter thus addressing himself to his Reader:

If I cowde, says he, have found me stories I would have set in it moo; but
the substance that I can find and know I have shortly set them in this
book; prayeinge all them that see this simple work of mine to pardon me of my
simple writynge.

And indeed I for my part should have been very ready so to do, had it been as
Harmless as it is Simple; and were it not likely, as Simple as it is, to be
produced hereafter for a Testimony against the Churches Rights, if it be not
now opposed and disowned. For which reason, how Simple soever the performance
is, it deserves to be examined; and I go on therefore to observe,

IV. That Dr. Wake distinguishes not between the Powers in Fact exercised by
Princes, and those of Right belonging to them, by virtue of their Office. Good
Princes have been allowed often to extend their Authority in Spirituals very
far, and Ill Princes have often usurped an Authority beyond what they were
entitled to. Dr. Wake troubles not himself with these Considerations; but what
ever Powers he can find any Prince, (whether Good or Bad) to have exercised
over the Church, Those he proposes, as Patterns, which all other Princes may
safely copy, and as the true Bounds and Measures of the Royal Supremacy, When
in the Story of our Convocations some Acts of theirs come cross him, that he
does not like, then his Maxim is, That they did take upon them to do this is no
proof that they had a Right to do it P. 296.
. But the most Extravagant Pretentions of Princes in the Ordering
Church Matters are admitted by him without any such Guard or Distinction;
without considering Who it was that did this or that, and in what
Circumstances, and for what Reasons they were submitted to in the doing it.
Charlemagne in Germany, and Recaredus in Spain, ordered Ecclesiastical Affairs
with a very high hand, and had certainly somewhat more than their Share came to
in the management of them. But this was tacitly yielded to by their Bishops,
who saw, that to whatever Degree their Power was carried, it would all be
employed for the Establishment of the Church, and Advancement of the Christian
Religion. What They did therefore must not, because they did it, be presently
presumed to be the Common Right of every Christian Ruler; but oftentimes an
Instance only of a Discreet Compliance, in the Clergy, with such Intrenchments
on the Liberties of the Church, as might redound to the benefit of it. Good
Princes, who had the Hearts of their People, and were known to be entirely in
their Interests, have been permitted to carry their Prerogative in Civil
Matters to an height, that has been withstood and retrenched in more suspected
Reigns. Were the Measure of our English Constitution to be taken from those
Excesses of Regal Power, which have been winked at sometimes when well
employed; what would become of the Liberty of the Subject, or the Freedom of
Parliaments?

Dr. Wake finds perhaps in the Acts of some Councils Expressions of Great Duty
and Respect used to Pious Princes by their Clergy; These presently he lays hold
of as Authentic Synodical Decisions. The Council of Tours, it seems, did once
upon a Time, tell Charles the Emperor See p. 92.
, that they left their Decrees to Him to do what he pleased with them; and the
Council of Arles begged him, if he thought fit, to amend and alter them Ibid.
: This is Handle enough for Dr. Wake to annex such an Altering Power to the
Kingly Character, and to represent the Business of Synods to be only the
preparing of matter for the Royal Stamp, which may be improved, corrected,
enlarged, shortened at the Prince's Pleasure; as (in p. 84, and 85. of his
Honest Performance) he is pleased to express himself; and therein to entitle
the King, de Iure, to a more Extravagant Authority, than ever the Pope himself,
I believe, with all his Plenitude of Power, de facto exercised, or claimed. But
surely this is a Doctrine of too great Importance to be established on so
slight a bottom: and of such dangerous consequence to the Church, that nothing
less than the Universal Practice of the Church can sufficiently authorize it.
The Doctor may remember, when he wrote against Prayers for the Dead, in a late
Reign, his way of arguing was, that Doctrines of that weight were not to be
built on the Figurative Apostrophe's and Rhetorical Flights of the Fathers: but
now he is of another mind; every Submissive word, every Respectful Form of
Expression that he finds to have dropped at any time from the Mouths of the
Members of a Synod, when addressing to their Prince, is Ground sufficient to
rear a proof of his Prerogative upon. But thus it is, when Princes are to be
complimented at the Expense of their Subjects Rights, Compliments shall pass
for Arguments!

As Dr. Wake has furnished himself with a Plea for the boundl^^s Authority of
Sovereigns in Church Matters, from such Extraordinary Acts of Power, as have
been submitted to in good Princes; so can he argue as well from the Unjust and
Violent Encroachments of Ill ones. Henry the Eighth was such, if ever any
Prince upon Earth was; and Sir Walter Rawleigh therefore says of him, that, if
all the Pictures and Patterns of a Merciless Prince were lost in the World,
they might all again be painted to the Life out of the Story of this King Pre^.
to hi^ Hist. of the World.
. And yet the Acts of this King, the most Exorbitant and Oppressive Acts of
Power which he exercised toward the Clergy, are produced by Dr. Wake as good
and lawful Precedents, which all his Successors are allowed and incited to
follow. Particularly that Instance of his Correcting and Amending the
Determinations of the Clergy in Synod, even upon Doctrines of Faith, is given
us See pp. 136, 137, 138, 139.
without any Intimation that such a practice exceeded the Bounds of the Kingly
Power. And in this he is followed by Mr. Nicholson Hist. Lib. ^ol 3. p. 196, 197
. And both these Gentlemen are so eager to assert this Power to the Crown, that
they have not given themselves leisure to inquire how far the Authorities they
in this case cite, are to be depended on. Dr. Wake quotes my Lord of Sarum for
it, whose words are, These Articles [in 1536] being thus conceived, and in
several places corrected and tempered by the King's Own Hand were subscribed by
Cromwell and the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Seventeen other Bishops, Forty
Abbots and Priors, and Fifty Archdeacons and Proctors of the Lower House of
Convocation Hist. Ref. Vol. 1. p. 217.
. And in the Addenda to his first Volume P. 364.
his Lordship further says, that He has had the Original, with all the
Subcriptions to it, in his Hands. I have had it too, and can assure the Reader,
that there is not a single Correction by Henry the Eighth's hand, or any
others, in that Original. It Is a Copy fairly Engrossed in Parchment See it
Bibl. Cotton. Cleop. ^. 5.
, without any Interlineations or Additions whatever. My Lord Herbert indeed,
who is Mr. Nicholson's (and I suppose my Lord of Sarum's I suppose so, because
my Lord of Sarum 's account of the Subscriptions is exactly the same as my Lord
Herbert 's, and with the same mistakes: no Deans being mentioned by either, nor
any Consideration had of those of the Lower House, who subscribed in double
Capacities; which makes the Subscriptions more numerous than they are
represented to be.
) Authority, says, that the Bishops and Divines who consulted upon these
Articles were divided in their Opinions, some following Luther, and some the
Old Doctrine; whose Arguments on either side the King himself took pains to
peruse and moderate, adding Animadversions with his own Hand, which are to be
seen in our Records Hist. H.S. p. 469.
. But these words I must be bold to say, are mistaken both by my Lord Bishop,
and Mr. Nicholson, if they infer from thence, that the King made any
Alterations in the Articles after they were drawn up; since the Animadversions
plainly were, not on the Articles themselves, but on the Arguments urged on
either side of the Questions determined in 'em. These Arguments, or Opinions,
were, it seems according to the known way of that time, offered in Writing, and
subscribed by the Parties maintaining 'em: And the King took upon him to temper
and soften the Expressions on either side, till he had brought both to a
Compliance. But this is a very different thing from his Correcting and Amending
the Articles themselves; even as different, as assisting in the Debates of a
Synod, before the Conclusion is formed; and altering the Conclusion it self,
after it has been unanimously agreed on.

This is truly the Case of those Amendments of Henry the Eighth, which Dr. Wake
is so full of: However had it been such as he represents it; yet no Argument of
Right, I say, can be advanced on such Facts as these; and it had become Dr.
Wake therefore, when he related 'em, to have told us withal, that they were
unjustifiable. Many of the Actions of that Supreme Head of the Church were
such, as cannot justly, (and will therefore, I hope, never) be imitated by any
of his Successors. For instance, he made his Bishops take out Patents to hold
their Bishoprics at pleasure; though I suppose my Lords the Bishops that now
are, do not think such a Power included in the Notion of the King's Supremacy.

William the Conqueror is another of the Pious Patterns he recommends; who
would suffer nothing, he says, to be determined in any Ecclesiastical Causes,
without Leave and Authority first had from him P. 179. and L.M.P. p. 34.
: for which he cites Eadmerus; and might have told us from thence, if he had
pleased, more particularly, that he would not let any of his Noblemen, or
Ministers, though guilty of Incest, and the Blackest Crimes, be proceeded against
by Church Censures and Penalties Nulli Episcoporum permittebat ut aliquem de
Baronibus suis, seu Ministris, sive Incestu, sive Adulterio, ^ive aliquo
Capitali Crimine denotatum public, nisi ejus praecepto, implacitaret, aut
Excommunicaret, aut ulla Ecclesiastici rigoris poena constringeret. Eadmer.
page 6.
; that he made his Bishops, his Abbots, and Great Men out of such as would be
sure to do every thing he desired of 'em; and such, as the World should not
much wonder at for doing it; as knowing, who they were, from whence he took
'em, and for what end he had raised 'em: and that all this he did, in order to
make way for his Norman Laws and Usages, which he resolved to establish here in
England Usus atque Leges quas Patres sui and ipse in Normanni^ habere solebant
in Anglia servare volens, de hujusmodi Personis Episcopos, Abbates, and alios
Principes per totam terram instituit, de quibus indignum judicaretur, si per
omnia suis Legibus, postposita omni alia consideratione, non obedirent, and si
ullus little pro quavis terrena potentia caput contra eum levare auderet;
scientibus cunctis Unde, Qui, and ad Quid assumpti sunt. Cuncta ergo Divina and
Humana ejus Nutum expectabant* -- Ibid.
! This I say, and more than this he might have given us from the very Page of
Eadmerus he mentions: by which it is clear, that that Prince was as Absolute in
Ecclesiastical as in Civil Affairs: and his Acts therefore are, I hope, no
Precedents to any of his Legal and Limited Successors. His Present Majesty is
not William the Conqueror; and can no more, by our Constitution, rule
absolutely either in Church or State, than he would, even if he could: His Will
and Pleasure is indeed a Law to All his Subjects; not in a Conquering sense,
but because his Will and Plea^ure is only, that the Laws of our Country should
be obeyed; which he came over on purpose to rescue, and counts it His Great
Prerogative to maintain* and contemns therefore, I doubt not, such sordid
Flattery, as would measure the Extent of His Supremacy from the Conqueror's
Claim.

Intimations of this kind have been thought so Heinous as to be purged only by
Fire; a Punishment which our Gentle Laws, though they have taken it off from Men,
have still reserved for Books, and applied it now and then to repress a
State-Heresie, and secure the Fundamentals of our Constitution, against All its
Underminers.

This Conqueror, and his Family are much in request with our Writer; and again
therefore of his Son William Rufus, he tells us (not without a Glance on more
Modern Times) that he would suffer no Ecclesiastical Synod to be held during
the thirteen years of his Reign P. 185.
: But let me ask our Man of History, which of all those Historians in whose
Works he has so happily spent his Researches, represent this part of Rufus's
Character to his advantage? which of 'em that mention the thing, do not also
complain of it, as one of the Greatest Hardships of that Cruel and Oppressive
Reign? and to be ranked with that other Righteous Practice of his, by which he
kept Vacant, and set to Farm all the Bishoprics and Abbeys, as they fell, and
had by that means, when he died, no less than Twelve of them in his Hands
Iorvall. apud X. Script. Col. 996.
: and of these the small Bishoprics of Canterbury, Winchester, and Sarum were
Three. These are sad Stories, but (God be thanked) they were done a great while
ago, and do not therefore much concern us. For we live now neither under
William the First, nor William the Second, but under William the Third: A short
Answer to an Hundred such Old Tales as these; but every good Englishman will
think it a full one. Less have we to do with his Outlandish Instances of
Ecclesiastical Tyranny; such as the Dealing of Constantius was with the Council
of Ariminum: A very Righteous and Laudable Act which Dr. Wake proposes for the
Instruction of future Princes; and was, as follows: When the four Hundred
Fathers assembled there, had finished the business for which they met, and
determined the disputed Points clearly against Arius, they begged of
Constantius, that they might return home, and attend their Flocks: but he
refused 'em, ordering his Officers to keep the Synod together by force, till
they had revoked their former Decision, and subscribed an Arian Form that he
transmitted to them; upon which, those who were resolved not to comply, made
their Escape as well as they could, and even without his Permission went back
to their Dioceses. But Constantius not having given them his Leave, neither
will Dr. Wake give them His; and does as good as say, they did Ill to separate
without the Emperor's Order, and deserved his Resentments for so doing See p.
77.
.

I know in his Appeal P. xviii.
he pretends to fosten this Censure, and to take off several Invidious
Instances of the same kind, by saying, that we are to distinguish between what
he relates as matter of History, and what he delivers as his own Opinion. But
how should the Reader distinguish, where the Writer does not? nay, where the
Writer has left no possible room for a Distinction, though the Reader should be
never so willing to employ it? For it is certain that Dr. Wake produces these
Facts, purely to establish Rights upon them; and having laid down his
Historical Grounds therefore does, in every Instance, proceed to draw his
Conclusions from them: particularly in This we are upon [the Instance of a
Tyrannical Power exercised by Constantius over the Fathers at Rimini]; after he
has told the Story, and added Two other accounts of the Imperial Authorities
exerting it self on the like Occasions, he thus concludes: It is therefore the
Duty of All Synods, as they are convened by the Prince's Authority, so to
tarry, till they have the same Authority for their Dissolution P. 79.
.

Let him not hope then, after amassing together all the Instances of an Ungodly
Usurpation in Princes upon the Liberties of the Church, to come off by saying,
that we are to distinguish between what he relates as matter of History, and
what as matter of Opinion; and by leaving it in his own Power afterward to
apply this General Plea to any particular Instances in his Book, as he shall
have need of it; for these Two in Works of this Nature cannot be separated.
Where an enquiry is made, what Princes may lawfully do, and in order to it an
History drawn up of what they have actually done; there all the Accounts the
Historian gives us of their Acts he must be supposed to approve too, unless he
has taken care to warn us to the contrary, and to express his Abhorrence of
them. Should a Man pretend to mark out the Bounds of the King's Prerogative in
Civil Affairs, and to that End deduce an account of all the most Arbitrary and
Illegal Acts of our Princes, by which they have trampled on the Liberties of
their Subjects, and the Power of Parliaments; would it avail him afterward, in
abatement, to say, that he intended these Instances by way of History only, and
not to express his own sense of things; when his own sense of things is
manifestly built on those Historical Accounts, his Conclusions deduced from
them, and supported by 'em? Such a poor Excuse would not be admitted in behalf
of such a Chronique Scandaleuse; Every Good Englishman would still see through,
and detest the Design; and the Author, under all his shifts, would be as
scandalous as his History. But to proceed in our Remarks. I observe,

V. That Dr. Wake, in his accounts of Ancient Councils often confounds two
things that are widely different, the Prince's power of proposing any Subject
of Debate to his Synods, and his Power of confining 'em to debate of nothing
but just what he proposes. As to the First of these, no body questions the
Prince's Right in all Synods, from the Greatest to the Smallest: but as to the
Latter, he has neither Right or Practice on his side; not even in the most
General Councils (where the Civil Authority always exerted it self most),
whatever Dr. Wake may pretend to the contrary. It Is true, in those Larger
Synods, which met at the Call of Princes, upon Extraordinary Occasions, the way
generally was, that the Business for which they were called should be first
handled: and from the Acts of those Councils it appears, that the Emperor, or
his Commissioners, interposed sometimes to prevent their entering on any foreign
matter, till That was dispatched; called 'em back to it, when they wandered;
and made 'em begin their Debates anew, when they had proceeded irregularly. But
after This was over, that they never entered on any new Point without his
express Direction, and in every step of their other Debates expected his Order,
is an Assertion worthy of Dr. Wake See p. 48.
, and every way becoming his Cause and his Character. Let us see how he proves
it: He instances first in the Great Council of Ni^e, whose Acts were either
never drawn up in form, or quickly lost; and one would think it therefore
pretty difficult to give a Punctual ac^count of their manner of Proceeding: But
Dr. Wake, by the help of some History, and more Divination, ventures upon it:
It was called, he says, to restore the Peace of the Church which the Heresy of
Arius, and the Oriental and Western Churches about the time of keeping Easter
had so dangerously broken; and Eusebius tells us, that Constantine, at the
opening it, earnestly exhorted the Bishops, by their wise Resolutions to settle
all things in Quiet and Unity. And accordingly (says he in his new manner of
Speech) the Subject of their Debates turned upon these Two Points. P. 48.
But his History is every whit as new as his Language: for it has been hitherto
thought, that (the Subject of their Debates, or rather) their Debates had
turned on several other Points, beside these Two, particularly, that there were
Twenty Canons framed and published by them; and, whatever becomes of the
Arabic ones, yet that these were of confessed Authority. And as willing as Dr.
Wake is to overlook these Canons, I must take the liberty to put him in mind of
them, especially of the Fifth, which provides for the frequent Sessions of
Provincial Councils; without any Previous Application to the Emperor for his
Leave to make such Provision. Nay, I find not in any of these Canons a word
mentioned, either of the Arian Controversy, or that about Easter; the Decision
of which was comprised in their Synodical Epistle: Does the Doctor think that
they debated on nothing but what was the Subject of that Letter? or has he some
secret History of their Acts, by which he can prove that Constantine offered
these Canons to 'em ready drawn up, and that they passed the Synod by way of
form only, without being discussed? If he can make this out, the Instance will
be somewhat to his purpose; otherwise, it is fit to keep Company with those
that follow.

Viz. the Instances of the two General Council of Ephesus P. 49.
, and Chalcedon P. 51.
, where the Roman Emperors had their Commissioners to preside in their stead.
They had so; but in what manner, and to what Ends, let those Emperors
themselves, in their Commissional Letters speak: it was (...), to secure Order
and Regularity in their Proceedings, and with an Express Prohibition of their
interposing in Matters Doctrinal, and such Points as were properly of
Church-cognizance. This is so beaten a Theme, and the Answers to these objected
Instances are so well known, that I should be ashamed to give 'em, were I not
obliged to it by Dr. Wake; who is not ashamed to produce the Instances
themselves without taking any notice of the Answers that have been an hundred
times over made to 'em.

Our Learned Mason long ago thus accounted for these very Instances: The
Lay-Presidency, he says, in these Synods of Ephesus and Chalcedon was made use
of for four Reasons.

(1.) To hinder Strangers, who flocked thither and had no Right to Vote, from
breaking in upon the Assembly. (2.) To keep all the Members of the Synod
together, till they had dispatched the business for which they met. (3.) To see
that Business first concluded, before any new Point was started, and pursued.
(4.) To take care, that the private Piques and Resentments of any of the
Members should not interrupt the Public Work.
These were the Chief Ends, for which the Emperors had their Commissioners at
those Meetings; and not, for the proposing to the Fathers the several
successive Matters which they were to Deliberate on; much less, for the
Confining 'em to deliberate on nothing but what they proposed. So far was that
from being the Case, that the Eighth Canon of the Ephesine Council [occasioned
by a Dispute about the Cyprian Priviledges] was plainly brought in, debated,
and concluded, by the Synod, without the least Interposition of the Civil
Power: And which of the Thirty Canons passed by the Council of Chalcedon Act.
15.
were not so, I desire Dr. Wake at his Leisure to inform us; and withal, with
what assurance he could say, that every New Matter [in that Council of
Chalcedon] is Prefaced with this Declaration, that they had obtained leave of
the Emperors for the Fathers to consider of it, and that the Emperors Orders
were delivered to the Commissioners, Page 51.
to authorize the Bishops to enter upon it. -- When not one of these Thirty
Canons were thus Prefaced, or authorized? though some of them were of the
Greatest Weight and Consequence; particularly the 28. which put the Sea of
Constantinople upon the Level with that of Rome; and which the Fathers were so
far from being authorized beforehand to Treat on, and to pass, that the
Commissioners knew nothing of it till it had passed; and had it therefore read
to 'em at their next Meeting, in order to their considering, and approving it.

To support this Gross Falsity, he quotes the 7 th. 9 th. 10 th. and 11 th.
Actions of this Synod, where the New Matter, on which their Debates proceed,
is, he says, Prefaced with the Emperor's Leave: but it was not to his purpose
to speak more plainly. For that New Matter was such, in which, it is likely,
the Emperor had beforehand been applied to, and interested himself: in which
case, it was decent, if not necessary, to have his Consent, before it was
presented to the Synod. It related to some Bishops, who had (as They urged)
been Uncanonically deprived, and had probably sought the Emperor's Protection
in the case. When the Council sat, he referred 'em thither for Justice; and
they might therefore, on this account, fitly mention the Imperial Leave, when
their Business first came on. But let this be as it will, it is a Point of
Jurisdiction, with which we are not at present concerned: The Canons of that
Council it is certain had New Matter in them; and it is as certain, that none
of that New Matter was Prefaced with the Emperor's Leave; and how Dr. Wake came
to forget, both these and the Nicene Canons is matter of wonder. I had thought,
the Decrees of Councils were the most Important and Sacred Part of their Acts;
especially the Decrees of those four first General Councils, for which both the
Church, and the Law of England Canon. Aelfrici. Can. 33. 1 Eliz. c. 1.
have, and have always had a particular Veneration.

But of All the Instances he has pitched upon to show, that Synods can debate
of nothing but what the Prince particularly proposes to 'em, commend me to
those he urges ( P. 54, 55.) from the Practice of Carloman, at the Synod of
Leptines, and of Arnulph, at that of Trebur. The first of these says, he had
called his Clergy together to advise him how the Law of God, and the Religion
of the Church, which had been suffered to fall into such decay, in the days of
his Predecessors, might be restored. The second desires them to consider what
they thought was needful to be done, for the Reformation of Men's Manners, for
the Security of the Faith, and for the Preservation of the Unity of the Church.
How could these Emperors possibly have expressed themselves in words that left
their Synods more at large, or gave greater Scope to their Debates than these
do? which yet Dr. Wake produces on purpose to show, that the Prince prescribed
to them the Particular Points, on which they were to proceed. These are Ill
Proofs indeed; but pity it is, that such Bad Notions should ever be supported
by better.

Under the Prince's Power of suggesting any Subject of Debate to a Synod, I
comprehend also his Power of proposing the Draught of a Canon to them; for that
too he has sometimes done; but without confining 'em to pass such Canons in the
Form prescribed: which I conceive, he has never done, nor has any Right to do,
though Dr. Wake gives us very Broad Hints that he thinks otherwise; and to that
End produces the Three Ecclesiastical Constitutions which Marcian delivered to
the Fathers of the Fourth General Council at Chalcedon ready drawn up, to be
approved by them; and they all (he says) gave their Unanimous Assent to 'em P.
65.
. But he tells us not, as he might, that the Matter of these Canons was of such
a mixed nature, as made it proper for the Emperor to interpose in them: nor does
he inform us, with what words of high Respect and Deference he offered 'em to
the Synod. There are (says he) Three Points which in Honor to your Reverences
we have reserved for you; judging it fit and decent, that they should rather be
by You in Synod Canonically defined, than Enacted by our Temporal Laws (...).
Act. 6.
. And in what manner the Synod passed 'em is worth our notice: for it was
neither in that Order, nor exactly in those Terms in which they were proposed.
And one of them The Second.
they put into different words, without any the least alteration of sense,
merely, as it should seem, to keep free of an Ill Precedent, which by receiving
the Emperor's Form they might have brought upon themselves. So that this is a
much better Proof, that the Emperor could not prescribe the Form of a Canon to
them, than that he could.

Nor are his English Instances of this kind more to his purpose: Some of our
Princes (he says) have not only prescribed to their Convocations what they
should go about, but have actually drawn up beforehand what they thought
convenient to be established, and have required them to approve of it P. [110.]
. And for this he vouches King James's Letter to the Convocation in 1603,
together with which he sent them the Articles of 1562, to be approved by 'em. A
notable Instance of the Prince's Power actually to draw up beforehand what
they think convenient to be established by their Synods! because King James
sent a Message to one of 'em, about Confirming the Thirty nine Articles, which
had been actually drawn up by another Convocation, forty years before that
Message was sent.

And that this Point may be sure to be well proved, he adds a Second Instance
of it, every whit as concluding as the Former, The same Prince, he says, to
Another Convocation, about four years after, signified his Pleasure for Singing
and Organ-service to be settled in Cathedral Churches, without submitting it to
their judgment, whether they approved it, or no Ibid.
. He tells us not from whence he dr^w either this, or the former particular,
and so I am not able to say how he has disguised them. But taking this last as
he has represented it, clear it is that the King in this case did not form, or
draw up any thing beforehand for the Convocation to Sign, but only suggested
the Matter of a Canon to them; and of such a Canon, as (if necessary) there was
no doubt of their agreeing unanimously in, since it was only to confirm a
received Practice: and therefore if he did not ask their Approbation, it was
because he was sure of it.

Dr. Wake is in this Observation all over Mistake: For whereas he calls this
Another Convocation from that in 1603, it was certainly the same; That in 1603
being by Prorogations continued from Time to Time for seven years together, as
his own words are, a few Pages afterward P. 142.
. Nor could the Import of this Message well be the Settling of Singing and
Organ-service in Cathedral Churches; for it was settled there long before At the
Reforming of the Church, not only the King's Chapel and all Cathedrals, but
many Parochial Churches also had preserved their Organs, to which they used to
Sing the appointed Hymns, i. e. the Te Deum, the Benedictus, the Magnificat,
the Nunc dimittis, etc. performed in an Artificial and Melodious manner. --
Heylin. Hist. of Presbyt. p. 226.
. Only King James, I suppose, recommended to 'em the framing of a Canon in
behalf of what was hitherto authorized by Practice alone, and by the Queen's
Injunctions Sparrow, p. 80.
. But this the Synod thought needless, the Thing being otherwise so well
established already; and therefore framed no Canon concerning it. How
Ridiculous then is it in Dr. Wake to say, that the King signified his Pleasure
to them in this matter, without ever submitting it to their Judgment whether
they approved it or no? when the Event shows, that they disapproved, and did
not comply with the Motion: for I never heard of any such Canon in behalf of
Singing, and Organ-service; and which is more, Bishop Sparrow never heard of it
neither. If this Message therefore make any thing for the King's Power of
Proposing, it makes as strongly for the Clergy's Privilege of denying, if they
think fit; which is the very thing Dr. Wake is endeavoring in this place to
deprive them of.

VI. A Sixth Observation I have to offer on Dr. Wake's way of managing this
Controversy is, that Those very Acts of Authority which were exercised by
Princes in Ecclesiastical Matters, to support and corroborate the Churches
Power, are by Him perversely made use of to undermine and destroy it. He finds
that the Canons of the most General Councils have been confirmed by the Civil
Power, and confirmed at the Instance and Petition of the Synods themselves P.
80.
. And from hence he infers therefore that their Definitions are no farther
Obligatory, than as they are ratified by the Civil Authority P. 79.
. And this Point he is so sure of, that he conceives it to be allowed on all
hands; whereas I on the contrary conceive, that it is allowed on no hands; and
is a Conclusion I am-sure, that neither agrees with the Principles of our
Church, nor can ever be drawn from the Premises on which he pretends to
establish it.

If this Doctrine be good, then is that of our Twentieth Article stark naught,
which determines, that the Church has Power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and
Authority in Matters of Faith. But how has she Power and Authority to this
purpose, if her Synodical Decisions are in no case farther Obligatory, than as
they are ratified by the Civil Authority? The Magistrate at this rate, will
have Power, but the Church her self can have none. For she speaks only by her
Synods, in matters of this nature: and if therefore her Synodical Decrees have
not any Authority of their own, till confirmed by the Prince, then under an
Heathen or Heretical Prince, the Church has not, I say, any Authority, though the
Article expressly says, that she has.

It is very observable, that Dr. Wake has not in either of his Books mentioned
this Article; which yet surely in a Controversy of this nature deserved to
have been taken notice of. Such an Omission could not be by chance: and we must
believe therefore, that he is of the Opinion of those Back-friends of ours in
Charles the First's time, who would allow the former part of the Article no
more Authority than Dr. Wake allows to the Church; but said it was deceitfully
inserted by Archbishop Laud, and wanting in the Original. He might be ashamed
to take up with this Reproach, after that Solemn Appeal, which the Archbishop
in his Speech in the Star Chamber Anno 1637. See Heylin 's Life of Laud, p. 339.
made to the Records of Convocation, for the disproof of it. If he have any
Suspicions still left in this matter, my Lord of Sarum, in his Late Exposition
P. 26.
, will clear them. In the mean time let me put him in mind of the Fate of Dr.
Mocket's Book de Doctrina and Politeia Ecclesiae Anglicanae In 4 to. London,
1617.
, which though writ by Archbishop Abbot's direction, yet was Burned publicly;
and that chiefly on the account of this very Omission, if Dr. Heylin's History
Life of Laud, p. 76
may be relied on.

But how comes he to dream it to be allowed on all Hands that Synodical
Definitions are no farther Obligatory than they are ratified by the Civil
Power? What Church upon Earth ever determined or allowed this Doctrine? Because
the Fathers of many Synods desired the Prince, under whose Direction they met,
to enforce their Decrees by Civil Sanctions and Penalties, does it follow, that
therefore these Decrees without the Addition of the Civil Sanction would have
had no Authority, no Force to oblige the Consciences of Christians? Does the
Subsequent Authority destroy the force of the precedent one? Is the one of
these lost and swallowed up in the other? At this rate, what will become of
Excommunication, when confirmed, as it is here with us, by a Civil Penalty? Has
the Church Sentence in this case no Authority, because the Writ de
Excommunicat^ capiendo is linked to it, and issues out upon it? Such arguing
would have become a Disciple of Erastus much better than a Son of the Church of
England.

But he will tell me Canons lose no Authority in this case which they ever had,
because indeed they never had any: the Great Privilege of the Church being
only to prepare Draughts of Canons, and Dead Matter as it were for the Royal
Stamp afterward to put Life into. But if so, How shall we account for the Acts
of Church Power exercised by Synods, from the first Planting of the Christian
Religion, till the Empire turned Christian? It is plain, that the Governors of
the Church for three hundred years before the Civil Power came in to assist
them, met in Synods, and made Laws, which were universally submitted to, not
only as Councils or Advices proceeding from Men whose Character was had in
great Reverence, but as the Commands of Lawful Superiors toward their
Spiritual Subjects: and as such, they were understood to oblige the Consciences
of all good Christians in those Ages. And if they had such an Authority before
Constantine's time, how came they to want it afterward? As the Church could
get no New Power by coming under the Protection of the State, so how does it
appear that she lost any Old one? The Emperors indeed by turning Christians
gained something, to wit an Interest in the management of Ecclesiastical
Affairs: but their Gains were not built on the Church Governors Losses; the
Power that by this means accrued to 'em was Accumulative not Privative; i. e.
it gave them some Authority which they had not, but it took not that away which
the Spiritual Pastors and Governors had. A Distinction, that I am not afraid
to make use of, notwithstanding the Quarter it comes from!

If Dr. Wake therefore denies the Definitions of Synods [held under the Civil
Power] to have any other Authority than what they derive from that Power, he by
consequence denies that the Anti^ Nicene Fathers assembled in Synod, had any
Right to prescribe Rules to those Christians that lived within the District
over which they presided; or that those Christians were bound to obey 'em: He
affirms in effect the several Canons that these Assemblies passed, the Censures
that they pronounced, all the Acts of Synodical Authority which they exercised
to be in themselves Null and Void, and mere Usurpations upon the Liberty of
Christians. And whether he will take up with these Scandalous Notions, or not,
we shall see, when he blesses the World with his Next Performance: Sure I am
that without 'em, his Scheme cannot be consistent, and of a piece.

Again, Dr. Wake is also very faulty on this Head, when in order to depress the
Power of the Church, he promiscuosly enumerates all the Laws, framed by Princes
about Ecclesiastical Affairs, without informing us which of those Laws only
traced the steps of precedent Canons, and which of them proposed New Matter of
Obedience, beside, or contrary to those Canons; which would in this case have
been a very Material and Pertinent Distinction. He is full of the Edicts
relating to Church Matters, that are to be met with in the Code of Theodosius,
the Code and Novels of Justinian, etc. P. 11.
But it would have been very honest of him here to have told us (as the Truth
is) that there were scarce any of these Edicts, to which some Canon had not
beforehand led the way; and that All therefore that those Princes generally
did, was to re-enact by the Civil what had been before enacted by the
Ecclesiastical Authority; and to give the Church Decisions more weight and
force by inserting 'em into the Body of the Imperial Laws, and annexing further
Penalties to the Breach of them. This is so certain and known a Truth, that
even at this day we can point out the several Canons upon which almost all the
Civil Constitutions of those Princes were founded; and in which the matter of
'em was either particularly and in Terms, or at large, and in general
determined. And if in some few Instances we should not be able to do this, what
wonder is it? when it is considered at what a Vast Distance of Time we live
from the first Rise of these things, and how many Ancient Church-Monuments that
would have given light in these matters, have in the course of so many Ages
perished? Justinian in his Laws appeals frequently to the Canons, and professes
to follow them Nov. 6. c. 1. Ibid.. 8. Nov. 58. sub finem. Nov. 123. c. 36.
. And by this Pattern the French and German Princes in aftertimes framed their
Capitularies, taking the Subjects of them from the Resolutions of antecedent
Synods Decrevimus juxta Sanctorum Canonum Regulas -- Caroloman. in Syn. Leptin.
Anno 747.
, and even referring themselves thither, for the more clear understanding of
what their Law only briefly and in General delivered P. 91.
. A Truth so Notorious, that Dr. Wake himself durst not dissemble it! And it
would puzzle a man therefore to show, how such Laws should any ways derogate
from the Authority of Synods, which they took their rise from, and were made on
purpose to support, and confirm. I must put the Doctor in mind here of a way of
arguing made use of by one of his Seconds in this Controversy, where he is
disputing against the Universities Authority to declare Heresy: there he lays
down this Position; That, the Convocation of the University of Oxford have
never forbid any Doctrine to their Scholars, before that very particular
Doctrine was first declared Erroneous, or Heretical by some Persons who were
then reputed to have Power to declare Heresy L. M. P. p. 69.
. The Truth of this Assertion I at present trouble not my self with; but
supposing it true, the Inference that arises from it has weight, I own; and
when applied to our Present Argument, is of use to inform us, what Secular
Decrees in Church Matters are no ways prejudicial to the Power of the Church,
and the Authority of Synods. And this was an Head, I say, upon which Dr. Wake
should have explained himself largely and openly, if he had intended a fair
state of this Controversy, or had had any other New in what he wrote than
merely to serve a Turn, and to advance some colorable kind of Plea for a
Practice, which, if he knew any thing of these matters, he must know, was
indefensible, and be writing all the while for his Point, against his
Conscience: and if he knew nothing of it, with what Conscience could he
undertake to determine it? These are words that I do not easily persuade my
self to bestow on any Man: but his Gross Prevarications and Disguises of Truth
in Doctrines of so great moment, wherein the Interests of his Order, and of
Religion are so nearly concerned, force this hard Language from me.

Nor stops he at General Reflections in this case, but brings them home also to
our own Church and Constitution; pretending in his Appendix Number. vii.
to give us an Abstract of several things relating to the Church, which have
been done since the 25 Hen. 8. by Private Commissions, or otherwise, out of
Convocation. In which Abstract many of the Points mentioned had certainly the
Authority of Convocation, though he would fain have us believe they had not; and
that, antecedently to the Civil Injunction: Others are such Acts of Ordinary
Power, as by the consent of All Churches and Parties of Men every Christian
Prince is confessedly entitled to: and some few perhaps might be owing to the
Necessity of Affairs which would not then admit of more Regular Methods; and
should not therefore be vouched as reasonable Precedents, and settled Rules and
Standards of acting in more quiet times; which is manifestly Dr. Wake's End in
producing them.

The Reader must forgive me, if I detain him so long, as to run through the
Particulars of this List, and show upon each of 'em, how far the Ecclesiastical
Power concurred and led the way to it. It will be a dry unpleasing Task, but is
of use to clear the Orderliness of some steps taken in those times, which are
generally misunderstood; and is necessary to wipe off the Dirt thrown by Dr.
Wake on the English Reformation: the Process of which, I am satisfied, was very
Regular, and Canonical in most Cases, though in some, by reason of the Loss of
Records, it cannot easily be proved so. Of this we are in General assured by
such as lived at the time when those Records were in being, particularly by Sir
Robert Cotton, and Mr. Fuller. The first in his Posthuma P. 215.
, has these words, If any shall object that many Laws in Henry the Eighth's
time had first the Ground in Parliament, it is manifested by the Dates of their
Acts in Convocation, that they All had in that place their first Original. The
Latter speaks, as follows: Upon serious Examination it will appear, that there
was nothing done in the Reformation of Religion, save what was acted by the
Clergy in their Convocations, or Grounded on some Act of theirs precedent to
it, with the Advice, Counsel and Consent of the Bishops, and most Eminent
Churchmen; confirmed upon the Post-fact, and not otherwise; according to the
Usage of the best and purest Times of Christianity Church-Hist. xvi. Cent. p.
188.
. To which I shall add the Testimony of one, who must be allowed a Good Witness
in this case, my Lord of Sarum: He assures the Bishop of Meaux, in the Answer
he made to his Variations, that Our Parliaments and Princes have not meddled in
matters of Religion any other way, but that they have given the Civil Sanction
to the Propositions made by the Church: and this is that which Christian
Princes do in all Places P. 35.
. And in 1604, I find a Puritan Writer making this Challenge: Let them, if they
can, show any one Instance of any Change or Alteration, either from Religion to
Superstition, or from Superstition to Religion to have been made in Parliament,
unless the same freely and at large have been first agred upon in their Synods
and Convocations Assertion of True and Christian Policy. P. 168.
. Which is no otherwise considerable, I own, than as it comes from the Pen of
an Adversary. These are General Proofs, which would go a good way toward
setting aside the Particulars in Dr. Wake's Abstract, if we had nothing more to
say against 'em: But they shall be further and more distinctly considered.

The Doctor took 'em, he says, out of his Collections as they lay there: and
for these Collections, I find, he scarce ever goes further than Bishop Burnet's
History of the Reformation; which though a very Excellent Work, and meriting the
Thanks of Parliament, which it had; yet, as to the Proceedings of Convocation,
and the share which the Ecclesiastical Authority bore all along in those
Changes, is extremely defective; partly from the want of Records, and partly
from his Lordship's omiting to set down All even of that Little that is left
us, on this Head, in the Manuscript Memoirs of that time: So that it is no
Proof that nothing was done by the Clergy in such or such a Case, because his
Lordship says nothing of it. Besides, that History is by its very Method apt to
mislead an unwary Reader in Enquiries of this nature; the way of it being, to
set down first the Proceedings of Parliament in every case, and then those of
Convocation: which makes it look oftentimes, as if the Parliament had led the
way to the Convocation, in their Debates, when the contrary to that is most
certainly true; and would have appeared so to be, had his Lordship thought fit
to follow the Pattern set by Antiquitates Britannicae, and given the Precedence
always to the Acts of Convocation, when the Business was first agitated there,
and afterward brought into Parliament: which, in a Church-Historian, had, I
presume, been a method not improper or unbecoming. At least, since his Lordship
could not but know, that our Reformation had suffered by being misunderstood in
these respects, it might not have been amiss to have given us warning, when
things were told out of the Natural Order of time in which they happened, and in
what Instances the Leading steps were from the Convocation, though the Course of
his History seemed to place the rise of 'em elsewhere. The want of this notice
has occasioned Dr. Wake's mistakes in some cases, and in others he has not made
use even of the Light which this History would have afforded him. I shall
examine every Instance, any ways material, the Injunctions only excepted;
which, it must be confessed, were by Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, in
virtue of their Supreme Headship, and under the shelter of that Act, which made
the King's Proclamations equal to an Act of Parliament, Issued out in a very
Arbitrary manner; and continued so to be, as long as our Princes could in their
High Commission-Court take notice of the Breach of them. But since that Court
has been put down, and the Extraordinary Acts of Spiritual Jurisdiction,
annexed to the Imperial Crown of England by the First of Elizabeth, Chap. 1.
can now be exercised only in Parliament* how far any Royal Injunction is valid,
unless where by the Advice of the Metropolitan it orders such things as that
Act directs and allows, or seconds some Authentic Canon, or Received Practice;
and whether it has any greater force in Ecclesiastical, than the King's
Proclamation has in Civil Affairs, I leave to the Gentlemen of the Long Robe to
determine. The Clergy, I am sure, are not the only Persons concerned in this
point; for the Princes of those days carried their Power further than Them, and
issued out Injunctions alike for the Clergy, and Laity See Edward the Sixth's
Injunctions, To all and Singular his Loving Subjects, as well of the Clergy, as
of the Laity. Sparrow, p. 1. And Q. Elizabeth 's, Anno 1559. Ibid. p. 65.
. If the Professors of the Law think that the Crown has still such a Power of
sending out Commands at pleasure, the Clergy will, I dare say, be concluded by
Their Opinion.

An Abstract of several Things relating to the Church, P. 381.
which have been done since the 25 Hen. 8. by Private Commissions, or
otherwise, out of Convocation.

25 Hen. 8. Thirty two Persons appointed to review, etc. the Canons of the
Church, and to gather out of them such as should from thenceforth alone be of
force in it. See the Act. c. 19.

Dr. Wake might, if he had pleased, have said, See the Petition of the Clergy
in Convocation, which preceded this Act, and wherein this Review of the Canons
is by Them desired. What was done in this matter, was done at Their Instance,
and therefore had Their Authority.

1536. Order for the Translation of the Bible. B^rn. Hist. Ref. p. 195, 249,
302.

This too was in consequence of a Petition from the Convocation, a Memorandum
of which is entered in their Acts December. 19. 1534. Heylin Reform. justified, p.
8.
seems to say, that it was put up by Both Houses* However that which came from
the Upper House is still extant in a Cotton Manuscript Cleopatra, E. 5. fol.
339.
: and in it the Bishops, Abbots, and Priors request the Archbishop to be
instant with the King, Ut dignaretur decernere quod Sacra Scriptura in Linguam
Vulgarem Anglicanam per quosdam Praelatos and Doctos Viros per dictum
Illustrissimum Regem nominandos transferatur. And this Dr. Wake could not well
be ignorant of, because his very Guide in one of the places he himself quotes
from him P. 195.
on this occasion, mentions this Petition But places it in 1536. i. e. Two
Years later than it was really made.
, as an Act of Both Houses, and let us us know, the Translation of the Bible
took its rise from it.

1538. Explication of the Chief Points in Religion, published at the Close of
the Convocation, but not by it. Ibid. p. 245.

He means the Book called The Institution of a Christian Man; but mistakes both
the Time of its coming out, and its Title, and the Authority by which it was
published. And in the first and last, of these that very Passage he cites,
would have set him right, if he had heeded it. For thus it speaks: Though there
was no Parliament in the Year 1537, yet there was a Convocation; upon the
Conclusion of which there was Printed an Explanation of the chief Points of
Religion, Signed by Nineteen Bishops, Eight Archdeacons, and Seventeen Doctors
of Divinity and Law Hist. Ref. Vol. 1. p. 245.
. Here is no Intimation of its not passing the Convocation, but rather the
contrary; Twenty five of the Lower House subscribing it: which might well be a
Majority of the Members, when not many years before, in the great Debate about
the Divorce of Queen Cathari^e, Twenty three only (as we have heard already P.
53.
) were present; and Fourteen of these Votes therefore made a Majority of that
House. But Heylin, who had the Opportunity of examining the Registers, puts
this matter beyond a Probability; for he speaks every where Ref. just. p. 11.
and p. 549.
of this Book as having passed the Convocation, and of these Twenty five as
Subscribing it in the Name of all the rest of the Members. At least, if
Heylin's word may not be taken for it, yet Dr. Wake's, I hope, may: And he, in
his Appeal P. 28.
calls the Clergy's Dedication of this Book an Address of the Convocation to
the King; and says, it was Subscribed by both Houses.

1539. A Committee of Bishops appointed by the Lords, at the King's Command, to
draw up Articles of Religion. Ibid. page 256.

This was in a Preparatory way only, and in order to their being considered by
the Convocation and Parliament. However this Committee did nothing, Bp. Burn.
Ibid.
and should not therefore be made an Instance of Things relating to the Church,
done out of Parliament. And which is more, the Convocation did the very
business, which this Committee was appointed to do; as we shall learn from the
next Particular.

The Six Articles on which the Act passed* brought in by the Duke of Norfolk,
and wholly carried on by the Parliament. Ibid. p. 256, etc. This is News to
that Parliament, by which Dr. Wake says it was wholly carried on; for They in
the Preamble of the Act of the Six Articles, say, That the King considering,
etc. had caused his most High Court of Parliament to be Summoned; and also a
Synod and Convocation of all the Archbishops, and Bishops, and other Learned
Men of the Clergy of this his Realm. -- In which Parliament and Convocation,
there were certain Articles set forth, etc. and after a great and long,
deliberate and advised disputation and consultation had and made concerning the
said Articles, as well by the Consent of the King's Highness, as by the Assent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and other Learned Men of his Clergy in
this Convocations and by the Consent of the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, it was and is finally resolved, accorded and agreed in manner and
form following 31 H. 8. c. 14.
.

We see these Articles were so far from being wholly carried on by Parliament,
that the Parliament it self thought not fit to Enact 'em, without expressing in
their Bill the previous Consent of the Clergy in Convocation.

Some Body seems to have told the Doctor thus much, before he wrote his Appeal;
in a corner of which, among the Errata, he desires that these four Lines may be
blotted out. Why he was so Particular in his Requests I cannot tell: but sure I
am, that there are very few Lines in this whole Article of his Appendix, that
do not deserve blotting out as much as They.

1540. A Committee of Divines employed to draw up the Necessary Erudition of a
Christian Man. Ibid. p. 286. In saying they were employed to draw it up, he
speaks unaccurately; for that implys it to be then first drawn up, whereas this
Book was in the main the same with that which was published in 1537, under the
Title of the Institution of a Christian Man. This I have already shown, passed
the Convocation: The Members of which, that were employed in composing it, do
in their Dedication of it to the King, Most humbly submit it to his most
Excellent Wisdom, and Exact Judgment -- to be recognized, overseen, and
corrected, if his Grace shall find any Word or Sentence in it meet to be
changed, qualified, or further expounded, etc.

The Liberty thus given by the Clergy, was made use of by the King, who in 1540
committed it to several Bishops and Divines. (All Members of Convocation) to be
reviewed, and made afterward some Alterations in it with his own Hand (to be
seen still in the Original in Sir I. Cotton's Library Heylin. Ref. justif. p.
549.
) and finally published it anew in the year 1543 There was an Edition in 1540.
which differs not considerably from that in 1543; and therefore I give no
Distinct Account of it.
, with this Title Which the Exact Mr. Nicholson has changed into a Necessary
Defense for all sorts of People. Hist. Libr. Vol. 3. p. 197. Where he tells us
also, that the King drew up these Articles in 1543; meaning, that he made some
Marginal Amendments to the Book after it was drawn up. This he mentions at
large, as an approved Instance of the King's Power in such cases without
intimating his Dislike of it: and without letting us know (how should be? for
he knew it not himself) that what the King did here, was not only at the
previous Permission, but Desire of the Clergy; and was afterward once again by
them in Convocation confirmed. Such accuracy is there in the Accounts of Books
given us by this Historical Librarian!
, A Necessary Doctrine and Erudition for any Christen Man, set furthe by the
Kings Majeste of England. There is no mention here of the Concurrence of the
Clergy in Convocation to this Book; and yet it is certain that all the new
Alterations and Additions in it, as they sprang at first from a Request of
theirs, so passed 'em again solemnly afterward. This appears from some short
Memorandums Sess. 25. Apr. 25. Reverendissimus tractavit de Sacramentis (of
which that Book treats at large) and ibi examinati sunt quidam Articuli.

Sess. 26. Ult. Apr. Reverendissimus exposuit Articulum Liberi Arbitrii (which
is another Head there) ubi Prolocutor, etc. exposuerunt suas Sententias.


of the Acts of Convocation in 1543, from Heylin's Express Testimony Ibid. See
also ( in his Quinquartic. Controv. p. 569.) some other Passages out of the
Acts of that Convocation, which prove manifestly that these Alterations
underwent their Review.
, and from those words in the King's Preface prefixed to the Book; that he had
set it furthe with the Advice of his Clergy -- the Lords both Spiritual and
Temporal, with the Nether House of Parliament, having both seen and liked it
well.

Another Commission appointed to Examine the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church. Ibid. p. 294. This Committee of Bishops and Divines, for reforming the
Rituals and Offices of the Church, was settled at the same Time with That which
reviewed the Institution; and was composed therefore, as That was, of the
Members (and probably of the same Members) of Convocation, which was sitting
now at the Time, when this Committee was appointed; as appears by the Subsidy
32 H. 8. c. 23.
, and the Sentence of Divorce 32 H. 8. c. 25.
, that passed 'em, compared with the Act of Parliament of the same Session
Rastall, p. 690.
, that mentions this Committee as sitting. From hence alone we might have been
satisfied, that this Committee was empowered by the Convocation to act, had we
no other Evidence for it. But, as it happens, we have: for in the short Remains
of Edward the Sixth's first Convocation, this Committee is said to have met ex
Mandato Convocationis In a Petition of theirs, where they pray, Ut Opera
Episcoporum and aliorum, qui alias ex Mandato Convocationis Servitio Divino
Examinando, Reformando, and Edendo invigilarunt, proferantur, and hujus Dom^s
Examinationem subeant. Synodalia.
.

And something of the same nature seems to be intimated in the Statute I
mentioned, which Enacts, that whatever should be Ordained and set forth by the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Doctors now appointed, or other Persons hereafter to
be appointed, by his Royal Majesty, or else by the whole Clergy of England, in
and upon the matter of Christ's Religion, and the Christian Faith This relates
to the Institution of a Christian Man, then to be reviewed.
, and Lawful Rites and Ceremonies This to the Rituals, at the same time to be
altered.
, and Observations of the same, shall be in all and every point, limitation,
and circumstance thereof by all his Grace's Subjects, etc. fully believed,
obeyed, observed, and performed.

Here the words [by the whole Clergy of England] do most naturally refer to the
Last Verb [appointed,] and under that Construction imply, that this, and such
like Committees, were consented to by the Convocation, as well as named by the
King: and so they certainly were. And the reason of establishing 'em was,
because the matters to be discussed requiring (as this very Act speaks) ripe
and mature deliberation were not rashly to be defined, nor restrained to this
present Session, or any other Session of Parliament: as they must have been, if
they had been considered only in Convocation; which Then sat, and rose always,
within a few days of the Parliament.

These Committees therefore were appointed to sit in the Intervals of
Parliament: and though they had a Power of concluding finally, yet they seldom, I
suppose, did more than prepare business to be laid before the Convocation, when
it sat. Accordingly what was done by this Committee for reforming the Offices,
was reconsider'd by the Convocation it self, two or three years afterward; as
a Manuscript Note Sess. 19. 21. Feb. 1542, and 43. Reverendissimus dixit Regem
velle Libros quosdam Ecclesiasticos examinari and corrigi. Ubi Reverendissimus
tradidi^ hos Libros examinandos quibusdam Episcopis.
I have met with, taken from the Journals of Convocation, implies. These
Committees indeed are spoken of sometimes in our Statutes, and elsewhere, as
appointed by the King, without any mention of the Convocation-Clergy: which was
partly owing to the Doctrine of those times, by which the King in virtue of his
Supreme Headship, was said to do, decree, and order every thing, though the
previous Steps and Resolves were from the Convocation; and was withal not
improper, considering how much was left to the Royal Power in such matters: for
the Clergy often only Petitioned the King for a Committee, and referred the
Nomination of it to him; of which a clear Instance has been given before, in
the Request for the Translation of the Bible. Indeed, when the Committee was
composed of Members from both Provinces, (as it was in the Present case The Act
styles them, The Archbishops, and sundry Bishops of Both Provinces, of
Canterbury and York, within this Realm, and also a great Number of the best
Learned, Honestest, and most Virtuous sort of Doctors of Divinity, Men of
Discretion, and Judgment, and Good Disposition, of this said Realm.
) it could not sit and act by a bare Order of the Clergy; but was necessarily
to have the King's Commission, before it could be a Legal Assembly: and no
wonder therefore, if, though both Convocations consented to it, and perhaps
sometimes named it, yet the King only be said to empower them.

And here I must once for all observe, that whatever was done by such Select
Committees, appointed, or approved by Convocation, though done out of
Convocation, must be reckoned done by it; as carrying the stamp of its
Authority: For so the way has been in all manner of Assemblies, both
Ecclesiastical, and Civil. The Catechismus ad Par^chos, among the Papists, is
accounted to have the Authority of the Council of Trent, though that Council
never passed, or saw it; because it was drawn up, and published by Order of the
Pope, to whom that Council had referred it. The like is to be said of the
Oxford Bp. B^^^. Vol. 1. p. 85.
, and Cambridge Ibid. p. 87.
Resolutions, concerning the Invalidity of King Henry's first Marriage; which
carried the Authority of those Universities, because drawn up by Committees,
which were in full Convocation appointed by them. Nor want we Precedents of a
Delegation of the Power even of Parliaments to Committees, in ancient times.
For 1 Hen. 6. some Lords and Others of the King's Council were empowered to
determine all such Bills and Petitions, as were not answered in Parliament Rot.
Parl. n. 21.
; and so again 6 Hen. 6. n. 45, 46. and several Times before, and after. And
Henry the Eighth had frequently the whole Power of Parliament Translated upon
him: We are not to wonder therefore if the Convocations of his Reign did
something like this, when they had so Great Patterns to follow, and were so
much more at his Mercy than Parliaments were.

1542. The Examining of the English Translation of the Bible, being begun by
the Convocation, is taken by the King out of their Hands, and committed to the
two Universities. Ibid. p. 315. Were the Translating of Scripture a Work
appropriated to Synods, (as sure it is not) yet the Petition of the two Houses
in 1534 to the King, to take care of a New Translation of the Bible, would have
been Warrant enough for him to have put it into whose hands he pleased.
Especially, since it is probable, that this very Synod in 1542 complied at last
with the King's Proposal. I find indeed in some Minutes of their Acts, that the
Bishops at first disagreed to it Sess. 9. Mart. 1541, 42.
: but they were, I suppose, over-rul^d* for Parker's account is only,
Aliquandiu quibus Biblia transferenda committerentur, ambigebant P. 338.
; which shows, that the dispute was soon over.

1544. The King orders the Prayers for Processions, and Litanies to be put into
English, and sends them to the Archbishop, with an Order for the Public Use of
them. Ibid. p. 331. This was done by a Royal Injunction So it is styl^d in
Bonner 's Reg. f. 48.
, then equal to an Act of Parliament, and need not therefore by me here be
accounted for. However, there is reason to believe, that the Committee for
Reforming the Offices, or the Convocation it self, might have an hand in it:
for about this time, it is plain, they composed the Little Book of Prayers,
called the Orarium Orarium, sive Libellus Precationum, per Regiam Majestatem
and Clerum Latin editus. Ex Officina Rich. Grafton. 1545.
, which was set out by the King the Year afterward.

1547. The King orders a Visitation over his whole Kingdom, and thereupon
suspends all Episcopal Jurisdiction while it lasted. Vol. II. p. 26. The King
Visited by virtue of his Supreme Headship, recognized first in Convocation, and
established afterward in Parliament. And while this Royal Visitation lasted,
all Inferior Jurisdictions ceased a course; as they do, even when an Archbishop
visits Pendente Visitatione Atchiepiscopali tam Suffraganei quam Inferiores
Praelati ordinari^ su^ Jurisdictione abstinent, omniaque per Archiepiscopum
ejusque Commissarios expediuntur. -- Ant. Brit. p. 29.
. But what would Dr. Wake infer from this Instance? that the King took to
himself a Power, which has been thought regularly to belong to the Convocation?
Why, was ever any Man wild enough to say, that the Convocation were the
Visitors-General of all Ecclesiastical Bodies in England?

The Homilies composed. Ibid. He should say, reviewed, and altered: for they
were composed many years before, in the Convocation of 1542, as the Acts
declare Ian. 1541, and 42. Tractavit Reverendissimus de Homiliis conficiendis.
16. Feb. 1542, and 43. Presentatae sunt Homiliae compositae per quosdam
Praelatos de diversis materiis.
. And by virtue of this Convocational Authority which they had, Archbishop
Cranmer sent 'em 1 E. 6. to Bishop Gardener requiring him to publish 'em
throughout his Diocese. Thus Bishop Gardener himself in his Letters to the
Protector Fox. Vol. 2. p. 1.
; the first words of the first of which are, After most humble Commendations to
your Grace, I have received this day Letters from my Lord of Canterbury,
touching certain Homilies, which the Bishops in the Convocation holden Anno
Dom. 1542. agreed to make for stay of such Errors, as were then by Ignorant
Persons sparkeled among the People.

The Second begins thus: I have received other Letters from my Lord of
Canterbury, requiring the said Homilies, by virtue of a Convocation holden five
years past: [He does not allow indeed, that the Homilies formally passed that
Synod, for he adds] Wherein we communed of That, which took none effect then,
and much less needs to be put in Execution, ne in my judgment cannot. But
Cranmer, we see, was of another opinion, and thought these Homilies
sufficiently authorized by the Convocation of 1542; and that they wanted only
to be confirmed, and recommended by the King; as they were in the Injunctions
of that year. But should there be any thing wanting to the Authority of these
Homilies, when first set out, that want was made up, when they were
subsequently ratified by the Clergy in Convocation See Art. of 1552, and 1562.
.

L. M. P. has increased Dr. Wake's Collections by an Instance or two of this
date, which must not be neglected: Parliaments, he says, without the
Concurrence of Convocations have learnedly argued and determined the Questions
about the Lawfulness of Priests Marriage, and Communion in one kind P. 16.
. As to the first of these, the Stat. 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 21. does indeed
determine this point; but it is in consequence, and almost in the very words,
of the Determination of the Clergy in Convocation made the year before, which
Arth. Harmar has Printed P. 170.
, and my Lord of Sarum has given a short account of Vol. 2. p. 50.
, though with some mistakes in the Circumstances of it. For whereas his Lordship
makes but Thirty five to have affirmed the Question, and but Four^een to have
denied it; there were many more in either case, Fifty three in the first, and
Twenty two in the latter Synodalia.
. The Name also of the Prolocutor, who gathered these Votes, is mistaken: for
it was Io. Tailor Dean of Lincoln, not I. Tyler; who had been Prolocutor Thirty
two years before in the Convocation of 1515: where his Lordship takes notice of
him Vol. 1. p. 14.
with Indignation, for making a Partial Entry in the Journals of Parliament, on
behalf of the Clergy, then contending with the Lay-power, about their
Ecclesiastical Privileges, which his Lordship says, is no wonder; the Clark of
the Parliament being at the same Time Speaker to the Lower House of Convocation
-- though, had not his Lordship thus judged, I should have been apt to have
thought this Entry Impartial, for the very same reason; because the Man that
made it, belonged equally to both the contending Parties: Unless it shall be
said, that Clergymen are so blindly devoted to the Interests of their Order,
that no other Ties, or Views whatsoever can make 'em think indifferently, where
That is concerned. But of this his Lordship's own Works are an Effectual
Disproof.

As to the other Point, about the Communion in both kinds, neither did the
Parliament establish that, without the Concurrence of Convocation: for though the
Clause concerning it was brought into the House of Lords (by Bishop Cranmer, I
suppose) November. 24 Bishop Burn. Vol. 2. p. 41.
, yet it lay upon the Table, without being called for again, till the Clergy
December. 2. had Voted it in Convocation; after which, the very next day
Synodalia.
, it had a Second Reading.

1548. A Committee of Select Bishops and Divines appointed to Examine and
Referm the Offices of the Church. Ibid. p. 61, 71. To such a Select Commit I
have shown that the reforming the Offices was by Convocation entrusted in Henry
the Eighth's time; so that this was but continuing that business in the same
method into which the Convocation had formerly put it. And there is Great
Reason to believe that it was thus continued by this Convocation it self; and
that the Petition of the Lower House to the Bishops Mentioned by me p. 181. out
of the Acts of this Convocation.
for a Review of the Books prepared by the former Committee to this purpose,
ended in an Address of Both Houses to the King for a New one. Thus, it is
plain, Bishop Burnet See Vol. 2. p. 50.
understood this matter, and Bishop Stillingfleet too, who first produced that
Petition in his Irenicum See p. 386. where he terms it a Petition for calling
an Assembly of Select Divines, in order to the settling Church Affairs. Not that
this was the Direct Purport, but only the Result of it; and occasioned by it.
.

A New Office of Communion set forth by Them, [ i. e. by the Select Committee.]
Page 64. And it was therefore Authorized by that Convocation which we have
reason to think, consented to this Committee. However, sure we are, that it was
established soon afterward, by another Convocation; which passed the whole
Service Book, where this Communion-Office was, with some Alterations inserted.

There is a Deep silence all along in my Lord of Sarum's History, as to the
Convocational Authority of this Service Book; which he seems to represent as
the Work of a Committee See Vol. 2. p. 71, 93.
only, confirmed afterward by Parliament. His Lordships's History has that
Credit in the World, that his very Omissions may in time pass for Proofs, if
they be not observed and supplied; especially in the Present Case, where it
will be naturally enough concluded, that the Church Authority did not
intervene, if a Church-Historian of his Lordship's Rank takes no notice of it.
For which reason, and because I think the Point to be of Importance, and withal
related nearly to the Article we are upon, I shall here produce some Passages
from the Papers and Records of that time, which fully clear it.

King Edward's Answer to the Devonshire-Mens Petition Fox. Vol. 2. p. 666.
, Assures 'em, that for the Mass, no small Study or Travel has been spent by
All the Learned Clergy therein p. 667. b.
. And again, That whatsoever is contained in our Book, either for Baptism,
Sacrament, Mass, Confirmation, and Service in the Church, is by our Parliament
established, by the whole Clergy agreed, yea by the Bishops of the Realm
devised, by God's Word confirmed P. 668. a.
.

The Council's Instructions to Dr. Hopton how to discourse the Lady Mary Fox.
Vol. 2. p. 701.
, affirm the same thing, somewhat more forcibly. The first of these is, Her
Grace writes that the Law made by Parliament is not worthy the Name of a Law,
meaning the Statute for the Communion, etc.

You shall say thereto. The Fault is great in any Subject to disallow a Law of
the King, a Law of the Realm, by long Study, free Disputation, and uniform
Determination of the whole Clergy consulted, debated, concluded.

But above all most Express and Full to this purpose is the Assertion in a
Letter of Edw. 6. dated July 23. Regni tertio, and entered in the Register of
Bonner F. 219. a.
; it runs thus: That one Uniform Order for Common Prayers and Administration of
the Sacraments has beyn and is most Godly set fourth not only by the
Common Agreement and full Assent of the Nobility and Commons in the late
Session of our late Parliament; but also by the like Assent of the Bysshopps in
the same Parliament, and of all other's the Learned Men of this our Realm in
their Synods and Convocations Provincial.

I thought it worth my while to make good this Point, because it has by some
been much doubted, and their Doubts have been countenanced by the Act 2 and 3
Edw. 6. c. 1. which establishes the Service Book; and wherein there is mention
only of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and certain of the most Learned and
Discreet Bishops and other Learned Men of this Realm, appointed to compile it;
but no Formal notice is taken of the Convocation that passed it. And the Proof
I have given in this single Instance, will suggest to the Reader, that it might
be so in General; and that several other Things done by this Select Committee,
were probably approved afterward in Convocation; though the Statutes, and other
Records of that time should seem to mention the Committee only. The
Convocation-Records, which alone could have given us Full Light in this case
are destroyed; and the chief way we now have of supplying this Defect is by
Parallel Instances, and Probable Reasonings: which Fair Men therefore will
admit as good Evidence, for want of better; and not take advantage, as Dr. Wake
does from the Destruction of such Records to deny that there ever were any.
This is as if a Man should pretend to prove, that none of the People of such or
such a Parish were, in the Reign of Edward the Sixth Christened, because perhaps
the Old Parish-Registers are lost.

This made way for the Act of 1548, p. 93. and 1551, p. 189. He means King
Edward's two Acts of Uniformity, which established the first and second
Service Book; and way therefore was made for them, not by this New Office of
Communion, but by the Service-Books themselves: These, I have shown, though the
Work of a Committee, yet had the Authority of Convocation, inasmuch as the
Convocation approved this Committee beforehand, and confirmed what was done by
it afterward. I have shown it, I mean, of the One; and the Reader therefore,
will easily believe, that the same Steps and Measures were observed as to the
Other.

1549. An Order of Council forbidding Private Masses. Ibid. p. 102, 103. As
contrary to the Statute of Uniformity, and to the Determinations of the Clergy
in Convocation: and the Council therefore, who sent this Order, do afterward,
in a Letter of theirs to the Lady Mary June 4. 1551.
, call her Chaplains saying Mass, a contempt (not of Their, but) of the
Ecclesiastical Orders of this Church of England Fox Vol. 2. p. 709.
.

The Forms of Ordination, appointed by Act of Parliament, ordered to be drawn
up by a special Committee of Six Bishops, and Six Divines to be named by the
King. Ibid. p. 141, 143. The true account of this is, that the Council had
already appointed this Committee, at the Instance (as we may from former
Precedents reasonably collect) of the Convocation it self then sitting: and of
the Members of Convocation therefore this Committee was composed, according to
my Lord of Sarum's account of it. Some Bishops and Divines (says he) brought
now together by a Session of Parliament, were appointed to prepare a Book of
Ordination Vol. 2. p. 140.
. The Session was likely to end, before these Forms could be prepared, and the
Parliament passed therefore a previous Confirmation of them, as they had done
in the case of the Necessary Erudition, in 1540 See Stat. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 25.
. Dr. Wake must have a very uncommon way of arguing, if he can draw any thing
to the Prejudice of the Churches Power from such Instances as these, where such
an Implicit Deference was paid to the Resolutions of the Clergy, as to Enact
'em, before the Parliament had seen 'em, and indeed before they were made.

Dr. W. we see, does in this, and in every other step of this Article, appeal
to my L. of S.'s Book, and would under the cover of his Lordship's Name put off
all his Bad History, and Worse Opinions. It may not be amiss therefore to give
him the Judgment of this Right Reverend Prelate clearly expressed, and avowed,
in another Piece Vind. of the Ord. of the Chapter of Engl.
; and with that, to balance all these Doubtful and Uncertain Authorities.

His Lordship, speaking of the English Ordinal (the Point we are upon) and of
the Alterations that were afterward made in it, has these words, It was indeed
confirmed by the Authority of Parliament, and there was good reason to desire
That, to give it the force of a Law: but the Authority of [the Book and] those
Changes, is wholly to be derived from the Convocation, who only consulted about
them, and made them. And the Parliament did take that care in the Enacting
them, that might show, they did only add the force of a Law to them: for in
passing them it was ordered that the Book of Common Prayer and Ordination
should only be read over, (and even that was carried upon some Debate; for
many, as I have been told, moved that the Book should be added to the Act, as
it was sent to the Parliament from the Convocation, without ever reading it:
but that seemed Indecent and too Implicit to others) and there was no change
made in a Tittle by Parliament. So that they only Enacted by a Law what the
Convocation had done Pp. 74, 75.
. And again, As it were a Great Scandal on the first General Councils to say,
that they had no Authority for what they did, but what they derived from the
Civil Power; so is it no less unjust to say, because the Parliaments empowered
Here I must beg leave to say, that his Lordship's Expression is not Exact. The
Parliament did not empower, but approve of them.
some Persons to draw Forms for the more pure Administration of the Sacraments,
and Enacted that these only should be lawfully used in this Realm, which is the
Civil Sanction; that therefore these Persons had no other Authority for what
they did. Was it ever heard of, that the Civil Sanction, which only makes any
Constitution to have the force of a Law, gives it another Authority than a
Civil one? The Prelates, and other Divines, that compiled our Forms of
Ordination, did it by virtue of the Authority they had from Christ, as Pastors
of his Church, which did empower them to teach the People the pure Word of God,
and to administer the Sacraments, and perform all other Holy Functions,
according to the Scripture, the Practice of the Primitive Church, and the Rules
of Expediency and Reason; and this they ought to have done, though the Civil
Power had opposed it: in which case their Duty had been to have submitted to
whatever Severities and Persecutions they might have been put to, for the Name
of Christ, or the Truth of his Gospel. But on the other hand, when it pleased
God to turn the Hearts of those which had the Chief Power, to set forward this
good Work, then they did, as they ought, with all thankfulness acknowledge so
great a Blessing, and accept and improve the Authority of the Civil Power for
adding the Sanction of a Law to the Reformation, in all the Parts and Branches
of it. So by the Authority they derived from Christ, and the Warrant they had
from Scripture and the Primitive Church, these Prelates and Divines made those
Alterations and Changes in the Ordinal; and the King and the Parliament, who
are vested with the Supreme Legislative Power, added their Authority to them,
to make them obligatory on the Subjects Pp. 53, 54.
.

I have produced these Passages at length, not so much for any Light they give
to the Particular we are now concerned in, the Authority of the English
Ordinal, as for the General Use they may be of in settling the Dispute between
Dr. W. and the Church, about the Distinction of the Two Powers Ecclesiastical,
and Civil; and the Obligations we are under to the Decisions of the one,
antecedently to the Sanctions of the other. I subscribe to his Lordship's state
of it, and think nothing can be said more justly and truly.

1552. The Observation of Holy Days ordered by Act of Parliament. Ibid. page
191. This Act traced the Steps of the Rubric, in the Common Prayer Book,
relating to Holy Days; and ordered none to be kept Holy, but what had
beforehand been so ordered to be kept by the Clergy in Convocations, only it
added New Penalties.

1553. A New Catechism, by the King's Order required to be taught by
Schoolmasters. Ibid. p. 219. This Catechism was published with the Articles of
1552. and had, I suppose, the very same Convocational Authority which those
had. It was compiled indeed by Poynet, but is said, in the King's Patent
annexed, to have been afterward perused and allowed by the Bishops, and other
Learned Men; by which we are to understand either the Convocation it self, or a
Grand Committee appointed by it, and upon which its Power was devolved. That
the whole Convocation have been by these, or such like Terms about this time
often expressed, the Instances given in the Margent The Six Articles in the Act
31 H. 8. c. 14. are said to be agreed to by the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Learned Men of the Clergy; who a little before are styled a Synod, or
Convocation.

In the Articles of 1536. (See 'em in Bishop Burn. Vol. 1. Coll. of Rec. p.
305.) the Convocation is expressed by the Bishops, and others, the most
Discreet and Learned Men of the Clergy.

The Articles of 1552. are in the Title said to be such, de quibus in Synodo
Londinensi inter Episcopos, and alios Eruditos viros convenerat. And i^ will
scarce, I think, bear a Reasonable Doubt, whether these Articles passed the
Convocation.

Finally, The Act about Holidays, (as it is called) is in the Canon it self. (
See it in Sparrow, p. 167.) said to be decreed by the King, with the Common
Assent and Consent of the Clergy in Convocation assembled. But in the King's
Letter to Bonner about it, the words are, By the Assents and Consents of all
you Bishops, and others, Notable Personages of the Clergy of this our Realm in
full Convocation and Assembly had for that purpose.


will evince.

And that this Catechism was generally understood to have the Authority of
Convocation, is plain even from the Exception made to it by Dr. Weston For
that, said he, there is a Book of late set forth, called the Catechism, bearing
the Name of this Honorable Synod, and yet put forth, without your Consents, as
I have learned, etc. ^ox. Vol. 2. p. 19.
, in the first Synod of Queen Mary; but plainer still from Philpot's Reply to
that Exception; which discovers also to us somewhat of the Manner, by which the
Convocation came to be Entitled, not to this Catechism alone, but to several
other Pieces, that seem to carry the Name of a Committee only upon them. His
words are, that This House [of Convocation] had granted the Authority to make
Ecclesiastical Laws unto certain Persons to be appointed by the King's Majesty;
and whatsoever Ecclesiastical Laws They, or the most part of them, did set
forth, according to a Statute in that behalf provided, it might be well said to
be done in the Synod of London, although such as be of this House now had no
notice thereof before the Promulgation. And in this Point be thought the setter
forth thereof nothing to have slandered the House -- since* they had our
Synodal Authority unto them committed to make such Spiritual Laws as They
thought convenient and necessary ^bid. p. ^0.
.

The Knowledge of the Time and Circumstances of appointing this Committee, we
have lost, together with the Acts themselves: however, plain it is from this
Assertion of Mr. Philpot, made in open Convocation, that such a Committee there
was, named by the Crown, at the Instance of the whole Clergy; and that this
Catechism, among other things, passed them; and had on that account, as He
judged, the Authority of Convocation. It is left to the Reader, by whom in this
ca^e he will be guided, the Churches Martyr, or her Betrayer. And here the
Instance of the Catechismus ad Parochos is very pat to our purpose, and ought
once again to be remembered.

The rest of Dr. W.'s Particulars are Immaterial, and need not stop us: only on
the Last of 'em a Line or two may be not improperly spent.

King Charles the First.

Directions concerning Preaching with respect to the Arminian Points.

These Directions were for the silencing both Parties, and for preventing all
Innovations upon the Doctrine of the Church already Established; and such
Directions, it is not only the Christian Magistrates Privilege, but his Duty
to prescribe: provided always, that he do it not with any such underhand Views
and Aims, as my Lord of Sarum represents K. Charles the First to have had in
publishing His, -- All Divines (says he) were by Proclamation required not to
Preach upon Those Heads: but those that favored the New Opinions were
encouraged, and the others were depressed Exposition on the XXXIX. Article, p.
152.
. I presume, this is no part of the Regal Supremacy, nor a Pattern fit to be
imitated in succeeding Reigns: especially, if the case ever should be, as his
Lordship further informs us, it was Then, -- And unhappy Disputes (continues
He) falling in at that time, concerning the Extent of the Royal Prerogative
beyond Law, the Arminians having declared themselves highly for that, they were
as much favored at Court, as they were censured in Parliament. If this were
then really the case, we of This Age have reason to thank Heaven for reserving
us for better Times, when the Interests of Prince and People are the same; and
it can never therefore be a recommending Qualification of a Man, that he is for
extending the Royal Prerogative beyond Law; nor entitle him to the favor of a
Court, to be censured in Parliament.

These are the Instances, in which Dr. Wake has shown himself very willing to
blast the Honor of the Reformation, in order to assert an unreasonable
Prerogative to the Crown, for which no good Prince will thank him. I have
considered 'em throughout, and have proved, I hope, that the History he brings
to justify his Principles is every whit as unjustifiable as the Principles
themselves; and that they deserve therefore to keep Company with one another.
In some of these Instances, Truth was so easy to be come at, that he must be
thought to have missed it willingly, and to have judged it pardonable to
pervert History a little, in order to make his Complement with the better
Grace. A Principle, familiar to the Writers in this Controversy, as I could
show by some Domestic Instances; but, since that is not proper, shall content
my self with a foreign one.

De Marca, a Man excellently well read in this Debate, and of Abilities of Mind
equal to his Reading, (and like Dr. W. in nothing, but in his Design of letting
the Royal Power in upon the Church as far as he was able) while he was writing
his Famous Piece, Baluzii Vita Petri de Marca, etc. in principio operis de
Concordia Sacerd. and Imp. pp. 13, 14.
was named to the Sea of Thoulouse, but not quickly settled there, for want of
his Bulls. To obtain them, he wrote a Letter to the Pope, full of Submission
and Respect; and in it, took occasion to compare his own advancement to the Sea
of Toulouse with that of Exuperius, formerly Bishop of that place: whom he made
the same with Exuperius, the Spanish President, on purpose, that the Parallel
might run the better (He himself having for some time presided in Catalonia);
though he knew very well, they were two different Men. When this was objected to
him, as an oversight, or rather as a piece of Art, not very well becoming his
Holy Character, he laughed at the Objection, and pitied the poor People that
made it; who were so scrupulously silly, as to tie Men up to strict Truth in
such cases as these, and not able to distinguish between History and a
Complement. So that with the Writers in this Argument, it has been, it seems, a
Fashion all along, to disguise Truth; and the bending of matters of fact to
by-purposes, is a tried and approved Remedy for the Dispatch of Bulls. As a Key
to all the false Stories vouched by Dr. W. I have added this true one: and
should it happen not to be very pertinent, or entertaining, I have no Excuse to
make to him on that head; it is but returning him a Freedom, which he has often
beforehand taken with his Reader.

I am sensible these Reflections of mine are running out into too great a
Length, and shall therefore only name two or three more without enlarging much
upon 'em.

VII. Dr. Wake makes no distinction between Absolute and Limited Princes, but
produces the Acts of the one to prove and justify the Exercise of a like Power
in the other. His first Chapter is taken up in telling us, what was done in
relation to Ecclesiastical Synods, and Affairs by the Roman, and German
Emperors, and by other Princes, of narrower Territory, but not less Despotick
in their Government: as if what They did, or had a Right to do, were
immediately the Right of every other Christian Prince, without any regard to
the Restrictions which the Power of that Prince might be under, by the
Constitution of his Country. But now should he have told us, what Acts of
Absolute Authority were exercised by those Emperors in State-matters, and how
their Edicts had the force of Laws; would this Plea justify an English Prince
in attempting the like things at home, or be a Bar any ways upon the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament? Indeed our Author seems sensible, that these
Instances are not very Conclusive, where he confesses, that Princes may by
their own Acts Limit themselves, and that such Limitations may alter the Case
mightily, and make that Lawful in one Country which is not so in another P. 95.
. Pity it is, that this Truth had not come into his Thoughts sooner than the 95
th. Page of his Work: it might then have prevailed with him to withdraw that
huge Heap of Foreign Precedents, which now take up so much room in his Work;
and which would have been left to sleep peaceably in his Common-place-Book,
without seeing the Light, upon so improper an occasion. For should, what he has
the Courage in his next Chapter to assert, be true; that, by our own
Constitution, the King of England has all that Power at this day, over our
Convocation, that EVER ANY Christian Prince had over his Synod P. 98.
: yet the Power he has in this respect, he derives from the Particular Rules of
our Constitution, not from any beyond-Sea-Customs and Usages. He claims it not,
I suppose, as Heir to the Imperial Authority of Constantine, or Charles the
Great; but by virtue of that Prerogative, which, as King of England, he has by
the Laws of England: and should the Power therefore happen to be equal here at
home to what it is abroad, yet there lies no Proof from the one of these to the
other. Dr. Wake it seems has different notions of these things; for he tells
us, that Whatever Privileges he has shown to belong to the Christian
Magistrate, they belong to him as such; they are not derived from any Positive
Laws and Constitutions, but result from that Power which every such Prince has
Originally in himself, and are to be looked upon as part of those Rights which
naturally belong to Sovereign Authority: and that, to prove any particular
Prince entitled to these Rights, it is sufficient to show, that he is a
Sovereign Prince; and therefore ought not to be denied any of those
Prerogatives that belong to such a Prince, unless it can be plainly made out,
that he has afterward, by his own Act, Limited himself Pp. 94, 95.
. So that, according to Dr. Wake's Politics, All Kings, in All Countries, have
an Equal Share of Power, in their first Institution; none of 'em being
Originally Limited, or subjected to any Restraints, in the Arbitrary Exercise
of their Authority, but such as they have been pleased, by after-acts and
condescensions, graciously to lay upon themselves. Which Position how it can be
reconciled with an Original Contract, and with several Branches of the Late
Declaration of Rights, I do not see: and how far it may appear to the Three
States of this Realm, to entrench on their share in the Government, and on the
Fundamental Rights and Liberties of the Free People of England, Time must show.
That all Bishops indeed are Equal, is the known Maxim of St. Cyprian; but which
of the Fathers have said, that All Kings are so too, I am, I confess, as yet to
learn. For my part, I should think it as easy a Task to prove, that every
Prince had originally the same Extent of Territory, as that he had the same
Degree of Power: The Scales of Miles in several Countries are not more
different, than the Measures of Power and Privilege that belong to the Prince,
and to the Subject. But Dr. W. has breathed French Air for some time of his
Life, where such Arbitrary Schemes are in request; and it appears that his
Travels have not been lost upon him. He has put 'em to that Use, which a Modern
Author Moldsworth's Pref. to the State of Denmark.
observes to be too often made of 'em, that they teach Men fit Methods of
pleasing their Sovereigns at the Peoples Expense: though at present, I trust, his
Doctrine is a little out of season; when we live under a Prince, who will not
be pleased with any thing that is Injurious to the Rights of the Least of his
Subjects, when duly informed of them.

Whereas then Dr. W. in great Friendship to the Liberties of his Church, and of
his Country, asserts, that by our Constitution the King of England has all that
Power at this day over our Convocation, that EVER ANY Christian Prince had over
his Synod; I would ask him one plain Question, Whether the King and the Three
States of the Realm together have not more Power in Church Matters, and over
Church-Synods than the King alone? If so, then cannot the King alone have All
that Power which ever any Christian Prince had; because some Christian Princes
have had all the Power that was possible; even as much as belongs to the King
and the Three Estates in Conjunction.

There is one thing indeed which seems material to be observed and owned in
this case; it is the Assertion of the Second Canon, which declares our Kings to
have the same Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical that the Christian Emperors
in the Primitive Church had. But this Canon must necessarily be understood of
the King in Parliament: for out of Parliament it is manifest, that he is not so
Absolute in Ecclesiastical Matters, as those Emperors were. In Parliament, he
can do every thing, that is by the Law of God, or of Reason lawful to be done;
out of Parliament he can do nothing, but what the Particular Rules of our
Constitution allow of. And,

VIII. This too is a Distinction which Dr. W. should have taken notice of, had
he intended to do Justice to his Argument. For the Church here in England is
under the Government both of the Absolute, and Limited Sovereign: under the
Government of the Limited Sovereign, within the Compass of his Prerogative;
under the Government of the Absolute Sovereign, without any Restraints or
Bounds; except what the Revealed Will of God, and the Eternal Rules of Right
Reason prescribe. The Pope usurped not only on the King, the Limited; but on
the King and Parliament, the Absolute Sovereign: and what was taken from Him
therefore was not all thrown into the Prerogative, but restored severally to
its respective Owners.

And of this Absolute Sovereign it is the Duty, when Christian, to act in a
Christian manner; to be directed in matters Spiritual by the Advice of
Spiritual Persons, and not lightly to vary from it. By the same Rule the
Limited Sovereign is to steer likewise, within the Sphere of his Prerogative:
And he is also further obliged, to preserve those Privileges of the Church
which belong to her by the Laws of the Realm. Now Dr. Wake, I say, confounds
these two Powers, and the Subjections that are due to them; speaking all along
of the King, as if He, in Exclusion to the Three Estates, had the Plenitude of
Ecclesiastical Authority lodged in him, and were the single Point, in which the
Obedience of the Church, and of every Member of it centered. This is a
Fundamental Mistake that runs quite through his Book; and is such an One as
overturns our Constitution, and confounds the Executive and Legislative parts
of it; and deserves a Reprehension therefore some other way than from the Pen
of an Adversary.

Henry the Eighth, it is true, in virtue of his Supreme Headship, laid claim to
a Vast and Boundless Power in Church Affairs; had his Vicegerent in
Convocation, Enacted every thing there by his own Sole Authority; issuing out
his Injunctions as Laws, at pleasure. And these Powers, whether of Right
belonging to him, or not, were then submitted to by All, who either wished ill
to the Pope, or well to the Reformation; or wanted Courage otherwise to bear up
against his Tyrannical Temper and Designs: and were the more easily allowed of
by Churchmen, because they saw him at the same time exercise as Extravagant an
Authority in State-matters, by the Consent of his Parliament.

However the Title of Supreme Head, together with those Powers that were
understood to belong to it, was taken away in the ^^^st of Queen Mary, and
never afterward re^ved: but instead of it, all Spiritual Iurisdicti^^ was
declared to be annexed to the Imperial ^rown of this Realm, 1 Eliz. c. 1.
and the Queen enabled to ^xercise it by a Commissioner, or Commissi^ners. This
Power continues, no doubt, in ^he Imperial Crown; but can be exerted no
^therwise than in Parliament, now, since the ^igh Commission Court was taken
away by ^he 17 Car. 1. It was attempted indeed to be ^estored in the Last
Reign; but was then uni^ersally disallowed, and has since been solemn^y
condemned by the Declaration of Rights, as ^ne cause of the Abdication.
Whatever therefor Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth ^id, in virtue of
their Supreme Headship, what^ver the Three succeeding Princes did by their
Ecclesiastical Commissions, is not therefore, because Their Act, or Right, a
present Branch of the Regal Supremacy: all those Extraordinary Powers and
Jurisdictions, which were pe^uliar to that Title, or that Court, being now
^eturned to the King in Parliament. And When Dr. Wake therefore tells us, that
he is not ^ware of any Law that has debarred the King from ^aving his
Commissioner, or Vicar General in Convocation now, as Henry the Eighth before
had P. 114.
, ^e shows how unfit he is, under such a deep ^gnorance of our Constitution, to
write on ^his Argument: for a very moderate share of ^kill in these things was,
methinks, sufficient to have made him aware of the Illegality of King James's
Commission. I shall beg leave not to think, that this is a Principle approved
by ^his Grace of Canterbury, or that his Grace would ^ow give place to such a
Vicar General.

IX. One thing more I have to offer, and with that shall shut up these General
Remarks Dr. W. distinguishes not between those Power^ in which the Crown is
Arbitrary, and those in which it is purely Ministerial; between Royal Acts that
are Free, and such as are Necessary, so that by the Rules of our Constitution
the King cannot omit them. For example, he tells us, That the King determines
what Persons P. 103.
shall meet in Convocation, at what Time P. 103.
, and in what Place. And this he talks of in such a manner, as if the Prince
were perfectly and equally at Liberty, in all these Respects; and under no
manner of Tie from the Laws and Usages of this Kingdom. It Is true, as to the
Place of their Meeting, he is free, and may appoint their Session in what part
of his Country he thinks fit; just as he may that of the Lords and Commons. But
as to the Time, he is so far restrained, that some Times there are when he
ought to call them together, by the Fundamental Rules of our Constitution; and
those are as often as Writs for a New Parliament go out. As for the other
Convocations in the Intervals of Parliament (if our Constitution now, after an
hundred and fifty years disuse, knows any such thing, which I shall not here
dispute;) it is as to These only, that the Issuing out Writs for the Clergy can
be matter of Grace and Favor, or become the Subject of Deliberation. But as to
the Persons that are to meet, the Crown has no Power of determining who, or how
many they shall be; for the Law has determined this beforehand. The King may
indeed name whom he pleases to Deaneries and Bishoprics: but when he has done
so, Those, and no other must be Summoned to Convocation. And in this he does
not seem to have left himself at so much Liberty, as he still has in relation
to the House of Lords, to which he can by Writ call whom he pleases, whereas it
may be questioned, whether his Writ can give place to any one in the Upper
House of Convocation, but Bishops only.

The Truth is, the King appoints the Persons that are to come to Convocation,
just as he does those that are to come to Parliament: some have a Right of
sitting there in Person, and to those therefore he directs Particular Writs;
Others have a Right of being represented there, and those therefore he orders
to send up their Proxies; that is indeed, the Constitution appoints, what
Persons, or Communities shall be Summoned; and the King, according to that
Rule, does, as often as he is pleased to call a Parliament, by his Ministers,
Execute that Summons. And if Convocations are upon the Level with Parliaments
in this respect, as it is certain they are, Dr. Wake had best have a care how he
attempts to prove, that it is the King's Right to appoint who shall come to
those meetings, because this implies, that if he should think fit not to
appoint 'em, they would have no Right to come: which is a Doctrine of very
dangerous consequence, and not likely to recommend the maintainer of it to the
Thanks of either House of Parliament.

Dr. Wake is not content to assert this Power to the King, unless he does it
upon the bottom of an Imperial Power: for after he has proved, as he thinks, in
his First Chapter, that the Emperors of Rome and Germany were Absolute in all
these respects, he goes on in his Second to show, that by our own Constitution,
the King of England has all that Power at this day over our Convocation, that
ever any Christian Prince had over his Synods P. 98.
; and immediately in the same Particulars of Time, Place, and Person, draws the
Parallel between 'em.

It Is true as to Place, the Kings of England are as Arbitrary as those Emperors
were: however his way of making out this both of the One and the Other is
somewhat singular. Abroad, Pepin's determining the Place of his Synods meeting
is proved, from his determining that they should meet either at Soissons, or at
such other place as the Bishops should agree upon P. 38.
. At home, the same thing manifestly appears, because our Princes leave their
Synods, with a Great Latitude, to be held either at St. Paul 's, or at any
other Place, which the Archbishop shall judge to be more convenient P. 103.
. Which is very true, for the words of the Writ to the Archbishop have for some
hundred years run, ad conveniendum in Ecclesia, etc. vel alib^, prout melius
expedire videritis, which is just such a Determination of the Place they are to
meet in, as Dr. Wake's Book is of the Point in question.

He has much such another Argument to prove that the Emperors determined the
Persons too, that were to come to their Great Councils; because in Three of
them (which he there mentions) they left it to the Metropolitans, when they
came, to bring such of their Suffragan Bishops as they thought fit along with
'em. And when the Princes (says he) who followed after, Summoned their National
Synods, They in like manner directed the Choice of those who were to come to
them Pp. 39, 40.
. If they directed the Choice in like manner, I may venture to say, that they
did not direct it at all: for those Emperors gave no Directions for the Choice,
but, as He says, left it entirely to the Discretion of the Metropolitan; or
rather, as the Truth is, left it to the several Provincial Synods to determine,
what Bishops should wait upon their Archbishop to the Council. Were Dr. Wake's
Conge d'estire to be so drawn up, as to leave the Chapter to which it shall be
sent, at as great a Liberty as these Princes left their Metropolitans, he would
not think it, I believe, a sufficient Direction of their Choice, because, I
dare say, he would not find it so. In the mean time, what Bungling Work is this
for an Old Controvertist, that has encountered the Bishop of Meaux, and half
persuaded him to be a Protestant? The Dr. indeed lets us know plainly enough,
what he would be at, in the Positions he lays down; but by the Instances he
sometimes brings to back 'em, one can hardly tell, which side he is retained on.

CHAP. V.
HItherto, I have made only some General Remarks on Dr. Wake's way of managing
this Controversy, and by that means showed the Reader, how much there is in
his Loose Work utterly wide of the Mark he should have aimed at; and how unfair
he is in his Representations, and defective in his Proofs, even on those Points
which are not pertinent, and where Truth had been of little or no disservice to
his Cause. I might go on, and in the same manner lay open his Fourth Chapter
also, which he calls a Short View of the State of our Convocation in times past
P. 147.
; and which is just as short a View, as it is a True one: it being drawn out to
the length of an hundred tedious Pages; in which there is scarce One (I speak
what I have considered) that would not, upon a careful Review, yield a manifest
Proof of his Insincerity or Ignorance. So slight and partial are the accounts
he there gives of the Business of Convocations, and the Ends of assembling
them; so false are his Allegations often times, and so weak the Inferences he
draws from them; such an Implicit Relyance has he on every Relation he meets
with in any of the Monkish Chroniclers, and so willing is he to think it as
Exact and Full, as if the Authors had written Just Histories of Ecclesiastical
Affairs, and not Lean Journals only; so thoroughly in the dark does he appear
every where to be as to all those Manuscript Papers and Records that might be
of use to clear up this Controversy; so base and untrue are the Aspersions he
casts on some of the best Clergymen of those times, and (where he can) on his
Whole Order; so mean and fulsome is the Flattery he bestows on the Memory of
some of our Worst and most Arbitrary Princes: Upon all these Accounts, I say,
and many more than these, Dr. Wake has left so much room for Censure, that it
would be the business of one entire Book to set out the Mistakes and
Prevarications of that single Chapter. But in this, I shall rather trust the
Reader to believe as he pleases, than tire him with a proof of it: especially,
since opportunity will be given me of displaying some of them, here and there,
under the following Heads of Matter I have marked out, and according to the
Method I have resolved to proceed in. By That I am now led to consider the
Exceptious of all sorts that have been taken at the Two Points asserted in the
Entrance of this Work, by any of those Writers who have pretended to answer the
Letter to a Convocation-man We have hitherto done little more than set aside
what in Dr. Wake's Book is foreign to the Argument he treats of; let us see
now, what there is either in That, or any other Piece, written on the same
side, that can be thought Material: I shall conceal nothing that may seem in
the least to affect the Truth I contend for, or the Proofs which I have brought
to support it.

In Relation to the first Point laid down we are told, that the Provincial
Writ, by which a Convocation is Summoned, has no relation to the calling of a
Parliament, nor does so much as mention it L. M. P. p. 29, 30.
; That by such Writs the Clergy may be assembled, when no Parliament is in
being, may meet before the Parliament, and be continued after the Dissolution
of it; That as to the Clause, Praemunientes, in the Bishops Writ, it is matter
of Form only, having stood there these three hundred Years without any manner
of use Ibid. p. 32.
, and referring to a Convocation, which for many Years past has had no
Existence W. p. (284.)
; That it was first inserted upon some Particular Occasion, and continued after
the Cause was determined L. M. P. p. 32.
; and that, merely by the neglect of a Clark, as my Lord of Sarum conjectures
Hist. Ref. Vol. 2. p. 49.
; That upon the whole therefore the Time of the Convocations meeting is no ways
fixed, but Precarious L. M. P. p. 27.
, and it is Just Definition is, an Occasional Assembly for such Purposes as the
King shall direct, when they meet -- as a late Little Author Nicolson. Hist.
Libr. Vol. 3. p. 200.
has told us out of a Great one.

But let the Definition come from what Hand it will, I must be bold to say,
that it is unskilfully drawn. For from the Accounts already given in these
Papers it appears, that the Convocation is not an Occasional, but a Stated
Assembly; in some measure Stated, as a Provincial Synod, simply in it self
considered; much more so, as a Synod attendant on a Parliament. As a Provincial
Council, the Rules of the Church, received in all Christian States, and
particularly in ours, direct that it should be Annual: As a Synod attendant on
the Parliament, it has the same stated times of assembling that the Parliament
has. And such Parliamentary Meetings of the Clergy ought the rather to be kept
up, because it was from These that the Disuse of yearly Provincial Councils,
here and elsewhere, originally sprung. For when through the Piety of our Saxon
Ancestors the Clergy were called to the Great Councils of the Realm, and made a
constant and necessary part of them; they were obliged so frequently to attend
in that Capacity, that they had neither Leisure, nor Need to observe the set
times of their Provincial Assemblies. The Ordinary Business of These was
dispatched at those State-meetings; which were frequent, and gave the Clergy
the Opportunity of an easy Recourse to the Civil Power for a Confirmation of
their Decrees. And this, by degrees, brought on a discontinuance of Provincial
Synods, which from thence began to meet only on Great Emergencies, and for
Extraordinary Occasions. Thus the matter stood throughout the Saxon Times, and
for some Reigns after the Conquest: The Clergy of the whole Realm met
Nationally with the Laity, and did Church-business at the same Time and Place
that the Great Affairs of the State were transacted. Afterward it was thought
more Regular, that they should attend the Parliament, not in one Body, but in
Two Provincial Synods; which would equally answer the State-Ends of assembling
them, and would withal be more strictly agreeable to the Canons. Accordingly
they have for near 400. years past constantly thus attended; and are therefore
in this respect as stated an Assembly, as the Parliament it self. It Is true,
there have been during this Period, Other Meetings also of the Clergy out of
Parliament time, when the Necessities of the Church so required; and these
Assemblies indeed (and these alone) were properly Occasional. But these were
rare in comparison of Parliamentary Synods, even in Popish times: and since the
Reformation there has been no Instance of 'em, the Convocation of 1640. only
excepted; which is no Complete Instance neither: for it was called, and sat
together with the Parliament, though it continued after it. And what Reflections
and Votes this Continuance produced in the Succeeding Parliament, is
sufficiently known. Setting aside therefore what was done in this disputed
Instance, it is certain, that All the Business of the Church has for these
hundred and fifty years last been transacted purely in Parliamentary
Convocations: and these therefore (which are the only Synods now in use) being
Stated, and not Occasional, it can be no part of the Definition of a
Convocation, that it is an Occasional Assembly. By the Universal Rules and
Practice of the Church there are Set-times allotted for Provincial Synods to
meet; and these Times are by our Constitution adjusted to those of Parliament.
And the Clergy-Meetings therefore thus appointed concurrently with Parliaments
can no more be said to be Precarious, or Occasional than They are. It Is true,
their Acting is Occasional, though their Meeting and Sitting be not: for they may
possibly, when met, have no Business to do; and then, as they met a course, so
they adjourn, or are adjourned a course: but the Chance of their acting, or not
acting, ought not any ways to hinder their Meeting and Sitting, both because it
cannot certainly be known till they are met, whether there be any Business for
'em, or no; and should there not be any, yet they preserve a Right to do
Business, when there shall be occasion for it, by thus assembling when there is
none. Archbishop Parker, Mr. Cambden, Sir Robert Cotton, all that have been
Eminent for their skill in our Constitution, have constantly represented the
Convocation to be a fixed and stated Assembly, and never once dreamt that it
was Occasional: and one would wonder therefore how our Young Antiquaries came
to be wiser in this respect than the Old ones. No! this Meeting is not
Occasional, but the Notion is taken up purely to serve a Turn, and do Business:
for there must be New Notions to justify New Usages. But (to speak a plain
word) I cannot for my heart like these Men of Occasional Principles: for I
remember well that Those were thought thoroughly Honest by neither side, who
were for Occasional Communion.

Thus much in answer to the General Part of the Objection, which would persuade
us, that it is of the Nature of a Convocation to be a Precarious Assembly: what
is further urged to support this Notion, shall be considered under Two Heads,
wherein I shall show,

1. That the Praemunientes in the Bishops Writ, is not an Idle Useless Clause
(as we are made to believe) inserted only on a Particular Occasion, and
continued by Accident; but a Real, and (heretofore at least) an Effectual
Summons of the Clergy to Parliament; such as they constantly made Formal
Returns to, as often as it went out, and did expressly obey.

2. That the Writ to the Two Archbishops to convene the Clergy of their
Provinces, though it does not expressly mention a Parliament, yet has an immediate
Reference to it: the Original Design of its issuing out together with the
Bishops Writ being only to secure an Obedience to the Premunitory Clause of it,
and to make the Clergy's Parliamentary Assemblies more full and certain.

Upon the first of these Points I shall not content my self barely to make good
what I propose; but shall extend my Enquiries further, and endeavor to give
some account of the Original of the Premunitory Clause, as it now stands in the
Bishops Writ, of the true Grounds of inserting it, and of the steps by which it
prevailed.

Something not unlike it I find practiced as early as the Sixth of King John,
when a Writ, yet to be seen among our Records Cl. 6 Joh. m. 3. dors.
, went out, calling the Bishops to Parliament, and by them all the Conventual
Abbots and Priors of the Diocese; that is, it may be, all those of the Clergy
below Bishops, who might, in this Instance, be Summoned to Parliament. Ten
years after this the Charter of Runnymead obliged the Crown to Summon every
Bishop, Baron, Abbat, and Prior, Singillatim, that is, by a Distinct Writ: and
accordingly in the 26 H. 3. Cl. m. 13. dors.
the Archbishop of York's Summons has no such Clause in it; the Abbots being
then, we may presume, Summoned severally; as we are sure they were in the 41
st. of the same Prince, from the Abbot of Burton's Summons, preserved in the
Annals of that Monastery P. 371.
, and as the Deans appear to have been in the 49 H. 3. Dugd. Sum. p. 2.
And whether the Clergy of yet Lower Rank came to that Famous Meeting in some
proportion answerable to that of the Lower Laity, and in what manner they were
Summoned thither, can be matter of Guess only; for our Records are silent.

Edward the First, a Martial Prince, having great Designs abroad, had
consequently need of Great Supplies at home; and in order to obtain them
quietly, found it requisite to get the Express Consent of as many of his
Subjects as he could to the Parliamentary Grants; and for that End resolved to
make the Lower Clergy and Laity a constant and standing Part of All his
Parliaments.

In his first year, while he was yet abroad in his Expedition, we find the
Commons (as we now understand the word) present in Parliament de quolibet
Comitatu Quatuor milites, and de qualibet Civitate Quatuor. Ann. Wav. p. 227.
; and that in a greater number than they were in the 49 th. of his Father. But
it does not appear, that the Inferior Clergy were at this Meeting; who, it
seems, standing upon their Privileges and Exemptions, were not so easy to be
dealt with in this respect as those of the Laity were. In his third year
therefore we hear only of the Pontifices, and Cleri Majores in Parliament [ i.
e. of the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and Archdeacons]; of whom the King demanding
a Subsidy was answered by the Bishops, that they could not agree to it, without
consulting the Clergy of their Dioceses; Wykes, ad Ann. 1275
which they promised to do against the next Parliament met, and to bring their
Resolutions along with them to it.

In his Seventh year the Council of Reding met, wherein it was ordered that two
Proctors should be Elected by the Clergy of every Diocese, and sent up to
represent them in the next Congregation of the Clergy to be held with the next
Parliament This is according to the Edition of the Canons of that Council, at
the End of Lynwood. From what Copy it was taken, is not said: But those Copies
which Sir Will. Dugdale Transcribed into the Second Volume of our English
Councils [ See p. 320.] differed from it, it is clear; if at least Sir William
's Transcripts are Exact, and to be depended on.
. Whether Archbishop Peckam found, that the King had resolved to bring these
Proctors to Parliament by his Own Authority, and therefore prevented him by
this Constitution, or whether he did it, to have their Counsel and Assistance
in opposing the Statute of Mortmain, which he foresaw would be attempted in
that Parliament (and was accordingly carried); or upon what other View he
acted, I pretend not to say. But from thence forward I take it for granted that
such Proctors were constantly returned to all the Clergy's Parliamentary
Meetings; and that purely upon an Ecclesiastical Call at first, though the King
soon let himself into a share in Convening them.

For in his Ninth year, His and the Archbishop's Authority were jointly and
interchangeably employed in it; the Archbishop signifying the King's Pleasure
in his Letters Mandatory to the Clergy, and the King on the other side
Executing the Archbishop's Mandate by his Own Ministers. The Case (if my
Collections deceive me not) was thus: The Bishops [and their Clergy] were
Summoned to a Synod at London by an Injunction from the Archbishop in which
they were commanded also to meet at another Time and Place appointed by the
King: and that they might be sure so to do, Letters of Citation are directed
(not to the Bishop of London, but) to the King himself, to be by him
communicated to the several Bishops by Royal Messengers. This odd President we
have an account of in the Register of P^ckam The Citatory Letters are dated
Kal. Apr. 1281*
. And the same Formality, I suppose, was used in Convening the Clergy of York
Province, who met about this time at York, as appears from a Writ extant in
Pryn Eccl. Jurisd. T. 3. P. 275.
, impowring the Bishop of Carlisle, to collect the Tenth of his own Diocese,
granted at that Provincial Assembly.

Next year the Prerogative got ground a little, for the King holding his
Parliament at Northampton, commanded the Archbishop by Writ to Summon his
Clergy thither, to meet Coram Nobis, vel coram fidelibus nostris quos ad hoc
duximus deputandos, See App. Number. VII.
ad audiendum and faciendum ea quae pro Republica Vobis and eis super his
ostendi faciemus, etc. But the Persons which the Archbishop is directed to
Summon are only Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and other Heads of Religious Houses,
together with the Proxies of Deans and Chapters, without any mention of
Archdeacons, or of the Diocesan Clergy; who, it may be, were by a Particular
Writ to be applied to afterward, and required to follow the Pattern which the
Superior Clergy should set, according to the way sometimes practiced in former
Reigns See an Instance, A. D. 1207 80. Joh. in Pryn 's Parl. Writ. Vol. 1. Pref.
. So that this Meeting was just such another as that in the third of his Reign,
where the Majores Cleri only were present. And yet at the Synod called on the
same occasion by the A.B. of York, in His Province, we find the Diocesan Clergy
appeared: and (which is very remarkable) the Laity of York-Province under
Barons, [ Milites, Liberi Homines, Communitates, and omnes alii de singulis
Comitatibus ultra Trentam] had also their Summons to the same Time and Place
with the Clergy. So I gather from the Writ sent jointly to both, which being of
a curious and uncommon Form, will deserve a place in the Appendix Numb. VIII.
where the Reader will find also another directed to the Clergy and Laity of the
Bishopric of Durham; who though meeting with the rest of York- Province, yet
had, it seems, distinct Messages and Messengers sent to them, and made likewise
their separate Returns. ( See Regist. Joh. Romani ad Ann. 1286. fol. 99.
Regist. Grenefield ad Ann. 1310. f. 180.) and something of this Privilege I
think, that See even yet retains.
.

Hitherto then the Clergy were so far from meeting Nationally with the
Parliament, that the Lower part of the Parliament seems to have divided
sometimes to accommodate it self to the Provincial Meetings of the Clergy.

How the King was obeyed in this Instance as to the Province of Canterbury
appears from Peckam's Register, where we find his Mandate See App. Number. IX.
to the Bishop of London, reciting the King's Writ, and commanding all the
Bishops of his Province, and all the others mentioned in it, to assemble dictis
die and loco ob Reverentiam Regiae Majestatis, de expedientibus reipublicae
tractaturi; but with words also that intimated his sense of the Hardship which
this New Precedent laid 'em under, and which the Clergy, I suppose, so
understood, as if he would not be very severe upon them, though they should not
comply with it. Accordingly their Meeting at Northampton was but thin, and they
brake up immediately, referring themselves to a Fuller Convocation; to be
called in the usual Form by the Archbishop, and refusing to answer the King's
Demands till such an one were Summoned; as it was soon afterward See App. Number.
IX.
: and that being a Regular Assembly, both as to the Place Nov. Templ. Land.
at which, and the Authority The Archbishop's.
by which they met, and the Persons Totus Clerus are said to be called i. e.
beside those Summoned to Northampton, the Archdeacons also, and Diocesan-Clergy.
composing it, the King's Business did there receive an Easy Dispatch.

Had the King's Writ, which called the Clergy before his Commissioners at
Northampton been obeyed readily, the way had been opened toward his bringing
the whole Body of 'em afterward to Parliament. But having failed in this, and
such like attempts, and finding that the Archbishop and his Clergy understood
one another, and were secretly agreed to defeat him, he afterward went more
roundly to work, and without asking help from the Church, was resolved to use
only his Own Authority; and accordingly Summoned all the Great Abbats and
Priors to Parliament Personally, as well those who did not hold of him by
Barony, as those who did; and the Lower Clergy by a Premunitory Clause inserted
in the Writ to every Bishop. At what time precisely this Method was first set
on foot, I cannot be positive: but sure I am that a year before the 23 Edw. 1.
(the common Era of the Praemunientes) it was practiced. Peckam was now dead,
and Winchelsey not yet returned with his Pall from Rome; and the Sea of York
filled with an Obnoxious Person Ioh. Romanus.
, Fined lately Four thousand Marks by Parliament Ryley's Placita. p. 141.
; and on that, and some other accounts See Ibid. p. 173.
now at the King's Mercy. This lucky Juncture the King seems to have laid hold
of, to bring the Clergy to a compliance with his Will, when they had no body to
head them in their opposition to him Vacabat Ecclesia Cant. (says Knighton) and
membra sine capite in consilio dispersa sunt; Eboracensis vero Iohannis
Romanus, Regis timore perterritus, eo quod in magna pecuniae summa regi
tenebatur, quasi dissimulando destituit, etc. p. 2502.
. He Summons the Prior and Chapter of Canterbury therefore, as Guardians of the
Spiritualties of that See, during its Vacancy, and by Them the Archdeacon of
Canterbury, and two Proctors for the Diocese See the Writ Append. Numb. X.
.

The Clause in this Writ differs in nothing from what was afterward practiced,
except that it begins with the word Vocantes, instead of Praemunientes, and
mentions not the Prior and Chapter of Canterbury, they being indeed the Persons
written to, and having already in the former part of the Writ been cited under
another Capacity. Only still we may observe that though the Call were really to
Parliament, yet it is not mentioned throughout the Summons; either in that part
of it, which commands the Bishop to attend, or in that which warns the Lower
Clergy to accompany him; but they are cited only to treat and to consult among
themselves.

Knighton Eodem Anno (MCCXCIV.) Vocavit Rex per Literas suas Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, Decanos Ecclesiarum Cathedralium and Archidiaconos in propriis
personis suis Clerumque uniuscujusque Diocesis per duos Procuratores, etc. X.
Script. col. 2501.
, and the Annals of Worster Die XIX. Sept. Rex habuit Colloquium Londoniae cum
omnibus Episcopis, and Archidiaconis, and Abbatibus. Et Clerus ibi similiter
habuit Procuratores. Ann. Wig. apud Ang. Sacr. Vol. 1. p. 516.
, and Eversden Rex Parliamento die crastino Sti Michaelis [it should be
Matthaei] habito -- Universos and singulos Angliae Praelatos cum Clero, nec non
and Religiosos omnes possessiones obtinentes ad ipsum Parliamentum vocatos, ad
praestationem, etc. induxit. M. S. in Off. Arm. ad Ann. 1294.
mention the Clergy as present in this Parliament, and the two first of these
tell us particularly, who were Summoned. Neither of their Enumerations are just
indeed, but both together complete the Account. And from the notice thus taken
of the Clergy's attendance, and from the Particular given of the Persons
attending, we may be satisfied, that the Summons was Extraordinary; and from
thence may conclude, that before this it had not, probably, been practiced; to
be sure, not obeyed. But now it was effectually: for, upon the receipt of the
King's Writ, the Prior and Chapter sent out their Letters Mandatory (in which
they recite it) One to the Archdeacon of the Diocese, and another to the
Commissary of their Separate Jurisdiction, ordering them to bring the Clergy of
their several Districts together at a Place, and Time appointed; as They did:
and the Clergy thus met, deputed two Common Proctors, to represent the whole
Diocese. And these Proctors sat and acted for them in Parliament, i. e. in that
Assembly of the Clergy which was Summoned by the same Writ, to meet at the same
Time and Place that the Lay-part of the Parliament were Ad ipsum Parliamentum
vocatos, says Eversden, above.
; and accordingly did thus meet at the opening of it promiscuously So I gather
from Mat. Westminster. who says, Coadunatis apud -- Clero and Populo. P. 422. and so
Knighton 's Relation, (Col 2502.) manifestly implys.
, though they afterward debated and resolved separately This too appears from
Knighton (ibidem) and from the manner in which their Orders in relation to the
Grant are spoken of in Registr. Henr. Prioris, fol. 63. There a Writ recites,
that in sesto beati Matthaei, etc. quaedam ^unt Ordinata per Praelatos and
Cleri Procuratores, exclusively to the Laity. And the Clergy's Proctors are
there also empowered to consent to what the Prelates, Archdeacons, and other
Proxies of the Clergy should do in common.
. And one of the Resolutions they came to was to give the King a moiety of
their Goods for one year. This Gift however was by the Province of Canterbury
alone; for the Clergy of York-Province, if present in this meeting, yet did not
make their Grant in it, as appears from the King's Letters Patents transmitted
to them by the Dean of York, immediately upon the rising of the Clergy of
Canterbury The Parliament sat on Sept. 20 th. or 21 th. and rose in a few days,
the Letters Patent to the York- Clergy are dated September. the 28 th.
, wherein they are commanded to do as the King's Agent shall direct, i. e. as
the Clergy of the other Province had done before them. It appears indeed from
the Register of Ioh. Romanus Ad Ann.
that his Clergy were Summoned to this Parliament by the very same Writ that
those of Canterbury were: but whether they declined appearing there, or only
delaid their Grant till they met Provincially at home, I cannot say: sure we
are, that the next year 23 E. 1.
they were again Summoned, the Praemunientes being inserted into the Writs of
all the Bishops of York-Province, as Pryn Parl. Wr. Vol. 1. p. 7.
informs us. And the year after that, we know that it was not only inserted
Dugd. Sum. p. 13.
, but obeyed by them. For Rex Angliae apud Sanctum Edmundum in crastino
Animarum Parliamentum suum tenuit, and vocati ibidem venerunt per Regias
Literas Praelati and Totus Clerus, says the Manuscript Chronicle of Canterbury
written at this time, of which a Fragment is published by Mr. Wharton ( Angl.
Sac. Vol. 1. p. 50.) and so Thorn. Rex apud S. Edm. tenuit Parliamentum,
Convocato illuc Toto Clero. Col. 1965. Now therefore the Praemunientes became
an Usual Part of the Bishop's Writ, and had a place there, not as Matter of
Form only; for as often as it was repeated, it was expressly complied with. The
Bishop, upon the Receipt of his Writ, transmitted it in a Letter of his own to
the Dean or Prior of his Cathedral Church, and to the Archdeacon or Archdeacons
of his Diocese, commanding them to appear in Person at the Time and Place
prefixed by the Writ, and to warn the Chapter to send one of their Body, and
the Clergy of the Diocese Two thither; and moreover to transmit an account to
him of what they had done, or would do in this matter. To this the Deans,
Priors, or Archdeacons, made answer by their Certificatorium; which recited the
Bishop's Writ, as that recited the King's, and concluded always either that
they had done, or would do, as commanded. Upon this the Chapter met and deputed
One, and the Clergy of the Diocese Two to appear for them in Parliament. The
Persons so deputed had Procuratoria (or Letters of Substitution, Literae de
Rato.
and Ratihabition) given to 'em from the Persons they represented: These ran
always in the same Terms with the Writs of Summons, and varyed according to
them; so that when the One was ad tractandum, ordinandum, and faciendum; or ad
faciendum and consentiendum, or ad consentiendum only, so was the Other. These
Instruments they exhibited the first day of the Session, or at least of their
Appearance there; and Memorandum's of them were entered, together with the
other Proxies, by the Clerk of the Parliament.

This was the Method in which the Praemunientes was Executed upon the Inferior
Clergy, and obeyed by them: a Method, not practiced once, or twice, upon an
Exigence only (as our Adversaries ignorantly talk); but for two hundred years
and upwards, at least, after the first framing it.

Several times it was inserted in the Latter Years of Edward the First, as the
Writs Printed by Pryn, and Dugdale show, and sometimes when they take no notice
of it For instance, the Writ for the Parliament in Quindena Purific. 33 E. 1.
is Printed in Dugdale ( p. 45.) without the Praemunientes: whereas both That,
and the Writ of Prorogation certainly had it; as appears from a Certificatorium
relating to the one, and a Procuratorium to the other; both entered in a
Register of Henry the Prior of Canterbury.
. And I have seen either the Certificatories, or Letters of Proxy, that were
drawn up by some Capitular Body or other, in relation to every one of these
Meetings. Three or four of these for the Convent of Bathe, Pryn Parl. Wr. Vol.
1. Pp. 116, 117, 118.
has given us as Rarities; and indeed they are All that I have seen Printed any
where, (for That which he mentions out of Seldom is a Deputation for an Abbat
only): However in the Old Chapter-Books they are very commonly to be met with;
and from thence therefore I shall take the Forms of some Few See Append. Numb.
XI.
, and the Dates of as many more as will be requisite to continue the Succession
of them down to Henry the Eighth's Reign.

All Edward the First's time, I have said, that this Clause had its due effect;
the Clergy, by virtue of it, resorting from Both Provinces to Parliament. Of
this the Evidence is very Full and Convincing, in relation to his Last
Parliament at Carlisle, the Records of which Ryley has Printed at length in his
Placita Parliamentaria; and amongst them, the Names of all those Proctors that
appeared for every Capitular Body, and for the Clergy of Each Diocese of the
Kingdom. It Is the only thing of the kind that is extant, or perhaps preserved;
and the Book where it lies is in the Hands of Few but the Professors of the
Law: for which reason I shall place a Specimen of it in the Appendix See Number.
XII.
.

Nor did any Change happen in this respect, all Edward the Second's time:
Indeed the Weakness of that Prince (who was given up to his Favorites and his
Pleasures), and the Ascendant which Archbishop Winchelsey had over him, after
his Return from Exile, encouraged, the Clergy to slacken a little in their
Obedience to this Clause, at the Beginning of his Reign: and once or twice
under Archbishop Reynolds they attempted to free themselves wholly from the
Authority of a Lay-Summons. But they could not bring it to pass; and after a
short struggle therefore soon return^d to their Duty, and made their
Representatives regularly, according to the Tenor of it, throughout all the
Latter part of his Reign. It will be at least a curious, if not an useful piece
of knowledge, to give our selves some Account of the Steps taken by the Lower
Clergy, to get rid of the Praemunientes, and of the little Varieties made use
of in convening them, at this Critical Time.

In the first and third years of this Prince, when it went out, it was complied
with Vide Procuratoria data 3. Apr. 1307. and 25. Apr. 1309. in Registro
Henrici Prioris.
: but the Clergy afterward fell off, so that in his fifth year, he found
himself obliged to insert a Clause of a different nature into the two
Archbishops Writs See the Form in Dugd. Summoit. Pp. 77, 78.
, ordering them to bring the Clergy (not of their several Dioceses only, but)
Provinces to Parliament. And here (for ought I can find) the Foundation was
laid for that Practice of a Double Summons of the Clergy, both by the
Provincial, and Bishop's Writ, which grew afterward the settled Course, and
does even to this day (with some small Variety as to the Form) obtain.

Two years afterward a New Attempt was made by the Crown, to bring Each
Province apart before the King's Commissioners, out of Parliament time, but by
Writs in a Parliamentary Form to the several Suffragan Bishops, and by others
to the two Archbishops See Append. Numb: XIII.
, ordering them to convene their Clergy Provincially at two different Times and
Places therein mention, Prout in proximo Parliamento nostro apud Westminster
habito tam per Clerum quam per Communitatem regni nostri extitit concordatum
This refers to the Parliament in Quindena Paschae, (Dugd. p. 95.) which was
Summoned with the Praemunientes, and that Clause was (as appears by these
words) obeyed.
. The Direction of it was, Venire faciatis coram dictis fidelibus nostris
Suffraganeos vestros, Decanos, Priores Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, Archidiaconos,
Abbates Exemptos and non Exemptos Provinciae vestrae in propriis personis;
Capitula etiam -- per unum -- and Clerum -- per duos Procuratores, ad
tractandum and consentiendum una Vobiscum, etc. And because the Exempt Abbats
might be backward in obeying the Archbishop's Mandate, They too had the same
Writ sent 'em, as the Suffragans had, the Clause Praemunientes only excepted.
Had this Method succeeded, it would have brought the Clergy more effectually,
and in fuller Numbers to Parliament than the Praemunitory Clause did. When met
therefore, they took the Alarm, and remonstrated against it, as a Novelty,
never before practiced, in forma qua nunc scribitur. They complain also of the
Total Insertion of the King's Writ into the Archbishop's Mandate, as tending to
a manifest Subversion of their Privileges, and desire a Revocation of it; and
that they may be resummon'd in a Regular Manner, by the Archbishop, without any
Interposition of the Civil Authority; which was granted. The Remonstrance See
it Append: Numb. XIV.
is set down in an Old Cotton-Manuscript Faustin. A. 5.
, but with a false Date: for it is there supposed to be made at a Convocation
in 1322, to which it no ways belongs.

The Alteration this produced was, that the next year [of this Prince's reign,
but the same of our Lord] the Archbishop had two several Writs directed to him,
when the Parliament was Summoned; the One, as he was Bishop of the Diocese,
with the Usual Clause for the Lower Clergy; the other See it Append. Number. XV.
, as Metropolitan, to cite those very Clergy, and no others, Provincially, who
were called up by the Writs to their several Diocesans. But neither would this
Method take easily, for the Clergy, when assembled, protested against such sort
of Citations by the Archbishop, as calling a part of the Body only; and those
ad Curiam Saecularem, puta Domini Regis Parliamentum quod in Camera ejusdem
inchoatur; and therefore tam ratione Fori, quam Loci, Uncanonical; and say,
that for the future they will not obey them See their Protestation, Appen. Number.
XV.
.

For which reason when the year after 9 E. 2. 1315.
, Both these Writs went out again, the Archbishop varied a little from both in
his Letters Mandatory Dated 15. Kal. Jan. 1315. in Registro Reynolds.
; for he called not only those specified in the Praemunitory Clause, but the
Whole Clergy of his Province; to appear, not in Parliament, but before himself,
in a Sacred Place, the Day before the Time prefixed by the King's Writ: Nor
does he in his Mandate recite, or mention this Clause; but refers himself to
that Other Writ, which the King sent out at the same time to enforce the
Praemunientes; and mentions it, as a Request Cum nos Rex suis Rogatibus
excitaverit -- Nos Regiae Majestatis hujusmodi Precibus eo facilius inclinamur.
--
only on the Crown-side, and a Condescension on His; but not as a Legal
Command, issued by a Competent Authority. The Clergy thus convened stood by him
in what he had done, and made their Excuse for not appearing at the Place the
King directed; praying the Archbishop and his Suffragans to be instant with the
King, that he would not insist on his Summons, but give them the Liberty of
declining it. So I gather from a Petition of theirs (in an Old Book in the
Cotton-Library Faustin. A. 8.
, said to be made tempore Edvardi 2 di, without any further Date; but seeming
by its Place in the Manuscript, and some other Coincidences to belong to this
year, and to this Assembly. The Reader will find it in the Appendix Numb. XV.
. Whether they carried their Point, at this time, I know not, but soon after we
find, the Writ with the Praemunientes inserted in the Archbishop's Mandate Vide
Registr. Henr. Prioris, f. 227. and fol. 263. where it appears that the two
Writs with the Praemunientes of the 15 E. 2. and 20 E. 2. Printed by Dugdale,
(Pp. 122.136.) were formally obeyed.
, and formally complied with by the Clergy.

When the Procuratoria were drawn, in relation to the Praemunientes alone, they
ran (as that did) ad faciendum and consentiendum, or ad consentiendum only:
when the Provincial Summons went out also, the Clergy's Powers ran ad
tractandum cum Venerabili Patre -- Praelatis and Clero, necnon ad
Consentiendum; which answered Both the Citations. And sometimes Double
Instruments of Prexy were framed both for the Parliament and Convocation, and
different Proctors appointed for each of 'em. And this, I conceive, was as
often as the Parliament was held out of the Province, and the Clergy were at
the same time to meet Provincially at home An Instance of such a Double
Procuratorium is to be seen in Registro Henr. Prioris, fol. 202, 203. naming
different Proctors to represent the Chapter of Canterbury in the Parliament to
be held at York, a die Paschae in mens^m, and in the Convocatio Cleri London in
Quindena Paschae. It was in the Year 1319.
and do business; for they could not then assemble with the Parliament, or near
it; and sent their Proctors therefore to testify their Consent to what should
be done in it. And the same thing I have observed to be done sometimes even in
that Province where the Parliament met, if the Archbishop of it did then
solemnly hold his Provincial Council: for in this case also different Proxies
were returned to these several Meetings An Instance of this kind also I have
met with Ann. 1323, when the Parliament was held in die Purisic. and the
Archbishop's Provincial Council about the same time: The Dean and Chapter of
Lincoln send Proctors to both of them. Vide Registr. penes Dec. and Cap. Linc.
ab Anno 1321, ad 1339. fol. 33.
.

Now then, though the Praemunientes was obeyed Nationally, yet the Clergy that
met with the Parliament acted Provincially, i. e. the Clergy of that Province
where the Parliament was held, acted as a Synod convened by their Metropolitan,
and the Clergy of the Other Province sent their Deputies to the Lay-Assemb^y to
consent for them, but taxed themselves, and did all manner of Ecclesiastical
Business at home Thus in the Instance before given An. 1321, The Clergy of
York- Province, (where the Parliament was held) are only said to have made
their Grant in Parliament. For a Writ (tested July 19. that Year) to the
Archbishop of Canterbury recites, how in Parliamento nostro ultimo apud Eborum
summonito -- Xa Cleri in Prove. Ebor. XVIIIva. Bonorum Mobilium Communitatis
regni and XIIa. in Civitatibus Burgis and Dominicis nostris fuerunt concessae:
But the Clergy of Canterbury- Province are not said to have granted in
Parliament, though they met at the same time Provincially, and Consented to the
Grant of a Tenth, which the Pope had imposed upon them, as the same Writ
afterward recites. See it Reg. Henr. Pr. fol. 211.
in their Own Province. And this was pitched upon as a Mean of complying with
the Canons of the Church, which required frequent Provincial Councils, and yet
paying their attendance in Parliament: the Archbishop's Mandate Summoned them
to the One, and the Praemunitory Clause to the other, and Both were obeyed.

Nay, so great stress was laid on this Clause, that when an Archbishop died
There was the same Reason for it, when a Bishop died, and therefore the
Practice, I suppose, was the same.
, after it went out, and before the Return of it, a New Summons was sent to the
Guardian of the Spiritualties commanding him again to warn the already
premonish'd Clergy; and a particular Writ directed over and above to the Dean
and Chapter of the Cathedral, enforcing that second Summons; the Tenor of which
Writ was, Nos Nolentes per mortem praefati Archiepiscopi dicta Mandata nostra
differri, set ea potius per Vos executioni debitae demandari, Vobis Mandamus,
etc. I take this to be very material to prove, how strictly the Praemunientes
was executed upon the In^erior Clergy, and obeyed by them; and shall therefore
among the Instruments Append. Numb. XVI.
Print it at large, as Pryn Parl. Wr. Vol. 1. Pp. 152, 153.
has given it us. Mr. Elsyng P. 50.
therefore makes this the formal Reason of Summoning the Guardians of the
Spiritualties, and the Vicars General, when the Bishops of such Sees were
either dead, or in Foreign Parts, [He might have added also why Bishops Elect
were Summoned before Confirmation, and even the Vicars General of Elect
Bishops, when those Bishops were abroad] because they were (says he) Praemunire
Clericos, i. e. that the Inferior Clergy might be sure to have their Summons.
This may have been one Reason of that Practice, but I do not think it the only
one It could not be the Only one, because long before the Praemunientes was
inserted, the Custom was, to Summon the Chapters of Vacant Sees to Parliament:
of which take this Instance from M. Paris, who tells us that in the Parliament
of the 38 H. 3. there were Pr^curatores t^ium Sedium Vacantium, ex part
scilicet Capitulorum. P. 643.
, because it does not account for the Summons of Elect Abbats also, before
their Installment; and I doubt not therefore but this Custom had its Rise
chiefly from the Double Capacity in which the Greater Clergy attended the
Parliament, both as Spiritual Prelates, and Barons of the Realm: on which
account when they had not a right to a Summons as Barons, yet as Ecclesiastical
Prelates, they had. However, They who make this Supposition, make it mightily
to the advantage of the Lower Clergy, and suppose their Presence in Parliament
to have been indispensably necessary. And thus stood the Clergies Obligations
in relation to the Praemunientes, throughout Edward the Second's Reign.

Edward the Third continued this Practice upon the very same Foot that he found
it: the only difference was, that whereas before his Time the Praemunientes was
inserted, or left out, at the King's pleasure, in his Reign it grew a constant
and necessary part of the Bishop's Writ; so that no Parliament ever met without
one, after his sixth year; that is, indeed, after the Complete Settlement of
Parliaments upon the Foot on which they do now, and will, I hope, for ever
stand. And this Observation alone is sufficient to show, that the Clause in the
Bishops Writ was not grown Useless; for if it had, it would not then have been
most regularly inserted, and have grown most in request, when its Use and
Significancy (if some Men's word were to be taken) had utterly vanished.

In the year before it was fixed, though there were several Summons to
Parliament, yet it was inserted but in One of them, and in that One it was
obeyed. For the Records of Parliament tell us, that upon a Debate, the Bishops
and Proctors of the Clergy went by themselves Abr. of Rec. p. 11.
. And that These were Proctors of the Inferior Clergy, according to the strict
sense of the word, and not the Proxies only of Absent Bishops, Abbats and
Priors, (as L. M. P. dreams P. 32.
) does from hence appear, that in the other Parliaments of this year, when the
Praemunientes was not practiced, no mention is made of the Proctors of the
Clergy; the Phrase then being, that the Bishops went by themselves, the Lords
by themselves, and the Knights by themselves P. 12.
. Neither is there ever in those Records any mention of the Proctors of the
Clergy at a Great Council, but at Parliaments only: the reason of which is,
that Parliament-Writs only had the Praemunientes in them, but the Summons for
Great Councils had not.

And now therefore the Clergies Returns for the Parliament are frequently to be
met with in our Old Registers, Parliaments themselves being frequent. If in the
succeeding Reigns we find not so many of these Procuratoria on Record, it is
not to be wondered at: for the Archbishop's Writ, which went out concurrently
with the Praemunientes, being understood to be a Summons to Parliament (which
it was in Effect, though not in Terms) and being strictly executed upon the
Inferior Clergy, might in time bring on a Disuse of the Forms practiced in
Executing the Other. The Bishops, through whose Hands both the Parliamentary
and Provincial Summons came, might sometimes, either by the Neglect of their
Officers To this Neglect of their Officers that Clause seems to have referred*
which was an usual part of the King's Writ to the Archbishop in E. 2. and 3ds
time, Nos nolentes negotia nostra pro defectu Praemunitionum antedictarum, si
forsan minus rite factae fuerint, aliqualiter retardari.
, or as thinking it sufficient, transmit the first of them only; or, if Both
were transmitted, might wink at the Clergies Omission in making their Return
but to the One: as not being unwilling to sooth up the Lower Orders in their
Averseness to comply with a Lay-Summons; because that sensibly increased the
Greatness and Power of the Parliament Prelates; and by degrees brought the
Clergies Interest in State-matters all into their Hands. Besides oftentimes,
when the Bishop executed the Praemunientes, and the Clergy certify'd upon it,
yet no notice might be taken in our Registers of Forms which returned so very
frequently, and which were not stood much upon, while the Provincial Mandate,
that went out on the same Occasion had its certain and Regular Course. These
and several other Accidents might, I say, conspire to make the Entry of such
Procuratoria in Chapter-Books less frequent in aftertimes: however neither are
they sowed so thinly there, but that we can make a shift from the Helps of this
kind that are left to continue the Succession of them down from the 22 E. 1. to
the Latter End of Henry the Seventh's Reign, as low as whose 19 th. year Anno
1503.
I have seen a Deputation See App. Number. XI.
made to a Monk, to represent a Capitular Body in Parliament; and that, drawn
up in such a manner, as to be at once a Joint-Proxy both for the Parliament and
Convocation. I question not, but that there are more of a Lower Date (though I
have not had Opportunity, or Leisure to search for them) for I find that the
Praemunientes was executed in form, as low as the 33 d and 36 th. years of
Henry the Eighth See Registr. Bonner. fol. 33, 65.
; and Returns therefore were for some part of his Reign very probably made to
it.

Not many years after this, the Custom of returning Proxies to Parliament in
Form, did, I believe, cease: and if a Conjecture may be allowed in a matter of
this nature, where with some care and search one might be certain, I should
choose to fix the Time of this Total Disuse, not far off of the 6 th. or 7 th.
of Henry the Eighth, when the Disputes between the Spiritualty and Temporalty
about the Exemption of Clerks, growing loud and warm, and the Clergy with an
high hand asserting their Privileges, might take up thoughts of setting
themselves free also in another Instance than that which they contended about,
and agree generally to frame no more Instruments of Proxy in Obedience to the
Lay-Summons. And this Guess of mine falls in well enough with the Tradition my
Lord of Sarum mentions as prevailing in Queen Elizabeth's time, that the
Inferior Clergy departed from their Right of being in the House of Commons,
when they were all brought under a Praemunire in Cardinal Wolsey 's time Hist.
Ref. Vol. 2. p. 48.
; if we understand this of the first Praemunire they fell into upon the Citation
of Standish, and not (as his Lordship does) of that from which they ransomed
themselves by a Tax and a Submission, fourteen years afterward; and if by
departing from their Right of being in the House of Commons we do, as we must,
suppose his Lordship to mean, that they declined sending up those Deputations
to Parliament, which manifested their Ancient Right of sitting in it, and being
part of it. For there could not possibly be any Tradition in Queen Elizabeth's
time of the Inferior Clergy's sitting in the House of Commons, in the middle of
Henry the Eighth's Reign, because there were probably many Persons then alive,
who remembered the contrary, and there were certainly some who understood the
Old Constitution of Parliaments well enough to contradict so absurd an Opinion,
and prevent its spreading: a very small degree of skill in our English
Antiquities sufficing to have informed 'em that the Lower Clerks had no place
in the House of Commons, not only at the Period assigned, but for an hundred
years before it. The truth is, I am the worse satisfied with this Guess of
mine, because I do not find what Ground his Lordship had to say, that there was
in Queen Elizabeth^s time, such a Tradition. For he seems to have taken up this
Opinion from the fourth Article of Bishop Ravis's Paper See it Coll. of Rec.
Vol. 2. p. 121.
which he there quotes: whereas I must take the Liberty to say, that his
Lordship misunderstood that Article, if he thought it related to any thing done
in Henry the Eighth's Reign. For the Separation there spoken of is plainly of
ancient Date, and refers (as there is good reason to think) to the Times of
Edward the First, and Archbishop Winchelsey. But whatever was the precise time
at which the Clergy desisted wholly to make their Returns to the Bishops Writ,
it is certain they did not think, that upon that failure the Effect and
Influence of the Praemunitory Clause ceased, but looked upon themselves as
still Summoned by it, and meeting in virtue of it, in their Parliamentary
Assemblies. Of this their Remonstrance in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, is a Solemn
and Authentic Proof; the words of it have been produced already, Page 66. of
these Papers, and thither I shall refer the Reader. If after this we hear of no
Formal Claim made by the Church in this case, it was because there was no need
of it; Common Opinion, and Common Practice being all along of her side; and no
Instance to be given of a New Parliament Summoned, without a Convocation to
attend it, from the Times of the Reformation, till some years after the late
Revolution. And no wonder therefore that a Claim was not frequently put in,
which was never till lately denied, or disputed.

Thus have I given the Reader some account of the Praemunientes, its Rise, and
Use, and of the Methods which all along have been taken by the Bishops in
Executing it, and by the Lower Clergy in obeying it. An imperfect Account
indeed! however such an one, as does, I am sure, sufficiently expose the
Letter-writers pretense P. 32.
, that it was a Clause added only upon a Particular Occasion, and continued
after the Business was determined, and has stood in the Bishops Writ these 300.
years without any manner of Use. Assertions that, I might by this time be
allowed to tell him, could flow from nothing but the Depth of Ignorance or ill
will to the Function, were I not restrained by considering whence Hist. Ref.
Vol. 2. p. 48.
it is that he borrows his Light, and Who therefore would be understood to
share the Reflection.

Indeed strange it is, that any Man in the least versed in our Antiquities
should doubt, whether the Clergy came to Parliament by the Praemunientes; and
stranger still that he should imagine that Clause to have been preserved in the
Writ by Accident, after its first Insertion, and think to account for this
merely by the neglect of a Clark Ibid.
. A neglect, that must have continued now for above four hundred years; and yet
could not possibly have continued One, if it were a neglect, without being
observed, and amended. No Forms were more nicely worded, or more Religiously
kept to, in the main Frame and Substance of them, than Writs of Summons to
Parliament. After they first issued out, they received not any the minutest
Alteration but by the Command of the Prince, signified by his Chancellor; and
after they were fully fixed, not any that was Material, but by Consent of
Parliament. How many Ordinances of Parliament were there in Later Times for the
several Successive Changes in the Writs for Electing the Commons? Particularly
that New Circumstance, that the Knights should be girded with Swords Gladiis
cincti.
, and the Clause of Nolumus autem quod Tu, nec alius Vicecomes, etc. inserted
in the 13 th. and 46 th. of E. 3. had they not the Authority of the three
Estates to warrant them? And when afterward Richard* the Second added to the
Commons Writs this Particular, that the Persons returned should be in Debatis
Modernis Indifferentes Cl. 11. R. 2. m. 23. dors. See Pryn. P. W. Vol. 2. p.
121.
, was he not forced to retract it immediately, and issue out New Writs in the
Old Form before the Session came on? When Edward the Third in the fourteenth of
his Reign, made an Addition to his Regal Titles in the Writs of that year, he
excused his so doing in the Writs themselves See ^em Pryn. Par. Wr. Vol. 1 p. 5.
, and referred himself to what the Parliament, when met, should order in that
matter. And in the first of Queen Elizabeth there was, we know, a warm dispute,
whether the Omission of the Title of Supreme Head in the Writs of Summons (though
it had not been then practiced thirty years) did not null the Proceedings of
those Parliaments where it was wanting Sir Symonds d'^wes, p. 38.
. At such times as these, when the Parliament appears to have been so jealous
of any Alterations in these Forms, can we imagine that the Praemunitory Clause,
had it been kept in by the neglect of a Clerk, would not have been retrenched?
They that can suppose this, may as reasonably suppose also, that some have
grown Barons by Writ by the Neglect of a Clark, who finding them Summoned once
or twice to Parliament, continued to Summon them on, without the Prince's
Privity or Consent, and so made them Lords of Parliament. For if the Neglect of
a Clark can account for any Material Clause or Part of a Writ, it may as well
account for an Whole one. 'Twill be a more reasonable way of applying this
Supposition, and more honorable to the Maker of it, to suppose, as I am
willing to do, that the Passage which contains it, was a part only of the Rude
Draught of his Lordship's Work, and expunged by him upon a Review, but kept in
by the Neglect of the Transcriber; Let. to Bp. of Cov. and Litch. in 1693.
upon whom I find his Lordship lays very great Blame: And indeed, if he stands
answerable for All the Neglects that are, and may be charged, I think, very
deservedly.

But should many mistakes of this kind be found in that Celebrated Work, yet
would they receive an Easy Excuse. The Composer of it, having his Thoughts
busied chiefly in that Period of Time to which his History reaches, might, when
he steps backward, and takes a greater Compass, overlook Truths sometimes that
lay hid in our Elder Records, where his Lordship had not leisure to search for
them. If the Main Facts he professes to relate, and the Colors he gives to
those Facts are right; if there be no premeditated Omissions, or Disguises of
Material Truths; no Designed Complyances with Popular Mistakes and Prejudices;
if that Air of Impartiality which at first sight seems to run through the
Relation be undissembled, and not only a more Artificial Way of conveying false
Principles and Characters into the mind of the Reader: if, I say, in These,
which are the most Essential Virtues and Beauties of good History, his
Lordship's Labors will bear the Test (which his Lordship's Friends do not much
doubt) -- though it should after this be granted, that Mistakes of a Lesser Size
and Importance aboun^ there without number, and particularly, that the
Digressive Part of the Book has little of Exactness in it; this would not
however sink the Reputation of the Work: it is what, considering the Have of
the Composure, is not to be wondered at, and may easily be excused. All that
One could have wished in the Case is, that where Light on these, and such other
Accounts as these was wanting, and Mistakes therefore were necessary, his
Lordship had been so happy as to have mistaken always on the Side, and to the
Advantage of the Clergy; which, some Readers will tell us* his Lordship has not
always done. But let this be as it will -- The Plea here advanced in behalf of
that Eminent Historian cannot be made use of to excuse our Letter-Writer, who
has no manner of Title to it. It was His Chief Business to have considered with
care the Rise of the Praemunientes, and the Reasons of its continuance, the
Obligation it was all along understood to lay on the Inferior Clergy, and their
Methods of complying with it; this being one Great Article upon which the
Dispute, that he was so willing to thrust himself into, turned. And his
Ignorance therefore of every thing that relates to it is inexcusable; but his
Confidence, under so Gross a degree of Ignorance yet more inexcusable. For
these are his Peremptory Words -- That the Clergy were ever a part of the
Parliament, or sat in it, is very uncertain; the Affirmative being supported
only by Conjectures, without any Record or Authentic Memorial to maintain it
P. 31.
. Words, which no Learned Man could ever have said, and no Wise Man, conscious
of his want of Skill in this point, would ever have ventured to say. But it
seems neither of these Qualities hindered our Letter-writer from falling into
them, and by that means affording us a clearer Proof of his own utter Unfitness
to meddle in this Argument, than he has given of any One Point besides that he
pretends to maintain. For it is certain (as certain as that these Words were
thrown out by this Gentleman at Random) that the Inferior Clergy were a part of
the Parliament, were Summoned, and repaired to it as such, and as such sat in
it, both when the Praemunientes first went out, and many years afterward --
sat in it, I say; not under the same Roof, indeed, with the Laity (I mean not
Ordinarily); but asunder, as a separate State; and as the Lords now sit (and
even then, for the Greater part of this Period, sat) asunder from the Commons.
And he who makes this matter of Conjecture, and pronounces it Uncertain, puts
it beyond a Conjecture, how far in things of this kind, his word is to be
taken. I have shown him, that there are many Unquestionable Records, and
Authentic Memorials yet left (some Printed, but more in Manuscript) which
prove the Clergy to have been once in the strictest sense of the word, a Member
of Parliament: and if the Church part of these Records lay out of his way (though
they were as open to Him, I dare say, as they were to me) yet as a Lawyer,
methinks, he should have had some Acquaintance with Ryley's Placita
Parliamentaria.

As for Dr. Wake, he resolves to be as little out as he can on this Head, and
therefore wisely says nothing of it. For from the Beginning to the End of his
Book you shall not find a word to inform us, how the Praemunientes, after its
first Insertion, was executed upon the Inferior Clergy, and obeyed by them. He
seems indeed to be of Opinion, that the Clergy were a Part of Parliament, in
Edward the Third, and Richard the Second's Reigns; and he means, I suppose,
that they were a Part of it, as Summoned thither by the Praemunientes, tho^ he
does not say so. However, that the Virtue of that Clause has long since ceased,
so that it is now become utterly useless, in That he is positive Pp. 213, 214.
: and modestly therefore proposes a Retrenchment of i^ from the Bishop's Writ;
thinking it advisable to reduce that Writ to its first Form, when the Proctors
of the Clergy not coming, neither were they Summoned to Parliament P. 253.
. A very free piece of Advice indeed! which not only his Order, but the Great
Council of the Realm have reason to thank him for! Who for some hundred years
have been under the Mistake of thinking this Clause an Essential Part of the
Writ, till their Eyes were opened at last by this Wise Observer! While our
Constitution was unsettled, these Writs were so too; but they are now as
Immovable as That. Let them have been Letters of Grace, or Badges of Duty at
first, they have since grown to be Charters of Right and Privilege by long Use
and Continuance. The King, Lords and Commons indeed may alter them, if they
please, (for they may do any thing); but I humbly suppose that no One Part of
the Constitution can do it without the Other. Some of our Princes indeed have
attempted to make some slight Changes in them; but scarce sooner entered on the
Attempt, than they disclaimed it. Had Dr. Wake known in the least, how Sacred
those Forms are held by our Law, and of how great Importance it is to the
Constitution to preserve them, he would never have dared to recommend such an
Alteration as this; but Ignorance is fearless! We may see here, how the Love of
Alterations creeps upon a Man, and how far in time it may carry him; from
mending the Model of the Church (which was the work Ten years ago) to the
Improving that of the State: without considering, that the One of these may be
tampered with, and practiced upon more easily than the other, and more
securely. When such Bold Proposals as these come from Private Unauthoriz'd
Hands, they deserve a Public Censure; and, (because I am for every thing's
having what it deserves) I hope, will find it.

Dr. Wake it seems, does not understand to what purpose this Clause is retained
in the Writ, and proposes therefore a Retrenchment of it. An hard Case this,
that the Writ should be altered, because he does not understand it! for at this
rate, what Old Forms are secure? I have endeavored however to help his
Understanding a little, and to show him, that it is retained there to very good
Purpose; that it declares the King's Right of Summoning the Clergy to attend
his Parliaments in Body, the Lords and Commons Right of being thus attended,
and the Clergy's Right also to be Summoned, and to attend accordingly. And that
These are very great and weighty reasons for keeping it there, appears from
what has happened already, and may happen hereafter. The Time is now come when
the Clergy find themselves obliged to put in their Claim to a Parliamentary
Attendance, because it is disputed: and according to the Natural Vicissitudes
of things, a Time may possibly come, when the Crown, or the Lords and Commons
shall want the Parliamentary Attendance of the Clergy, and be willing to claim
it. Equal Provision is made against each of these Inconveniences, by continuing
the Praemunitory Clause in the Bishops Summons: where, I hope, it will ever
continue* even though a Set of Future Bishops should arise (which God forbid)
that would be contented to be Summoned without it; as not considering, that it
is as much Their Interest, as the Inferior Clergy's, ^o keep this Form whole
and entire, and that if the one part of the Writ goes, the other may not stay
long behind it.

Were this Alteration at any time to take place, it had been well for Dr. Wake
that it had happened, before he wrote his Book; for then, had the Clause been
left out of the Writ, he might have left it out of his Appendix too, and by
that means saved himself the shame of those Childish Mistakes which he has
committed in Reciting it; and which shall in due Time and Place be made known
See p. 427, 8, 9. of these Papers.
.

Nothing could have taken off from the Extravagantness of Dr. Wake's Proposal,
but as wild an Assertion of a certain Acquaintance of his, who is not afraid to
tell us, that Parliamentary Writs prove nothing of the Constitution L. M. P. p.
32.
; and this in words at length, and not in Figures! A Glorious Maxim^ which the
Lords and Commons at Oxford knew nothing of, who declare that the Writs of
Summons are the Foundation of All [Parliamentary] Power Declaration of the
Treaty, p. 15.
. I shall say not one word to disprove it; for Parliamentary Writs and
Constitutions are able to take care of themselves. Only I cannot but observe
how wise a way he has taken of making this Maxim good: For (continues he) a
Writ of Summons in the Time of Edward the First upon occasion of War with
France, had (...) Chiuse, [Q^^d omnes tangit ab omnibus approbetur.] And it may
with as much reason be concluded from that Writ, that the King cannot make War
without the Approbation of his Parliament, (...) from the Present Writ that he
cannot hold a Parliament, without calling the Clergy to it. That is, the King's
known Prerogative may with as much reason be barred by an Expression once
inserted in the Preamble of a Writ, as the Clergy's Right and Privilege can be
grounded upon a Clause in the Body of a Writ, which has stood there for above
four hundred years. What a wonderful way of arguing is this? how can we choose
but surrender upon such Proofs, as soon as they are produced? Dr. Wake, I
remember, has an Axiom, that Logic is one thing, and Law another P. 252.
, (which, by the by, is all he knows of either). And I must needs say, that I
never in my life met with a better Instance of the Truth of that Axiom, than in
this Gentleman's Law-Reasonings.

Thus far of the Inferior Clergy's Summons to Parliament by the Clause in the
Bishops Writ; the Rise, Nature, and Force of which I have fully explained, and
pro^'d that it is not even at this time so insignificant a Form, as we are made
to believe; much more, that it has not been so now for some Hundreds of years.
But there is also another Summons of the Clergy; though not to Parliament, yet to
meet in Parliament-time, under the Two Archbishops, in their several Provinces.
And This too has been regularly issued out, as often as a New Parliament was
called from the Latter End of Edward the Second till now, with Few Exceptions
to the contrary; and with None, from the first Dawn of the Reformation in Henry
the Eighth's Reign, down to this present. And from this Ancient Custom (as
Ancient as the Complete Settlement of our Constitution) the Clergy think
themselves entitled to be Summoned, to assemble, and to sit Provincially, when
ever a New Parliament meets.

But here it is objected, that the King's Writ to the Two Archbishops to call
the Clergy of their Provinces together has no relation to the calling of a
Parliament, nor does so much as mention it L. M. P. p. 29, 30.
, that a Convocation is not in its Nature and Constitution at all dependent
upon a Parliament; that its Summons is distinct from that of a Parliament, and
so is its Dissolution: and, admitting therefore that the Clergy ought to be
called to Parliament (which is all that can be inferred from the Bishops Writ),
yet does it not follow therefore that the Convocation ought to be Summoned,
when the Parliament meets; for that is plainly a Distinct Assembly, and
Summoned by a Distinct Writ P. 32.
. And much to the same purpose Dr. Wake, p. 226. (284.) and elsewhere, has
stated the matter. I think this needs no Answer, but what it has already
received. For allowing the Objection in its full force, yet since Custom is the
Law of Parliaments, and it has perpetually been the Custom to issue out these
Writs to the Archbishops, whenever Writs went out for the Parliament; it is
certain that the Clergy have a Right to these Provincial Assemblies in
Parliament time, on the account of this Ancient Prescription, though the
Convocation-Writ it self should neither mention a Parliament, or any ways refer
to it. For if a Custom of three or four hundred years standing, will not create
a Right, I know not what will. However, that I may not seem to neglect any
thing that has the Look of an Objection, I will give a further and more
distinct Answer to it; going on (as I proposed) in the

2 d Place to show, that the Writs to the Two Archbishops to convene the Clergy
of their Provinces, though they do not expressly mention a Parliament, yet have an
Immediate Reference to it; the Original Design of their Issuing out together
with the Bishops Writ being only to secure an Obedience to the Praemunitory
Clause, and to make the Clergy's Parliamentary Assemblies more Full and
Certain. This is so Indubitably true, and so capable of being made out clearly
from the Elder Convocation-Writs yet remaining, that had Dr. Wake, or the
Letter-Writer seen any one of them they would have foreborn starting this
Objection, for very fear of receiving the true Answer to it; than which nothing
can more expose the Weakness of that Cause they plead for, or of the Arguments
they bring to maintain it. The Case was truly thus --

From the time that the Praemunientes was first granted into the Bishops Writ,
the Popish Clergy, who out of a false Policy studied all ways of dividing
themselves from the Laiety, were, as I have said, very uneasy under it, and
cast about how to evade it. When it went out therefore in the 33 Edw. 1.
Archbishop Winchelsey took this way of salving in some measure the pretended
Privileges of the Clergy, without disobeying it See Append. Numb. XIV ( c).
. In his Letter to the Prior and Chapter of Canterbury, he recites not the
whole Summons sent him by the King, but the substance only of the Warning
Clause, and then commands them (as he did I suppose the Clergy of his Diocese
by the Archdeacon, and all the rest of his Province by the Dean of it, the
Bishop of London) to appear before himself at Lambeth, a Day or two earlier
than the Parliament was to meet, in order to treat with Him, (as a Provincial
Council) and to do afterward in Parliament what the Holy Canons of the Church
should allow of.

A weak Government succeeding, the Rigor of this Clause was so far relaxed,
that though the King still kept it in his Writs, yet was he forced (as I have
observed) to call the Archbishop to his help, in order to get it obeyed; and to
comply with the Clergy so far as to let the Provincial go out hand in hand with
the Parliamentary Summons; accepting their Obedience to the One, as a
Constructive Obedience to the Other; upon Condition, that the Forms should
still be kept up, that Execution should be duly made of the Praemunientes, and
Letters of Proxy sent up and Registered, as often as it went out. And these
Acknowledgments being paid, they were allowed to meet, and do all manner of
Business in their Provincial Assemblies, according to the Tenor of the
Archbishops Summons* This I apprehend to have been the Method of obeying Both
Writs, which was then pitched upon, and afterward obtained.

The first Instance of this kind, wherein I remember such a Double Writ to have
been plainly practiced, is 8 Edw. 2. In which year it went out twice for Two
several Parliaments. The Tenor of it was, that whereas the King had Summoned a
Parliament to such a Time and Place, he did r^gando mandare the Archbishop Then
and There to convene such of the Clergy of his Province, as He and the Bishops
were by Distinct Writs ordered to premonish; See Append. Nu. XIV ( d).
ad tractandum and consentiendum hiis quie in praemissis tunc ibidem contigerit
ordinari. It was rested the same day with the Ordinary Bishops Writ, and
transmitted at the same time with it to the Archbishop.

In the 14 Edw. 2. (if not sooner) it received some Alteration; for the
Preamble of it recited the Bishops Writ with the Clause Praemunientes entirely,
See App. Numb. XIV ( e).
and then added; Nos nolentes negotia nostra in dicto Parliamento tractanda
propter absentiam dictorum Decanorum, Priorum, Arc^idiaconorum retardari, Vobis
Mandamus rogantes, etc. And thus the Form, with some little Variety, continued,
for many years afterward; particularly I have seen the several Writs with
this, or the like Clause, for the several years of E 2. and E. 3. mentioned in
the Margent 17 E. 2. Cl. m. 27. dors. 20 E. 2. Cl. m. 4. dors. 1 E. 3. Cl. ps.
2. m. 16. dors. and m. 3. dors. 2 E. 3. Cl. m. 22. dors. -- and so in his 3 d,
4 th, 6 th, 7 th, 8 th, 9 th, 10 th, 13 th, and 14 th. years. See Pryn 's
Register of Parl. Writ. Pp. 34, 36, 37, 43, 44, 46, 98, 99. where many of these
Writs are Printed.
. With this, or the Like Clause, I say; for from the End of E. 2. downwards, it
ran nearly in these Terms: Et licet Injunxerimus singulis Episcopis praedictis
qu^d quilibet eorum praemuniri faciat, etc. nolentes tamen dicta negotia nostra
pro defectu praemunitionum praedictarum, si forsan minus rite factae fuerint,
aliqualiter retardari: Vobis mandamus rogantes, etc.

Hitherto therefore the Writs for a Convocation went not out only together with
those for a Parliament, but were designed purely to Second and Enforce them,
and to be a Double Tie upon the Clergy to come to Parliament, being called
thither both by the Bishops Writ, and by a Provincial Citation from their
Metropolitan. And the same Members therefore, we may observe, neither more nor
fewer, are ordered to be resummon'd by the Provincial Writ, which had been
before Summoned by the Premonishing Clause; Deans, Cathedral-Priors,
Archdeacons, and the Clergy of Chapters and Dioceses, being the only Persons
cited both by the One and the Other, without any mention of Bishops, Abbats, or
other Priors, who had Personal Summons to Parliament; and there being not so
much danger therefore of Their not attending, the Archbishop had no Commands in
Relation to them. Accordingly his Mandate was usually drawn just as this Form
directed, citing those of the Clergy, and no other than those which it
mentioned, and exactly to the Time and Place prescribed. I shall present the
Reader with a Copy of this Mandate, among the other Records, as it was
practiced Anno 1321, to execute the Writ of the 14 E. 3. just now mentioned,
and in it he will find also Expressions which show, Append. Numb. XIV ( f.)
that the same Course had for a good while before this obtained.

It Is true, when the Archbishop Summoned in Obedience to this Second Writ, he
did not do always just what that Writ exacted, and no more; but took occasion
Thus Anno 1323. when the Parliament met in Octabis S. Hill. and the
Praemunientes went out (for the Writ has it, whereby that Parliament was
Prorogued. See Dugd. Sum. p.) the Archbishop at the King's Instance expressed
in his Second Writ, with the Clause Nos nolentes, etc. ( a Copy of which for
the Prorogation of this Parliament is in Pryn, Vol. 1. p. 98.) Summoned not the
Parliament-Clergy alone, but all such as composed a Provincial Synod. See Reg.
Henr. Prioris. f. 234.
sometimes from thence to cite all those Abbots and Priors who had no place in
Parliament, in order to complete the Numbers of the Clergy, and form a
Provincial Assembly. And he cited 'em to appear (after Winchelsey's Pattern)
not before the King, and among the other States; but before Himself, in the
Chief Church of the Place. But this was at his Choice; for the King's Writ
directed him only to command the Attendance of the Parliament-Clergy. And with
this the Crown had reason to be content, while the Defects of these General
Summons by the Provincial and Bishops Writs were supplied by Particular Writs
directed to great Numbers of Abbats and Priors, as the way was in Edward the
First's and Second's time; the former of these citing Personally to his
Parliaments, after the Praemunientes went out, often sixty, or seventy, and
sometimes above eighty Regular Prelates; and the Latter usually Summoning about
fifty of them, till the Declining Part of his Reign. But this being esteemed an
Hardship on those Regulars, who were not by Tenure obliged to attend the King's
Summons (as holding nothing of him by Barony), they were in time omitted, and
the Number of Abbats and Priors, who had Personal Writs, reduced to about
thirty; the Archbishop's General Mandate then calling the rest to his
Parliamentary Convocations, and that being allowed and accepted by the Crown as
a sufficient Attendance in Parliament. But what the Archbishop did of himself
at first, That he did afterward at the King's Instance; who took occasion from
this Practice to enlarge his own Letters of Direction to him, and by them at
last to require him to Summon all those Regular Prelates he was used to Summon
without such a Direction. This, as it was a Natural Step, so indeed it was
necessary, after the Crown had foreclos'd it self from Summoning the greatest
part of the Abbats Personally to Parliament: for then it lay purely in the
Archbishop's Breast, whether he would call the Unsummon'd Abbats by his General
Mandate or no; and so, upon any Dispute between the Spirituality and
Temporalty, the Crown might have been defeated of their Parliamentary
Attendance.

At what Time precisely these Writs to the Archbishop for a Full Convocation to
be held concurrently with a Parliament, began to be practiced, I have not
found. The Eldest that has yet come to my hands is of the 10 th. of Edw. 3.
when the Parliament was called to meet at Nottingham die Lunae prox. post
Festum S. Matthaei See Dug. p. 186.
by a Writ dated Aug. 24. And the same day another Writ issued to the
Archbishop of Canterbury to call all the Clergy of his Province to Leicester,
ad diem Lunae prox. post Festum S. Michaelis, that is seven days afterward See
Cl. 10 E. 3. m. 16. dors.
. And the next year again the same thing was practiced; the Archbishop being
ordered to Summon the Convocation to St. Paul's, two or three days after the
Parliament was to meet at Westminster See Pryn. Parl. Wr. Vol. 1. p. 39, 40.
. And still (which is observable) the Style of Authority in these Fuller
Convocation-Writs was the same as it was in those where the Premonish'd Clergy
only were mentioned; it being a Mixture of a Command and a Request [ Rogando
Mandamus] as it continues to be in all Writs for a Convocation to this very Day.

This also deserves notice in many of them, that they went not out only at the
same time with the Parliament Writs, but mention the holding of a Parliament in
their Preambles as the Ground of their issuing; that so the Clergy, according
to their Duty, might resort to it. Thus it was in the Writ of the 11 Ed. 3. Ps.
2. m* 40. dors.
just now mentioned. And so again in his 29 th. year another Writ Cl. m. 8.
dors.
runs, Cum pro arduis and urgentibus Negotiis Nos and Statum Regni nostri
Anglicani ac necessariam defensionem ejusdem Regni concernentibus ordinaverimus
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westmonasterium tenere, etc. Quia expedit quod
praedicta Negotia quae Salvationem and Defensionem Regni nostri contingunt
salubriter and efficaciter cum bona and matura deliberatione deducantur, Vobis
mandamus rogantes, etc. to call the Clergy of Canterbury-Province to St. Paul's
die Lunae prex. post Festum S. Martini, ad tractand' and consulend' super
praemissis una Vobis^um and aliis per Nos illuc mittendis, and ad consentiend'
hiis quae tunc, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 25. Sept. The same Form recurs 31 E. 3.
Cl. m. 21. dors. and in diverse other Instances. And when the Convocation-Writs
did not mention a Parliament in Terms, yet the Matter and Tenor of them showed
that they belonged to one: for as long as the Reasons of State were continued
in the Parliament-Writs, so long we find 'em inserted in those to the
Archbishops for a Convocation; and after the Particular Causes of Summons, came
to be omitted in the Convocation-Writs, and They, as well as Those for a
Parliament, were reduced to a Fixed Form, which returned constantly, with
little or no Variation (which happened, I think, about the middle of R. the 2 d
There are later Instances of Parliament-Writs, where the Reasons of Summoning
are declared specially (as 7 H. 4. Cl. dors. m. 29.) but they are rare ones.
); yet even Then the General Reasons of convening them left in the Writ, and
still a part of it, show that they were called not only for Ecclesiastical, but
Civil Affairs, and such as concerned the Peace, Public Good and Defense of the
Kingdom; in a word, to the very same Intents and Purposes for which the
Parliament it self was assembled.

These Writs for a Full Convocation grew now the Common Form, it being matter
of Ordinary Practice to send them out concurrently with those for a Parliament,
in Edward the Third, and Richard the Second's Reigns; and still the Convocation
was (as in the preceding Instances) generally ordered to attend a few days
sooner or later than the Parliament did, and not precisely on the Spot, where
the Parliament opened, but at some Church, or Chapter House near it. And
sometimes the Archbishop was left wholly at large as to both these
Circumstances, the Place being mentioned with a vel alibi prout melius expedire
videritis, and the Time no otherwise prefixed than by the words, cum omni
celeritate accommoda, or, ad breviorem diem quam poteritis, or such other
Equivalent Expressions: which yet were so understood as to oblige the
Archbishop to join the Assemblies of the Clergy both in Place and Time closely
to those of the Laiety. A yet Greater Liberty was indulged and taken in some of
the succeeding Reigns; till in Henry the Eighth's time My Lord of Sarum (Vol.
1. Coll. o^ Rec. Number. 3.) Prints a Convocation-Writ as the Pattern of all those
which were issued out in his Reign; whereas the Forms were different. Before
the Submission Act the Writ was so worded as to leave the Archbishop at Liberty
both as to Time and Place; but after, it was restrained often in both these
respects; and more narrowly in the last, that it is now at present, running
without the words vel alibi, as appears by the Writs for the Convocation 20.
Jan. 1541. 30. Jan. 1544, 45. in the Register of Bonner, fol. 33. 65. This
Omission hindered the Clergy from meeting in, not from adjourning to, any other
place than that mentioned in the Writ: and therefore when the Convocation of
the 13 Nov. 1554. adjourned to Henry the Seventh's Chapel, I find this Note
thus entered by their Registrary, Memorandum quod in Brevi Regio precis^
convocatur Clerus in Ecclesiam D. Pauli, and non alibi, quamvis hic prorogatur
ad Ecclesiam Westminst.
, things came about again into their Original Course; and the Old Method took
place of opening the Convocation very near at the same time with the Parliament.

Upon the whole therefore it is manifest, that the King's Writ for a
Convocation, when it went out with that for the Parliament was originally only
a Second Summons of the same Persons that were called by the Praemunientes, and
to the same Ends and Intents for which they were called by it; that it was
employ^d at these times only to secure an Obedience to the Praemunitory Clause,
and to leave the Clergy (thus doubly Summoned both by the Provincial and
Bishops Writ) without Excuse, if they did not attend the Parliament: That it
was made use of afterward (when it took in Abbats and Priors) to bring those
Regulars to it by the Assistance of the Archbishop, who declined appearing
there upon an Immediate Summons from the King, as holding nothing of him by
Barony; and to render, by this means, the Parliamentary Assemblies of the
Clergy so much in proportion fuller, as the Number of the Abbats and Priors
decreased, who were used to be Summoned, and to sit with the Laiety: That this
little Diversity between the Persons Summoned by the Provincial and Bishops
Writ ceased at length upon the Dissolution of Monasteries; the Old Usage then
returning of addressing both the Writs precisely to the same Persons, and ever
since continuing: That the Letterwriter therefore is utterly mistaken when he
pretends that the Writ for a Convocation (though it went out constantly with
every New Parliament, yet) has no Relation to it P. 29.
, because, forsooth, it does not now mention it expressly (though at first, for
many years after it was practiced, it did): and that Dr. Wake is yet further
from Truth, when, in his Fantastic way of Speech, he tells us, that the
Convocation called by the Provincial Writ is consisted of another sort of
Persons P. (284.)
than the Parliamentary Assemblies Summoned by the Praemunientes were; since it
is certain, that Both those Assemblies were originally consisted of the very
same Persons, and were really but one Assembly of Men, meeting under a Double
Capacity; and as certain also that they have been again thus consisted, for the
last one hundred and sixty years. I am really at a Loss to determine, which of
the Two is more absurdly false, the Doctrine he here lays down, or his manner
of expressing it.

That Air of Assurance which Dr. Wake takes up every where on this Article
would be very Amazing to a Man that did not consider, how Doubts dwell usually
in knowing Breasts, and that those who have the least skill in things are most
apt to be Positive. It is as plain (says he) as any thing can well be, That the
Convocation of the Clergy considered as called by the Parliamentary Writs, and
sitting by virtue of them; and the Convocation considered as Summoned by the
Convocation-Writ, and the Order of the Archbishop consequent thereupon, are, in
their Nature and Constitution two different Assemblies; and which, by no means,
ought to be confounded together P. 226.
. By no means indeed, if Dr. Wake's Cause must right or wrong be upheld: for
the confounding these two Assemblies, and making them but one, confounds all
his Little Aims and Reasonings. However, I have shown, that they must
necessarily be, and have always been thus confounded together, when ever the
Praemunientes, and a Royal Writ for the Convocation went out jointly; and it
will puzzle Dr. Wake, I believe, out of his Plentiful store of Useless
Collections to furnish us with a single Proof to the contrary, where the
Convocation-Clergy called by the Archbishop at the King's Writ, and those
Summoned by the Praemunientes, have met, sat, and acted in the same Province
distinctly; all which they must have done, to be, what he tells us they were,
two different Assemblies. Nothing but a continued Series of such Instances as
these, carried through the several Reigns in which this Double Summons was
practiced can justify Dr. Wake's Notion; and therefore I am very sure, it can
never be justified: for They that that are versed in these things know, that
when these two Summons issued concurrently from the King, the Clergy called up
by the Praemunientes formed no distinct Assembly, but after making their
Returns to it, sat and acted Provincially; and this, as I have often times
said, was reputed, and accepted as a Parliamentary Attendance. At these Times
therefore the Convocation of the Clergy praemonish'd by the Bishops Writ, had,
as Dr. Wake says rightly, no Existence, i. e. no separate Existence from the
Convocation of the two Provinces; but was involved in it, and represented by
it, and acted through it. It Is true, Two sort of Writs going out to call the
Clergy in Time of Parliament, there is room for a Nice Head to distinguish (as
Dr. Wake does) between the Nature and Constitution of that Assembly which
relates to the One, and the Nature and Constitution of that Assembly which
relates to the Other. But these two Assemblies being in fact but one Assembly,
it does us no Harm, as to the Argument we are upon, to consider that One
Assembly under as many different Views and Respects as Dr. Wake pleases. So he
will allow it to have but One Existence (to keep to his Phrase) we will not
dispute its having Two Essences; that is, its convening under two different
Formalities: for Metaphysical Speculations ought to make no Quarrels among
Friends.

CHAP. VI.
I Have in the Preceding Chapter examined carefully into the Rise, Nature, and
Force of the Praemunientes, and of the Convocation-Writ that goes out with it;
and have fully considered whatever may be objected from either of these against
the Clergy's right of Meeting and Sitting in Convocation together with every
New Parliament: more fully indeed than the Objection it self deserves, had I
intended barely to pull down what was advanced on the other side, without
giving some further Light into this Intricate, and as yet untrodden Subject.
For the Objection it self might in Two Words have been dispatched by saying,
That the Clergy have certainly a Right of Meeting and Sitting in Convocation
thus often, because thus often they have for some hundred years met and sat:
And this is a plain short Answer, which is capable of no Evasion. Dr. Wake
however has made some small Effort toward Eluding it; and what he offers to
this purpose shall in the next place be considered.

We find him ( Pp. 106, 107, 140, 141, etc.) thus distinguishing: That the
Clergy have no Right to Meet, and Sit, but only to be Summoned as often as a
Parliament: That having indeed for some hundreds of years been Summoned always
with the Parliament, it may be questioned P. 229.
whether they have not (he means, it is not to be questioned but that they
have) now a Right to such a concurrent Summons; but it is certain they have a
Right to nothing besides; and it were no Great Matter whether They had a Right
to that or no P. 107.
. This is Dr. Wake's New Scheme for laying aside the Clergy's Parliamentary
Meetings first, and their Parliamentary Summons afterward. A very Honest
Design, if it could be effected! and very fit to be first recommended to the
world by the Pen of a Clergyman! God be thanked his Abilities are not Equal to
his Goodwill in the Case, nor the Colors by him put upon this matter such, as
will ever tempt a wise Ministry to execute what he has Projected! In answer to
this New Distinction, I desire to be satisfied, why, if Custom gives the
Convocation a Right to be Summoned as often as the Parliament meets and sits,
it does not give 'em a Right to Meet and Sit too; since it is certain that they
have the very same Custom to plead for the One, as for the Other. Time out of
mind the Custom has been, that whenever the Parliament has met, the Convocation
(should not only be Summoned, but) meet too; and accordingly for some Ages now
it has met with it, and been opened in Form by the Archbishop, or in the
Vacancy of his See, by some Bishop Commissioned from the Dean and Chapter of
Canterbury; Divine Service has been said, a Sermon preached, and a Prolocutor
chosen. There are Instances indeed when they have gone no further than this,
and done no other Business; but it was when they had no other Business to do:
for they were always put into a Posture of doing it, and into a Capacity of
making such Motions and Requests as they should judge proper for the Good of
the Church, or the Redress of Grievances. Till late years, it was never known,
that Convocations should meet purely in order to be adjourned; that the Members
of the Lower house should attend only to be told when they should attend next;
without being allow^d to offer their Advices, or Complaints, or even to put
themselves into a Condition of offering them. This Custom, we know is but nine
years old, whereas the contrary Custom is as old as these Assemblies themselves
are: and if Custom be the Law of Convocations (as Dr. Wake allows P. 298.105.
it to be) he will be pleased to tell us, how this Established Custom can be
broke in upon, and set aside, without a Breach of the Law; and whether the
Clergy's not being suffered to meet and form themselves into a Body, according
to the Intent of their Summons be not (upon Dr. Wake's Principles) as plain a
Violation of their Rights, as it would be, not to Summon them Queen Elizabeth,
one would think, was under these Apprehensions; for she suffered a Popish
Convocation to sit and act together with her first Parliament, at a Time when
she was taking all manner of Legal Steps and Means to expel Popery, and to
introduce the Reformation: which she would never, I presume, have done, had she
thought her Power extended so far over the Convocation as to adjourn them
before a Prolocutor was chosen There was indeed a Singularity practiced at the
En^^ance of this Convocation, which I remember no Instance of in any other: It
was opened without any Sermon. The reason of which is thus given in the Acts,
Sess. 2. Episcopus London Commissarius -- evocata Domo Inferiori exposuit eis
Causam Convocationis, and quod non futura sit concio pro more quia Seeds
Episcopalis destituta existit, and quia Consiliarii Regis [ it should be
Reginae] in mandatis dederunt, ne Conciones in Eadem Ecclesia fierent, donec de
Beneplacito Reginae constaret. The first of these Reasons is no reason, but the
last is sufficient, according to the Doctrine of Those Times; when our Princes
in Virtue of their Supremacy, were thought to have a Power of silencing any, or
even all the Pulpits of England at once; which both King Edward and Queen Mary
are said to have practiced. But that Doctrine being now out of Doors, the
Practice founded upon it can be no Warrantable Precedent for our Times. Even
the Acts themselves that give us an account of this Omission, affirm the
Custom, and say the Sermon was a thing de more.
. And if she did not think she had such a Power, it would make one apt to
believe that she had it not: for, whatever else has been said of her, I never
heard it laid to her Charge, that she was ignorant of the Extent of her
Prerogative, or used it too tenderly.

It Is true, my Lord of Sarum informs us, that left the Clergy might set out
Orders in Opposition to what the Queen was about to do, she sent and required
them under the Pains of a Praemunire to make no Canons Vol. 2. p. 327.
. His Lordship gives us no Authority for this Particular, and I must beg leave
therefore to suspect the Exactness of it; because the Submission-Act, and that
which confirmed it, were repealed in Queen Mary's time, and as yet unreviv'd:
and the Queen could have no Pretense from any other Acts than these to threaten
them with a Praemunire, if they proceeded to make Canons. However allowing this
account of the Queen's Message to be just, we may observe, that though she
prohibited 'em to make Canons, yet she did not forbid them to Sit and Act in
Inferior Instances, because she thought it their Privilege so to do; and
accordingly this very Convocation did business, drawing up their Judgment upon
five Important Points in five Articles, by way of Protest, to be delivered (not
to the Queen, as his Lordship thinks Ibid.
) but to the Keeper of the Great Seal, and to the Lords of Parliament: And this
they did, for the Disburthening of their Consciences Ad exonerationem
conscientiarum suarum.
, as the Acts speak; and were allowed to do it without Check or Disturbance.
And if the Privileges of a Popish Convocation were thus tenderly preserved to
them by a Queen averse to their Principles, we may be sure that the Protestant
Clergy afterward had not less Liberty, or Worse Usage; but were allowed freely
to sit and declare their Grievances, as often as they were understood earnestly
to desire it in the Succeeding Reigns: there being no Instance of such a
Liberty denied by any of our Princes to any of their Synods, when the Prince
and the Synod were of the same Judgment in Religion. I have shown that it has
been granted even when they differed in Principles, let Dr. Wake prove to us,
that ever it was withheld when they agreed; and he will somewhat lessen the
Opinion the Clergy have of the Hardship they at present lie under.

If Custom therefore creates a Right, we are sure that the Clergy have a Right
to somewhat more than a Bare Summons; they have a Right actually to assemble,
to be formed into a Body, and to fill the Chair of the Lower House; and if they
have any Petitions or Motions to make in Church Matters, they have a right to
sit so long as till they have made them; for thus they have been always
accustomed to do; and when they were adjourned without it, it was upon a
Presumption, that they had nothing of this kind to offer, and were themselves
consenting to such Adjournments.

Dr. Wake himself is forced in good measure to agree to this, for he owns, that
whilst the Clergy were wont to assess themselves, and their sitting upon this
account was necessary for the support of the Government; they were not only
Summoned to meet, but were wont actually to assemble; and sit so long as it was
requisite for them to do for this purpose P. 141, 249.
. Now it is not forty years ago since the Clergy were in the undisputed
Possession of this Privilege of Assessing themselves; and till That time
therefore, even by Dr. Wake's Confession, they had Custom, and consequently
Right of their side, even for Assembling, and Sitting, as well as being
Summoned. And the Late Discontinuance of this Custom cannot yet have infringed
that Right, as being not yet Immemorial. There is no Custom therefore for the
Methods lately taken; and it is the Clergy's great desire that there never may
be any: and for that reason among others it is that a Convocation is so
earnestly called for, to prevent this Pretense of Dr. Wake's from growing up
into an Argument; for though it have now no manner of strength in it, yet twenty
or thirty years hence perhaps it may.

But though Dr. Wake is out, as to the Clergy's having no Right, because no
Custom to sit; yet at least he can prove, he thinks, that it is very fit and
reasonable they should have none, upon Two Accounts: the One, drawn from the
True End and Design of calling the Clergy to Parliament; the Other, from the
Alteration that has happened in the Original Constitution of those Meetings. As
to the First of these, he tells us, that the True End and Design of the
Clergy's Assembling with the Parliament was to raise Money; and that End
therefore now ceasing, since they have left off to assess themselves, the Right
grounded upon it ought to cease too All the use that was generally made of them
was to conconcur with the other Estates in granting Money to the King, which
having done, they were commonly dismissed without entering on any other
Business. Pp. 106, 107.

However the King usually added a Conciliary Summons to his Parliamentary Writ
-- yet still the Design was in Both the same that they might thereby more
effectually confirm what had in Parliament been granted to the King, etc. Ibid.

The Main Design our Princes seem to have had in assembling these Convocations
either at the same time they did their Parliament, or not long after, was to
get Money from them. P. 227.

This was the Great Use the King was wont to make of our Convocations, and from
thence it came to be the Custom to Summon them for the most part as often as
the Parliament met. P. 229.

For the most part what was done by the Convocation when they met, was only to
confirm or make an order for Money. P. 228.

For the most part the Great End our Kings had in Summoning them was to get
Money from them. P. 245.

As long as the Clergy in Convocation have continued to assist the Government
by granting Subsidies, it has been allowed to sit as often as it was necessary
to that purpose, though it has seldom done any thing besides. P. 250.


. As to the Second, That the Convocation, when it used to sit at the same Time
with the Parliament, was a Member of Parliament; but not being so now, there is
no reason why it should sit with it Pp. 105, 106, 107.
.

The first of these is so False and Scandalous a Reflection upon our Princes,
and those Meetings, and upon the Constitution it self, that I wonder how it
could drop from the Pen of an English Divine, that had any Regard left for his
Church, or his Country; and how even This Writer, as meanly as he may think of
Synods, and their Powers, could yet prevail with himself to say it. He says it,
not once or twice only, but often, and with the utmost Assurance; of
Convocations called out of Parliament time, as well as of those which met in
it; and seems to be afraid only, lest this Decent Maxim should escape the
Reader's Eye; and has therefore taken care to instill it so often, and on so
different Occasions, that one cannot read long in his Book without meeting it.
Let us see, how he attempts the Proof of it.

Why, he tells us, that in the accounts of our Elder Synods, little more is
said to have been done by them, than that they gave the King such and such
Supplies; and though they met often in former times, yet as for Ecclesiastical
Business, for ought he can find, they did as little with their often meeting
then, as they do with their seldom meeting now P. 283.
. But first, allowing all this to be true, does it follow from hence that the
End of the Convocations sitting was to give Money? might not frequent
Opportunities be taken of pressing the Clergy to Grants, and yet That not be
the End of their Meeting? Money has been as frequently given by Parliaments as
by Convocations, and has been as much the Design of calling them; so that once
upon a Time Cl. Rot. 21 E. 3. ps. 2. m. 9. dors. -- Et scire Vos volumus quod
dictum Parliamentum non ad Auxilia seu Tallagia a Populo dicti regni nostri
petenda, vel ad alia Onera eidem Populo imponenda, set duntaxat pro Justitia
ipsi Populo nostro super Dampnis and Gravaminibus sibi illatis facienda -- See
Pryn. Parliam. Writ. Vol. 1. p. 53.
, when the King inserted a Clause in the Commons Writs to assure them, that
That Parliament was not called in order to a Supply, it is taken notice of by
our Antiquaries as a Wonder: Nevertheless the Reason and End of those
State-meetings is not, I suppose, to be fetched purely from Money, but Redress
of Grievances, according to the honest Doctrine of the Mirror Pur Oyer and
Terminer les playntes de tort de le Roy, de la Roigne, and de lour Enfans, and
de eux specialment, de que^x Torts lun ne poet aver autrement common droit.
Cap. 1.
. Further, had the accounts we have left of Convocations mentioned little more
than the Supplies they gave, yet it might have become Dr. Wake to suspect that
those accounts were Defective, and that much besides might have been done, though
little else was recorded. The Proportion that the Clergy bore in the Taxes,
being a matter in which the State, as well as the Church was nearly concerned,
might be set down in our Annals with a more than Ordinary Care; on the
Crown-side it might be taken notice of, that the King for the future might be
sure of as much; on the Clergy's side, that they might be sure of giving no
more: Both might think it prudent to arm themselves with Precedents for a
Demand, or a Denial, as the Case might happen; and for this reason, among
others, the Article of Subsidies might have been supposed to make so
considerable a Figure in the Story of those Synods, had Dr. Wake been inclined
in the least to embrace any accounts that were for the Honor or Interest of
his Order. But after all, the very Bottom he goes upon is false; an injurious,
and groundless Misrepresentation: For that the Clergy, when met, had a great
deal of other Business to do, besides Raising Money, appears from Numerous and
Undeniable Testimonies. And if Dr. Wake cannot find 'em, as he says, it is
because he has not looked where they ought to be found, or at least not with
that care he ought to do, in order to find them. Had he looked into Spelman or
Lynwood, methinks, he might have found, that they made Provincial Canons and
Constitutions all along for the good Government of the Church; and by means of
'em repressed now and then an Aspiring Clergyman, that was making a False Court
by betraying the Interests of his Body, and endeavoring to build his Fortune
upon the Ruin of their Liberties. Had he looked into our Historians, as nicely
as he would be thought to have done, particularly into Harpsfield, and
Antiquitates Britannicae, he would have found, that they were taken up often in
Foreign, and more often in Domestic Affairs of the utmost Importance; in
Deputing some of their Members to General Councils Harpsf. p. 610, 611.
, and preparing their Instructions; in restoring Peace to the Church, when it
was broken by the clashing of Popes with Councils Ant. Br. p. 227.
, or by the Contentions of Rival Popes about the Lawfulness of their Titles
Harpsf. p. 608.
; in resisting Papal Encroachments and Provisions Harpsf. p. 618, 654.
, in exercising their Jurisdiction, in Reforming Abuses among themselves, or
Petitioning for the Redress of them above; that they opened their Mouths to
their Superiors, as well as their Purses; and gave Dutiful Advice sometimes
that was as serviceable and welcome to a Good Prince as their Money. But above
all, had he looked into the few Old Acts and Journals of Convocation saved out
of the General Wreck, and yet remainining, he would have found, that the
Articuli Reformandi, or Gravamina Cleri were put up almost at every Session,
that Subsidies were seldom given without them, and that they were suggested
often, when no Subsidies were given; the Clergy in those Days being allowed
sometimes to approach their Prince Empty-handed, and to beg of him what was
their Due without paying for the Liberty of doing it. Reforming Grievances was
so much the End of the Clergy's Conciliary Meetings, that the Archbishop
mentioned it oftentimes in his very Provincial Mandate In one of Archbishop
Mepham 's Anno 1328. there is this Clause, Proviso quod singuli Episcopi
antequam Dioceses suas versus dictum Concilium egressi fuerint, cum suo Clero
deliberent and inquirant sagaciter de Gravaminibus and Defectibus dicti
Concilii studio reformandis -- and to the same purpose another of Stratford's
Dated 10. Kalend. Aug. 1341. These were for Provincial Councils, strictly so
called.
; the Bishops being there directed to consult with the Clergy of their several
Dioceses, about the particular Grievances they lay under, in order to their
being laid before the Assembly. And the Lower Clerks have now and then observed
these Directions of their Metropolitan so well as to complain to him of the
Inabilities, or Exactions of those who had Jurisdiction under Him, or under any
of the other Bishops Duck. Vit. Chichleii, ad Ann. 1421, 1432.
. As they were always sure of his Good Offices, so sometimes it has so happened
that He himself has stood in need of Theirs; and accordingly the Subject of
their Debates has been how to screen an Archbishop from the Displeasure of his
Prince Heylin's Hist. of Presbyt. p. 250.
. Sometimes they have consulted of measures for the Advancement of Learning,
and Encouragement of Universities Concilium Provinciale ad reparationem
splendidarum Universitat. Oxon. and Cant. ac Graduatorum in eadem proficientium
promotionem -- Ann 1417. Registr. Bubwith. Ep. B. and W.
, and have come to resolutions very much to the Honor and Advantage of those
Famous Bodies Spelm. Conc. Vol. 2. p. 677. Ant. Brit. p. 214.
; and have by that means made way for them, when under a Cloud, to the Favor
and Bounty of Others. At some times the Regulation and Improvement of
Grammar-Schools Acta MSS. Synodi tentae, An. 1555 -- ad Jan. 7. 1555, 56.
; at Others, the Looseness and Disorders of the Stage Febr. 24. 1541, 42.
Episcopi consultarunt de Publicis Dissolutis Comaediis corrigendis -- Act. MSS.
have been the Subject of their Debates: and it has been known, when even
Matters of Common Justice and Traffic have felt the Influence of their
Resolves, and the Kingdom been generally benefitted by the Spiritual Censures
they have denounced on the Use of False Weights and Measures Constitutio facta
-- in Convocatione -- 1430. pro abolitio Ponderis vocati Le Auncell Weight.
Spelm. Vol. 2. p. 687.
. A Late Writer Nicholson, Hist. Lib. p. 196.
has found out yet another Employment for the Clergy in Convocation, to pass
the Finales Concordiae, or Levies of Fines, as we now call them; and this upon
no less an Authority than Sir Henry Spelman's; who says In voce Finis.
, it seems, that such Matters were transacted sometimes coram Episcopo, and in
Synodali Conventu: and so they might be, without however being ratified by a
Convocation properly so called: for the words of Sir Henry refer to those Mixed
Assemblies, where the Clergy and Laiety sat together. Would Mr. Archdeacon
afford us an Instance of a Fine thus passed in a Pure Ecclesiastical Meeting,
after the two Jurisdictions were completely separated, it would be a very
Curious Particular, worth acquainting the World with. But this is not the Only
Instance See another p. 31. of these Papers.
he has given of his knowing no other sense of the word Synodus, but that of a
Church-Assembly.

Many other ways the Clergy assembled in Synod had of employing themselves to
the Adtage of the Church and the Commonwealth; too many to be Enumerated, and
too well understood to be insisted on: if Dr. Wake knows nothing of these
things, he is to be pitied for his Ignorance; if he does, and yet dissembles
his knowledge of them, he is to be detested for a much worse Quality. But can
this Gentleman be in Earnest when he says, that the Convocation had little else
at any time to do but to give Money? does not He himself own in several places
Pp. 286, 287, 236, 237.
, that the King frequently sent his Prohibitions thither, commanding 'em not to
enter or proceed upon Business that he did not approve of? This implies, I
think, that they were often otherwise employed than in Money-matters: for Dr.
Wake, I believe, will not pretend that it was Usual with our Princes to
prohibit the Clergy from giving them Money. Nay, he tells us further out of
Coke, that the King did often appoint Commissioners by Writ to sit with the
Clergy in Convocation, and to have Conusance of such things as they meant to
establish, that nothing might be done in prejudice of their Authority P. [111.]
. And if so, he could not but see, that they were used to do some other
Business beside Taxing themselves; for here again I humbly conceive, that
neither were these Commissioners sent to restrain the Clergy's Liberality. To
convince the Reader yet further, that the Clergy, when met, had other things
beside Taxes to consider of, I shall direct him to those very Instances brought
by Dr. Wake to show they had not: I shall examine All his Proofs of this kind
drawn from the Practice of Modern Synods, and by Them shall leave the Reader to
judge how fairly he has dealt with the Ancient ones.

That I may not be thought (says he P. 142.
) to speak at all Adventures, I will offer an Instance or two of it. The
Convocation that met the first of King James the First, was by Prorogation
continued from time to time for seven years together. Yet except it were in his
first year, we do not hear of any great Business that was done by them more
than that of granting Subsidies. But I am well satisfied that he speaks at all
adventures from this very Instance. For Book X. p. 28.
Fuller seems to say, that the Acts of this Convocation were lost even in his
time; and if so, Dr. Wake must needs be a Bold Adventurer, to pretend to say
what was, or was not done in it. Besides, had he spoken out, and told us
plainly, what that Business was they did in their first year, it would have
given us some account why they might possibly have layn still a good while
afterward. For that Business was no less than the settling the whole Discipline
of the Church in a Body of an hundred and forty one Canons then drawn up, which
was one of the Greatest Works that ever any English Convocation had before
them: and having finished it therefore, it would have been no wonder, if they
had discontinu'd their Debates for some time without entering on any thing that
was Material. If they had no Business to do, we cannot expect that they should
have made Business on purpose to do it. But after all it so happens that we can
certainly prove this Convocation to have sat and done Business, and that of a
very Important Nature: for in 1606 Bishop Overall's Convocation-Book passed it;
a Work, considerable in it self; but made yet more considerable by the Event
that attended the Publication of it. And throughout all the rest of the Time,
that they were Employed, or at least sitting, and in a Readiness to do
Business, as it should happen, appears from the Bishop of St. David's Speech in
1604, about the Use of the Cross There is mention of this Speech in the Preface
to Pool 's Sermon about Spiritual Worship. He speaks of it as made in 1604;
though otherwise I should have placed it at the Time when the Canons were
passing. The Speech it self, and some Account of it is among the Manuscripts
Bodl. Bibl. n. 8069* From which Paper we might certainly learn when it was
spoken, but I have not consulted it.
, (which shows that matter was then re-debated); from the strict Attendance
paid by the Members of the Lower House (Three of which were Excommunicated by
Archbishop Bancroft in 1605, on the account of their Absence, and absolved from
that Sentence the year afterward See Registr. Banc. often. fol. 138, 139*
); from the Messages sent by King James at several times to them (with Two of
which relating to the Articles of 1562, and Cathedral Service, Dr. W. himself
has kindly furnished us P. 110.
); and from the Applications made by the Clergy to the King; One Instance of
which [their Petition against Prohibitions Append* Numb. VI.
] I have already given the Reader. So that no Instance could be more
unfortunately pitched upon by Dr. Wake than this: Let us see whether he is more
lucky in that which follows.

His next Words are, In King Charles the First's time there were but Few
Parliaments, and therefore we are not to look for Convocations in that, P 142.
. In the first sixteen years of King Charles the First there were five New
Parliaments chosen, and as many Convocations; and every One of those
Convocations met, and sat, and we know who were the Prolocutors in each of
them. The first of these five Anno 1625. See Fuller. C. H. Book. XI. p. 108.
was hindered from doing much Business by the Plague which then reigned; and the
Last, by a Select Committee for Alterations, which sat in the Ierusalem-Chamber
of the Deanery of Westminster, and was set on foot to supplant the Use of
Synods. And yet even in these Two, Motions were made Some Instances of this
kind Fuller takes notice of. Ibid. and p. 172.
, and Debates held, though no Synodical Conclusions were formed; and in all the
Five In the Convocation of 1628: Pryn says, that Dr. Jackson was accused of
Arminianism, Append. to Anti-Arminianism.
at least so much Business was done, as made their Title good to do more, if
they thought fit: for I must here and every where put this Gentleman in mind,
that there is a great deal of Business for Convocations to do, besides framing
Constitutions. However even That Business it self was done in One of these
Assemblies, the Convocation of 1640; where also their Jurisdiction was
exercised in a very Notable Instance, the Suspension of the Bishop of
Gloucester See Heylin. Cypri^n. Angl.
. Dr. Wake takes no notice of these things, but slips quietly over this Reign
to the next. --

In which, he says, upon King Charles the Second's Return, the Famous
Convocation of 1660 met, to remedy those Disorders which the Civil Wars had
occasioned. In order whereunto it was necessary for them at first to settle the
Affairs of the Church: but that being done, they were by the King's Writ
Prorogued Eighteen times successively; and it does not appear by the Journal of
it, which I have seen, that any thing Material was done in it afterward. He
has seen a Journal, it seems, where there are no Memorandums of any thing done;
and from that Empty Journal One would think that he had learnt all his skill in
the Business of Convocations. But had not something else been as Empty as that
Journal, he would sure have foreborn giving this as an Instance how
Convocations have been employed, whilst they were used to assess themselves
(which is his professed Design in producing it See Page 141.
), when all these Eighteen Prorogations were after they began to be Taxed by
Parliament; and all of them were with the Good will and Consent of the Clergy,
who by the Favor of their Prince, and the Assistance of the Parliament, had in
the first year of their Sitting done so much, that little or no Church-work
might remain upon their Hands for several succeeding years. And yet in All
those years they were not Idle for want of an Opportunity of being otherwise;
for they observed their Forms all along, met with every Parliament, and said
their Prayers together, and when their Prolocutor died, chose a new one; as
even that Journal the Doctor perused, as Empty as it was, would have taught
him; if I guess right at the Quiver from whence this Blunt and Harmless Arrow
was drawn. Now the observing these Forms, whatever Apprehensions Dr. Wake may
have of it, yet several of his Brethren of the Clergy think to be very
Material; as being a step to that which is confessedly so, and preserving the
Body in their Legal Capacity of Acting, as there shall be Occasion.
Particularly that part of the Solemnity, the Opening of the Assembly with
Prayers and a Sermon, as it is a matter of great Decency, so is it of some Use
also; the uttering of these Discourses from the Pulpit having been generally
the Province of the Lower Clergy, who took the liberty at such times to lay the
State of the Church before the Fathers and Governors of it very nakedly and
plainly, and freely to expostulate with them about any Neglects or
Mismanagements, they might observe to prevail. I shall give the Reader a few
Instances of the Freedom practiced on that occasion, which may satisfy him
that it had its Uses in some special Junctures; and may be as serviceable
again, when the same Corruptions shall have got into the Church; as it is
possible that they sometime or other may, though at present we are never so free
from them.

The Passages of this kind I shall take notice of, are in Pieces not easy to
be met with; and should therefore my Transcripts from thence be somewhat large,
I hope they will not be thought tedious; the Christian Courage, Integrity, and
Zeal that animates these Awakening Discourses will be my Apology for producing
so much of them, and for doing it here in the Body of the Book, without
referring the Reader for a sight of them to an Article in the Appendix.

Oration habita a D. Ioanne Colet Decano S. Pauli ad Clerum, in Convocatione,
Anno M. D. XI.
Page 1. Accessi hodie, Patres, admonendi vestri gratia, ut de reformatione
Ecclesiae, in illo vestro Concilio toto animo cogitetis.

5. In ipsis Dignitatibus qui sunt, plerique little incedunt vultu adeo erecto,
and oculis tam sublimibus ut non in humili Praesulatu Christi, sed in alto
dominatu mundi positi esse videantur, non agnoscentes, nec animadvertentes,
quidnam magister humilitatis Christus dixerit discipulis suis, qu^s vocavit ad
Praesulatum; Principes Gentium, etc. vos autem non sic. Quibus verbis docet
plane Magisterium ^^ Ecclesia nihil aliud esse quam Ministerium, and Primatum
in Ecclesiastico homine nihil esse aliud quam humilem Servitutem.

7. Oh Avaritia! ex te onerosae Visitationes Episcoporum, ex te Corruptiones
Curiarum, and inventiones istae quotidie novae quibus miser populus devoratur.
Oh Avaritia matter omnis iniquitatis! a te procacitas, and petulantia
Officialium, ex te in Ordinariis illud ardens studium amplificandae suae
Iurisdictionis, ex te in Ordinariis ista insana and rabiosa contentio de
Insinuatione Testamentorum, ex te Intempestivae Sequestrationes, ex te ista
superstitiosa observatio Legum earum quae Lucrosae sunt, posthabitis iis quae
ad Emendationem Morum spectant.

8. Faciem Ecclesiae maculat assidua Occupatio Secularis, in qua se implicant
multi Sacerdotes and Episcopi, Servi magis Hominis quam Dei -- nihil audent nec
facere, nec dicere, nisi ea quae noverint suis Principibus grata and placentia:
hinc Ignorantia and Caecitas, quando obcaecati tenebris hujus seculi nihil
vident nisi terrena.

12. Quare vos, Patres, vos, Sacerdotes, vos, omnes Clerici expergiscimini
aliquando ex isto vestro somno in hoc mundo Lethargico, and evigilantes tandem
audite Paulum Clamantem vobis, Nolite conformari huic seculo, sed reformamini
in novitate sensus vestri The Text.
. Haec autem Reformatio and Restauratio Ecclesiastici Status oportet incipiat a
Vobis Patribus nostris, and sic deinceps in nos Sacerdotes vestros derivetur.
Ad Vos spectamus tanquam ad Signa directionis nostrae, in vobis and in vita
vestra cupimus legere, tanquam in vivis libris, quonam pacto ipsi vivamus:
Quare si volueritis videre Festucas nostras, prius tollite Trabes de oculis
vestris.

13. Nullum est erratum cui Patres optima remedia non providerunt. Non est opus
ergo ut novae Leges and Constitutiones condantur, sed ut serventur conditae.
Quare in vestra illa Congregatione recitentur leges quae sunt editae: imprimis
recitentur leges quae admonent vos Patres ne manus vestras cito alicui
imponatis -- Recitentur leges quae jubent ut Beneficia Ecclesiastica dignis
conferantur. Recitentur Leges quae militant contra Simoniacam Labem.

16. Ante omnia vero recitentur Leges quae pertinent and spectant ad Vos
reverendos Patres and dominos Episcopos; Leges de justa and Canonica Electione
Vestra in capitulis Ecclesiarum cum invocatione divini spiritus: nam praeterea
quod hoc non fit his diebus, and quia saepe eliguntur Praelati magis favoribus
hominum quam Dei gratia, idcirco habemus certe nonnunquam Episcopos parum
Spirituales, homin^s magis Mundanos quam Coelestes, sapientes magis spiritum
hujus Mundi quam spiritum Christi.

17. Recitentur Leges de residentia Episcoporum in diaecesibus suis --
Renoventur postremo istae Leges and Constitutiones patrum de celebratione
conciliorum,
quae jubent ut Provincialia Concilia frequentius pro reformatione Ecclesiae
celebre^tur: nam nunqu^m accidit Ecclesiae Christi res magis detrimentosa quam
omissio Conciliorum, tum Generalium, tum Provincialium.

18. Qua quidem in re vos potissimum debita reverentia, Patres, appello; nam
ista legum Executio a vobis incipiat oportet -- Vos autem si servaveritis
leges, sique ad normam and regulam Canonum vitam vestram imprimis
reformaveritis, tuna dabitis nobis lumen in quo quid nobis faciendum sit
videamus, lumen videlicet optimi exempli vestri; nosque videntes Patres nostros
servare leges, libenter Patrissabimus.

21. Considerate miseram Ecclesiae formam and Statum, and in ejus reformatione
totis animis incumbite; Nolite, Patres, nolite sinere istum vestrum tam
celebrem Conventum abire in vanum; nolite pati istam vestram congregationem
elabi in nihilum: congregamini quidem saepe, sed (ut vestra pace quod verum est
dicam) quis adhuc fructus praesertim Ecclesiae ex istiusmodi conventibus est
consecutus? ite modo in Spiritu, quem invocastis, ut ejus auxilio adjuti in
isto vestro Concilio possitis ea excogitare, statuere, decernere, quae sint
Ecclesiae utilia, quae vobis laudi, quae Deo honori.

Oration ad Pontifices Londini in Aede Paulina An. Dom. 1553.17. Id. Apr. per
Nic. Grimoaldum. Impressum 1583. Londini.
7. Nescio quo fato fieri dicam, Patres praeclarissimi, etiam vobis
praesidentibus, qui eruditionis gloria floretis, in quavis Diocesi plures ut
inveniantur Legum Sacrarum expertes Sacrifici quam intelligentes. Number vos
etiamdum, Praesules, ad hunc honestissimum ordinem atque pulcherrimum,
illiberale and imperitum genus hominum aggregatis? --

8. Vestrarum hoc partium est, Pontifices, fovendo gnaros, repudiando rudes,
efficere ut vel vulgus hominum intelligat, quid sit bonis artibus excoli.

10. Cogitate Vos esse eos unde sibi and Populus, and Reges, and Cives omnes
consilium de maximis gravissimisque rebus expectant: loquendum est libere, and
admonendum; debere Reges erudiri rectam ut sententiam far possint; debere
Principes viros convenire, Domino ut inserviant; debere eos sanciendis
promulgandisque legibus ostendere se fidem habere Deo, se Remp. and quidem
Christianam tueri, amplificare, and confirmare: Scilicet summum Deum odisse
malorum Ecclesiam, eosque qui non stant ab illius partibus, contrarios illi and
adversarios esse, and plane perduellionis reos.

11. Quo minor est rerum bonarum cura, quo major est doctorum virorum paucitas,
eo vos haec ipsa def^ndite diligentius. In Patriam and Remp. intuemini, Patres,
cui dati estis a Deo Gubernatores. Scelerati and flagitiosi omnia refer
solent ad utilitatem propriam, nec facile possunt animum inducere ut agant
emnino aliquid gratui^o: Vir pius tamen and religiosus non commoditates suas
quaerit, sed totus est in juvandis aliis occupatus -- Estis Sal terrae, condite
caeteros: Estis Lux orbis, lucete aliis: Estis Duces, praeite viam reliquis.
Estis Angeli Dei Op. Max. nunciate ingentem laetitiam futuram toti Populo.
Estis divinorum arcanorum dispensatores, scienter id facite, and fideliter.
Reverendi Patres Episcopi, facile est Episcoporum habere nomen, rem praestare
profecto difficile: vestro si vultis officio perfungi, oportebit docendo,
monendo, emendando, suadendo, deterrendo, disputando, aliisque multiplicibus
ministeriis, obire labores maximos, tolerare vigilias, excubare, animis
concoquere longa taedia, pati contumelias improborum, and versari etiam in
vitae discrimine -- quare jam inde ab hoc tempore usque ad occasum vitae,
extremumque spiritum nunquam divelli vos a tam praeclaro instituto patiamini.

Non ita multos abhinc annos in eo fuistis multi, ut quos possetis ab Operum
Nitelis averteretis, a Peregrinatione Religionis ergo, a Lucernis ad Statuas
affigendis, a Lustrali Aqvula, Missa Papistica, and id genus aliis rebus:
superest, Patres, sicut antea disceptatum est cum Superstitione, nunc ut cum
Impietate certetur; sicut ante disceptatum est de ma^e collocatis Operibus,
nunc querela fiat de amissis benefactis, and nusquam fere comparentibus; sicut
antea declamatum est in Idola, and Cultus execrabiles, nunc in illum
pestilentissimum Deastrum Mammonem declamitetur. Nam quod Tempus simile
Temporum nostrorum? Quot ^odie solent alienas invadere facultates? eatenus
amplectuntur plerique Religionem, quatenus quaestum ex ea commodumque faciant.
Ut distrahuntur Opes Ecclesiasticae! Sacerdotiorum quam frequens est
Nundenatio! Venalia Templa sunt, Venales Ecclesiae.

14. Nam quid ad haec dicemus Auditores optimi? Scholarum and magistrorum
quibus carere Christianae civitates nullo modo possunt, cur dilaniari sinitis
alimoniam and viscera? quid de vobis judicabit atque sentiet Posteritas, tantam
audaciam si non coercebitis? quousque conceditis hanc licentiam? Quousque
comprobabitis quae Avarissimus quisque concupivit? Si potestis parum, saltem
cohibete Assensiones, ne participetis eorum facta. Si potestis amplius
extinguite crescentem flammam, ne deinde Victrix ad Domorum and Templorum Tecta
subsiliat. -- Agite, O Praesides, and Procuratores Ecclesiae, per Deum
Immortalem agite. --

16. Vident certe multi qui possit ex hisce malis eripi Ecclesia, sedent tamen
compressis manibus, secumque (ut dicitur) vivunt.

19. Si estis Episcopi, circumspectate quid a famulis, quid a liberis, quid a
ministris Ecclesiasticis, quid a Magistratibus, quid agatur a populo. Si estis
exploratores, Exquirite Papistas, investigate Anabaptistas, Libertinos, and
Haereticos omnes deprehendite, corrigite, fugate, fundite. Si Legati estis,
Imperata peragite; Si Custodes omnium, custodite Domini vestri Ovilia, and
quidem integra, ut ne partim foveantur, partim deserantur.

23. Iam nunc penes vos erit vestroque in arbritrio positum, aut Ecclesiae
Proceres praeclarissimos, aut Custodes inertes and negligentes in perpetuum
appellari. Quapropter excitate Spiritus; Erigite capita; aures, oculos,
animosque advertite; omnia collustrate; in toto regno religionem confirmate;
Literas, Leges, virtutesque conserite. Vos si in speculis forte stetistis
Episcopi, jamdudum sentire potuistis pleraque in Ecclesia agi raptim, atque
turbate, sine more, sine ordine. Quid ergo? quid existimatis, gravissimi viri?
desiderari nullas Leges Ecclesiasticas?

24. Necesse habetis pro ea condition in qua positi estis maleficia palam
patrata palam arguere, neque personarum in ea re discrimen habere ullum. -- Vos
cum excluseritis eos e Christianorum conventiculo, docebitis populum ea sancta
credere, quae ab istis violari solent.

26. Contra horum Luporum omnium incursus quam paratis defensionem, Patres? and
quos tandem opponitis adversarios? O rem miseram, atque miserandam* ad
Ecclesiarum procurationem admoventur non Patroni, Tutores, Defensores; sed
praedones, hosts, proditores; Qui non quam ipsi boni sint curant, sed quam
bonum Sacerdotium. -- Mirer si est vana fere vestra, Pontifices apud plebem
authoritas? Vos elevatis eam. Quippe quia muneribus and emolumentis
Ecclesiasticis dum vultis vobis devincire nescio quos ex alieno genere atque
ordine, efficitis ut minus possitis ipsi, and estis majori despicatui. Qui
aliis Exemplo esse debetis, aliorum Exemplo peccabitis potius quam alii vestro
recte faciant? His ego jucundiora and plausibiliora dictu alia esse scio, sed
me vera and seria pro jucundis and plausibilibus loqui, etsi meum ingenium non
juberet, necessitas Cogit.

29. Ipsa Patria sic vobiscum, Pontifices, agit and quodammodo tacita loquitur.
-- Quid agitis Antistites? Vobis non modo inspectantibus, sed etiam
assentientibus labefactabitur Ecclesia vera?

31. Veniat in mentem, vestra quid polliceatur professio, quid noti, quid
ignoti, quid expectent a vobis omnes; quid Regia Majestas, quid ejus
Consiliarii, quid ipsa Resp. postulet. -- Vae vobis, si aut ignavia vestra, aut
vitio pusilli animi, aut quovis alio modo perdideritis Oviculas-Date diligenter
operam, timete Mortalium neminem.

Concio ad Clerum in Synodo Provinciali Cantuariensis Provinciae ad D. Pauli,
Die XX. Febr. A. D. MDXCIII. per Lancelotum Andrews Theol. Doct. Inter
Opuscula, Edit. Land. 1621.
Act. XX. 28. Attendite Vobis, and Universo Gregi in quo Vos Spiritus Sanctus
posuit Episcopos, etc.
P. 27, 28.
NEque vero haec Apostolus -- Viderat procul dubio, viderat alicubi in Synodo
remissas quorundam manus, soluta genua: Viderat nonnullos in Asia, quorum nos
hic in Anglia non paucos videmus, ad Munus suum vel non satis attendentes, vel
non satis acri tendentes animo -- Ita fere animati sumus, ita (ut eleganter
Augustinus) secum quisque loquitur, Quid ad me pertinet? quisque quid velit,
agat; Victus meus ^alvus erit, and Lac and Lana; Satis est mihi, eat Ecclesia
qua potest. Hoc malum sub Sole est, Patres; ab hoc vero malo est quicquid
usquam est mali. Cladem Ecclesiae sic orditur Christus in Parabola Zizaniorum,
cum Dormirent Homines. Scio quidem accessit Invidia Daemonis; sed substrata
illi causa, Desidia Hominis. Nam certe quae fuerunt unquam Gregis Dispersiones,
aut agri Zizaniis oppleti, vel luxatae in Ecclesia trabes, and tecta
perstillantia, ab hoc malo fuerunt omnia. Etiam Nos, Patres, dum* semisomnes
hic sedemus, (quanquam somnu non fuit, vidimus enim); dum videmus ergo, sed
tamen tepidi and tacentes sede^us, nescio quae portenta Opinionum invaluerunt
hic apud Nos, nulli priscorum a^dita vel visa, and vulgi a^res animosque
occuparunt; ac jam Zizania scilicet Zizania non sunt; Fruges sunt. Cura certe
nobis, si non Cor defuit; and eodem redit, venienti malo vel non attendere per
oscitantiam, vel non contra tendere per vecordiam.

P. 29. Neque vero laeta magis Ecclesiae facies, aut quam videre malles, quam
cum Timotheos habuit, qui rem Gregis germane accurabant; neque vero tetra magis
aut funesta facies Ecclesiae, quam cum Galliones habuit, quibus nihil illorum
curae, quibus susque deque quid fieret Ecclesiae.

P. 31. Et est in Vobis Cura, est Attentio vestri; quis negat? Satis enim Vos
vobis attendere, and rei vestrae, populi V^x est; satis Vos strenue ditandis
filiis, dotandis filiabus attendere: tam vero Vos hac ex part attentos esse,
ut Haeredum magna sit Vobis attentio, Successorum exigua (etsi quae exigua est,
aliqua est); [imo] ut prae Haeredum attentione, nulla sit Successorum.
Attendere, hoe quidem est; sed vereor ut Pauli sit. --

P. (31.) Omnium in Vos Oculi atque Or^ conversa sunt -- Quod si quis in vestro
illo tam sancto ac venerando Ordine malae frugis, si quis Dilapidator Aerarii
sacri, si quis Polygamus, s^ Nepos, si Falsarius, si F^^nerator, si caupo
Beneficiorum; late se spargit Exemplum, and nimis facile responsum, Idem hoc
Episcopus noster factitavit. --

P. 32. Haec ad Vos de Vobis. De Grege jam vestro superest sermo alter. --
Omnino auditur Susurrus iste in vulgo (utinam falso); Ubi Vestra res agitur, si
quid in Titulos, in Statum, in Dignitatem Vestram tentatur, si periclitatur
pars vestra in redargutionem venire; ut ille, praecedenti capite, pro Diana
sud, itidem and Vos mirum in modum satagere; non labori, non sumptui parcere,
non attentioni ulli: de Grege vero non perinde sollicitos esse. Etiam hoc
quoque dicitur, ad illos Consessus vestros and Consistoria, si vestrum
cujusquam privata res agatur, sive lucrum est, sive vindicta, alacres,
^^rectos, attentos advolare Vos, ac vehementer quidem perorare: sin aliquid in
commune tractandum* si collatis sententiis deliberandum, vel nequid Ecclesia
detrimenti capiat, vel cum quid Ecclesia detrimenti c^pit, si res gregis prae
manibus est, concidere illico attentionem vestram, subducere se quemque, vel
non interesse, vel, si interest, tepidum and tacentem sedere and obtorpescere.

P. 37. Attendite, inquam, idque perpetuo facite; Domi quisque in speeuld,
Foris in Visitatione vestra, tum vero in Synodo hic hodie, vel maxim.
Synodorum enim vel uno hoc attentionis nomine in Ecclesia illustre semper
nomen, and cum celebris tum salubris Authoritas; in quibus -- magnum semper
remedium extitit ad (...) Ecclesiae. Si quando enim Murmur in ea exortum, hic
sedatum est (cap. 6.); si quando emersit Haeresis, hic profligata est (cap.
15.); si quando quid ulla in re cuiquam Indulgendum fuit, hic dispensatum fuit
( cap. 21.). Benedictus Deus, qui dedit talem Potestatem Hominibus! Beati vero
Homines, quibus Potestate hac data legitime uti fas!

P. 40. Proxime post hos Attentionem vestram requirit scelerata illa Simonis
and Judae fraternitas; Judae, quid datis mihi? quaerentis; Simonis, vel
pecuniam, vel pejorem pecunia conditionem offerentis. Nec hoc solum in Nobis
Minoritis, qui sic Rectorias nostras feri paciscimur; sed and apud Vos
Majoritas, quos sic Cathedras vestras, nempe vel Pecuniarum summis, vel
Ecclesiarum spoliis foede cauponari vulgo dictitant. Quo morbo male jamdiu
habet and audit Ecclesia nostra? nunquid non est Resina in Gilead? quare itaque
non est obducta Cicatrix Leprae hujus?

These Three Instances, taken at three several Distances, from the times before
the Reformation down to the Latter End of Queen Elizabeth, will convince the
Reader, that the Solemnity of opening a Convocation, is it self a matter of
some Importance, and which would deserve carefully to be kept up, even though
there were nothing Material to be done in Synod afterward. We live in a
Preaching Age, when the Devotion of People runs much that way, and they are
mightily indulged in it. Pity it is, that whilst so many New Discourses of this
kind are set up for the Laiety, this One good Sermon ad Clerum should be put
down; which, besides that it has some Hundred years Prescription to plead for
it self, is at least as edifying an Exercise as any of those that are more
encouraged.

I have examined all the Modern Instances produced by Dr. Wake in behalf of his
Darling Point, That the Chief End of Convocations is to give Money: His Elder
Accounts would afford as much room for Reflection, if it were worth the while
to pursue 'em as minutely. But I suppose there is no great need of proving to
the Reader, that a Writer has misled him in Facts of an Ancient Date, when I
have shown that he has done it in things that have happened within our Memories,
and under our Noses. For he that will impose upon a Man before his Face, will
certainly do it behind his Back; and the more out of his Reach he is, the more
he will do it.

It is said, his Superiors have employed him in an Edition of these Old English
Councils. If he deals with them as ill in that Edition, as he has done in this
account, it will, I am sure, be the faultiest Book in the kind, that ever was
Printed; and so far from mending Sir Henry Spelman's Collections on this Head,
that it will be worse than Mr. Baxter's. However, should he discharge the Task
never so well, his Hand, I think, is not proper to be employed in it: for the
World will judge it a Preposterous thing for the same Pen to be used in
preserving the Memory of Old Canons, and writing down the Privileges and very
Being of Convocations. I suppose he thinks the Mortal Blow is now given to the
Church, and that she will never hereafter speak by her Provincial Assemblies;
and therefore, as the way is to give accounts of Men when they are Dead, he
thinks it time to collect the Acts of a Departed Convocation. But he ought to
be sure, that it is departed, before he enters on this Task: for should it ever
revive and sit again, one of the first Requests it would make, might possibly
be, that the Work should be taken out of his Polluted Hands: Since the Church
cannot hope, from what she knows of him, that his Account of her Synods will be
given with any other View, than the Learned Friar wrote the History of that of
Tre^t; on purpose to expose 'em. But this is a Distant Concern; Our Business at
present is with him only as to the Treatment which these Ancient Councils have
found from him, in the Work we are upon: and upon this Head, I shall for the
Reasons already given, trust the Reader, without entering into the Retail of it;
adding only to what has been already said in this Chapter, one short Remark --
That from Henry the Eighth down to the last Unhappy Prince, no King has sat on
the Throne, who did not allow and encourage these Meetings of the Clergy. King
James's Late Reign made the first Exception of this kind; when Popery and
Arbitrary Power being determined to be set up, consequently Parliaments and
Convocations were laid aside, from whence the Greatest Hindrance to those
Designs was most likely to come: for though the Clergy wrote Popery out of the
Kingdom, in a smaller time than they could be expected to have done it in that
Method; yet, had they been allowed to sit in Convocation, they had probably
dispatched the Work somewhat sooner. But the Oppressive Pattern then first set,
will not, we dare say, by our Generous Deliverer be followed. Frequency of
Parliaments has been the distinguishing Mark and Glory of his Reign; and it
will add some small Luster to it, if it may be said in our Annals, that the
Liberties of Convocations too were no less tenderly preserved. We question not,
but so Good and Gracious a Prince, and so great a Pillar of the Protestant
Religion, will in this respect yield to the Just and United Desires of his
Clergy, when they are sufficiently made known to him. No Men resisted the
Encroachments of the Late Reign more than They; no Men by their Labors and
Zeal contributed more to our present happy Establishment; and they have reason
therefore to hope for their share in the Common Benefit of it.

CHAP. VII.
BUt to return to our Business -- Another Objection made by Dr. Wake against
the Reasonableness of the Clergys Assembling with every New Parliament, is,
That when this was Customary, they were a Member of Parliament; but not being
so Now, neither is there the same reason that they should assemble with it P.
106, 107, and (284.)
. To this I answer, that the words Member of Parliament, may be taken
differently, as they signify either an Essential Part of the Legislature,
whose Consent and Authority is necessary to all Laws; or a part of the Great
Body of Parliament, assembled by the same Writs, at the same time with it, but
to some special Intents and Purposes prescribed by our Constitution. In the
former Sense, the Clergy are not, nor for some hundred Years have been; in the
latter, as they always were, so they still, I presume, are a Member of
Parliament: Not an Intrinsic Member, if I may be allowed so to speak, or
Estate of Parliament; but only an Extrinsick Part of it, or an Estate of the
Realm, called with the Parliament always, and attending upon it; who have a
Parliamentary Right of Petitioning, and Advising within their proper Sphaere,
and at whom Decrees about Matters Spiritual ought regularly to begin. They are
a Lesser Wheel in the Machine of Government, that is acted by the same Springs
and Weights, and therefore moves and ceases together with the Greater, but has
peculiar Ends and Offices of its own to which it serves. Nor is this to be
wondered at, for even the States of Parliament themselves have different Powers
and Privileges, and peculiar Orbs of their own, as it were, within which they
move; the Lords are distinguished by their Jurisdiction, and the Commons by
their Money Bills: so that the being Member, Part, or Parcel of Parliament,
does not necessarily imply the very same Parliamentary Interests and Powers.
And the Clergy therefore, though no part of the Civil Legislature, nor
concerned directly in the great Affairs of State transacted in Parliament, may
yet in other Respects, and to other Purposes, be properly reputed and styled a
Member of Parliament. And accordingly I have shown, that they have been thus
esteemed, and spoken of, from the time of their separation downwards; and even
by Henry the VIII. himself, many Years after their submission to him. One
instance of this kind has been given already P. 59.
from a Proclamation in the 35 th. of his Reign: and because the way of Wording
these State-Papers is a matter of great Weight and Importance, I shall here add
another, from an Original Direction of the same Prince to his Judges, then
about to go their Summer Circuit. It begins thus --

By the KING.
Henry R.

Cleop. E. 6. fol. 214.
TRusty and Right Well-beloved, We great you well. And whereas heretofore, as ye
know, both upon most just and virtuous Fundations, grownded upon the Laws of
Almighty God, and Holly Scripture, and also by the deliberate Advice,
Consultation, Consent and Agreement as well of the Bishops and Clergy, as by
the Nobles and Commons Temporal of this our Realm, assembled in our High
Court of Parliament, and by Auctorite of the same, the Abuses of the Bishop of
Rome, his Authority and Jurisdiction of long time usurped against Us, have
been not only utterly Extirped, Abolished and Secluded, but also the same Our
Nobles and Commons, both of the Clergy and Temporaltie, by another several
Act, and upon like fundation, for the public Weal of this our Realm, have
united, knytte, and annexed to Us, and the Corone Imperial of this Our Realm,
the Title, Dignite and Style of Supreme Head in Earth, immediately under God of
the Church of England, as undoubtedly evermore we have been: Which things also
the said Bishops and Clergy, particularly in their Convocations, have wholly
and entirely consented, recognized, ratified, confermed and approved
autentiquely in Writing.

-- Signed June 25.

And that this Doctrine was still good, and the Language much the same, as low
as the Restoration of C. the II. the Office then set out for the 5 th. of
November shows; where mention is made of the Nobility, Clergy and Commons of
this Realm, then assembled in Parliament Prayer the 2 d.
: For to say, that by the Clergy of this Realm, my Lords the Bishops only are
intended, were so absurd a Gloss, that even Dr. Wake's Pen would, I believe, be
ashamed of it. And if they were then rightly said to be assembled in
Parliament, they may as rightly be said to be so assembled still: and if
assembled in Parliament, why not a Member of Parliament? to those Intents and
Purposes, I mean, for which they are assembled in it? Dr. Wake will be pleased
to answer this Question at his Leisure; and withal to inform us, among his late
Meditations on the Day Sermon. on the 5 th. of Nov. 1699.
, this had not been a proper one. His Function may be, some excuse for his
being a stranger to the Language of the Statute Book, or of our Manuscript
Records: but not to have so much Law as even his Common Prayer Book would have
furnished him with, is, let me tell him, inexcusable.

Dr. Wake's Foundation therefore failing, the Inference he builds upon it falls
accourse, and the Argument will now run quite the other way; that, because the
Clergy are a Part, or Member of Parliament (in a qualified Sense) therefore
they ought to Assemble with it. However, since that Expression is invidious,
and liable to be misconstru'd, I willingly wave it, and content my self to say,
that, though the Clergy are now no Member or Estate of Parliament, as they once
were (not the Third, as Dr. W. ignorantly talks P. 151.
, but the First Estate of it) yet are they still an Estate of the Realm,
necessarily attendant on the Parliament; and have attended as such, whenever a
new Parliament was called, from the time that they left off to be an Estate of
Parliament, till within a few Years past, with few Exceptions to the contrary;
and with none, from the Reign of Henry the VII. to that of his present Majesty.
And this prescription of some hundred Years has given them an undoubted Right
of being summoned, and sitting as often as a Parliament is summoned and sits,
though they are not a Member, or Estate of Parliament.

No more than this need be said, to remove the Objection. But I design not
barely to answer Dr. Wake, but moreover to give the Reader every where as
Comprehensive a View of the Subject in Debate, as the short compass of this
Work will allow of; and shall take occasion therefore from hence to deduce an
Account of the Interest which the Lower Clergy have had all along in these
State Meetings. It Is a point that well deserves our Reflections; and Dr. Wake
therefore, according to his instructive way, has said nothing of it: No body
had gone before him, and common placed our Historians, and Manuscript
Authorities to his hand on this Argument; and he never ventures to break the
way, or to give us any part of Learning, but what has born the test of Time,
and is warranted by at least an hundred Years usage.

A complete State of this point is not to be expected in a Digression; all I
can do here is, to lay before the Reader some of the most Material Passages to
this purpose, that have occurred to me in our Histories and Records, and to add
here and there a few cursory Remarks upon them: which will throw some small
Light into things as we pass, and may suggest matter of juster and sounder
Reflections to others, who shall write after me on this Argument. The Proofs
taken singly, may few of them perhaps seem full and convincing; however, when
united, I persuade my self, they will carry such an evidence in them, as is not
easily to be withstood.

The Saxon times are overspread with Darkness; and yet Light enough is still
left us to discover, that the Inferior Clergy, as well as La^e^y, were then
oftentimes called to the Great Councils of the Realm. Much has been Written on
this Point as to the Laiety, but I do not remember that I have met any where an
account of the Lower Clergys Interest in those Meetings; and therefore I shall
produce some Proofs of it here, without entering into the Civil part of the
Dispute, any further than may be of use to give Light to the Ecclesiastical,
and to clear the Ancient Rights and Privileges of the Commons Spiritual;
which, I am satisfied, ran even all along with those of the Commons Temporal,
and proportionably grew, declined, or revived with them.

The first Instance I shall take notice of to this purpose, is that known
Preface to King Ina's Laws, which says, they were made (in the Rude, but
Faithful Translation of Iorvallensis) exhortatione and doctrina Ceonredi Patris
mei, Heddae Episcopi mei, and Erkenwoldi Episcopi mei, and omnium Senatorum
meorum, and seniorum sapientum Regni mei; multaque Congregatione Servorum Dei
X. Scrip. p. 761.
. That the Servi Dei here mentioned were Clergy, bears no doubt; and that the
Words are further to be understood chiefly of the Inferior Orders of the
Clergy, appears both from their Numbers (for the West Saxon Bishops and Abbats
were but few), and from the like use of the Phrase in other places: for
instance, in the Council of Cloveshoe, A. C. 824. (another mixed Assembly) the
Dei Servi, then present, are thus in the next words explained; Presbyteri,
Dia^oni, and Plurimi Monachi Ibid. p. 335. And in a Charter of Milred, Bishop
of Worster (A. D. 774.) he makes his grant cum Licentia Servorum Dei, qui sub
meo regimine Dei Providentia constituuntur (Monast. Vol. 1. p. 122.) i. e. of
all the Clergy of his Diocese.
. And when therefore Athelstan's Laws are said to be drawn up at one of these
State-Meetings For thus we read a^ (...) close of it. Totum hoc -- (...) Magna
Synodo apud -- (...) Arch. Wl^inus inter^uit^ and omnes Optimates, and S. p.
(...) tes quos Adelstanus rex potuit congregare. Iorv. p. 84^.
Consilio Wolfelini Archiepiscopi mei, and omnium Episcoporum, and Dei
Ministrorum, Ibid. p. 841.
those Ministri Dei also are to have the same Interpretation. Something of this
Dr. W. seems to have been aware of, and therefore slid over these three
Instances in have as it were, and touched them tenderly: His account of the
first is, That Ina made his Laws with the consent of his Bishops and all his
Aldermen P. 171.
; of the last, That Athelstan published his Ecclesiastical Laws with the
Council of his Bishops P. 162.
; and as to the third, he tells us, There was such a Council at Cloveshoe, Anno
824. P. 172.
and that is all. Very succinct indeed! especially, coming from the Pen of so
prolix and tedious a Writer; who fails not to tire us with Circumstantial
Accounts of things, when they are unenlightning: But here a punctual Relation
might have opened Eyes, and made Discoveries; and in such Cases Dr. W's.
communicative Temper always fails him.

I shall supply his Defects as to one of these Instances, a little further than
I have done, by transcribing a Passage or two from an old Charter granted to
the Church of Worster, and entered in the Register of it. There this Meeting at
Cloveshoe (Anno 824.) is called Pontificale and Sinodale Conciliabulum, at
which the King, the Bishops, Abbats, and Universi Mercensium Principes, and
multi Sapientissimi viri were present. Statut [a] est autem atque decret [a] ab
Archiepiscopo, [um]
and ab omni Sancta Sinodo illa consentienti* ut Episcopus, qui Monasterium and
Agellum cum libris haberet, cum juramento Dei Servorum, Presbiterorum,
Diaconorum, and plutimorum Monachorum, sibi in propriam possessionem terram
illam cum adjuratione adjur [ asset], [aret]
etc. Quaproptersiquis, etc. contra Decreta Sanctorum Canonum sciat se facere;
quia Sancti Canones decernunt quicquid Sancta Synodus Universalis cum Catholico
Archiepiscopo suo adjudicaverit, nullo modo fractum vel irritum esse faciendum.
-- The Charter is subscribed by the King, Bishops, Abbats and great Men of the
Laiety; and then comes this Note in Saxon, thus Translated by Dugdale Monast.
vol. 1. p. 125
: Eidem Iuramento apud Westmonasterium praestito aderant 50 Sacrifici The
Saxons is Masse-preosta [ i. e. Missales Presbyteri] in both places.
, and 10 Diaconi, and ex omnibus aliis Presbyteris, 160. And after that, this
other: Haec sunt Sacrificorum nomina qui Iuramento illi astiterunt, and idem
praestiterunt, -- which is followed by the Subscription of 3 Abbats, 47
Presbyters, and 6 Deacons. The Book which furnishes us with this Instrument, is
a venerable Monument of Antiquity, reposited in the Cotton Library Tiberius A.
13.
; it was written about the Conquest, that is, within 250 Years of the Date of
this Council, whose constituent parts it thus reckons up; and the Account
therefore it gives is as Authentic, as it is Considerable: which are two
reasons why Dr. W. should pass it by unobserved.

The only instance of this kind, I think, which he has prevailed with himself
to mention at length, is the Council of Becanceld in 694. where together with
the Duces, Satrapae, Abbates, Abbatissae, there met also Presbyters, and
Deacons, who are said in unum glomerati de statu Ecclesiarum Dei pariter
tractare; and accordingly in the Subscriptions of that Council yet remaining,
there are the Names of 8 Presbyters Spelm. Conc. v. 1. p. 19^.
to be seen. This is so clear a proof of what I am contending for, that
allowing the matter of Fact true, there is no evading it. Dr. W. therefore
would fain, if he could, have the Account thought Fabulous; if (says he) the
Relation be true, it was indeed an Assembly of an Extraordinary Composition P.
171.
. But if he suspected it not to be true, he would have done well to acquaint us
with some of the Grounds of his Suspicions; all which he has discretly kept to
himself. And indeed, I cannot imagine what Ground there can be to suspect the
Truth of it: There are no Marks of Imposture in it, nothing that disagrees with
the Story, or manners of that time. Sir H. Spelman printed it from five good
Manuscripts, and one of them, near as Old as the Saxon Age. In the Ancient
Saxon Chronicle, there is at the Year 694. a very large and particular account
of this Council: and, least the Dr. should startle at the Abbesses being found
in such Company, they are expressly mentioned also by that Chronicle as present.
Nor can this be matter of surprise to any one in the least acquainted with the
State of those times, when it was not unusual for Women to assist at their
Synods, and great Councils; witness the Synod of Nidde Eddius in Vita Wilfredi.
c. 58.
, and that of Streanshealeh, mentioned by Dr. W. P. 166.
as held in the Monastery of Hilda, and in which (though he does not mention
it) she her self sat, Argued, and Voted See Eddi. c. 10. and Beda Eccl. Hist.
l. 3. c. 25.
. Ingulphus who understood the manner of these Saxon Assemblys somewhat better
than Dr. W. does, did not suspect a Charter passed in one of them, because he
found several Abbesses subscribing their Names to it P. 17.
. And there is reason to be^lieve that this Practice was not confined to the
times before the Conquest, but continued long after it; if at least an
expression in M. Paris may be relied on, who tells us, That in the Year 1210.
venerunt ad Generalem Vocationem [Regis] Abbates, Priores, Abbatissae P. 230.
, without any Intimation that the latter of these came by Proxy only, and not
Personally to this Meeting.

What is it then that makes Dr. W. think this to be an Assembly of an
Extraordinary Composition? it must be, because he finds Presbyters and Deacons
there: but that this is no such Extraordinary Thing, appears from the instances
I have already produced, and yet further from these that follow. For,

In the Year 697. the constitutions of Withred were made by the Bishops, and
caeteri Ordines Ecclesiastici illius gentis In a Mixed Council; for the Viri
Militares are said to be there. Spel. Conc. V. 1. p. 194.
; in which several of the Clergy under Abbats must be included.

In 747. at another Council at Cloveshoe, together with the King and the Great
Men of the Laiety, there are said to meet Praesules, and Plurimi Sacerdotes
Domini, and Minores quoque Ecclesiastici Gradus Dignitates; and these did all
(the lowest as well as the highest) de Unitate Ecclesiae, ac statu Christianae
Religionis and concordia Pacis tractanda confirmandaque pariter considere
Malsmb. l. 1. p. 197.
.

In the Legates Relation to Pope Adrian of what passed at the Synod of Calchyth
(A. C. 787.) it is said, That every thing was done in Concilio publico coram
Rege Aelsvaldo, and Archiepiscopo Eanbaldo, and omnibus Episcopis and Abbatibus
Regionis, seu Senatoribus, and Ducibus, and Populo Terrae Spelm. ibid. p. 300
. And at the Close of the subscriptions we find these words; Hijs quoque
saluberrimis Ammonitionibus Presbyteri, Diaconi Ecclesiarum, and Abbates
Monasteriorum, Iudices, Optimates, and Nobiles unopere uno ore consentimus, and
subscripsimus P. 301.
. Which words occur also in a Charter of the Year 996, granted to the Dean of
Wolverhampton, in a great Council of the Realm Monast. v. 1. p. 991.


In a second Synod at Calchyth (Anno 816.) we find the King cum suis
Principibus, Ducibus, and Optimatibus: tum undique sacri Ordinis Praesides cum
Abbatibus, Presbyteris, Diaconibus, pariter tractantes de necessarijs and
utilitatibus Ecclesiarum Spelm. 16. p. 328.
.

At the Coronation of King Edgar (Anno. 973.) the Saxon Chronicle tells us,
Conrenerat Sacerdotum Caetus, ingens Monachorum turba, sapientumque Concilium
P. 122.
.

By the Sapientes here mentioned, the Laiety are chiefly to be understood: But
in other places, where the lower Clergy are not distinctly named, the Word
comprehends Them also, and is designed to express them; of which that passage
in Simeon Dunelmensis, where he speaks of the Synod of Finchale (and probably
speaks out of the very Acts of that Synod) is a clear Proof: His words are, In
diebus justorum Regum, and Ducum bonorum, atque sanctorum Episcoporum,
aliorumque Sapientum, Monachorum scil. atque Clericorum, quorum prudentia, etc.
X. Script. p. 114.
Lastly,

At the great Council of Westminster, convened Anno 1066. by Edward the
Confessor, upon the Consecration and endowment of that Abbey, there was
Generalis totius fere Nobilitatis Angliae Conventus Hist. Ramseyens c. 120.
; and, on the Church part, Episcopi and Abbates totius Angliae, and Monachi,
and Clerici Spelm. ibid. p. 629.
, who went aside to excommunicate the Infringers of the Privileges then
granted.

These Instances are so plain as to need no Comment, and to admit no fair
Reply. Dr. W. indeed seems to have laid in matter for an Evasion, where he
speaks of Ecclesiastical Synods properly so called, at which the King, and his
Nobility were present; insinuating, that we are to distinguish these from those
mixed Saxon Councils, composed originally, and equally of the Clergy and Laiety.
But this is an imaginary Distinction, for which there is no foundation in
History. There were indeed in these times Ecclesiastical Synods properly so
called, without any intermixture of the Laiety; but there was no Business
appropriated particularly to these; the most solemn Church affairs being
transacted generally at the State-meetings by the Clergy then assembled; who
went aside and consulted among themselves, and then laid the result of their
Debates before the great Council of the Realm, in order to be confirmed by
them. And wherever therefore we find the several Orders of the Laiety present,
we must consider, that that Assembly, where they were present, was a State
Council, though matters properly of Ecclesiastical Cognizance were transacted
in it. Besides, several of those Councils I have instanced in, had Civil as
well as Church Affairs before them, and made Laws in both equally; which is a
sure sign that they were not pure Ecclesiastical Synods.

It may perhaps further be urged, that the Lower Clergy present at these
State-Councils, were no part of them, but called only to a Synod by their
Metropolitan, at the same time and place that the great Council of the Realm
met. But they who shall thus pretend, must produce some good Evidences and
Authorities to support this pretense, and not expect that we should take their
bare word for it; the common appearances of History being on the other side.
However, allowing this Scheme true, yet is it some proof of the Interest which
the Inferior Clergy had in those State-meetings, if they were used to assemble
together with them, though not in them; this being the only Interest they at
present claim.

Not that I believe them to have had place in all (even the most ordinary and
stated) Assemblies, but only in the Greater and more Extraordinary ones; the
Wittena-gemots, and Mycel-Synods, the Magna Concilia, and Pleni Folcmoti, which
are plainly destinguish'd from the less Solemn and Numerous Councils; and which
met together only ex arduis contingentibus, and legum condendarum Gratia, as
Sir H. Spelman observes In Voce Gemotum p. 261. ^.
: The foundation (as I have said) being laid thus early of that difference,
which afterward more plainly appeared, between Councils, and Parliaments,
properly so called; which was no new Institution set up first by the Normans,
but the old usage of our Saxon Ancestors, Time without Memory.

Nor do I suppose that the Clergymen of lower Rank called to these Full
Conventions treated always as freely, and acted as authoritatively as the
constant and standing Members did: No, I take them as to this, to have been
much in the same case with the inferior Laiety, who are said oftentimes to have
been present at such great Councils, and to have consented to, and approved
what was done there, but not often to have deliberated or determined; just as
the Lesser Members of the German Colloquia, or Synods (the Patterns of our
English ones) are represented by Hincmar In the passage mentioned p. 30. of
^his Book.
to have interposed in them.

The Doctrine here laid down is no new Scheme of mine, contrived to serve a
Turn, but what has in the main been long ago asserted by the Learned Mr.
Sheringham, in his Book of the Supremacy. In the Saxon Times (says he) Laws
were commonly made by the Approbation and Consent of the Nobles, Archbishops,
and Bishops, in a Public Synod or Parliament: sometimes the Queen was present,
sometimes the Inferior Clergy, and sometimes also the Commons; but that happened
very seldom P. 52.
. Which coming from the Pen of one of known skill in our English Antiquities,
and in a Treatise not at all designed to assert the Liberty of the Subject,
does on both these accounts carry a particular weight with it; and will with
those who have a due regard for that excellent Writer, be a strong presumption
of the truth of all I have offered on this Argument.

Another clear proof of the Lower Clergys assisting frequently at those Great
Councils, may be drawn from the Subscriptions of Charters, where we frequently
meet with Capellani and Presbyteri, and sometimes with simple Deacons, among
the other Witnesses. One instance or two have been given already, to which
these following ones may be added.

A Charter of King Ethelred So it should be, though the MS. by the mistake of
the Scribe, puts Edgar instead of Ethelred.
to the Church of Paul's (Ann. 867.) is subscribed by several Ministri, Abbates,
and Presbyteri intermingled Lib. MS. Paul. Eccl. notat. B. f. 20. a.
.

In another of the same Prince to the same Church, after the Bishops, Duces and
Satrapae, two Presbyters and a Deacon follow. Ib. fol. 21.


The Saxon Chronicle affords us one of these Instruments (with all the
subscriptions at length) which belonged to the Church of Peterborough, and was
framed A. D. 664. and to this also Eoppa Presbyter, and Wilfridus Presbyter are
Witnesses P. 37.
.

But the two Charters of King Edgar to the Monasteries of Westminster and
Ramsey, are in this respect most observable. To the first, after the King, his
Sons, 14 Bishops, and 11 Abbats, 9 Presbyters subscribe; and the last of these
thus Writes, Ego Oswardus Presbyter cum supradictis, and cum aliis 107
Presbyteris, infractores hujus firmitatis excommunicavi. Nine Duces follow, and
after them this Note: Ad ultimum itaque una cum Rege and Filiis ejus nos omnes
Confratres and Coepiscopi, and cum tota hac populosa and sancta Synodo ejusdem
loci, omnes futuros Abbates, etc. contestamur -- Quatenus, etc. Quod si aliquis
praesumpserit, illum sicut Violatorem atque Transgressorem hujus Nostri
Decreti, imo Apostolici, ante summum judicem, cum venerit saeculum judicare per
ignem, responsurum super hac re invitamus Cartularium Caenobii Westminster. in tit.
Sulcardus. Bibl. Cot. Faustina. A. 3. fol, 11.
. That to the Monastery of Ramsey is signed by fix Presbyters, and the last of
the six adds also, Ego Aethelsi Presbyter cum supradictis and aliis
quamplurimis Presbyteris infractores hujus firmitatis excommunicavi. It passed
in a mixed Council of those times, cum in Natali Dominico (as the Charter
speaks) omnes Majores totius regni mei, tam Ecclesiasticae Personae quam
Saeculares, ad Curiam meam celebrandae mecum festivitatis gratia convenissent.
The Alii Quamplurimi Presbyteri are also mentioned once again in the Body of
it; and in the Close this Passage occurs, Post hujus itaque Privilegii
donationem excommunicaverunt omnes Episcopi, Abbates, Presbyteri, qui in
plurima numerositate eodem die affuerunt, eos qui hoc institutum in fringerent,
etc. Monast. vol. 1. pp. 235, 236.


To which I shall add a like Passage from the Confessor's Privilege to the
Church of Westminster; Post hanc Donationem excommunicaverunt omnes Episcopi
and Abbates totius Angliae, and Monachi, ac Clerici, eos qui hoc constitutum
infringerent Ibid. p. 61
.

I could multiply Instances of this kind, but I forbear; because these, I
think, are sufficient to show, that the Inferior Clergy were an usual Part of
the great Saxon Councils; since their Names are often either added to, or
mentioned in those Charters, which passed in such Councils, and which were not
otherwise held Valid and Binding; as appears by a remarkable Instance, briefly
set down in the Evidentiae Cantuarienses X. Script p. 2218.
, but more largely explained by the Monasticon Egbertus and Athelwolf filius
ejus dederunt Ecclesiae Christi, etc. quod Manerium prius eidem Ecclesiae dedit
Baldredus Rex: Sed quia non fuit de consensu Magnatum regni, donum id non
potuit valere. Et ideo isto anno in Concilio apud Kingstone celebrato ab
Archiepiscopo ^eolnotho restauratum est Ecclesiae antedictae. Vol. 1. p. 20.
, out of another Writer. And if in the Subscriptions to many other such
Privileges and Muniments, we find none of the Clergy under Abbats, that is not
to be wondered at; since the Members only of highest Rank and Dignity were used
to sign, though all consented; as we have already See p. 32. of this Book.
heard from Ingulphus, and may from the following Passages in some of the
Conquerors Charters further learn. One of them made in the 15 th. Year of his
Reign thus concludes, Convenientibus in unum cunctis Patriae Primatibus in
Nativitate domini, etc. Scripta est haec Charta and auctorisata, and ab
Excellentioribus Regni Personis Testificata, and Confirmata, and Corroborata
Sulcardus f. 42.
. In another of the Year 1075, passed in an Universal Synod, as the word there
is, the Conqueror decrees, Communi Consensu, maxim Episcoporum, Abbatum, and
aliorum in signium nostrorum Procerum Ib. fol. 39.
. And in a third, granted A. D. 1077. the subscriptions are but few: However
the Members composing that Synod where it passed (the Charter it self tells us)
were Numerous, and all these are said Hanc eandem [Chartam] cooperante sibi in
omnibus Divina Pietate honorifice perficientes complevisse. Quorum igitur
Memoriam and Nomina singulatim exprimere, and huic Paginulae longum and
fastidiosum videtur exprimere Ibid. p. 38.
. So that though the Subscriptions of Charters inform us clearly who were Members
of those great Councils, yet do they not show us also who were not; since
Multitudes were Present at such Meetings, who yet did not Subscribe.

It is not however improbable, that under the Title of Ministri, some of the
Inferior Clergy might often be comprehended; especially when these Ministri
signed, as they sometimes did, in great Numbers, and so as to bear no
Proportion to the other Ranks of Witnesses, either of the Clergy, or Laiety
Thus a Charter granted to the Monastery of Abingdon is attested by 60 Ministri,
7 Duces, and 8 Bishops. Monast. v. 1. p. 103.
. This will seem a Paradox; however, there is more to be said for it, than at
first sight may be imagined. For as Minister, and Thane, were words Equivalent,
so it is certain that the latter of these was applied frequently to Spiritual
Persons; sometimes to Bishops Adeo ut multi de Nobilissimis Thanis mortem
obirent. -- Eorum unus fuit Swithulfus Episcopus de Hrofceaster. Chron. Sax. p.
97.
, but more often to Presbyters, who in Athelstan's Laws, are termed Apud
Jorval. pp. 845.846.
Messe-Thegnes, [or Thanes Spiritual] in opposition to Woruld Thegnes [or
Thanes Temporal] and were at other times called Ministri Dei Ibid. p. 841.
, and Theo-Thayni, if the Manuscript Note of a learned Person does not deceive
me. In a certain Charter I find one Ethelwald thus signing, Wintoniensis
Ecclesiae Minister and Glastoniae Monachus Monast. vol. 1* p. 17.
; in another, Ego Ingvaldus Presbyter, and humilis Minister vocatus audivi
Ingulph. p. 4.
. Sir H. Spelman further says, that the Religiosi are sometimes in old Books
called Ministeriales Glossar. in voc Minister.
, and that in Domesday the Terra Tainorum Ecclesiae is often expressly mentioned
Reliq. Spelman n. p. 42.
. Dr. Brady adds, that under the Title of Terra Tainorum Regis, the Lands of
Priests, and other Inferior Clergymen are often included Introd. App. p. 21.
. However, this I propose as a Conjecture only, to be admitted or refused, as
the Men of more skill in these Matters shall agree upon it: That which I insist
on, is, that the Attestations and Style of these Charters make it manifest,
that many of the Lower Clergy had place in those great Councils which confirmed
them. How, and in what Capacity they were summoned thither; whether as
representing any part of the Spiritualty, or as the King's immediate Servants
and Dependants, (his Hand-Preosts, and Hir'd-Cleres, as the Capellani and
Presbyteri Regis are in the Saxon Chronicle odly called) is another Enquiry,
which it is not very easy, nor very necessary at present to determine.

Nor matters it much, whether the Charters I have vouched be all Genuine, or
not: for supposing them forged, they must be allowed at least to be well
counterfited; or else they would not have passed upon knowing Men, when first
produced. The Monks, who Coined them, were no Bunglers; but understood very
well the state of those Times to which they adjusted these Instruments, and
drew them, no doubt, according to authentic Forms and Patterns. And a
Testimony therefore taken from thence concerning the Customs and Usages of
those times holds near as well, as if they were confessedly Genuine, and of the
very Age they pretend.

At the bottom of these Instruments See Evidentiae Cant. col. 2212.
, and of some Ecclesiastical Synods See Spelm. Conc. V. 1. pp. 328. and 325.
, among the other Inferior Clerks, Archdeacons now and then appear; and those
not Titular ones only, but such as had Authority, and held their Courts for
Matters Spiritual, even in the Saxon times; whatever a late Writer Nicolson
Hist. Lib. Vol. 3. p. 207.
pretends to the contrary, who both as an Antiquary, and an Archdeacon, should
have understood this point better. The Words of the Conquerors Writ, whereby he
separated the two Jurisdictions, are a plain Proof of this; for they run --
Nullus Episcopus, vel Archidiaconus de Legibus Episcopalibus amplius in Hundret
Placita teneat, etc. which implys the Archdeacons to have exercised
Jurisdiction in the Hundred Courts before the Conqueror came in; especially, if
we add the Praefatory Words of that Writ, where he styles these Usages such as
had obtaind in regno Anglorum usque ad mea tempora. But because this matter is
with so much assurance denied by that Writer, and is generally so much
mistaken, it may not be amiss, to add a few Instances more; some of which carry
the Proof of it above an hundred Years higher than the Era pretended. Sir H.
Spelman's Opinion in this Case is of Great Weight, and may go for a General
Proof: His Words are, The Archdeacon, in the Saxon times, had a superintendent
Power over all Parochial Parsons in every Deanery of his Precinct Rel. Spelm.
p. 50
. The Acts of the Synod of Worster, Printed by Mr. Wharton A. S. vol. 1. p. 543.
, recite a Constitution of St. Dunstan and Archbishop Oswald, made about the
middle of the X th. Century, which ordains, quod nullus Decanus, nullus
Archidiaconus de Monachorum Ecclesiis vel Clericis se intromittat, nisi per
Priorem Ecclesiae [Wigorn]. And there is an Elder Charter of this Dunstan,
while Bishop of London, still preserved In Cartulario Westminster. Faustina A. 3. f.
13
whereby he grants a burying place to the Church of Westminster, so that
whosoever petierit se ibi sepeliri, non impediatur vel ab Episcopo, vel ab
Archidiacono, vel a Parochiano suo Presbytero. The Northumbrian Canons also,
framed not much after, set this point beyond dispute: Two of these are,

6. Si Presbyter Edictum Archidiaconi non exequatur, XII Oris eluito.

7. Si Presbyter reus criminis contra Archidiaconi Prohibitionem Missam
celebraverit, XII Oris dependito. Spelm. Conc. V. 1. p. 496.
And methinks this Last Instance at least might have been known to a man who
professes to have made the Antiquitys of our Northern Countys his Peculiar
Study; and has ventured to add his insipid Remarks to those of the Learned
Cambden, particularly in that of Northumberland.

It Is true, the Great Man he mentions, places the Rise of the Archdeacons
Jurisdiction no higher than He does: but That was in favor to his Own Order;
in which cases the Best and Greatest Men are not allways so Discerning, or so
Indifferent as they ought to be. It was a slip of that truly Great Man's
Memory, who had not then the words of the Conquerors Writ in his View, which
prove the contrary: whereas our Archdeacon sleepily produces those very words
P. 207.
but a Page or two before he espouses this Opinion.

Nor can he pretend, that he is speaking only of the Archdeacon's Jurisdiction,
when it became Independent of the Bishops; whereas till the Conquest, he acted
merely as a Deputy: for besides that this is more than He knows, his Words are
plain, that the Archdeacons had no Jurisdiction in the Saxon times, their whole
Business being to attend the Bishops at Ordinations, and other Public Services
in the Cathedral P. 209.
. And the same is said, but in more forcible Terms, by the Great Man whose
Opinion he implicitly transcribes, and approves. But we are not to wonder, that
He who so Liberally gives up the General Rights of his Church, should be as
ready to quit any Particular Point that is to the Advantage of his Own Office
and Authority.

He makes amends however a little afterward P. 210.
, and learnedly proves, that the Archdeacon's Jurisdiction must be somewhat
older than the Council of Clarendon, from some Trite Passages in those
Constitutions, so notoriously known, that they have not escaped even Dr. W's
Enquirys See p. 125
. But if he must needs have produced a Proof of this lower than the Conquest,
why was not the Council of London under H. the I. thought of? where it was
decreed Eadmer. Hist. Nor. L. 4. p. 95.
, that the Archdeacons should take an Oath about the Execution of the Canons
then made; not to connive at the Breach of them for Money, but severely to
punish Offenders. This would have carried his Proof between 30 and 40 Years
higher than the Council of Clarendon, and would have showed his Reader, that he
did, not upon such Heads as these, content himself barely to transcribe those,
who had transcribed others; but conversed with Original Authors.

To make all he says on this occasion of a Piece, he further adds, That we
should not have known that the Bishops and Archdeacons were forbidden by the
Conqueror to mix Jurisdiction with the Earl, etc. in the Hundred, or
Shiregemots, but for an Inspeximus, 1. R. 2. m. 12. n. 5 P. 72.
. Not have known it! Why, there are diverse Authentic Manuscript Copys, or
Accounts of it yet in being, writ long before the time he talks of.
Particularly one entered in the Register of Winchelsey Fol. 1.
, where the Clergy in their Roll of Grievances recite it. Sir R. Twysden saw
another of the Hand of E. the I. Hist. Vind. p. 99.
Dugdale, in the Instruments relating to Paul's, A^p. p. 196.
has Printed a third of the same Age: And a much Ancienter Copy than any of
these is to be found in one of the Old Books of that Church, Lib. B. versus
finem.
writ about the Reign of R. I. between which, and that of R. II. there is
almost 200 Years distance, as my Almanac tells me. Mr. Archdeacon might have
modestly said indeed, that He himself had not known of this Charter, without
that Inspeximus; and some People would be apt to add, nor with it neither, if
he had been to fetch his Intelligence from the Records of the Tower: With which
had he been acquainted, he would have known, that this Inspeximus was of the 2
d. not of the 1 st. Year of R. II. as he imagines.

This, I am sensible, is a Digression; but I shall make no Apology for it,
either to Mr. Nicholson, or the Reader: The One of these, I hope, will overlook
it, if he does not like it; and the other may censure it in what manner he
pleases.

Having shown, that there was by our Original Constitution a difference between
the Greater and Lesser Councils of the Realm in the Saxon times; and this
Distinction being yet more Evident in the Latter Ages, from the middle of E.
the I. downwards; as our Records, preserved pretty well throughout this space
of time, abundantly testify: We cannot doubt, but that the same Distinction is
applicable also to the Intermediate Period; and that the Conqueror, and his
nearest Successors had also their Magna Concilia (called afterward Full
Parliaments) to which the Summons of their Subjects, both of the Clergy and
Laiety was more General, and the Resort more Numerous, than to their Ordinary
Courts and Councils, which were held de more, for the dispatch of common
Business, and at stated Times. And in such Extraordinary Meetings it is, that
we must chiefly expect to hear of the Inferior Clergys appearance.

Accordingly in one of them, held in the 11 th. Year of William the I. we find,
that a Charter then granted to the Monastery of Westminster is subscribed by
Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Comites, and alii Seniores, etc. multis praeterea
Illustrium Virorum Personis and Regni Principibus diversi Ordinis omissis, qui
similiter suae Confirmationi piissimo affectu Testes and Fautores fuerunt. Hii
etiam illo tempore a Regia Po^estate e diversis Provinciis and Urbibus ad
Universalem Synodum, pro causis cujuslibet Sanctae Ecclesiae audiendis and
tractandis ad praescriptum celeberrimum Canobium, quod Westmonasteriense
dicitur, convocati Spelm. Conc. Vol. 2. p. 14.
. It is plain, this was a mixed Meeting of the Temporalty, and Spiritualty, such
as were in use among the Saxons. Who were there on the Lay part, it is not my
Business to enquire: however, They who restrain the words most as to Them, yet
allow, that they must be understood to take in Deans, Archdeacons, and other
Dignified Persons of the Clergy Dr. Brady Introd. p. 302.
. This was an Extraordinary Assembly; the Conqueror is known also to have had
his more Ordinary Courts, which were held every Year at the Three Great
Festivals, and at which he appeared, Crowned and Robbed, in great State and
Splendour. And of what Persons, These were composed we learn from the Saxon
Annals, where they are thus reckoned up; Archbishops, Bishops and Abbots,
Earls, Thanes and Knights P. 190.
, i. e. all who held by Knight Service. And among These, that several of the
Lower Clergy had place, appears from the Survey of Doomsday; upon which, we are
told, there were found in England 60215 Knights Fees; and of these the
Religious possessed 28015, the Vills 1080, and Parochial Churches 4711 Author
Eulogii MS. apud. Seldom. Tit Hon.
. There is no doubt, but the Priests of these Parochial Churches, as well as
the King's Tenants in those Towns and Buroughs, were present, or represented
in his Curiae, whenever they assembled. And among Those who are termed
Religious, and who had in them near half the KnightsFees of all England, there
were, to be sure, some of the Saecular Clergy above Parish Priests, and below
Bishops. And these too appeared among his Tenants in chief, at such Assemblys;
and are comprehended in that General account given of one of these Courts in a
Cotton-Manuscript -- Convenerunt ad Regalem Curiam An. 1072.
apud Civitatem Wentanam in Paschali Solemnitate Episcopi, Abbates, caeteri ex
Sacro and Laicali Ordine Cleop. E. 1.7.
. Whether more of the Clergy than these, even some who held in Frank-almoigne,
might not be present at that Extraordinary Convention at Sarum, to which all
the [ Terrarii] or Landholders of note in England, repaired, cujuscunque Foedi
fuissent, (as M. Paris Ad ann. 1084. Cujuscunque feudi vel tenementi fuissent.
, the Waverly-Annals Ad ann. 1086.
, and Huntingdon P. 370. But he places it in the Conqueror's 19 th. Year.
expressly speak) may be worth an Enquiry.

In his Son H. the I's time* a Parliament met at London An. 1102
, and there the Spiritualty went aside, and made several Ecclesiastical
Constitutions Eadmerus p. 67.
. The Lower Saecular Clergy therefore were there, whose consent to the framing
of Canons was requisite; and so Hemingford's Relation of it plainly implys;
statuerunt (says he) Archiepiscopi, and Episcopi cum Clero -- which word,
Clerus, when opposed to Archbishops, and Bishops, must signify some of the
Inferior Saeculars or Regulars, and not merely Abbats and Priors.

In the Council of Gloucester, Ann. 1123. (which Hemingford has confounded with
the former) William de Corboyl was chosen Archbishop of Cant. Sim. Dunelm p.
247.
But not being a Religious, as all the Archbishops of Cant. from Austin down to
his time had been, the Prior and Monks of Cant. opposed his Election, and so
did all the other Monks of the several Orders there present; with whom most of
the Earls and Thanes also sided; if the Monk of Peterborough be not partial in
his Story Prior and Monachi de Cantwarabyrig, omnesque alii Monarchici Ordinis
Viri, qui ibi fuerunt, oppugnarunt illud integrum biduum, etc. Tunc elegerunt
quendam Clericum W. de Curboil nomine, etc. and Rex dedit ei Episcopatum: ac
omnes Episcopi eum susceperunt -- verum rejecerunt Monachi, and Comites, and
Thani pene omnes qui interfuerunt. Chron. Sax. p. 225.
. Monks only are mentioned here, because They only were engaged in the Struggle.

In King Stephen's time the Lower Clergys Interest in these State-meetings is
set in something a better Light by a Passage in a Charter of his to the Church
of Westminster, which recites, that in his third Year An. 1138.
there was at Westminster, Universal^ totius Angliae Concilium, at which
affuerunt quidam Comites Regni mei, and Barons mei quam plurimi, and innumera
Multitudo Cleri and Populi The Historians speak of this Meeting in the very
same words, particularly Gervasius; who after saying, there were 17 Bishops,
and 30 Abbats there, adds, cum Cleri and Populi multitudine numerosa. X.
Script. p. 1347. So also Continuator Florentii, ad ann. and Hagustald. p. 327.
, qui hiis omnibus interfuerunt, and religioso favore Voluntatem and Assensum
Auctoritatis, nostrae Paginae and Privilegio praebuerunt Sulcard. fol. 60.
.

M. Paris's Expressions relating to the following Reign, are yet Clearer. There
were summoned, he says (2 H. 2.) Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, multarumque
Ecclesiarum Praelati, cum Comitibus, and Baronibus totius regni, ut negotia
Regni and Ecclesiae pertractarent V. Abb. S. Aug. p. 79.
. And these last Words are probably those of the Writ it self, by which they
were summoned; and which lay before Paris, in the Register of St. Albans, that
he was then transcribing. In 1162, he tells us that the Universitas
Episcoporum, Abbatum, and aliorum Magnatum met at Westminster V. Abb. S. Aug.
p. 79.
: and these Alii Magnates are in his History explained by Comites, Barons,
Archidiaconi, and innumera turba regni P. 99. l. 1.
. And to the Articles of Clarendon, in 1164, he says there swore Archiepiscopi,
Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, Clerus, cum Comitibus, ac Baronibus, and Proceribus
cunctis; and this, not afterward, but upon the spot, Viva voce, in that very
meeting where these Constitutions were made.

With these accounts agree those which Gervase of Dover has given us of some
Great Councils in the same Reign. That at Northampton in 1157, was composed, he
says, of the Praesules and Principes regni, Abbates nonnulli, aliaeque
inferioris ordinis personae. And of another in 1168 he particularly observes,
that the Subprior and Monks of Cant. had their Writ to come to it Convocati
sunt, illico apud London Praesules and Praelati and Proceres, ut contra mandata
Alexandri Papae and Archiepiscopi omnes appellarent. Sed and Monachi Cant. ad
idem sunt Evocati. Act. Pontif. p. 1671. And to this, or some such other
Meeting, the following passage in his Chronicle referrs. Congregatio
Episcoporum and Abbatum, and aliarum personarum Ecclesiasticarum apud Londonias
facta est. Sed and Subprior and Monachi Cant. Ecclesiae Imperio Regis jussi
sunt etiam adesse. p. 1404.
. He mentions Those only, because He himself was one of their Number.

And in the last Year of this Prince An. 1188
we are by Hoveden told, that he did Magnum celebrare Concilium Episcoporum,
Abbatum, Comitum, and Baronum, and aliorum multorum tam Clericorum quam
Laicorum P. 642.
.

In the 6 R. I. the same Writer informs us that the Bishops, Earls and Barons
were called to the Commune Concilium regni; and the first day that they met,
the Archbishops, the Bishops, Abbats, and Clerici multi Cant. Dioces. i. e.
Province.
went aside into the Chapel of the Infirmary at Westminster, and
Excommunicated Earl John, and all his Adherents.

5to. Ioh. Military Aids were given the King by his Great Men in a Colloquium
at Oxford: Nec etiam Episcopi and Abbates, sive Ecclesiasticae Personae, sine
promissione recesserunt M. Par. p. 209.52.
.

17o. Ioh. Convocatum est Parliamentum Londoniis, praesidente Archiepiscopo cum
toto Clero, and tota Secta Laicali Author Eulogii apud Seldom. Tit. Hon. part
2. c. 5.
Which Expression, how forcible soever, yet being General, I should not have
mentioned, had not the Learned Sir R. Cotton made use of it before, to show,
that the Inferior Ministers of the Church, as well as Bishops, had suffrage in
Parliament Remains p. 209.
.

Indeed some of this Princes Great Councils seem, as to the Spiritual part of
them, to have been composed only of Bishops, Abbats and Priors; as may probably
be collected from a Writ in his 8 th. Year Pat. 8. Ioh. m. 1. apud Pryn. Parl.
Wr. 1 Vol. Praef.
, reciting, that these Great Clergymen had granted him an Aid in Parliament;
and demanding the like Aid of the Saecular Clergy of the Province of Cant.
below Bishops, then assembled in Convocation. However in others of them, more
of the Clergy were plainly present; particularly in one 15to. Ioh. at London,
to which Stephanus Cant. Arch. cum Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Decanis,
and Baronibus regni is said to have come *. And the Archdeacons, though not
specified were probably there; for the Clergy we find, went Synodically apart,
and made Canons; which implys the Presence and Concurrence of the Archdeacons,
who were a necessary part of every Synod; and had therefore, almost an 100
years before this, been summoned particularly by the Archbishop to the Council
of London An. 1125 See the Archbishops Writ of Summons in Spelm. Conc. Vol. 2.
p. 33. taken out of the Codex Landavensis. It Is the most ancient Summons of any
kind that I have ever observed.
.

In the next Reign, the Archdeacons presence in Parliament is frequently taken
notice of by our Historians, as may appear from the following Passages in M.
Paris, and the Annals of Burton.

1231/2 XVI. Call. Ian. habitum est apud S. Albanum ingens Consistorium Abbatum,
Priorum, Archidiaconorum, cum fere tota Nobilitate regni, Magistrorum, and
Clericorum -- M. Par. p. 372.

1247. Fecit Dominus Rex Magnates suos, nec non and Angliae Archidiaconos per
Scripta sua Regia Londinum evocari. Ib. p. 719. and again, Convenerant etiam
tunc ibidem, ut praetactum est, Archidiaconi Angliae, nec non and totius Cleri
pars non minima, cum ipsis Magnatibus conquerentes communiter super
intolerabilibus and frequentibus Exactionibus domini Papae. -- Tandem de
Communi Consilio provisum est, ut Gravamina terrae domino Papae seriatim
monstrarentur ex part Communitatis totius Cleri and Populi regni Anglicani.
pp. 720, 721.

1255. Post festum St. Mich. tenuit Rex Parliamentum suum apud Westminster,
convocatis ibidem Episcopis, Abbatibus, and Prioribus, Comitibus, and
Baronibus, and totius Regni Majoribus, in quo petebat a Clero de Laicis Foedis
suis sibi [Suffragium] Subsidium.
exhiberi -- disponens hoc prius a Clero, and post ea a Populo Majori and
Minori extorquere. Episcopi vero, Abbates, Priores, and Procuratores qui ibidem
pro Universitate affuerunt, nolentes huic exactioni adquiescere -- Gravamina
summo Pontifici sub sigillis destinarunt, Quorum Tenor Talis est.

De Archidiaconatu Lincolniae Articuli pro Communitate. Procuratores
Beneficiatorum Archidiaconatus Lincoln, pro tota Communitate proponunt, etc.
Ann. Burt. pp. 355, 356.

1256. A Writ from the Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry to the Archdeacon of
Stafford, commanding him to collect the Papal Procurations, ipsam Pecuniam tali
die in Parliamento Londoniensi nobis assignantes (Ibid. p. 372.) Which supposes
the Archdeacons Then to have attended the Parliament. And accordingly the next
time it was assembled, we again find them there: For a Debate arising, this
Resolution was taken; Commune Concilium super hoc resedit, quod Decani,
Praelati Regulares, ac Archidiaconi tractabunt cum suis Capitulis and Clericis
it a quod ad mensem post Pascha redeant per Procuratores instructos ad plene
respondendum (Ann. Burt. p. 374.) The meaning of which was, that the Deans,
Priors and Archdeacons appeared in Parliament, not for themselves alone, but
for the whole Clergy of the Body, or District over which they presided;
bringing up from them Procuratorial Letters See a Bishop's Mandate to this
purpose, in the next Year (1257) which runs, ut praedicti Dicanus and Prior
dictarum Cathedralium Ecclesiarum [ Cov. and Litchf.], Abbates, and alii
Priores, cum Literis Procuratoriis nomine Congregationum suarum confectis, ac
dicti Archidiaconi cum Literis similibus factis ex part Clericorum qui subsunt
eisdem -- dictis die and loco peronaliter intersint. Ann. Burt. p. 382. This
Summons was purely Synodical. P. 9. of this Book, I have given two Instances,
wherein the same method was at this time practiced in relation to the
Parliament.
, in which their Powers were sometimes specified, and limited: and this made a
Recourse to their Principals necessary, as often as any thing was proposed,
that exceeded the Limits of those Powers. This was by way of Indulgence to the
Lesser Clergy, in times, when Summons to Parliaments were very frequent, and
consequently Attendance there very Expensive and Troublesome. And the
constitution of Reading therefore (so often cited) which first made distinct
Proctors from the Rural Clarks of every Diocese, a fixed and necessary part of
the Clergys Parliamentary Assemblys, did it not as a Privilege, but a Burden:
for it commands them to be returned, etiamsi de Conturbatione vel Expensis
oporteat fieri mentionem, i. e. notwithstanding the Trouble and Charge it might
be to them. This they felt not, while the Archdeacons were Commissioned to act
for them; who being bound Themselves to attend in Person, by taking
Procuratoria from the Inferior Clerks, lessened Their Charge, without
increasing their Own: But as soon as the Clergy sent up Distinct Proctors, they
were obliged to maintain them.

The Laiety, I find, were at this time indulged in like manner, but in an
Higher Degree: for in the Parliament of Oxford (Ann. 1258.) this Memorable
Provision was made, which I shall for more than one reason here insert entirely.

Si fet a remembrer ke le Commun es^ise XII prodes homes ke vendrunt as
Parlemenz (which by the last Article were to be held three times every Year)
and autre fez quant mester serra, quant Rei, u sun Cunseil, les mandera pur
treter de bosoingnes del Rei and del Reaume. Et ke le Commun tendra pur estable
cer ke ces XII. frunt: and ceo serra fet pur esparnier le Cust del Commun Ann.
Burt. p. 416.
.

These Words, at first sight, might pass well enough for a Proof, that the
Commons of England, properly so called, were now represented in Parliament. But
upon comparing the several parts of the Relation, it appears, that these very
Twelve, who are here said to be elected par le Commun, are in another place
mentioned as chosen by the Barons. And therefore the Community here spoken of,
must be the Community of the Baronage, or Military Tenants, who (the Highest as
well as the Lowest) did, it seems, empower this Committee of Twelve to act for
them in the three Annual Parliaments then appointed to be held. And These,
together with the King's Council of Fifteen (at the same time chosen) had
Authority to make Acts and Ordinances; as appears evidently from the Provisions
published the next Year, in the Parliament at Westminster, of which it is said
-- Ces sunt les Purveances and les Establissimentz ^aitz a Westmoster al
Parliament, a la seint Michel, par le Rei and sun Conseil Who the King's Council
were, appears p. 413
, and les XII par le Commun Conseil esluz, (after which these remarkable Words
follow) par devant le Communance de Engleterre, ke dunke fu a Westmuster, le an
del regne Henry le fiz le Rei Johan quarantieme terz Ibid. p. 435.
. The Community of England therefore, as distinguished from the Community of
Barons, or Great Tenants in Chief, (represented here by the Committee of XII)
were at, and of this Assembly; though the Enacting part of the Provisions then
passed, did not run in Their Name, whose proper Province it was to Represent,
and to Petition. Accordingly at their Instance these very Provisions were made,
as the same Annals inform us, -- Significavit Communitas Bacheleriae Angliae
Domino Edvardo filio regis, Comiti Gloverniae, and aliis Iuratis de Concilio
Regis apud Oxoniam, quod dominus Rex totaliter fecerat and adimplevit omnia and
singula quae providerant Barons, and sibi imposuerant facienda; and quod ipsi
Barons nihil ad utilitatem reipublicae sicut promiserant fecerunt, nisi
Commodum Proprium and Damnum Regis ubique; and quod nisi inde fieret Emendatio,
alia ratio Pactum reformaret. -- Upon which it follows -- Tandem videntes
Barons magis expedire promissa sua per seipsos adimpleri quam per alios,
public fecerunt Provisiones suas promulgari subsequentes pp. 427, 428.
. Here the Communitas Bacheleriae Angliae are the same with the Communance de
Engleterre before mentioned: And that These were no Tumultuary Rabble, but a
Constituent Part of the Parliament, who had an Interest there, and a Power of
acting within their proper Sphaere, is manifest from their threatening the
Barons, that if they did not publish the Provisions agreed on at Oxford, they
would do it themselves; that is, they would step out of their Circle, and
Ordain, whereas they were used only to Represent, or to Petition.

And that this word, Bachilers, was then applied to the Commonalty, as we now
understand the word, may be gathered, I think, from another Writer Wykes.
, who a few Years after this tells us, that the Inferior sort of People, who in
every Town and Borough, did without, and against the Governing part of it
combine together for the Redress of Grievances, styled themselves by this Name;
in imitation, I suppose, of the great Communitas Bacheleriae Angliae, who
pushed on this Reformation in Parliament. Indeed Wykes, a Warm Advocate for the
Crown, uses the word there in an angry and reproachful Sense; the
Licentiousness, and Disorders of those Times having distasted him: but that it
had a more Honorable Meaning some Years before this M. Paris shows Ad Ann.
1244.
; and that it recovered its Credit again, and was long afterward employed to
signify those Commoners of Lower Rank, who had place in Parliament, take these
two Instances out of many.

Rex die crastino Coronationis suae de assensu Baronum sibi assistentium
delegit and per Literas suas Patentes vocavit and constituit duos Episcopos,
duos Comites, duos Barons, duos Bannerettos, and quatuor Bachiliers de
Consilio, Statu, Honor, and Emolumento Regis and Regni procurando and
ordinando, etc. Rot. Pat. 1. R. 2. p. 2. m. 16.

And again in the last Year of this Prince, the Lower House of Parliament are,
in the Instrument of his Deposition See it ad calcem X Script.
, more than once called The Bachilers and Commons of this Land.

Upon the Whole therefore I must needs, till I am better informed, think this a
clear Proof, that the Commons, properly so called, had Interest in Parliament,
before the 49 H. III; notwithstanding what has been said to the contrary by
some Learned Persons, whom for their great Skill in our English Antiquitys I
honor. And with due Reverence to Them, I shall (since I am upon this Head) beg
Leave further to say; That had such a Change happened all at once, in this Point
of time which they have pitched upon, some of our English Annals would to be
sure have taken notice of it: which yet I do not find that any One of them has
done. On the contrary, several of them speak of the Parliaments preceding this
in Terms that imply them to have been at least as Numerous. For instance, a
Parliament in the 48. H. III. is thus described by Matthew. of Westminster,
Maxima coadunatur Congregatio Londini Procerum and caeterorum Praelatorum
regni, quanta non est visa longo tempore in Anglia P. 384. To this Parliament
the Record ( printed by Mr. Petyt Miscell. Parl. p. 41.) referrs, which
contains a Form of Peace a Domino Rege, and Domino Edmundo, Praelatis and
Proceribus, and Communitate tota regni Angliae communiter and concorditer
approbata. It was sealed in Parliament, de consensu, voluntate, and praecepto
domini Regis, nec non Praelatorum, Procerum, ac etiam Communitatis, tunc ibidem
praesentium. Rot. Parl. 48. H. III. pars. unic. m. 6. dors. in Scaccario.
; and of another in the same year, he says, M^gnum celebratum est Parliamentum
Londini Ibid.
: the very word that is used of that in the 49 II. III. by the, Annals of
Waverley P. 216.
; which Wykes passes over with this mention only, Convocatio non mimima
Procerum Anglicorum P. 65.
. This was, I know, a very busy and bloody Year, and bred much business for the
Pens of our Historians: However no Passage in it could be more Considerable
than this of the Enlargement of our Great Councils, had it then newly happened;
nor would have deserved better to be recorded. When the Clause, Premunientes,
was first inserted into the Bishop's Writ, our Historys take notice of it
Knighton. Annal. Winton. Chron. Abendon.
; and so they would (some of them at least) of these New Writs for the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, had they then first issued out. It Is true, the same
Objection lys against fixing the Date of this Change in any Year, if it were
necessary to fix it in any, which I suppose it is not: the Alteration being, as
I apprehend, not made all at once, by any sudden and Violent Shock in the
Government; but introduced leysurely, and by easy degrees, according as the
Exigences of the Times, and the Designs of the Partys th^n contending either
for Empire, or Liberty would allow of it: the Barons favoring the growth of the
Commons Interest in Parliament, as promising themselves from thence an
assistance toward making their stand against the Crown; and the King hoping
also by Their Means to be the better able to curb his Troublesome Barons. And
the steps by which their Parliamentary Interest grew to the full Height
wherein we find it, toward the Latter End of H. the III, were such as These.
Sometimes the King wanted an Account of the Ancient Customs and Usages of the
Realm, and directed Writs therefore to the Sheriffs, to return a certain Number
of Knights for every County, to inform Him, and his Great Council concerning
them: This was practiced in the Conqueror's Reign Chronic. Litchfeld. apud
Seldom. in Eadm. p. 172.
. At other times, when the People had layn under Great Oppressions and
Grievances, the Shires were ordered to send up each their Representatives, who
should lay the Particulars before the King and his Nobles: Such a Summons went
out in the 15 th. Year of King John M. Par. p. 239.
. And the same Year also there was a more General General Call of Quatuor
Discreti Milites de quolibet Comitatu, ad loquendum nobiscum de Negotiis regni
nostri Cl. 15. Ioh. pt. 2. m. 7. dors. apud Seld. T. H. p. 587.
; without specifying the Particular Business about which they were summoned.
Sometimes these Knights were, together with the Sheriffs, to appear in
Parliament, and account for their several Shires, in relation to some Subsidys
formerly granted, the Collection of which they had been appointed to take care
off Cl. 4. H. 3. m. 5. dors.
: sometimes they were called up in order to a Grant; ad providendum (as the
Words of the Writ are Cl. 38. H. 3. m. 7. and 12. dors.
) una cum Militibus aliorum Comitatuum, quos ad eundem diem vocari fecimus,
quale Auxilium nobis in tanta necessitate impendere voluerint. They were to
take their Instructions from a Country-Meeting, where the Busyness of this
Assembly was previously to be debated, and the Result of those Debates was to
be laid before the King and his Great Council, by these special Messengers,
quos iidem Comitatus elegerint, vice omnium and singulorum eorundem. By these,
and such steps of these, the Commons recovered their Privileges, which the
Norman Conquest seems to have eclyps'd a little, without extinguishing; and not
only recovered, but enlarged 'em: till they came at last, about the End of H.
the III. to that Height of Parliamentary Power and Interest which they now
enjoy. And by the like steps, I question not, the Lower Clergy rose also;
bearing the Commons Company on all these Occasions, as they remarkably did in
the Last Instance produced: where, at the same time that Praecepts went out to
the Sheriffs to return duos Legales and Discretos Milites for every Shire,
Writs went out also to the Bishops to convene the Clergy of each Diocese, and
propose the Kings busyness to them, and from that Diocesan Meeting, to send up
certain discreet Men by them Chosen; who should attend at the same Time and
Place, and for the same Purposes that the Knights of Countys did Pryn. Reg.
Parl. Wr. Vol. 1. p. 4, 5.
.

It cannot therefore be said, that the Commons were first called to Parliament
in the 49 H. III; but that they then, or there abouts, began to be Summoned
thither uninterruptedly, and to grow a fixed and necessary part of the Meeting.
The Learned Advocate, I know, on the other side has doubted (and Dr. W.
therefore is very pardonable in doubting after him) whether from the 49. H.
III. to the 18 E. I. any Summons went out, because the Writts are lost. But
this, I think, will bear no doubt: for that Loss is, as it happens, pretty well
supplied by our Histories; and I shall produce the Passages from thence that
prove it.

The Parliament of the next Year which met after the E. of Leicester was slain,
and the King set at Liberty, is just so spoken of as that in the 49 th. Factum
est Parliamentum Magnum Wintoniae Ann Waverl. p. 220.
; and so is that in 1266, at Kenilworth Iibid. p. 224.
, and another in 1268, at Northampton Ibid. p. 222.
. In which Year also Wykes's words are, that the King convened all the
Praelates and Great Men, nec non cunctarum Regni sui Civitatum Pariter and
Burgorum Potentiores-confluente pariter Plebeiae Multitudinis ( i. e. of the
Commonalty of every County) Turba non modica Chronic. p. 85.
.

But more express are the words of the former Annalist, in the 1. E. I. when,
he says, Convenerunt Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Comites, Barons, Abbates,
Priores, and de quolibet Comitatu Quatuor Milites, and de qualibet Civitate
Quatuor Ann. Waverl. p. 227. The ^ame words occurr also into the Annalls of
Worster, apud A. S. Vol. 1. p. 499. and in Annals Monasterii Hidae extra
Winton. MS. Bibl. Bodl. 1891.
.

1274. The Assembly that met per Evocationem Regiam, upon E. the I's Return
into England, was composed of Comitum, Baronum, and Militum Copiosa Caterva,
besides the Representatives of the City of London, and caeterarum Civitatum,
and Oppidorum totius regni Wykes p. 187.
; to wit, of such as sent Members to Parliament.

1275. The Statute of Westminster was made by the Assent of Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Counts, and tout la Cominaltie de la Terre illonques
summone^s.

1282. The King's Writ to the Archbishop recites, that he had begun the War
with Lewellin, de Consilio Praelatorum, Procerum, and Magnatum regni, nec non
and totius Communitatis ejusdem. Dat. apud Rotholan. Nov. 22. regni 11
Registrum Peckam.
.

1285. Circa festum S. Mich. rex convocari fecit apud Salopesbiriam Majores
regni sui and sapientiores tam de Civibus quam de Magnatibus Wykes p. 111.
.

1288. Convocatis Edicto publico regni magnatibus -- Episcopus Eli, Regis
Thesaurarius, petiit Subsidium a Comitibus and Baronibus, imo and generaliter
ab Omnibus Incolis regni. Which last words are applied to the Commons, in the
Writs Writ of 23 E. I. summons ad trac^and cum Praelatis, Proceribus, and aliis
Incolis regni. Dugd. Surm. p. 10.
and Historys M. Westminster. ad ann. 1297. Exigendo pro hac concessione ab Incolis
octavum denarium. Qui mox concessus est a Plebe in sua tunc Camera
circumstante. p. 430.
of those times.

This Collection of Authoritys is Material, not only as it affords us a proof,
that from the 49 H. III. to the 18. E. I. the Commons continued to be Summoned;
but as it is a strong Presumption also, that they were so summoned before it.
For had they first been called, when the King was under a Force, and in the
hands of Simon Momfort, as soon as that Force had been removed, and the King at
Liberty, such a Practice, so ill begun, would certainly have been discontinu'd:
whereas we find on the contrary, that the Last Eight Years of H. the III. and
the first Seventeen of E. the I. afford us frequent Instances of it. And (which
deserves our Notice) it then grew to be most frequently used, and most
unalterably fixed, when E. the I. one of the most Potent and Glorious Monarchs
that ever swayed the English Scepter, was arrived at the utmost pitch of his
Power and Grandeur. So far is that Excellent Constitution of Parliaments, we at
present live under from owing its rise to the Weakness of our Princes, and the
Encroachments made by Rebellious Subjects upon their Royal Authority.

As for the Appeal made to our Records, it has, I presume, no manner of weight:
for what wonder, if in such times of War and Confusion all the Writs of Summons
to the Commons before this Era should be lost? The same thing has happened to
the Writs for the Temporal Lords also; none of which Elder than this date are
preserved: but I hope, it follows not from hence, that they were never before
this Summoned.

How Beaten a point soever this may be, I could not forbear saying something to
it, as it fell in my way; especially since it bears so near an alliance to the
subject I am upon: For it is certain (as I have said often, and shall once
again repeat) that the Parliamentary Interests and Privileges of the Commons
Spiritual and Temporal ran even always; or, at least, were never far a
sunder: and they do therefore, when made out, mutually prove each other.

And now, having said so much in this case my self, I may the more freely
venture to show the weakness of an Argument that has been lately offered on the
same side, by Mr. Nicholson. He has discovered a Record (where indeed one would
hardly look for it) in a Dictionary; which, he thinks, plainly proves that the
People had their Representatives in Parliament before the Era commonly
assigned; and he wonders that none who have written on this Argument, should
have taken notice of it Hist. Lib. Vol. 3. p. 60
. To Ease him of his wonder, I will whisper the reason of it to him in his Ear;
it was, because those Knowing Gentlemen saw it was frivolous, and not worth the
mentioning. The Words, as they stand in Somner's Translation are, --
Consiliarii qui fuerint electi a Nobis and a gentis Plebe in regno nostro, etc.
I have no skill in the Tongue, Mr. Somner had certainly a great deal, and Mr.
Nicholson has some, if at least we may take a Friends Praef. Chronic. Saxonic.
word for it. However in opposition to both, I must beg leave to say, that
either the Original is faulty, or the Translation not proper: and I do this,
upon very good Grounds, because it differs from the Translation which the
Parliament it self made of this Record: for, as Mr. Nicholson ought to have
known, it was published by them in three several Languages, English, Latin, and
French; and the French Copy of it we have in the Printed Annalls of Burton P.
417.
, which were written at the very Time when this Charter was framed. And there
the words are, Nostre Cunseil -- ke est eslu par nous, ou par la Commun de
nostre Reaume. It was, it seems, at that Oxford Parliament agreed, that the
Kingdom should be governed by a Council of Twenty Four, Twelve of which should
be chosen by the King, and Twelve by the Community, i. e. by the Baronage, not
by the Commons properly so called; as is manifest from the whole Course of the
Story, and particularly from that Branch of it, where the Names of the Twenty
Four are set down All but One.
, under these Titles; Electi ex part Domini Regis, and Electi ex part Comitum
and Baronum P. 412.
. And not the Electors only, but every one of the Twelve also, who were thus
Elected, were Barons. It is sufficiently evident from hence, that the words,
Electi a Plebe, give us no true account of that part of the Record they pretend
to Translate; and that our Historical Librarian therefore might have kept this
Rarity to himself, and the World not have been injured by his Reserv'dness.

Mr. Archdeacon fitly puts me in mind of the point from whence I wandered. I
was proving, that there is frequent mention of his Order, as called to
Parliament, in H. the III's Reign; and of this I gave several Instances: there
are others, which prove the yet Lower Ranks of the Clergy to have been present
there. For Example,

1229. 13. H. III. Fecit Rex convenire apud Westminster -- Dominos Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, Templarios, Hospitalarios, Comites, Barons,
Ecclesiarum Rectores, and qui de se tenebant in Capite, ad Locum praefixum and
diem, ut audirent Negotia memorata, and de rerum Exigentiis communiter
tractarent ibidem M. Par. p. 367.
. By Ecclesiarum Rectores here I understand, not Deans, and Archdeacons only,
but some of the Rural Rectors of Parishes; the words being employed in this
sense frequently in the Records of this Reign See Pat. 11. H. III. m. 10. apud
Pryn Eccl. Juris. T. 2. p. 406. Cl. 32. H. III. m. 12. dors. ibid. p. 718.
.

1232. A Tax is said to be given by the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors,
and Clerici terras habentes quae ad Ecclesias suas non pertinent Cl. 16. H.
III. m. 2. dors. Which M. Par. seems to have copied, where he says, that at
this Meeting there was given the King a 40th. ab Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Prioribus, Clericis and Laicis, p. 318.
, to which are joined, on the Laypart, Earls, Barons, Knights, and Freemen,
and Villani de Regno. A Learned Person Dr. Brady Introd. p. 220.
says these Clergymen were such as had Lands, the Fee of which was in the
Crown, and not in the Church: and if so, we must suppose 'em to be the
Parochial Priests of some of those Churches, which upon the Doomsday-Survey
were found to have 4711 Knights Fees in them. However that may be, again five
Years after this, we hear of these Clerks Cl. 21. H. III. m. 7. dors.
: only now the Record varys a little; for the Earls, Barons, Knights, and
Freemen give pro se, and suis Villanis; whereas still the Clerici terras
habentes, etc. are said to give for themselves.

Between these Two we have a Writ Pat. 20. H. III. m. 8. in tus apud Pryn,
Eccl. Jurisd. T. 2. p. 475.
, wherein the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and aliae Ecclesiasticae
Personae de regno are said to have granted an Aid de omnibus Foedis suis, tam
de illis de quibus nobis respondent quando Scutagium datur, quam de aliis quae
retinent ad Opus suum: and that this was a Grant in Parliament, we learn from
the Test of it (which is, May 4.) compared with M. Paris in this Year, where
he tells us, that 4. Kal. Maii (i. e. 8 days before) congregati sunt Magnates
Angliae Londini ad Colloquium, de Negotiis Regni tractaturi Ad ann. 1236. p.
429.
. And in the same History we are told of a Parliament 32. H. III, that there
came to it Edicto, Regio, totius regni Angliae Nobilitas; and among them,
Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and Clericorum multitudo copiosa. M. Par. p. 743.


These Testimonys are, I think, sufficient to show, that from the Conquest down
to E. the I. the Inferior Clergy had Place, and Interest in Parliament; being
there sometimes in Body, and as representing the Whole, sometimes in Part
only, and as entitled by their Tenures: the Lower Regulars and Saeculars
appearing now and then by distinct Proctors of their own, but more frequently
by their Priors and Archdeacons, particularly empowered to that purpose. Nor
matters it much, whether they were thus called up immediately by a Royal Writ,
or by an Ecclesiastical Summons only, issued out at the King's Instance;
since, whether cited this way or that, the Effect of their Citation was to
attend the Parliament: and accordingly the Memoirs of those times speak of them
as being of the Parliament, and as acting in it. They might be summoned often,
as they sat, Apart from the Laiety; but as they sat in Parliament, though
separately; so were they called to Parliament, though perhaps after a different
manner from the Laiety; and did there, together with the Greater Prelates,
compose a Full Representative of the Clergy, and the first Estate of the Realm.

This meeting of the Clergy with the Parliament was at first in One National,
but afterward in two Provincial Assemblys. When such Synods of the Province,
held concurrently with the Parliamentary Sessions, began, is hard to say: but,
to be sure, they were Older than E. I. in the beginning of whose Reign they
are, we find, by the Constitution of Reading mentioned, as Established
Customary Meetings: the Archbishop there, with the consent of the Synod,
ordaining, quod in Congregatione nostra tempore Parliamenti proximi post festum
Sti. Mich. ad Tres Hebdomadas per Dei gratiam futurum, praeter Personas
Episcoporum veniant duo Electi ad minus a Clero Episcopatuum singulorum, qui
Auctoritatem habeant una nobiscum tractare de hiis quae Ecclesiae communi
utilitati expediunt Anglicanae Constitt. Prove. ad finem Lynwood. p. 25.
.

It appears from hence, both that the Clergy were now used to attend the
Parliament in their Synods Provincial, and that the Parliament it self was now
used to sit after Michaelmas; since it could not else well have been spoken of
here as an Assembly that would at that time certainly convene. For this Council
of Reading sat down 29 July, and therefore (as Synodical Sessions were then
very short) rose in the beginning of August: at which time, there could be no
notice of the approaching Parliament (not yet summoned) but from common Custom
and Usage. And the same received Custom there was also, it seems, for the
Clergy at That and Other times to attend the Parliament; their Congregatio
tempore Parliamenti being not now first ordered, but spoken of as an ancient
and authorized Practice. These Clergy-Meetings however, though concurrent in Time
with those of Parliament, yet were not necessarily to be held at the same Place
also, where the Parliament was opened; but assembled oftentimes at some other,
either in the Neighborhood of it, or more Remote from it; as the Archbishop
thought fit, or the Churches Occasions required. Thus in 1290 (18. E. I.) The
Parliament met after Michelmas, at Clipston See Ryley's Placita Parliament* p.
63.
; but the Convocation, that was held concurrently with it, at Ely, upon the
Consecration of the Bishop of that Place Wikes ad ann.
.

And what the Form of the Archbishops Summons to these Parliamentary Synods
was, we may learn from a Procuratorium, relating to this very Meeting at Ely;
the most Ancient Instrument of the kind I have ever seen: and by it the Proxys
sent have power ad tractandum vobiscum and aliis Venerabilibus Patribus
suffraganeis Provinciae Cant. ac etiam totius Cleri Procuratoribus in Civitate
Eliensi, super his quae Dei honorem and publicam Utilitatem recipient, and ad
consentiendum hiis quae ibidem ad pacem and consolationem Ecclesiae, Dominique
Regis and Regni Angliae, Cleri Communitas inspirante Deo providebit Regi. strum
Henrici Prioris. f. 146.
. The first part of which seems to refer to this Assembly, as a Synod of the
Province; and the Latter, as a Convention of the Clergy, held for State-Ends,
in time of Parliament.

Thus stood matters, when the Clause Premunientes was first inserted, and by it
the Clergy of both Provinces were again called Nationally to Parliament, and
required strictly to attend at the very Time and Place at which the Parliament
assembled. How this Clause was executed upon the Inferior Clergy, and obeyed by
them, and what Interest it gave them in Parliament, has been already
considered so fully, that I need enter into no New Account of it.

But here, in the very Entrance of this Period, a famous Interruption of this
New Practice happened: the whole Body of the Clergy fell under the Displeasure of
the King, were put out of his Protection first, and out of his Parliament
afterward; and a Great Council of the Realm was held, Excluso Clero, without
summoning any One of the Spiritualty to it. This Instance some Modern Writers,
willing to reduce the Parliamentary Interest of the Clergy as low as they can,
are very full of; and Dr* Wake, among the rest, has very amply P. 232, 233.
from p. 348. to 355.
, and often dilated upon it: nor does it seem to have been rightly understood,
even by Those Grand. Quest. p. 182. Heylen Refor. Iustify'd, etc.
who on the Clergy's behalf have undertaken to account for it. For which
Reasons it will, I hope, be no unacceptable Entertainment to the Reader, if I
digress so far as to set this Piece of History in a Truer Light than it has
hitherto appeared; and show, that neither were the Clergy in this Instance to
be blamed so much, nor was the Exclusion of them carried so far, as is commonly
imagined.

Edward the First was the most Expensive Prince that perhaps ever sat on the
English Throne, and had by his Large and Frequent Demands almost exhausted all
his Subjects; particularly those of the Spiritualty, upon whom the Burden
still fell heavyest. His French, Welsh, and Scotch Wars, and Voyages to the
Holy Land, in some of which he was constantly engaged, putt him upon asking
supplys every Year of his Reign, and upon extorting 'em sometimes, when denied,
in a very Arbitrary and Illegal manner: and in these Demands he still grew
upon the Clergy, so that in his 22 d. Year, he had no less than a Moiety of
their Goods at once; which single Levy Ioh. de Eversden MS. in Off. Arm. ad
ann. 1294.. 314.
, a Cotemporary Writer, reckons to have amounted to 100100 l. A vast Sum, for
those times, to be raised, in One Year, upon any One Body of Men, and indeed
upon any One Kingdom! Nor was the Sum more Extraordinary, than the way of
procuring it. The King first seized all their Wool, and all the Wealth that was
laid up in any of their Churches or Monasterys: then calling 'em together, came
himself in Person to them, and demanded Half of their Movables Knighton Col.
2501. Joh. de Eversden thus relates the Story, -- Rex tum Precibus, tum
Exhortationibus, tum etiam Comminationibus praemissis Universos and singulos
Angliae Praelatos cum Clero, nec non and Religiosos omnes possessiones
obtinentes -- ad praestationem Medietatis omnium bonorum suorum Spiritualium ac
Temporalium -- compulit and violenter induxit.. 314.
(rightly so termed, at present; for he had taken 'em violently out of their
Owners hands, and put them safely under Lock and Key, in his Own Treasury at
London Knight. ibid. Wikes ad ann.
). Upon their demurring a little, they were threatened to be put out of his
Protection Kn. col. 2502.
, and a certain Blustering Knight stood up M. Wesim. ad ann.
, and bad the Man amongst 'em, who durst dispute the King's Demands, come
forth, that they might know him, and use him as he deserved. It was to no
purpose for Them to pretend to deny him Half, who had already All under his
Custody: and therefore at last they consented to it; and took out Letters of
Protection, directed Capitaneis Marinariorum, and iisdem Marinariis, etc. who,
it seems, at the beginning of the Dispute, had been sent to quarter upon them.
The form of the Writ to those Captain-Mareeners is very remarkable, and to be
seen among Ryley's Records P. 462.
; who also gives us an account of near 300 Letters of this kind, that issued
out for the Regular Praelats only. The very next Year to this, the King
demanded a Third M. West. pp. 425, 426.
of that Half that was left; and was, with great difficulty, and after a long
Contest, prevailed with to accept the Disme M. West. pp. 425, 426.
which they offered him. Wearied with these Exactions, and foreseeing no End of
them, the Clergy resolved at last to take refuge in the Pope's Authority (as
oppressed Men will seek Relief at any hand, where it is to be had); and, by
Archbishops Winchelsey's means, procured a Bull from Pope Boniface, forbidding
them to give any further Aids, without Consent of the Holy See: and upon this
Head, excused themselves in a Parliament held the next year at St. Edmundsbury
Nov. 3. 1296.
; where he again demanded a Fifth, after having (in Dr. Wake's Quaint
Expression) accounted his Circumstances to them P. 350.
: and that Excuse not being accepted, referred themselves, for their Final
Answer, to a Full Convocation of the Province; which should be called by
Ecclesiastical Authority; for now they met only upon a Lay-Summons. Respite
accordingly was given Them till Hilary next; and in the mean time their Stores
and Granaries all sealed up by the King's Officers, to be ready for
Confiscation, if they persisted in their refusal: as they did, when on the Day
prefixed they assembled at Paul's, by a Mandate from Archbishop Winchelsey See
his Register f. 205.
, and after 8 days M. West. p. 429.
fruitless debate separated. Upon which they were, as it should seem,
prosecuted in the King's Bench, and judged out of the King's Protection; one of
the Justices there, after sentence pronounced, adding openly, in terrorem,
these Memorable Words Vos domini Attornati Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum,
Abbatum, Priorum, and caeterarum Personatum omnium ex Clero, nuntiate Dominis
vestris and dicite, quod de caetero in Curia^ domini Regis nulla flet eis
justitia de quacunque re, etiam si illata fuerit iis injuria atrocissima.
Justitia tamen de eis fiet omnibus conquerentibus and e^m habere volentibus,
Knighton. c. 2491.
, You the Attornys of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons, tell your Masters, that from henceforth no Right shall
be done on their Behalf, in the King's Courts, whatever Injurys they receive;
but Justice shall be done upon them, at the suit of any Man. After this, their
Lands were seized, their Goods confiscated, and their Persons subjected to all
manner of Affronts and Indignities.

While they were under this Outlawry, the King called his Lay Nobles to Sarum,
and there held a Council, Excluso Clero; at which high Words arose, and great
Heats happened between Him and his Barons; so that Roger Bigod, Earl Marshal,
when upon his refusal to go in person to the Wars in Gascoigne, the King in
passion told him, By God, Sir Earl, you shall either go or hang; made this
sudden and stout reply, And by the same Oath, Sir, I will neither go, nor hang
Knight. p. 2493.
. Upon which He, and many others, left the Place in Discontent, and wearied
with the Kings Oppression and Tyranny (I speak the Words of Westminster Ad ann.
1297. p. 430.
) held a Parliament, in the Marches without him. The Meeting of Sarum being up,
the Archbishop summoned another Provincial Council to meet at Paul's, in
Midlent, 1297 Vide Procuratorium Subprioris and Capituli Bathon, apud Pryn.
Parl. Wr. Vol. 1. p. 118.
. But that too dispersed without coming to a Temper, or pitching upon any
Expedient. And thus the matter rested, till the Counts and Barons came in
openly to their Quarrel, as they did in a Parliament of that Year at Lincoln
Rex indixit Parliamentum apud Lincoln in Octavis S. Ioh. Bapt. in quo orta est
dissensio inter ipsum and quosdam Comites and Barons regni, quod tam Clerum
quam Populum intolerabili onere conabatur opprimere. Petebat enim iterato a
Clero medietatem omnium bonorum suorum, a Lai^cis vero sextum Denarium.
Responderunt ergo Comites and Barons, sine assensu Archiepiscopi Cant. and
totius Cleri tam onerosam and importabilem Exactionem se nullo modo subire. Sed
petebant instanter bona potius Ecclesiae Sanctae, and sua, injuste a Regiis
Ministris communiter capta indilate restitui, and Articulos and Punctos in
Magna Chasta contentos de caetero observari. Eversden, ad ann. 1297.
; jointly protesting against the King's Exorbitances, and insisting upon a
Redress of Grievances. So that the King, who saw himself opposed on All sides,
was forced at last to be reconciled to both, and to beg pardon of Both
together; as he did, even with Tears, when he restored the Archbishop to his
Temporaltys, on the 14 th. of July Westminster. ibid.
afterward. And this struggle finally ended in a Confirmation of the Great
Charter, and the Charter of the Forests, enlarged by a new Article, which
provided, that no state for the future should be taxed separately, but only by
Common Consent of Parliament.

This is a faithful and full account of that Transaction between the King and
his Clergy, which Dr. W. neither like a good Historian, a good Churchman, nor a
good Englishman, has so represented, as if the Clergy had been altogether
blameable, and the King had done nothing but what the Laws of the Land allowed
of. But in all that vast Heap of Mistakes, his Book, there is not any one
Particular, further from Truth than this, or less becoming the Pen that it
comes from. They were faulty indeed in applying to the Pope: but it was an
Error of those times, when the Pope's Power over the Clergy was thought very
great, and carried very far, even by the Consent of the Laiety. Besides, never
Men could be more tempted than they were to make use of this Extraordinary
Remedy. Accordingly they were so far from being blamed by their Country for
procuring this Bull, that the Great Men all stood by them in it, and publicly
approved it. For so I find it recorded in a List of Grievances, which were by
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal presented to the King a Year or two
afterward, and entered in a Register of that time, together with the Answers
to Each, as in a Roll of Parliament. At the close of these, the Prelates excuse
themselves from consenting to the Contribution desired, by reason of the Bull
of Pope Boniface; to which the Answer annexed is, Non placuit Regi, sed
Communitas Procerum approbavit. However, allowing 'em to have done amiss in
this Application, yet nothing that they did afterward needs an Excuse: Their
Refusal to comply with the King's Excessive Demands, was not only faultless,
but honorable; and the Proceeding against them upon that refusal was
altogether Illegal and Barbarous. For we must not think, that this sentence of
Outlawry was built on any Legal Forfeiture they had incurred, by adhering to
the Pope against the Crown; no, it was founded purely on their denying to
supply the King, according to his Demands: for three years before this, when
they delayed to grant the Moiety asked, he threatened Audiens Rex indignatus
est, and per suos satellites comminatus est, se extra Protectionem suam Clerum
velle ponere, nisi medietatem omnium bonorum concederent. Knight. c. 2502. So
also Eversden, before cited.
to do, what he actually did now [to put them out of his Protection]; and Then,
the Prohibitory Bull of Pope Boniface was not in being.

It would be some Mitigation indeed of the severity of this Process, if it had
been, as Dr. W. would persuade us P. 351.
, carried on in Parliament. But that is highly improbable, and inconsistent
with the best accounts we have of those times. The Barons, it is plain, were
now very uneasy under the King's Exactions; and it is not credible therefore
that They should join with him in oppressing the Clergy: nor had they, for
ought I can find, any Opportunity of doing it. For the Clergy were put out of
the King's Protection Ian. 30 310. Call. Feb. tale fuit Regis Consilium quod
praeciperet praescriptam duriti. em fieri contra Clerum. Ann. Wigorn. apud
Angl. Sacr. Vol. 1. p. 520.
1296; which was long after the Parliament of St. Edmundsbury Held Nov. 3. 1296.
was up, and before the Council of Sarum Which met Feb. 24. 1296/7.
was called. Nay 12 days before this Council, the Sentence was not only
pronounced, but executed, even in the remote parts of England: for the Writ of
Seizure to the Sheriff of Worcestershire bears date Feb. 12 Vid. eosdem Ann.
Wigorn. ibid.
. And this agrees very well with the Observation made by the Writers of that
time Eversden, Knighton, Westminster, Ann. Wigorn.
, that the King's Army was beat in Gascoign, on the same day that the Clergy
were outlawed here in England: for the News of this Defeat, it appears from
Matthew of Westminster P. 429.
, reached the King, sometime before he met his Barons at Sarum. Indeed Knighton
Col. 2491
, and Walsingham Ypod. Neustr.
speak of a Parliament at Hillary 9^. where this Sentence may seem to have
pals'd; but there is great reason to suspect their Exactness in this
particular. The Eldest of them lived an 100 Years after the Time they here
write of; whereas there is no one Cotemporary Author Rex Angliae Edwardus in
crastino animarum apud S^um. Edmundum Parliamentum suum tenuit, and vocati
ibidem venerunt per Regias Literas Praelati and totus Clerus. Sed quoniam
Clerus vocatus fuit ibidem ad mandatum regis, and non auctoritate
Ecclesiastica, noluit ibidem finaliter respondere. Sed prorogata dies fuit
quoad Clerum usque in Crastinum S. Hilarii. A Laicis tamen ibidem duodecimam
partem bonorum-suscepit, etc. In festo vero S. Hill. -- Rex petebat a Clero tunc
Londoniae eadem causa congregatis auctoritate Ecclesiastica Auxilium, etc.
Excerpta e Chron. MS. Eccl. Cont. apud Angl. Sacr. Vol. 1. ^p. 51.

Generalis Convocatio Cleri facta est apud Londoniam in Octavis S. Hill. ad
tractandum de pace Sanctae Eccl. etc. John. de Eversden MS.

The Sentence of Excommunication denounced by the Bishops and Clergy in
Convocation A. D. 1298. ( see it Spelman Council. Vol. 2. p. 428.) style this
meeting Quaedam Convocatio Praelatorum and Cleri London celebrata post Festum
S. Hill. A. D. 1296. The Writ also for summoning it ( see it Registr. Winchelsey
fol. 205.) the Returns to that Writ ( see One, Registr. Henr. Prioris fol. 70.)
and the Procuratoria drawn in relation to it (ibid.) mention a Meeting of the
Clergy alone, without any the least Intimation of a Parliament.


that I have seen, either in Print, or Manuscript, (and I have perused several)
that mentions such a Parliament, or speaks of this meeting at St. Hilary any
otherwise than as a Provincial Council of the Clergy; agreed upon indeed in the
preceding Parliament of St. Edmundsbury, but not held concurrently with any
Session of it. Nor is there a Writ of this date, either of Summons, or
Pro^ogation, in our Rolls, or Registers. So that the word, Parliamentum, in
these two Historians, must be taken loosly, and in the same Latitude that it is
made use of at this very time, by Westminster Barons Angliae Parleamentum suum
per se-statuerunt ad ann. 1297.
, and Eversden Comites and Barons tenuerunt Parliamentum suum apud
Northampton, de discordia orta inter Regem and Ipsos. ad ann. eund.
, when they apply it to the Barons Voluntary Meetings, without, and in
Opposition to the King's Authority. Accordingly we may observe, that in the
Praecept to the Sheriff for-seizing the Estates of the Clergy (by me lately
mentioned) there are no words that imply the Sentence to have passed de
Consilio Baronum, or to have had the Consent of Parliament. It says only,
Propter aliquas certas C^usas Tibi praecipimus quod omnia L^^ca F^eda totius
Cleri in Balliva tua -- sine dilatione capia^is in manum vestram, etc. Annal.
Wig. p. 520
and by the Tenor of it one would guess, that it was a mere Arbitrary Command
of the Prince, not built on any Judicial Process whatever. I have been very
Liberal therefore in allowing that it might spring from a Judgment in Court
(led to it by some Expressions that look that way in the Relations of Thorn,
and Knighton): However the Judge who pronounced it, will not be excused by this
allowance; for he passed an Unrighteous Sentence in a very Infamous Cause, and
meanly prostituted the Law, to gratify the King's Resentments. For which reason
we may be sure, that Sir Roger Brabazon Dr. W. pretends to tell this Story with
great Exactness, and yet mistakes both the Name of the Person and his Office;
there being no such Judge at that time as Robert Brabazon; and the Person he
means being never either second Judge, or Chief Justice of the Common Pleas (as
Dr. W. will have him to have been) if Dugale 's Chronica Juridicialia may be
relied on. The Dr. it seems, found there Justitiarius ad Placita little Rege,
and Justitiarius de Banco, opposed to one another; and wisely thought, that the
first of these signified the Common Pleas, and the second the King's Bench;
just as they sounded.
was not the Man, as my Lord Coke too hastily thought; for He was too Great and
Good a Person, to be employed in such Vile Offices. No, it was John de
Metingham, a Clergyman, who uttered those words, as the Annals of Worster
expressly tell us P. 520.
; a fit Instrument, to be made use of in the Oppression of his Brethren! For
look through all our History, and you shall find, that wherever the Clergy have
smarted under any Great Hardship, some of their Own Order have been still at
the bottom of it; without whose Helping Hand, the Rights and Privileges of the
Church never were, and never would be invaded.

Thus much, to take off the Aspersions, with which Dr. W. has loaded the Clergy
of those times, very Indecently, and Untruly. Their Conduct I do not in every
respect pretend to justify: However, I think it capable of a Fair Excuse, if
their Circumstances be considered. And accordingly I observe, that among all
our Historians of Note, Ancient or Modern, there is not One, that I know of,
who has thoroughly taken the King's part in this Dispute; none, I dare say,
that has represented it so much to the Disadvantage of the Clergy, as this
Gentleman of the Function has done. And yet several of these were Laymen;
particularly Daniel, the most sensible of the Moderns, calls the King's
Proceeding in this Case, a strain of State beyond any of his Predecessors P.
194.
. It was a Debt I owed to Truth, to set this Story right; and I would have done
it, had Jews or Heathens been the Subject of it. Whatever the Popish Clergys
faults were, yet want of Love to their Country was none of 'em; the true
Interests of which they understood, and espoused generally, and were ever fast
Friends to the Libertys of it. They were bad Christians, but good Englishmen;
which is more than can be said for some of their Successors, who, with a Purer
Religion, have been worse Members of the Commonwealth than They. Their
Dependence indeed on a Foreign Head misled 'em in Church affairs; but against
the Exactions and Usurpations even of the Pope himself in Civil Matters, none
declared more loudly, or made a more vigorous stand than They. Matthew Paris is
an Instance of this kind, worth our notice; who, though of a Monastery that owed
all its Immunities and Exemptions to the Pope, yet takes the English side all
along against Papal Encroachments: and his Works therefore (the best part of
our History) are a mere Satyr on the Court of Rome; written indeed, not in the
mannerly way of later times, but however with a Spirit of great Honesty and
Freedom. Disinterestedness, a Love of Truth, and a Generous Concern for the
Public shine through every Page of him: Qualitys, which it were well, if some
Modern Historians, who have spent a great many Popular Invectives against
Monks, and Monkish Writings, had been pleased to observe, and imitate, Their
Works (as well as Persons) would then have been in much greater Esteem with the
Age wherein they lived, and have had a much surer Title to the Applause of
Posterity. If what I have said of the Popish Clergy be suspected any ways, my
Lord Coke will vouch for the Truth of it; who, with great Candor and Justice,
observes of that very Reign we are upon, that Allbeit diverse Judges of the
Realm were Men of the Church, as Briton, Martin de Pateshull, William de
Raleigh, Robert de Lexington, Henry de Stanton, and many others; and that the
Honorable the Officers of the Realm, as Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord
Privy Seal, Master of the Rolls, etc. were in those days Men of the Church; yet
they ever had such honorable and true-hearted Courage, as they suffered no
Encroachment by any Foreign Power upon the Rights of the Crown, or the Laws
and Customs of the Realm Upon the Stat. of Westminster. I. cap. 51.
. Among so many Excellent Persons, what wonder is it, if a false hearted
Clergyman or two were found; true neither to the Libertys of their Country, nor
the Interests of their Order? Every Age, and every Body of Men has had (and
will have) its John de Metingham's; it is enough if the Age, and the Body they
were of has constantly abhorred them.

From what has been before related, it appears that this Exclusion of the
Clergy from Parliament, so much talked of, is as much misunderstood: for, in
the first place, That was really no Parliament from whence they were excluded,
but a Colloquium or Tractatus only, as the Writ of Summons Dugdale Summon. p.
18.
expressly calls it. And the common Opinion, that this happened at the Parliament
of St. Edmondsbury, in crastino Animarum, is a common mistake; for the Clergy
were certainly both summoned thither Dugd. p. 13.
, and present there throughout the whole Session MS. Chron. Eccl. Cant. and
Eversden ante citat.
: But they were not so in the Council of Sarum, on St. Matthias's day; to
which, it appears by our Rolls Dugdale p. 19.
, that some particular Barons and Knights only were called, but not one of the
Clergy. And here therefore Knighton Col. 2492.
, and Eversden Rex Parliamentum suum apud Sarum cum Laicis ad hoc tantum
vocatis in die cinerum tenuit. --
positively fix the Exclusion; and what they say, the whole course of the Story
manifestly confirms. The Pretense for this Exclusion I suppose to have been,
the Clergys Outlawry, and the seizure of their Temporaltys, which was judged a
sufficient reason for denying 'em their Writs of Summons. And this also seems
to have been the Ground of that famous Resolution of the Judges in Keilway's
Reports fol. 181.
; where it is affirmed, that the King might hold his Parliament without the
Spiritual Lords, i. e. when those Lords Spiritual are in the case of Outlaws,
and under a Praemunire, as they were, when that Judgment was given; and
incapable therefore (as Opinions then ran) of their seats in Parliament. But
later Times, and greater Authoritys have decided quite contrary; it being upon
several solemn Debates in the House of Commons, 35. Eliz. resolved See Sir
Symonds d' Ewes Jour. p. 518.
, that a Man under an Outlawry was capable of being elected a Member: and what
does not disable a single Person from being chosen into Parliament, could be no
sufficient reason for shutting the whole Spiritualty out of it, who are One of
the Greatest Estates of this Realm 1. Eliz. c. 1.
. All therefore that this celebrated Instance amounts to, is, that the King,
having put the Clergy under an Outlawry, against Law and Reason, held a select
Council of the Laiety without them, against all Rule and Custom. And it must be
remembered, that this was not only Excluso Clero, but Excluso Populo too; for
neither had the Countys, Citys, and Buroughs any Representatives there: and
such an Instance can, I am sure, no ways prejudice the Parliamentary Interest
of the Clergy.

To proceed therefore in our Account of it, -- that is, in our Deduction of
those particular Passages in our Historys and Records, which prove it all
along, from the Insertion of the Premunientes down to the Times of the
Reformation. Three sorts of these there are, that deserve to be taken notice
of. First, Such as represent the Convocation to be a Meeting Coincident with
the Parliament. Secondly, Such as speak of the Convocation Clergy, as of the
Parliament, and in it: And Thirdly, Such as declare the Particular Intents and
Purposes, for which the Convocation Clergy were, and were esteemed to be, of
the Parliament.

The First of these points, as far as Ancient Practice is concerned, our
Adversarys seem to grant: or, should they dispute it, yet it has already, in
the former part of this Book, by many plain Evidences and Authoritys been made
good. However, since it falls once more in my way, I shall here add a few
Instances of the same kind, by way of Supplement.

13 E. II. The King is said, ad requisitionem Praelatorum and Cleri regni
nostri [then sitting] to have prorogued the Parliament Dugd. Sum. p. 108.
.

5. E. III. In a Bishop's Summons to Parliament, we find this Clause, -- Et
quia ante haec tempora Communia Regni nostri negotia, propter aliquorum
Praelatorum and Magnatum absentiam, qui ad Convocationes and Parliamenta
hujusmodi, non ad dies statutos, sed diu post modum venerunt, frequenter
retardata fuerunt, ad commune damnum Populi regni nostri; volumus, etc. quod
dicto Crastino omnimodo sitis apud Nos ad Locum praedictum; and praemuniatis
Priorem Archidiaconos and caeteros, quod ipsi similiter intersint; quia
intentionis nostrae existit, quod Parliamentum illud cum celeritate qu^ poterit
finiatur Ibid. p. 163.
, etc. This implys plainly, that these Two Assemblys, [the Convocation, and
Parliament] were used [ ante haec tempora] long before this time, to assemble
concurrently; as also (which relates to the second point) that the Praemonish'd
Clergy, so assembling in Convocation, were yet reckoned to be of the Parliament.

13. E. III. Mention is made of Writs then to be issued, One to call the
Convocation of the Province of Cant, and the Other, that of York, against the
Time to which the next Parliament was Summoned Abr. of Rec. p. 19.
.

20. E. III. The Bishops are commanded to certify into Chancery the Names of
all Aliens, their Benefices, and Values, avaunt le jour de la Convocation de la
Clergy, ou adonque a pl^s tard Rot. Parl. n. 46.
. i. e. before, or at the next Convocation, which was to fit with the next
Parliament.

29. E. III. (Cl. m. 8. dors.) The King's Writ for a Convocation recites, that
he had, pro arduis and urgentibus negotiis Nos and Statum Regni nostri Angliae
and necessariam defensionem ejusdem regni concernentibus, called his Parliament
to Westminster. die Iovis, in crastino Sti Martini -- and then adds, -- Et quia
expedit quod praedicta negotia, quae salvationem and de^ensionem regni nostri
sic contingunt, salubriter and efficaciter cum bona and matura deliberatione
deducantur; Vobis mandamus rogantes, -- to call the Clergy of Cant. Prove. to
Paul's, die Lunae prox post festum S. Martini -- ad tractandum and cons^lendum
super praemissis -- T. Rege apud Westmr. 25. Sept. The same Praeamble literally
recurrs in the Writ of the 31. E. III. ( Cl. m. 21. dors.); and something
Equivalent to it is to be found in several succeeding ones.

1. R. II. The Clergy grant a X th. on condition that the Commons give a XV th:
Registr. Sudbury f. 44. b.
and on the other side, (8. R. II.) the Commons offer two XV ths, on condition
that the Clergy shall give two X ths Registr. Courtney f. 81. b.
, These Mutual Stipulations imply, that the two Assemblys were concurrent: They
were practiced frequently in the Entrance of this Reign See Rot. Par. IV. R. 2.
n. 13. VII. R. 2. n. 13. VII. R. 2. n. 12.
, but now, in this last Instance, a Check was given to them; for the Archbishop
protesting, in behalf of the Clergy, that the Condition was against the Liberty
of the Church, and insisting that it ought not to remain there, it was by the
King's Order withdrawn. For which reason there is now no mention of it in the
Rolls of this Parliament.

More such Passages as these might be brought in each succeeding Reign; but I
shall content my self to step an hundred Years forwards, and produce one only
out of the Continuer of the Annals of Croyland. In his account of E. the IV
th's last Parliament Anno 1483.
, he tells us, that the King, nihil a Communitate subsidii pecuniarii expetere
ausus, betook himself to the Clergy, quasi (adds the Monk) semel comparentibus
Praelatis and Clero in eorum Convocatione, quicquid Rex petit, id sieri debeat
P. 563.
.

These, I confess, are not Direct and full Proofs of the Convocations sitting
ordinarily with the Parliament, but only intimate and suppose it; and are
therefore mentioned here, not so much to strengthen that point, which is
otherwise sufficiently secured, as to illustrate and explain it. The Passages
of the second sort which represent the Convocation Clergy, as of the
Parliament, and acting in it, have more Weight in them: Some of these I have
already offered P. 60. etc.
, and shall now add several others. The Reader, who considers that the very
stress of the Debate lies here, and who has withal any Taste of these studys,
will not, though I abound in Proofs of this kind, think me Tedious.

The first Instance I shall give, is from the Articuli Cleri (10. E. II.) the
Praeamble of which recites, quod cum dudum temporibus Progenitorum nostrorum
quondam Regum Angliae in diversis Parliamentis suis, and similiter postquam
regni nostri gubernacula suscepimus in Parliamentis nostris, per Praelatos and
Clerum regni nostri plures Articuli continentes Gravamina Ecclesiae Anglicanae
and ipsis Praelatis and Clero illata, ut in eisdem asserebatur, porrecti
fuissent, and cum in stantia supplicatum ut inde apponeretur remedium
opportunum; ac nuper in Parliamento nostro ^p^d Lincoln, anno Regni nostri
nono, Articulos subscriptos, and quasdam Respon^iones, ad aliquos eorum prius
factas coram Concilio nostro recitari, ac quasdam responsiones corrigi, and
caeteris Articulis subscriptis per Nos and dictum nostrum Concilium fecimus
responderi, etc. Spelm. Conc. Vol. 2. p. 483.
. Words which show the Lower Clergy, as well as Prelates, to have been looked
upon as of the Parliament, and acting in it; not then only, but long before
also, in the Reigns of several of that Princes Progenitors; to wit, in those of
E. I. and H. the III. at least, if not higher. And I the rather produce them at
length (as Sir William Dugdale copied them from a Cotton-Manuscript Otho. A.
15. fol. 136.
, and from the Archbishop's Register Raynold, f. 76.
), because the Printed Statutes See Rastal Vol. 1. p. 57.
have given a different turn to them, and made them utterly insignificant to
the purposes for which I urge them.

In the 13 th. Year of this Prince, a Writ to the Archbishop Cl. m. 20. dors.
thus speaks -- Cum in Parliamento nostro ultimo apud Eborum summonito, per
vestrum caeterorumque Praelatorum, and Procerum regni Consilium and Assensum,
etc. Xa Cleri in Provincia Eborum, XVIIIva bonorum mobilium Communitatis, and
XII ma in Civitatibus and Burgis and Dominicis nostris nobis -- fuerint
concessae Registr. Henr. Pri. fol. 211.
. Where we see the Clergy of that Province in which the Parliament was held,
are said to have granted in Parliament; in like manner as the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses did.

In a statute of the 25. E. III. See it Rastall V. 1. p. 100.
there is mention of a Dism, and Quindism, granted by the Commons: which is a
clear proof of what I have before advanced P. 59.
, that the Commons Spiritual come often times under that Appellation; for the
Dism here mentioned was given by the Spiritualty, and the Quindism by the
Temporalty, as the Nature of the Grants speaks, and Knighton expressly informs
us Col. 2603
.

And this Language meets us frequently in the Rolls; for again, 50. E. III. n.
168. The Commons of Tividal as well Religious as Saecular Prayen Abr. of Rec.
p. 137. I have not the Transcript of the Roll by me, but as I remember the
French word there is Liges Gens --
: and in the same Parliament, n. 162. The Commons of the Diocese of York
complain of the Outrageous taking of the Bishop and his Clerks for admission of
Priests to their Benefices Ibid p. 136.
, by which, as I conceive, the Commons Spiritual are most naturally understood.

In the same Year a Constitution of Simon Islep is said to be made, de consilio
and consensu Fratrum nostrorum in Parliamento praesentium, and Procuratorum
absentium Spelm. Conc. Vol. 2. p. 598.
This Decree, we must believe, passed in Convocation; and that Meeting
therefore was then esteemed Parliamentary: for why else, should the Bishops,
when acting in their Convocational capacity, be spoken of as present in
Parliament?

And here also I must take notice of a Passage in that Ancient Piece, Modus
tenendi Parliamentum; I call it Ancient, because Mr. Seldom himself, who first
discovered it not to be of the Age it pretends, says, he saw a Copy of it in an
Hand of E. the III. And indeed younger than that it cannot well be, for it
would not then have been entered (as part of it is) in Arundel's Register, for
a piece of real Antiquity, without any suspicion of its Forgery. And it may
therefore safely be produced as a General Evidence of the Practice in E. the
III's time, at least of the Opinion which Men then had of the Lower Clergys
Parliamentary Rights and Interests in Elder Ages. The Passages in it which
concern us, are -- Ad Parliamentum summoneri and venire debent ratione Tenurae
suae omnes and singuli Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, and alii
Majores Cleri, qui tenent per Comitatum vel Baroniam, ratione hujusmodi
tenurae; and nulli Minores, nisi eorum praesentia and adventus aliunde quam pro
Tenuris suis requiratur; ut si sint de Consilio Regis, etc. The Copy that Mr.
Seldom (Tit. Hon. part 2. c. 5.) and that which my Lord Coke (Inst. part 4. p.
4.47.) used, differed some what from this, and from each other; but those
differences are not material.
Item Rex facere soleba^ summonitiones suas Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and
aliis Exemptis Personis, ut Abbatibus, Prioribus, Decanis, and aliis
Ecclesiasticis Personis quae habent Iurisdictiones per hujusmodi Exemptiones
and Privilegia separatim quod ipsi pro quolibet Decanatu and Archidiaconatu
Angliae per ipsos Decanatus and Archidiaconatus eligi sacerent duos peritos and
idoneos Pr^curatores [de proprio Archidiaconatu] ad veniendum and interessendum
ad Parliamentum, ad illud subeundum, allegandum and faciendum idem quod
facerent omnes and singulae personae ipsorum Decana tuum and Archidiaconatuum,
si ibidem personaliter interessent. Et quod hujusmodi Procuratores veniant cum
Warantis suis duplicatis sigillis superiorum suorum signatis, quod ipsi ad
hujusmodi Procurationem Clerici missi sunt. Quarum Literarum una liberabitur
Clericis de Parliamente ad irrotulandum, and alia residebit penes ipsos
Procuratores. Et sic sub istis duobus generibus summon^ri debet Totus Clerus ad
Parliamentum Dacher. Spicileg. T. 12. p. 557.
. I know very well, that this Account in the Modus, is not suited to the exact
manner of the Clergys Summons to any Parliament, the Records of which are left
us; and therefore I produce it only as a General Proof, that the Lower Clergy
were some way or other called to Parliament, and were understood to have been
so called for some Ages, at the time that this Modus was framed. My Lord Coke
Ibid.
, from the first Lines of what I have cited, endeavors to l^ssen and bring
down the Parliament-Rights of the Lower Clergy; but without considering, that
the same words are afterward used also of the Lay Commons.

2. R. II. In the Register of Selby Bibl. Cott. Cleop. D. 3. f. ^^.
, the King's Letter to the Abbat of that Monastery takes notice, that diverse
reasons had been showed in Parliament, why the payment of the Disms and
Quindisms, granted in the said Parliament by the Clergy and Laiety of the
Kingdom Les dismes and quindismes a nos grantez au di^ Parliament per le
Clergy, and per lez Lays de nostre Royaume. --
, should be anticipated: and that accordingly the Archbishop of Cant. with the
other Prelates and Clergy of his Province had agreed to it, as also the
Archbishop of York, and those Prelates No mention of the Lower Clergy of York
Prov^n^e, because They at that time were not present, but holding a Convocation
at Home, together with all the Prelates of th^^ Province, who were not Barons
of Parliament.
of his Province who were present. But that some of the Clergy of that Province
delayed payment, as the King understood, at which he much marvelled, and was
highly displeased Encontre ce que feu^^ acordez a nostre dit Parliament, don't
nous avons grande merveil and d^sp^eser. Et sur ^eo escrivon^ a dit
l'ercevelque de Everwy^k empriant and requirant que consideres les chooses
sus^ites, and coment la Province (...) Everwick a condiz ^^^s^umez en le temps
[ of E* III.] affere semblablement, and aussi bien come o^t fait ceux de la
Province de Canterbiri, etc.
: And had therefore written to the Archbishop of York, praying, and requiring
him (in consideration of that Agreement in Parliament, and according to the
Custom established in Edward the III's time, for the Province of York to do
always as that of Cant. did) to take effectual Care that all his Clergy did
their Duty in this respect. I have enlarged my Recital of this Letter thus far,
because, beside the main purpose for which I have vouched it, ^t furnishes us
also with the Proof of a Bypoint, which has been before laid down in these
Papers P. 46, 47.
, that the Convocation of York was ^ook'd upon as under some kind of Obligation
^o follow the Pattern set by that of Canterbury.

The Protestations of the whole Clergy against Diverse Bills, are mentioned in
the Rolls, and sometimes entered at length: a manifest Evidence that they had
something to do in Parliament; for otherwise, I am sure, they could have had no
Pretense to Protest against what was doing there; nor would the Parliament have
accepted, and entered such Protestations. These ran indeed sometimes in the Name
of the Archbishops alone, but were however made on the behalf of their
Suffragans also, and of the whole Clergy of their Provinces; as the Rolls Rot.
Parl. 13. R. 2. n. 24.
expressly speak. And this is in general to be observed, that oftentimes, in
matters Parliamentary, where the Bishops names only are mentioned, yet it was
not Their Act alone, but had the Concurrence also of the Convocation Clergy.
Thus the Statute of the Clergy 25. E. III. Rastall p. 93.
is in the Preamble said to have taken its rise from a Petition of the Bishops:
but if we look into the Roll of that Parliament, we shall find that the Bishops
petitioned for themselves, and tote la Clergy. And 15. E. III. n. 19. though
Archbishops and Bishops only are named, yet in the Note of the King's answer
(n. 26.) they are called Generally, Petitions of the Clergy. This well deserves
our Notice, because it gives us a true account, how the Parliament Prelates
came to act in Parliament for the whole State Spiritual: for that being at hand
always, was consulted and advised with in every thing that related to them; and
the Result of those Debates was by the Lords Spiritual laid before the
Parliament.

21. R. II. The Clergy of both Provinces appoint a Common Lay Proctor to
consent for them to some Matters done in Parliament, which they could not
Lawfully be present at; and the Form of the Power given by Them to this purpose
in writing, is as follows. Nos Thomas Cant. and Robertus Eboracensis
Archiepiscopi ac Praelati and Clerus utriusque Provinciae Cant. and Ebor. Jure
Ecclesiarum nostrarum and Temporalium earundem habentes jus interessendi in
singulis Parliamentis domini nostri Regis and Regni Angliae pro tempore
celebrandis, nec non tractandi and expediendi in eisdem -- Quantum ad singula
in instanti Parliamento pro Statu and Honor domini nostri Regis, nec non
Regaliae suae, ac Quiet, Pace, and Tranquillitate Regni Iudicialiter
justificanda, Venerabili Viro Thomae de Percy Militi nostram plenarie
committimus potestatem; ita ut singula per ipsum facta in praemissis perpetuis
temporibus [rata] habeantur Rot. Par. n. 10.
This Instrument is by order enrolled, and the Right therefore which the
Prelates and Inferior Clergy there claim, of being of every Parliament, and
acting in it, is by the King, and his Great Council, who ordered this
Enrollment, admitted and affirmed.

2. H. IV. c. 15. The Statute against the Lollards sprung from a Remonstance
made to the King, ex part Praelatorum and Cleri Regni sui Angliae in praesenti
Parliamento, as the Preamble speaks: and again it is said, in the Body of it;
super quibus quidem Novitatibus and Excessibus superius recitatis Praelati and
Clerus supradicti, ac etiam Communitates dicti regni, in eodem Parliamento
existentes dicto domino Regi supplicaverunt Constitt. Provv. ad finem Lynwood.
pp. 62, 63.
. And at their Request, the King Enacts, ex assensu Magnatum, and aliorum
Procerum ejusdem regni in dicto Parliamento existentium. -- So that the
Prelates, and Barons, the Commons, and Lower Clergy are alike here said to be
present in Parliament.

The Testimony of Walsingham also, who lived at this time is considerable: He
appears to have been excellently well versed in our Records, and speaks
properly always, though not Elegantly, of the matters he relates: And his
Phrase, where he gives an account of any Grant, or Act of the Clergy in
Convocation, usually is; Clerus in eodem Parliamento conce^^it, or Statuit. Of
which take One very remarkable Instance. Anno 1391. (says he) Parliamentum
incaeptum est intra mensem and faeliciter expeditum. Nempe praeter Xam a Clero
and XVtam a Populo concessam, multa alia sunt in Clero and Populo ad Regis
Placitum reformata; and praecipu^ in Ordine Nigrorum Monachorum, illic in
maximo numero, Regis Edicto, insimul congregato. Fuerant itaque ibidem etiem 60
Abbates, and Priores Conventuales, and etium 300 and amplius Monachi, Doctores
and Procurato^s -- Statutum ^uerat etiam in eodem Parliamento, ad instantiam
maxim domini Regis, ut asseritur, per clerum, ut tertium Beneficium, etc. It
is the Convocation-Clergy, and Convocation-Business, that the Historian all
along here speaks of; and yet he speaks of the first we see, as being of, and
of the second, as done in Parliament: so closely were those Two Meetings then
thought to be united and allied. And the same is Perpetually the Style 133^.
Edvardus Parliamentum tenuit, in quo Archiepiscopus Cant. Concilio Cleri
celebrato. Regi Xam triennalem a Clero concedi obtinuit. p. ^22.

1371. In h^c Parliamento Cleri Synodus ab Archiepiscopo celebrata est. p. ^^3.

1344. -- Parliamentum tenu^t In eo Clerus ei concessit Xas triennales, ^ ^36.
and


of the Author of that Excellent Book de Antiquitate Ecclesiae Britannicae;
than whom none understood our Constitution better, or expressed himself with
greater Exactness.

To descend to Times nearer our Own. In the 21. H. VIII. The Summer before the
Clergys Submission, a Letter was written to the Pope, about the affair of the
Divorce, by many Members of Parliament, Herbe^t's His^. p. 334
who subscribe it under eight distinct Ranks, or Classes; the last of which is,
Milites and Doctores in Parliamento: Eleven of these there are, and several of
'em Clergymen; as particularly Wolman, Sampson, Gardener, Lee, etc. Who seem to
have subscribed as Members of Convocation; for Wolman at this time was
Prolocutor Act. MS. Conv. 1529
. And I do not see how otherwise some of them could be reckoned of the
Parliament, being not, that I can find, called up thither, either as the King's
Great Officers, or by Writ of Assistance.

I have already mentioned P. 62.
a Mandate of Bonner's, in 1543. very observable for the way in which it is
worded. There is another issued about two Years before this, 32. H. VIII. (the
first time, for ought appears, that the Clergys Subsidys were confirmed by
Parliament): and there the Phrase differs a little; for the Prelates and Clergy
of Cant. Prove. are said to have granted a subsidy tam in ultim^ ipsorum
Praelatorum and Cleri dictae Prove. Cant. Convocatione apud D. Paul. Land. quam
etiam in Parliamento hujus regni tum apud Westminster. sacra regia auctoritate
respective tentis Registr. Bonner f. 21. a.
, and so again in another, dated 10. December. 1544. Ibid. f. 66. a.
and in a Third of Bishop Ridley's, drawn 4^o E. VI Ridley's Registr. f. 287. b.
. So that all along from the Time when the Premunientes was first inserted,
down to the Reformation, and below it, the Clergy assembling in Convocation
have been still reputed and spoken of in our Records, and most Authentic
Writers, as attending on the Parliament, being of it, and acting in it: To what
Intents and Purposes they were so, and how far their Parliamentary Interest in
these times extended, is to be our Third and Last Enquiry.

It Is upon many accounts too nice a Point, to be fully and exactly stated here:
Something however, as it falls in my way, I shall say of it; desiring the
Reader (as I have done already on other Occasions) to remember, that I meddle
not in what follows, with what is, or ought to be the Clergys Right, or
Privilege now; but only with what it has been heretofore; and that I act the
part of a mere Historian, not of an Advocate.

Their Great Parliamentary Right was to Tax themselves, which they did always
by separate Grants, and those anciently neither prescribed, nor confirmed by
the Laiety in Parliament. till 32. H. 8.
When therefore in the 4 R. II. Rot. Par. n. 13.
the Commons proffered a certain Sum, so the Clergy, who (they said) had the
third part of the Realm, would give as much, it was answered by the Clergy;
that their Grants never had been, nor ought to be made in Parliament [in that
sense of the word, by which the Parliament is opposed to the Convocation] that
neither could the Laiety constrain Them in this respect, nor They the Laiety:
praying the King withal, that the Libertys of the Church might be still
preserved, as they had hitherto been; and that the Commons might be required to
do their Dutys, as the Clergy would also certainly do Theirs, and had always
done. Upon which the Commons Proposal was withdrawn, and they granted without
that Condition. And the same Motion was made again, and quashed, after a very
remarkable manner, in the Eighth Year of this King, as I have already had
occasion to observe.

This Privilege they enjoyed chiefly as to their Old Revenues, with which they
were endowed before the Statute of Mortmain; but for what they acquired after
that Act, they were rated together with the Laiety, notwithstanding their
frequent Struggles against it. See Abr. of Rec. 15. E. III. p. 33.14. E. III.
p. 28.20. E. III. p. 51.1. R. II. p. 163.


Another of their Great Parliamentary Privileges was, To begin Bills by
Petition from themselves, in the same manner as the Commons did; and those
Requests, when answered from the Throne, by the advice of the King's Great
Council, grew Statutes, or Ordinances of Parliament. The Rolls are full every
were of These; which are mentioned under a distinct Head from those of the
Commons, and Receivers are now and then particularly appointed for them 21. E.
III. See Abr. of Rec. p. 51.
. They came sometimes from both Provinces Rot. Par. 1. R. II. n. 112.
jointly, but generally from the Province of Cant. alone; and the Style of them
was -- Supplicant vestri Humiles Oratores, Praelati, and Clerus 4. H. IV. n.
19.2. H. 4. n. 48.
Prove. Cant. Or Humiles and Devoti Oratores Clerus totius Prove. Cant. 50. E.
III. n.
. Vos assiduels Orators, and devotz Prelatz, and toute la Clergy de Province,
etc. 51. E. III n. 80.
Vostre Chapelains,
La Commune de la Clergy 25. E. III n. 69.
. These Requests for the most part began in the Lower House of Convocation;
especially when they tended to the Redress of Grievances, in which the Lower
Clergy were most nearly concerned: and took it therefore to be their peculiar
Province to draw up Heads of these, and propose them either immediately to the
King and Parliament, or to the Prelates of the Upper House, in order to their
being proposed in Parliament.

The Clergy further claimed, in those times, to have no Bills in derogation of
any of their Privileges and Immunities pass without their Consent. And in
favor to this Claim of theirs it was, that when such Bills were offered, they
were enacted sometimes by the King, under a Condition, that the Clergy should
thereto agree Rot. Par. 9. R. II. n. 44.
; and at other times, referred to the Clergy in Convocation; and the Answers
made by them to such Petitions reported in Parliament. Numerous Instances there
are in both these kinds; I shall mention some few of them.

11. H. IV. n. 70. A Petition from the Commons is thus answered; C^st matteire
appertient a S. Eglise -- and quant a la Residence remedy em ^ust purveu en le
darrain Convocacion. Another Petition of theirs (7. R. II. n. 53.) thus: The
King will Charge the Clergy to amend the same. It related to the Extortions of
Ordinarys for the Probates of Wills.

18. E. I. The Commons desire Remedy de multimodis injustis Vexationibus eis
factis per Officiales, and alios Ministros Ecclesiae. The King replied,
Cancellarius emendet in Temporalibus, Archiepiscopus in Spiritualibus Sir Rob.
Cotton Rem. p. 216
. i. e. the Archbibishop in Convocation.

21. E. III. n. 48. To a Petition of the Commons about the Tithe of Great Wood,
claimed, as they say, by the Clergy, in virtue of a late Constitution, the
King's answer is; L'ercev^^ que de Canterbery and les auters Evesques ont
^^^sponduz que tiele disme nest demandee per res^^ de la dit Constitution,
forsque de s^bbois.

27. H. 6. n. 25. The Commons pray a Pardon, in behalf of some of the Clergy,
allowing the King a Noble an head for every one of the Priests so pardoned. The
King's Answer is (what, for as much as there is no Intimation of it in the
Abridgement, I shall at length Transcribe): At the Reverence of, and for the
Love and Tenderness that the King has to the Church, and to the Ministers of
the same, he woll that this Bill as to the Imposicion that should bate the
Secular Prests of this Roialme not beneficed as Stipendiaries and Chauntrie
Prests, be committed to the Archbishops and Bishops in the Convocations of the
Clergies of this Roialme, because it touches the Immunitie and Liberty of the
Church, the which the King intends to keep without hurt or Prejudice in all
wise. And as touching the Pardon contained in this Bill, in case the Nobles of
the said Prests be granted to him in the said Convocacions, then the King woll
that the said Pardon stond in his virtue and strength, without fine or fee
payeing therefore, by auctorite of this present Parliament.

And when in the same Session the Commons petitioned for the Perpetual
Imprisonment of Felonious Clarks, they were thus answered, Forasmuch as the
matter contained in this Petition pertains to Spiritueltie, the King woll
that the Archbishops and the Bishops of this Roialme set such due Remedy
thereynne as shall seem to their wisdom covenable and sufficient therefore
hereafter, and that the Church have its freedoms and Libertees. n. 22.

45. E. III. n. 47. The Commons ask, that the Statutes of the Priests, by
Assent of the Clergy may be observed Abr. of Rec. p. 114.
. Again,

50. E. III. n. 46. They desire que null Estatute, ne Ordenance soit faite ne
grante au Petition du Clergy, si ne soit per assent de Voz Commenes; ne que
vous dites Communes ne soient obligez per nulles constitutions quils font pur
lour avantage, sanz assent de voz dites Commenes. The Reason of which Request
follows; Car eux ne veullent estre obligez a null de voz Estatutz ne Ordinances
faitz sanz lour assent. i. e. to none, made to their Hurt and Detriment, and
pur avantage de Gens Lays. In the Kings answer, the Truth of what is here
asserted, is not denied; but the Request and the Imputation being too general,
it was ordered -- Soit ceste matiere declaree en special.

The Protestation of the Clergy against the Statute of Provisors 13. R. II. n.
18.
runs, That they assent to no Act, made in that or any other Parliament, in
restrictionem Potestatis Apostolicae, aut in subversionem, enervationem, seu
derogationem Ecclesiasticae Libertatis.

Nay even as low as the Year 1529 or 30, I find 'em asserting their supposed
Privileges in this respect, and complaining of some Statutes For an account of
which See Hist. of Ref. Vol. 1. p. 82.
which passed in that Parliament to their Prejudice, ad quae facienda nec
consenserunt per se, nec per Procuratores suos; neque super eisdem consulti
fuerunt. It Is in a Petition yet unprinted, and which I shall therefore from a
Cotton-Manuscript transcribe into the Appendix See N. XV.
.

And some things have been reckoned to be so properly of Ecclesiastical
Cognizance, that even in Acts of Parliament made since the Reformation
concerning them, the Previous Resolution, or Concurrence of the Clergy in
Convococation has been expressly taken notice of. Thus 5 and 6 E. VI. c. 12. The
Learned Clergy of the Realm are said to have determined Priests Marriages to be
most Lawful, by the Law of God, in their Convocation, as well by their Common
Assent, as by the Subscription of their hands. And 1 Eliz. c. 1. allowed not
the High Commissioners to order, determine, or adjudge any matter or cause to be
Heresy, but only such as have heretofore been determined, ordered, or adjudg'd
to be Heresy, by the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the first
four General Councils, or any of them, or by any other General Council, wherein
the same was declared Heresy by the express and Plain Words of the said
Canonical Scriptures or such as shall hereafter be ordered, judged, or
determined to be Heresy by the High Court of Parliament of this Realm, with the
Assent of the Clergy in their Convocation. And so in several other Statates.

Beyond all this, their Consent in Parliament has also, by way of
Condescension, been sometimes asked, and admitted, even in matters where they
were not particularly interested. For 9. H. V. the whole Body of the Clergy
(under the Style of Proelati and Clerus) concurred to the Ratification of a
League by Parliament; wherein it is said, how the King Tres Status regni, viz.
Praelatos and Clerum, Nobiles and Magnates, nec non and Communitates dicti
regni -- ad Palatium suum Westminster -- ad majorem firmitatem and robur pacis
praedictae; nec non propter alias causas suum statum, regnum, and regni
utilitatem concernentes juxta morem and consuetudinem ejusdem fecerat convocari
-- Coram quibus tribus Statibus idem Serenissimus dominus Rex, etc. made this
Treaty be read, and They confirmed it. n. 15.

And the very same Method, I doubt not, was practiced 35. E. III. when,
according to Walsingham's account, in Parliamento Londoniis proponebatur
cunctis Regni Statibus Concordia inter Reges Stabilita, placuitque Yp. Neustr.
ad ann. 1361.
cunctis dictam concordiam recipere and tenere Yp. Neustr. ad ann. 1361.
.

6. H. VI. n. 27. When it was Enacted, that no Man should contract or marry
himself to any Queen of England, without the King's leave; the Record says,
that the Bishops and Clergy agree to it, as far forth as the same swerveth not
from the Law of God, and of the Church, and so as the same imports no Deadly
Sin. Abr. of Rec. p. 589.
.

In all the Judgments of the Parliament 21. R. II. the Name and Assent of the
Proctors of the Clergy is particularly alleged Abr. of Rec. p. 381.
, to countenance (as the Historian of our Reformation supposes Part 2. p. 49.
) the Acts of that Meeting, wherein the whole Proceeding of a former Parliament
was annulled; and to give a Collateral Assent, and Authority to them, as
another Writer L. M. P. p. 32.
(not much amiss, I think) distinguishes. And thus far I can agree with Both:
but when his Lordship further adds, that this is the only time that they are
mentioned as bearing a share in the Legislative Power, I must beg leave to
believe the Records before him: One of which [the Instrument of Succession in
H. IV th's time] has been already produced P. 61, 62.
; and his Lordship upon a view of the Words cannot, I dare say, doubt whether
the Clergy were, in that Instance, allowed a share in the Legislative Power;
for the Succession is said to be settled, not only with their Consent, but by
their Authority.

Such have the Instances been, in which they either claimed, or were indulged a
consenting Voice; and for the sake of which, as it should seem, their Summons
ad consentiendum issued out all along, even after their Complete Separation.
Not that the same Reasons still continue, though the same Summons does; for 200
Years Disuse has barred the Clergy from acting Parliamentarily in several
Instances, which heretofore they were allowed to interpose in. Our Constitution
is much altered in many of these respects: and (to say the Truth) it was fit,
that in many of them it should be al^er'd; and that the Parliamentary Interest of
the Lower Clergy should be reduced (as it is) to Matters Ecclesiastical, and
such Things as concern either Religion, or their Order. And in this Sphaere, I
conceive, they still move, and are still a Parliamentary Assembly; whose
Consent is regularly to be had to all Laws, relating to Faith, or
Church Discipline, when ever the Parliament shall please to enact any; and
whose consent, when Previous to such Laws, is, I presume, most Regular. They
have still a Right o^ being summoned to* and with every new Parliament, and a
Right of sitting by virtue of that Summons; in order, not to those High Affairs
of State, which they once considered jointly with my Lords the Bishops, when
they sat with them in Parliament; and which made the Constant Preamble of their
Convocation-Writs, long after they separated: but for some Religious Ends, and
Church Purposes; with which, however, the Safety and Peace of the State is
closely interwoven. They are to be ready, to offer to the King and Parliament,
what they shall Judge serviceable to the Interests of Piety and Good Manners;
and to consider of what shall be offered to them; to remonstrate against what
may be passing there to their Disadvantage; and to pray Help of the States, in
such matters as may redound both to the Benefit of their Own Order, and to the
good of the whole Kingdom. In these, and several such respects as these, the
Clergy have still a Right of Attending on every New Parliament; and (which
ought to be considered) the Parliament have also a Right of being attended by
them, as their Proper Assistants, and Councelors in matters Ecclesiastical,
whose Judgment is in many cases to be asked even where it may not be followed;
and whose Resolutions are not without Weight, even when they are without
Authority.

It Is in this case, as in that of the Judges, the Masters in Chancery, and the
King's Council learned in the Law; who have a Right of being called up to the
House of Lords, and to that end can demand their Writs of Assistance: Nor is
this all; for the Lords also have a Right of being thus assisted by them; and
can therefore claim their attendance, though they themselves should be willing
to forego it: The Privilege is mutual, and not to be waved on the one side,
without Consent of the other. In like manner, I say, the Convocation-Clergy may
be considered as the Council Spiritual of Parliament; to whose attendance
therefore, that August Body is entitled; and in whose Summons and sitting
consequently, it is in a near manner concerned. For should there not be
frequent need of their Advice or Assistance, yet as it is for the Honor of the
two Houses, that the Clergy should be ready always, against there shall be need
of it; so is it for their Interest too, to keep up a Title to such Assisting
Assemblys, by keeping up the Assemblys themselves. It is possible, that there
may be no occasion of advising with the Judges, throughout an whole Session of
Parliament. Could the Lords certainly foresee this, yet they would not, I
suppose, consent that their Summons should, for that time, be dropped, or even
their Attendance excused.

The Argument therefore advanced in these Papers must be looked upon, as a Plea
for the Privileges, not of the Convocation-Clergy only, but of the Parliament
it self also, to which they belong; and to whose Assemblys, Theirs, are now,
and from the first settlement of Christianity among us have been, strictly
united: not indeed constantly in the same Respects, and by the very same
State-Tyes, and Ligaments; but sometimes by more, and sometimes by fewer; and
always by such, and so many, as were needful to preserve, and prove the Union.
An Account of these, regularly deduced through the several Periods of time,
from the earliest Saxon Age downwards, has been the business of this Chapter:
not with any Aim of retrieving lost Rights, or building New Pretensions on Old
disused Practices; but merely to show, that the Parliamentary Assemblys of the
Clergy, are of the Essence of our Government, have been practiced from the
foundation of it, and are woven into the Frame of it; and can never therefore
without doing Violence to our good Old Constitution, be suppressed.

The Ends and Uses indeed of these Conventions of the Clergy have been
different; but under all those Varietys, the Right, and the Practice of
Convening has still continued the same, without being ever, till now,
interrupted, or disputed. And therefore (to repeat here at the close of this
Chapter, what I have said already at the Entrance of it) it makes nothing
against the Clergys Right of Meeting with the Parliament, that they are now no
Member, or Estate of Parliament (as Dr. W. objects): since they are, however,
an Estate of the Realm, obliged and entitled by the fixed Rules of our
Constitution to assemble with the Parliament; and which has, according to this
Obligation, and by this Title, assembled with it, now for some hundred Years,
since all Pretense of assembling, as an Estate of Parliament, vanished.

And now, I have, I think, answered all Dr. W's Objections on this first Head;
unless we should allow a certain poor Color of his to pass for an Objection,
where he tells us, that Our Kings have often been wont to hold Convocations
when there were were no Parliaments sitting Pp. 229. (286.)
: from whence he would have it understood, that those two Meetings have no
manner of dependence upon one another; and that the King therefore is as much
at Liberty to hold a Parliament without a Convocation, as he has been to call a
Convocation without a Parliament. To this End he has adorned his Appendix with
a learned List of Convocations anciently held without Parliaments, or at
different Times from them Number. VI.
: an whole Dozen of which he finds in the Compass of 240 Years From 1287. to
1538.
. It Is a mercy, his knowledge is somewhat stinted in this way: for else, we
should assuredly have had fifty Instances more of the kind; since so many at
least, might, within that Compass of time, have been fetched from our
Manuscript Registers, and Printed Historians. I could without difficulty number
up the greatest part of them now, if it were either worth the Readers while to
have such a List, or related any ways to the present Dispute; which turns not
on the King's Prerogative of assembling Convocations out of Parliament (a Right
undoubtedly belonging to the Crown in elder Times) but on the Spiritual
Subject's Privilege of being assembled in it. Had Dr. W. given us a List of
Parliaments anciently held without Convocations, That indeed had been to his
purpose, and would have gone a good way toward settling the Point between us.
But here he is as reserved as one would wish; for from the beginning to the end
of his Crude Work, there is not a single Instance of this kind made out, or so
much as pretended Except the Trite* Instance of Exclus^ Clero.
. Nay, to see the fate of misapplied Reading, even of those twelve
insignificant Instances which he has produced, no less than eight are evidently
mistaken, as to the Dates either of the Parliaments, or Convocations mentioned
in them. The Reader will rather take my word for it, than allow me the liberty
of interrupting the Course of my Argument so far, as to prove it: And I shall
proceed therefore to consider and remove the several Objections that lie also
against the second Point advanced in these Papers, that the Clergy, when met,
have a Right of Treating and Debating freely about such matters as lie within
their proper Sphaere, and even of coming to fit Resolutions upon them, without
being necessitated antecedently to gratify themselves for such Acts or Debates,
by a License under the Broad Seal of England.

CHAP. VIII.
IT had been argued from the General Nature of such Assemblys, as these we are
treating of, that Freedom of Debate was their undoubted Right and Privilege,
incident to them as such, and inseparable from 'em. To this I find these
several Answers returned.

Dr. W. assures us, that the Debates of the most General and Famous Councils
have been under as great Restraint as he supposes the Convocation to be P. 288.


L. M. P. adds, that Poyning's Law has tied up even a Parliament in Ireland as
strictly P. 44.
: and the Author of the Postscript At the end of a Book, entitled -- An Essay
concerning the Power of the Magistrate, 8^. 1697.
fetches a third Instance from Scotland, where the Three Estates, he says, can
debate of nothing, but what the Lords of the Articles have beforehand agreed on
P. 198.
.

As to the first of these, supposing Dr. W's Allegation true, yet he has been
told, that there is no arguing from the Powers claimed, or exercised by
Emperors in those Great and Extraordinary Assemblys, to what is fit to be done
in lesser and stated ones: and why such Inferences do not hold, some Reasons
have been given him, which I need not now repeat. But in truth he mistakes, or
misrepresents the Practice of the Emperors, even in these General and Famous
Councils, which (I have shown him p. 125, 6.) went no further, than to require
a preference to that Particular Business for the Dispatch of which they were
Summoned, not to exclude their debating on any thing, but what the Emperor
proposed to them. And of this the Canons of those Councils are an Evidence
beyond Dispute; which, both as to Matter and Form, took their Rise from the
several Synods they were made in, without any Imperial Leave, or Direction for
the framing them. With what Face then can Dr. W. vouch the Practice of these
Councils as Precedents for that Degree of restraint he would have laid on an
English Convocation? With what Truth or Conscience can he affirm, that they
acted entirely according to the Prescription of the Emperors? P. 288.
and deliberated on nothing, but what they were directed, or allowed (he means
expressly, and particularly allowed) by the Prince to deliberate on P. 48.
? Whatever our Author may think of such Doctrine Now, or whatever he may Hope
from it, sure I am, that had he lived, and uttered it, while those Holy Synods
were in being, it would not have been two or three Years afterward before he
had repented of it. But Old Councils are Dead and Gone; and any thing, it
seems, may be said of them. Let him not depend too much upon that: for they
have Friends still in the World, that may happen, yet before he dies, to meet
together, and ask him a few Questions. A living Synod may sometime or other
think it for its Interest, and find it in its Power, to vindicate the Honor and
Authority of the Dead ones.

Well, if Old Councils cannot afford a Precedent, Modern Parliaments shall.
Poyning's Law therefore is urged, which provides, that All such Bills as shall
be offered to the Parliament of Ireland, shall be transmitted hither under the
Great Seal of that Kindom; and having received approbation here, shall be sent
back under the Great Seal of England, to be preferred to the Parliament of
Ireland L. M. P. p 44.
. But what have we to do with Instances fetched from Conquered Countries, who
must receive what Terms the Victor pleases, and be glad of any? We live among
another People, always Jealous of their Libertys, and careful to preserve them:
in a Land, where slavery either in Church or State, though sometimes planted,
could never thrive. And those Fetters therefore, which might perhaps justly be
laid on an Irish Parliament, may not fit an English Convocation so well; which
is therefore free, because it is an English one. But after all, how far does
this Law of Poynings reach; Our Lawyer tells us, that it leaves not the
Parliament at Liberty to propose what Laws they please, that the Irish look
upon it as Conclusive upon their Debates, and are satisfied: and again, that we
have here an Instance of a Parliament without Liberty of Debate. But this is
too gross an Imposition upon the Credulity of his Readers; few of which are so
ignorant, as not to be aware, that Poyning's Law lays a restraint only on the
Enacting Power of their Parliament, but not on the Debates of it; which,
notwithstanding this Act, are left as free as ever. They can still Treat and
Conferr about all Matters and Causes that are of Parliamentary Cognizance; they
can Petition, Represent, and Protest: Nay they can propose what Heads of Bills
they please, to be transmitted hither, and sent back thither in Form; of which
we have had very late and frequent Experience. And how therefore the Abridgment
of the Convocations Liberty of Debate can be pretended to be justified by this
Irish Precedent, is, I confess, past my English Understanding. For, as I take
it, the Convocation desires no other Powers and Privileges, but just what this
Parliament claims and practices; and pleads only, that the 25 H. VIII. may not
be extended to such a Rigorous and Unjustifiable Sense, as will lay greater
restraints upon Them, than Poyning's Laws does upon Those of Ireland.

But our Letter-writer himself is sensible, that this Instance is not to the
purpose: for at the close of it, his Conscience gives a little, and he is
forced to confess, that the Irish Parliament are not under an Universal
Restraint, nor wholly mute, till the King gives them Power to Debate and Act P.
44.
. Are they not? Why then was it generally said, that they were a Parliament
without a Liberty of Debate, or of proposing what Laws they please, in the very
next Lines to these, where it is all unsaid again? What means this Absurd
Writer, to place his Inconsistencies so near one another, that one Glance of
the Eye discovers them? Even Dr. W. is in this respect a more Modest and Wary
Manager: for His Contradictions usually keep their Distance, and may lie hid
therefore, if the Reader do not think it worth his while (as few Readers do
perhaps) to carry the several parts of his Book in their mind, and compare them
one with another. Besides, if the Irish Parliament is not under an Universal
Restraint, what have we to do with it here* where we are enquiring after
Instances, to countenance the laying such an Universal Restraint on the
Convocation in England? If this be not a Parallel of a Restraint in the same
Degree, it is no parallel at all: there is no doubt, but such meetings may be
restrained; how far, is the Question. Were Precedents Proofs of the
Reasonableness of such and such ways of acting, yet those Precedents must be
exact and full, or they prove nothing. Ay, but the same Power that disabled
them so far, might have put them under an entire disability. It might so, if
they were a Province won to the Crown by its Sword; for it might have allowed
them no Parliament at all: but if it allowed them any, Freedom of Debate could
not have been denied them; without which, in the Apprehensions of Us
Englishmen, there can be no Parliament. It Is true, the French use the word
otherwise: for with Them it signifies an Assembly, to which the King's Edicts
are sent to be verified. But we are not yet acquainted with this Sense of the
Word, and I hope never shall. We took the Term from them heretofore, when it
signified something else; and we have taken care to preserve its Original
Meaning. Dr. W. indeed bids far for introducing the French sense of the Word;
for he tells us roundly, That the English Parliament are, P. (289.)
in the main parts of their Debates as much, though not as necessarily directed
by the King in what he would have them consult about, as the Convocation it
self. And how far the Convocation is, in his Opinion, to be directed by the
King, his Book informs us. This is harsh Doctrine, to suppose any restraint
upon the Parliaments Freedom of Debate, and may happen not to go down easily
with Those that are concerned in it. But he thinks he has softened it, by
saying, that the Parliament are in their Debates as much, though not as
necessarily directed as the Convocation. What the meaning of that senseless
Distinction is, I cannot see, or how it does him any service. Should we allow
him, that his Doctrine curbs the Parliaments Freedom of Debate as much, though
not as necessarily, as it does that of Convocation, would such an allowance
mend the matter? or screen him a whit the more from the Just Resentments of
Those, who will no more bear being told, that they are as much, than that they
are as necessarily directed in their Debates, as the Convocation is? if indeed
the Convocation can debate of nothing, till they are qualified for it under the
Broad Seal of England. I am mistaken, if this be not, to wound the Libertys of
Parliament, through those of Convocation.

The Instance of the Lords of the Articles in Scotland is as little to the
purpose. They were a Previous Committee, composed of some Members of the
Estates of Parliament, through which every Act was to pass, before it could come
before the States themselves. But they were no bar upon the Debates of
Parliament; where any Subject might be started and discussed, any Requests or
Proposals to the Prince might be drawn, whether these Lords had made way for
such Considerations or no. However, the check which this gave to the Parliament
in their Legigislative Capacity, was thought a Badge of slavery by the Scotch;
and therefore toward the beginning of this Revolution, when the Chains were
knocked off every where from his Majesty's Subjects, this Committee was
abolished. And had the English Clergy then lain under any undue Restraint, They
too might have hoped for a Relief from it, as soon as any men; since none had
been more Instrumental than They in promoting the Common Deliverance. They
might have expected a legal Relaxation of the Rigor of any Law that lay hard
upon them: but instead of this, their only Request is, that an Act made in
Abridgment of their Privileges may not be construed to an Illegal and
Oppressive Sense; that they may enjoy their Old Rights, which they stand
possessed of by Law; and that no New Encroachments may take place upon them.
Which is so very Modest a Plea, as may be made by any Body of Men, even without
Merit on their ^^de; and cannot when understood, be denied them without
Injustice: and therefore, I am confident, when it is understood will not be
denied them.

Having taken off this General Color, drawn from the Authority exercised over
such Meetings as these, in other Times and Countries, I go on now to what has
been objected more particularly and closely. And the first Exception of Weight
that lies against the Claim made, is, That the Perpetual Practice of
Convocations, ever since the 25 H. VIII* runs otherwise: and this indeed, were
it true, would be a strong one. And if General Assertions without Proofs would
have made it true, Dr. W. had done it: for he has over and over Pref. p. II.
pp. 26, 40, 43, 109, 113, 115, 116, etc. 293.

L. M. P. p. 40, 43, 3^


affirmed this to be the case, with as much assurance as if he had perused the
Journals of every Convocation since that Act, and seen the King's several
Commissions entered there. By that time he is got to the second Page of his
Preface, we have him affirming, that the Sense of the Act given is repugnant to
the Constant Practice of our Convocations ever since the time of H. VIII. This
is certain, he says, nor does he Himself (against whom he writes) deny it.
Indeed it is just as certain, as it is that that Writer yields it; who says only
[in answer to a Question there put, whether the Convocation may conferr without
a License?] that the Common received Opinion is in the Negative P. 40.
. But not a word has he there, or any where else, about the Practice consequent
upon that Act: and he speaks only of the Opinion at present received, without
entering into the Judgment of Elder times. So that Dr. W. represents his
Adversarys Positions just as honestly as he argues against them. Indeed should
that Author have allowed the stream either of Practice or Opinion to have been
always contrary to his sense of the Act, he had been (as Dr. W. now is) under a
Gross Mistake; for it is certain, that both General Opinion and Practice were
on his side for many Years after the Act passed. Upon a strict Enquiry into the
matter, I find no Instance of a Commission to treat, that is not Threescore and
ten Years younger than the Statute it self. The several Convocations in the 12
last years of H. the VIII. those of E. the VI th. of Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth
all, for ought I can find, acted without any such Commission, or License in
writing; and the first time we meet with it on Record, is, in 1603, when King
James's first Synod met, to settle the Discipline of the Church, in that Body
of Canons, which at present obtains. Nor is there any Opinion, I believe for
the Necessity of such a License, elder than this Practice: at least I have not
had the good fortune ever to meet with any, though I have diligently sought for
it. It Is true, the Registers of most Convocations, summoned since this Statute,
were lost in the Fire of London; however large Extracts out of several of them
are preserved, and complete Transcripts of some: and in none of these is there
the least Footstep of any License under the Broad Seal to be seen, but very
plain Intimations to the contrary; as I shall now by some Remarkable Passages
taken from thence, and from other Books and Papers of good Authority show. And
if I am somewhat Larger in my Recitals of this kind than is absolutely
necessary, the Reader, I hope, will easily forgive me: What does not directly
tend to establish my Assertion, will serve at least to give some small Light
into the Methods of Proceeding usual in Convocation, which the Author of the
Letter to a Convocation-man rightly observes to be little known, or minded. And
Dr. Wake, who smiles at his Remark, is himself a most Contemptible Instance of
the Truth of it: since he has ventured to write a Book, about the Customs and
Privileges of Convocations, without having perused the Acts of almost any One
English Synod; and has from the beginning to the end of his wretched
Performance, proved nothing effectually, but his own profound Ignorance of the
Subject he is engaged in.

I shall take the Rise of my Enquirys from the Convocation which sat, upon a
Prorogation, Nov. V. 1532. before which the Submission of the Clergy was made
to the King, but not yet Enacted: so that though it obliged them not Then as a
Law, yet it bound them as a Promise; by the Terms of which, if a Commission to
Treat had been then held necessary, we may be sure, they would not so soon
after the making that Promise have treated without one. And yet I find no Hint
of a Commission in a Diary of that Meeting, where a great many things of much
less moment are set down; and where, it being the first time the Clergy met
after they submitted, had any such thing been practiced, we should without fail
have heard of it. Sess. 11. Martii 26. 1533. this Note is inserted, -- Tunc
vertebatur in dubium, an liceret disputare in Negotio Regio, eo quod Negotium
pendet coram summo Pontifice indecisum. Which Doubt the President removed by
producing the Apostolic Brief, that gave leave cuilibet Opiniones suas dicere;
and Dominus Praesidens instanter rogavit omnes ut diligenter inquirerent de
ista quaestione, and referrent quid sentirent. See Ant. Brit. ad ann. where the
very same account is given of Stokesly' s producing a License from the Pope,
but no hint of any from the King.
They had no doubts, it seems, about the Lawfulness of Treating without a Royal
License; which had they had, it would have been mentioned here together with
the Papal Leave: and we may fairly therefore presume, they had none.

In the Convocation begun June 9. 1536. the first in which Cromwell sat as
Vicegerent The Bishop of Sarum tells us, that Cromwell came hither as the
King's Vicar General; but he was not yet Vicegerent. For he sat next the
Archbishop; but when he had that Dignity, he sat above him. Nor do I find him
styled in any Writing Vicegerent, for sometime after this, though my Lord
Herbert says he was made Vicegerent the 18th. of July this Year, the same day
on which the Parliament was Dissolved. Vol. 1. p. 213. In which Paragraph there
are great Marks of Haste: For the Acts of this Convocation expressly call
Cromwell Vicegerent, as well as Vicar General, and show, that he both took
place of the Archbishop, and signed before him; as he does in two Papers that
passed this very Convocation, and which together with the Subscriptions his
Lordship has given us. Vol. 1. Coll. of Rec. p. 157. p. 315. The Words of the
Acts are -- Magister Willielmus Petre allegavit, quod ubi haec Synodus
convocata ^it auctoritate illustrissimi Principis* and dictus Princeps Supremum
Locum in dicta Convocatione tenere debeat, ac eo absente honorandus Magister
Tho. Cromwell Vicarius Generalis ad Causas Ecclesiasticas, ejus Vicemgerens,
locum ejus occupare debeat; ideo petiit pradictum locum sibi assignari. Ac
ibidem praesentavit Literas Commissionales dicti Domini sui, sigillo Principis
ad Causas Ecclesiasticas sigillatas. Quibus perlectis Reverendissimus
assignavit sibi Locum juxta se, i. e. the Place next above himself, which he
demanded. Nor does my Lord Herbert say, that Cromwell was made Vicegerent July
18th. this Year; but July 9th. ( see Hist. p. 466.) which is a manifest
Misprint for June 9th. the very day on which this Convocat^on was opened, and
on which, I suppose, his Patent bore date. Indeed, I question, whether the
Powers of Vicar General, and Vicegerent were different, and conveyed, as my
Lord of Sarum thinks by different Patents, for I have seen no Good Ground any
where for such a Distinction. In the Collection of Records at the End of the
second Part (p. 303.) the Bishop has given us what he calls Cromwell 's
Commission to be Lord Vicegerent in all Ecclesiastical Causes. But his Lordship
had not time to peruse it; for upon reading it, he would have found, that it
was only the Draught of a Commission to certain Persons deputed by Cromwell to
execute the Vicegerents Power in several parts of the Kingdom: One of those
Subordinate or Subaltern Commissions, which had respect to a Superior one, as
his Lordship upon another occasion (Vol. 2. p. 347.) very properly
distinguishes.
, we are told, Comparuit Dominus Prolocutor una cum Clero, and exhibuit Librum
sub Protestatione, continentem mala Dogmata per Concionatores intra Prove. Cant.
public praedicata. This List is Printed by Fuller P. 208.
; and in it the Clergy, by way of Preface to their Articles, Protest, That they
neither in Word, Deed, or otherwise, directly, or indirectly, intend any thing
to speak, attempt, or do, which in any manner of wise may be displeasant unto
the King's Highness, etc. and that they sincerely addict themselves to Almighty
God, his Laws, and unto their said Soverign Lord the King, their Supreme Head
in Earth, and his Laws, Statutes, Provisions, and Ordinances, made here within
his Graces Realms. Had any General Commission been granted them, there had been
no need of this Protestation; which was made, to guard against the Penaltys of
the Acts 25. and 27. H. VIII. and has therefore, we see a plain reference to
them.

The Convocation in which Alesius the Scot disputed with so much applause, sat
the Year after this, Anno 1537: Ant. Brit. p. 331. Fox Vol. 2. p. 504.
(though my Lord of Sarum Vol. 1. p. 214.
, I find, out of a laudable Eagerness to record the Honors done to his
Countrymen, has placed this Dispute a Year earlier than it happened.) Cromwell
opened the Meeting with a Speech, where he tells them, that they are called to
determine certain Controversys in Religion, which at this time be moved,
concerning the Christian Religion and Faith, not only in this Realm, but also
in all Nations thorough the World. For the King studieth Night and Day to set a
Quietness in the Church, and he cannot rest till all such Controversys be fully
debated, and ended through the Determination of You, and of his Whole
Parliament. For -- he will suffer no Common Alteration but by the Consent of
You, and of his Whole Parliament. And he desires You for Christ's sake, that
All Malice, Obstinacy, and Carnal Respect set apart, ye will friendly and
lovingly dispute among your selves of the Controversys moved in the Church,
etc. These Fox tells us, were the very words of his Speech; and that, as soon
as it was ended, the Bishops rose up altogether, giving thanks unto the King's
Majesty, not only for his Great Zeal toward the Church of Christ, but also for
his Godly Exhortation worthy so Christian a Prince [and then] immediately they
went to Disputation. We may observe here, that neither Cromwell in his Speech
to the Convocation, nor the Prelates in their Answer, mention any Commission to
Treat, though it had been a Proper Head to have been enlarged on, in both
Cases; and could not well have escaped the Clergy, when returning Thanks to the
King for his Goodness to them, had any such Commission then issued. But that it
did not, and that the Clergy were then under no Apprehensions that their
liberty of Debating on what Subjects, and even of coming to what Conclusions
they pleased, was abridg'd by the late Act, the Preface to the Institution of a
Christian Man (a Book, which passed this Convocation) evidently shows. I have
transcribed the Passage already from thence See P. 97.
, and shall here therefore only referr the Reader to it. No, the Practice then,
and long afterward, was only for the President of the Synod to declare to 'em
by word of Mouth Thus in the Convocation of Jan. 1. 1557 The Acts say, that
Card. Pool Causas hujus Synodi Verbo tenus proposuit. And so diverse times
before, and after.

1541. Ian. 20. Reverendissimus exposuit iis ex part Regis quod intentio ejus
erat, quod ipsi inter se deliberarent de Reformandis Errotibus -- and
conficerent Leges de Simonia vitanda, etc.

1547. 1. E. VI. Nov. 5. Revmus exposuit i^s fuisse, etc. de mandato Regio and
Procerum quod Praelati and Clerus inter se con^^lerent de ver^ Christi
Religione probe instituenda.

With this agrees an Old Directory of Cranmer's for the first Day of the
Convocation, 7 E. VI. May 1. 1552.

. 6. The Clergy of the Inferior House to be called up to the Chapitor; his
Grace to declare the Cause of this Convocation, and to appoint them to Elect,
etc.

1555. 22. Oct. Episcopus London summarie and compendiose Causam Synodi vocatae
exposuit.

Ian. 13. 1562. Arch. Cant. brevem quandem Orationem Eloquentiae plenam habuit
ad Patres and Clerum; perquam inter alia opportunitatem reformandarum rerum in
Eccl. Anglic. jam oblatam esse aperuit, ac Propensos animos tam illustrissimae
Dominae Nostrae Reginae quam aliorum Magnatum hujus regni ad hujusmodi
Reformationem habendam declaravit.

I have laid these Instances together, that we may see clearly, what the Custom
then was, and how a Message from the King by the President supplied the place
of a Commission under the Broad Seal, which was afterward practiced. Heylin
and Fuller have translated some of these Passages in their Historys, but so
loosly, as to accommodate them to the Current Doctrine and Practice of their
time, when a License to Treat was held necessary. Which I mention, to warn the
Reader, not to receive their Versions as Literal: For it is plain, they saw no
other Acts of Convocation than those from whence these Transcripts were taken.


the King's Pleasure, for what Ends he had called them together, and what
Business he would have them proceed upon. And this Verbal Intimation was all
the Previous Leave that was either asked, or given in That, or several other
succeeding Reigns.

The only Instance in H. the VIII 's time that seems to contradict this, is the
Divorce of Anne of Cleve in 1540, mentioned by L. M. P. P. 40.
which he says, the Clergy could not take cognizance of, till the King's
Commission empowered them to debate and consider it. And in their Judgment
therefore they recite that Commission at large, and by virtue of it declare,
etc. They do so; and there were Two very good Reasons for it, arising from the
Matter about which they were to give their Judgment, and from the Manner also
in which they were to handle it. As to the first of these, the attempting any
thing by Word or Deed against this Marriage of the King with Anne of Cleve, was
High Treason (or at least^ Misprision of Treason) by the Laws of the Realm; as
the Clause of Pardon in the Act 32. H. 8. c. 25.
for dissolving this Marriage evidently shows. And the Clergy therefore had
reason to desire a Commission from the Crown, to screen them from these
Penealtys. But further, such a Commission was necessary, not only for their
security in a point of this Importance, but in order to their very Assembling.
For (which has not been hitherto observed) this Cause was adjudg'd, not in a
Convocation properly so called, that is, in a Provincial Synod; but in a
National Assembly of the whole Clergy of either Province: the King issuing out
his Letters Commissional under the Great Seal (as the Sentence See it Bishop
Burnet. Vol. 1. Col. of Rec. p. 197.
speaks) to the Two Archbishops, All the Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and
Clergy of England, and commanding them in Universalem Synodum convenire, to
debate, and determine this matter. The Lords and Commons then sitting had
petitioned the King to referr it to his Clergy, with a design of grounding an
Act of Parliament on Their Determination. The Business required Haste The
Commission was sealed the 6 th. of July, the Clergy met by Virtue of it the
7th. The Cause was heard, Judgment given, and Letters Testimonial of that
Judgment drawn up, and signed by all the Clergy on the 9th. such Dispatch was
required of them. On the 10th. the Archbishop of Cant. reported it to the Lords
and Commons. On the 11th. the King let the Queen, then at Richmond, know what
was done, and had her Consent to it; and on the 12th. a Bill was brought into
the House annulling the Marriage, which ( says my Lord of Sarum Vol. 1. p.
282.) went easily through both Houses.
, for the Summer was now far come on, and the Parliament of Necessity soon to
disperse; it could not therefore be committed separately to the Convocations of
either Province, there to be transacted in a Regular manner: But all the
Bishops of the Province of York being present in Parliament, and all the Clergy
of that of Canterbury being ready hard by in their Convocation; the King took
this way of joining both together by his Commission, and forming One National
Assembly. To these he recommended the Discussion of his Case, so that what
should be by them determined, id demum (says he) Totius Ecclesiae nostrae
Autoritate innixi licite facere and exequi audeamus. It is manifest, that this
Commission to Treat (or rather to Sit The Clergy are said in the Instrument, to
be Congregati and Convocati virtute Commissionis, etc. but there is no formal
Mention of their Treating in virtue of it.
) was here necessary to be issued out, for such Reasons, as sufficiently
distinguish both this Meeting, and their Business from those we are discoursing
of. To proceed therefore to the times of E. VI. In his first Year I have shown
the Custom still continued for the President to declare the King's good
Pleasure to the Houses, Orally, without producing any License under the Broad
Seal. It Is true, there is the Draught of a Petition of this Year preserved,
which seems at first sight to imply the contrary; and shall be fully considered
under a separate Head: All I shall here say to it is, that should the Sense of
the Inferior Clergy be justly expressed in this Petition, at the opening of
this Convocation, yet it is certain they continued not long of this Opinion; but
were soon satisfied, either from the Answer made to them by the Bishops, or
some other way, that their Fears of incurring a Praemunire, if they treated
without a Commission, were vain and groundless; because we are as sure as we
can be of a Negative of this nature at this distance, that in all the
Convocations for many Years after this they treated without one.

In the 6 th. of the same Prince (1552) that Convocation met in which the first
42 Articles passed, whose Title is, Articuli de quibus in Synodo Londinensi
Anno Dom. 1552* ad tollendam Opinionum dissensionem and consensum Verae
Religionis firmandum, inter Episcopos and alios Eruditos Viros convenerat.
Regia Authoritate in Lucem Editi. And here again the Omission of a License in
form ought to satisfy us, that there was no such thing, because where we know
it was granted, as in 1603. and 1640. there the Titles of the Canons then
framed carry an Express mention of it.

1o. Mariae, The Prolocutor certify'd the [Lower] House [upon their first
Meeting] that it was the Queens Pleasure that the Company of the same House
being Learned Men This explains the Eruditi Viri in the Title of the Canons of
1552. And is another Instance of the Convocational Use of that Phrase, to be
added to those I have given. p.
Assembled, should debate of matters of Religion, and constitute Laws thereof,
which her Grace and the Parliament would ratify. Philpot 's account in Fox Vol.
3. p. 19.
And the same Intimation was given, I suppose, by Bonner, the President of the
Upper House, to the Bishops; or rather to both the Houses jointly, and his
Speech reported afterward by the Prolocutor to the Lower Clergy; as the Custom
is for the Speaker to do in Parliament. The Business committed to this
Convocation was very extensive we see; and yet no other License, but what was
Verbal, either given, or required; though the 25. H. VIII. stood in full force,
both then and the Year afterward.

When another Convocation met, Nov. 13. 1554. They too debated and acted,
though Unlicens'd As far as the Silence of the Acts in this case (good part of
which I have seen) are an Evidence of it.
; and among other things solicited for a Repeal of this Statute. Twenty Eight
Articles of Reformation the Lower House preferred; and in the Preface to those
Articles assert the Power by which they did it, Accounting our selves (say
they) to be called hither -- to treat with Your Lordships as well concerning
the restitution of this Noble Church of England to the Pristin State and Unity
of Christ's Church, as of other things touching the State and Quietness of the
same Church in Doctrine and in Manners; we have for the furtherance of your
Godly Doings therein devised these Articles following Bishop Burnet 2. Vol.
Col. of Rec. p. 207
.

The next Convocation Dr. IV. Appeal p. 30.
assure us out of the late Life of Cranmer, was assembled by Cardinal Pole in
virtue of a License from the Queen, whereby he was empowered also to make
Canons. But this is according to his usual Exactness in these Matters. The
Convocation in 1555. met Oct. 22. Act. MSS
; the Cardinal's License to hold a Synod bears date Nov. 2. ( Anth. Harmar. p.
142.
) that Year; and that Convocation therefore could not possibly be assembled by
him in virtue of this License. Besides, he was not consecrated till the Day
after Granmer's Death (22. March. 155^ Hist. of Ref. Vol. 2. p. 340.
) and could not therefore, as Archbishop, till then* summon a Convocation of
the Province. The true account of this matter is, that the Parliament meeting
this Year, Oct. 21. D^dg. Sum. p. 517.
, the Convocation also, in course, met the day after it at Paul's; being
convened by the Dean and Chapter of Cant. Heylin Hist. Q. Mary, p. 223.
as was usual in the Vacancy. The Cardinal, though in England, did not appear
at it, but Bonner, by Commission from the Chapter presided. There they sat and
did business till Oct. 30. Act. MSS
when I find them coming to a Conclusion, and offering their Subsidys, and
Complaints to the Queen. The second of the next Month, Anth. Harmar p. 141
the Cardinal had his License under the Broad Seal, to hold his Synod Legatin
of both Provinces, and upon it issued out his Mandate to Bonner, Nov. the 8 th.
for the Prove. of Cant. to meet those of York, on the second of December.
following. Accordingly both Provinces met in the King's Chapel at White Hall
Act. MSS. Memorandum (...) post incaeptam Convocationem in Ecclesia Divi Pauli,
etc. Loco Capitulari ibidem, postea [Episcopi] una cum Inferiori Clero Prove.
Eb^r comparuerunt in Synodo Reverendissimi in Christo Patris Domini Reginaldi,
etc. inchoata in Sacello Regio apud Whitehall prope Westminster. W. Say.
; and from thence adjourned back again to Paul's, and afterward to Lambeth; and
continued sitting there till Feb. 11 th. which was two Months after the
Parliament was dissolved Parl. dissolved Dec. 9. Journal.
. Nor was the Synod even then dissolved; but prorogued only to the 10 th. of
October.

All our Writers (my Lord of Sarum not excepted) have confounded Two things
here, that are very distinct, the Convocation of this Year, and the Legatin
Synod: For the Former of these no License was granted, or necessary; but it
issued purely in relation to the Latter; wherein the Clergy of both Provinces
were to meet N^tionally, by a Legatine Authority. For the Exercise of this
Authority the Cardinal had before hand been empowered by Letters Patents of
December. 10. 1554. But this License being too General, and expressing matters of
Jurisdiction and Dispensation only; it was thought fit to add another, for the
more ample Declaration of those Letters Patents (as the Words of it are); and
therein to specify the Power of holding Synods, and framing Constitutions
Legatine, and to indemnify the Clergy particularly for meeting and acting under
that Authority. This (says the Bishop) was thought safe on both sides, both for
Preserving the Rights of the Crown, and securing the Clergy from being
afterward brought within the Statute of Praemunire, as they had been upon their
acknowledging Cardinal Wolsey's Legatine Authority Vol. 2. p. 324.
: For the Old Laws against Provisions, which brought the Clergy then under a
Praemunire, were still in force. This was the Reason of the second License,
which could have no manner of regard to the 25 H. VIII. for that Act was Then
repealed. I shall give the Reader in the Appendix Nu XVI.
this License at large, as it is found in Pole's Register Fol. 7.
; where (and it seems, in the Patent Rolls Rot. Pat. 1. part 310. Reg. says
Hist. Ref. ibid.
also) it is still preserved. The Observation naturally arising from hence is,
That if any other License of this Nature had from the Time of these Legatin
Synods down to that of James the I. been granted, it would also either in the
Rolls, or Registers be found: But none such (that I can hear of) appearing
there, we have all the Reason in the World to conclude, that none issued. In
which Opinion we shall be further confirmed if we take a view of the
Convocations in Q. Elizabeth's Reign.

The first, met Ian. 24. 1558/9. and were so far from being Commissioned to
Treat, that they had not so much as any General Directions from the President
to proceed upon Business See Fuller C. H. p. 54. Act. MSS.
: for when he inquired, an Clerus Inferioris Domus aliquid excogitavit quod
voluerunt exponere illo die, the Prolocutor, and the Rest made answer, se
nescire ob quam causam, and quibus de rebus tracta turi sunt. I mention this
particular, to show, that it was Customary for the Convocation to be directed
to the subject of their Debates by the Crown, even when the 25 H. VIII. lay
under a Repeal (as it now did): and such Directions therefore given at other
Times, when the Statute was in force, must not be supposed to spring from this
Act so much as from the King's known Prerogative, by which he ever proposed
both to Parliaments and Convocations, at their first opening, the Reasons which
He, on his Part Super praemissis, and aliis quae ibidem ex part nostra clarius
exponentur, are the Words of every Convocation-Writ.
, had to assemble them. But this only by the bye. -- The Protestant
Convocations held after this Statute was revived, are a plain proof of the
Truth of that Exposition I have given of it. For in a Directory of Archbishop
Cranmer's, prescribing the Method of opening them, though every step that is at
such times to be taken be minutely set down, and the sum of whatever the
Archbishop, or any other, is on that occasion to do, or say, be distinctly
mentioned; yet of his producing a Commission to Treat, not a word is said: as
it is natural to think there would have been, had such a Commission been
practiced. I shall give the Reader a Copy of this Directory among the other
Papers See Append. N. XVII.
, because, if the Discontinuance of Convocations prevails, such Lights as these
may in some time be necessary. We are hastening on, I find, into so Thorough an
Ignorance of these matters, that it may, for ought I know, within a while, be
urged as a Reason for not holding a Convocation, that we do not understand the
Manner of holding it. I am sure this is as good a Reason as any that has been
yet given for it. I call this Paper Archbishop Parker's, because by the Company
I find it in, I have reason to conclude it so to be. However, it was certainly
drawn up, since the Reformation, either in King Edwards, or in the beginning of
Q. Elizabeth's Reign; for there is no mention in it of the Mass, or of Abbats,
and Priors: and it is of use therefore to prove the Practice of those
Protestant Conocations which we are enquiring after. But this is only a General
Proof.

More Particular and Express to our Purpose is the Synod of 1562. where Matters
of Great Moment were transacted, the Articles of the Church, and the Catechism
reviewed; and several Canons relating to Discipline framed, though some of
these were not at that time published. And the Debates on these occasions were
all entered upon, and managed without any Commission from the Queen; as is
manifest beyond a Doubt, from the Acts of that Synod, of which I have seen an
Exact and Entire Copy, written in an Hand of the Time, and taken from the
Registers of that Convocation, soon after it sa^. These Acts are very
Particular and Minute in giving an account of the Proceedings of every Day, and
do orderly specify all the Public Instrustruments that any way concern the
Synod: But as to a Commission to Treat, they are perfectly silent. The Reader,
who has any Curiosity this way, will not be displeased, I suppose, if I produce
some Passages from thence, that show plainly how they were employed.

Ian. 16. The Archbishop himself said Prayers, reading the Litany, cum
Collectis assuetis, ac Oratione [in] Synodo Provinciali dicenda noviter, ut
adparuit, edita. Which new Collect I take to be that in the Convocation Office,
which begins, Domine Deus, Pater Luminum, etc. and in it they beseech God, ut
Gratia Tua caelitus adjuti ea omnia investigare, meditari, tractare, and
discernere valeamus quae Honorem Tuum, and Gloriam promoveant, and in Ecclesiae
cedant profectum. I can scarce believe that they would have chosen to address
themselves to God in such a Form of Words as this, had they thought that they
were under an utter Incapacity of entering on any particular Debate whatever,
without being Qualified by a Broad Seal for it.

It follows, Tunc dimisso Clero Inferioris Domus Reverendissimus rogavit
Patres, quod unusquisque eorum intra proximam Sessionem Excogitate velit ea
quae in eorum specialibus Diaeces. reformatione indigeant, ac in proxima
Sessione proponere dignaretur.

Jan. 19. Habita inter dictum Reverendiss. Patrem ac caeteros Episcopos --
communicatione sive deliberatione de quibusdam Articulis ad Christianam fidem
facientibus, tandem dictus Reverendissimus accersiri jussit ad se Prolocutorem
Domus Inferioris. Qui quidem Prol. una cum Sex aliis de Clero dictae Domus
Inferioris coram Patribus sui Copiam faciens proposuit and asseruit, quod
quidam de dicta Domo exhibuerant quasdam diversas Schedas de rebus reformandis
per eos respective Excogitatas and in Scripta redactas. Quae quidem schedae de
communi consensu traditae sunt quibusdam Viris gravioribus and doctioribus de
caetu dictae Domus Inferioris ad hoc electis perspiciendae and considerandae.
Quibus sic electis (ut asseruit) assignatum est, ut hujusmodi Schedas in
Capitula redigant, ac in proxima Sessione exhibeant coram ipso Prolocutore* Et
ulterius proposuit, quod Articuli in Synodo Londinensi tempore nuper Regis
Edvardi Sexti ( ut asseruit) Editi This is a sufficient Proof that the Articles
of 1552. passed the Synod of that Year in form; however my Lord of Sarum, in
his late Exposition, came to say the contrary. See Introd. p. 5. where his
Lordship thinks it probable that they were prepared by Cranmer and Ridley, and
published [ without any Synodal Consent] by the Regal Authority. What were the
Reasons inducing his Lordship to think this probable, I presume not to guess:
The only Reason he has pleased to give, is, That the Major part of the Synod
could not have agreed to 'em without a Miracle. However, since the Acts of
another Synod Ten Years afterward, assure us, that such a Miracle was done; we
have reason, I think, to take Their Word before my Lord of Sarum 's Conjecture.
, traditi sint quibusdam aliis Viris ex Caetu dictae Domus Inferioris, ad hoc
etiam electis, ut eos diligenter perspiciant, examinent, and considerent, ac
prout eis visum fuerit, corrigant and reforment; ac in proxima Sessione etiam
exhibeant. Et tunc Revmus hujusmodi Negotia per dictum Proloc. and Clerum
incaepta approbavit, ac in iisdem juxta eorum determinationem procedere voluit,
and mandavit.

Jan. 20. Episcopi -- de and super quibusd^m Articulis sacrosanctam Christi
Religionem concernentibus -- per spatium trium horarum aut circiter inter se
tractarunt.

Jan. 29. Post Tractatum aliquem inter Episcopos habitum, tandem super
quibusdam Articulis Orthodoxae fidei inter Episcopos quorum nomina eis
subscribuntur, convenit. Deinde Electi fuerunt Reverendi Patres Domini Edmund
Londin, etc. ad Excogitanda quaedam Capitula de Disciplina in Ecclesia habenda.

Feb. 5. Reverendi Patres Domini. Joh. Sarum, etc. assignati fuerunt ad
examinandum Librum dictum the Catechism.

Mart. 1. Comparuit coram eis Prolocutor -- and allegavit quod Caetus dictae
Domus Inferioris excogitavit quaedam Capitula Additionalia ad librum de
Disciplina coram patribus ultima Sessione porrectum. Quae quidem Capitula dicto
Libro (ut asseruit) addi cupit. Unde dictus Revmus tradidit eidem dicto
Prolocutori Librum praedictum, mandando quod additis hujusmodi Capitulis sic
Excogitatis ipsum Librum cum Additionalibus praedictis denuo exhibeant coram
codem Revmo

Mart. 3. Dominus Proloculor, etc. Nomine totius Caetus praesentarunt eisdem
Patribus quendam Librum nuncupatum Catechismus Puerorum; cui (ut asseruerunt)
omnes de Caetu ejusdem Domus unanimiter consenserunt.

Mart. 5. Dom. Proloc. etc. comparuerunt, and exhibuerunt, etc. Librum de
Disciplina una cum quibusdam Capitulis Additionalibus ad eundem, viz. de
Adulterio, etc.

The Reader sees that the Business here gone upon was as great and weighty as
perhaps ever employed any English Synod: The Doctrine of the Church was here
settled in the Articles, and the Catechism, and new Rules of Discipline formed;
and all this was done without any Previous License, except what was contained
in that General Message delivered by the Archbishop in his Speech which I have
already mentioned. It is further observable, that the Review of the Articles
took its Rise from the Lower House; that the matter of the New Canons was There
first suggested and drawn into Form; and that every thing almost that was done,
came Originally from Them to the Upper House, and not from the Archbishop to
Them: and was not the Effect therefore of any Royal Command, or Intimation, but
a Free Act of the Body.

The Articles set out by this Synod bear this Title -- Articuli de quibus
convenit inter Archiepiscopos and Episcopos utriusque Provinciae, and Clerum
Universum in Synodo Londini Ann. 1562. Editi Authoritate Serenissimae Reginae.

The Ratification of them afterward in 1571. (when they were again with this
Ratification Printed) runs thus -- Hic Liber antedictorum Articulorum jam denuo
approbatus est per Assensum and Consensum serenissimae Reginae Elizabethae
Dominae Nostrae retinendus, and per totum regnum Angliae exequendus. Qui
Articuli and lecti sunt, and denuo confirmati subscriptione D. Archiepiscopi
and Episcoporum Superioris Domus, and totius Cleri inferioris Domus My Lord of
Sarum (Exposition p. 16.) doubts whether the Articles in 1571. passed the Lower
House, at least, whether they were Subscribed by the Members of it. But these
Words in the Ratification of them (Printed by his Lordship, p. XVI. though at
present, I suppose, out of his mind) leave no Room or Color for such a Doubt.
His Lordship was betrayed into it, it seems, etc. by the Be^net College
Manuscript, where the Subscriptions of the Bishops only appear. But it might
have been presumed that the Bishops did in this Instance sign One Copy by
themselves; and the Clergy of the Lower House another, which has since perished.
in Convocatione A. D. 1571 Sparrow p. 222.
. In neither of these is there any hint of a License under the Broad-Seal;
although it be expressly mentioned afterward, where we know it was employed.

The Speech wherewith Archbishop Parker opened a Convocation in 1572. I have
seen and perused; and there is no Expression in it from whence we can suspect,
that that Meeting was to Treat by Commission from her Majesty.

In the Synod of 1584 the Style of the Articuli pro Clero then agreed upon is,
Articuli per Archiepiscopum, Episcopos, and reliquum Clerum Cant. Prove. in
Synodo, etc. Stabiliti, and Regi^ Authoritate approbati and confirmati Sparrow
p. 191.
.

The Canons made in the Convocation of 1597. bear this Title -- Capitula, sive
Constitutiones Ecclesiasticae, per Archiepiscopum, Episcopos, and reliquum
Clerum Cant. Provinciae in Synodo, etc. congregatos tractatae, ac postea per
ipsam Regiam Majestatem approbatae, and confirmatae; and utrique Provinciae tam
Cant. quam Ebor. ut diligentius observentur eadem Regia Authoritate sub Magno
Sigillo Angliae promulgatae Sparrow p. 243.
.

L. M. P. has been guilty of a piece of slight of hand in producing this Title:
for he has removed the Comma, which should be after the word Tractatae,
backward to Provinciae, (omitting the Words between those Two) that so
tractatae may seem to belong to the Sentence which follows it, and the Reader
be by that means led into a belief that the Original Treating it self was as
much from Royal Condescension and Grace, as the Passing, and Promulging
afterward. I need not say, how absurd this is, and how contrary to the Rules
of common Construction, and common Sense.

It is true (and Truth being the only thing I seek, I shall not conceal it)
that in the Manuscript Collections of a Learned Man, who lived before the
Convocation-Registers were burnt, I have seen a Memor. in these following
Terms. --

Lib. Convocat. ab anno 1584. usque, etc. 1597. Fol. 195. The Queens Letters
Patents to confirm the Canons, a Recital of the Writ, of their Desire, the
Canons Confirmation, and a Command to have them observed in both Provinces.

Which shows indeed, that the Synod in 1597 desired, and had leave for the
Canons they passed, and implys further, that both their Request, and the Answer
to it were very probably in writing; since it could not else have been recited
in the Ratification of them. But what this Leave was asked, and given for;
whether only for the passing these Canons, or even for the Previous Treating
about them, appears not from this Memorandum; and must otherwise therefore be
determined. Our Public Records will not ease us of this Doubt; among which (I
am told) this Instrument is not now to be found: and the only way therefore we
have left of clearing it, is, by a Recourse to the Title of the Canons; which,
if it may be depended on, evidently shows, that their Desire was for Leave, not
to Treat, but to Enact only. And how Authentic and Significant the Titles of
Canons are to this purpose, our Adversarys in the next Instance will tell us:
for they produce Appeal p. 24. L. M. P. p. 37.
the Title of those in 1603. as a manifest Proof, that that Synod had a
Commission to treat. We allow it had; and it is the first Synod that ever had
one from the 25 H. VIII. down to that time.

L. M. P. indeed has found out one somewhat Elder: for he tells us, that a
Proclamation on came out 5. March 1. Iac. 1. for the Authorizing of the Book of
Common Prayer, etc. which recites that the King had issued out a Commission to
the Archbishop and others, according to the Form which the Laws of the Realm in
the like Case prescribe to be used, to make an Explanation of the Common
Prayer, etc. So that in those days (says he) this Independent Freedom of Debate
was not esteemed amongst the Libertys of the Church P. 41.
. But had that Writer seen the Commission it self, and not guessed at the
Contents of it from a Recital in a Proclamation, he would have known, that it
was directed, not to the Clergy in Convocation, (for they met not, till some
Months after the Date of it) but to the High Commissioners in Causes
Ecclesiastical; authorizing the Alterations they had made in the
Common Prayer Book, by virtue of a Proviso in the Act of Uniformity 1^. Eliz.
How is this to his purpose? or what possible use can he make of it? It is
indeed to my purpose, to observe from hence, how high the Prerogative then ran,
and what Unreasonable Powers were claimed by it. The Book of Common Prayer was
established by an Act of the 1 st. of the Queen, in which it was provided, that
if there should happen any Contempt, or Irreverence to be used in the Ceremonys
or Rites of the Church by the misusing of the Orders appointed in that Book,
the Queens Majesty might by the Advice of her Commissioners, or of the
Metropolitan, ordain and publish such further Ceremonys or Rites, as might be
most for the advancement of God's Glory, the Edifying of his Church, and the
due Reverence of Christ's Holy Mysteries and Sacraments Cap. 2.
. In virtue of this Proviso, King James in his first Year gives Directions to
the Archbishop, and the rest of the High-Commissioners, to review the
Common Prayer Book; and they accordingly made several Material Alterations and
Enlargements of it, in the Office of Private Baptism, and in several other
Rubricks and Passages; added five or six new Prayers, and Thanksgivings, and
all that part of the Catechism, which contains the Doctrine of the Sacraments.
Which last Additions would not, I conceive, have been in the least warranted by
that Proviso, had the Powers there specified extended to the Queens H^irs and
Successors: but as they were lodged peresonally in the Queen, there could, I
presume, be no Color for K. James's exercising them in virtue of it. The
Drawer up of the Commission was aware of this, and supplys therefore what was
wanting in this Provisional Clause, by some General Words, and by a Recourse to
that Inexhaustible source of Power, the King's supreme Authority and
Prerogative Royal; which, it seems, was at that time conceived to extend so
far, as to enable the Crown to make Alterations of Great Importance in a Book
established by Act of Parliament, to authorize the Book thus altered, and to
forbid the Use of the Other. I question whether such a Proceeding would now be
thought Legal; but then it went down quietly: and in virtue of it, the Common
Prayer Book so altered, stood in force from the 1 st. of K. James till the 14
C. II. when, upon a new Review, it was again confirmed by Parliament. I shall
place this Commission in the Appendix N. XVIII
, that the Reader may have an Instance, what the Doctrine of that time was
concerning the Extent of the Prerogative in Church Matters, and from thence
cease to wonder that a Formal Commission to treat, etc. should be first granted
to the Convocation a few Months afterward. I say first granted; for there is
no Suspicion of any preceding License of this kind, but in 1597. only: and that
rises no higher than a Suspicion; there being stronger Probabilitys against it,
than for it. And thus, I hope, I have effectually removed Dr. W's Argument
about the sense of the Act* taken from the Constant Practice of All
Convocations ever since the framing it; which he appeals to so frequently, and
with so much Calmness and Security, that one less acquainted with him than I am
would have been tempted to think, that he spoke upon good Grounds, and had well
considered what he said: Whereas in truth he was merely upon the Conjecture;
and having found that the Convocations of 1640. and 1603. acted by Commission,
concluded presently that all the Precedent ones must have done so too;
forgetting in the mean time that wise Maxim of his Own, with which he very
fitly introduces as wise a Chapter. So great (says he) is that Uncertainty to
which all Human Constitutions are exposed, that though I have before sufficiently
shown, what the Nature of our Convocation at present is, and what Authority our
King's have over it, yet we can by no means from thence conclude, that this was
always the case P. 147.
. Which deep Remark, had it been in his View throughout his Book, would have
instructed him not to determine so peremptorily upon the Course of Ancient
Practice from some Modern Instances; it would have saved him the shame of
slipping into so many false and groundless Assertions on this Head, and me the
trouble of exposing them. When he resolved, for Reasons best known to himself,
to set up for a Champion in this Cause, he should either have taken care fully
to instruct himself in the matters he wrote of; or at least, where he was
conscious of his want of Light, he should have had the Discretion to express
himself a little more warily.

The oldest Era therefore of these Commissions, which empower the Convocation
to Treat, etc. is 1. I. 1. how that New Precedent came then to be set, and what
Restraints it may be conceived to have laid on the Clergys Liberty of Debate, I
shall now briefly enquire.

It must be confessed that K. James, who had been somewhat less than a King in
Scotland, took upon him to be somewhat more than a King, as soon as he came to
the Crown of England; spoke of his Prerogative in a very high tone, looked upon
it as some Innate Power, divinely annexed to the Kingly Character, and did not
stick to call it so frequently in his Speeches and Messages See his Speech to
the Bishops and Ministers, Spotswood p. 534. Letter to the Assembly of Perth.
ib. p. 537.
; and sometimes to talk even of a Sovereign and Absolute Authority, which he
enjoyed as freely as any King, or Monarch in the World See his Declaration in
1605. Spotswood p. 488.
. Bishop Bancroft, who had corresponded with him formerly in Scotland, knew his
Temper well: and, the Church having then Great Business to do, and He himself
some, (for the Sea of Cant. was then void) contrived, we may imagine, how to
humor it in the approaching Convocation, wherein He was to Preside; and to that
end procured this Ample Commission, as an Instance of the great Deference and
Submission which the Church of England paid to the Royal Authority. Indeed the
Clergy had reason to show all the Marks of Duty and Respect that were fiting,
to a Prince that had shown himself so fast a friend to them, as K. James in the
Hampton Court Conference, which immediately preceded this Convocation, had
done: Where he had declared openly for All the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church, against the Scruples of those, who were then called Puritans, and had
peremptorily commanded them to Conform. This, I say, may be supposed to have
wrought on the Clergys Gratitude, and made them easier to accept such a
Commission now, than they would have been in any other Juncture: especially
since by it, though they might seem to abridge their Liberty in One Respect,
yet they certainly enlarged it another. For whereas in Former Convocations,
which were not thus Commissioned, the Custom had been to draw up their Rules
and Canons in an Unauthoritative Style, and without denouncing Spiritual
Penaltys on the Infringers of them (according to the Pattern set by the Old
Canons); here the Clergy first began solemnly to Decree and Ordain, and to
annex the Sentence of Excommunication to the Breach of those Ordinances. The
Canons of Q. Elizabeth's time, where they run most in the Style of Authority,
do yet rise no higher than to a Cautum est nequis See Sparrow p. 245. as before
in 1584. p. 193.
, Volumus etiam Ibid p. 252.
, and Decernendum censemus Ibid. p. 247.
: but in 1603, the very first Canon begins with Statuimus and Ordinamus And so
in those of 1640. We Ordain and Decree Can. 1. The Synod does ordain and
decree, Can. 2.
; and the Sanction of several of them runs thus -- Excommunicetur ipso facto,
non nisi per Achiepiscopum restituendus; idque postquam resipuerit, ac impium
hunc errorem public revocarit. The Previous License therefore qualifying them
to Decree in form, and to bring their Canons up to the ancient Synodical
Pattern, they might for this reason be inclined to make use of it; imagining
(how justly, has since appeared) the Ground they got in one respect, to be an
Equivalent for what they lost in another. Something too of this Caution might
be owing to the Circumstances and Temper of the Times, when there was no good
understanding between Them, and the Great Men of the Law, the Two Jurisdictions
clashing mightily; and when those who underhand blew the Coals between Them and
the Nonconformists, were uneasy under the Clergys late Victory at
Hampton Court, and would not have been sorry to see them make an ill use of it,
or to have had any Handle toward disputing the Legality of their after
proceedings. On this account a License under the Broad-Seal might be thought
convenient, to cover them, not so much from the Law it self, as from Popular
Complaint and Misconstruction. And if these Reasons may be supposed to be then
of weight for the beginning this Practice, they were yet stronger afterward
for the continuance of it, in 1640. when the Passions and Prejudices of Men ran
even higher against them than Now, and every thing they did was more likely to
be misinterpreted.

Thus far, by way of Enquiry into the particular Grounds and Motives from
whence this New Precedent may be supposed to have sprung: let us now see how
far the Clergys Liberty of Debate was really affected by it; and we shall find
this not to have been to such a Degree as is commonly imagined. For in relation
to this License, there are Three things that deserve to be considered.

1. That it was not granted the Clergy immediately upon their first coming
together. The Convocation had sat from March 20. to April 12. that is, three
full Weeks, without a Commission, and to be sure therefore had in that time
Treated without one; and did not therefore think themselves unqualify'd for all
manner of Synodical Debates, till they were so commissioned.

2. It is very observable, that in the King's Letters Patents of Confirmation
See them in the English Edition of the Canons in 1603.
reciting this License, there is a plain difference made between his
Prerogative Royal and Supreme Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, and the
particular Powers lodged in him by the 25 H. VIII. In virtue of the first of
these, he is said to have granted the Clergy full free and lawful Liberty, etc.
to confer, treat, debate, etc. upon Canons; but to have given his Royal Assent
to those Canons, according to the form of a certain Statute, or Act of
Parliament, made in that behalf, in the 25th. Year of the Reign of K. Henry the
VIII. And so in the Commission it self, ( see it in Dr. W's Append. n. V.)
though the 25. H. VIII. be recited in the ^reamble of it; yet where Leave is
granted to C^n^er, Treat, etc. such Grant is said to be by Virtue of our
Prerogative Royal, and Supreme Authority in C^^se^ Ecclesiastical, without any
reference to the Statute.
which Statute is no where vouched in that Ratification, but with regard to
such Royal Assent only. It cannot be inferred therefore that either the Givers
or Takers of this new License understood the Submission Act in a Sense
different from what we contend for, since it does not appear that the Grant of
this License was really founded on that Statute. However, supposing it was, yet
are we to consider in the

3 Place, that it is not a bare License to treat that is there granted, but
beyond this (as the words run) A full free and lawful Liberty, License, Power
and Authority to conferr, treat, debate, consider, consult, and agree of and
upon such Canons, Orders, etc. Now though a License to debate of Canons was not
necessary according to the Act, yet a License to agree upon them might be
judged necessary; the Clergys agreeing upon Canons (especially in such an
Authoritative Form, and with such Sanctions and Penaltys, as I have shown them
now first to have practiced) being liable to be construed to a sense equivalent
to Enacting or Making them; which without the Royal Assent and License, they
were by the Act expressly prohibited to do. The License to Treat therefore is
not to be taken separately, but in conjunction with agreeing of and upon; and
must be supposed necessary no otherwise, than as it qualified the Clergy so to
treat of Canons, as to agree also, and come to a Conclusion upon them. And thus
therefore the Latin Title of these Canons (which Dr. W. acknowledges to be
truly Authentic and Legal App. p. 25.
) runs.

Constitutiones sive Canones Ecclesiastici per Episcopum Londinensem Praesidem
Synodi pro Cantuariensi Prove. ac reliquos Episcopos and Clerum ejusdem Prove. ex
Regia Authoritate Tractati and Conclusi.

In ipsorum Synodo inchoata Londini, etc. Ab eadem Regia Majestate deinceps
approbati, ratihabiti, ac confirmati, ejusdemque Authoritate sub magno Sigillo
Angliae promulgati, per utramque Provinciam tam Cant. quam Ebor. diligenter
observandi.

They are said to be ex Regia Authoritate tractati, and conclusi [joyntly]: not
ex Regia Authoritate tractati, and conclusi in ipsorum Synodo, etc. as L. M. P.
has fallaciously pointed these words, on purpose that he may sever their
Treating from their Concluding, and make the Royal License seem to have been
necessary for the one without any Consideration of the other. But this is
according to his usual Sincerity in these Matters; one Instance of which I have
already observed to the Reader.

The English Title of these Canons confirms what has been said, and gives us
further Light in the case; it is thus worded.

Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, Treated upon by the Bishop of London,
President of the Convocation for the Prove. of Cant. and the rest of the Bishops
and Clergy of the said Province:

And agreed upon with the Kings Majestys License in their Synod, begun at
London, A. D. 1603, etc. and now Published for the due Observation of them by
his Majesty's Authority, under the Great Seal of England.

Here is no mention of the Kings License for any Act previous to their agreeing
upon these Canons; which is a good Evidence that the Framers of them thought
there needed none: and though, by the form of their Commission, a free Liberty
was granted them to treat, debate and agree; yet that really they had occasion
for such a Grant, only as to the last of these Acts, but not as to the Former.
For had the One been equally necessary with the other, they would have taken
equal care to express it. Dr. W. indeed excepts against this English
Inscription App. p. 25.
, and says, it is very imperfectly rendered from the Latin, and apt to lead men
into mistakes about these matters; believing, it seems, that the Translation of
these Canons into English, was the work of some Private Hand, unauthoriz'd by
the Convocation: whereas he should have known, that the way was for the
Convocation to prepare both her Articles The Articles of our Church were at the
same time prepared both in Latin and English; so that both are equally
Authentical. Bishop of Sarum 's Exposition, etc. p. X.
and Canons in Latin and English at the same time; and that the one of these
therefore is every whit as Authentic as the other. And in the present case it
may be questioned, whether the English Canons be not rather somewhat more
authentical than the Latin ones; since it was That Copy of them, which seems
particularly to have passed the Great Seal, and was, with the King's
Ratification at length annexed, then published from the Press Royal. And as low
an Opinion as Dr. W. has of Convocations, I hope he will allow them able to
translate their Own Latin, and to understand their own meaning. But should
there in rendering the Latin Title, any casual Mistake have happened, it would
have been set right afterward in the Canons of 1640 See Sparow Col. p. 235.
, when it behooved the Clergy to tread warily, and to prevent all manner of
Exceptions. And yet There again, the very same English Inscription returns; nor
did that House of Commons, which was no ways unwilling to find fault with any
thing in these Canons that could be laid hold of, except against this Title,
but made use of it themselves in their Votes Rushworth part 3. p. 1365.
of Dec. 1.5, 16, [1640] without questioning the Accuracy, or Legality of it.

From all which I infer, that those very Convocations that took out these
Commissions, did not however think that they treated in virtue of them, and
much less that they could not have treated without them. They needed such
Powers, only to draw up and pass their Synodal Decrees in form; and though more
was inserted into them, even the Liberty of Debating, as well as Concluding;
yet they accepted what was not necessary, for the sake of what was: taking care
only in the Front of their Synodical Acts, to assert a Liberty of Debate to
themselves, independently of any such Royal Grants or Commissions. All they
wanted was a Commission to make or decree Canons; the Attorney General who had
the drawing it, thought, it seems, that it would not harm them, if a little
more than they wanted was given them; and knew, to be sure, that he should not
hurt his Master's Prerogative by it: and so, that the Royal Grant, and the
Clergys Privilege might look Ample and Full enough, was pleased, as has been
usual in such cases, to multiply Words without Occasion: But it no more follows
from the Clergys admitting such a License, that they needed every Part and
Parcel of it, than it does, that a Criminal, who takes out a General Pardon, is
guilty of every Individual Crime that is there specified. In the first seven
Years of Q. Elizabeth, every New Bishops Patent had this Clause in it, --
Supplentes nihilominus Suprema Authoritate nostr^ Regia, ex Mero Motu, and
Certa Scientia nostris, siquid aut in hiis quae juxta mandatum nostrum
praedictum per Vos fient, aut in Vobis aut -- Condition, Statu, Facultate
vestris ad praemissa perficienda desit aut decrit, eorum quae per Statuta hujus
regni aut per Leges Ecclesiasticas in hac part requiruntur, aut necessaria
sunt, temporis ratione, ac rerum necessitate sic postulante. These words sound
high, and yet our Learned Mason pleads de Minist. Angl. p. 329.
, that it cannot from hence be collected, that there were any such Defects as
are here said to be Pardoned; and likens this Clause to that in the Pope's
Bulls, which absolves every Bishop a quibusvis Excommunicationis, Suspensionis,
Interdicti aliisque Ecclesiasticis Censuris and Paenis a Iure vel ab Homine
qu^vis Occasion vel Causa latis P. 330.
, without enquiring whether the Bishop had incurred any of these Censures, or
needed this Absolution. It was given out, as he there distinguishes,
Hypothetice, non Absolute P. 331.
, i. e. if they wanted it, there they had it; and if they did not want it, yet
ad abundantem cautelam they might be willing to accept it; because others might
Imagine both that they did want it, and that it was this way to be supplied:
and it might be proper therefore to ward against these Supposed Defects, as
well as more Real ones. Which is all as Applicable to the Convocation, that
took out the License in the first of K. James.

Does Dr. W. think, that every impowring Clause or Phrase in a Commission
implys that the Persons Commissioned could not have done such or such a thing,
without they had been so empowered? The following Instance may satisfy him to
the contrary.

A Commission for the Repair of Paul's in 1631. gives full Power and Authority
[to the Persons named in it] to consult, advise, and consider of meet Orders,
Ordinances and Constitutions for the better preservation of that Church, and
for the preventing Annoyances; and the same Orders, Ordinances, and
Constitutions being reduced into Writing, to present unto us to the intent that
the same being perused by Us, and considered of, may receive our Royal
Approbation and Allowance Bibliotheca Regia p. 256.
. The Powers here granted are much the same, and in much the same words with
those in the Commission to the Convocation: but no body can be silly enough to
think that Private Persons might not of their own Accord have done all this,
have entered into such Considerations, and made such Proposals to the King,
without a Commission. Commissions are oft-times employed, not for the security
of such as do the Business, but to secure its being done; they give the
Countenance of Authority to Things, and promote the Dispatch of them. For
Example,

In the 21 H. III. A Writ issued to William de Perecat, the Court-Barber; which
Mr. Pryn, out of his Zeal against Long-hair, has put into his Tomes of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction T. 2. p. 479.
, and may therefore become this place as well. It ran, as follows.

Pat. 21. H. III. m. g. d^r^.
REX Willielmo de Perecat, Salutem. Sciatis quod concessimus and plenam
Potestatem Vobis dedim^s scindendi Capillos Clericorum nostrorum qui sunt de
Hospitio nostro and familia nostra longos crines habentium, and comas
nutrientium, and ad Crocos capillorum suorum deponendos. Et ide^ Uobis mandamus
quatenus ad hoc modo debito intendatis; hujusmodi Potestatem nostram vobis
concessam taliter exequentes circa predictos Capillos scindendos and Crocos
deponendos, ne ad Capillos vestros scindendos forcipes apponere debeamus. Test
meipso apud Clyne 2 do. die Septembris. Now though I doubt not but that William
de Perecat went about his Business more nimbly, and to better effect, after
this Message than before it; yet I cannot forbear thinking, that if these
Clergymen and He had been agreed, he might have exercised his Office upon them,
without having a Writ to show for it. This is a familiar Instance indeed, but
may be as Instructive as a more solemn one; and if it serve withal to relieve a
serious Scene, and make the Reader smile a little, I have my double end in it.

What has been said, may be sufficient, I hope, to account for the License of
1603. and for any Word or Passage in it, that may be supposed to affect the
Clergys Liberty of Debate, which they were in an Unterrupted Possession of when
that Practice first began, and have an Undoubted Right to still,
notwithstanding the continuance of it.

One Expression indeed there is in it, which Dr. W. catches at, and has not
been yet considered. He observes, that the Liberty granted by that Commission
is said to proceed, out of the King's Especial Grace, Certain Knowledge, and
Mere Motion P. 116.
; and does most invincibly from thence argue that it could not therefore be
their Due, or belong to them ex debito justitiae P. 290. (283.)
. I agree with him thus far, that a Commission impowering them to Treat is not
their Due, because I take it to be their unquestioned Right and Due to treat
without one. But his Reason why they are not entitled to it of Right, I can by
no means admit; because Learned Lawyers tell me, that those Phrases Especial
Grace, and Mere Motion are used sometimes for forms sake, where the thing said
to be thus granted is strictly of Right, and cannot be with Justice denied. For
Instance, the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, upon a Certification into
Chancery, follows, we know, in course, and de Iure Ordinario; and is therefore,
in diverse Precedents of it, said to issue secundum Consuetudinem Angliae, i.
e. according to the common Law of England; and yet in one Instance, Dr. Cousin
Apol. for Proc. Eccl. p. 8.
informs me, that it runs quod hujusmodi breve nostrum de Gratia nostra
procedat; and a Note therefore in the Register, upon these words in another
Writ, says, that they are used only pro Honor Regio, etiamsi ad id de Iure
teneatur.

But I pay too great a Regard to his trifling Remarks, in pursuing them thus
minutely; and go on therefore to remove the rest of the Exceptions taken at our
way of expounding the Statute.

In my account of the Practice of Convocations since the 25 H. VIII. I slipped
over some Requests of the Lower House of Convocation to the Upper, a few years
after this Act passed, and promised to make a distinct Head of them; which I
shall now therefore consider and explain.

It is objected against that sense I have given of the Statute that the Clergy
of those times did themselves understand it otherwise; for in a Petition put up
by them to the Bishops 1o E. VI. they recite some part of the Submission-Act,
and of the 27 H. VIII. that confirms it; and then desire, that being presently
assembled in Convocation by auctority of the King's Writ, the King's Majestys
License in Writing may for them be obtained and granted, according to the
Effect of the said Statues; auctorising them to attempt, entreat, and commune
of such matters, and therein freely to give their Consents, which otherwise
they may not do upon Pain and Peril premised. This indeed seems Material, and
for this Reason, I suppose, Dr. W. takes no notice of it. But L. M. P. insists
upon it, and styles it an Authentic Exposition of that statute, which without
any other Evidence is sufficient to show, that it was the Intention of that
Act, that the Treating and Resolving, as well as the Meeting of a Convocation
should depend upon the Mere Good Will of the Prince Pp. 39, 40
. The Reader may observe, how wondrous kind this Gentleman can be to the Clergy
upon occasion, and what a profound respect he has for their Opinion, when it is
for his Turn. He allows a Petition of the Lower House of Convocation, to be an
Authentic Exposition of an Act of Parliament; an Honor, which the most solemn
Decisions of both Houses would not (much less do the Petitions and Requests of
any one) deserve; and least of all the particular Requests we are at present
concerned with. For,

It is probable that the Petition it self is not Authentic, and then the
Exposition it gives, to be sure, cannot be so. There are two Papers printed by
my Lord of Sarum 2. Vol. Coll of Rec. n. 16, 17.
, which he calls Petitions of the Lower House of Convocation (1o E. VI.) to the
Upper. The Former of these N. 16.
is not a single Petition, but four several Requests (or rather the Minutes of
four) joined together; with a certain Query annexed, in the Close of them. Of
these the First relates to the Collection of Ecclesiastical Laws, appointed by
Act of Parliament to be made in H. the VIII th's time. The Second is a Proposal
for adjoining the Lower House of Convocation to that of Parliament. The Third
concerns the Committee for reforming the Offices. The Fourth is about the
Statute of First fruits and Tenths. The Query added is, Whether the Clergy of
the Convocation may liberally speak their mind, without danger of Statute, or
Law? The Latter is a Petition in form, from the Lower Clergy to the Bishops,
enforcing the second of those Requests put up in the former Paper, and praying
a License in Writing, in the Terms already recited P. 399.
. Now this last Paper, I say, seems never to have been approved, or presented,
by the Lower Clergy; and I say it, upon these Grounds.

1. Because the short Acts of this Convocation, preserved in the Book called
Synodalia In Bennet Coll. Library.
, short as they are These Acts, short as they are, give an account of the
Business that was done, and the Motions that we made, every single Day that
the Convocation sat, from Nov. 5 to December. 1^ except in the 4th. Session only,
which was Nov. 25. where my Transcript of the Acts is a Blank: And there is but
this One Day therefore in which it can be supposed that this Petition might
have been drawn and presented.
, do yet, I find, mention the first Paper, and the four several Articles of it
Sess. 3.22. Nov. Ista die -- convenientibus -- in inferiori Domo concordatum
suit, ut Dominus Prolocutor nomine totius Domus referal Rmo subsequentes
Petitiones.

Viz. 1o. Quod provideatur ut Ecclesiasticae Leges Examinentur and Promulgentur
juxta statutum Parliamenti editum 35 H. VIII.

2. Item ut pro nonnullis urgentibus causis Convocatio hujus Cleri, si fieri
possit, assumatur and cooptetur in Inferiorem Domum Parliamenti, sicut ab
antiquo fieri consuevit.

3. Item ut Opera Episcoporum and Alicrum, etc. as before. p. 181.

4. Item ut Rigor statuti de Primitiis Domino nostro Regi solvendis
aliquantisper in certis urgentibus Clausulis moderetur and reformetur si
commode fieri possit.


, in the Order they there lie; but give not the least Hint of this Second: nor
does Archbishop Parker, in Antiquitates Britannicae, where he speaks P. 339.
largely of matters agitated in this Convocation, say a syllable of it.

On the Contrary, both He, and Bishop Burnet give us some Particulars, that do
not seem very consistent with the supposal of such a Petition. Bishop Burnet's
words are, That the Act [which repealed the Statute of the six Articles] was
occasioned by a Speech that Archbishop Cranmer had in Convocation, in which he
exhorted the Clergy to give themselves much to the study of Scripture, and to
consider seriously what needed Reformation, etc. upon which some intimated to
him, that as long as these Six Articles stood in force, it was not safe for
them to deliver their Opinions. This he reported to the Council, upon which
they ordered this Act of Repeal Hist. Ref. Vol. 2. p. 40
, [his Lordship means, agreed that the Repeal of this Statute should be
proposed in Parliament.] Thus his Lordship out of Archbishop Parker's Papers;
and thus the Archbishop himself out of the Records of Convocation Ex Archivis,
he himself says.
, In Synodo Cranmerus Archiepiscopus habita oratione de religione ex verbo
Christi institut^ populo tradenda, etc. consulendum duxit. Sed Legum adhuc de
Sex Articulis Henrico Rege regante latarum severitas plerosque terruit quo
minus suas de Religione resormanda Sententias libere dicerent. Itaque
impetravit a Rege Cranmerus ut interim dum illae Leges Parliamento abrogentur,
Praelatis de Religione in Synodo disserentibus atroces illae rigidaeque paenae
laxarentur. Quod and conc^ssum est. A clear account is given here of the
Clergys fears in relation to the Statute of the six Articles, and of their care
to screen themselves from the sad Penaltys of it; but not a word of any
Apprehensions they were under in reference to the Submission-Act. And with
these Accounts that Passage in the Acts falls in

Sess. 7. Dec. 9. -- The same day were likewise appointed Mr. Dean of
Winchester, and Mr. Dr. Draycott to associat Mr. Prolocutor to my Lord of Cant.
to know a Determinat Answer, what Indemnitys and Immunities this House shall
have to treat in matters of Religion, in Cases forbidden by the Statutes of
this Realm to treat in.

They are concerned here we see to be indemnify'd to treat of matters of
Religion in some Particular Cases forbidden by the Statutes of this Realm, i.
e. by the Statute of the six Articles, and another (35 H. ^. c. 1.) enforcing
it: But as for a General License, authorizing them to treat in All Cases (such
an one as this second Petition prays) they express no want, or desire of it.
And yet had they wanted it at all, it was now high time to have had it; for
five weeks of the Session were run out, when this Motion was made. Indeed

2. Had such a Petition for Liberty of Debate been presented, it had, in all
probability, been the First step, which the Convocation, after they sat down,
would have taken: whereas we find by the Petition it self, that it could not be
drawn up, till the Session had continued some time; for the first Clause of it
mentions a former Suit of theirs made to the Bishops, in order to be by Them
promoted with the King; of which the Clergy had hitherto been expecting some
Account from their Lordships, without receiving any. Further

3. The Paper it self (that part of it, I mean, which prays a License) has such
manifest mistakes, in relation to the Submission of the Clergy, and the Statute
enacting that Submission, as one cannot suppose the whole Lower House of
Convocation could well fall into. For it confounds the Praeamble of the Act
with the Body of it; reciting that part of the Statute which declares the
Penalties, and an whole Proviso at the End of it, as if they had been the very
words of the Clergys Submission; which it is manifest they were not, and could
not be.

My Lord of Sarum therefore not informing us, whether the Paper from whence he
transcribed this form was an Original (as when it is so, he generally does) I
must take leave to suspect that it was not; and to apply to it the words, which
his Lordship himself uses about a Proclamaon of an Extraordinary Nature,
printed by Faller. If he saw but a Copy, we have reason to doubt of it; for
that might be only the Essay of some Projecting Man's Pen Vol. 2. p. ^1.
. The present Paper might be, and, it is likely, was no more than the first
Draught of a Petition framed by some Private Hand, but never agreed to by the
Lower Clergy: And (were it allowable to guess at his Lordships Thoughts in this
case) I should think that He himself had entertained some such Opinion
concerning it. For though he has Printed this second Petition, together with
the First, in his Collection of Records, yet in his History Vol. 2. p. 47.
he makes but a very slight mention of it, and gives no Account but of the
First only: and yet this Last contains New Matter in it, of great Importance,
and which, were the Paper, where it is, Authentic, would very well have
deserved a place in the Body of his Lordships Work; and could not well have
escaped the Pen of so Discerning a Writer. One would think therefore that his
Lordship had some secret Suspicions of the inauthoritativeness of this second
Paper, grounded either on a View of the Manuscript it self, from whence he
transcribed it, or on some other reasons which his Lordship has not been
pleased to acquaint us with.

Indeed Bishop Stillingfleet, who first produced it, seems to say, it was found
among Archbishop Cranmer's Papers: which looks as if it had been lodged in his
hands as President of the Convocation; and consequently were not a mere Dra^gi^
only, but agreed to, and presented by the Lower House. For which reason,
notwithstanding all the Probabilitys there are to the contrary, I will suppose
it Authentic; and if it were so, have this further to say to it: That if we
allow this Petition to have been actually offered, yet it is certain that it
had not its Effect, and that no License in Writing issued upon it. For if it
had, we should never have heard of any such Memorandum in the Acts, as that I
just now produced. It is manifest that at the Time of the Date of this
Memorandum, the Clergy were (...) Licensed: for they could not then have needed
an Indemnity to treat in particular cases; since the General Powers contained
in that License would have been to all Intents and Purposes their Warrant and
Security. And if they had not a Commission in five Weeks from the time of their
Meeting, it will be easily granted me, that they had none afterward. Indeed
for the same Reason that this Memorandum proves, that the Clergy had no License
now, it proves also that they were to have none: for had they not laid aside
all Thoughts of a General License, they would never have asked for a Particular
one, to indemnify them in some special Cases. On the very day when they prayed
this Indemnity, the Acts say also Isto die communi consensu nominati and
^ssignati fuerunt Magister Roland Merrik, Ioh. ap Harry, Ioh. Williams and
Elizeus Price Doctores, in Solli (...) ad obtinendum Effectus sequentes, viz.
That the Petition made, to have this House adjoined to the L^wer House of
Parliament, may be obtained.
, that they appointed some Members of their own to solicit their Conjunction
with the Commons; which was plainly in consequence of the first Branch of their
Petition, intimating a Design of appointing such Sollicitors. But as to the
Second Clause relating to the 25 H VIII. and a General License, they now take
no notice of it; but instead of it, desire only to be Indemnify'd from the six
Articles. Which is a manifest sign, that they had now dropped this Request, if
they ever made it.

The Petition therefore, if put up in form, was most certainly quashed above,
by the Bishops, satisfying the Clergy, upon Advice had in the case, that such a
Commission was needless. So that nothing can be more to the Advantage of the
Clergys Freedom of Debate, than this Petition, supposing it Authentic. For as
the Preferring it shows that the Clergy doubted at first whether a Commission
might not be necessary to enable them to attempt, entreat, and commune, etc. so
their acting without such a Commission afterward (for act they did) is a clear
Evidence that those Doubts were overrul'd as soon as started, and does in
effect amount to a Determination of the Point in question. For the Judges, to
be sure, or King's Co^ncil (and, it may be, both) were consulted in the Case;
and did therefore (as the Event shows) give their Opinion against the Necessity
of such a License; but not* it seems, against the Necessity of that Exemption
from the Penaltys of the six Articles which the Clergy continued to pray, and
which was now granted, according to their Prayer, as Bishop Parker Quod and
concessum est. -- See above. p. 4 2.
assures us.

But had we been in the dark as to the Event of this Petition, yet the very
Time and Circumstances in which it was framed would sufficiently have accounted
for it, and showed us the Unreasonableness of setting up this Instance as a
Precedent. The Nation was then in an high Ferment, and the Popish Party both in
the Convocation, and out of it, strong; and, to be sure, watchful to make use
of all Advantages against the Reforming Clergy: in whom therefore it might be
prudent to arm themselves for the Great Work they were going about (a thourough
Alteration of the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church) with the Largest
Powers they could procure, whether in strictness of Law they needed them, or
not. They themselves could not well doubt, whether they had such a Freedom o^
Debate, as they were permitted to enjoy by H. the VIII th. himself, a Prince
jealous to the utmost of every the least Encro^chment on his Prerogative, and
careful to put every method, he fairly could, in practice, which might be of
use to humble the Clergy. This Petition therefore cannot be supposed to express
their Sense of the Act, but their Fears rather of the Construction which some
of the Men in Power might put upon it. And under this View a License might
appear (though not necessary in it self, yet) useful to prevent the Malice of
their Enemies, and to allay the Doubts of their Friends; to take away all
Excuse from those who pretended to be under the Aw of that Statute; and every
way to increase* and animate their Party. It was no new thing, in that and the
preceding Reign, for freedom of Speech, even when it had Right on its side, to
ask Leave; a Practice stooped to by the Laiety of those times, as well as the
Clergy. For it was, we know, in the 33 d. Year of H. the VIII th. (...)
Sy^m^nds d' Ewes Jour. p. 43. (...) chapter 7.
that the Commons made their first Request for Liberty of Speech, which has
been since continued. And in his Son's Time (the Time we are upon) they have
petitioned even for Leave to Treat, in particular Cases; of which I shall give
one Instance out of their Journals. In the Parliament begun 4. Nov. 3 E. VI.
the Commons, e're they would attempt the Repeal of a Branch in a certain Act of
Relief, made suite to the King, for Liberty to proceed in it. The Words of the
Journal are 18. Nov. It is ordered, that Mr. Speaker with the King's Privy
Council of the House, and twelve others of the House, shall be Suitors to know
the King's Majestys Pleasure by his Council, if upon their Humble S^ite they
may treat of the last Relief for Clothes and Sheep, at four of the Clock in the
Afternoon.

Nov. 20. It is reported by Mr. Speaker, the King's Pleasure to be by his
Counsel, that the House may treat for the Act of Relief, having in respect the
Cause of the Granting thereof.

N^v. 30. Mr. Comptroller reports, that the King's Majesty is pleased with
the Petition for the Relief, and gives License to treat upon it.

Dec. 11. A Bill was brought in for the Discharge of that Subsidy, and Repeal
of the Branches wherein it was granted.

We see here what a profound Submission was in those times paid to the
Prerogative, in the Point of Liberty of Debate, even by Parliaments themselves;
and have with all a clear Proof, that Men may Petition for what is
unquestionably their Right; and (which is more) may continue so to do for long
Periods of time, without prejudicing their Right by such repeated Petitions.
Which however is far from being the case in respect of the Clergy: for I have
shown it doubtful, whether the Petition alleged were ever presented; or, if it
were, yet certain that it was overrul'd afterward, no License issuing upon it;
and that the Clergy neither had, nor thought they needed any such License for
some succeeding Reigns. So that (to return to what led me into these Enquirys)
no Authentic Exposition of the Submission-Act is to be had either from this
Petition as L. M. P. imagines, or from the Uninterrupted Practice of
Convocations, to which Dr. W. appeals. And if our sense of the Act therefore be
not proved faulty by some better Mediums then these, it will remain unshaken.

Little now is left behind to this purpose unconsider'd, except the Opinion of
Dr. Cousins, and Dr. Zouch, and a Resolution of some of the Judges Mentioned by
L. M. P. p. 38, 39.
: of Each of which some short Account shall be given.

Dr. Cousins in his Tables (as they are now Printed) lays down these Three
Assertions. Synodus Provincialis, vel Nationalis, convocari non debet absque
Principis rescrip^o.

N^c tractari, nec determinari potest aliquid in Synodo, nisi consentiente and
assentiente Principe.

Nihil habet Vim Legis, priusquam Regius Assensus sucrit adhibitus his quae
Synodus decernenda censuerit.

Of these the first and last Positions are easily admitted; but I desire to be
excused from believing that the second, as it is now worded, was of Dr.
Cousins's drawing; since it contradicts the Practice of the Synods held under
Parker, and Grindall, and his own Patron Archbishop Whitgift; and as far as we
can learn, that of the Convocation in 1597, the Year before Cousins died. The
Tables therefore being not published till after his Death, and after the Synod
in 1603, it is reasonable to believe, that they had the General Fate of
Posthumous Pieces, not to come out exactly as their Author left them; and
particularly that they were, in the second Position, adjusted to the Practice
of the Synod in 1603, either by the Editor, or by the owner of that Copy from
whence the Edition was made. I should think that Cousins's Proposition ran
thus, [ Determinari non potest] aliquid in Synodo, nisi consulto For the Change
of Consentiente into Consulto I have good Authority. And under this Reading, it
is implied, that both the Request and Consent were Verbal.
and assentiente Principe; which by some unskilful hand that had seen the
License in 1603. was altered into [ Nec Tractari nee Determinari potest]: I
say, an Unskillful Hand: for it is clear, and I have shown it, that that
License it self does not go so far as this second Assertion; the Instrument
reciting only a leave given to Treat and Resolve jointly; that is, a Leave for
the one, in order to the other: whereas here they are mentioned separately, and
a License affirmed necessary to the first, without respect to the Latter. Dr.
Cousins, who was a Man of Skill and Exactness in these things, would never have
expressed himself thus injudiciously, had he indeed lived to see an Instance of
such a License practiced: and we may observe therefore how nearly he traces the
Synodical Form in the third Position; where the Quae decernenda censuerit is
plainly taken from the Decernendum censemus we meet with in the Canons of 1597,
and which I have already observed to be the highest Expression of Authority
used by That, P. 388.
or any other of our Synods, that treated without a Commission.

Dr. Zouch relied implicitly on Cousins's Tables, and from them thus
interpolated, transcribed these Positions Verbatim into his Descriptio Iuris
and Iudicii Ecclesiastici: and therefore this is no new Authority.

The Resolutions of the Judges 8vo Iac. in my Lord Cokes XII th. Report, have
somewhat more of Authority in them. But these also are calculated to the Course
that had been taken 1o. Iacobi, and which perhaps my Lord Coke himself might
have directed: neither do they oppose the Interpretation that has been given of
the Statute, if we look narrowly into them; they are to this purpose.

1. A Convocation cannot Assemble without the Assent of the King.

2. After their Assembly, they cannot confer to constitute any Canons, without
License from the King.

3. When upon conference they conclude any Canons, yet they cannot execute them
without the Royal Assent. It is not said here, that they cannot confer about
Canons, which the Tables grossly affirm (and Dr. W by placing the Comma between
Confer, and Constitute See p. 108.
, would ^ain insinuate) but only that they cannot confer to constitute; which
is very true, if the meaning of the words be, that they cannot so confer as to
constitute: and that this sense was intended by the Judges, appears from their
Third Resolution, where the Phrase is thus varied, When upon Conference they
conclude. I submit to their Opinion, that the Convocation cannot confer to
constitute (that is, as they explain themselves, upon Conference conclude)
Canons; and I infer from hence, that neither the Submission-Act, nor the
License in 1603. can fairly be extended to a further sense, and that this is
the utmost R^straint which the Clergy now lie under. Dr. W. seems to have been
sensible of this, and has produced these Resolutions therefore, not at once,
but by Piecemeal; craftily dividing the second from the third, and placing
them at a convenient distance See p. 108 (129.)
, that we might not have the Opportunity of explaining the One by the Other. L.
M. P. has dealt more fairly, and aboveboard; for he has cited all Three of them
together P. 38.
, though at the Evident Hazard of their appearing by that means to be nothing
to his purpose. And, to give a further strength to these Decisions, he adds,
That Godolphin cites and admits them in his Rep^rtorium Canonicum; a Book,
which Dr. W. having mentioned with the utmost Contempt P. 275.
, it is much that one who comes after him on the same side, should urge as good
Authority. The Dr. pity; poor Godolphin for depending on Sir E. Coke, in a
matter of Antiquity; the Letter-writer brings this very Godolphin, to confirm
St. E. Coke's Opinion in a Point of Law; so little are they ageeed upon the
Character and Credit of their Witnesses! Poor as he is, Dr. W. it seems, has a
Friend yet poorer than He; who would not else have vouchsafed to borrow from
him. But why Poor Godolphin! he was as rich in Learning as his little Gleanings
could make him; a Collector, and a Scribler: and how then comes Dr. W. to
despise him? Methinks We second-hand Writers should learn to speak more
respectfully of one another; because if We our selves do not, it is probable no
body else will. Let Godolphin's Character be what it will, Dr. Wake could not
have taken a more unlucky occasion of undervaluing him, than he at present
makes use of. If I stop a little to, state the Case between them, I hope I
shall have the Pardon of my Reader. Godolphin had said, that Church Gemot
denoted anciently what we call a Convocation, and vouched Sir. Edward Coke for
it: the Letter to a Convotion-Man had asserted the same thing, though without
citing any Authority. Dr. W. who is deeply learned in these Researches, insults
them all Three, upon this supposed mistake; and with a scornful Air tells his
Adversary, I am confident be will be hard put to it to bring us any Author
elder than Sir E. Coke, from whom as Poor Godolphin first, so as he now taken
it at all adventures. P. 275.
What Authority that Gentleman had, or had not in his View, I cannot say; for
That, I am sure, would be to speak at all Adventures, since He himself vouches
none. But that there is an Authority for this Elder than Sir E. Coke's, and
that Dr. W's Confidence therefore misled him, when he pretended to be sure
there was none, I can safely affirm. For the Learned Sir H. Spelman has said
this very thing, and repeated it at least four several times In the words
Gemotum, Haligemot, and Chirchgemot: and not there only, but again in his
Reliquiae too, where he has translated the passage in H. the I's Laws, into
English, thus: And whomsoever the Church-Synod shall find at Variance, let them
either make an accord between them in Love, or sequester them by their Sentence
of Excommunication, p. 54.
in the 1 st. (that is, the most Authentic) part of his Glossary, which came
out in 1626. many Years before the IV th. Book of Institutes appeared abroad in
the World. From Him my Lord Coke probably had it; for he quotes, I find, the
very same Passage for it, out of the Laws of H. the I. Quoscunque Chirchgemot
discordantes inveni^t, vel Amore congreget, vel sequestret Judicio c. 7.
where Sir Henry's Transcript read Cyricgemot instead of Scyresmot, as Wheelock
afterward from the Exchequer Manuscript it self Printed it P. 180.
. This seems to be the Correcter Reading; however I dare not determine it so to
be, because Sir H. Spelman, I find, had the perusal of two other Manuscripts
beside that of the Exchequer: and Wheelock's Edition, whether rightly Copied in
this Instance, or no, yet is in several other respects faulty; particularly in
the very next words to those Sir H. quotes, there is a manifest mistake: for
instead of [ Debet utem Scyresmot and Burgemotis, Hundreda, vel Wapentachia
duodecies in anno Congregari, and Sex diebus anted submotum (which in the
Margin is Summonitionem)] we ought to read, [ Debet autem Scyresmot, and
Burgmot ^is, Hundreda, and Wapentachia duodecies, etc. and 7 diebus antea
summoniri] as the Passage is read in the Laws of E. the Confessor Pp. 147.148.
, from whence these of H. the I. were taken.

But which soever of these be the true reading, we have Sir H. Spelman's word
for it, that Chirchgemot is a good Saxon word, and did in that Language signify
a Synod, or Convocation. Had he not known it to have been so used in other
places, he would scarce have mended a corrupt Reading by the Use of it here;
for he was not like some small Dablers in Antiquity, that make two mistakes
always, when they pretend to mend one; but a very sure, as well as a very
modest Writer.

This short Digression was but necessary to repress Dr. W's indiscreet Vanity,
who has ventured to decide peremptorily upon the use of a Saxon Word, though, I
believe, he understands as little of that Tongue, as he does of the true state
of this Controversy: and has ushered in his Critical Remark with Language of
good Assurance. -- I am confident (says he) that this Gentleman will be hard
put to it, to bring any Author, etc. Confidence, let me tell him, even where
Men are certainly in the right, is not over becoming: but where they are as
certainly in the wrong, and are reprehending others that are in the right;
there, no Quality whatsoever sits so ill upon a Man, or looks so untowardly.
Some Saxon Friend, I suppose, had blown Dr. W. up into this Degree of
Assurance; and were not Mr. Nicholson a little too distant to Impart, I should
pitch upon Him to this purpose, as soon as any Man. For the Assertion is all
over like One of his, both as to the Assuming Air, and the Mistake of it. I
have given the Reader one proof of this kind before P. 313.
; and, since Skill in Saxon happens to be here once again my Theme, shall take
this Opportunity to add another.

Mr. Nicholson Hist. Lib. Vol. 2 p. 112.
professes himself not satisfied with the Opinion of Cambden, Lambard, Spelman,
and generally, of All our English Antiquaries and Historians, that there were
in this Kingdom before the Conquest three Codes or Digests of Laws, which from
the several Countries where they first prevailed, were rightly termed the West
Saxon, the Mercian, and Danish Laws: This Conceit of theirs he imputes to a
Mistake of Laga (in the Words Westsaxenalaga, Myrcenalaga, and Danelaga) for
Law, whereas it signifys, he says, a Country, or District. Very Decisive
indeed! But one would have thought that the Great Council of the Realm, which
in H. the I's Reign reenacted and enlarged the Confessors Laws, should have
understood the Saxon Tongue, and Times pretty well; and yet they tell us, --
Regnum Angliae tripartitum est in West Saxones, and in Mercenos, and Dacorum
Provinciam. Legis etiam Anglicae trina est Partitio ad eandem distantiam Ll. H.
I. p. 182.
, and again, -- Legis etiam Anglicae trina est Partitio ad superiorem modum.
Alia enim West Saxiae, alia Mercena, alia Denelaga est Ib. p. 180
. A Particular account is given of the several Shires, in which each of these
Laws obtained by Iorvallensis X Script. col. 956.
, who, though he had no great share of Latin, is known to have understood both
our Saxon Tongue and Antiquitys perfectly well. Or if his skill should be
doubted, yet sure Gervase of Tilbury's cannot; and thus he writes concerning
the Conqueror. -- Propositis Legibus Anglicanis secundum tripartitam eorum
distinctionem h. e. Merchenlage, Denelage, and West-Saxonlage, quasdam
reprobavit, quasdam autem approbans Transmarinas -- Normanniae Leges adjecit L.
1. c. 29.
. And as to the Use of the Word Laga, a Charter of H. I. (drawn but Fourteen
Years after the Conquerors death) will sufficiently clear it. There this
passage occurrs, Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis reddo cum illis Emendationibus
quibus eam pater meus emendavit Archaion p. 176. and M. Par. ad ann. 1100.
: Does Laga here signify the Confessors Law, or his Country? Whether all this
Old Evidence laid together may be allowed to outweigh our Librarians New Guess,
must be left to the Reader. If it does, it will be apt to raise in him no very
advantageous Opinion, either of Mr. Nicholson's Skill in these particular
matters, or of his Modesty in any.

But to resume our Argument, -- We are told further, that K. James the I. in
his Declaration prefixed to the XXXIX Articles, and published with them, does
declare, That he is Supreme Governor of the Church of England; and that if any
difference arise about the External Policy, concerning Injunctions, Canons, or
other Constitutions, the Clergy in their Convocations is to order and settle
them, having first obtained Leave under our Broad-Seal so to do L. M. P. p. 41.
. If King James declared this, he declared it some Years after he was in his
Grave; for the Declaration meant came not out till 1628. But let the Doctrine
be whose it will, it is very good; Leave under the Broad-Seal, it is confessed,
must be had, to order and settle any difference arising about Old Canons and
Constitutions, for that is in effect to make New ones: but for any other Acts
previous to this Ordering and Settling, such a Leave is not necessary, nor does
the Declaration say it is; though there are some words that look a little more
this way, than any of those produced by this wise arguer; for it follows, --
Out of our Princely Care that Churchmen may do the Work which is proper for
them, the Bishops and Clergy from time to time in Convocation, upon their
humble desire, shall have a License under our Broad-Seal to deliberate of, and
to do all such things as being made plain by them, and assented unto by Us,
shall concern the settled continuance of the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England Established, from whence we will not endure any Variance, or
Departing in the least Degree. This latter Clause must be explained by the
former, where the Doctrine in this point is professedly sta^ed; and there a
Leave only to order and settle is made necessary. Besides even here
Deliberating is not to be separated from Doing; nor a Leave supposed requisite
for the one, but as it is to end in the other. This is a Form of Expression
founded on the License practiced in 1603, which I have already accounted for.

And now nothing I think that carrys the Face of an Objection has escaped me,
unless it be a small Remark made by Dr. W. on the Form of the Convocation-writ;
wherein the King, he says, reserves to himself the Privilege of naming the
Subject, which they are to Deliberate and Resolve upon P. 111.
. It Is true, in another place he tells us, with his usual Consistency, that he
does not found his Opinion of the Necessity of a License upon the Form of this
Writ P. 287.
: however even there he affirms this Writ plainly to imply that some such
License is to be expected from the King P. 287.
; and though therefore his Opinion be not founded on the Writ, yet he thinks it
is mightily strengthened, and countenanced by it. But this is a Construction
that no man living could have made of it, that had a true Understanding either
of the Writ it self, or of the Times wherein it was framed. His account of the
Writ runs thus -- In the beginning of it (says he) the King having mentioned by
way of form, that for certain urgent Affairs of great Concern both to the
Church and Kingdom, he had commanded the Archbishop to summon the Clergy to
come together to such a certain place, and at such a certain time; he thus
declares what they were to do, when met: Namely, that they were to Treat,
Consent and Conclude upon the Premises, and such Other Matters which should be
more clearly declared to them, when they came together, on the King's behalf.
From hence he reasons in this manner, -- that though the Urgent Affairs of the
King, Church, and Realm, which the Convocation is in General to debate about,
be the constant Introduction of every Convocation-Writ, yet this is by way of
form only: for the King still reserves to himself to declare to them, and they
are, when met, to expect his special Direction, and not ramble after their own
fancys, or any matter within this General Compass without his Warrant Pp.
111.112.
. But how false and forced these Colors are, will appear if we consider,

1. That the Writs which summon the Barons to Parliament, have much the same
Introduction, with this for a Convocation; these also beginning with a [
Quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis, etc.] as this does; and proceeding to
other Expressions, the same in sense with the subsequent Words in the
Convocation-Writ; and in this only differing from them that they are not quite
so Expressive and Forcible. Now Dr. W. will not, I hope, dare to say, that
those Words are placed also in the Lord's Writs by way of form only: and if
not, how come they to be used more by way of form Here than There? Nay,

2. These words are so far from being placed in the Front of the
Convocation-Writ by way of Form only, that they are expressly referred to in the
Body of it; where the Clergy are said to assemble ad tractandum, consentiendum,
and con^oncludendum super PREMISSIS, i. e. super ^rduis and urgentibus
negotiis, before mentioned; even as the Barons are in the same* part of their
Writ said to meet super DICTIS negotiis tra^aturi, etc.] It is added indeed and
aliis quae darius exponentur tune ibidem ex part nostra: which intimates that
the King will also on his part propose some particular subjects of Debate to
them, but precludes them not from debating on any thing except what he
proposes. Nor can any Man, who considers the Date of these Writs, possibly
think that this Meaning is to be drawn from them. For

3. They went in near the same Terms that they do now, 200 Years before the
Submission-Act passed, when the King's Power of confining the Clergy to
deliberate on nothing but what he offered to them, was a Doctrine never dream
of. And I hope, since the Words of the Writ are the same Now as they were Then,
the meaning of them must be the same too: for though the 25 H. VIII. abridg'd
the Convocations Privileges in several respects, yet it could not make the
Words of their Writ signify otherwise than they did, when they were first
inserted. Dr W. himself happened to stumble upon this Truth though he wanted
either sincerity, or skill to make use of it. The Grand Question P. 160.
had told him (what he tells us again P. [113.]
, as if it had been his Own Observation) that this Clause (...) to be found in
the Convocation Writs as far back as 28 H. VI. after which, It should be 38 H.
VI. The Writ is to be found Cl. m. 29. dors. ( See Pryn. Parl. Wr. Vol. 1. p.
91.) Which shows from whence Dr. W. borrowed his knowledge, since he ^ook this
Mistake also along with it.
a small share (...) Logic methinks might have taught him, that this Claus^
could never be intended to tie u^ the Clergys Debates to such Pa^^ticular
subjects as the Kin^ should allow them to delibera^^ on. But he may be pleased
to know, that it (...) yet an 100 years Older than he thinks it is: for I have
seen Writs in the beginning of E. the (...) with these, or the like words in
them; par^^^cularly Cl. 7. E. III. ps. 2. m. 15. dors. the Archbishop and his
Clergy are summoned Super dictis negotiis quae Vobis ibidem ex part nostra
before exponentur tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium Impen^^ri, and 20. R. II.
ps. 2. m. 12. dors. it ran almost in the same Syllables as it does now, -- Ad
tra^tandum [concordandum] consentiendum, and concludendum super praemissis, and
aliis quae sibi per Nos vel Commissarios nostros in hac part clarius
exponentur tunc ibidem. And a little acquaintance with the Old Acts of
Convocation would have informed him, what this Phrase ex part nostra meant; it
being the Custom always for the King, soon after the Convocation far down, to
send his Nuntii Speciales thither, which were some of his Prime Nobility, his
Great Officers, or Judges; and by them to intimate his Demands, or Desires to
the Clergy. And these therefore are said to come ex part domini Regis, every
where throughout the Archbishops Registers. Dr. W. cannot be ignorant enough to
think that the Clergy had Then no Power of entering on any Deliberations except
what those Honorable Messengers recommended to them.

Prohibitions were at that time usual, sent sometimes in Writing, and sometimes
denounced Viva Voce by the Judges, who came along with the Great Men that
brought the King's Message. By These the Clergy were forbid to treat of any
thing wherein the King's Crown and Dignity was concerned; which implys them at
Liberty to treat of every thing in which they were not thus prohibited. Their
Debates indeed were bounded by the Nature and Ends of the Assembly it self;
which confined them to Matters properly of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, and such
as related to their Own Order, and did no ways entrench on the King's
Prerogative, and on the Laws of the Realm. But in all other respects, the
Debates and Proceedings of Convocation were then under as little restraint as
those of Parliament.

The form of the Convocation-Writ therefore is of no manner of service to Dr.
W. and had been better let alone by him than produced; as indeed all his
Learning of this kind had; in which he is very Improper and Unlucky, for he
scarce ever medles with a Writ, without giving the Reader some occasion or
other to pity his Ignorance, before he has done with it. This (having secured
the Two Points laid down at the En-I trance of these Sheets against all
Exceptions) I am now at Leisure to make out upon him; and, by briefly running
over what there is in his Book of this, or the like nature, to show, how
unqualify'd a Man he was to meddle in the present Dispute, and how utterly a
stranger he is to all that Knowledge that is requisite to frame a True Judgment
upon it. This shall be the Business of the Next and Last Chapter; which I shall
draw into as narrow a Compass as conveniently I can, having already, I fear,
expatiated a little too much in the Others.

CHAP. IX.
DR. Wake has graced his Appendix with the Forms of several Writs; the First P.
359.
of which is, he says, an Ancient Writ of Summons for an Abbat, and the second,
for a Bishop P. 361.
, to come to Parliament. It seems, this Great Antiquary thinks that Bishops and
Abbats were called to Parliament by Writs of a different form: whereas every
one that is in the least acquainted with things of this nature knows, that
whenever the Abbats had an Immediate and Personal Summons, their Writs ran in
the very same Terms with those of the Bishops, the Clause Premunientes only
excepted; and are therefore very seldom recited at length in the Rolls of
Parliament, but entered only with an Eodem modo mandatum est, or Consimiles
Literae diriguntur Abbatibus and Prioribus subscriptis. But had he a mind for
the Honor of the Abbats, whose order is now extinct, to record Their Writ of
Summons distinctly in his Immortal Work, and by that means to preserve the
Memory of it to future Ages, yet that he should single out that particular Writ
he has printed, as an Ancient one, and of the Reign of H. III. See p. 359.
is a little unhappy; when it is certain that That Writ in all its forms never
went out till the Middle or Latter End of R. II. i. e. till about an 120 Years
after H. the III. was dead and buried. The Introductory words [ Quia de
avisamento consilii nostri] are scarce found in any Parliament-Writ before 12
E. III. when they are two or three times used, and not afterward till the 46
E. III. when they begin to be employed pretty constantly. The Defense of the
Church of England, mentioned in the Close of it, never had place in any Writ
till 6 E. II. (says Pryn P. W. Vol. 1. p. 115.
); was never ordinarily inserted, till the 49 E. III. and never in that manner
in which it is expressed in this Writ, till toward the End of Richard the II's
Reign. At which time, and so on downwards the Precise Form (Printed by Dr. W.
for an Ancient Summons in the Time of H. the III.) with little or no
difference, regularly obtained. However Dr. W's Writ cannot be yet so Old as R.
II. for it begins with Henricus dei gratia, etc. and must belong therefore to
One of the Three Harry's that immediately succeeded him. Impossible therefore
it is, that the Abbot of Tavestoke should ever be summoned by this Writ, as he
tells us P. 360.361.
he was; since that Abbat was never called to Parliament after the 23 E. III.
Pryn P. W. ^. 1. p. 144.
when this Writ was not yet heard of, till 5 H. VIII, Godayn de Prasul. part 2.
p. 180.
when it was in some Expressions altered.

Dr. W. will perhaps lay the blame of all these Faults on Reynerius's
Apostolatus Benedictinus, which he quotes there. But can it be any Excuse for
him, who had so many near Domestic Helps toward clearing up these Mistakes,
that One who wrote at a distance from all our Records has mistaken before him?
However, even Reynerius himself, as much at a distance as he wrote, was better
instructed than this comes to; for neither does he produce this as the Summons
of an Abbat, distinct from that of a Bishop; nor as an Old one, much less as of
the Time of H. III: nor does he say, that the List of Abbats given by Dr. W.
were by this Writ ever Summoned. These are all Dr. Wakes new Lights, and
Peculiar Improvements.

After all, if he thought a Writ of Summons to an Abbat would look well in his
Appendix, how came that in the Annals of Burton P. 371.
to be overlooked; which is really of the age he pretends that the other is,
and one of the most Ancient Writs extant, being sent out in the 41 H. III. Ao.
1256?

In the next Number we meet with an Ancient Writ of Summons of a Bishop to
Parliament P. 361.
. And here again, Dr. W. can rise no higher than the 49 H. III. whereas we have
a Writ of this kind 6to Ioh. i. e. 60 Years Older than this; and two others of
the 26 and 38. H. III. still preserved in our Records, and not in our Records
only, but in the Printed Pieces of Seldom, Pryn, and Brady: so that they can be
a secret to none but those to whom every thing almost of this kind is so.

After the Abbats Ancient Summons, he sets down a List of 24 Abbats and one
Prior anciently Summoned; believing this to be the fixed number of them,
whereas it frequently varied. In the 49 H. III. by that very Writ he Prints, no
less than 102 Abbats and Priors were Summoned; which Dugdale would have told
him, had he transcribed that Writ out of Him, and not out of a Faulty Edition
of Elsyng. I suppose he took it from thence, because I find the same Error
there that I do in Dr. Wake's Transcript; pro pace regni assensuranda, instead
of assecuranda: which in Elsyng is only a Mistake of the Printer, but Dr. W.
took it for an Old Term of Art, and was nicely careful therefore to preserve
the Spelling. In Edward the I. and II's times, 50, 60, 70. and sometimes 80
Abbots and upwards 28 E. I. Cl. m. 3. dors.
were Summoned; that the Number of the Regulars might be in some degree
answerable to that of the Seculars, called up by the Premunientes, and the
Parliament be a Full Representative both of the Clergy and Laiety. About the
middle of E. II. when the Clergy got ground upon the Crown, the Number of
Summoned Abbats decreased mightily, and was generally a few under, or above
thirty, throughout Edward the III's Reign: when Convocations being now held a
course concurrently with Parliaments, all the Abbats and Priors of note came up
thither, upon the Archbishop's Mandate; and were there ready to receive the
King's Commands: and were excused therefore from the Parliamentary Writ, which
was sent out only to such Abbats and Priors as held by Barony. Afterward from
the Reign of E. III. to the Reformation, their number always exceeded twenty,
and fell short of thirty, says one excellently versed in these Enquirings:
whose Observation however is not Universally true; for the 12 H. VI. See
Dugdale Sum. p. 424.
and 31 H. VIII. Ibid. p. 501.
are Exceptions to it; in both which Instances the Number of Abbats called fell
short of twenty. This Inequality in the Latter Reigns seems to have sprung
chiefly from the Vacancy of Abbys, or the Absence of Abbats, who were abroad
either upon Embassys, or at General Councils; and had not in this case (as the
Bishops had) their Vicars general, to whom the Crown directed Writs in their
stead.

Nor Mistakes he only in the Numbers, but in the Titles also of these Abbats;
for some that are not in his List (particularly the Abbats of Waltham-Cross,
and Cirencester) were from the 49 H. III. downward, as constantly Summoned as
almost any of the twenty four he has set down; and the Prior of S. John's of
Jerusalem, much oftener than the Prior of Coventry, whom alone he has mentioned.

The next thing we meet with is a Bishop's Summons of the 23 E. I. P. 363.
which is given us by the Dr. as the first Writ of the kind by which the
Inferior Clergy were warned to Parliament See p. 212.
, where as I have shown that it went out in the 22 E. I. if not earlier; and
have brought Vouchers for this, not from musty Manuscripts only, which are
below the Dr's care, but even from his Old Friends and Acquaintants, our
Printed Historians. And Methinks a Man so Historically inclined as He is, might
have known what Knighton, and the Annals of Worcester say on this occasion.

But to let this Error pass, as a common one; yet in his next Article, where he
pretends to compare the Clause Premunientes as it was settled 15 E. II. with the
same as it is now P. 365.
, his Mistakes are unpardonable. For whereas he tells us, that this Clause was
settled 15 E. II. it is true neither ways; since long before this it was settled
as much as now; going out in the same Terms often in the Latter End of E. the
I. and beginning of E. II: And long after his 15 th. Year it received an
Alteration that has by some been thought Material; for the Words ad faciendum
and consentiendum were not constantly employed, but turned sometimes into ad
consentiendum, even in E. the III's Reign; and never, that I can find, used
after 5 R. II. from which Time to Ours the Writ has ran ad consentiendum only.
The Clause Premunientes therefore was not perfectly settled till threescore
years after 15 E. II. But that is not all; for neither in the 15 E. II. it
self, was it so settled as Dr. W. represents it to have been, who makes it to
premonish Priorem and Capellanum, Ecclesiae, instead of Capitulum; and repeats
this senceless Mistake no less than thrice in the Compass of this short Clause;
to show us that it was not the Error of his Pen, but the Effect of pure
Ignorance. It seems, he found it thus set down in an III Edition of the
Abridgment of Records P. 2.
; and the Errors of that Book too are all sacred with him. Dr. W's Enemies, as
meanly as they may think of his Abilitys in these sort of studys, must yet
allow him to have One good Property of an Antiquary; for he copys every thing
with great nicety, and religiously transcribes even the Verbal Mistakes of
those Authors he deals with. Whateever Other Alterations he is for, You shall
never find him venturing to alter a faulty Text: for as he knows no Truth, that
is not in Print; so he takes every thing for true, that is.

The same Evidences of his Skill meet us in every Article; for again, Number. III.
we have him following such another Blind Guide, into a Mistake as gross every
whit, as the former For he recites that part of the Old Convocation* writ,
where the Constituent Members are reckoned up, after this manner -- Universos
and singulos Episcopos vestrae Provinciae, ac Decanos and Praecentores
Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, Abbates, etc. Any Man that had ever read Two of these
Writs must have known, that Praecentores here should be Priores; and without
having seen a second Writ, might by dint of Common Sense have smelt out so
plain an Error as this: but Dr. Wake found the word thus in Fuller Chapter Hist.
XVI. Cent. V. Book p. 190.
, and took it as he found it; without rasing any Scruples to himself, which it
was not in his power to lay.

After all, when Dr. W. makes these Praecentores Ecclesiarum Cathedralium to
have place in Convocation, he speaks a greater Truth than he is aware of. For
there are a Few Instances on Record, when they were really called up thither,
with the rest of the Cathedral Dignitaries, the Chancelors, Treasurers, and
Capitular Archdeacons. Thus the Case was twice under Edward the III. in his 25
th. See Regist. Winchelsey f. 142.
and 29 th. Ibid. f. 147.
Years, when the Exigences of the Church required that the Clergys Assemblys
should be Numerous and Full; and when it was in the Archbishops Power (as it
Then was) to summon whom he pleased to the Convocation, in like manner as the
King could to the Parliament.

These small matters were not worth insisting on, but to satisfy the Reader how
unacquainted Dr. W. is with the Forms of all sorts of Writs, either for the
Convocation, or Parliament, i. e. indeed with the first Elements and Grounds of
this Controversy; which can never be rightly understood, or stated, without an
Exact knowledge of the Nature and Kinds of these Writs, and the several
Alterations they under went in different Ages. For Dr. W. has rightly observed,
that at first these Summons were very properly drawn, and do mark out to us the
Undoubted Rights of those to whom they were sent, as they were allowed of in
those Ancient Times P. 214.
, which holds not only of the first Draught, but of the several Changes made in
them afterward. And if so, it is very wonderful that our Author, when he was
about to state the Rights and Powers of the Clergy in Convocations and
Parliaments, should not above all things have studied and compared these Forms,
and endeavored to give us an Exact and Particular Account of them. A few
Observations of this kind, drawn from our Manuscript Registers, would have been
of more use toward settling the Point in Debate, than Volumns of such Common
Trash as he has produced out of our Printed Historians. It has been my care in
several parts of this Answer to make up this Defect of Dr. Wakes, as far as the
Old Collections I had made, and the few New Opportunities I have had of
improving my knowledge this way, would allow of. Had the Way to these Records
been as open and easy to me as it was to Dr. W. I would have endeavored that
nothing should have been wanting on this argument.

The Mistakes I have hitherto laid open in this Chapter, belong only to the
Three First Articles in Dr. W's Appendix: of the Four remaining ones, the Last
has been examined thoroughly already; and upon enquiry we have found, that from
the beginning to the end, there is scarce a true Line in it. The same thing I
have assured P. 355.
the Reader concerning the VI. also, though I waved the Proof of it, because it
would be Tedious: but if Dr. W. demands it, it shall be forthcoming. The IV th.
and V th. are barely Copys of the Submission-Act, and of K. Charles Commission
to the Convocation in 1640; in which there was no room for Ignorance to show it
self, and therefore the Mistakes he has there made must be willful ones. And
willful ones therefore he has made, giving us such deceitful Transcripts As I
have shown p. 85. in the Margin, and p. 96.
of Both these Records, as omit some of the most Material Parts of them. In
short then, among these several Vouchers, which Dr. W. has brought to credit
his Work, there is not one that does not some way or other blemish it, and
betray in him a manifest want of Skill at least, if not of a much better
Quality: And the whole Appendix therefore is throughout of a Piece with it
self, and with the Book it belongs to.

Here his Mistakes lay collected to our Hand; but there are many more to the
same purpose scattered through his Book; which should be brought together and
represented in One View to the Reader. I am weary, and hastening to Close:
however I shall give him a sight of some few of them.

We have seen already how the Dr. out of his Especial Grace and Mere Motion has
Summoned the Praecentors of Cathedral Churches to Convocation: which was very
Obliging to Them; but not very kind to the Priors, whom he left out, to make
room for them. He is as Liberal of his Favors to the Lower Clergy too, for he
tells us, that the Convocation-Writ calls two of every Archdeaconry to the
Synod; P. 104.
and the Clause Premunientes, as many out of every Archdeaconry to Parliament
P. 150.
. His Own Writs in the Appendix, if he had read them, would have prevented this
mistake, and have told him (what one would think a man should scarce need being
told) that there come but two Proctors from the Clergy of any One Diocese (for
Instance, that of London) though there happen to be never so many Archdeaconrys
in it. The Archdeaconrys indeed choose two a Piece: but out of Them a New
Choice is made of two to represent the whole Diocese.

The only thing that can keep Dr. W. in countenance, is, that a certain
Brother-Writer of his, a Member of Convocation, knows as little of these things
as He does. For his account of the Bishops Writ, is, that it commanded Them to
attend, accompanied with the Priors, Archdeacons, and Proctors of the Clergy
Nicolson Hist. Lib. Vol. 3. p. 66.
: as if the Premunites had Summoned all the Priors, and no Deans! But how can
we expect a true account of Writs from Him who gives us so false an one of the
Books which they are contained in? For concerning Dugdale's Summons thus, in
the same Page, he instructs us; that it is a perfect Copy of all Summons of the
Nobility, etc. from the 49 H. III. to the present times; and therein also (he
says) we shall find the like Mandates for the Clergy and Commons Nicolson Hist.
Lib. Vol. 3. p. 66.
. Which shows evidently that he never saw the Book: for there are but Two Writs
in it for the Commons, and not One for the Clergy, properly so called, that is,
for the whole Body of them. But I remember his Words of Bale (such another Rash
and Rude Writer), who had misjudg'd of a certain Piece -- The Character might
be true, say he, for any thing (perhaps) that He knew; but it is that Writers
way, to give accounts of Men, and their Labors, at random Vol. 1. p. 177.
. Words, which had Mr. Nicholson carried in his Eye throughout the Course of
his Work, it would have been much shorter, and much better than it is at
present: the Three Parts of his Historical Library would have shrunk into one,
had he confined himself to say nothing of Books, but what he knew of them. And
this, I assure him, is a Character not given at Random! But not to loose sight
of our Principal Author, --

Dr. W's Nicety and Exactness in this part of knowledge appears again in his
account of the Persons, of which the Lay part of the Parliament was anciently
composed: for he tells us, that in the 6 E. III. the Dukes and Barons went
aside to consult P. 219.
; whereas it is famously known, that there was no Duke in England till the 11
th. of E. III. when the Black Prince was first made Duke of Cornwall. How he
came to quote the Abridgment of Records P. 11.
for this mistake, I cannot divine; where there is not a word of Dukes
mentioned, any more than there is of that Parliaments being called for the
Affairs of Scotland, for which also Dr. W. very gravely vouches it. In Elsyng
P. 99.
indeed these Two Mistakes are to be found; but I suppose they were none of
His, but his Printers: And had Dr. W. consulted the Abridgment, as he pretends,
he would have known so too; and have dropped this learned Remark about Dukes,
and the Affairs of Scotland.

If we ask this Knowing Gentleman, what the Inferior Clergy are Summoned to
Parliament for, and empowered by their Writ to do, he will tell us, that the
Parliament-Writ Summons them to come to Parliament, there to Treat with the
King, etc. The Convocation-Writ calls them to Consult only among themselves P.
229.
. Whereas again his Own Appendix, faulty as it is, would have truly taught him,
that the Parliament-Writ, as it now stands, summons the Inferior Clergy ad
consentiendum, not ad tractandum; and the Convocation-Writ ad tractandum,
consentiendum and concludendum, not to consult only. The Last of these does
expressly summon them ^o Treat, and yet he says, it does not; the First does
not, and yet he tells us, it does.

After this Wild Account of the Writs to the Clergy, we are not to wonder, if
he mistakes as much in those to the Commons; the Impowring Words of which, he
assure us, were about the 26 E. III. thus altered ad tractandum, Consulendum,
and Faciendum, and ran so, on to the 46 th. of the same King, when they were
again worded, ad faciendum and consulendum, and so have continued to this day
P. 213.
. Every particular of which account is false: for the Writ to the Commons 26 E.
III. ran ad tractand, consulend, and consentiend. Pryn. P. W. V. 2. pp. 92, 94.
; and so it did several Years before this, viz. in the 21 E. III. Ibid. 95.
. And between the 26 and 46 E. III. the Phrase frequently varied: for in the 36
th. it was ad consentiendum only Ib. p. 107.
, and so on the 44 th Ib. p. 102.
, when it changed into ad consulend. and consentiend Ib. p. 106.
. And in the 46 th. it ran, ad faciend. and consentiend. (not consulend) Ib. p.
(113).
. And thus indeed it has, for the most part, continued to this day: However not
always; for as low as the 7 th. of R. II. it called them ad consentiendum only
Ib. p. 117.
. I defy any Man to make more Mistakes in so few Words as Dr. W. has done. One
or Two of them, I find, he has with Great Industry picked out of the Grand
Question P. 156.
; but where he got all the rest, I cannot imagine.

P. 104. He makes it a doubt, whether the settled number of the Inferior Clergy,
called by the Bishops Writ, was derived from thence into the Convocation-Writ,
or from the Convocation-Writs into those of Parliament: which is, in effect, to
doubt, whether the Deans, Archdeacons, Capitular and Rural Proctors were called
to Convocation, before the Bishops Writ had that Clause in it. And he who
doubts of this, puts it beyond a Doubt, how far He is qualified to write on
this subject.

The 49 th. of H. the III. is not more famous for sheathing the Old Barons
Swords, than for Exercising the Pens of our Modern Writers. Much has been said
of it in relation to the Parliamentary Interest of the Commons Temporal; Dr. W.
seems to make it the Era of that of the Commons Spiritual too; for thus he
speaks of it. Whereas before the 49 th. of H. III. only the Bishops and Abbots,
who held of the King by their Baronys were wont to be summoned to Parliament;
in that Year, when the Commons began to be called, several of the Inferior
Clergy were also called together with them; and that, for ought appears, in a
larger Proportion than the Laity themselves were P. 209.
. Here are two Assertions, in the last of which he is kinder to his Function
than will consist with Truth, and in the First not so just as he ought to be.
For long before the 49 th. of H. III. not Bishops and Abbots only, but (I hope)
some Priors too, were called to Parliament. We will suppose him to have
comprehended These, under Abbats; yet even thus his account is very defective.
For not those Abbats and Barons only, who held by Barony, were called, but many
more than these; and oftentimes the whole Order. The first Parliamentary
Summons left 6. Ioh.
calls all the Abbats and Priors of the Diocese together with the Bishop of it:
and the Priores Installati, and plenum sub se Conventum habentes, are (I have
shown already) several times mentioned by Paris, as having a General Call to
Parliament. Who speaks also not seldom of the Decani, Archidiaconi, And so
Annals of Burton. See Pp. 301, 302. of this Book.
and aliae Ecclesiasticae Personae as present. Dr. W. who would be thought to
know All our Historians so intimately, should methinks have had some sort of
acquaintance with the best of them, M. Paris: at least he should not, till he
had read him, have ventured to determine any thing concerning the Constituent
Members of the Great Councils in H. the III's time, of which we have no where
so just an account as in that accurate Writer. But he makes his Order amends in
what follows: for in the 49 th. H. III. (it seems) when the Commons began to be
called, several of the Inferior Clergy were also called together with them, and
that, for ought appears, in a Larger Proportion than the Laity themselves were.
Were they so? How came then our Historys and Records not to have mentioned it?
From none of which can it be certainly learnt, that there were any of the
Clergy called to this Meeting, below Abbats and Priors, but five Deans only. It
may be, many of Inferior Rank might be summoned too: but if they were, it is
more than can be proved; for there is not, I believe, the least Hint of such a
Summons remaining: sure we are, that they could not be called up in the same
way that was afterward practiced, for the Bishops Writ of that Year is on
record, and has no Warning Clause in it. But it may be, the Abbats, Priors,
(and Deans) that held not by Barony, are Dr. W.'s Inferior Clergy: let them be
so, their Number in this Instance did not amount to above Eighty; whereas the
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinque Ports must have been
four or five times that Number. Whence he drew this Piece of History therefore,
I cannot divine. The Learned Person, Dr. Brady
I am sure, whom he vouches for it, in his Margin, has not a Letter this way,
in the Pages cited: but he thought the Reverence Men had for the Character of
that most Knowing Antiquary, would have made them take every thing implicitly
for Truth, to which his Name was set, and have prevented all further Enquirys.

In what Place the Clergy called to Parliament met, Dr. W. professes himself
not to have found P. 221.
; but he thinks it not improbable, that it may have been at St. Paul's, because
their Other Convocations were usually held there P. 221.
. But I think it very improbable, that while they were, strictly speaking, a
Member of Parliament, they should meet so far from the Place, where it opened
and sat; as improbable, as that the Commons should have met at the same
Distance from the Lords. Westminster Abbey was somewhat nearer, and more
convenient; and if the Commons had the Use of the Chapter House there, we may
reasonably believe, that the Clergy too were accommodated with some Other Room
in that Monastery; as indeed they anciently were: for sometimes we hear of them
in the Capella Monachorum infirmorum Hoveden ad ann. 1194. p. 735. In Conc^lio
Northampt. vide Benedict. Abb. Apud Cotton Reliq. p. 212.
, which is called also Capella Sta. Catharinae Diceto inter X Scriptores c. 589.
; and sometimes in the Capella Sti. Iohannis Evangelistae M. Par. ad ann. 1244.
p. 640.
, when the Parliament, we find, was opened, and all the States of it came
together, in Refectorio Monachorum M. Par. ibid.
, and continued so to do, for at least Fifty Years afterward: for Math. of
Westminsters Relation in 1294 implys, that that was Then the place, where the
Spiritual and Lay part of the Parliament met one another Congregatis in
Refectorio Monachorum Westminster. Surgens unus Miles Ioannes de Havering dictus in
medio eorum, dicebat, Viri Venerabiles, etc. p. 422.
. Upon the Division of the Two Houses, the Commons sat in the Chapterhouse of
the Abbat of Westminster: Dr. W. observes that this is mentioned in the
Abridgment of Records, 50 E. III; and might have observed, how it is mentioned
there, as the accustomed (or rather, as the Roll it self speaks, the Ancient
Aunciene place.
) Place of their assembling; which implys them to have sat there probably from
the time of their Separation. Not many Years after this, they seem to have
exchanged this Place with the Clergy, and to have sat themselves in the
Refectory of the same Abbey, for in the 9 H. V. the Chapterhouse appears to have
been the Place of Reception for the Convocation Clergy See Walls. Hist. Angl. ad
ann. 1421.
; and in the 4 H. V. the Rolls say, Le Chanceleur per commandment du Roy
assigna a les ditz Chivalers, Citizeins, and Burgeoises une Maison appellee le
Froitour dedeinz L'abbee de Westminster, a tenir en y^elle leur Counseilles and
Assemblees: and in the 6 H. VI. it is said to be the place, where the Commons
ordinarily sat The Roll goes further, and says, Eorum Domus Communis antiquitus
usitata.
, in a Manuscript of Mr. Petyt, printed by Bishop Burnet Hist. Ref. Vol. 1.
Coll. of Rec. p. 100.
.

But though the Place of their Meeting puzzles him, yet the Time, it seems,
does not; for as to That, he informs us, that the Clergy who met by virtue of
the Convocation-Writ in Parliament time, came together heretofore on some Other
Day than that on which the Parliament began P. 224.
. He knows not, it seems, that they have done so a late too, and that the
Custom for an Age and half was for them to assemble the Day after the
Parliament. This Usage began in the time of H. the VIII th. and was then often
practiced; but not regularly fixed till toward the latter End of his Reign:
from which time to the late Revolution it held; and from thence the Parliament
and Convocation-Writs have Summoned to the very same day; which has joined
these two Bodies yet more closely than formerly, in their Summons, though their
Assemblys at the same time are more than ever divided. My Lord of Sarum
therefore had not well considered this matter, when he said, that it was the
Custom of all H. the VIII's Reign for the Convocation to meet two or three days
after the Parliament Vol. 1. p. 213.
. For besides that it sometimes met before it, (for instance, in 1511/2. the
Convocation came together, Feb. 2. Registr. Hadr. de Castello.
the Parliament not till Feb. 4. D^gd. Sum. 3 H. 8 th.
) the very Instance upon which his Lordship produces this Observation, destroys
it; for the Convocation of 1536. began June 9 th. the Parliament, June the 8
th. And indeed near half the Convocations in that Princes time met (as they did
till the present Reign) nicely the day after the Parliament, as will appear by
particularly comparing the Dates of both of them.

Parliament Met,
1514/5 Feb. 5. Dugd. Sum. 1515 Nov. 12. Ibid. 1536 June 8. Ibid. 1540 Apr. 12.
Bp. Burnet V. 1. p. 274. 1544/5 Ian. 30. Dugd. 1545 Nov. 23. Ibid. 1546/7 Ian.
14. Ibid.
Convocation Met,
Feb. 6. Registr. Warham. Nov. 13. Registr. Hadr. de Cast. June 9. Ibid. Apr.
13. Registr. Cranmer. Ian. 31. Ibid. Nov. 24. Ibid. Ian. 15. Ibid.
And the same Distance of Time was often also observed both in Proroguing and
Dissolving that Princes Convocations and Parliaments.

As to the Authority by which the Clergy were convened, Dr. W. affords us as
little light in That Point too as in any of the former. He recites the Opinion
of some who think that after the statute of Praemunire in 1393. our Archbishops
left off to summon Convocations by their Own Authority, and called them only at
the King's Command Pp. 240, 241.
: but in this account, he says, he is not altogether satisfied. Had he any
manner of Knowledge of these things, he would not be at all satisfied with it.
For as in Fact it is certain, that the Archbishop after this time summoned
Convocations frequently by his Own Authority, so it is clear in point of Law,
that he had as much Right to do it, after the Statute of Praemunire, as before
it; there being no Clause, or Word in that Act, that can be supposed to
restrain His Power in this particular. Indeed had the Archbishop, whenever he
called a Convocation without the King's Writ, done it by a Legatin Authority
(as Dr. W. represents him to have done P. 241, 199.
) there would have been some Ground to think that the Praemunire Act might have
laid a Restraint upon him. But this is another of Dr. W's mistakes: for the
Archbishop needed no Help from his Legatin Character to convene the Clergy of
his Province; which he was sufficiently empowered to do as Metropolitan, by the
Old Canons of the Church, received and allowed in this Kingdom. And accordingly
by this Metropolitical Power, the Archbishops all along called Provincial
Councils, before any of them were the Popes Legates, which from St. Austin down
to ( Theobald say some Ant. Brit. p. 127.
to) William de Corboyl (say others Gervasii Act Pont Cant. X Script. col. 1663.
none of them were. He indeed, by virtue of his New Character, summoned the
Archbishop of York, and all the Clergy of that Province Ibid. and Continuator
Florentii Wig. ad ann. 1127.
to his Councils; and One of his Successors Hubert.
, who is supposed by some to have got the Title of Legatus natus for ever
annexed to his See, did Iure Legationis visit York Province Hoveden ad ann.
1195.
. And in order to these Extraprovincial Acts of Jurisdiction, the Legatine
Authority was indeed needful. For though it had been solemnly determined in
favor of Lanfrank by the Great Council of the Kingdom Diceto de Archi. Cant.
p. 685.
, that the Sea of York should be subject to that of Cant. and the Archbishop of
the One obey the Conciliary summons of the other; yet was not this Decision
long observed, the Archbishop of York soon finding means to get rid of it, and
to assert the Independency of his See. But as to the Ordinary Acts of
Metropolitical Power (One of which was the calling of the Clergy of his
Province together at Times prescribed by the Canons) the Archbishop had no more
want of a Legatine Character, to qualify him for the Exercise of them, than a
Private Bishop had (or now has) for summoning a Diocesan Synod; nor was it, as
the Law then stood, any more an Encroachment upon the Royal Authority. Dr. W.
therefore is not very kind to the Memory of our Archbishops, nor a Friend to
the Ancient Libertys of this Church, when he asserts, that all those Synods
which the Metropolitan called without a Writ from the King, were Legatine; and
upon that notion, dates the Disuse of them (at least as to their frequency)
from the Statute of Praemunire, which did no ways, and could no ways affect
them. For after this Statute most of Arundel's Synods met by the Archbishop's
Writ only; as Dr. W. P. 280.
himself tells us from Harpsfield, and might have told us yet more authentickly
from that Archbishop's Register yet remaining. This account of Harpsfield puts
him upon fixing on a New Era; and now therefore he will have it, that about
the End of Arundel's time the King began wholly to assume this Power; and this
he thinks to be no Improble Conjecture of Fuller our Church-Historian P. 230.
. When the Authority of a Conjecture of Fuller's is appealed to, one may be
sure that both Authoritys and Reasons run low with him. Let us balance the
Authority of a Conjecture of One Church Historian with the Records printed by
another Bishop Burnet.
at the End of his first Volumn. Amongst which One of the first that meets us,
P. 6.
is, a Mandate for a Convocation issued out by Archbishop Warsham in 1509,
without the Recital or Mention of any Previous Writ from the King to that
purpose. This Instance I have particularly pitched upon, because Dr. W. has
strengthened this Guess of Fuller's by another of his Own; concluding from the
Assertion in the Submission-Act, that the Convocation certainly met by the
King's Writ all H. the VIII's time, and for some considerable time before P.
231.
; whereas this Synod in the first Year of that Prince met, as far as appears,
by no Provincial Summons, but what was from the Archbishop only.

How the Clergy, when met either in Convocation or Parliament, consulted, is
another Curious Part of Knowledge which Dr. W. endeavors a little, and but a
little, to supply us with. Something he says of the Spiritualty sitting and
acting separately from the Lay-part of the Parliament P. 221.
, and something he seems to hint of the Inferior Clergys sitting apart from the
Bishops after they had a Prolocutor of their own P. 220.
. And this is all he knows of the matter. I will add a few Particulars on this
Head which a man of his Research methinks should have been no stranger to.

That the Clergy in Synod, whether meeting with a Parliament, or at different
times from it, sat ordinarily together for many Reigns after the Conquest, is
pretty well agreed on: the Like Practice of Parliaments proves it, and the
Phrase of our Elder Historians, who speak of the Clergy always, as meeting in
some One Particular Place, without giving us the Names of several Rooms in
which they sat apart, or intimating that they usually subdivided. The Canon See
it in Malmsbury ad ann. 1075.
made in Lanfrank's time to restrain all under Abbats from speaking in Synod
without the Metropolitans Leave, implys that the Greater and the Lesser Clergy
then sat together: so does the Account in M. Paris Ad ann. 1256.
of a Synod in his time called by Rustandus, where Magister Leonardus (an
Inferior Clergyman) is termed quasi Cleri Advocatus, and Prolocutor
Universitatis P. 920. l. 10. And in another place it is said of him. In cujus
Ore posita fuerunt Verba Episcoporum exponenda p. 918. l. 6.
It seems, he was deputed to deliver the sense of the whole Synod, both of the
Upper and Lower part of it; who therefore, we may presume, now sat and debated
together. The Custom also of Bishops sending Inferior Clergymen to represent
them, though it held long after the Convocation divided, yet to be sure had its
rise when they were together, and proves that originally they thus sat. Indeed
when the Archdeacons came with Procuratoria from the Inferior Clergy (as they
often did till E. the first's time) it is not to be believed that they separated
from the Greater Prelates, but deliberated and voted with them, as the Knights
of Shires did at first with the Barons See a Record to this purpose in Dr.
Brady 's Introduction Ap. p. 29 and p. 37.
. Not that the several Ranks of the Clergy did not even then act separately
upon occasion: The Instance of the Council of Winchester, in Malmsbury Ad ann.
1142. Hist. Nov.
is a plain proof of this; at which he tells us, the Legate consulted with the
Bishops, the Abbats, and the Archdeacons severally; and informs us withal, that
He himself was present in this Council Cujus Concilii Actioni quia interfui,
integram Veritatem Rerum Posteris non negabo. From whence also one would guess,
that more of the Inferior Clergy were there, than are in the General Division
of the Members expressed; unless we shall say that Malmsbury came as the Proxy
of his Absent Abbat.
so that his account is to be depended on. When the Proctors of the Capitular
and Diocesan Clergy came to be a certain and standing part of these Councils,
(as they did in the 13 th. Century) they too sometimes consulted a a part, and
made as it were a distinct State by themselves. Thus we are told of Two several
Convocations in the Year 1296. by the Chronicle of Dunstable MS. in Biblioth.
Cotton. Tiberius. A. 10.
, (written at that very time) Congregatio divisa erat in Quatuor Ordines, sive
Turmas; Episcopi scilicet and eorum Procuratores seorsum, Decani, Cathedrales
and Archidiaconi seorsum, Abbates, Priores, and alii Praelati seorsum,
Procuratores Communitatis Cleri seorsium. Into such Committees as these the
Convocation, I suppose, subdivided all along, down from these Times to the very
Reformation, as often as there was occasion for it; though for the greater part
of that Period, they ordinarily sat and consulted together in Two Bodies, as
they do (I mean, should do) at this day. In Arundel's Register Archiepiscopus
consultis separatim Episcopis -- ad Oct. 8. 1399. Iterum ad ann. 1396.
therefore we find, the Bishops often treating separately from the Abbats and
Priors; and in one of Chichley's Synods Ao. 1438. See Duck 's Life of Chichley.
, it appears that the Proctors of the Inferior Regular Clergy granted subsidys
(and therefore, we may presume, consulted about them) apart from the Diocesan
Clergy. And as low as 1529. in the Acts of the Synod of that Year this passage
occurs Sess. 4.
. Exclusis omnibus praeter Suffraganeos, Reverendissimus habuit Communicationem
In MSo. Convocationem.
cum eis. Intraverunt postea Abbates -- Illis Exeuntibus, intraverunt Fratres
Mendicantes quatuor Ordinum; cum quibus Reverendissimus habuit seriam
communicationem. Postea ingressus est Prolocutor cum quibusdam de Clero. -- At
what time the Two Houses of Convocation divided, is not easy to say; but it was
not, I believe, till after the Commons had separated from the Lords: and
therefore in all E. the II's Reign, and in the beginning of E. III. the
Petitions are made to the Archbishops, and Bishops, and run in the name of
Religiosi and Clerus See an Instance in Dene 's Hist. Ross. Angl. Sacr. Vol. 1.
p. 363. and here in the Appendix, Numb. XV.
; under which style all of the Convocation below Bishops are comprehended. In
the last Year of Edward the III. some Expressions in Sudbury's Register In
Conv. 4. Nov. Feb. 1376.
seem to intimate that this Division had obtained (if at least my Extract do
not mislead me): but a formal mention of the Inferior Domus Convocationis, and
of a settled Prolocutor is not, I think, to be found in the Registers, till
sometime afterward: Though the Mere silence of such imperfect and scanty
Records is by no means sufficient to establish a Negative; all the Notices we
now have of this kind, being short Entrys only, made by the Archbishops
Registrary; who was no more careful to record what related to the Honor or
Privileges of the Inferior Clergy, than the Clark of Parliament appears
anciently to have been in relation to the Commons. For in those Days neither
the Lower House of Convocation, nor Parliament kept distinct Acts of their own:
and when the Clergy first began to do it, we know not certainly, though from
the Acts of the Convocation 1o. E. VI. In the Book called Synodalia.
it appears that they then had a Separate Actuary; which is as high as we have
any Iournals for the Commons Though Mr. Nicolson Vol. 3. p. 51. tells us of a
Iournal of theirs, throughout H. the VIII. Reign, now in the Cotton Library:
such a Iournal is, I dare say, in no other Library, but his Own Historical one,
to be found, where there is indeed a Great Collection of such kind of
Curiositys.
, though 6to Hci 8vi, the Book of the Clerk of Parliament appointed, or to be
appointed for the Common House, be in a statute C. 16.
of that Year mentioned.

After the Separation of the two Houses of Convocation was fixed, we scarce
ever find them Treating and Resolving together in Body, upon any Occasion. But
if any thing happened that required Joynt-Counsels, their way was to transact it
in a Committee of both Houses; wherein the Number of the Inferior Clergy
exceeded that of the Greater Prelates. For instance, a Grand Committee in 1408.
Ian. 25. Registr. Arundel.
consisted of six Bishops, twelve Abbots and Priors, and of twenty four from
the Lower House, i. e. I suppose of six from the four Ranks or Degrees of
Clergy which composed it; Deans, Archdeacons, Proctors of Chapters, and
Dioceses. The Resolutions of the Lower House were communicated to the Upper by
their Prolocutor, attended with some of their Members, More or Less, as the
Importance of the Message seemed to require; and sometimes (for instance, when
they presented their Subsidys, or Grievances; which they generally did
together) the whole House came up with them. And whatever they had to offer in
Writing, or by Word of Mouth, they did it standing always, the Prelates in the
mean time being Seated. Most of the Business of Convocation took its Rise from
the Lower House; there, regularly Taxes were first agreed on, there Articles of
Reformation where drawn; in preparing which as they had a nearer Interest, so
had they more Leisure for it, than those of the Upper House, who were called
upon often to attend the Parliament, and were forced to adjourn often for that
reason; the Inferior Clergy continuing to sit all that while, and do Business
Die Lunae praesens Archiepiscopus propter Parliamenti Negotia venerabilibus
Fratribus sibi assidentibus prorogavit ad diem Veneris -- and demandavit aliis
Praelatis and Clero quod singulis diebus interim ad dictum locum convenirent
and laboratent circa reformanda and Articulos conciperent-Registr. Arundel in
Conv. 10. Maii 1406.
And when they adjourned, it was sometimes their Own Act, but oftener at the
Command of the Archbishop. This Power belonged to him acourse when the Two
Houses were united; and he preserved it after they were separated.

I have added these Particulars, that I might not barely trace Dr. W's Mistakes
(which is too Dry, and too Humble a Task) but might with all make my Proofs of
his Ignorance as instructive as I could to the Reader.

Whether the Clergy called to Parliament by the Premunientes consulted with the
Laiety, or by Themselves, is a Point that the Dr. has left doubtful. But the
Great Record in Ryleys Placita See part of it App. Numb. XII
will, I judge, go a good way toward clearing it. For as we may be pretty
certain from thence, that the Clergy made their appearance in Parliament, upon
the first Opening it (for why else should their Proxys be all Registered in the
Records of that Meeting?) so have we good Ground also to believe from thence,
that they divided afterward, and consulted by themselves; since their Proxys
are entered, not promiscuously, but apart from those of the Laiety. The Bishop
of Winton therefore, we may observe, sends up the Archdeacon of Surry, as his
Proxy; and yet tha^ Archdeacon makes a Proctor for Himself: which he needed not
to have done, had the Clergy and Laiety sat all in one House (as the common
Opinion supposes them Now to have done); for then this Archdeacon might have
Voted in a double Capacity. But if the Clergy sat a part from the Laiety, it
was necessary for the Archdeacon, when he appeared for his Bishop among the
Barons, to make a Proxy for himself among the Clergy. Besides, I find, the
Bishops and Abbats do not give Procuratorial Letters exactly to the same
Persons Thus in the Diocese of St. Asaph, the Chapters* Dean, Archdeacon, and
Clergy of the Diocese send the very same Proctors, but the Bishops different
ones. And when the Bishop of Hereford commissioned one Lugwardin (who was sent
up also by the Archdeacons of Hereford, and Salop, the Chapter of Hereford, and
the Clergy of the Diocese) he joined another with him, who might be his
separate Proxy upon occasion. The only Exception to this, that I have observed
in the List of Proxys is, That the Chapter, and Bishop of Exon return the very
same. But he might perhaps be (if the Transcript of the Record be exact here)
the Chapters Proxy, and the Bishops Messenger only, who brought his Letters of
General Ratihabition, without any Power of Voting for him, in particular cases.
For this Method, I find, was practiced at that Meeting, v. g. Abbas de Cumba
non misit Procuratorem, set promittit per Literas suas Patentes se ratum and
gratum habiturum quicquid indicto Parliamento Rex decreverit salubriter
ordinandum. The Reader, who has considered Dr. W's Book, finds, that the Spirit
of this Implicit Abbat did not die with him; but has descended upon One, who
makes the same offer with less Wariness, and puts not in so much as a
Salubriter, to guard his Submissive Doctrine.
as are empowered by any of the Inferior Clergy; but if one or two of them be
the same, they add a Second or Third that is different: which I take not to
have been Casual, but with Design, that so He who was Proxy for the Bishop
alone, might separate from the Rest, and act for him among the Laiety, while
the Others Voted for him among the Clergy. Which I apprehend also to be what
chiefly gave birth to the Custom of the Clergys sending more Proctors than One
both to the Convocation and Parliament, by the Clause [ Conjunctim and Divisim]
in their Procuratoria; that so they might have some to vote for them in the One
place, and some in the Other.

Once more, the Time when the Crown began to issue out Writs for the
Convocation ( i. e. to command the Archbishops by Writ to assemble the Clergy
of their Provinces) is another point, which Dr. W. would fain, if he could,
determine; and in order to it, pitches upon a Writ of this kind in the 9 E. II.
as the first that perhaps is extant P. 101.
, or (which is all One it seems) as the first he has ever met with P. 225.
Which Learned Hint he takes care also to inculcate often Pp. 100.103.225.228.
that he may be sure to have Justice done him for the Discovery. But in this he
is a little too vain, because neither is the Remark his Own (for he met with it
in the Grand Question, p. 159.); nor, if it were, would he have any reason to
boast, since it is by no means a true one: for there are several Writs of this
nature extant before the Date of this; particularly of the 7 th. and 5 th.
Years of E. II. and as far back as the 11 th. of E. 1. which I have already in
the course of these Papers had occasion to take notice of. And even this Writ
it self is misdated, as to the Time to which it Summoned: for whereas Dr. W.
says, that it called the Convocation to meet Feb. 9. the Parliament sitting
Oct. 16. foregoing, P. 103.
the Truth was, that the Writ was dated Oct. 16. and summoned the Convocation
to meet, not on Feb. 9. but Ian. 27. i. e. in quindena Hilarii.

But I offend, I fear in too nice a pursuit of his Errors, and shall close
these Remarks P. 244.
therefore, as He does his, with the Account of a Convocation, the
Circumstances of which have been much misunderstood, not only by Dr. W. but by
my Lord of Sarum too, and even by our Elder Historians. Henry the VIII th. he
says, having called a Parliament to Westminster, Anno 1529. [he should say,
1523. April 15 th. 1523. the Parliament met. April 20 th. Warham's Prove. Synod.
Apr. 22 d. Wolseys 's Legatin Synod.
commanded Warham to Summon a Convocation of the Clergy, to meet about the same
time at St. Paul's. Cardinal Wolsey, who, as Archbishop of York, had no place in
the Convocation, and was desirous to bring every thing to his Own Management,
by his Legatin Power dissolves the Convocation held at the King's command by
Warham, and orders the same Synod to appear before himself, as the Pope's
Legate, the next day at Westminster; where having got a sufficient subsidy
granted by them to the King, he soon dismis'd the Assembly P. 244.
. Thus Dr. W. tells the Story out of Antiqu. Britan. My Lord of Sarum adds,
that this Dissolution was May 2. and points to the Writ of this date in
Tonstall's Register, issued out by the King to Tonstall for the Clergy of Cant.
Prove. to meet at Westminster Hist. Ref. Vol. 1. p. 20
. But here (to use his Lordships Own Words of my Lord Herbert Vol. p. 95.
) he had not applied his Ordinary Diligence, for the Writ he referrs us to is
quite another thing than his Lordship apprehends it to be; and the whole story
of the Dissolution is a Mistake, as appears beyond doubt from the Preamble of
the Act of Subsidy, printed by his Lordship himself among the Records Vol. 1.
p. 8
; where we find these words. Nos Praelati and Clerus Cant. Prove. in hac Sacra
Synodo Provinciali, sive Praelatorum and Cleri ejusdem Convocatione in Ecclesia
D. Pauli London, 20 die Apr. A. D. 1523. inchoata, ac usque ad and in 10. Aug.
proxime ex tunc sequentis de diebus in dies continuata, etc. Had his Lordship
considered these words, he would have seen, that this Synod was so far from
being dissolved May 2 d. that it sat, as a Provincial Synod, above three Months
afterward, and was continued from the first to the last Day of its Session, by
Ordinary Adjournments. And had his Lordship further given himself the Trouble
to peruse the Mandate to Tonstal, which he cites from his Register, he would
have found that there is not a Syllable of a Dissolution, or a Reassembly
mentioned in it; and would there have lit upon a true account of this mistaken
Story. For that Mandate recites, that the Ca^dinal had sent out his Legatin
Summons [concurrently with the Bishop of Cant's Provincial Citation] for the
Clergy of Both Provinces to meet at St. Peter's Apr. 22 d. [two days after
those of Cant. were Provincially to assemble]: that they did accordingly thus
meet, the York-Clergy by Adjournment from York [where they met first March the
22 d See Stat. 22 H. 8. c. 15.
] and those of Cant. by Adjournment from Paul's. But the Clarks of Convocation
for Cant. Prove. being to appear first before their Own Archbishop, had brought
up Powers to Treat with Him alone, without any mention of the Legate: for which
reason the Cardinal issued out his Mandate of May the 2 d. to Tonstal for the
Clergy of his Diocese [and so of all others] to meet and send up proper Forms
to their Proctors; as they did, I suppose; and then the Business of the subsidy
was debated, and the quantity of it agreed on before the Legate; but the formal
Grant of it made afterward in Two Provincial Assemblys. The Common Account
therefore of this Legatin Synod is Fabulous, taken up in Hatred to the
Cardinal, and too easily received by Iosceline himself, without inspecting the
Registers for the Truth of it; Archbishop Parker, upon the Review of his Work,
being not able to set this Story right by Memory alone, for he was but Eighteen
Years Old, when it happened. Had indeed the Fact, as it is commonly handed down
to us, been true, Dr. W. would have had reason to say, that it is not to be
paralleled in all its Circumstances in any part of our History. But as it
really stood, there was nothing but the Writ for New Powers, Extraordinary, or
singular in it: Pool's Legatin Synods being afterward Summoned and held with
the very same Formalitys, particularly that in 1555, by the Acts of which it
appears, that the Synods of Cant. and York were first convened apart (after the
same manner that they were always used to be in Parliament time) and then Both
called to an Exempt place [the Chapel Royal in Whitehall] and there united into
one National Assembly. Besides, had Cardinal Wolsey by his Power Legatin
dissolved a Convocation called by the King's Writ, we should certainly have
heard of it, among the 44 Articles preferred against him in Parliament See 'em
Lord Herbert p. 293
: but it not being touched on, or so much as hinted there, we might without
further Authority conclude that nothing of the kind was done

Nor is the Usual Account of this Action of the Cardinal's worse than the
Reason given for it; for he is made to dissolve the Convocation, because as
Archbishop of York, he had no place there; But, I hope, as Bishop of Bath and
Wells He took Durham, and quitted B and W. while this Convocation was sitting;
but the Exact Date of this Change I have not considered.
, or Abbat of St. Albans he had; and might therefore in either of these
Qualitys have been present in the Convocation of Cant. if that had been all he
aimed at. But it was neither suitable to his Character, nor agreed well with
his Temper, or his Business, to appear among the Clergy any otherwise than as a
Legate: As such, he took place of Warham, and presided over the Debates of the
whole Body; and had an opportunity by that means of poysing the Refractory Part
of the Clergy in Warham's District with Those of his Own Province, who would be
more complying.

Common Justice obliged me to say thus much in behalf of that Great Minister,
who had Real Faults enough, not to be loaded with Untrue Ones. Dr. W. had much
Nearer Obligations to have done this, who has eat the Bread of Wolsey (to use
an Homely, but Authorized Phrase) near Half his Life, and now owes his
Comfortable Summer-Retreat to that Cardinal's Bounty. But I find the Praemunire,
that transferred all the Cardinal's Estate to the Crown, has transferred all
the Doctor's Gratitude thither too: and with reason; for the Cardinal is Dead
long ago, but Crowns are Immortal. He has His reason, and I have mine; which
is, to do right to any injured Person, let his Character be what it will; and
not to fall in with a Calumny knowingly, let it be never so Popular and
Fashionable. They that defend the Dead, cannot be supposed guilty of Flattery,
or Design; and with either of these, I thank God, there is not a Line in this
Work that can reproach me.

I have now offered all I think necessary, either to assert, explain, or
justify that Double Right of the Clergy, which I at the Entrance of these
Papers proposed to maintain, their Right of Meeting at set times, and Acting
within such a Determined Compass as I have marked out. There is behind still a
Second Consideration, which relates to the Need that the Church has of such
Meetings, and which, according to the Method laid down, I should now enter
upon. But this Book has grown too much under my hands, to allow room for any
New Matter here; and all therefore that I shall say of it is, that if the
Church has a Clear Right to such Meetings (which by this time, I hope, is past
a Doubt) she has for that very Reason a Need of them; because her Right has
been publicly questioned, and actually suspended for a Time: And she has Need
therefore to exert it, that she may be sure to preserve it. Upon this Foot I
shall leave the Point of Expedience at present, not without Intentions of
returning to it, and giving the Reader as full and particular a View of the
Debate on This side also, if it shall appear, that what has been already said,
has not had its Due Effect on Those, whose Eyes the Author of these Papers is
particularly concerned to open; and whose backwardness to keep the Church in
possession of her Greatest Privilege, he cannot but impute chiefly to a
mistaken Opinion they are in, that she has really no such Privilege to claim.
And that Mistake therefore being cleared up, he hopes and believes, that they
will be as ready to assert her Just Rights, and Espouse her True Interests as
any Men. These are his present Apprehensions and Wishes, in which he shall be
very sorry to find himself deceived; but if so it happen, has determined not to
stop here, but proceed on to such further Enquirys and Considerations as he
shall judge proper to promote the End that he aims at: the great Importance,
and Reasonableness of which he is so fully satisfied of, that he shall think no
Sacrifice, whether of his Time, his Ease, or his Fortune, too dear to be
bestowed upon it. He is sure, that he has the Perpetual Practice of the Church
of Christ, and the Law of his Country on his side; and he is conscious of no
other Aims in what he has undertaken, than those of promoting the Honor of God,
and his Religion, and supporting our Constitution* and these Assurances and
Views will, he trusts, carry him on to the End of his Work, through whatever
Difficultys and Discouragements.

If he succeeds in his Design, he shall think that he has not lived in vain; if
he fails, yet he will satisfy himself in having honestly attempted it, and done
what in him lay to preserve to the Body he is of the poor Remains of their
Ancient Legal Rights and Privileges: for he could not stand by and see the
Great Rights of his Church ready to ^ink, without endeavoring to save them. The
Events of things are not in our Disposal; it becomes private Men to do their
Duty, without having a Demonstration that it shall be successful. And should it
be determined to lay this Part of Our Constitution asleep, yet he is not
without hopes, that the Truths delivered in this Book (for Truths they are) may
in some Favorable Juncture contribute to awaken it. With this single Prospect,
he would have undertaken the Work, had all others failed him; and in despair of
being listened to by the Present Age, would have wrote, and appealed to
Posterity.

At the worst, what he has here offered, and shall further offer, if it have no
other Effect, will yet be serviceable, as a Testimony against Dr. Wake's Book,
and the Pernicious Principles of it: it will let our Successors see, that his
Doctrine, whatever Boasts, or Pretenses it might make, was not the Doctrine of
the Church and the Age in which he lived; but was disowned and detested as soon
as wrote: and that the Establishment of the Practice which he pleads for (if it
must be Established) was not owning any ways to the Silence of those who were
concerned to oppose it. Especially if so it fall out, that They of the Clergy,
who are not of Dr. Wake's Mind, and in his Measures, shall, upon this occasion,
take some way of owning publicly to the World their Dislike of them: this will
justify the Body from having any Hand in stifling and betraying their Own
Privileges, and will remove the Guilt of any Present, or Future Innovation
from Them, at whose Door soever it lays it.

I have done with the Argument of Dr. Wake's Book, and have now only a short
Address to make to the Writer of it; whom toward the latter End of it I find
thus expressing himself. This, says he, brings us to the true way of deciding
the point here before us. If by the Laws and Usages of this Kingdom, the
Convocation has a Right to Sit and Act (as this Gentleman affirms) let those
Laws be produced, and those Usages made out, and I submit Pp. 285, 286.
. I agree with him, that this is the true way of deciding the Point before us;
and have accordingly taken this way, and no other, to decide it. I have
produced the Laws and Usages of this Kingdom, that make out both these Rights,
so incontestably and clearly, I think, as to leave no Room for a Cavil; and I
call upon Doctor Wake therefore to Submit, or to show wherein I have mistook,
or misrepresented those Laws and Usages. Let him not think to evade the Force
of what has been said by Loose and General Reflections, by once again amusing
us with Heaps of Foreign Precedents, and long Historical Tales nothing to the
Purpose; in a word, by drawing fresh supplys from that Everlasting Magazine of
Insignificant Authoritys, his Common-place-Book. All this Show of Reading (and
God knows, it is but a Show) will be of no manner of weight with Discerning
Judges: the short Point between Him and Me is, as He himself acknowledges, how
our Own Constitution stands, and what are the Particulars Laws and Usages of
this Kingdom. By these I affirm, (and have proved) That the Convocation has a
Right not only to be Summoned, but to Meet with every New Parliament, and to be
opened in Due Form by Divine Service, and a Sermon: That the Clergy of the
Lower House, when thus met, have a Right of filling the Chair of it with a
Prolocutor, and of being put into a Condition of doing Business: That if they
have any Requests, any Motions to make, to my Lords the Bishops, the King, or
his Great Council, for the Good of Religion, or the Redress of
Church-Grievances, they have a Right to make them; to enter into what Debates,
and come to what Resolutions they shall think fit (within their Proper Sphere)
without being obliged to Qualify themselves for such Debates, or Resolutions by
a Royal License; which is necessary to no Synodical Act, previous to that of
Making, or Enacting a Canon: That in these Respects, and to these Purposes, the
Convocation is still a Parliamentary Body, and an Essential Part of our
Constituon; called both by the Clause in the Bishop's Summons, and by Writs
directed to the Archbishop of either Province; which Clause, and which Writs,
whenever a New Parliament is to meet, can no more by the Rules of our
Constitution be omitted, than the Writs for any of the Lords or Commons can: In
short, that the King has not only a Right of thus calling the Clergy to attend,
but the Clergy also have a Right of attending, and the Lords and Commons a
Right of being attended by them. This is the Doctrine briefly laid down in that
Letter, which first gave rise to this Debate; and in these Papers more fully
explained, and proved. If Dr. Wake can show, wherein any part of it disagrees
with the Laws and Usages of this Kingdom, let him do it: if he cannot (as I am
certain, he cannot) he is obliged by his Own Proposal to Submit, that is, to
own himself utterly mistaken throughout this Dispute, and publicly to retract
his Illegal and Slavish Opinions.

APPENDIX.
I.
EDvardus dei gratia Rex Angliae, See p. 20.
and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, Uenerabili in Christo Patri Radulfo,
eadem gratia, Bath. and Well. Episcopo salutem. Cum pridem in Parliamento
nostro apud Westminster. in quindena Paschae convocato, quaedam Legibus and
Consuetudinibus regni nostri Angliae express contratia, and Regiae Dignitati
nostrae nedum va^de prejudicialia, sed probrosa, fuissent nimis importune
petita; quae nisi per modum statuti tunc permisissemus consignari dictum
Parliamentum fuisset sine omni Expeditione in Discordia dissolutum: and sic
Guerrae nostrae Franciae and Scotiae quas de Consilio vestro, ut scitis,
principaliter assumpsimus, fuissent, quod absit, verisimiliter in ruina: and
Nos ad evitanda tanta pericula, praemissis protestationibus de revocando cum
possemus provide quae sic a nobis quasi invitis extorta fuerint, illa sigillo
nostro sigillari permiserimus ista vice, and postmodum ea de Consilio and
Assensu Comitum and Baronum ac aliorum Peritorum ex Causis Legitimis, quia
defecit Consensus noster, declaravimus esse nulla, nec nomen vel vim habere
debere statuti: Ac jam accepimus, quod Uenerabilis Pater Arch. Cant. unum
Concilium Provinciale in crastino Sti Lucae proxime futuro apud London
convocare mandavit, in quo Uos and caeteros Praelatos Cant. Prove. contra Nos
concitare, and aliqua nobis praejudicialia circa roboratinem dicti pretensi
statuti and in Enervationem, Depressionem, and Diminutionem Iurisdictionis,
Iurium, and Prerogativarum nostrarum regalium, nec non circa Processum inter
Nos and Praedictum Archiepiscopum super quibusdam ex part nostra eidem Archo
oppositis pendentem statuere, declarare, and super hi^s Censuras Graves
intenditis promulgare: Nos volentes tanto Prejudicio, ut convenit, obviare,
Uobis districte prohibemus, ne quicquam quod in Derogationem seu Diminutionem
Regiae Dignitatis, Potestatis, and jurium Coronae nostrorum, seu Legum, and
Consuetudinum dicti regni nostri, aut in Prejudictum Processus memorati, vel
etiam in roborationem dicti pretensi statuti, vel alias in contumeliam nostri
nominis and honoris, aut in gravamen vel dispendium Cons^liariorum vel
Obsequialium nostrorum cedere poterunt, in dicto Concilio vel alibi proponatis,
statuatis, aut aliqualiter attemptetis, aut attemptari faciatis. Scituri quod
si secus feceritis, ad Uos ut Inimicum nostrum, and nostrorum Uiolatorem
Iurium, gravius quo licite poterimus capiemus. Test Rege apud Westmonast. 1.
Oct. regni 15.

II. For Mr. Sanders Minister of the Gospel at Oxford.
Reverend Sir, Newbury June 7. 98.
I Had a Letter last week by the Direction of the Committee of Ministers and
Gentlemen, Sept. 26.
appointed at London for settling a Correspondence of the Protestant Dissenting
Ministers, and Congregations throughout this Kingdom for the advancement of the
Interest of Religion, and Reformation of Ministers, with the Articles there
agreed upon in order thereunto, and a desire to communicate them speedily to
the Brethren in these Parts, that, if possible, a General Meeting might be had
this Summer in London.

Pursuant hereunto it is desired that You would not fail to come your self, and
bring with you one prudent Person of your Congregation chosen for that End
(according to the Method resolved on in London) to meet several of the Brethren
and the Members of the Respective Congregations here at Newbury the 22 Instant,
to consider of the said Proposals, which shall be laid before you, and the
proper Method to obtain so desirable an End.

You are desired to be here on Tuesday in the Evening, that we may enter on our
Work on Wednesday Morning; resolving (God willing) to spend some time in
Prayer, before we begin.

I am, Sir, Your Affectionate Brother and Servant in the Lord, W. F.

III.
See p. 87.
1. ANd as concerning the requiring of your Highnesses Royal Assent to the
Authorizing of such Laws as have been by Our Predecessors, or shall be made by
Us in such Points and Articles, as we have by God Authority to rule and order
by Provisions and Laws: We knowing Your Highnesses Wisdom, Virtue, and
Learning, nothing doubt but the same perceives how the granting thereunto
depends not upon our Will and Liberty; and that We your most humble Subjects
may not submit the Execution of our Charges and Duty certainly prescribed by
God to Your Highnesses Assent, although in very deed, the same is most worthy
for Your most Princely and Excellent Virtues, not only to give your Royal
Assent, but also to Devise and Command what we should for good Order and Manner
provide in the Church. Nevertheless, considering we may not so in such sort
restrain the doing of our Office in the feeding and ruling Christ's People,
Your Graces Subjects, We most humbly desire your Grace, as as the same has
done heretofore, so from henceforth to show Your Graces Mind and Opinion to us,
what Your Highnesses Wisdom shall think Convenient; which We shall most gladly
hear and follow, if it shall please God to imspire us so to do: with all
submission and Humility beseeching the same, following the steps of Your most
Noble Progenitors, and conformable to Your own Acts, to maintain and defend
such Laws and Ordinances as We, according to our Calling, and by the Authority
of God, shall for his Honor make, to the Edification of Virtue, and Maintaining
Christ's Faith, whereof Your Highness is Defender in Name, and has been
hitherto in Deed a Special Protector.

Bibl. Cotton. Cleop. F. 1. fol. 96.

II. Forasmuch as the Answer lately made by Your Clergy unto Your Honorable
Commons, for their satisfaction in their Bill of Complaint put up unto Your
Highness, does not please nor satisfy Your Highness in some Points concerning
Your Own particular Interest, specially in that Point which concerns Laws,
either Now to be by Us made, or else Old, to be by Us reformed: for Your
Highnesses better Contentation in that behalf, We Your said most Humble
Chaplains, do now more especially answer unto those Points as follows.

1. As touching New Laws to be by us Hereafter made, we say, that the Laws and
Declarations of Christ's Holy Church, throughout all Christian Realms received
and used, been clear and manifest; that the Prelates of the same Church have a
special Jurisdiction and Judicial Power to Rule and Govern in Faith and Good
Manners, necessary to the Souls health, the Flocks unto their Care committed;
and that they have Authority to meet and ordain Rules and Laws tending to that
purpose: which Rules and Laws has and does take effect in binding all
Christian People as of theymself; so that before God, there needs not of
necessity any Temporal Power or Consent to concur with the same by the Way of
Authority.

Item, they say that this Power and Authority in making Laws in matters
concerning the Faith and Good Manners necessary to the Soul's health, all
Christian Princes has hitherto reckoned themselves bound to suffer the
Prelates to use within their Realms, and have not claimed of the same Prelates,
that they should from time to time require their Consent or License by the way
of Authority, more in making of such Laws, than they do claim, that they the
said Prelates should from time to time, require their Consents autorysable in
the giving of Holy Orders to any of their Subjects, or in the exercising any
other Spiritual Act depending upon their Spiritual Jurisdiction; the Authority
whereof immediately proceeds from God, and from no Power or Consent
Authorisable of any Secular Prince; except it be that Consent that is taken of
the Princes own submission to the Faith Catholic, made not only by their
Noble Progenitors, when they first admitted Christ's Faith, and the Laws of the
Holy Church within their Realms; but also by themselves, first Generally at
their Baptism, and after more specially and most Commonly by their Corporal
Oaths at their Coronation.

We say also, that this Power of making Laws aforesaid, is right well founded
in many Places of Holy Scripture, now so much the less necessary here to be
rehearsed, for as much as that matter is at large set out in a Book now by Us
put up unto Your Highness, and Your Highness your self in your Own Book most
excellently Written against M. Luther for the defense of the Catholic Faith
and Christ's Church, does not only knowledge and confess, but also with most
Vehement and Inexpugnable Reasons and Authoritys does defend the same: Which
Your Highnesses Book we reckon that of Your Honor You cannot, and of Your
Goodness You will not revoke.

Yet these Considerations notwithstanding, We your most humble Chaplains and
Bedesmen, considering Your High Wisdom, Great Learning, and Unfeigned Goodness
toward Us and the Church, and having special Trust in the same, and not
minding to fall into Contentions or Disputations with your Highness in any
Manner of Matter what we may do; We be contented to make Promise unto Your
Highness, That in all such Acts, Laws, and Ordinances as upon Your Lay
Subjects, We, by the reason of our Spiritual Jurisdiction and Judicial Power
shall hereafter make; we shall not Publish, nor put them forth, except first we
require Your Highness to give your Consent and Authority unto them; and so
shall from Time to Time suspend all such our Acts Ordinances and Laws hereafter
to be made, unto such Time as Your Highness by Your Consent and Authority shall
have authorized the same: except they be such as shall concern the maintenance
of the Faith and Good Manners in Christ's Church, and such as shall be for the
Reformation and Correction of sin, after the Commandments of Allmighty God,
according to such Laws of the Church, and laudable Customs as has been
heretofore made, and hitherto received and used within Your Realm. In which
Points our Trust is, and in most humble manner we desire Your Grace, that it
may so be, that upon the Refusal of Your Consent (which We [presume] that we
need not fear, but yet if any such thing should fall) Your Highness will be
then contented, we may exercise our Jurisdiction as far as it shall be thought
necessary unto us for the maintenance of Christ's Faith, and for the
Reformation of Sin, according to our Offices, and the Vocations that God has
called us unto.

As for the Second Part, concerning Laws that in Time past has been made by
us, or by our Predecessors, contrary to the Laws of this Your Realm, and to
your Prerogative, as it is pretended; to this Point We Your Highnesses most
humble Chaplains answer and say, that such our Laws by our Predecessors within
this Realm made, as contain any matter contrary to your Laws or Prerogative,
and be not now in use, and do not concern the Faith, nor Reformation of Sin,
when we shall be advertised of them, we shall right gladly in that part revoke
them, and declare them to be void, and of none effect. So that Your said right
Honorable Commons shall now dare execute Your Laws, without any Fear, or
Dread, or Danger of our said Laws, if any such there be.

Ibid. fol. 101.

III. First, as concerning such Constitutions and Ordinances Provincial, as be
to be made hereafter by Us your most humble Subjects B. Adds -- of the Clergy
of this your Realm.
, we having our Especial Trust and Confidence in your most high and excellent
Wisdom, your Princely Goodness, and Fervent B. Virtuous
Zeal to the Promotion of God's Honor, and Christ's Religion Wanting in B. from
the words, and especially, to, read of.
, and especially in Your incomparable Learning, far exceeding in our Judgment
the Learning of all other Kings and Princes that we have read of, and doubting
nothing but that the same shall still continue, and increase in your Majesty,
do offer and promise here unto the same, that from henceforth B. Adds -- During
Your Highnesses Natural Life (which we most heartily beseech God long to
preserve.)
we shall forbear to Enact, Promulge, or put in Execution any such Constitution
or Ordinance; so by Us to be made in time coming, unless Your Highness by Your
Royal Assent shall License us to B. adds, The contrary; and leaves out all from
thence to the word, Authority.
Make, Promulge, and Execute such Constitutions, and the same so made shall
approve by Your Highnesses Authority.

Second, Whereas Your Highnesses Honorable Commons do pretend B. Surmise.
, that diverse of the Constitutions Provincial which have been heretofore
Enacted, be not only much Prejudicial to Your Highnesses Prerogative Royal, but
also oovermuch Onerous to the said Commons, We Your most humble Subjects B.
Leaves out all with in this Parenthesis.
(for the Considerations aforesaid) be contented to refer and remit all and
singular the said Constitutions to Your Highnesses only Judgment and
Examination; and which soever of the same shall finally be found, thought, and
judged by Your Graces most Excellent Wisdom to be Prejudicial and overmuch
Onerous, as is pretended, we offer and promise your Highness to B. To abrogate,
annul, and declare the same to be taken as of no force and strength.
moderate, or utterly to abrogate, and annul the same, according to the
Judgment of Your Grace.

Saving to Us always all such [Immunitys and Libertys of the Church of England,
B. [ Constitutions Provincial, as be conformable and do stand with the Laws of
Almighty God, and of Holy Church, and be not repugnant to the Laws of the
Realm; with all such other Immunitys and Libertys of the Church of England, as
has been granted and confirmed to the same, either by General Councils, or
else by the Goodness and Benignity of your Highness, and other Your Noble
Progenitors. Providing also, that until Your Highnesses Pleasure herein shall
be further declared unto us, all manner of O^dinarys may execute their
Jurisdictions, according to the said Constitutions, in like manner and form as
they have used the same in Times passed.]
as has been granted to the same by the Goodness and Benignity of your
Highness and other Your Noble Progenitors; with all such Constitutions
Provincial as do stand with the Laws of Almighty God, and of your Realm,
heretofore made; which we most humbly beseech your Grace to ratify and approve
by Your Royal Assent, for the better Executing of the same in times to come
among Your Graces People.]

These Articles above Written be agreed in the Over-house, and the Lower House
is agreed to the same; so that in the first Article be added these words [ and
Holy Church] with a Proviso at the Latter End: and so the Articles, as they be
agreed by the Lower House, be of this Tenor following.

Then follows another Copy, with these Alterations inserted, as I have placed
them in the Margin. There is a Third Form also, [designed by the Letter B.]
that has both these, and some other Differences; which I have placed also in
the Margin.

They seem to be of Archbishop Cranmer's own Handwriting. The Copys I have
taken are, I hope, exact in every respect, but that of the Spelling; which I
have not always observed. There is a slight Difference also in a Word, or two;
which not being Material, is not taken notice of.

IV.
IN most humble wise complaining do show unto your Excellent Majesty Your poor
distressed Supplicants the Whole Clergy, See p. 109.
that some in the Lower House of Parliament have proposed often, and withal
Eagerness do promote diverse Bills against the -- and namely one entitled, a
Bill against Pluralitys: Which indeed impeacheth Your Majesty's Prerogative
Royal, impayreth the Revenue of the Crown, overthrows the Study of Divinity
in both Universitys, depriveth Men of the Living they do lawfully possess,
beggereth the Clergy, brings in a Base Unlearned Ministry, takes away all
hope of a Succession in Learning: will breed great Coffeehouse in the
Younger sort of Students, and make them fly to Other Seminarys, where they may
hope for more encouragement; will give the Adversary just Cause to rejoice and
triumph, when they shall see the Clergy and Learning generally so much
disgraced and vilify'd by the Gentry and Commons of this Land; abridgeth all
Ability, either of keeping Hospitality, or of contributing to the State in case
of necessity; and, that which is most lamentable, makes way to Anarchy and
Confusion.

Great are the Indignitys, the Injurys, the Absurditys of this Bill, if with
Religious Wisdom the Effects of it be truly considered; but as great is the
Hypocrisy of the same: for it does not Reform the things it pretends to
Redress; it permits them, and increases them rather. The only thing it does
principally intend is the Impoverishing and Imbasing the Clergy; whereupon will
ensue the utter Contempt, both of their Persons and their Doctrine. All which
we are ready (with Your Highnesses Favor and License) to justify before any
Competent Judge, if we be permitted an Indifferent Hearing. In the mean time,
and always, most humbly committing our Poor Estate to Your Majesty's most
Gracious and Princely Clemency, on which, next to the Goodness of Almighty God,
it does wholly depend; We do in all submission, both in respect of our Selves,
and especially in regard of our Successors, most instantly pray such speedy
Remedy in this behalf, as to Your most Excellent Wisdom, and wonted Godly Care
of Religion shall seem fit. And that the rather, because it would leave a
Perpetual Blemish upon the Time of Your Highnesses Government if there should
appear to be such an Hatred of the Clergy, and of Learning in this Land, as
that such an Act of Parliament should be now established.

Cleop. F. 2. fol. 255.

V.
WIth how great Hatred the Common sort of Men are inflamed against the
Ministers of the Church, See p. 109.
how watchful they are for the halting of their Leaders, and how narrowly they
sift every syllable of the Statute, by which Ecclesiastical Livings become
void, daily and continual Examples declare unto Us. If we compare the Charge of
Ecclesiastical Persons in these our days with the Immunitys they have
heretofore enjoyed, if it be considered with what cold Devotion all Tithes are
paid, if you set before your Eyes how hard it is to wring a Free Presentation
from a Lay-patron; if it be remembered, how much every Rectory wants of that
it has been worth heretofore, by reason of the taking of Offertorys, laying
down of Tillage, and nonpayment of Tithes Personal; it will appear that a
Benefice of Twenty Pounds in the Queen's Books will now more hardly sustain the
Incumbent, than heretofore a Benefice of Ten Pounds. Wherefore seeing the great
Charge of Ecclesiastical Persons must needs increase, in regard of the Malice
of the Foreign Enemy, and the Charity of Men toward our Calling is like to
decrease; as also, for that unto many poor honest Ministers the Encombrance
growing by pretended Lapses, grounded for the most part upon false surmises,
has been more hurtful than all their Payments to her most Excellent Majesty;
May it please this Honorable Synod, that the Reverend Fathers and Lords, which
present the Free and Voluntary subsidy of the Clergy to her Highness, may be
humble suitors to her Gracious Clemency in the behalf of her Majestys most
Faithful Subjects, the Clergy of England and Wales, that her Highnesses free
pardon may extend it self to the forgiving of all Lapses and Irregularitys of
her Clergy whatsoever; except only in case of High, and Petty Treason, Willful
Murder and Felony, and other Enormous Faults: and Her Majestys most faithful
Subjects, the Ministers of the Word of God shall continually pray unto God for
Her Majestys Long, Gracious and Prosperous Reign.

Ibid. fol. 123.

This seems to be a Petition of the Lower Clergy out of Convocation, to the
Convocation it self. However in that Manuscript (p. 264.) I find a Memorandum
of it, as of a Petition presented by the Lower to the Upper House of
Convocation.

VI. 1606. Petition of the Lower House of Convocation to His Majesty, against
Prohibitions.
See p. 110.
MOst humbly beseechen your most Excellent Majesty, your most Faithful Subjects,
the Clergy of the Lower House of Convocation, for Themselves, and the rest of
their Brethren in the Ministry; That whereas they have been very much of late
Years defrauded of their Tithes, and debarred from obtaining their Right due
unto them by Your Excellent Laws of this Church, through Prohibitions procured
by Those which wrong them, out of Your Majesty's Temporal Courts, to your
supplyants great Hindrance, Molestation, and utter Impoverishing in time, if
Remedy be not provided; besides the stopping of Justice, occasion of Perjury,
and further Wrong, and overthrow of your Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as though
it were an unjust Usurpation of Foreign Power, against Your Majesty and Crown,
and not the due Execution of Your Majestys own Rightful Power and Just
Jurisdiction in Causes Ecclesiastical: It may please Your most Excellent
Majesty, upon due notice given, and in tender Consideration of our Grievances
herein, to take some speedy Order for the Help and Relief of the same, in such
manner as to your Highnesses Wisdom, Piety, and Clemency shall seem just, fit,
and convenient.

And Your Majestys supplyants shall ever more (as they are bound) with all due
thankfulness pray unto God for Your Majesty's Long and Happy Life, and
Prosperous Reign.

Ibid. fol. 364.

VII.
REx venerabili in Christo Patri J. eadem gratia Cant. Archiepiscopo totius
Angliae Primati, See p. 221.
Sal. Quia Lewelinus filius Griffini, and Wallenses Accomplices sui, Inimici and
Rebels nostri, totiens temporibus nostris and Progenitorum nostrorum Regum
Angliae pacem regni turbarunt, and rebellionem suam and maliciam jam resumptam
continuare non desinunt animo indurato; propter quod, negotium quod incepimus
de Consilio Praelatorum, Procerum and Magnatum regni nostri, nec non and totius
Communitatis ejusdem, ad praesens proponimus, ad nostram and tocius regni pacem
and tranquillitatem perpetuam, Domino concedente, finaliter terminare:
Commodius etiam and decentius esse perpendimus, quod nos and Incolae terrae
nostrae ad ipsius Maliciam totaliter destruendam pro communi utilitate
laboribus and expensis fatigemur hac vice, licet onus difficile videatur, quam
hujusmodi turbatione per Wallenses ipsos nunc habita pro voluntate sua futuris
temporibus cruciari, prout tempore nostro and Progenitorum nostrorum contigit
manifest: Vobis mandamus rogantes, quatenus Suffrageneos vestros, and Abbates,
Priores, ac alios singulos domibus Religiosis praefectos, nec non and
Procuratores Decanorum and Capitulorum Ecclesiarum Collegiatarum vestrae and
Suffraganeorum vestrorum Diocesium venire faciatis coram nobis apud Northampton
in Octabis Sti Hilarii, vel coram Fidelibus nostris quos ad hoc duximus
deputandos: and Vos iisdem die and loco intersitis, ad audiendum and faciendum
ea quae pro republica Vobis and Eis super hiis ostendi faciemus, and ad
praestandum nobis consilium and juvamen, praesertim cum vestra sicut aliorum
intersit, per quod Negotium jam incaeptum ad laudem and honorem dei, and
magnificentiam nostram, sane ac tocius regni nostri and populi pacem and
tranquillitatem perpetuam valeamus hac vice, ut intendimus, feliciter
consummare, T. Meipso apud Rothelan Nov. 22. regni 11.

Rot. Walliae. 11 E. I. m. 4. dors. see Pryn T. 3. Eccl. Jurisd. p. 301.

VIII.
See p. 222.
REx Venerabilibus in Christo Patribus, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus,
Capitulis Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, and Collegiatarum de Provincia Eborum, and
eorum Procuratoribus, ac toti Communitati Cleri Provinciae ejusdem, Militibus,
Liberis Hominibus, Communitatibus, and omnibus aliis de singulis Comitatibus
ultra Trentam apud Eborum in instantibus Octabis Sti Hilarii conventuris Sal.
Cum nos occasion praesentis nostrae Expedicionis nostrae Walliae ad maliciam
and rebellionem Wallensium Inimicorum nostrorum reprimendam, and ad perpetuam
pacem regni nostri faciendam, ad quam toto cord intendimus, subsidio fidelium
nostrorum regni nostri opus habeamus ad praesens: Nos de benevolentia
venerabilis patris W. Eborum Archiepiscopi, Angliae Primatis, and de
circumspectione dilecti Clerici and Secretarii nostri Antonii Beke,
Archidiaconi Dunelmensis fiduciam gerentes specialem eisdem Archiepiscopo and
Antonio tenore praesentium plenam damus potestatem petendi and procurandi
nomine nostro, juxta formam per nos eis inde traditam and injunctam subsidium
ad Opus nostrum a Fidelibus nostris singulorum Episcopatuum and Comitatuum
regni nostri ultra Trentam. Et ideo vobis mandamus rogantes* quod iisdem
Archiepiscopo and Antonio in hac part firmam fidem adhibentes ea quae circa
praemissa vobis dicent, modis omnibus expleatis pro^t ipsi vobis scire facient
ex part nostra in cujus, etc. T. Rege apud Rothelan 1o die Jan.

Ibid. p. 302.

REx venerabili in Christo Patri R. Dunelmensi Episcopo, and Abbatibus,
Prioribus, Decanis, Capitulis infra Episcopatum Dunelmensem consistentibus, ac
Militibus, Liberis Hominibus, Communitatibus Burgorum and Villarum ejusdem
Episcopatus Sal. Cum nos occasion, etc. [ut prius] opus habeamus ad praesens.
Nos de fidelitate and industria dilectorum and fidelium nostrorum Thomae de
Mandevill, and Magistri Henrici de Newerk, Archidiaconi Richmund fiduciam
gerentes specialem, eisdem Thomae and Henrico tenore praesentium damus
potestatem petendi and recipiendi nomine nostro subsidium ad opus nostrum tam a
Clero quam a populo Episcopatus praedicti in forma per nos sibi tradita and
injuncta. Et ideo vobis mandamus rogantes, quod eisdem Thomae and Henrico in
hac part firmam fidem adhibeatis, and ea expleatis quae vobis dicent de
praemissis, prout ipsi vobis scire facient ex part nostra. Et hoc, sicut de
benevolentia [nostra] confiditis, nullatenus omittatis. In cujus, etc. T. Rege
apud Rothelan 6. Ian.

Ibid. p. 303.

IX.
See p. 222.
FRater J. etc. Venli. in Christo Patri -- Episcopo London sal. Literas Domini
Regis recepimus in haec Verba [ and then the Writ is recited as before P. 476.
]. Quia igitur Regiae Majestati tenemur, quatenus secundum Deum passimus,
obedire, quamvis Viarum and Temporum and aliorum Gravaminum multiplex
Importunitas videatur huic negotio plurimum adversari, Vobis, hiis non
obstantibus, dolentes and inviti in virtute obedientiae mandamus, quatenus in
forma mandati Regii ad praefixos diem and locum venire curetis; citantes
nihilominus ad hoc ipsum Abbates, Priores, and alios singulis Domibus
Religiosis Praefectos, Exemptos quidem in locis non exemptis, sitali^ loca
habeant, vel si non habeant, per aliam viam efficacem, and eodem modo Decanos
and Capitula non Exempt. pariter and Exempt. vestrae Dioceseos, ut dictis die
and loco compareant ob reverentiam Regiae Majestatis de expedientibus
Reipublicae tractaturi. Citetis insuper omnes Suffraganeos ad hoc ipsum -- quod
personis Episcoporum eo debet esse facilius quod, ut speramus firmiter, circa
id tempus Electus Heref. poterit in eorum praesentia facile altissimo
consecrari. Dat. Heref. 4. Id. Dec. 1282. Ord. nostrae 4t^

Registrum Peckam, fol. 82.

Episcopo Land. ad citandum totum Clerum. Dat. Northampt. 12. Call. Feb. 1282.
QUoniam in Congregatione -- apud Northampt. habita coram Nuntiis Domini Regis
-- tum propter absentiam maximae partis Cleri tunc temporis modo debito non
vocati, See p. 222. This is not all the Mandate, but the Substance only of it.
tum propter alia diversa non potuit ad plenum responderi, de Communi omnium
tum praesentium consensu extitit ordinatum, quod Clerus Totus Cant. Provinciae
ad certos diem and locum pro danda responsione hujusmodi congregetur. Quocirca
Fraternitati vestrae -- quatenus Confratres nostros -- nec non Abbates,
Priores, ac alios quoscunque Praefectos -- Exemptos and non Exemptos, Decanos
Ecclesiarum Cathedralium ac Collegiorum ac Archidiaconos universos -- quod
conveniant apud Novum Templum Land. -- Singuli etiam Episcopi, sicut provisum
fuerat -- Clerum suae Dioceseos congregari faciant, and eidem quae ex part
Regis nobis proposita fuerant diligenter exponi procurent, ita quod ad dictos
diem and locum -- de qualibet Diocesi duo Procuratores, and de singulis
Capitulis Ecclesiar. Cathedralium and Collegiatar. singuli Procuratores
sufficienter instructi mittantur, qui plenam and expressam Potestatem habeant
-- tractandi and consentiendi hiis quae ibidem ad honorem Ecclesiae,
consolationem Domini Regis, and Pacem Regni, Cleri Communitas providebit.

Ibid. fol. 83.

X.
See p. 224.
REx Custodi Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Cant. sede Vacant, Sal. Qualiter
Rex Franciae nos de Terra nostra Vasconiae maliciose decepit and inde
fraudulenter ejecit, eam nequiter detinendo, Vos credimus non latere. Cum
igitur ad Terram illam recuperandam de manibus dicti Regis vestrum Consilium
and Auxilium, sicut and Praelatorum ac Cleri de regno nostro, quos communiter
Negotium istud tangit, nobis quam plurimum prospeximus profutura: ob quod apud
Westmr. in festo Sti Matthaei Apostoli and Evangelistae proxime futuro
personaliter esse disposuimus, d^o dante, ad Tractandum una Vobiscum and
Praelatis ac Clero ejusdem regni, and ad Ordinandum tunc ibidem super statu
dictae terrae nostrae Vasconiae and Remedio in hoc contra hujusmodi maliciam
adhibendo: Vobis mandamus in fide and dilectione in quibus Nobis tenemini
firmiter injungentes, quod dictis die and loco personaliter intersitis;
Vocantes prius Archidiaconum totumque Clerum dictae Dioceseos, facientesque
quod idem Archidiaconus in propria persona sua, dictusque Clerus perduos
Procuratores idoneos, plenam and sufficientem potestatem ab ipso Clero habentes
una Vo^iscum intersint modi^ omnibus tunc ibidem ad tractandum, o^dinandum, and
faciendum, pro ipso Clero, ac ejusdem nomine quod de Vestro, Praelatorum,
Archidiaconi, Procuratorumque praedictorum communi Consilio provide^itur in
praemissis. Test meipso apud Portesmu^h 19. die Aug. regni 22.

XI. Procuratorial Powers from the Inferior Clergy to the Parliament.
1295. See p. 228.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint H.
permissione Divina Prior and Capitulum Ecclesiae Christi Cant. Sal. in Domino
sempiternam. Noverit Universitas vestra quod nos facimus, Constituimus, and
Ordinamus dilectos nobis in Christo fratres G. de Chyleham and R. de Clyve
Commonachos nostros veros and legitimos Procuratores nostros conjunctim ac
divisim, dantes eisdem and eorum alteri potestatem tractandi, ordinandi and
faciendi cum Praelatis and Proceribus and aliis Regni Angliae Incolis in
instanti Parliamento domini E. Regis Angliae illustris, die Dominica proxime
post festum Sti Andreae Apostoli proxime futurum apud Westmr. qualiter sit
dicti Domini Regis and Regni sui ac etiam totius Communitatis ejusdem,
periculis and maliciis excogitatis, quatenus est licitum, salubrius obviandum.
Ratum habituri quicquid per praedictos Procuratores nostros, seu alterum
ipsorum tractatum, ordinatum, seu factum fuerit in praemissis. Dat. in Capitulo
X. Kal. Dec.

Reg. Henr. Prior f. 67.

1296. OMnibus, etc. [ut prius] potestatem ordinandi una cum Praelatis and
Procuratoribus Cleri totius Prove. Cant. in instanti Parliamento Domini E. Regis
Angliae illustris in crastino Animarum apud S. Edmundum, de quantitate and modo
subsidit eidem Domino Regi, quatenus est licitum, pro defensione regni ejusdem
praestandi; Ratum habituri quicquid per praedictos Procuratores nostros seu
alterum ipsorum ordinatum fuerit in praemissis.

Dat in Capitulo nostro 14. Kal. Nov. A. D. 1296. Ibid. fol. 69. ( b)

1304. Universis praesentes Literas visuris vel audituris Henr. permissione
divina Prior Eccl. Christi Cant. and ejusdem Loci Capitulum Sal. in Dom o
sempiternam. Noveritis quod nos constituimus, facimus, and ordinamus dilectum
nobis in Christo fratrem Joh. de Thaneto Commonachum and Praecentorem nostrum,
verum and legitimum Procuratorem nostrum ad faciendum and consentiendum his
quae in instanti Parliamento Domini Regis, Dominica prox. post festum S.
Matthiae Apostoli de communi Consilio favente Deo contigerit ordinari, vel
etiam pro communi Utilitate Regni Angliae provideri, ulteriusque faciendum una
cum Praelatis and Clero in dicto Parliamento quod permittunt sacrorum Canonum
Instituta. In cujus rei Testimonium praesenti scripto sigillum nostrum commune
duximus apponendum. Dat. in Caplo nostro 4. Kal. Mart. A. D. 1304. Ib. fol.
103. (a)

1307. Universis pateat per praesentes quod Nos Henr. etc. and ejusdem Loci
Capitulum, etc. Procuratores nostros conjunctim and divisim ad faciend. and
consentiend. hiis quae in instanti Parliamento apud Nor^hampton prox. tenendo
de communi Concilio Praelatorum Cleri and Magnatum Regni Angliae tam super
Humatione corporis celebris memoriae Domini Edi quondam Regis Angliae nuper
defuncti, quam super solennitate Sponsalium and Coronationis Domini Edvardi dei
gratia nunc regis Angliae auctore domino celebranda, aliisque negotiis statum
dicti regni contingentibus favente deo contigerit ordinari: Ratum habituri and
Gratum quicquid per eosdem Procuratores nostros, vel alterum ipsorum actum
fuerit in praemissis. Dat. 3. Oct. 1307. Ibid. fol. 108.

1309. Iidem constituunt, 2. Commonachos conj. and div. ad faciend. and
consentiend. hiis quae in instanti Parliamento a die Paschae prox. praeterito
in unum mensem de Communi Consilio favente domino contigerit ordinari super
hiis quae Honorem Dei and Ecclesiae Anglicanae, ac etiam statum Domini nostri
Regis Angliae illustris, and regni ejusdem contingunt. Dat. 25. Apr. 1309.
Ibid. fol. 112. (a)

1311. Noverint Universi, etc. quod Nos Henr. etc. and Capitulum --
constituimus -- Procuratorem nostrum ad comparendum die Iovis 4to Non. Dec.
^rox. futur. in instanti Parliamento apud Westminster tenendo, and ad
consentiendum hiis quae ^^ eodem de Communi Assensu Praelatorum and Cleri
ordinabuntur and statuentur, ad honorem Dei ^ Ecclesiae suae sanctae ac
Utilitatem Domini ^egis and Regni sui. Dantes eidem Procuratori ^ostro
potestatem substituendi loco suo alium Pro^ratorem ad praemissa quotiescunque
sibi viderit ^pedire. Ratum habituri quicquid per eundem ^rocuratorem nostrum,
vel substitu^um ab eodem ^^um fuerit in praemissis. Dat. 4. Kal. Dec. 11. Ib.
fol. 118. (b)

1314. -- Ad comparend. nomine nostro apud Ebor -- coram venerabili patre
domino W. d. g. Cant. Archp o. and ad faciend' and consentiend' hiis quae ad
animarum salutem ac Utilitatem Ecclesiae and Reipublicae de Communi Concilio
praefati venerabilis Patris nostri, and alior' Praelator' ac totius Cleri Prove.
Cant. favente domino tunc contigerit ordinari. Dantes eidem potestatem alium
Procuratorem loco suo substituendi, etc. Dat. 16. Kal^ Sep. 1314. Ib. fol. 161.
(a)

[ It answers the Writ of Summons in Dugd. p. 97.]

1318. Ad comparend. nomine nostro in Parlia^mento Ebor -- and ad consentiend.
hiis quae tun^ ibidem de communi Consilio Praelatorum, Mag^natum, Procerum, and
Cleri Prove. Cant. savent^ Dom o contigerit ordinari -- and ad substituendum
etc. Dat. 8. Oct. f. 199. (a)

1319. Iidem constituunt Procuratores suos con^ ac div. ad Parliamentum apud
Ebor a die Pasch^ in unum mensem tenend. Ib. fol. 203.

1321. Iidem constituunt Procuratorem suu^ in Parliamento apud Westminst. a die
Nativitat^ beati Joh. Bapt. ad tres Septimanas celebrando^ ad faciend. and
consentiend. hiis, quoe de comm^^ni consilio and assensu ven. patris Domini W.
Pra^^latorum, Magnatum, Procerum and Cleri Pro^ Cant. -- concorditer contigerit
ordinari. Dat. Id. Iul. Ibid. fol. 224.

1322. Iidem constituunt Procuratores sues Parliamento apud Ebor. a die Paschae
in tres (...) timanas tenendo. Dat. 25. Apr. 1322. Ibid. fol. 227.

1323. Nos Capitulum Eccl. Lincoln -- constituimus J. de Harington Concanonicum
nostrum, verum and legitimum Procuratorem ad comparend pro nobis in Parliamento
die Purif. beatae Mariae Virg. ( to which day the Parliament was prorogued
Dugd. p. 126.) Registr. penes Dec. and Cap. Linc. ab A o. 1321. ad 1329.

132^/4. Prior and Capit. Cant. constituunt Procuratorem suum in instanti
Parliamento [a die Purif. b. Mariae Virg. in 3. Sept. tenendo] ad tractandum
cum venerab. Patre -- and cum caeteris Praelatis and Clero super urgentibus
Eccl. Angl. atque regni negotiis in Parliamento praedicto, nec non ad
consentiend hiis omnibus quae ad honorem Dei and Ecclesiae suae sanctae ac
Utilitatem totius reipublicae -- divina disponente gratia ibidem contigerit
ordinari. Dat. X. Kal. Mart. 1323. Reg. Henr. Pr. f. 236.

1325. Iidem constituunt Procuratores suos in Parliamento apud Westmr. in
Octabis S. Mart. ad tractand', and ordinand' una cum venli. Patre, etc. and
iisdem nomine nostro consentiend' prout Utilitati Ecclae. and Animarum Saluti
Visum fuerit expedire. Dat. 16. Nov. Ibid. f. 146.

1330. Capitulum Wellense mittit unum, item Bathoniense alterum Procuratorem ad
Parliamentum apud Wynton Die Dominica prox ante fest. Sti. Greg. ( 4 E. 3.)

Registr. Rad. de Salop. Episc. B. and W.

1334. Prior and Capit. constituunt Procuratores suos -- ad comparend -- in
Eccl. S. Pauli -- die Lunae post festum Exaltationis S. Crucis -- super Arduis
-- in Parliamento apvd Westmr. dicto Die and Loco tenendo diffusius
pertractandis, nec non ad consentiend. -- Facimus etiam and constituimus dictos
Fratres procurr. ad comparend -- post festum Sti. Matthew. -- coram Ven. Pre --
in Eccl. S. Pauli. Dat. Sept. 1334.

Titulatur -- Litera de Parliamento and Congregatione. --

Registr. Oxinden. f. 32.

1335. Procuratorium eorundem ad Parliamentum apud Westmr. and Congreg. Cleri
in Eccl. Sti. Pauli Land. Dat. Feb. 1335. Ibid. p. 38.

1337. Procuratorium eorundem ad comparend pro nobis and nomine nostro in
Parliamento 5 Kal. Feb. 1337. Ib. f. 80 (b)

1350. G. de Welton, and H. de Ingelby Electi Procuratores Capituli Ebor. in
Parliamento. R^gistr. penes Dec. and Cap. Ebor. f. 74.

1397. Procuratorium Decani and Capituli Ebor. pro Parliamento tenendo apud
Westmr. die L^nae prox post festum Exalt. St^ Crucis. Dat. 27. Aug. 1327.

Registr. penes Dec. and Cap. (nota^. Q.) ab A o. 1390 ad 1410.

1425. Pateat Universis per praesentes quod no^ Edmundus permissione div. Prior
Eccl. Cath. Elyens. and ejusdem Loci Capitulum, ad comparendum pro nobis and
nomine nostro in instanti Parliamento Domini Nostri Regis Hen. VI. apud Westmr.
in crastino S^i Martini prox. futuro per Ipsum Dom. Reg. and Consiliuum suum
celebran^^ Dilectos nobis in Christo Venerabiles Viros, Magistros, etc. nostros
veros and legitimos ordinamus and constituimus Procuratores, and Nuncios
Speciales; dantes and concedentes eisdem Procuratoribus nostris and eorum
cuilibet Potestatem Generalem and Mandatum speciale pro nobis and nomine nostro
in omnibus and singulis quae per dom. nostrum Regem and Consilium suum, ac
caeteros Proelatos, Magnates, and Proceres dicti regni sui ad Utilitatem and
Defensionem. regni Angliae and Eccl. Anglicanae in dicto Parliamento tractari
and ordinari contigerit consentiendi, ac omnia alia and singula faciendi and
expediendi quae per Procuratores expediri poterint. Ratum and firmum habituri
quicquid iidem, etc. Dat. 8. Oct. 3. H. 6.

Registr. Eccl. Elyens. f. 145.

Iidem iterum constiuunt Procurr. suos -- ad comparend' pro nobis in instanti
Parliamento -- apud Westminster. ult. die Apr. prox. fut. Dat. 24. Apr. 3. H VI. Ibid.

1503. Universis Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filiis ad quos praesentes Literae
pervenerint, Thomas Permissione, Divina Prior -- and Capitulum salutem in
Domino. Noverit Universitas vestra nos ordinasse dilm. nobis in Christo Fratrem
Joh. Menys Commonachum nostrum verum and legitimum Procuratorem, Negotiorum
gestorem, and Nuntium Specialem, ad comparend' pro nobis and nomine nostro
coram Custode spiritualitatis Archiepiscopali sede Vacant 26. Jan. apud
Westmr. ubi and quando metuendissimus in Christo Princeps and Doms. noster
Henr. d. g. R. Aae. and Fr. and Doms. Hibern. de Avisamento and Consensu
Concilii sui pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotii^ statum Publicum and
Commune Bonum Regni Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus quoddam
Parliamentum suum teneri statuerit, ordinaverit, and decreverit; and ibidem cum
Praelatis and Clero, Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti regni sui Colloquium
habere and Tractatum; prout per Literas dicti metuendissimi Principis nobis
transmissis liquet manifest. Damusque and concedimus eidem Procuratori nostro
Potestatem generalem and Mandatum Generale cum dicto Spiritualitatis Custode
caeterisque Ecclesiasticis Viris, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, and aliis
inibi convenientibus, de and super hujusmodi Arduis and urgentibus Negotiis
Ecclesiam Anglicanam and Clerum ejusdem, ac praefatum metuendissimum Regem
nostrum and Regnum suum Angliae concernentibus seriosius exponendi, tractandi,
and hiis quae ex deliberatione communi ad honorem Dei, Utilitatem Ecclesiae,
Regis, and Regni sui praedicti and totius Rei publicae concorditer and Canonice
ordinari contigerit consentiendi, ac omnia and singula faciendi, exercendi and
expediendi in praemissis. Dat. 21. Jan. 1503.

XII
See p. 229. Ryley Pl. Parl. p. 321
MEmorandum quod Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, Decani, Archidiaconi. [cum Clero]
and Capitula diversarum Diocesium subscripta miserunt ad Parliamentum Regis E.
apud Karliolum in Octabis S. Hilarii ann, etc. XXXV. Procuratores suos inferius
nominatos, ad tractand' cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, and aliis Proceribus regni
dicti Regis super Negociis pro quibus dictum Parliamentum summonitum fuit, and
ad consentiend' hiis quae in eodem Parliamento super negotiis illis contigerit
ordinari, viz.

Tho. Episc Exon misit, etc. Henr. de Pynke^ee Rectorem Ecclae. de Honyton.

D. Episc. Menev. misit, etc. Mag. Joh. Bussh Canonicum in Eccl. Menev. and
Warinum Martyn Militem.

Gervasius Archidiac. Cicestr. misit, etc. Nich. de Dynnesleye Vicarium in
Eccl. de Boseham.

Superior It should be Supprior; which is a mistake that runs through the Printed
Record
and Conventus Roffens. Miserunt, etc. Robertum Rectorem Ecclae. de Hoo.

Capitulum Elyense misit, etc. Mag. Ric. de Dene Clericum.

Abbas de Cumba non misit Procuratorem, sed promittit per Literas suas Patentes
se ratum and gratum habiturum quicquid in dicto Parliamento Rex decreverit
salubriter ordinandum.

Abbas de S. Radegund juxta Devorr. promittit per Literas Patentes quod ipse
ratum habebit quicquid indicto Parliamento, etc.

Clerus Dioc. Lincoln misit, etc. 2. Rectores.

Clerus Archidiac. Cicestr. misit Nich. de Dynnislee Vicarium ^ut prius].

Clerus Archid. Surr. misit Mag. Rich. de Barton, and Hug. de Tychewell
Clericos.

Clerus London Dioces. misit, etc. Magistr. Will. de Melford, and Rog de
Arewold Capellanos.

Joh. de Wakerle Clericus, Procurator Cleri Archidiac. Surr. habens Potestatem
alium Procuratorem substituendi, substituit Loco sui Joh. de Bray Clericum,
etc. etc.

XIII. Part of the King's Writ to the Archbishop 7 E. II.
***ET quia Vos, See p. 230.
and caeteri Prelati, ac Clerus de regno nostro in tam arduis Nos and Statum
Ecclesiae Sacrae and Coronae nostrae tangentibus, non solum Consiliis nobis
tenemini assistere, sed etiam debetis extendere Manus Adjutrices, Auxilia
Opportuna faciendo: Vobis mandamus rogantes quatenus aliis praetermissis sitis
in propria persona vestra apud Westmr. in Crast. Ascens. Dom. prox. futur..
Coram Fidelibus nostris ad hoc Deputandis, ad tractand. cum eisdem super
competenti Auxilio a Clero Prove. vestrae Cant. nobis impendendo ex causis
praedictis pro Utilitate Reipublicae and statu Ecclesiae sanctae relevand. a
servitute praedicta, prout in proximo Parliamento nostro apud Westmr. habito
tam per Clerum quam per Communitatem Regni nostri extitit concordatum; and
prout per praedictos Fidelos nostros ex part nostra eritis requisiti. Et ad
eundem diem Venire faciatis coram dictis Fidelibus nostris Suffraganeos
vestros, Decanos, Priores Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, Archidiaconos, Abbates Ex.
and non Ex. Prove. vestrae in propriis personis suis, Capitula etiam singula
dictarum Eccl. Cath. per singulares Procuratores, and Clerum cujuscunque Dioc.
per duos Procurr. sufficientes, ad tractand' and consentiend' und Vobiscum hiis
quae in praemissis ibidem contigerit ordinari. Et hoc sicut Nos and Honorem
nostrum and vestrum, and Utilitatem Reipublicae, and Relevationem Eccl. Sacrae
ab hujusmodi servitute diligitis, modis omnibus faciatis. T. Rege apud Westmr.
27. Martii.

XIV.
See p. 231:
VEstrae Paternitati, Reverende Domine D. G. Cant. Archp. totius Aae. Primas,
Abbates, Priores, Ecclesiar. Cathedralium Decani, Archidiaconi, Capitulorum and
Cleri Cant. Prove. Procuratores, in instanti congregatione apud [ ] praesentes,
Petitiones and Supplicationes porrigunt infra scriptas.

Imprimis cum in Eccl. Cant. tota Eccl. Angl. libera sit and fuit, ac tali
hactenus gavisa sit Liberate, quod Clerus ejusdem Provinciae, ut Regni,
Authoritate Regia convocari non consuevisset, nec debuisset de Iure, Praesens
tamen Citatio, cujus obtentu Clerus vocari dicitur supradictus, Domini Regis
Mandatum [continet] prout ex forma ejusdem Citationis, in qua breve Regium
totaliter est insertum, evidenter apparet. Quod quidem ad subversionem
Ecclesiasticae Libertatis tendere dinoscitur manifest.

Item cum tempore Sanctae and Felicis Memoriae D o. Robti. nuper Archiep.
habito quondam in Concilio Provinciali super eodem Articulo cum Episcopis suis
suffraganeis and Clero Tractatu diligenti, visum fuisset Mandatum hujusmodi
Regium ad laesionem Libertatis Ecclesiasticae cedere manifestam, de concessu
Fratrum and totius Cleri extitit declaratum consensum, and concorditer
ordinatum quod obtentu mandatorum hujusmodi ad Convocationem Cleri nullatenus
esset procedendum; praesertim cum temporibus dominorum Archiepiscopor quorum
memoria nunc existit, id factum non fuit informa qua nunc scribitur, vel aliquo
tempore observatum.

Item cum in Eodem Mandato Regio contineatur express quod Vos Venire faciatis
Praelatos and Clerum ad faciend. prout in eodem continetur; tantum ac tale
Praejudicium ex hoc vestrae Ecclesia possit verisimiliter imminere, quod si
eidem pareatur in praesenti, quoties domino Regi placuerit, possit Vobis
Ecclesiae Cant. presidentibus consimilia mandata dirigere, praetendens ex
scripto praesenti se esse in possessione praecipiendi and mandandi; and nisi
Executio juxta Mandatum Regium sequeretur, non parents gravius puniret; prout
in Brevi Venire Facias contra singulares Personas impetrato aliquotiens dicitur
esse factum.

Item cum non liceat Metropolitano cuicunque subditos suorum suffraganeorum
extra Territoria sua nisi in casibus certis, de quibus ad praesens non existit
-- trahere, vel aliqualem Iurisdictionem in eos exercere Mandatum hujusmodi, si
eidem pareatur, in enormem Iurisdictionis suffraganeorum cedere possit futuris
temporibus laesionem, and gravamen subditorum.

Item cum Laici Iudices, Auditores, seu Cognitores Causarum vel Personarum
Ecclesiasticarum esse non poterint ullo Casu, praedictum Mandatum, quo tam Vos
quam suffraganei, and caeteri Praelati and Clerus vocari mandatur ad comparend.
coram Fidelibus Domini Regis nulla Ecclesiastica Authoritate fulcitis (prout in
eodem mandato continetur, and ex lectis ac recitatis public coram vobis
apparet manifest) nedum Periculosum factum, sed and Ecclesiasticae Libertati
contrarium, ac futuris temporibus perniciosum trahi possit in exemplum.

Item cum Negotium de quo agitur omnes Personas Ecclesiasticas Cant. Prove.
Possessiones habentes contingat, ac Priores Electivi per se Monasteria sua
Gubernantes, and Conventus Abbatum and Priorum, quorum etiam Negotium aeque
agitur sicut nostrunt, citari non mandantur; and ipsis non vocatis, licet
fortassis diceretur ab aliquo in caeteris rite processum, ad tractandum tamen
and caetera facienda quae in dicto mandato continentur procedi non potest, ut
decet, ne Unitas Ecclesiae in suis Ministris Divisionem patiatur; praesertim
cum Abbates hujusmodi vocari omissis suis Conventibus, and sine Consensu
eorundem ipsorum Conventuum non possint.

Item cum in jure caveatur, quod Clerus ad subventionem quae petitur, nisi cum
quadam Iuris Observantia minime teneatur, sicut in sacris Canonibus est
contentum; praedictam subventionem, quae tanquam ex debito fieri petitur,
facere non valemus absque Libertatis Ecclesiasticae laesione and Sacrarum
Constitutionum manifesta Offensa, quamquam in casu aliquo hiis praetermissis
licite procedi aliqualiter potuisset.

Supplicant igitur devoti vestri -- Abbates -- Priores and caeteri infrascripti
vestrae Paternitati reverendae, humiliter and cum omni reverentia petentes,
quatenus consideratis and ponderatis praemissis omnibus and singulis periculis
quae ex hoc facto Libertati Ecclesiasticae imminere noscuntur, tam pro Iure
Ecclesiae Vestrae Cant. quam totius Ecclesiae* Anglicanae, and pro evitandis
hujusmodi periculis in futurum revocationem Brevis Regii impetrare, and hujus
revocatione habita praedictam Citationem tam periculosam and Ecclesiasticae
Libertati plurimum derogantem ex paterna provisione dignetur -- Paternitas
vestra Reverenda. Vosque, Patres Reverendi, praedictae Ecclesiae Cant.
Suffraganei, pro conservatione Libertatis, sicut tenemini, apud Patrem
praedictum una nobiscum instare velitis, si placet, ut Petitionem nostram, tam
licitam, tam rectam tamque honestam exaudire dignetur: pro firmo tenentes quod
absque Libertatis Ecclesiasticae laesione evidenti, vel potius subversione
ejusd^m praemissa subsistere non possunt absque remedio competenti.

The Cotton-Copy, from whence I took this, is very faulty, and I was forced to
supply it in several places, by Guess. There is an Omission also of one Whole
Article in it, about their being called to an Exempt Place. A more Correct Copy
is to had in some Registers, particularly in those of the D. and Chapter of Cant.
where I had no opportunity to search for it.

XIV. (a)
See p. 231.
CL. 8. E. II. m. 35. dors. Rex Venerabili, etc. Sal. Quia super diversis and
arduis negotiis nos and statum Regni nostri, and maxim terrae nostrae Scotiae
specialiter tangentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Eboracum die Lunae in crast.
Nativ. beatae Mariae Virg. prox. futur. tenere, and vobiscum ac cum caeteris
Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus dicti Regni habere proponimus Colloquium
and Tractatum, Vobis mandamus rogantes, quaetenus Decanos, and Priores
Ecclesiarum Cath. ac Archidiaconos tocius Provinciae vestrae in propriis
personis suis, Capitula etiam singula dictarum Eccl. Cath. per singulares
Procuratores, and Clerum cujuscunque Dioces. ejusdem Prove. per duos
sufficientes Procuratores ad dictos diem and locum Venire faciatis, ad tractand
and consentiend hiis quae in praemissis tunc ibidem contigerit ordinari. Et hoc
nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Ebor. XXIX. Iul.

The Protestation of the Clergy, when met, against this Citation.
LIcet Mandatum vestrum Citatorium, See p. 231.
Pater Reverende, Domine W. d. g. Cant. Archp. Totius Angliae Primas, ad Clerum
Prove. vestrae convocandum, in eo quod ad Curiam Secularem, puta Domini Regis
Parliamentum, quod in Camera ejusdem Regis fuit inchoatum, and per dies aliquot
continuatum, sicque tam ratione fori quam etiam loci contra Sanctos Canones and
Sanctorum Patrum Instituta videatur esse conceptum, and per consequens Clerum
artare non poterit taliter ad comparend. absque Ecclesiasticae Offensa
Disciplinae, and Laesione Ecclesiasticae Libertatis manifesta, quodque de
Abbatibus and Prioribus per se suos Conventus regentibus, and suis Conventibus
seu Collegiis, Prioribus Ecclesiarum Cathedralium duntaxat exceptis, nulla
omnino habeatur mentio in eodem: quanquam iidem Religiosi sic omissi maximam
partem Corporis Cleri vestrae Prove. faciant, and de communi Negotio sive
necessitate agatur omnes communiter contingente, sicque sine ipsis taliter
omissis de communi negotio sive necessitate ipsos omissos aeque principaliter
contingente ut praesentes tractatus qualis haberi deberet and etiam expediret,
haberi non valeat ipsis non vocatis, ne Unitas Ecclesiae ex processu hujusmodi
Divisionem patiatur: Ut tamen subducta Citatione predicta vestris beneplacitis
quatenus fieri poterit per nunc praesentes absque Ecclesiae and Absentium
Prejudicio pareatur reverenter; and ne publicae Utilitatis Expeditionem ex
non-paritione in tanta necessitate impediri contingat, offerunt se praesentes
paratos ad tractand. and faciend. prout eos attinet, quod justum fuerit and
Canonicis conveniens Institutis. Supplicant igitur hii qui in hac Congregatione
praesentes sunt de Clero Vestrae Paternitati Reverendae, quatenus in mandatis
Vestris quae -- consimiliter emanabunt in futurum, quoad praemissa and caetera
omnia quae occurrunt facienda Ordo debitus and de jure licitus ac
Ecclesiasticae Libertati non derogans per omnia observetur; protestants
express coram Vobis in praesentia venerab. Patrum Episcopor. Suffraganeor.
vestror. quod absque Libertatis Ecclesiasticae laesione and status sui periculo
praefatus Clerus mandatis consimilibus parere non poterit aliqualiter in
futurum.

Petitio proposita per Religiosos and Clerum.
See p. 232.
VObis Reverende Pater Domine Cant. Archpe* totius Angliae Primas and
suffraganeis vestris hic Congregatis supplicat Clerus Universus ad mandatum
vestrum Dom. Cant. Archp. totius Angliae Primas, humiliter and obedienter
comparens, quatenus vos eum excusare dignemini erga Dominum nostrum Regem quod
coram eo sine Offensa Dei and Ecclesiasticae Libertatis praejudicio modo quo
praecipitur, seu oratur, parere non possit; prae^ertim cum praetextu citationis
vestrae, in Loco isto and non alibi, and coram Vobis comparere tenentur:
Advertentes praecip^^e quod hoc facto servitus inaudita, and Iugum intolerabile
Ecclesiae imponatur, quod nedum in Ecclesiae Cant. Prejudicium diceretur
factum, sed Vobis, qui praeestis eidem, Dedecus Sempiternum inferret.

Bibl. Cotton. Faustina. A. 8.

XIV. (b)
I Shall rather refer the Reader to Pryn himself ( Parl. Wr. V. 1. p. 152.)
then increase the Bulk of the Appendix by a Transcript of it. See p. 235.


XIV. (c)
R. Permissione divina Cant. Archp' etc. dilectis filiis Priori and Conventui
Eccl. nostrae Christi Cant. Sal. Gratiam and Benedictonem. Literas domini Regis
nuper recepimus talis Tenoris vel consimilis in essentia, See p. 252.
quod pro quibusdam Negotiis quae regnum Angliae specialiter tangunt, nec non
and stabilimentum Terrae Scotiae, nec non and pro aliis diversis Negotiis Vos
praemuniri faceremus, quod Vos Domine Prior in propria person^, Capitulum vero
per unum procuratorem die Martis in quindena Purif. beatae Mariae Virg. prox.
fut. in Parliamento suo apud Westmr. nobiscum intersitis, ad faciend' and
consentiend' hiis quae tunc de communi consilio favente deo ordinari
contigerit, vel etiam pro Utilitate dicti regni provideri. Quocirca mandamus
Vobis firmiter injungentes quatenus Vos, Domine Prior, in propri^ persona, and
Capitulum per unum Procuratorem Die Dominica prox. ante dictum diem Martis
ipsum diem Martis praeveniendo coram Nobis compareatis apud Lamethe circa horam
primam, Nobiscum super quibusdam statum Ecclesiae contingentibus tractaturi,
ulteriusque facturi un^ Nobiscum in dicto Parliamento quod permittunt Sacrorum
Canonum Instituta. Et quid feceritis seu facere decreveritis in praemissis nos
dicta die Dominica certificare curetis per vestras Literas patentes harum
seriem continentes. Dat. Wynton. Id. Jan. 1304. Consecr. 11o.

Reg. Henr. Prioris fol. 103. (a)

XIV. (d)
This Form I have given before, Numb. XIV. (a)

XIV. (e)
Cl. 14. E. II. m. 5. dors.

See p 253.
REx Venerabili, etc. Sal. Quia super diversis, etc. [ as in the Writ with the
Premunientes in Dugd. p. 119.] -- Tractatum. Et mandavimus singulis Episcopis
Prove. vestrae Cant. quod dictis die and loco, etc. impensuri; and quod ipsi
praemuniant Decanos, Priores, and Capitula Ecclesiar' suar', Archidiaconos,
etc. antedictis. Nos nolentes negotia nostra in dicto Parliamento tractanda
propter absentiam dictor' Decanor' Prior' Archidiaconor' retardari, Vobis
mandamus rogantes, quatenus Decanos and Priores Ecclesiar' vestrar' Cath. and
Archidiaconos totius Prove. vestrae in propriis personis suis, Capitula etiam
singula dictar' Ecclesiar' Cath. per singulares Procc. and Clerum cujuscunque
Dioc. ejusdem Prove. per duos sufficientes Procurat. ad dictos diem and locum
venire faciatis ad tractand' and consentiend' hiis quae in praemissis tunc
ibidem contigerit ordinari. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Westmr.
15. Maii.

XIV. (f)
See p. 255.
W. Permissione divina Cant. Arch. -- dilecto H. Priori and Capitulo nostro
Cant. Sal. Nuper Dominus Rex, vocatis ad se Praelatis quibusdam, Comitibus, ac
Proceribus, ac aliis de Consilio suo peritis tunc praesentibus, Negotia sua ac
regni sui diligentius pertractans pro feliciori Expeditione eorundem ex
deliberato Consilio Parliamentum suum apud Westmr. a die Nativ. beati Iohannis
Bapt. prox. futur. ad 3. Septimanas vocare decrevit, ac etiam ordinavit. Et
quia pro Negotiis arduis statum totius regni sui and Incolarum ejusdem
contingentibus praesentiam nedum Prelator' sed etiam Decanor' and Prior'
Ecclesiar' Cath. singular' and Cleri nostrae Cant. Prove. in agitatione eorundem
necessariam reputavit; ne per ipsor' absentiam contingat hujusmodi negotia
retardari, suis ad Nos directis Apicibus rogav^t, ut Clerum totius nostrae
Cant. Prove. in forma praescripta convocari faceremus, ad diem and locum
antedictos, ad tractand. super ipsis, and consentiend. hiis quae tunc
salubriter ordinari contigerit in eodem. Nos igitur tanto promptius tantoque
favorabilius Votis Regiis Inclinantes, quo Negotium de quo agitur Ecclesiam
Anglic. Regnum and Regni Incolas, tam personas Ecclesiasticas quam Laicas omnes
proculdubio contingit, prout haec apud omnes fore credidimus notorie divulgata;
quoque ad id faciend' ex necessitate curae nobis incumbentis novimus nos
teneri; cum quibusdam Fratribus and Coepiscopis nostris habito super hoc
Tractatu pleniori Regio Rogatui more consueto duximus, ut debuimus, annuendum.
Quo circa Tenore praesentium peremptory Vos citamus, quod Vos Domine Prior
Personaliter, and Capitulum per Unum sufficientem Procuratorem compareatis in
dicto Parliamento apud Westmr. prout hactenus fieri consuevit, a die Sti Joh.
Baptistae prox. fut. in 3 Septimanas, cum continuatione and prorogatione dierum
subsequentium, ad tractand. una Nobiscum super praemissis, and aliis urgentibus
Ecclae. Anglic. atque Regni in hac part Negotiis, in Domini nostri Regis
Parliamento ibid. celebrando, nec non consentiend' hiis omnibus quae ad honorem
Dei, and Ecclae suae sanctae and Utilitatem totius reipublicae ac regni
supradicti divina disponente Clementia ibidem contigerit salubriter ordinari.
Dat. 8. Kal. Iun. 1321.

Reg. Henr. Prior. fol. 224.

XV. Petitio Cleri Cant. Provinciae.
See p. 358. This Petition from the Matter of it seems to have been made A o.
1529. See Bishop Burnet V. 1 p. 82.
UT Ecclesia Anglicana gaudeat and fruatur omnibus and singulis Iuribus,
Libertatibus, Consuetudinibus antiquis and Privilegiis ac Immunitatibus
concessis a Nobilis Memoriae Regiae Sublimitatis Progenitoribus, Regibus
Angliae, prout in Cartis and Concessionibus eorundem, praesertim in Carta
magna, in Carta de Foresta, in Carta Edwardi super Articulis Cleri, atque in
brevi Circumspecte agatis, nec non Edwardi quarti; aliis item Immunitatibus
suis quibuscunque.

Et quia Clerus summopere affectat vitare offensam Regiae sublimitatis, and
aequum non est ut aliquis paenam Violatae Legis incurrat, quam scire non
potuit, ut dignetur sua sublimitas curare ac jubere ut certi ac praescripti
Limits clare designentur Casuum statutorum de Praemunire, sicque extra illos
casus declaratos aliqua non incurratur paena; and ne de caetero decernatur a
Cur^a Regia emittendum contra ullum Iudicem Ecclesiasticum aut parts
Litigantes Breve praefatum de Praemunire, nisi praemissia prohibitione regia,
and in Casibus praescriptis.

Praeterea cum Clerus multum Gravaminis ac Damni sustineat, ratione statutorum
in praesenti Parliamento editorum, Libertatem Ecclesiasticam and sanctiones
Canonicas enervantium, in animarum statuentium, and quorumcunque Executioni
demandantium periculum manifestum, sententiamque excommunicationis notorie and
damnabiliter incurrendo; ad quae facienda nec consenserunt per se, nec per
Procuratores suos, neque super eisdem consulti fuerunt; Ipsaque eadem statuta
paenas tum graves, tum inevitabiles in se contineant, non nihil etiam
Iniquitatis habeant, contra Charitatem and Canonicas sanctiones edita, sintque
in se adeo captiosa ut difficile sit ea non violare; Hospitalitati quoque non
parum derogantia, miseris Vicariis Rectoriarum suarum Conductionem, ut videtur,
prohibentia: ut iidem Patres (quorum est Veritatem Canonum annuntiare) remedium
opportunum in statutis praedictis provideant, tam praesenti quam futuris
temporibus debite consulentes.

Postremo cum sine fide impossible est placere deo, ut dignetur Regia
sublimitas in fidei favorem aliquod statutum in praesenti Parliamento edere
contra Haereticos, fautoresque Haereticorum, Defensores, and Receptatores
eorundem, nec non contra Libros suspectos aut prohibitos tenentes, habentes, in
regnum asportantes, per Ordinarios locorum non approbatos vendentes; una cum
bonorum quorumcunque de Haeresi prima vice per Ordinarios condemnatorum and
indicatorum confiscatione Domino nostro Regi, and caeteris Clausulis opportunis.

Bibl. Cotton. Cleopatra. F. 2.

XVI.
See p. 375.
PHilip and Mary by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, France,
Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Prince of Spain and
Sicil, Archeduk of Austrie, Duke of Burgundy, Myllaine, and Brabant, Countyes
of Haspurg, Flaunders, and Tyroll, To all Men to whom these Presents shall
come, Greeting. Where we have grauntid to the most Reverend Father in God, and
our most Trustye and Derest Cousin Reynald Cardinal Pole, Legate de Latere to
the Pope's Holiness, sent to Us and to our Realms and Dominions, our Letters
Patents of our Will and Consent for the free using of his Facultyes, Auctoritys
and Jurisdiction Legantine in form hear under following, that is to say,
Philip and Mary by the Grace of God, etc. Greeting* Whereas it has pleased our
most Holy Father the Pope, July the 3 d. to send unto Us, and this our Realm
of England, and the Dominions of the same, the most Reverend Father in God, and
our most trusty and derest Cousin Reynold Cardinal Pole his Legate de Latere
with certain Auctorities of Jurisdiction, Grace, Faculties and Dispensations,
to be ministered, exercised, and granted by authority of our said Holy Father
and See Apostolic to the Subjects of our said Realm and Dominions of the
same, as they shall for their Relief sue and make request to our said Cousin,
executing his said Commission and Legacy aforesaid; We calling to our
Remembrance and Understanding, the Godly Purpose and Intent of our said most
Derest Cousin his most honorable Legacion, and that the same is most
beneficial, and to the spiritual Solace and Consolation of Us and our said
Subjects (whose good Order and right walking in the Laws of God and our Mother
Holy Church we much desire) and therefore we are most glad of the Access and
Repaier of our said most dear Cosyn, unto us and this our Realm, with the said
Authority of Jurisdiction from our said Holy Father the Pope's Holiness and
See Apostolic. And for the further Declaration thereof, we do by these our
Letters Patents declare our Pleasures and good Contentments to be, that our
said Cosyn shall repaier unto us, and into our said Realm and the Dominions
thereof, with his said Authority of Jurisdictions, and to use and exercise his
Authority Legantine by himself, or by his Officers and Ministers under him of
whatsoever Nation, Country, State, or Condition soever they be, Denyzons, or
not Denyzons; and that his said Repaier with the said Auctorities is not only
unto Us most acceptable, but we do also by these our Letters Patents signify
unto all our Loving Subjects, as well Spiritual as Temporal, that we are
pleasid and contentid that they shall make Suits and Requests to our said
Derest Cosyn, and his Officers and Ministers, to obtain such Grace, Faculties
and Dispensations as they shall have need of, and the same so obtained, to use
and put in Execution according to the Nature and Quality thereof. Wherefore
we Will and Command all and singular our Subjects to receive, honor, and obey
the said Authority in such Cases* of Spiritual Jurisdiction for the
Reformation of their Sowles, as in the Time of the said 20 th. Year of the
Reign of our said Father King Henry the Eight was, or with his Consent might
have been used and executed in this Realm. In witness whereof we have caused
these our Letters to be made Patents. Witness our selves at Westminster the 10
th. day of Nov. in the 1 st. and 2 d. Years of our Reigns. Know ye for that so
much the said most Reverend Father earnestly desiring that his Labor and
Travail may take fruit to the Honor of God, and the Wealth of our Subjects has
now callid a Synod of the Clergy of this Realm of England, to appear before
him at our Palace at Westminster; We to avoid all Danger, Dowte, and
Ambiguitye which might arise in that case by reason of any Laws, Statutes,
Customs or Prerogatives of Us, or this our Realm of England, and for the more
Ample Declaration of our said Letters Patents, have granted, declared, and
signified, and by these Letters Patents, do grant, declare, and signify, that
our Will and Pleasure and Consent is, that as well the said most Reverend
Father Card. Pole Legate de Latere of the Pope's Holiness, and the Sea
Apostolic, may freely without let of Us, or danger of any our said Laws,
Statuts, Customs, or Prerogatives, caul and celebrate the said Synod, or any
other Synod hereafter at his Will and Pleasure, and in the same Statute,
Ordeyne, and Decree any wholesome Canons for the good lief and order of the
Clergy of this our Realm of England, or of any other of our Realms and
Dominions, and do any other thing for the better executing of their Office and
Duitye; as also the said Clergy may appear and be present at the said Synod
or [any other] and consent to fulfill and obey all such Canons as shall be
ordained in the same, or in any of them without Let or Impediment of Us, and
without incurring any Danger, or Penalty, or Forfeiture of any of our Laws,
or Statutes, any Act, Ordinance, or other matter contrary to the same
notwithstanding. And hereunto we have given our full Power and Authority by
these Presents. In Witness whereof we have causid these our Letters to be made
Patents. Witness our selves at Westminster 2 Nov. in the 2 d. and 3 d. Years
of our Reign.

Registr. Pole fol. 7.

XVII. Forma sive Descriptio Convocationis cilebrandae, pr^ut ab antiquo
observari decernitur.
SCiendum est quod omnes qui [citantur] Auctoritate Dni. Rmi. Arch. Cant. ad
comparend' coram eo in domo Capitulari Ecclae. Cath. Divi Pauli London, See p.
376.
12o die Jan. It appears from hence, that this Directory was framed immediately
before the Conv. of 1562. which me^ Ian. 12.
prox. tenentur prefixo tempore interesse, atque in Ecclesia Cath. praestolari
adventum dicti Rmi. Qui ex more paulo post 8vam. ante meridiem illius diei
solet cum celebri comitatu apud portam Thamisis vocatam Paul's Wharf in terram
descendere, atque exinde praeeuntibus Advocatis and Procuratoribus Curiae Cant.
certisque Rmi. Generosis, ac Virgifero Convocationis, ad Eccles^am Cath. Divi
Pauli London, recta tendere, atque in Chorum ibidem ingredi. Ubi postquam in
stallo Decani collocatus suerit, ac preces dixerit, tam ipse quam reliqui
Episcopi praesentes ^abitu Convocationis togati, ex utroque Chori Latere in
suis stallis sese constituunt; Et mox incipiunt preces, quibus S. Sancti gratia
invocatur; ac mox Concio subsequitur. Ac tempore Offertorii tam dictus Rmus.
quam caeteri suffraganei Episcopo rem divinam celebranti ordine progredientes
oblationem offerre ex more debent. Peracta in hunc morem re divina, solet
doctus aliquis ex Caetu Convocationis sive Superioris sive Inferioris domus ad
hoc selectus e Suggestu in medio Chori Concionem ad Clerum ibidem congregatum
Latin proferre. Qua absoluta Rmus statim se con^ert in Dom. Capitularem dictae
Ecclesiae, sequentibus Episcopis and toto Clero. Quibus ingressis, ac seclusis
Extraneis, Rmo. ac caeteris suis Coepis in suis sedibus ordine consedentibus,
ac reliquo Clero circumstante, Rmus. Dominus Episc. London mandatum sibi a dto.
Rmo. ad Convocationem hujusmodi submonend' alias directum una cum debito
Certificatorio super executione ejusdem introducere, ac debita cum reverenti^
e^dem Rmo. patri praesentare and tradere tenetur.

Quo quidem Certificatorio perlecto, statim porrigitur eidem Rmo. Schedula de
scripta, per quam pronuntiat omnes ad eosdem diem, horam, and locum non
comparentes contumaces, reservando paenam eorum contumaciae in aliquem diem
competent. pro been placito ipsius Rmi. Praemissis sic Expeditis, dictus Rmus
ad Episcopos and Clerum tunc praesentes Anglice sive Latin Causam sui adventus
ac dictae Convocationis Inchoatae exponit; Quodque ex Laudabili and Antiqua
ordinatione eadem Convocatio in duo Membra dividitur, nempe in Superiorem atque
Inferiorem Domum. Unde Rmus and caeteri Coepiscopi Superiorem Domum efficient;
Inferior vero Domus ex Decanis Ecclesiar' Cath. Archidiaconis, Collegiorum
Magistris and Capitulorum Cath. Ecclesiarum, nec non Cleri cujuscunque
Dioceseos Procuratoribus constat.

Et quoniam, si in rerum tractandarum serie unusquisque ex inferiori domo suam
ipse sententiam quoties visum esset diceret, aut si omnes, aut plures simul
loquerentur, pareret confusionem, igitur semper hactenus observatum fuit, ut
Unus aliquis Doctus and Disertus ex gremio dictae Inferioris Domus in eorum
omnium Locum ad hoc munus assumatur; ut is, intellectis and scrutatis
caeterorum omnium Votis, tanquam Unum Eorum omnium Os and Organum loquatur, and
consonam eorum sententiam eidem Rmo, cum ad hoc rogatus seu missus fuerit,
caeteris silentibus fideliter referat: Qui ex hoc munere Referendarius sive
Prolocutor communiter denominatur. Cujus eligendi Libera facultas semper penes
dictam Inferiorem Domum remanet. Unde ipse Rmus solet eosdem ex inferiori domo
monere atque hortari, ut statim se conferant in dictam Inferiorem Domum, ibique
de Viro docto, pio, and fideli in Prolocutorem suum assumendo consultantes
unanimiter consentiant, and eligant; sicque electum ipsi Rmo in eadem domo
Capitulari prox. insequente Sessione debita cum solennitate praesentent. His
dictis, descendunt omnes in inferiorem domum ad effectum praedictum.

Forma Eligendi and Praesentandi Prolocutorem.
SOlet observari, ut postquam ingressi fuerint Inferiorem Domum, in sedibus se
decenter collocent, and si aliqui ex iis sint Consiliarii, sive Sacellan^
Regiae Majestatis, ut hi superiores seeds occupent, atque inde unus ex iis
propter dignitatem and Reverentiam, seu in eorum absentia Decanus Ecclesiae
Cath. Divi Pauli London, sive Archidiac. Land. Presidentis officio in hujusmodi
Electione fungatur. Atque ut ad hoc ^i^e procedatur, primum jubebit nomina
omnium citatorum and qui tunc interesse tenentur a [ ] dictae inferioris Domus
recitari and praeconizari. Notatisque absentibus, alloquatur praesentes, atque
eorum sententiam de idoneo procuratore eligendo sciscitetur. Et postquam de eo
convenerint (quod semper quasi statim and absque ullo negotio perfici solebat)
mox conveniant inter se de duobus Eminentioris Ordinis, qui dictum electum Rmo
D o. Cant. in die statuto debita cum Reverentia and Solennitate praesentent.
Quorum alter sicut, cum dies advenerit, ipsum Prolocutorem cum Latina and docta
oratione praesentare tenetur, sic etiam idem praesentatus habitu Doctoratus
indutus consimilem Orationem ad dictum Rmum Patrem ac Praelatos and caeteros
praesentes habere debet. Quibus finitis, praefatus Rmus Oratione Latina tam
Electores quam Presentatorem and Praesentatum pro sua gratia collaudare, ac
demum ipsam Electionem sua Arch. authoritate express confirmare and approbare
non dedignabitur. Et statim idem Rmus Anglice (si placeat) exponere solet
ulteri^s beneplaeitum suum, hortando Clerum ut de rebus communibus quae
Reformatione indigeant, consultent, and referant die statuto. Ac ad hunc modum
de Sessione in Sessionem continuabitur Convocatio, quam diu expedire videbitur,
ac donec de eadem dissolvenda Breve Regium eidem Rmo praesentetur.

Et sciendum est, quod quotiescunque Prolocutor ad praesentiam Rmi causa
Convocationis, ac Tempore Sessionis, ^ccesserit, utatur habitu praedicto, ac
Ianitor sive Virgifer dictae Inferioris Domus ipsum reverenter antecedat.

Ejusdem Prolocutoris est etiam monere omnes ne discedant a Civitate London
absque Licentia Rmi; Quodque statutis diebus tempestive veniant ad Conv.
Quodque salaria Clericorum tam superioris quam Inferioris Domus, and Ianitoris
Inferioris Domus juxta ^^tiquam taxationem, quatenus eorum quemlibet ^^ncernit,
fideliter persolvant.

Synodalia fol 3.

XVIII.
JAMES by the Grace of God, See p. 385.
etc. To the most reverend Father in God, our right trusty and well beloved
Counselor, John Archbishop of Canterbury, of all England, Primate and
Metropolitan, the reverend Fathers in God, our trusty and well beloved Richard
Bishop of London, Anthony Bishop of Chichester, and to the rest of our
Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical, Greeting. Whereas all such
Jurisdictions, Rights, Privileges, Superiorities, and Prehemynences, Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Power, or Authority
have heretofore been, or may lawfully be exercised, or used, for the visitation
of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation, Order, and
Correction, as well of the same, as of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms,
Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities, to the pleasure of Almighty God,
the increase of Virtue, and the conservation of the Peace and Unity of this our
Realm of England, are for ever by authority of Parliament of this our Realm
united, and annexed unto the Imperial Crown of the same: And whereas also by
Act of Parliament, it is provided and enacted, that whenever we shall see
cause to take further Order for, or concerning any Ornament, Right, or Ceremony
appointed, or prescribed in the Book commonly called the Book of Common Prayer,
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rights and Ceremonies of the Church
of England, and our Pleasure known therein, either to our Commissioners so
authorized under the great Seal of England for Causes Ecclesiastical, or to the
Metropolitan of this our Realm of England, that then further Order should be
therein taken accordingly: We therefore understanding, that there were in the
said Book certain things, which might require some Declaration and enlargement
by way of Explanation, and in that respect having required you, our
Metropolitan, and you the Bishops of London and Chichester, and some others of
our Commissioners authorized under our great Seal of England for Causes
Ecclesiastical, according to the Intent and meaning of the said Statute, and of
some other Statutes also, and by our Supreme Authority and prerogative Royal,
to take some care and pains therein, have sithence received from you the said
particular things in the said Book declared, and enlarged, by way of
Explanation, made by you our Metropolitan and the rest of our said
Commissioners in manner and form following.

[Then come several Alterations in the Calendar, Rubricks, and Offices of
Private, Baptism, and Confirmation, an Addition about the Sacraments at the
Close of the Catechism; A Prayer for the Royal Family, and six new Forms of
Thanksgiving for Rain, Fair Weather, etc. and after these inserted at length,
it follows.]

All which particular points and things in the said Book thus by you declared
and enlarged, by way of Exposition and Explanation, Forasmuch as we having
maturely considered of them, do hold them to be very agreeable to our own
several Directions upon Conference with you and others, and that they are in no
part repugnant to the Word of God, nor contrary to any thing that is already
contained in that Book, nor to any of our Laws or Statutes made for Allowance
or Confirmation of the same, We by virtue of the said Statutes, and by our
supreme Authority and Prerogative Royal, do fully approve, allow, and ratify
All and every one of the said Declarations and Enlargements by way of
Explanation, Willing and requiring, and withal Authorizing you the Archbishop
of Canterbury, that forthwith you do Command our Printer Robert Barker newly to
Print the said Common Book, with all the said Declarations and Enlargements by
way of Exposition and Explanation above mentioned; And that you take such
Order, not only in your own Province, but likewise in our Name with the
Archbishop of York for his Province, that every Parish may provide for
themselves the said Book so Printed and Explained, to be only used by the
Minister of every such Parish, in the Celebration of Divine Service, and
Administration of the Sacraments, and duly by him to ^e observed according to
Law in all the other parts, with the Rites and Ceremonies therein Contained and
Prescribed for him to Observe. And these our Letters, Patents, or the Inrolment
thereof, shall be your sufficient Warrant for all and every the Premises
contained in them. Witness our self at Westminster, the 9 th. day of Feb. in
the first Year of our Reign, Per Ipsum Regem.

N.B. There was a Commission in the 3 d. of Q. Elizabeth, for making
Alterations in the Common Prayer Book, which This may seem to have traced: but
those Alterations were slight ones, reaching no further than the Expunging some
few Lessons in the Calendar, and appointing others in the room of them; which
was justifiable upon the Terms of the Act of Uniformity. See the Commission in
Parker's Register fol. 215. (a).

FINIS.
ADDENDA.
PAge 6. l. 8. When I say, Styled it a Convoc. I mean only, that he used the
word Convocare.

P. 72. l. 28. -- is now, and etc. I spoke this as supposing the Writ for the
Prove. of York to have gone out, when the last Parliament was chosen: but it
seems, it did not. The Reader however will allow me that this was a very
pardonable Supposition.

P. 262. l. 5. I mean, when the Ap. did not at the same time solemly hold his
Provincial Council: for at such times I have shown (before p. 233.) that
Distinct Proxys have been sent to the Provinc. Council, and Parliament.

P. 366. l. 18. My Lord H. in another place (p. 566.) does, I find, date the
Patent of his Vicegerency at July 18. But either that Date is mistaken; or that
was not the first Patent constituting him Vicegerent.

P. 381. l. 27. Upon further search it appears to me, that my Lord of Sarum had
yet less reason than I thought he mig^t have to doubt, whether the Lower Clergy
subscribed the Canons in 1571; for their Original subscriptions in Parchment
are still extant: sowed indeed to a Printed Copy of the Articles in 1562, by
mistake; but manifestly appertaining to those in 1571; as is Evident from the
Titles of several of the subscribing Dignitarys, compared with their Collations
in the Bishops Registers.

P. 382. Upon second Thoughts, I cannot allow the Memorand. to intimate any
thing contrary to what I have laid down. It falls in exactly with the Method,
which I suppose in that Convoc. to have been taken.

P. 385. l. 3. from the bottom, add -- Dr. Heylin indeed, in the Summary he has
given of King Charles's Letters Patents, confirming the Canons of 1640. (Cypr.
Angl. p. 425.) represents that Prince as saying, That in Imitation of the Pious
Examples of E. VI. Queen Elizabeth, and King James -- he had Licensed the
Clergy to make Canons, etc. which seems to imply, that such a License as was
then granted had been practiced in all the Preceding Reigns. But the Instrument
it self, if we consult it ('it is in Bibl. Reg. and Sparrow) sets this matter
right. The Words of it are these, We therefore out of our Princely Inclination
to Uniformity and Peace, in matters especially which concern the Holy Worship
of God, proposing to our selves herein the Pious Example of King E. the VI th.
and Q. Elizabeth, who sent forth Injunctions and Orders about the Divine
Service, and other Ecclesiastical mat^ers; and of our Dear Father of Blessed
M^mory, King James, who published a Book of Constitutions and Canons
Ecclesiastical; -- have thought good to give them free leave to Treat in
Convoc. and agree upon certain Other Canons, necessary for the Advancement of
God's Glory, etc. The Example of the Two first of these Princes is vouched only
in relation to their Issuing forth Orders and Injunctions about Divine Service,
and other Ecclesiastical Matters: The last is proposed as a Pattern also for
Commissioning the Convocation to Treat and agree upon Canons. The mentioning
these Three Princes in the Course of the same Sentence, though for different
Purposes, may create some Ambiguity; which will be cleared, if we observe, that
in King James's Letters Patents confirming the Canons of 1603. (annexed to the
Edition of them in 1604.) there is no Pretense of any Precedent for such a
License as he then granted: though had any such before that time issued, King
James's Instrument of Confirmation would have referred to it, no doubt, as King
Charles the 1sts. did afterward to his.

The Drawer up of this Instrument seems on purpose to have contrived such an
Artful Form of Words as might lead an Unwary Reader into a Belief, that the
Practice of Licensing the Conv. was Older than really it was; and yet, when
examined strictly, could not be laid hold of.

This Objection has not been made hitherto by any that have written on this
Subject. And I mention it therefore, only to prevent a Future Cavil.

P. 461. As this Book was finishing, Dr. Bradys late learned Work came to my
hands; in whose Appendix I find printed the Instrument first placed in mine.
Had I known it sooner, I would only have referred the Reader thither; for he
took his Copy from the Record it self, I mine only from a Register. The
Transcripts of that Knowing Person are Exact always, and securely to be relied
on.


