Astronomy's Advancement, or, News for the Curious; BEING A TREATISE OF
Telescopes: AND An Account of the Marvelous Astronomical Discoveries of late
years made throughout Europe; With the Figures of the Sun, Moon, and Planets;
with Copernicus his System, in twelve Copper Plates.

ALSO, An Abstract touching the Distance, Faces, Bulks, and Orbs of the
Heavenly Bodies, the best way of using Instruments for satisfaction, etc. out
of the best Astronomers, Ancient and Modern, viz. Mr. Hook, Mr. Bouilleau, Mr.
Hevelius, Father Kircher, etc.

A Piece containing great Curiosities.

Done out of French by Jos. Walker.

LONDON, Printed for Philip Lea, Globe-Maker, at the Atlas and Hercules in the
Poultry, right against the Old-Jury. 1684.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir William Portman Baronet, And Knight of the Bath.
IT may truly be affirmed that Nature made an equal Partition of all her Goods
amongst her Children, the Eagle and Hawk for Sight, the Hound for Sent, the
Lilly and Peacock for gay Clothing; Birds, Beasts, and Fishes went away alike
satisfied and pleased with their Sat and Condition. Man in this Distribution
(whilst he retained his Innocence) was Gods Vicegerent upon Earth, and besides
the Enjoyment of the World, and the Command of all Creatures, he had also
Fellowship with Angels; but failing of his Allegiance, he was soon degraded of
his Dignity, and became subject unto manifold Miseries, and even to Death it
self; yet in his fallen Estate there is to be seen some Marks of his Divine
Original. The Heathen Poet sings of him, Os homini sublime dedit Coelumque
tueri. That he is not a Child of Earth like other Creatures, but chiefly made
to Contemplate Heavenly things, of an erect Countenance, fitly framed with two
Eyes, wonderfully made to view the Works of God's Hands. It is true, the
Natural Imbecility, as of others, so of our Visive Organs, does not permit us
to take so full a view as we could wish of Bodies that are always at great
distances, therefore Men by their Industry have invented arts to supply this
defect, and amongst many, the Telescope (which occasioned the ensuing Treatise)
is one of the most useful and curious Instruments that has hitherto been
discovered. By the help of it, Men are in some measure restored unto their
first Dignity, and somewhat enabled to see and Contemplate the wonderful frame
and disposition of the Heavens and Heavenly Bodies, and thereby raise their
thoughts and affections from Earthly gross and mean Objects, to such, which
from a Primum Mobile, may advance them to the first Mover and Creator of all
things. But as the Eye of nature carries us but a little part of this way, so
also this Artificial Eye falls very far short of the Mark; and though it
communicates unto us some imperfect glimmerings of the Stars, Firmament, and
Lower Heavens, yet it there leaves us at a loss; so that it is absolutely
necessary to take some other help to gaide us to the sight and fruition of the
Supreme Happiness, and that is the Eye of Faith, purely abstracted from all
Sensitive Matter, which alone can penetrate through the Fogs and thick Vapors
of the Air, and can like the Eagle steadfastly (through the Veil of the
Firmament) behold the Sun of Righteousness. This Eye is only to be obtained by
the constant and Conscionable hearing and reading the Word of God, which by
some years Experience I observed you to perform, and question not your
perseverance therein, having received as many and great Blessings from His
Liberal Hand as any Heart can reasonably wish.

A Person of Quality, unto whom I have a thousand Obligations, was pleased
lately to show me the following Collections of Discoveries, made by many famous
Astronomers of Europe touching the Planets and some others Stars, intimating
that the time would not be ill spent to render it into English. I being very
sensible of his great Wisdom and Judgment, readily contributed my weak
Endeavors to communicate it unto all that are Well Wishers unto these Sublime
Speculations; And having for an Age past been ambitious to give some public
Demonstration unto the World (as I have done in several particular Rencounters
unto your self) of my Gratitude for the many Favors you have been pleased on
all occasions to confer upon me both in City and Country; Although I cannot
with a D'Avenant or Cowley fix your Illustrious Name amongst the Stars, by the
Rolling Measures of Pindarick or Heroic Odes; yet I do with no less hearty
Resentments, according to my slender ability, here fitly place your great Name
(as a Member of the most famous Society in the World) in the Front of the
choicest part of the most Eminent of the Heavenly Stars and Planets; And that
it may for many Lusters of Ages, flourish and shine with them above, as you
have done here below, and convey their happy

TO THE READER.
THey must be very great Strangers to be Genius of our Nation, that will go
about to deny them to have made as great progress in Astronomical Speculations,
as any others whatsoever. Yet knowing the active mind of Men is inquisitive
after new things, meeting accidentally with this small Treatise of Telescopes,
and finding it to have been received beyond Sea with a general Applause and
Approbation, and Printed at Paris, Avec privilege Du Roy, and supposing it as
fit as other Subjects to make a progress into England, I thought it would be no
disservice to the Curious to lend it my help and assistance in putting it into
an English Garb, and in recommending its Fate unto all Well-Wishers of the
Mathematics.

An Account of the Marvelous Astronomical Discoveries of late years made
throughout Europe by the help of Telescopes, etc.
SECT. 1. Of Telescopes.
THe Telescope or great Prospective-Glass was invented in the beginning of this
Age, before which time none in the World had knowledge of it. Formerly it was
made very little and short, but sinding that it representede Objects much
better being made in a larger form, it is now made 20, 30, and unto 60, or 80
foot long, whereby Object; at great distance are clearly and more distinctly
seen and discovered. Some do judge they may be made of such a capacity, or
improved to such form, that by them may be seen the Inhabitants or Animals,
which by some are pretended to be in the Moon; Wherefore according to the
Opinion of Mr. Azout, the matters hereafter mentioned, appear but as Objects of
60, or 70 Leagues distant. We will here report the Testimony of several famous
Artists and Astronomers, who by the means of this Instrument have made their
Observations upon the Stars and Heavens, each in their own Country, viz. some
at Paris, others at Rome, others at London, and others in several other places
of Europe.

SECT. II. General Discoveries made by the help of Telescopes.
1. BY means of this curious Instrument, it has been observed, that all the
Planets and Stars, excepting the Sun, are so many Opaque and Dense Bodies,
without any light whatever, but only what they borrow of the Sun.

2. That every one of the Planets, except the Sun, change their Faces like the
Moon; so that Venus and Mercury do sometimes appear like a half Moon, and
sometimes quite round, according as these Planets are found more or less
opposite unto the Sun. That Mars sometimes appears in a Curvy Lined Figure.
That Saturn shows himself as encompassed with a Ring. Touching Jupiter it is
very marvelous, That there are discovered four little Stars that continually
move Circularly about his Body, and which by that means cast a shade upon his
Superficies. These things are undeniable Testimonies, that all these Planets
have no other Light, but that which the Sun communicates unto them.

3. This Telescope does also inform us, that each of these Planets, except the
Sun, have spots in their Superficies, just as the Moon has, and of the same
kind of blackness.

4. The same Instrument has also informed us, that each of these Planets, and
the Sun also, together with the daily and Natural Motions, do besides, move
themselves upon their Centers, some by the motion of Revolution, and others by
that of Libration.

SECT. III. Discoveries in the fixed Stars.
TOuching the fixed Stars, it is marvelous that the same Four things which we
have observed to be in the Planets, are also found to meet in them. Hereupon it
is to be observed, that from time to time by help of the same Instrument, there
is discovered new Stars in the Firmament, the which having appeared a certain
time, do so decrease of their bigness, that they cannot any longer be
discerned; and then afterward, after the revolution of Months, Years, or Ages,
do appear again, as if they were newly come into being. This Wonder has given
occasion unto Astronomers and Modern Optists to conclude, that it is the same
with the Stars, as with the Psanets; and that at least some of them, have Spots
and Blemishes, and that they also move as those do, on their Centers; From
whence it proceeds, that when their Spects are turned toward the Earth, they
do not appear unto us; and when the Spots are turned the other way behind, then
they do appear by means ports an evident decision of the Question unto this day
controverted, to wit, whether these Stars shine of their own proper Light, or
of the Light borrowed from the Sunbeams, and we must hold it in favor of the
Affirmative, that they shine by virtue of the Illumination of this great
Planet; which is the point we have Established in the first part of our
Anticopernicus; There be a great many observable and curious things to be seen
in this first Part. As for the Stars which are permanent, or do always shine,
it may probably be said, that they always continue such, because that by their
moving upon their Center, they have little or no Spots. Moreover this
Prospective discovers unto us in the Heavens, a far greater number of Stars
than what we can discern with the naked Eye. It discovers unto us in the
Pleiades, in a Circle of one degree of Diameter which encompasseth them, the
number of 46 Stars, whereas we can perceive in that little company but six, the
seventh having disappeared a long time agone.

Behold here also another great marvel in the fixed Stars, which is, that when
they are beheld with th Telescope, the appeaso prodigiously small, that whereas
Tycho B. tells us that those of the first Magnitude appear unto the naked sight
about two Mients Diameter; they appear not unto us, according unto Galilco, but
five Seconds of a Diameter, which is twenty four times less. And whereas Tycho
B. makes these Stars to be 60 or 70 times bigger than the Earth; at this time,
on the contrary, they are found to be 200 time less than the Earth. Whereupon
Kepler warns us, that with the Telescope the greatness of any fixed Star cannot
be determined, because by how much the better the Glass is, by so much the
lesser the Stars appear. It is a matter of surprise to hear, that all the
Planets do appear greater in the Glass than they are, especially the lowest;
and then again these fixed Stars on the contrary, with the same Glass, do
appear smaller. I adhere unto this Opinion of the prodigious smallness of fixed
Stars; Nevertheless at present I judge, that as to this matter, there is some
kind of fallacy in our sight. Hereafter we will make a farther Demonstration.

Lastly, The Telescope has discovered and decided the Question which has been
so long agitated amongst the ancient Philosophers, namely, what the is which we
call the Milky Way, vulgarly in French the Way of St. James; for it has given
us to understand, that it is nothing but an infinite multitude of small Stars,
which by their nearness one to another, make up all that white Tract which we
behold in the Heavens.

SECT. IV. Of what has been Observed in the Sun.
BY help of the abovesaid Instrument, there has been observed upon the
Convexity of the Body of the Sun, black Spots which are moveable, variable, and
subject to change, and which do move regularly toward the West, finishing
their Revolution in 26 or 27 days. Nevertheless Hevelius here traces these ways
by bendings, sometimes Unequal, and sometimes Hollow. The motions of these Solar
Spots testify unto us, that the Body of the Sun truns upon this Center, with
that motion. These Spots are not Celestial Bodies, as J. Tarde would make us
believe, but rather Evaporations which rise from the Body of the Sun, after the
manner of Vapors arising from the Earth, and forming themselves into Clouds;
which does appear, inasmuch as these Spots are always chageable in their form,
bulk, and configuration. Sometimes there appears a great number in the Face of
this Star: sometimes but a few, and sometimes none at all. Some of these Spots
shine and become lightsom, and others that shined become dark. To this purpose
Malapert at Arras did daily observe these Spots, from the year 1618. unto the
year 1627. and never found them return unto the same Configuration they had in
all that time. Scheiner on the other hand observed them at Rome at the same
time, and found them no otherwise than the former had done.

It were to be wished that some of these. Solar Spots had remained fixed in the
Body of the Sun, for that would have decided the great Question, to wit, if it
be the Earth, or the Sun, which is immovable in the Center of the Universe.

Father Kirker with the help of this same Telescope, in his Description of the
Subterraneous World, Lib. 2. finds and tells us, that this great Star is a Body
of Fire, unequal in its surface, and composed of several parts, of a different
nature, some whereof is fluid, and others solid; that it appears that his
Disque is a Sea of Fire, wherein is perceived a perpetual agitation of Waves of
Flame. That in some parts may as it were be seen Burnings, and in others Spots,
much like unto thick Smoke; that these Burnings, and these Spots are not
without the Sun, but that they seem to proceed forth from his Disque, appearing
and disappearing, increasing and decreasing, the Fire showing it self casually
amongst those black Smoaks, which are the Spots that we perceive in this great
Luminary; In short they THE SUN ACCORDING TO EA. KIRCHER
are the foams or froth of the Fire which the Sun exhales and evaporates out of
its Body. Nevertheless Mr. Azout and Mr. Hugens do think, that these foams of
Fire are only appearances occasioned by the undulation or waving of the Air.
Some do esteem that these Solar Spots are the Seed and Matter whereof Comets
are formed, which is not improbable. Moreover these same Spots of the Sun
discover unto us, the reason wherefore in Charlemain's time, there was
discovered a Spot in this great Luminary.

Also, Wherefore at certain times it was, that this Star appeared not in his
wonted brightness, as it happened in the year 1547. from the 24th of August
unto the 28th. that the Sun appeared reddish, and not as bright as the Moon in
her total Eclips, so that several Stars were visible at Noonday.

It happened to be the same for a whole year together at the time when Caesar
was Murdered, insomuch that it was so darkened, that it could scarce ripen the
Fruits of the Earth, Virg. Geor. Lib. 1. and Ovid. Metam. Lib. 15.

It was then by reason of Evaporations of the Sun which covered its shining
face, and darkened its light, and diminished its heat.

SECT. V. Of what has been Observed in the Moon.
BEsides what is commonly to be seen in the Moon by the naked Eye, to wit, that
she changes her Face according as she turns toward the Sun, and that together
with what Light she has, she has also black Irregular Spots; the same
Instrument has farther informed us, that the Lucid parts of her Body are
Rugged and Protuberant, and as some conjecture, is like the Earth; and the rest
which consists in Spots, as the same Authors say, resembles the Sea. Also that
the Surface of this Planet is set all over with certain round hollows like Pits
or Wells, of several Magnitudes, all and every of which, some unadvisedly take
to be so many Mountains; but that they are rather a kind of Cavities, and liker
Wells or Pits than Mountains, is apparent, in regard their shade is toward the
Sun and not opposite, that is to say, beyond these Concavities or Wells.

And these be all the Shades which is remarkable in the Disque of the Moon, for
to imagine as a great many do, that these Spots are so many Shadows produced by
the Sun, by reason of Hills and Valleys, which all Antiquity supposed to be in
the Moon, is not true; for when the Moon is full and opposite to the Sun, these
pretended Shades in this Planet should by consequence disappear, which yet is
not so. Note, That in our Figure, all the abovesaid hollows, are represented
without shade, because being a Figure of the Full Moon, the Sun does thoroughly
enlighten them at other times, as at the Quarters, they show themselves shaded
in the part toward the Sun.

And although the Face of the Moon is full of Wrinkles, yet nevertheless there
appears no Shadow, whether it be that the Shades of these Wrinkles are
insensible for their smalness, or else that they be transparent to the Sun
Beams, which is the Opinion of Galileo, who esteems the Moon to be like the
Mother of Pearl, showing knobs and redness where there is none.

It is true that some of these Wells or Hollows seem to be all black in the
Full Moon, but that is without doubt, because that these Cavities are of the
nature of the Spots whereof we speak.

The Diameter of these Wells or Pits considered in regard of the Moon, which
contains about 650 French Leagues, contain some more some less; the greatest of
all is that of A. B. which by computation contains about 20 Leagues.

Let us farther observe in this Planet the admirable mixture of its Lucidities
and Spots, those surprising Varieties, those Resemblanoes of Forests of Forests
of Rushes which seem scattered here and there: those kinds of Spiders Legs:
those kinds of Polygones, and especially the appearances of Beams of Light
arising out of these profound Wells, as of the abovesaid A. B. To conclude, all
the great variety of these things cannot seem to happen by chance, but that
they were so disposed by the Sovereign Creator, for some end and reason unknown
unto us; And indeed the Eighth Psalm informs us, that this Planet, as also the
Stars, is the work of Gods Fingers.

Mark the word, Fingers.

All which being considered, and for other Reasons, we cannot say that the Moon
is a World filled with Inhabitants, Animals, and Plants, as many ancient
Philosophers have imagined; but rather a certain Vapor or Cloud, probably
condensed with Cold, which is evident, inasmuch as this Star by day appears as
a common Cloud; which Cloud were it raised to the height of the Moon, and that
it were as big, it would shine in the Night after the same manner. Add
hereunto, that the Pillar of the Cloud which conducted the Israelites in the
Wilderness, was a Cloud by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by Night. We judge that
all the Stars of Heaven, except the Sun, are of the same substance the Moon is
of.

It is moreover a great wonder that this Nocturnal Light, appears unto us here
below, to have borrowed the likeness of a Woman's Face in her Disque. Plutarch
has writ a Treatise expressly, wherein he says this Figure of a Human Face,
was in the Mouth and Hands of all the World; although it is certain that some
of great Wit and exquisit Judgment, do protest they do not perceive any Image
of a Woman's Face in this Planet. But Plutarch himself gives a Reason of this
mistake, saying, that it is because those People have the sight low and weak,
incapable of well perceiving the Lineaments of this Face; or rather, it is
because their thoughts are not intent upon the Design, Picture, or
Portraicture. For my part before I attained to be Six years of Age, I already
fancied the form of a Face in this Planet, which also most People in the World
think they do.

Besides let us observe this Face in the Moon with the Telescope, and let us
consider it altogether, and severally; then you will say, this Human Face will
no more be seen, but only certain Irregular Vapors without any order, which
have no likeness unto any Representation whatsoever.

1. Our Telescope has also informed us, that there is first an Atmosphere, or
Orb, which is supposed to be of a very thin Vaporous Air, which encompasseth
all the Superficies of the Moon; as round the Earth there consists the like Orb
of Vaporous and Cloudy Air, which contains the first Regions of the Air.

2. The Telescope has farther given us to understand a thing very surprising
in the Moon, which is, that in her Eclipse, when it is Eclipsed a Fingers
breadth or two, to the Naked Eye, it is not at all Eclipsed if you look on it
with the Telescope; and when it is quite freed from the Eclipse in the
Telescope, it yet appears to be Eclipsed a Finger or two's breadth to the naked
Eye. Upon this matter see the Hydrogr. of Father Fournier, wherein are given
some Examples of this Phenomenon.

3. This Telescope has farther given us the knowledge of a thing more strange
and wonderful, to wit, that although the Moon being low near the Horizon,
appears greater unto the naked Eye, and being mounted toward the Zenith
appears less; it is found, that when its Visual Diameter comes to be measured
in both these places, the quite contrary does appear; to wit, that she is less
when she is low near the Horizon, and greater when she is mounted toward the
Zenith.

THE FULL MOON ACCORDING TO Mr. HEVELIUS


4. Let us instance in a fourth thing which relates unto the Moon, which is,
that although for time out of mind, it has been believed that the Longitudes
of the World may be obtained by means of the Eclipses of this Planet;
nevertheless Observations do not thereto agree, and do very much disagree from
the Longitudes of our Maps of the World; whereupon see the Hydrogr. of Father
Fournier, which gives a greater number of Examples. Let us add another point no
less surprising, which is, that although that which is Illuminated in the Moon
proceeds from the Rays of the Sun darted directly upon her; When this
brightness comes to be examined, it is found that in all likelihood it is not
carried in a direct Line, but in a crooked, and seems not to proceed from the
Sun as from its Source, but ordinarily from another Principle higher and more
eminent. God willing we will give full satisfaction of all these Phenomena's in
a particular Treatise.

SECT. VI. Of what has been discovered in Saturn.
TIme out of mind it has been conceived that this Planet Saturn, consisted in
one entire round Globe; but now by help of this Telescope, we discover that it
is composed of two parts, and that indeed it is round in respect of its Body,
but does besides consist of a Ring, which is Luminous by means of the
enlightening of the Sun, as Saturn himself is Luminous by the same means; which
Ring encompasseth him all round after the same manner that the Horizon of our
Artificial Globes encompasseth their Globes, and is flat upon the Verge as they
be. Moreover this Ring shows not it self round, as a Circle seen direct, but
shows it self in an Oval, as a Circle seen Obliquely. Some have at certain
times found it twice and an half longer than it is broad; others have found it
decline from the Ecliptic 31 Degrees; whereupon see here what is strange,
which is, that upon certain Occurrences and Times this Ring disappears, so that
at that time Saturn is alone and quite deprived of his Ring, just as the
Figures here do represent, whereof the 1, 2, and 3, do show the Fig. 3.
SATVRN According to Mr. Hook Aspect

SATVRN According to Mr. Azout

SATVRN According Mrs. Hugens and Picart

SATVRN According to Mrs. Hugens and others

manner that this Planet does commonly show himself with his Ring, and the 4th
when he shows himself without a Ring, and quite round. Upon this change of
Figure, wherein Saturn at certain times appears, Astronomers have well
concluded, that in effect he moves in himself, and that it was necessary this
Circle should be flat like a Bourlet; and that the reason wherefore he
disappeared at certain times, proceeded, that at that time, he was as to us,
turned Prosil, and showed us the side, and was not enlightened with the Sun on
the side turned toward us. Moreover, Observations have given us to understand,
that this Planet moves upon his own Center, and upon his Own Ax, to wit, under
the East, to the West, as has been observed by Hugens, Cassiny, and others.
Touching the Motion of this Planet Mr. Hugens has observed, that when it
arrives at the 20th Degree and an half of Pisces and Libra, it appears round
and without Arms. To this purpose in the year 1671. at the end of May, it
appeared all round; and also in like manner it will appear all round in the year
1685. which is about fifteen years afterward, which will also continue from
fifteen to fifteen years, which is the moiety of the Natural Motion of this
Planet, which it is known compleats his course in about thirty years. Besides
there is farther observed in this Planet a little Moon, which like the
Satellites of Jupiter continually runs round his Body, and finisheth their
course in the space of fifteen days thirteen Minutes. Mr. Azout thinks that in
a few years the shadow of this same Moon may be seen upon this Planet.

SECT. VII. Of what has been Observed in the Planet of Jupiter.
WIth the help of the same Instrument there is observed in the Face of Jupiter,
and overthwart his Luminous part, three darkish Belts, like unto the Spots
which appear in the Moon; These Belts or Girdles which encompass or begirt this
Planet, show themselves all straight and parallel, and extend from East to
West, near after the manner of the Ecliptic; and do make as it were a kind of
Equinoctial and Tropicks, of an Artificial Sphere; Of his Belts the more
Southern is a little larger than the Northern, besides that it is a little
nearer the South than the other is unto the North. Mr. Hook has particularly
observed also a little dark Filament, and where Fig. 4.
Jupiter according to Mrs. Azout and Cassini

Jupiter according to Mr. Hook

the Satilites of Jupiter discovered by G. Galileus

these Girdles or Belts draw nearer the Poles, the Zones grow darker, as in A.
B. Fig. 2. Some Observators remark these Belts with some Curvity, but its
border appears perfectly round, and without radiation.

Moreover this Planet has four little Stars or Moons, which are not visible
unto the naked Eye, which do continually move round his Body, and which do rise
in the East of him, and set to the West. These four wonderful little Stars are
called the Satellites, or the Guards of this Planet; they are diversely distant
from Jupiter, and those nearest his Body finish their Revolutions with greater
expedition than those that are farthest off.

1. The nearest of the Satellites is distant from Jupiter three minutes, and
finisheth his course in eighteen hours, twenty eight minutes, thirty S.

2. The second Satellite is distant from Jupiter five minutes, and ends his
Revolution in three days, thirteen hours, eighteen minutes.

3. The third is distant eight minutes, and finisheth his Revolution in seven
days, three hours, thirty five S. and is greater and brighter than the others.

4. The fourth Satellite is distant from Jupiter thirteen minutes, and ends
his Course in sixteen days, eighteen hours, nine minutes, fifteen S.

It is to be observed that these Satellites do give a shadow upon the Body of
Jupiter, when they are found interposed betwixt the Sun and him. Moreover Mr.
Cassiny of late has observed two moveable Spots upon the Face of this Jupiter,
which do make their Revolution upon the Center of the same, tending toward the
West in nine hours, fifty nine minutes; The which by Consequence does testify,
that this same Planet moves upon his Center from the same part likewise in
nine hours, fifty six minutes. This Period is the shortest of all those that is
made in the Firmament.

SECT. VIII. Of what has been Observed in the Planet of Mars.
ACcording to Mr. Cassiny, Mars does move upon his Center and upon his Ax,
under the East, toward the West, and with a Direction very like that of the
Ecliptic, that is about twenty four hours, forty minutes each Revolution; the
which he discovered by means of two notable inherent moveable Spots upon the
Superficies Fig. 5.
1. Fate of MARS according to Mr. Cassini

2. Fate of MARS according to Mr. Cassini

MARS in his quadrat according to Herelius (...)

of this Planet, and which do both finish their Course in the same space of
time.

It is to be observed that Mars in his Opposition does always appear round; but
when he is betwixt the Conjunction and Opposition, he appears in a Curvy Line
Figure; like the Moon when she is near her Opposition, before or after him.

SECT. IX. Of what has been Observed in Venus.
THis Planet Venus appears sometimes round, sometimes half round, and sometimes
like a Cressent. Mr. Cassiny took notice of it, and did not sufficiently, nor
scarce at all understand it, until the year 1666. which he did not then
neither, says he, without much difficulty. He found that it had Spots upon its
Surface just as the Moon has; to wit, two, which are very thy, long, and
uncertainly terminated; amongst which at the seventh place marked 7, appears a
shining part. He found by means of these Spots, that the motion of this Planet
and of its Spots, was made upon its own Center, and upon an Ax which carried it
from South to North, which is a motion wholly unknown in the Heavens; and that
this motion was accomplished in one day, whether it be, says he, of Revolution
or Libration.

SECT. X. Of what has been Observed in Mercury.
TOuching Mercury we have no Observations can say that he has Spots, as the
other aforesaid Planets, nor can we determine whether he turns or not on his
Center or on some Ax; Nevertheless it is probable to believe, that it has all
things just as the other Heavenly Bodies. Moreover, hevelius in the year 1644.
observed, that he changed his Face, just as the Moon and Venus; and that he
appeared sometimes round, sometimes half round, and sometimes like a Cressent.
The reason wherefore this Planet is not discerned like the others is because of
his smalness, and for its being commonly darkened by the Sun Beams.

The 7th of November 1631. this Mercury was seen in the Disque of the Sun, as
it were to Eclipse it; and there appeared like a Spot of the eightieth or
ninetieth part of the Diameter of this great Star; It had its Center very
black, and the Extremities something red.

Fig 6
1 Face of VENUS according ta Mr. Cassini

2 another Face of VENUS according to Massini

3 another Face of VENUS accoring to Mr. Cassini



SECT. XI. Of new Stars which appear for a time, and then idsappear at another
time.
And First, Of the first which came to our knowledge, and of the Notable One
which appeared in the Chair of Cassiopea, Anno 1572.
THe first new Star come unto our knowledge, is that which appeared in the time
of Hypparcus, about 125 years before the Birth of our Savior Jesus Christ;
Since which time some others have also been discovered; to wit, one in the year
388. whereof Claudian makes mention: and one in the fifteenth Degree of
Scorpio, spoken of by Albumazar Haly, the which continued four Months. Since
which time, in the year 1571. the Ninth of November, there appeared in the
Firmament in the Chair of Cassiopea, that notable Star of the first Magnitude,
which in its Course governed it self like the other Stars, as holding place
amongst them, and had no Paralax. The Astronomers of those times well observed
it, for Instance Tycho B. it continued sixteen Months, after which time
decreasing very much, it grew quite invisible.

Upon the Consideration of this Star or Comet, is remarkable unto our purpose,
what the Marquess of Villenes has left in Writing in his Book upon the
Centiloqui of Ptolemey; to wit, that there remained a black Spot in the same
place where this Star appeared; which, if so, it would the more confirm what we
have said, that the Stars have Spots just as the Planets have, the which makes
them disappear at such times as they turn from wards the Earth. Nevertheless
seeing the Assertion of this Marquess is not seconded by other Authors, we will
refer our selves unto farther Experience.

It is doubtful if this same Star will not come and appear again. All we can
conclude of this Question is, that if it be a real fixed Star, it will not fail
appearing some other time; but if it be only a Cornet, or that it is in the
Firmament it self, or a little below it, then it will never appear again.

Fig. 7. The new STARR or Comet in the Constellation of Cassiopea observed by
Tycho Br


SECT. XII. Of the Star in the Swan's Breast.
NIne and twenty years after the Apparition of the Star in Cassiopea, viz. in
the year 1601. there appeared in the Heavens a new Star of the third Magnitude,
in the Swan's Breast, which continued visible unto the year 1626. and then
totally disappeared. Kepler observed it very diligently.

After it had disappeared, and in the space of thirty three years, to wit, in
the year 1659. Mr. Hevelius at Dantzick observed it to appear again in the same
place where Kepler first saw it, and of the same Magnitude, but in the year
1660. it seemed plainly to diminish, and quite disappeared soon after. Again in
the year 1666. Mr. Hevelius saw it re-appear, and it continues at present to be
seen, but so small, that it is but of the sixth or seventh Magnitude. It is
supposed that it is no less than fourteen years in finsh its Revolution; We
have here represented in in Tab. 8.

Of the Star near the Swan's Bill.
This Star was first discovered by Dom. Adthelm, Chartreux of Dijon; to wit, in
the year 1671. it appeared unto him of the third Magnitude; It is not mentioned
in any of the Catalogues of Stars, although a great many much more
inconsiderable ones be therein mentioned. The same Father, and Mr. Cassiny have
observed it as well in its increase as in its decrease; It has twice appeared
unto them in its greatest Luster: the first time the fourth of April, and the
second time the first of May; it is about a Month in its return to its first
state.

SECT. XIII. Of the Star in the Whales's Neck.
THis admirable Star in the Whale's Neck is of this sort also which appear
sometimes, then hide themselves, and then disappear again to appear at another
time. At first it appears to be but of the sixth Magnitude, then it increases
by little and little for 120 days together, after which time it arrives at its
full period and greatest brightness and eminency, which is, to be Fig. 9. The
new STARR in the Whales Neck discovered by Mr. Bouillau and Cassini
of the third Magnitude, wherein it continues fifteen days together, then it
decreaseth until it becomes invisible.

It does appear every year in this greatest brightness, thirty two or thirty
three days sooner than the precedent year, and compleats its Revolution in
about three hundred and thirty three days. Mr. Bouilleau Astronomer has very
diligently observed it; he thinks it moves upon its own Center and Ax; and
presupposes as we do, that it is composed of two different parts, the greater
obscure, and the less bright; remaining invisible when the obscure part is
turned toward us, and showing it self when the bright part is toward us.
Astronomers have judged that its motion is Irregular and inscrutable;
nevertheless the said Mr. Bouilleau has invented a very ingenuous Hypothesis,
whereby he makes its motion to be Regular.

SECT. XIV. Of the Cloudy Star of the Girdle of Andromeda.
FAther Fabry and Mr. Bouilleau abovesaid, have taken notice of this Star; it
appeared in the years 1612, and 1613. and then disappeared until the year 1664.
that it appeared again anew.

SECT. XV. Of the Star betwixt Eridanus and those of the Hare.
MR. Cassiny has discovered another new Star situate betwixt Eridanus and the
Hare, the which also shows it self, and then withdraws it self as the others
abovementioned, and is in the passage whereby the Comet in 1664. went. No body
has spoken of this Star, although it be one of the fourth Magnitude.

Fig. 10.
The Cloudy STARR newly discovered in ye Girdle of Andromeda diserrd by father
Fabri and Mr. Bouillau
Another new STARR betwixt cridanus and ye Hare discovered by Mr. Cassini


SECT. XVI. Of other Stars, of which it is very probable that they are new
Stars.
THere is one of the fourth Magnitude and two of the fifth in Cassiopea, which
in all likelihood be new Stars, for several Astronomers having given an exact
Account of far lesser Stars of this Constellation, yet have made no mention of
these three. Moreover there is one of the fourth and one of the fifth Magnitude
at the beginning of the Constellation of Eridanus, of which it is certain they
were not there in 1664. because in that part of the Heavens the Comet of that
year passed; and the very smallest Stars were diligently observed, whereas
these which were far more considerable, were not observed.

Mr. Cassiny has also observed four Stars toward the Artick Pole, which are
of the fifth and sixth Magnitude, which the Astronomers which have their Eyes
always fixed on this part of the Heavens, would not have omitted to have
inserted in their Catalogues, if they had ever appeared heretofore.

SECT. XVII. Of Stars which have appeared heretofore, and now disappear.
TIme out of mind there has seven Stars been observed in the Pleiades; The
sacred Text, Amos 8. v. 5. seems to speak of this number, and probably also
Revel. 1. and at present there is to be seen but six, a very probable sign,
that one of them is retired and become invisible, after the manner of these
abovementioned.

One of these of the Constellation of the Little Bear, which was formerly
visible, does not now appear.

Another also in the Constellation of Andromeda has also disappeared.

That also in the Extremity of the Chain of Andromeda, in like manner has
disappeared, or at least is become so very small, that it is in a manner
impossible to discern it.

Another which Tycho B. has inserted in his Catalogue for the twentieth of
Pisces, has also disappeared.

Now some may imagine that the abovesaid Stars may become invisible for a
certain time, that the Sky in the place where they are, is thicker than
ordinary, but that is not it, because when these Stars become invisible,
nevertheless the neighboring Stars, although much smaller, and as it were
imperceptible, yet are seen and discovered; The new Star abovementioned which
was in the passage of the last Cornet, disappeared, whilst other less Stars in
the same passage continued constantly to be seen.

An Abstract touching the Distance, Bulk, and Orbs of the heavenly Bodies; The
best way of using Instruments, etc. for satisfaction in the truth of the
foregoing and like Discoveries; Out of the best Astronomers ancient and modern.
SECT. I. A Brief Method to satisfaction in the truth of the foregoing and all
like Discoveries.
IN order to make a true Estimat of the certainty, or at least probability of
the former Discoveries, I know no better way than to consider first the
Distances of these Heavenly Bodies; then their Bulk and Bigness; next, their
Spheres, or the Circumference of their Orbs; and lastly, the best means and
times of making use of such Instruments by which exactest Discoveries may be
made. All which we will set down according to the best and most usually
received Accounts amongst the Learned, both ancient and modern, with all
possible perspicuity and brevity.

SECT. II.
ALbategnius and Alphraganus, with others who have improved Ptolemey's Doctrine
and Observations, adjust the distances of the Planets and Stars from us, by the
Semidiameter of the Earth, taking that as the first and best common Measure;
and the same measure have our Modern Astronomers take up from them, or Reasons
which may be touched hereafter. Now the Semidiameter of the Earth we cannot but
think may be in a very tolerable sort computed and ascertained by reason of the
great Improvements of Navigation, and the frequency of passing to and fro in a
manner from Pole to Pole; I mean within few Degrees of each, and from the East
and West Indies, and back again, etc.

Now though there have been diverse Opinions of the Compass of the Earth, yet it
is now in a manner agreed upon that it is of 20255 Italian Miles; and that the
Diameter thereof is 8354 such Miles; Therefore the half Diameter, or
Semidiameter must be 4177 such miles. Note, That the Italian Mile consists of
1000 Geometrical Passes; Now a Geometrical Pass contains five Foot, and must
not be confounded, as by some Ignorant People it is, with our common Yard.

SECT. III. Of the distance of the Moon from the Earth, the compass of her Orb,
and bigness of her Body.
ACCording to those forementioned Arabians, the mean distance of the Moon (that
is taking her when she is neither farthest off from, nor nearest to the Earth,
but in a middle motion) is forty nine half Diameters of the Earth: that is
about 1103881 Italian Miles.

This it is plain Copernicus thought too little, and therefore went not about
any particular Calculation of her distance, but only in general has told the
World, he looks upon the compass of the great Orb to be so vast, that the Earth
compared thereto is only as a Point; But Tycho Brahe having made stricter
Observations and Calculations, affirms the distance of the Moon from the Earth
to be 56 of the Earths Semidiameters; And Philippus Lansbergius yet more,
namely, of fifty nine Semidiameters.

So that should we compute at the lowest rate, taking Ptolemey's Measures, the
compass of the Moons Orb must be upwards of 6645348 Italian Miles, for its
Diameter made up of the Moons distance from the Earth twice taken, and of the
Diameter of the Earth will be 2215116 Miles, which multiplied by three (the
round number, to avoid Fractions) gives the forementioned Sum; A vast Orb
indeed, yet far the least of any of the Planetary ones.

Now as to the bulk or bigness of the Moons Body, it is estimated commonly by
the proportion it bears to the Body of the Earth. Those that follow Ptolomey
account it thirty nine times less than the Earth; But Copernicus tells us
roundly it is about forty three times less; Lansbergius forty five times and an
half; And Tycho Brahe forty two. Vtrum horum mavis accipe.

There is another Measure which Astronomers apply to Heavenly Bodies, which
they call a Degree; by that they mean an Arch of a supposed Circle in the
Heavens answerable to a Line of 60 Miles on the Surface of the Earth, which
will be best understood by the following Figure.



Let the small Arch intercepted between A and B be supposed to be 60 Miles in
the Surface of the Earth, the Arch which answers it in a supposed and very far
distant Circle in the Heaven will be the Arch intercepted betwixt C and D
vastly larger, yet bearing a proportion to the lesser Arch in the Earth. The
Arch then C. D. is a Degree in the Heavens as A. B. is a Degree on the Surface
of the Earth. Now these Degrees they ordinarily subdivide into sixty parts,
which they call Minutes or Scruples, and these again into Seconds and Thirds as
they please. Thus measuring, the apparent Diameter of the Moon is esteemed to
be thirty three Minutes and one third. And thus much of the Moon.

SECT. IV. Of the distance of Mercury and Venus from the Earth, the compass of
their Orbs, and the bigness of their Bodies.
AFter what has been said of the Moon, all will be much plainer touching both
the other Planets and fixed Stars, of which we will first consider Mercury and
Venus, whom we thus put together, because they also, as the Moon, are commonly
thought less than the Earth, though far more distant than the Moon.

Mercury is by the Ptolomaicks thought to be 115 half Diameters of the Earth
distant from the Earth; but by Tycho Brahe 1150; and by Lansbergius 1500.

Now if we will reckon according to Ptolomey, Mercury will be 480355 Miles
distant from the Earth, whichnumber if we double, and add thereto the Diameter
of the Earth, viz. 8354, we have the Diameter of his Orb, viz. 969064 -- Miles;
which number if we treble, we have near about the compass of his Orb, viz.
2907192 -- but if we take the other Accounts it is vastly bigger.

As to his Body, Ptolomey supposed him 19000 times less than the Earth, (a
prodigious mistake certainly) Tycho Brahe, who is more herein to be credited,
only nineteen times less, (by which he should be above as big again as the
Moon) and Lansbergius only twice less. His apparent Diameter is judged only of
two minutes or thereabouts, but Martinus Hortensius, a Disciple of Lansbergius,
making use of his Telescope, admits Mercury's Body to be only nineteen Seconds;
which Computation may be amongst others a good reason for his being so seldom
seen.

Venus comes next; By the Ptolomaick System distant from the Earth 618
Semidiameters of the Earth; By the Tychonick 1150; By Lansbergius's 1500.

Now if we will reckon again according to the lowest rate, which is that of
Ptolomey's, Venus will be 2581386 -- Miles distant from the Earth; which number
of we double, and add thereto the Diameter of the Earth, viz. 8354, as above,
we have the Diameter of her Orb; and that number if we treble, as before, we
have (nearly) the Compass of her Orb, viz. 15513378 -- which yet it is apparent
others would make vastly larger.

As to the bulk of this glorious Star, Ptotomey makes it twenty eight times
less than the Earth, Tycho only six times less, and Lansbergius but three and a
third part. Her apparent Diameter according to the first is of three Minutes;
according to the second of three and a quarter; but Martinus Hortinsius, a
Disciple and Assistant of Lansbergius, observing her by good Telescopes,
supposes her Diameter only of fifty nine Seconds.

SECT. V. Of the distance of the Sun from the Earth, the compass of her Orb,
and bulk of his Body.
THe mean distance (for of that all along we would be understood to speak) of
the Sun from the Earth, the Ptolomeans reckon to be 1165 Semidiameters of the
Earth; The Tychonians but 1150; (the samne as of Venus and Mercury)
Lansbergius, etc. 1500. as he also had judged of these two last Planets.

Whence, if we should compute at our former rate, it would follow that the Sun
is distant from the Earth about 4866205 -- Miles; which number, if, as before,
we double, and add thereto the Diameter of the Earth, we have for the Diameter
of the Solar Orb 9740764 Miles; and that if we multiply by the round number of
Three to avoid Fractions, as before, we have for the compass of that Orb
29222292 Miles. The Body of the Sun, which is the greatest of all the Heavenly
Bodies, is by the Ptolomeans judged to be 167 times greater than the Globe of
the Earth and Sea; yet do they reckon his apparent Diameter only thirty one
Minutes and one third, that is just two Minutes less than the Moon appears to
us. Copernicus esteemed it only 162 times bigger than the Earth. But
Lansbergius 434. And Tycho Brahe much less than either, only 139 times bigger
than the Earth, and his apparent Diameter of thirty one Minutes still less than
the apparent Diameter of the Moon; however his Body in it self be so vastly
bigger.

SECT. VI. Of the distances of the other Planets from the Earth, th compass of
their Orbs, and bulks of Body.
WE will now cease to compute the distance of the Planets by Miles, as being
too small a measure, and running Figures to too great a length; The method is
open enough, and any who have the curiosity to know the distance by Miles may
be supposed to have the industry also, if they please, to calculate it
themselves.

Mars's mean distance from the Earth according to Ptolomey is Four thousand
five hundred eighty four half Diameters of the Earth; his apparent Diameter of
one Minute and an half; and his Body once and an half bigger than the Earth.
According to Tycho he is only One thousand seven hundred and forty five
Semidiameters of the Earth distant, and his apparent Diameter of one Minute and
three quarters, and his Body thirteen times less than the Earth. Which last
point of his Opinion Lansbergius favors so far as to allow him to be eight
times less than the Earth, but distant from it Two thousand two hundred and
seventy five of its Semidiameters. Now M. Hortensius runs him so low as to
reckon his Body to be One thousand five hundred and thirty four times less than
the Earth, and his apparent Diameter only of thirty six S. And according to our
former rate and method, we shall have for the Diameter of his Orb Nine thousand
one hundred and seventy Semidiameters of the Earth, and for the compass of his
Orb 27410 of the Same.

Jupiter's mean distance is according to Ptolomey Ten thousand four hundred and
twenty three Semidiameters of the Earth; his apparent Diameter two Minutes and
an half; and his Body eighty one times bigger than the Earth. According to
Tycho he is only Three thousand nine hundred and ninety Semidiameters of the
Earth distant from it; his apparent Diameter much at the same rate as the
Ptolomeans judge it; but his Body only fourteen times bigger than the Earth.
Lansbergius makes him Eight thousand and ninety one Semidiameters of the Earth
distant from it; his Body but twenty five and two fifth parts bigger than the
Earth. Hortensius but one and one fourth bigger, and his apparent Diameter only
of fifty Seconds. And following still our former Computation upon Ptolemey's
Doctrine (the proportions of his System being a mean between the vast one which
Copernicus, and the narrower which Ty. Brahe introduced) we shall have for the
Diameter of his Orb Twenty thousand eight hundred and forty eight Semidiameters
of the Earth, and for the Compass or Circumference thereof upwards of Sixty two
thousand five hundred and forty four of the same.

Saturn the highest of the Planets comes last, whom Ptolomey placed Fifteen
thousand and eight hundred Semidiameters of the Earth, distant from it; Tycho
but Ten thousand five hundred and fifty; yet Lansbergius allows the distance to
be Fourteen thousand eight hundred and eighty of the Earths Semidiameters. His
apparent Diameter is judged by none, above one Minute and some odd parts,
however his Body is according to Ptolomey seventy nine times, according to
Lansbergius forty six, according to Tycho but twenty two times bigger than the
Earth. And at our old rate, the Diameter of his Orb will be about Thirty one
thousand six hundred and two Semidiameters of the Earth, and the compass of his
Orb about Ninety four thousand eight hundred and six of them. Thus far then of
the Planets, their mean distance from us, their bulk, and Orbits.

SECT. VII. Of the fixed Stars, their Magnitude and Sphere.
BEcause some have judged certain Comets to have mounted as high as the Sphere
of the fixed Stars, being that they were not able to observe they had any
Parallax, we will therefore here consider those Stars as we have done the
Planets.

Ptolomey (at least the forementioned Arabians deducing it from his Principles)
have placed the fixed Stars Nineteen thousand Semidiameters of the Earth
distant from it. Tycho honestly telling us, that no exact or certain measures
can be taken in this case, conjectures them to be near about Fourteen thousand
such Semidiameters distant. As to the Copernicans they have another way of
measuring, of which anon.

The fixed Stars are judged very far from being all of a bigness; And since the
invention of Telescopes, it is certain there are a multitude of them either so
small, or so far off us, that they cannot be seen by our naked Eye; however
according to the usual estimate, they are taken to be of six several
Magnitudes. Those of the first rate are conceived One hundred and eight times
bigger than the Earth; such are, the bigger Dog Star, the Bulls-Eye, etc. Those
of the sixth and least rate only eighteen times bigger than it, according to
Alphraganus his Account; but Albategnius, his Brother Ptolomaick, varies a
little, not very much worth insisting on. However behold his whole estimate of
all the Mundane Bodies. If we compare (says he) all the Mundane Bodies as to
their bigness, we must acknowledge the Sun to take the first place, as biggest
of them all; next him the fixed Stars of the first Magnitude; in the third place
Jupiter, in the fourth Saturn, in the fifth the rest of the five Orders of the
fixed Stars, according to their Magnitudes of 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6th Rate, in the
sixth place Mars, in the seventh the Earth, in the eighth Venus, in the ninth
the Moon, in the tenth and last Mercury. This is also generally the Ptolomeans
Opinion of the several Bodies in this Systeme of the World.

But I suppose it must be understood only of such fixed Stars as they knew; for
before the invention of Telescopes, that infinite number of Stars, which makes
up the Galaxy, or Milky Way, that great number also in the Constellation of the
Pleiades, not seen to the naked Eye, as also the innumerable number scattered
through the Heavens, discoverable by the help of our Glasses, were not known,
nor therefore estimated.

The Diameter of the Sphere of fixed Stars, if taken according to our old Rule,
is about Thirty eight thousand and two Semidiameters of the Earth: and
therefore its compass upwards of One hundred seventy four thousand and six such
Semidiameters.

SECT. VIII. Of the Opinion of the Copernicans in these points, and the
advantage of their Systeme.
NOw Copernicus and his Followers placing the Sun in the Center of the World,
and supposing the Earth to be moved both upon her own Center daily, and
annually about the Sun, (which is far the most probable of any of the Mundane
Systemes) measure the distance of the Sphere of fixed Stars by the
Semidiameters of the great Orb; And the great Orb they call the Sphere of the
Earths annual motion about the Sun. For the full understanding hereof, behold
here the Systeme (or Fabric of the World) according to the Copernican supposal.

The outermost Circle is the Sphere of the fixed Stars: The second is the Orb of
Saturn, marked: The third of Jupiter, who is placed in the four less Circles,
A. B. C. D. in each of which Circles is a little Star (called one of his
Satellites, or Life-guard-Men) moving round him: The fourth great Circle is the
Orb of Mars, marked: The fifth is the Orb of the Earth, marked 4; about whom in
a little Circle, the Moon is by them supposed to move Monthly: the Fig 11
sixth is the Orb of Venus, marked: The seventh of Mercury: In the midst of all
stands the Pavillion of the Sun, whom they suppose only to move about his own
Center in twenty seven days or thereabouts, which is proved by the Spots
observed in his Face by the help of our Glasses, which Spots make their returns
to the same point in about that time. The advantages this Hypothesis has above
the other, is too long here to insist on; Only I will say there are some very
Learned Men, who no more doubt that the motion of the Earth will be receive
generally within a small compass of years, than that now Men believe the
Antipodes, or the Circulation of Blood, and think it as much demonstrable as
either of them.

Supposing then the Earth to be moved round, the Sun in the Circle here
assigned to it, that Circle they call the great Orb, and suppose the
Semidiameter of it to be equal to 1500 Semidiameters of the Earth, and the
Sphere of the fixed Stars to be distant from the Earth 28000 Semidiameters of
the great Orb, or which is much about the same, forty two millions of the
Earths Semidiameters.

This distance indeed is vastly greater than either that assigned by Ptolomey
or Tycho, but yet admitting the distances assigned by either of the two later,
and measuring the compass of the Orb of fixed Stars thereby, it is in a manner
unconceivable that that Orb can be carried round the Earth in twenty four
hours, or in a natural day; for in such case its motion must be many hundred
times more rapid or swifter than the Shot out of any Gun. For according to due
Computation, the very Sun it self, by the Ptolomaick Hypothesis, must move in
one minute 13095 English Miles, and in an hour 783715 Miles; but the fixed
Stars most vastly more, namely 13513686 English Miles in one hour, and in one
minute not less than 225228 Miles, which I think no one can well believe. Yet
this I say would inevitably follow upon that distance at which Ptolomey places
both Sun and Fixed Stars from the Earth; and much more upon the distance
assigned by the Copernicans, only those indeed help themselves, by supposing
the Earths daily motion upon its own Ax.

SECT. IX. Of the bost way and times of using Instruments to satisfy our
selves in these Curiosities.
THat the Quadrant (or where a large Quadrant cannot be managed, a Sextant) and
Telescopes are the most useful Instruments for both making and satisfying our
selves in Discoveries of this Nature, I think will not be doubted. But
certainly the best way to use them is in conjunction. Its true there may be
several cases in which we respect not much the height or place of a Star; it
may be all we design is to view its Color, Form, Spots, or the like, and then
the Telescope it self may suffice. But because Stars appear of different
Diameters or sizes, according to their different height or position above the
Horizon, therefore we shall be able to make the exactest Observations and
truest Judgment, if we have to the side of a large Quadrant (or Sextant) duly
fixed a proportionable Telescope joined and fastened. The way of fixing both it
is scarce possible in words so to describe as that it will be plainly
understood. But these things may easily be seen, and then most readily
understood, if we go to any Artists. And being furnished with such a Machin or
Instrument, the best time to use it is not in the lightest Nights, or when the
Moon is at Full, (except on some particular occasions) for then the Luminous
Rays too much confound one another. It is much best viewing the Moon at or
near its Quarters. But if we will see a Full Moon, we must have larger and
longer Telescopes than such as can be fixed to Quadrants: and there are little
Devices to draw the Rays closer by putting a Paper with a Pin-hole in it
betwixt our Eye and the Glass, and the like with a little use will easily
direct and teach us to contrive.

Then for the Stars, the best time to view any of them is in clear Nights, when
there is little or no Moon. A Telescope of six or eight foot will for these,
and indeed for the Moon or Sun also, do in a manner as well as one of twenty
four or twenty five. The disadvantage of cumbersomness in these large ones is
such as scarce countervails the advantages which they have; the chiefest of
which is, that they take in a greater part of the Heaven than our lesser
Glasses.

But all Persons must be advised how they venture to look on the Sun with
Telescopes. For in due position the whole Instrument is but as one violent
Burning-Glass, and a Man may easily take such a look in an instant as never to
see more with that Eye. Therefore some use to smoke their Glass over a Candle;
but the best way is to have a small piece of red or purple Glass to interpose
betwixt your Eye and the Glass of the Telescope, and by this means you may view
that glorious Body with little or no prejudice. But as to these points, those
who sell these Instruments will certainly, if desired, show their Customers the
truest and safest way to use them, more plainly than I can speak. I will only
here add, that if we design a clear sight of the face or bigness of any of the
Heavenly Bodies, the worst time to view any of them is when they are not far
from the Horizon; for then the refraction of the Rays is so great, that their
Bodies appear much larger proportionably than at other times, and in other
positions, and the sight of them too is much more confused; By which one note,
any Person may be able to direct himself what Stars are in a most convenient
condition for him to view at any time, when his Curiosity leads him to such
Entertainments, And truly these are Entertainments so noble and glorious, as
well as ravishing and transporting, that it is to be wondered how Persons whose
Parts and Fortunes qualify them for them, are able to temperate themselves
from them.

But perhaps it will be said the uncertainty of the truth of them discourages.
Of that therefore we will consider in the next place.

SECT. X. What certainty there may be concluded in these Curiosities and
Discoveries.
To come to a perfect and exact knowledge of the distance of the Heavenly
Bodies, (by Miles or such known measures) of their bigness, substance, frame,
and contexture is not to be expected: nor will any, except Madmen, pretend to
have made such Discoveries. There are very few things which Wise Men will say
they thoroughly understand, even amongst these Sublunary Bodies. But there is
as great a difference betwixt the knowledge which Artists and Speculative Men
have of the Heavens, Stars, and Orbs, and that which the Common People have, as
there is betwixt the Common Peoples and Brutes notices of them. To come to
particulars.

The Parallax of the Moon is very sensibly discoverable. Its Horizontal
Parallax is above a whole Degree. Therefore the distance of the Moon may be
more certainly concluded upon, and more firmly credited. In the other Stars I
confess the Case is more difficult, and the Work finer, so that the Result
exceeds not probability. For in Mercury, Venus, the Sun, and Mars, we cannot
without great difficulty observe any Parallax, and that which we can at length
observe is very small. In Jupiter and Saturn there is scarce any. And as to the
fixed Stars they are so vastly above us, that we are to expect none in them.
The reason hereof is, that the Semidiameter of the Earth, which is taken in
these Cases for the common Measure, and as the interstice between the two
supposed Dimensory Stations, bears some sensible proportion to the distance of
the Moon; but as to the distance of those other Bodies, its proportion is so
very small, as almost to vanish when applied thereto. As if the Earth were but
in comparison of them as a Point, and there were no difference whether we
beheld them from the Surface of the Earth, or from its Center. By which
ingenuous dealing the Reader will be able easily to gather what kind of belief
he is to give to the foregoing Calculations or Accounts of the distances and
Magnitudes of these Bodies. They are mostly but the Conjectures of Men very
learned, knowing, and industrious in this kind.

And as to those Discoveries mentioned in the first part of this Book, it may
perhaps be suspected they are also as uncertain, because of the diversity of
Refractions and Mediums, the vast distance and other like Points. But it is to
be said hereto; Those Objects which constantly through diverse Glasses, at
diverse times, and by diverse Spectators observed, still generally, or most
commonly appear the same, are certainly as they appear. Saturn therefore most
surely has such Ansulae of Light as he is represented. Jupiter has such
Obscurer Tracts as those termed his Belts or Girdle. Mars such Features as I
may call them as above described. The Sun and Moon such Spots. And Venus her
different Phases, sometimes as an Half, Quarter, or Full Moon. And there are
none of these but are far a more glorious Light than they can be conceived,
when seen only in such Figures, as we have been able to represent them in. The
seeing them as near as we can by the help of our Glasses, in themselves fills
the Fancy with delightful news Idea's, and the Understanding with new curious
Contemplations, and prepares and raises the Mind to most Noble, Curious, and
Divine Speculations, as well as Wonder and Content. Then as to those New Stars,
(as I may call them) that is, such Stars as we cannot espy with our naked Eye,
but do plainly see, and can count with the help of our Glasses; (such as are
not only very many little ones, but one larger of the seven Stars in the
Pleiades, that infinite multitude in the Gallaxy or Milky Way, etc.) These are
most certain things, and not mere appearances: because if an hundred People
look at them, and have one hundred Telescopes, they shall all see the same
Stars, and be able to count them, and describe their Position, or the Figures
they make as they stand all along in the Tracts of the Heavens. These therefore
can be no sparklings of Light, or false appearances in the Glasses, but must be
real and proper Stars: some of them certainly very vastly above the others, and
having different Centers of motion, or different Orbs from the others. Most of
these things therefore cannot be doubted.

And de facto, it is not now doubted, I think, by any who have used Telescopes
in viewing the Heavens, that in the Firmament, as it is usually called, or
Sphere of fixed Stars, there are several Stars which have a peculiar motion of
their own, and are as it were Suns too, and illuminate others, as our Sun does
the Moon and other Planets. But the Theory of these things would lead us into
heights as far beyond our Conception and Comprehension, as above our Sight. We
will therefore here sit down a while and wonder, and put a stop to our thoughts
of the Stars.

Soli Deo Gloria.

