The LIFE of St. Antony, Originally Written in Greek BY St. ATHANASIUS, Bishop
of Alexandria, TO The Pilgrim Brethren.
YOUR Design of not only keeping pace with, but also of out-stripping the
Egyptian Monks in a virtuous Ascetick Course of Life, is an Entrance upon a
very generous and laudable Enterprise. You have at length, I find, got
Monasteries of your own, and a Platform of Monastic Discipline by you. There
is no one but must a Justice commend your Design; and no doubt but God will
bring it to Perfection, in case ye be but instant and constant in Prayer for
his Blessing.

And since you have an earnest desire of being informed, How St. Antony first
entered upon an Ascetick way of Living; and what manner of Man he was before;
and what sort of End he made at last; and whether the Reports that have passed
about him are true; in order, I presume, to bring your selves to an Emulation
of him; and hereupon have thought fit to request an Account of his Conduct from
my hands: Be ye hereby satisfied, that I have received your Command, and
received it with great Affection too; for the Truth of it is, the bare
Remembrance of St. Antony, is a Matter of great Advantage to me: Besides too, I
am very well satisfied, that when you have had an Account of this Man, you will
admire him so, as to rival and transcribe his Example; which indeed is a
Pattern so exact, that any Monk may form his Solitude by it; and therefore I
dare advise you not to dis-believe whatever you may have heard concerning him;
but rather to look upon common Reports, as strange as they may seem, to fall
far short of what St. Antony did and was: for truly his Fame does not come near
his Worth. And I must needs say, that what I send now to you concerning him in
this Letter, by reason of the Urgency of your Request, is only an imperfect
Relation of some few Passages of his Life, which are still fresh in my Memory.
And I desire you by no means to leave off Enquiring about him of Passengers
from all Quarters; for I am persuaded, did every one speak what they knew of
him, his Life would be found a Task too great for any Biographer to undertake
to perfect it: For which reason, as soon as your Letter had reached my hands, I
thought fit to send for some of those Monks who used frequently to visit him,
that by their Information my Narrative might be a little fuller than it is now.
But because the scantiness of the Seamens time and the have of the Pacquet-Boat
straightened me so, that I could not tarry till they came; I have used my utmost
Diligence to acquaint your Reverences with all that I knew my self, (for I have
often seen him) and could learn from a Person who was his Servant no small
time, and used to pour the Water on his Hands when he washed. I have all along
eyed the Truth, so that who-ever hears more than he will find here, may safely
give Credit to what he hears. Who-e'er knows less of him cannot choose but have
great Thoughts of St. Antony; but how-ever, cannot revere him so much as he
ought who Reads this.

1. ST. Antony was Born in Egypt, both of Rich and Noble, (and what is better
than both) of Christian Parents. And indeeed his exact Christian Life was a
clear Evidence of his Christian Birth. During his Childhood he was always kept
at home, being an utter Stranger to every Body but his Father's Family. And
after he was a little grown up, he could not endure to go to School, purely
because of an inbred Aversation to keeping Company with other Children: For he
had a strong desire to live, as we read of Jacob, like a plain Man dwelling in
Tents. When his Parents used to carry him to Church, (though but a Child) he
did not appear Listless or Lazy: Neither, as he grew up, did the least sign of
a refractory Spirit appear in him: But he was always very Obedient to his
Parents, and Attentive to the Prayers and Homilies, and strictly careful to
reap some Profit to his Soul from what he heard. Though he saw his Parents had
a great Estate, yet he never was concerned for dainty Victuals, or variety of
Dishes, being not in the least solicitous about matters of that kind; but was
always pleased with whatever was provided, and never desired any thing else.

2. At about Eighteen or Twenty Years of Age, at the most, he was left an
Orphan, with an only and very young Sister, and trusted by his Parents,
(notwithstanding he was so young) when they died, with the Management of the
whole Family and Estate, and the Education of his Sister. Before Six Months
after their Decease was expired, as he was going (according to his Custom) to
Church, and ordering his Faculties into a fit frame for Devotion, that Text (
Matt. 19.27.) of the Apostles leaving all to follow their Savior, came
particularly into his Mind in the midst of his Walk; as also concerning those
who in the Acts (Act. 4.35.) Sold their Estates, and brought and laid them at
the Apostles feet, to be distributed as every one had need; and what, and how
great an Hope remains laid up for them in Heaven: With these Thoughts he went
into the Church. Now it happened on that Day, that that part of the Gospel was
read where we read our Lord saying to the Rich Man, Matt. 19.21. If thou will
be perfect, Go sell all thy Possessions, and give unto the Poor, and then come
and follow me, and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven. This Lesson St. Antony
applied (as particularly directed to him) to himself; and hereupon embracing
the Remembrance of the generous Example of those Saints, as injected into his
Mind by God himself, accordingly parted with the Estate of an ancient Family,
in all 300 Measures (which the Egyptians call Arours) of very rich and fertile
Land, and distributed the Money, for which he sold it, among the Inhabitants of
the Village where he lived; that neither his own nor his Sister's Mind might be
encumbred with it any longer. His Movables he also Sold, and gave the Money to
the Poor.

3. And having reserved some small matter for his Sister, the next time he went
to Church he heard our Lord say in the Gospel, Matt. 6.34. Take no thought for
the Morrow: And therefore, without any more delay, he even went out
immediately, and distributed that too among the Poor. And having given her in
Charge to some experienced and trusty Virgins, to be Educated in their
Cloisters, he betook himself to an Ascetick Life without doors, keeping a very
close eye upon himself, and leading a very rigid and absteinous Life; for at
that time there scarcely were any settled Monasteries in Egypt, neither did any
Monk live in a remote Wilderness: But whoever had a mind to order himself very
severely, exercised himself in some solitary Place not far from his own Town.
At this time there was an Old Man in a neighboring Village that had obliged
himself to a solitary Life from his Youth. St. Antony having observed him, was
inflamed with Emulation, and at first continued alone in some place or other
that was hard by the Village. And wherever he heard of any studious and
zealous Courter of Virtue, like a provident Be, he would be sure to go and
find him out, never returning to his own Abode till he had seen him, and could
bring something back with him, which might serve for part of a Viaticum to bear
up his Spirit in his Progress to Heaven. After he had continued thus some time,
he squared his Mind with such exactness, as to resolve never to return again to
the Place where his Ancestors Seat was; nor so much as to bear the secular
Concerns of his Relations in his Memory any longer; that he might entirely
apply his Mind and Affections to a vigorous Assiduity in Asceticks. And
therefore he wrought with his own Hands, because it is written, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
Let not the Idle eat. Part of what he got by his Labor he subsisted on
himself, and part of it he gave to the Poor. He Prayed continually, because he
had learnt that we ought to pray incessantly in private. He attended so
diligently to the Scriptures, when read, that nothing fell to the ground from
him, but he held it so fast, that his Mind was as good as a Library to him. For
the sake of his Demeanor, he was beloved by all: He submitted, with great
readiness, to all virtuous Persons whom he visited: He would, with great
diligence, by himself mark every virtuous Person's Virtue, for which he was
peculiarly Eminent, and stamp them upon himself. In one, he would observe an
Obligingness of Carriage; in another, an unwearied Fervor in Prayer; in a
third, Calmness of Spirit; in a fourth, great Condescension and Charity: He
would very affectionately eye this Person's great Sprightliness, Vigilance, and
moderate use of Sleep; and another Man's Affability, Delight in the Scriptures,
and Readiness in Conferences on Spiritual Subjects: Here he admired one for his
Fortitude, Magnanimity, Patience, and Courage; there another for his Fastings,
hard Lyings upon the Ground, and other such like Arts of subduing the Body: But
principally, and above all, he would seal on his Heart and Soul that Piety and
vehement Affection for Christ, and stream of mutual Love, which was very
obvious and legible in them all. Thus he used constantly to go back to his own
Cell always fraught with such useful Observations as these; making himself the
Repository of all those Excellencies he could spy in others; whence he was wont
to elicit and display them in a bright and exemplary Conversation. All the
Contest he had with those of the same Age with himself, was, to be second to
none of them in Christian Discipline: In which fort of Victories he behaved
himself so modestly, that no body fretted at him for Envy; but rather, on the
contrary, took delight in taking Notice of him; insomuch, that the whole
Neighborhood that had any regard for Virtue, and all with whom he conversed,
observing his Goodness, used to call him Theophiles, or God's Friend: The
Elder, calling him Son; and the Younger, Brother.

4. But the Devil, who is envious, and hates every thing that is commendable,
could not endure to see such a noble Purpose in so young a Person; but made it
his Endeavor to thwart all his Designs to his Disadvantage.

At first he strove to bring him off of his Ascetick Course of Life, by
throwing into his Mind a Remembrance of his Estate, of the Nearness of his
Relations, and a Solicitude for them; a Love of Money, and Desire of Glory;
great Varieties of Pleasure, and other such Recommendations of the Methods of
the World; as also, Thoughts of the Ruggedness of Virtue, and how much Labor
it costs a Man to obtain it; and, to mention no more, of the Weakness of his
Body, and the long Remainder of his Life. In short, the Devil raised a great
deal of dust in his Thoughts, that by bemudding and disordering his Mind, he
might make St. Antony let go his Design. But as soon as the Enemy saw himself
too weak to foyl St. Antony's Resolution; and quite contrariwise, that he
himself was emasculated by the Holy Man's Steddiness, supplanted by a mighty
Faith, and fallen by reason of his continual and earnest Prayers, he assumed a
new Boldness and Confidence in those Weapons which he knows every Man carries
about him in his own Flesh against himself; for here he mostly lies in Ambush
against the Souls of the Young. Accordingly he renews his Assault against the
Youth, Night and Day attacking him with great Turbulence; insomuch, that
standers by could easily discern a Combat between them; for the Devil threw
filthy Thoughts into his Mind; and the Young Man routed them out as fast by
Prayers: the Adversary used his Policies to make his Body dissolute, and
rebellious; on the other hand, St. Antony fortified his Soul, and used his Body
hardly, and kept it under by Faith, and Fastings, and Tears, and earnest
Addresses to God. But still the Devil, though worsted, was very hardy, and
appeared to him in the Shape of a Woman, represented Beautiful in all respects,
only to impose upon St. Antony. But Antony, by placing the noble Extract of his
Spirit and intellectual Power in a clear view before himself, quenched this
Firebrand of Deceit. Nevertheless the Devil would yet be hinting the Softness
and Affectingness of this Pleasure; on the other hand, Antony, like an enraged
and exasperated Person, by revolving in his Mind God's Menaces of Fire, and the
Toil of those Furrows which the never-dying Worm ploughs in the Consciences of
the Damned, escaped free without being hurt, or so much as ^ing'd by his
Temptations. All which dashed the Enemy mightily out of countenance; for, he
that once thought of being equal with God himself, was now slighted and balked
by a Young Man; and he that generally vaunts and vapors so insolently over
Flesh and Blood, was now over-thrown by a Man, even whilst he wore his frail
Body of Flesh: For our Lord, who ^ore Flesh Himself for our sake, and gave the
^^dy a Conquest over the Devil, wrought and ^restled together with this Holy
Youth. So that every one who strives in good earnest with the Devil, may, with
good reason, say, Not I, (...) the Grace of God with me, 1 Cor. 15.57. ^t last,
the Devil perceiving that he could not overthrow and discourage Antony by this
Device, ^^ashing his Teeth, and being like one beside himself to see himself
drove out; he, who is really black in his Nature within, appeared in the form
of a Black Boy to Antony, and as it were lying at his Feet, (for the crafty
Spirit being turned out of his Heart, now no longer invaded his Thoughts)
assumed an Humane Voice, and said; I have deceived many, yea, verily, I have
worsted and deceived very many: But having now exerted my Strength against
thee, as against many others, I have been weakened and overcome. Who is this
(said Antony) that talks thus to me? The Devil answered in a wretched whining
Tone; To this Day I have plied soft fleshly Allurements in Young Persons, and
have been called, The Spirit of Fornication. How many, when willing to be
Sober, have I deceived? How many have I, by Hypocrisy, and sense-affecting
Motions, drawn aside? I am he of whom the Prophet speaks, Hos. 4.12. Ye have
been deceived by the Spirit of Fornication: 'Twas by me that they were tripp'd
up: I am he who have so often disturbed thee, and (...) often been humbled by
thee. Antony therefore having paid his Thanks to God, and being be come more
valiant in Spirit, said; Hence 'ti^ plain that thou art very contemptible, for
the Soul is black and swarthy, and thou art wea^ as a Child; neither will I,
for the future, give way to any Solicitude upon thy Account; for the Lord is my
Helper, and I shall look down upon mine Enemies with scorn; which he had no
sooner said, but the Black Monster fled away being afraid to speak or come near
the Heroe^

5. This was St. Antony's first Conflict with the Devil; or rather, (to speak
properly, and as I ought) this was our Lord's first defeat of the Devil in
Antony, who, Romans 8.3, 4. Condenm'd Sin in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the Flesh, but the
Spirit. But for all this St. Antony did not neglect himself, as if the Devil
were entirely under his Feet: Nor did the Enemy, as though vanquished, desist
from forming Stratagems; for he ranged about, like a roaring Lion, seeking out
some pretense against him. Antony had learnt from the Holy Scriptures that the
Wiles of the Devil are many continually, and therefore continually gave himself
to exercise; considering, that since the Devil could not deceive his Heart by
Pleasure, he would try the more subtlely and diligently to ^o it by other
Methods; for the Devil is Sin's ^^e Friend. Wherefore Antony tamed his Body
more and more, lest after he had conquered in ^^me Combats, he should be
dragged a Captive ^y him in others. Hence he resolves to accu^tom himself to
severer Discipline still. At which Resolution many were startled through
^^prize. But however, he went through with (...) very patiently; for the bent of
his Soul having lasted a long time, wrought such a good habit in him, that he
seized on every, even the last Occasion of exerting his strenuous pursuit after
Virtue.

6. He watched so very much, that oft-times he lay without Sleeping all Night
long; and this not once, or so, but very often, to admiration. He eat once a
Day, after Sunset; sometimes but once in two Days; nay, and sometimes but once
in four Days. His Diet was Bread and Salt: His Drink only Water. Instead of a
Feather-Bed, he lay on a Mat; and sometimes in the bare Ground. He never
anointed himself, because he said 'twas more proper for the Younger to addict
themselves to Ascetick Exercises, than to seek out those things which
effeminate the Body: They should rather accustom themselves to labor, and to
bear the Apostle's saying in their Mind, 2 Cor. 12.10. When I am weak, when I
am strong; for then (said he) the Vi^our of the Spirit is renewed, and becomes
Athletick, when the Pleasures of the Body languish and are impaired. This also
was an admirable Thought of his, (viz.) That he do not think it proper to
measure our Progress (...) Virtue, by the length of the Time we first (...)
out, or by our Retirement, so much as by our Divine Desires, and Longings, and
the Encrea^^ of our Holy Purpose. And therefore he would not remember the Time
past; but every Day as though it were the first, he would express a more ardent
Thirst and Endeavor after a further Advance. Speaking by the way of Solloquie,
that of the Apostle, Phil. 2.14. For getting that which is behind, and pressing
forward And remembering the Voice of the Prophet Elias, who says, 2 King.
18.15. As the Lord of Hosts lives, before whom I stand, I will sure^ show my
self to day: for he observes from the Prophet's saying, To day, he did not take
(...) measure of the Time past; but every day, as (...) it were, laying the
first Foundation of his Ve^tue, he studied to approve himself such an o^ as he
ought to be before God; pure in Heart and ready to obey his Will, and no ones
els^ Every Christian Ascetick (said he) ought (...) see and learn within
himself his own Life from Elias, as in a Glass.

7. Antony having by this time, and by the^ means, recollected and simplify'd
himself, Trave^ led to the Tombs, which were at a considerable (...) stance
from that Town, having first acquainted one of his Acquaintance with it, who
supplied him with Bread enough to subsist upon a good while. When he was got
thither, he went into one of the Tombs, and shut the door over his Head, and
tarried within there by himself.

Now the Devil not being able to away with this, and afraid lest, in a little
time, the whole Desert should be filled with Asceticks, came one night with a
great company of Devils, and beat and bruised him at that fearful rate, that he
lay a long time Dumb, because of the Extremity of his Torments; for he
protested his Pains were so great, that 'twas impossible Men should be the
Instruments of the like. But, by the Providence of God, (for the Lord does not
forget those who hope in Him) the Day after an Acquaintance came with some
Loaves to him, who, as soon as he had opened the door, seeing him lying along,
like a Dead Man upon the Ground, took him up and carried him to the
Town-Church, and laid him upon the Pavement, where many of his Relations and
Towns-People sat by him, (as they there used to do about the Corpse of the
Dead.) Now about Midnight Antony came to himself, and awoke, and saw all asleep
but himself and his Acquaintance that brought him from the Tombs. Antony
therefore becken'd to him, and desired him to carry him back to the Tombs,
without disturbing any of them. Accordingly his Friend carried him.

8. And when he was returned thither, shuting down the Tomb-top, he tarried
within there as before; and not being able to stand, because of the Stripes the
Devil gave him, he prayed lying prostrate; and after he had prayed, he said
aloud, I Antony am here; I don't run away for your Strokes or Terrors: For
though you inflict more upon me, nothing shall separate me from the Love of
Christ. Then he sung that of the Psalmist, Though Hosts encamp against me, yet
shall not my Heart be afraid. Thus did Antony think and speak: But the envious
Enemy, and hater of all Good, wondering to see him appear so confident in
spite of all that he endured, sounded his Hounds together, and being burst
with Envy, said; See here, we have not tamed nor tired this Man, either with
the Spirit of Fornication, or with our Stripes and Buffetings: on the contrary,
he is grown the more daring against us; let us therefore set upon him some
other way, (for the Devil has always new Schemes ready at hand to promote his
malicious Designs.) Wherefore, not long after, they came and made such a great
Noise in the Nighttime, that the whole Monastery seemed to be shook, and the
Walls of the Cell to be broke through by the Devils transforming themselves
into the Shapes of all sorts of Beasts, Lions, Bears, Leopards, Bulls,
Serpents, Asps, Scorpions and Wolves; every one of which moved and acted
agreeably to the Creatures which they represented; the Lion roaring, and
seeming to make toward him, the Bull to but, the Serpent to creep, and the
Woolf to hare toward him, and so, in short, all the rest, according to their
Natural Motions; so that Antony was tortured and mangled with them so
grievously, that his Bodily Pain was greater now than before: However, he was
unmoved, composed, wakeful, and himself: He groaned indeed for Bodily Pains,
but he had a sober undisturbed Mind, and, as't were, laughing, he said; If ye
had any Strength, it would be enough for only one of you to come against me;
but because the Lord has enervated you, therefore ye thus try to scare me by a
Multitude; and (which is a manifest Indication of your Weakness) ye have put on
the Shapes of irrational Creatures. If ye have any Power, if ye have received
any Authority, don't delay, but seize me: But if ye have not Ability, Why do ye
trouble both me and your selves in vain? My Faith in God is a sufficient Seal
and Security of his standing by me. The Devils therefore having assaulted him a
long while to no purpose, gnash'd their Teeth at him; for they found they
mocked themselves more than they mocked him.

9. Moreover, the Lord did not forget Antony's Bravery at this time, but came
to his Help; for as Antony looked up, the Roof of the Cell was as it were
opened, and there was a Beam of Light shooting down, as it were, upon him;
whereupon the Devils straitway became Speechless; Antony's Pain too presently
ceased, and the Roof closed again. Now Antony being sensible of the Ease that
had been sent him, and that he had gained Breath, and respite from his Dolours,
spoke respectively to the Vision, and said; Where wast thou before? Why did
thou not appear at first, that thou might assuage my Pain? And a Voice said
unto him, Antony, I was here; but I waited to see thy Behavior under this
Trial; and since thou have valiantly gone through it, and have not been
conquered, I will always be thy Helper, and make thee famous in all Places.
Having heard this, he rose and prayed, and grew so strong, that he perceived he
had more Strength now in his Body than he had before; being now near the 35th
Year of his Life.

10. The Day following, as he was walking out, he found himself stronger bent
to the Exercise of Religion; and he went to that Old Man (whom I mentioned
before) that Night, and would fain have co-habited with him in the Desert: But
the Old Man refusing, because of his Age, and the Unusualness of the thing,
Antony immediately fled into the Mountain. Now the Enemy again observing his
Zeal, and being willing to retard it, laid the semblance of a large piece of
Plate in his way. Antony perceiving his Craft, and spying the Devil in the
Dish, chid it after this manner: Whence should this Dish come hither? This is
no beaten Road, neither is here any Traveller's tread: If it had been lost,
it is too big not to be recovered again presently: Doubtless it would have been
found if they had returned; and, doubtless, had any one lost it, he would have
returned, because the place is so solitary. This is certainly one of the
Devil's Tricks: But, however, thou shall not impede my Holy Purpose so: May it
perish with thee. No sooner was the Word uttered, but the Plate dis-appeared,
like Smoke before the Fire.

11. Another time he saw not only a resemblance, but real Gold thrown in the
way: Whether it was a bad Spirit, or some good Power that laid it there to try
the Hero, and to show the Devil that he did not value real Money, he neither
told me, nor do I know any more of it then that it was really what it appeared
to be. Antony wondered at the Abundance of it, and leaping over it, as a Man in
a Fright over a Fire, never stood so much as to look back upon it; but run away
so fast and so far, that he was latent a considerable Time after.

And now St. Antony continuing still more and more intent upon his Purpose,
placed himself in an empty Castle that was on the other side of the River;
though before he came 'twas full of reptile Creatures, yet when he went in the
Serpents left the Place, as though it had been haunted by an Enemy. Here, after
he had stopped up the Entry, he laid in Bread enough to serve him half a Year,
(which the Thebans often do; nay, sometimes they will continue without moulding
a Year together) and having a continued supply of Water within, he winded up
his Soul to God. There he continued always in his Monastery, having entered it,
as a Holy Chancel; neither stirring out himself, nor taking Notice of Comers;
only once in six Months he took in some Loaves at the top of the House.

12. Some of his Acquaintance came often to him, and because he would not let
them in, lived often without doors whole Days and Nights by him, and seemed to
hear a tumultuous rout within, bawling and wailing from within, and crying, Get
away from our place; What have you to do in the Wilderness, since you
countenance none of our Devices? Those that were without thought it might be
some Travelers that had got into him by Ladders at the top of the Castle; But
after they had leant down and peeped through a little crack and saw no body,
they concluded they were Devils; and being afraid, they called to St. Antony;
but he heeded the Devils more than them; and whereas they expected to have seen
him dead, they heard him saying, Let God arise, and his Enemies be scattered:
Let them vanish, as the Smoke vanishes: As the Wax melts before the Fire, so
Sinners shall perish from the Presence of God. And again; All Nations compassed
me round about; but in the Name of the Lord I stav'd them off.

13. Thus did he lead Twenty Years in private Exercise, never stirring out, or
seen by any one. But, at last, many others desiring to imitate his Ascetick
Life, and other Acquaintance coming to him, and breaking open the Door by
force, Antony came out of the Castle, as out of an inaccessible Sanctuary,
being matriculated a Member of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and become full of God.
The Spectators, when he came out, were in an Amaze, to see his Body, that had
been so belabour'd by Devils, in the same shape in which it was before his
Retirement. The Temper of his Soul was very pure; neither clouded by Sadness,
nor shattered by Voluptuousness: Neither Laughter nor Melancholy held him in
their Chains: The sight of the Multitude did not disturb him; nor their Praises
make him vain: But he was entirely smooth and regular, steered by Reason and
Revelation, and fixed in the primitive State of Nature. Our Lord healed many
Sick Persons by him. He also cleansed many that were possessed, comforted many
that were grieved, and reconciled many that were fallen out, charging them all
to prefer none of the Things of this World before the Love of Christ;
discoursing and exhorting them to be mindful of future Goods, and of the great
Philanthropy of God, who spared not his own Son, but gave Him up for us all. He
persuaded many to choose a solitary Life; and by this means there came to be
many Monasteries in the Mountains: So that now the Deserts were turned into a
City by Monks that left their Estates and Houses, and entered themselves Members
of the Heavenly City.

14. Once he had an Occasion to pass over the Trench of the Arsenoites, to see
some of his Brethren Monks; which Trench was very full of Crocodiles; but St.
Antony, and all that were with him, by the pure Virtue of Prayer, went over
unhurt. When he returned to his Monastery, he obliged himself to very severe
and youth-like Enterprises. By his Conferences he would be continually
increasing the Fervor of other Monks, and exciting many others to the Love of
Exercise; and by the magnetism of his Discourses many more Monasteries were
erected; all looking upon him as their Father.

15. One Day among the rest, as he was walking out, he told the other of his
Brethren Monks, (who came to him with a desire to hear him) in the Egyptian
Language, that the Holy Scriptures are sufficient for Instruction: But,
nevertheless, it is decent for us to confirm one another in the Faith by
Exhortation, and to cheer and anoint each other's Spirits by mutual Discourses.
Wherefore do ye, my Sons, bring your Father what ye know; and I, who am your
Elder, will communicate to you what I know by Experience: But besure, in a
peculiar manner, to take care to be communicative and unanimous; and that now
ye have begun, ye don't grow slack, nor faint in your Warfare; nor say with
your selves, We have laid out so much; item. so much Time upon Exercise: But
rather, as beginning every day, let us enlarge our Resolution; for the Life of
Man altogether is very short, if we compare it with future Ages: All our Time
is nothing to Eternal Life. Every thing else is Sold for its Value, and like is
Exchanged for like: But the Promise we have of Eternal Life is a cheap
Purchase. For it is writ, The Days of our Life are Seventy Years, and if by
great Strength we reach Fourscore, or more, they are but Labor and Sorrow.
Now, if we spend Eighty Years in Exercise, we shall not reign an Hundred Years
for it; but instead of an Hundred, we shall reign for ever and ever. Again;
After we have contended on Earth, our Inheritance will not be upon Earth; but
we hold Promises of Heaven. Again; After we have laid aside a Mortal Body, we
are clothed with an Immortal One. Wherefore, Children, let us not faint;
neither let us think we lay out much Time for God, or do any great Matters; for
the Sufferings of this present Life are not worthy to be compared with the
Glory that shall be revealed. Neither let us think that we have parted with
great Possessions; for the whole Earth is very small, with respect to Heaven.
For just as one who parts with a Mite, for an Hundred Broad Pieces: So, were
any one Lord of all the Earth, and parted with it for Heaven, he parts with a
Mite, and receives an Hundredfold. But if all the Earth is not worth Heaven,
then, certainly, he who leaves a few Acres for it, does, in a manner, leave
nothing at all. If, therefore, any of us parts with a Mansion, or with Gold, he
should neither vaunt nor despond: But we should rather consider, that if we
don't leave them for the Sake of Virtue; yet, afterward, when we Die, we often
leave them to whom we would not; as the Preacher has minded us. Shall we not
therefore leave it for the sake of Virtue, to inherit a Kingdom? Let us have a
Thirst after true Possessions; for, What does it signify to possess those
things which we cannot carry away with us? Let us rather acquire those Goods
which will follow us into the other World; such as are Wisdom, Justice,
Sobriety, Fortitude, Spiritual Prudence, Charity, Love of Worldly Poverty,
Faith in Christ, Freedom from Anger, Delight in Hospitality; if we possess
these, we shall find they will procure us a Mansion in the Land of the Meek.
These things duly considered no Person can be Negligent, especially if he
consider that he is the Lord's Servant, and ought to serve Him. Since therefore
every one is his Servant, no one should dare to say, I do not work to day, for
I wrought yesterday; or by measuring the time past, to be idle for the time to
come. But every day a true Disciple of Christ will show the same Readiness of
Mind, that (as it is written) he may please his Lord, and not run a risque in
the Concerns of his Soul. So also let us every day persevere in Exercise,
knowing that if we are Negligent one day, we shall not be pardoned for it,
because we did well the day before. No, God is offended with such Negligence as
we read in Ezekiel. So also Judas, by one Night's Impiety, lost the Fruits of
his time past. Let us therefore, Children, adhere to Exercise, and not suffer
our Spirits to be bejaded: for herein the Lord is our Fellow Laborer; as it is
written, The Lord co-operates for Good with every one that wills and works
Good. Now, in order to our not being Negligent, there is a Noble saying of the
Apostle, on which we should often meditate, 1 Cor. 15.31. I die daily: for if we
so live as those, who consider they may die every day, we shall not sin. Whence
we learn every Day, when we rise, not to reckon upon our stay till the Evening;
and again, when we lie down to sleep, to suppose we shall not rise; because our
Life is uncertain by Nature; which Providence daily measures out to us. By
being thus disposed, and living so every day, we shall not offend; nor lust
after any forbidden Object; or be angry with any one; or lay up treasure on
Earth: But thus dying every day, we shall be possessing nothing, and forgive
all Offenses, being freed from all desire of filthy Pleasure; reputing it as
transeunt; always striving, and having the Day of Judgment in our Eye: for a
great fear of Eternal Torments takes off the Appetite from excess of Pleasure,
and rears up the Soul when it begins to stoop. Wherefore, having set foot in
the path of Virtue, let us advance faster and faster: and that we may be
Masters of all Opportunities before us, let none of us look back, as did Lot's
Wife; for our Lord has positively said, that No one that puts his hand to the
Plough, and looks back, is fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. Now, by the
Expression look back, is meant nothing else but to change our Thoughts, and to
relish the Things of this World. Be not startled when ye hear any thing of
Virtue; neither think strange of the Name; for it is not far from us, nor
without us; but the work is in our Power, and an easy matter, if we have but
an hearty Resolution. The Greeks travel and cross the Seas to learn Letters;
but we need not travel for the Kingdom of Heaven; or to cross the Seas for
Virtue; for our Lord has told us before hand, ^^k. 17.21. The Kingdom of Heaven
is within you: Wherefore Virtue stands only in need of the Will, since it is
within us, and built up out of us: For Virtue consists of a Soul which has a
primitive Natural Temper. Now the Mind is so when it has that Temper wherein it
was created. 'Twas created very beautiful and upfight; for which reason Jesus
the Son of Nave bid the People, Joshua 24.23. Incline your heart unto the Lord
God of Israel: as John also; Make strait your paths; for the Soul's being
strait or upright, does consist in its having its intellectual Faculty in that
posture in which it was created. Again; When the Soul bends, or is crooked,
from Nature's posture, then the Soul has Evil imputed to it: Wherefore, the
Business is not so difficult as some make it; for if we continue as we were
made, we are in a State of Virtue: But if we purpose things that are wicked, we
are arraigned before God for wicked Persons. If this Accomplishment were such,
as that it must necessarily be procured from without us, it would be difficult:
But since it is within us, let us keep our selves from evil, filthy Purposes;
and having received so great a Trust from God, let us keep our selves for God,
that he may own his Work, when he sees it such as he made it. Let us contend
earnestly, lest Wrath tyrannize, or Lust domineer over it; for it is written,
The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God: But Lust, when it has
conceived, brings forth Sin; and Sin, when it is finished, brings forth Death.

But since the Case is so with us, let us be sincerely sober, and, as it is
written, Keep our Hearts with all Diligence: for we have shrewd and subtle
Enemies, even wicked Devils. To which I add, with the Apostle; We wrestle not
against Flesh and Blood; but against Principalities and Powers, against the
Rulers of this World, against Spiritual Wickednesses in high places; for there
is a vast rout of them in the Air against us: Nor are they far from us: But
there is a great difference in Devils.

But to speak of their Nature and Diversity would take up too much time: A
Narrative of that kind must be the work of greater Abilities: That which lies
upon us, as necessary to be known, is, their various Subtilties against us. And
here be it known, that the Devils were not by Nature, what they are by Name:
For God made nothing Evil: But they were created Fair and Good: But having
fallen from an Heavenly Prudence, and now wheeling about the Earth, they
deceived the Gentiles with their Fantasies. And now, that they envy us
Christians, they leave no stone unturned to hinder us from Entering into the
Kingdom of Heaven; lest we should get thither whence they fell: therefore we
stand in need of much Prayer and Exercise, till we obtain the Gift of
discerning of Spirits; for when once a Man has obtained that, he may be able to
know, which of them is more, and which less Wicked; and whither their different
Endeavors mostly tend; and by what Means every one of them may be conquered
and cast out: For they have several Wiles and Stratagems. Hence came that
Saying of the Apostle, and his Followers: For we are not ignorant of his
Devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. Since therefore we are tempted by them, we should be
setting one another's Souls to rights. Wherefore, I having partly experienced
their Wiles, do now, but as a Child, speak something to you about them. Well
then; If they observe any Christians, especially Monks, laboring hard to make
a considerable Progress in Virtue, they assault and tempt them, by laying
continual obstacles in their way, (viz.) evil Thoughts. But, however, we should
not be afraid of their Threats; for by Prayer, and Fasting, and Faith in God,
they quickly fall. But after they have been thrown, they don't desist; but
presently come again subtlely and deceitfully; for if they cannot cheat our
Hearts by gross Pleasures, they will assault us another way, striving to
terrify us by false Appearances, and transforming themselves into the Shapes
of Women, Beasts, Serpents, Bulky Bodies, and Armies of Soldiers: Even then
our Hea^^^ should not mis-give us; for they are nothing* and presently
dis-appear; especially, if the Christian immures and fortifies himself with the
Faith, and the Sign of the Cross: But still they are very bold and impudent:
for when they have been thus vanquished, they set upon us another way, and
pretend to Prophecy, and foretell things to come: Also to scare us, they will
represent themselves so Tall, as to touch the Cieling, and proportionably
Broad, that they may steal those away by such Delusions, whom they could not
deceive by their Sophistry. But if they find a Soul so secured with Faith, and
that Hope which attends true Repentance, as to resist them still; at last they
bring the Prince of the Devils.

16. He said also that the Devil often appeared just as he is described in Job
41.18, 19, 20. His Eyes are like the Eyelids of the Morning. Out of his Mouth
go burning Lamps, and sparks of Fire leap out. Out of his Nostrils goes Smoke,
as out of a Seething-pot or Caldron. When the Prince of the Devils makes such a
figure, the old Impostor strikes Terror upon Flesh, and speaks very big. And
therefore he is upbraided, where we read; He esteems Iron as Straw, and Brass
as rotten Wood, and looks upon the Sea as a Pot of Ointment, and the deep Abyss
as his Conquest; even the Abyss is to him as a Walk. And by the Prophet, Ezekiel.
15.9. the Enemy said, I will, and will overtake. And again by another Prophet,
Isa. 10.14. I will grasp the whole Earth in my hand like a Nest, and take it up
like forsaken Eggs. And to speak all in one Word, they often make such Brags
and Promises only to deceive those who worship God. But we that are Faithful
should not fear his Appearances; nor give ear to his Words; for he is a Liar,
and speaks not a true Word: For, in truth, notwithstanding all his Vaunting,
our Savior draws him, like the Leviathan, by a Hook. Job 41.1. Like an Ox, he
has an Halter upon his Head, and his Nostrils are bored with a Ring, and his
Lips with an Hoople of Disgrace, like a Fugitive. He is tied, like a Sparrow,
by the Lord, so that we may justly deride him. He and his Crew crawl now like
Serpents: So that now he may be trod upon by us Christians. This is a certain
Sign that our way of Living mads and crosses him; for he, who before vapour'd
that he would make the Sea like a Pot of Ointment, and clinch the Earth in his
Fist, lo! now he cannot so much as hinder you from Exercise; or keep me from
speaking to you against him. Wherefore we mind not what he says; neither do we
shrink for his Objections and Lies; for there is nothing but a seeming light in
them: They are only, as it were, the Portraitures of the Fire prepared for
them. They would fain fright us with those Fires with which they will be
tormented themselves; but they are quickly detected in their Falacies, and do
not hurt the Faithful: But only give us a semblance of that Fire with which the
Wicked will be tormented. Wherefore, it behooves us not to fear; for all their
Devices, through the Grace of Christ, come to naught; for they are full of
Guile, and ready to be transformed into all Shapes. Hence it is that they often
pretend to sing Psalms, and cite the Scriptures; and sometimes whilst we are a
Reading, they give us Echoes of what we read; and often, in our Sleep, raise us
up to Prayers. And this they will do continually, not suffering us to rest:
Nay, and sometimes they will put on the Religious Habit of Monks, and talk like
Religious Persons, that they may deceive us by such Appearances; and when we
are deceived, lead us whither they please: But we should not give ear (or
listen) to them at all. No; though they wake us to pray, and advise us not to
eat at all; or pretend to condemn and deject us for those Matters in which they
before encouraged us: for they don't do this out of a Principle of Religion, or
Truth; but that they may bring the Simple into Despair, and make them apt to
say, Exercise is unprofitable, and so make them nauseate a Solitary, as a very
grievous and burdensome way of Living, and may entangle those who have entered
into a Course of Self-Government. Wherefore a Prophet, whom the Lord sent, has
declared such Miserable: Hab. 2.15. Woe be to him who offers his Neighbors
thick dregs to drink; because such Schemes and Purposes do turn us out of the
Path that leads up to Virtue: for our Lord Himself muzzled the Devils, though
they spoke Truth, and commanded them to be silent; for they did speak Truth
when they said, Thou art the Son of God, Matt. 8.29. Mark 1.25. lest with the
Truth, they also slily sow their Perverseness with the more Advantage; and that
he may accustom us not to hearken to them, though they seem to speak Truth; for
it is very unseemly for us, who have the Holy Scriptures, and Deliverance by our
Savior, to be taught by the Devil, who kept not his own Station, but studied
Disorder: For this Reason he is forbid, Psalm. 50.16. to quote Scripture; Unto
the Wicked, said God, wherefore do thou utter my Statutes, and take my
Covenant in thy Mouth: for they do pretend, and disturb all things to delude
the Simple: Sometimes they stamp, sometimes they laugh, and sometimes they
hiss. But when one regards them not, then they weep and lament, as vanquished:
For this Reason the Lord God muzzled the Devils. We therefore having learnt
this from the Holy Scriptures, ought to resist them, and imitate their
Resoluteness and Stratagems against us. Pray eye the Example of David, Psalm. 39
2. Whilst the Wicked was before me I was deaf, and still, and held my peace,
even from good Words: And again, Like a deaf Man I heard not, and as one who is
dumb I opened not my my Mouth: I became like a Man who does not hear. Wherefore
let us not hear them, as being Strangers to us; nor obey them, although they
wake us to go to Prayers, or talk about Fasts: But rather let us attend to the
Purpose of our Exercise, and not be deceived by them, who always act with
Deceit: Neither let us be afraid, though they should come with Force against
us, and threaten to kill us: for they are weak, and can do nothing but
threaten: But this by the By: But now I think of it, I must not think much to
speak more largely of these matters to you; for a Remembrance of them will be
safe for you. When our Lord was a Pilgrim upon Earth, the Enemy fell, and his
Forces were weakened. For this Reason he, a Tyrant, though fallen, is not at
rest yet; but threatens us with Words. Think of this all of ye, and despise the
Devil. Were they confined to such Bodies as these, they might possibly say, Men
lie hid, and we do not find them: But when we do find them, we make work with
them. But if the Case were so with them, we might hide our selves, by shutting
the Doors against them: But since it is not so; but their Nature, on the
contrary, is such, that they can enter in even when the Door is shut, and they
themselves are all over, and all about us in the Air, together with their
Principal, the DESTROYER; and do always will Mischief, and are ready girt to do
it; and the Devil, as our Savior has told us, the Father of Mischief, John
8.44. is a Murderer; and we now live a Life of War against him: it is plain now,
that notwithstanding they are not embodyed, they have no Strength; and
therefore their Weakness cannot be imputed to the Confinement of Bodies; for no
Place hinders them from laying their Snares; neither do they spare us because
we are their Friends; neither are they Lovers of Good, to rectify us: But they
are rather more Wicked. And there is nothing about which they are so
solicitous, as to mischief us, and all the Friends of Virtue, and of the true
worship of God. But because they are able to do nothing, therefore they are
continually pretending and threatening: Could they do any thing, they would not
delay; but they would put their Mischief in Execution; for their Design against
us is inveterate. Ye see we are here together, and speak against them in spite
of their Teeth, and they do know that they are weakened by our Proficiency in
Virtue. Had they Power and Authority, they would not suffer one of us
Christians to live; for Piety is an Abomination to a Sinner. And having not
such Power, they wound and vex themselves the more, because they cannot put
their Threats in Execution: This should often be in our Thoughts, that we may
not be afraid of them. Had they any Power remaining in them, they would not
have came in such a Multitude, or put on such Appearances, or have transformed
themselves for Stratagems sake. Were it otherwise, the Strength of one would
have sufficed to have done what he list. For a Wicked Being, that is invested
with Power, does not kill in Effigy, or terrify by Multitudes, but abuses his
Power as he pleases: But the Devils being stripped of their Power, like Actors on
a Stage, shift themselves into many Shapes, which only fright Children: And
therefore their Weakness should render them contemptible in our Eyes. The true
Angel, (of whom we read, 2 Kings 19.35.) who was sent by the Lord, stood in no
need of Multitude, or outward Appearances, or Shoutings, or Clappings, but made
use of his Power without Noise; and strait-way killed an Hundred and Eighty
Five Thousand. Only weak Angels strive to terrisie by Phansies.

17. But if any one here should have Job's Case in his Thoughts, and ask, How
came the Devil to do so much against Job? He plumed him of his Estate, killed
his Children, and struck his Body with a grievous Ulcer. I answer such in one,
the Devil had no Power; but God gave it him for the Trial of Job: Being able to
effect nothing of himself, and without leave, he requested Power, and got it:
And therefore the Devil is the more to be despised, because he had not Power,
so much as against one Righteous Person; for had he had it, he would not have
requested it. His having begged it, not only once, but a second time, shows
that he had not Power. And truly we need not wonder that he had no Power
against Job; for he could not hurt mere Brutes, without God's Permission. Matt.
8.31. He has no Authority, no not so much as over the Swine: for it is written,
that they entreated the Lord, saying, Suffer us to go into the Swine. Now, if
they have no Authority over the Swine, much less over Men, who were made after
God's Image: God alone ought to be feared: As for Devils, they should be
despised, not dreaded in the least. The more they level against us, the more
intent let us be upon Exercise; for an upright Life, and Faith in God, is a
very serviceable piece of Armor against them. They are afraid of the Fasting,
the Prayer, the Vigilance, the Meekness, the Contentedness, the Contempt of
Money and Glory, the Lowliness and Love of Poverty, the Alms and Meekness of
Asceticks; but principally, of their Piety to Christ. This is the Reason why
they make such a bustle, that there may be none to trample on them: For they
are very sensible that Christians have Grace given them by our Savior against
themselves: For He himself says, Luke 10.19. Behold, I have given you Power to
tread upon Serpents and Scorpions, and every Power of the Enemy. Whenever
therefore they pretend to foretell future things, let no one presume to regard
them: For sometimes they tell us of Brethren, that meet us some Days after, and
accordingly we meet them. But this they do without any principle of Kindness to
them, to whom they tell it: For they do it only to persuade them to believe
them in other Matters; and having once got them in their Clutches, they, at
length, find an Opportunity to undo them. Therefore we must not give them the
Hearing, but reject them, and tell them, We do not want to know such
unnecessary Matters. Besides too, What wonder is it if they, whose Bodies are
so much finer than Men's, when they have seen Persons set out upon a Journey,
get before them, and give Notice of it? Has not an Horseman the same Advantage
of one who travels on Foot? We need not therefore admire them for this: For
they do not foretell of things that are not; God alone knows things before they
are. To how many do these Devils run, like Thieves, beforehand, and tell them
what we are now a doing, and how we are Discoursing against them, before any of
us depart hence, and acquaint others with it? but, Cannot any that runs do the
same trick by one that walks gently? To make this familiar by an Instance;
Suppose a Person begins to walk from Thebes, or any other Town, and the Devils,
before he begins to walk, don't know that he will walk; but when they see him
walking, run beforehand, and give Notice of it before he is come, and
accordingly he comes at the time mentioned; Can this be called a Prediction?
nay, oftimes when those who began to walk return back, they deceive them. In
like manner they trifle about the River-Water; for having seen many Rains fall
in some Quarters of Egypt, and thence conjecturing, that the River will
overflow before the Water come to Egypt, they run and give Notice of the Flood:
Which Men might easily do if they could run so fast. They are just like David's
Spies, who (2 Kings 13.14.) went up to the top, and saw a Person coming, before
him that tarried below. This is to foretell things that are already upon the
Anvil, instead of foretelling suture Events. Thus these Spirits tell one
another, Such a Person is Sick, or the like, only that they may deceive:
Whereas, should Providence (as He can) decree any contrary Accident concerning
the Waters, or the Travelers, the Devils have falsify'd, and those that minded
them are deceived. Thus the Prophesies of the Greeks were packed together, and
they were deceived by the Devil in former times; and, at length, a period was
put to their Deceit: for the Lord came and brought the Devils with their
Subtleties to naught. For they see nothing of themselves; but, like Thieves,
carry away what they see from others: So that they are rather Conjecturers,
than Foretellers. Let no one therefore admire them, if they speak Truth
sometimes: For just so Physicians, after they have observed in others the same
Diseases, by Symptoms and comparing, give Notice of them in their Patients. So
also Mariners and Husbandmen observe the Temper of the Air, and, by Use,
forebode that there will be a Storm, or a Calm, Now, no one says, such foretell
from Divine Providence; but from Experience and Custom. Wherefore, if the
Devils do so, they neither deserve Admiration, nor Attention: for, What
Advantage can it be to know such things beforehand, if they be true? for such
Knowledge as this neither contributes to Virtue, nor Good Manners. No one is
judged for what he does not know of this kind, nor benefitted by having learnt
it: But every Man is judged by God and himself, whether he has kept the Faith,
and observed his Commands: To this we should give great Attendance. Our
Exercise and Contention should be, not to foreknow; but to walk wellpleasing
in God's Sight. And we ought to Pray, not that we may foreknow, nor to request
this as the Reward of our Exercise; but that our Lord may work with us toward
our obtaining a Victory over the Devil.

But if we find our selves solicitous to foreknow, [indeed] let us be pure in
our Minds; for, I do believe that a Soul, in every respect pure, and brought to
its primitive Frame, may become so discerning, as to see, by the Revelation of
our Lord, both more and remoter Events too, than Devils. Just so the Soul of
Elisha saw Gehazi, 2 Kings 5.25. and the Hosts standing before him, 6.17.

18. When, therefore, they come in the Night, and are willing to tell things,
or say, We are good Angels, believe them not; for they lie: Or, if they praise
your Exercise, or call you Happy, believe them not; neither submit so far to
them as to hear them. But rather cross your selves and your Families, and pray
together, and ye shall see them vanish: for they are dastardly, and dread the
Sign of our Lord's Cross, because by that our Savior made them bare, and
publicly exposed them, Col. 2.15. Moreover, if they grow more and more
Impudent, and leap about wantonly in various Shapes, don't be afraid, or attend
to them as good Spirits; for, by God's Assistance, 'twill be possible, nay
easy, to distinguish between the Presence of a Good and a Bad Spirit: For, the
Appearance of Holy Spirits is not with Disturbance and Disorder, Matt. 12.19.
for, He will not strive, nor cry, neither does any one hear their Voice. But a
Good Spirit visits in such a sweet and delectable manner, that Joy, and
Transport, and Confidence, presently cover the Soul that is visited: For, the
Lord is with them, who is our Joy; and the Power of God the Father. Besides
too, when they visit, the Thoughts of the Soul are free from Consternation and
Wavering: For the Soul, being enlightened by such a Vision, views with Ease the
Spirits that appear. Furthermore, it has a certain desire of Divine and future
things seizing it, and is willing to join with the Spirits, and to go out with
them. And if those, to whom they appear, be afraid of the Vision, they
presently take away the Fear by Love, as Gabriel did from Zachary, Luke 1.13.
As also, the Angel which appeared to the Women at the Divine Tomb, Matt. 28.5.
A Testimony of this Truth too, is, that saying of the Shepherds in the Gospel,
Luke 12.10. Be ye not afraid: for the Fear of Good Men is not a Fear of
Pusillanimity; but it proceeds from the Sense of the Advent of superior
Beings. So much concerning the Nature of the Vision of Good Angels.

But the Incursion and Appearance of Evil Spirits is disturbed with Noise, and
Clamor, and Brawling, like the Hurlyburly of untaught Boys, or High-way-men:
whence proceeds Timidity of Soul, Confusion, and Ataxy of Thoughts, Grief,
Hatred of Asceticks, great Despondence, Tediousness, Remembrance of Relations,
and Fear of Death: in short, Lusting after Evil things, Wearisomness of Virtue,
and Disorderliness of Morals. Wherefore, after you have been frighted with a
Vision, if your Fear be presently taken away, and there succeed in the room of
it a Joy unalterable, and you find within your self Cheerfulness, and
Confidence, and Refreshment, and Composedness of Thought, and all the other
things which I mentioned before, as M^nl^ness, and Love toward God, take
Courage and pray; for Joy and Steddiness of Soul discovers the Holiness of the
Spirit that is present. Thus Abraham, when he saw the Lord exulted, John 8.56.
And John, when he heard a Voice from Mary, Mother of God, leaped for Joy: But
if there be Confusion in those that appear and Noise from without, and Wordly
Pharasies, and Threatenings of Death, with the other Disorders abovementioned,
their know that it is the Sally of Wicked Spirits. Let this be a Common Rule, If
the Soul be searful, there are Enemies in sight; for they are Devils that don't
take away that Fearfulness, as the great Archangel Gabriel did from Mary, and
Zachary, and the Angel that appeared at the Tomb from the Women: But Wicked
Angels, when they see Men afraid, they increase their Fantasies, that they may
dread them the more: and so, at last, they assault them, and jeer them, and bid
them fall down and worship. Thus they deceived the Gentiles. By this Means they
that were not Gods, were falsely called Gods. But our Lord has not suffered us
to be deluded by the Devil, whom he rebuked, when he was exciting such Fancies
in Him, Luke 4.8. Get thee behind me Satan: for it is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve. Let therefore the
crafty one be more and more despised: For what our Lord spoke, he spoke for our
sake, that the Devil, hearing the same Words from us, may be overturned by the
Power of the Lord, who so rebuked them then.

19. But when we have cast out Devils we should not vaunt, neither when we have
cured Diseases should we be lifted up; or admire one that casts out Devils, or
despise one that does not cast them out: But, let every one mind every one's
Discipline, and either imitate or emulate it, or rectisie it. For doing of
Signs and Wonders is not our Business: This belongs to our Savior. Hence, Luke
10.20. He says to his Disciples, Rejoice not because the Devils are subject
unto you; but because your Names are written in Heaven: For our having our
Names written in Heaven is a Testimony of our Virtue and regular Life: But to
cast out Devils is the pure Gift of our Savior, who gave it. Whence we read,
Matt. 7.22. that to those who glorying, not in their Virtue, but in Signs,
said, Lord, have we not cast out Devils in thy Name? and in thy Name done many
Wonders? Our Savior said, Truly, I say unto you, I know you not: for the Lord
knows not the ways of the Ungodly. In short, as I said before, we should always
pray for the Gift of discerning of Spirits, that, as it is written, (1 John
4.1.) we may not believe every Spirit.

20. I thought, indeed, now to have concluded, and been silent of what
concerned my self, and to have contented my self with giving these Memento's.
But that ye may not think I speak these things idly, but do declare them from
Experience, and a Knowledge of the Truth, therefore (though I become as a Pool
thereby, however, the Lord knows the Purity of my Conscience, and that I do not
do it for my own sake, but out of Love to you, and to encourage you,) I will
further acquaint you with some of them. As often as they applauded me, when I, in
the Name of the Lord, cursed them: when they would be foretelling the Overflow
of the River, and I asked them, What need you concern your selves about that?
when once they came threatening and surrounding me, like Soldiers accoutred and
horsed; and another while filled the House with Wild Beasts and creeping
Creatures, and I sung Psalm. 19.8. These in Chariots, and they on Horses; but we
will rejoice in the Name of the Lord our God; they were presently routed by the
Mercy of Christ. Another time when they came and made an Appearance of Light in
the Dark, and said, We are come, Antony, to lend thee our Light: but I prayed,
shutting my Eyes, because I disdained to behold their Light, presently the
Light of the Ungodly was put out. A few Months after they came singing, and
talking out of the Holy Scriptures; but I, as though Deaf, hearkened not to
them, but prayed that I might abide unshaken in my. Mind. After this they came
and made a Noise, and hissed and danced; but as soon as I prayed, and lay along
singing by my self, they presently began to wail and weep, as though they were
spent: But I glorified God, who plucked down their Boldness, and exposed their
Fury. Once there came a Devil, very tall in Appearance, that dared to say, I am
the Power of God, and I am Providence, What would thou have me bestow upon
thee? But I spit upon him, and, having named the Name of Christ, endeavored to
beat him; nay, and I seemed to beat him; and he immediately, at the Naming of
Christ, as great as he was, disappeared with the rest of the Devils. And when
he came, as I was fasting in a Monk's Habit, with Loaves in his Arms, and said,
Eat, and take some Refreshment (you toil more than you need) otherwise you will
grow weak; for you are a Man: But I observed his Stratagem, and rose up to
Pray; which he not enduring to see, presently failed, and, going out of Doors,
disappeared like Smoke. As often as he laid Gold before me, to touch it, and see
it, I fell to Psalmody; and then he would pine. As often as they beat me with
Stripes, I said, Nothing shall separate me from the Love of Christ; and after
that they beat one another. However, it was not I that vanquished them, but the
Lord, who said, Luke 10.18. I saw Satan falling, like Lightning from Heaven.

Now I, my Children, being mindful of the Apostle's Saying, applied this to my
self, that ye may learn not to faint, nor be afraid of the Devil and his
Agents. And since I have been a Fool in telling this, receive from what I have
said a Spirit of Fear, and believe me; for I don't lie. Once one of them
knocked at the Door of my Cell, and when I opened it, I saw a tall Figure; and
when I asked him, Who art thou? He answered, I am Satan: said I, What makes you
be here? He answered, Why do all the Monks, and other Christians, blame me
undeservedly? Why do they hourly curse me? said I, Why do thou trouble them?
said he, I don't disturb them: But they trouble themselves; for I am weak.
Surely they have not read, Psalm. 9.7. O thou Enemy, Destructions are come to a
perpetual End; and thou have destroyed Cities. I have no longer a Place, an
Arrow, or a City: There are now Christians every where; and, at last, the
Desert is filled with Monks. Let them preserve themselves, and not curse me to
no purpose. Then I admiring the Grace of the Lord, said unto him, Thou art
always a Liar, and never speak Truth: Thou have spoke the Truth to me (now)
against thy Will: for Christ being come has made thee weak and bare. After he
had heard the Name of our Savior, which scorched him so that he could not
endure it, he disappeared. If therefore the Devil himself owns that he is weak,
it is our Duty always to despise him and his Agents. Thus ye see how many Wiles
the Enemy, with his Hounds, has against us: But I, having learnt his
Weaknesses, have showed my Contempt of him those several ways which I have
mentioned to you. Don't let us sink in our Minds, or form or entertain Fears
within our selves, saying, Lest the Devil come and overthrow us, and, of a
sudden, take us up, and throw us down, and put us out of Order. Let us have
none of these Thoughts, nor be Sorrowful, as though we were perishing: But
rather let us rejoice and be glad, as being in the Number of those who shall be
saved; and consider with our selves, that the Lord is with us, who have
triumphed over Devils, and put them to flight; and let us always think, that,
the Lord being with us, our Enemies can do us no harm: for they deal with us
differently, according as they find us differently disposed; and according to
the Thoughts which they find within us: Thus, if they find us dastardly and
disturbed, they form strange Fancies within us; just like Cutthroats and
Robbers; they presently seize upon the place which they find unguarded.
Whatever we think of our selves, to that they will be sure to add; If we are
dejected, they increase our Timerousness, by injecting Fancies and Threats; and
so the miserable Soul is tortured by them. But if they find us rejoicing in the
Lord, and discoursing of Matters that do relate to Him, seeing the Soul fenced
with such Thoughts, they are confounded and turn aside; because all things are
in the Lord's Hand, and a Devil prevails not against a Christian. When the
Enemy saw Job immured thus, he run away from him: But when he found Judas
destitute of these, he took him Captive. So that if we would despise the Enemy,
we should always think of the things that relate to the Lord; and our Souls
would be always rejoicing in Hope; and we should see all the Devil's ludicrous
Tricks be like Smoke, and they themselves rather flying than pursuing. For, as
I told you before, they themselves are very fearful, always expecting the Fire
prepared for them. Take this therefore for a Sign not to be afraid of them;
When any Spirit appears, faint not for Fear; But be the Vision what it will,
first boldly ask, Who art thou, and Whence? and if it be the Appearance of a
Good Spirit, thou will presently be strengthened with Plerophory, and turn thy
Surprise of Fear into Joy: But if it be a Diabolical Appearance, it presently
fails, when it sees thy Mind strong; for thy asking, Who, and whence art thou?
is a Sign of the Ataxy of thy Mind. Thus Joshua the Son of Nave, Josh. 5.13.
learn by asking: and the Enemy was not concealed when Daniel asked.

Antony having discoursed after this manner, they all rejoiced, insomuch, that
their Love of Virtue was increased, and the Negligence of some was shook off,
and the Opinionativeness or Self-Conceit, and Vainglory of others ceased; and
all were persuaded to despise the Devil's Treachery, admiring the Grace that
was given to St. Antony by our Lord for his Exercise.

21. The MONASTERIES now were like so many Sacred Tabernacles, full of Divine
Choirs, singing and delighting in Holy Conferences, and Fasting and Praying,
and exulting in the Hope of future Goods, and working to give Alms, and
Exercising mutual Love, and unanimous Symphony among themselves. So that you
might see there, of a Truth, a Land of Piety and Righteousness by it self: For
there was neither an Injurious nor an injured Person, neither any Complaint of
the Oppressor: But a Multitude of Asceticks, having one and the same Ardour
for Virtue; insomuch, that one amongst the rest of the Spectatours, seeing such
Monasteries, and regular Discipline, could not forbear crying out, as we read,
Numb. 24.5, 6. How goodly are thy Dwellings, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O
Israel! As the shady Vales are they spread forth, and as the Parks beside the
Rivers, and as the Tents which the Lord has fixed, and as the Cedars by the
Waters side.

22. St. Antony therefore, often retiring himself into his Monastry, daily grew
Vigorous in Exercise, and groaned, longing for Mansions in Heaven, because he
longed for them, and observed the frail Life of Man: Whenever he was about to
eat, or drink, or sleep, or serve any other Bodily Necessities, he blushed; for
he thought upon the Dignity of his Intellectual part: So that oftentimes, when
he was going to eat with other Monks, and called to Remembrance his Spiritual
Food, he refused, and retired to eat alone, thinking he should blush if he was
seen Eating by them. When he eat alone, 'twas purely out of Necessity:
Sometimes, though very seldom, he eat with his Brethren: But, though 'twere
with Blushing, he took the Liberty to acquaint his Brethren, for their Benefit,
that they should lay out their Leisure rather on their Soul, than their Body,
lest it be weighed down by the Pleasures of the Body, which ought to be in
Subjection to it. For our Savior has said, Take no thought for your Life, what
you shall eat; nor for your Body, what ye shall put on: Do not seek what ye may
eat, nor what ye may drink, neither aim at high things; For all these things
the Nations of the World seek; for your Father knows that ye need them; and all
these things shall be added unto you.

23. Not long after the Emperor Maximinus Persecuted the Church; and some Holy
Martyrs being carried to Alexandria, he left his Monastry and followed them,
saying to his Friends, Let us also go and combat; or see those who do: for he
was Ambitious of Martyrdom. But, not being willing to deliver up himself, he
ministered to the Confessors in the Mines and Prisons, and showed great
Diligence in the Court of Judicature, comforting and spurring on those that
were called to it, and attending them till they were Crowned Martyrs.
Wherefore, the Judge observing the Fearlesness and Assiduity of Antony, and of
those that were with him, ordered that no Monk should appear in the Court, nor
so much as live in the City; so that all the rest seemed to abscond that Day:
But St. Antony took this so much to thought, that he washed his Scapulary the
cleaner the Day after, and stood foremost on an high place before the Judge's
Face. And though all Persons admired at it, and the Governor, as he passed by
with his Train, took Notice of it; yet he stood unmoved, showing the Readiness
of the Christians to die: For, as I said before, he wished to die a Martyr, and
appeared very much grieved because he did not. But the Lord preserved and
reserved him for our Benefit, and the Advantage of many more, that he might be
a Teacher to many, by the Exercise which he learnt out of the Holy Scriptures;
for the bare sight of his Discipline inflamed many others to imitate his Life.
Wherefore, he again visited the Confessors, as he used; and, as it were bound
up together with them, he labored to serve them. But after that Persecution,
in which the Blessed Bishop Peter suffered Martyrdom, ceased, he pilgrimag'd
and retired again to the Monastry, where he was daily a Martyr in Conscience,
and fought the Combats of Faith: For there he used himself to much and stricter
Exercise; for he always fasted. His inner Garment was Hair-cloth, his upper of
Leather; which was the Habit he wore to his dying Day; neither washing the dirt
off his Body, no, nor so much as his Feet, unless they were wet by chance, when
he waded through Water on a Journey.

24. Now, when he had thus retired, and resolved to continue in that State some
time, without ever going abroad, or entertaining any Company. There came to him
one Martinian, a Colonel, who had a Daughter troubled with a Devil, and was
very troublesome to him; and after he had stood a long while knocking at the
Door, and entreating him to come, and pray to God for his Daughter, Antony
would not suffer him to break open his Door; but leaning out of the top, said,
Man, Why do thou stand crying thus? I am a Man as well as thou: If thou
believe, pray to God, and it is done presently. The Colonel therefore prayed
to God with Faith, and went his way, and his Daughter was cleans'd from the
Devil. Many other things did our Lord by him: Wherefore we do not read in vain,
Matt. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you. For many that were Sick, and only
sat without the Monastry, by Faith and Prayer were Cured. But as soon as he saw
himself thus disturbed by a great many People, and not permitted to retire,
according to his Purpose and Desire, and fearing lest, from what the Lord did
by him, he should be lifted up, or any one else, upon that account, should
think of him beyond what he ought, he thought, and was resolved to go to the
upper Thebais, where no body knew him; and having took some Loaves of his
Brethren, he sat down by the River Banks, watching for a Vessel to get over. In
the mean while came a Voice from Heaven, saying, Antony, Whither go thou,
and wherefore? Antony, without any Commotion, or Disorder of Mind, (for he was
used to such extraordinary Occurrences) said, Since the Multitude will not let
me be at rest here, I have a mind to retire in the upper Thebais; and so much
the rather, because they require things above my Strength. Then replied the
Voice, Should thou go thither, thou would have double the Trouble to
undergo: But if thou would be quiet, indeed, go into the inner Wilderness.
But, Who (said Antony) shall show me the way, for I don't know it? And the
Voice presently directed him to some Sarazens that were traveling that way.
Whereupon Antony made up to them, and requested to walk with them to the
Wilderness. They, as it were by the Order of Providence, received him readily.
By that time he had traveled with them three Nights and three Days, he came to
a very high Mountain. Now, under the Mountain there was fine, clear, cool,
sweet, trembling Water; and without the Plain, a few Wild Palm Trees that had
been neglected. Antony, as being sent thither by God, was in Love with the
Place; for this was the Place of which the Voice (that spoke to him upon the
Banks of the River) gave him Notice. Having at first took with him some of his
Fellow-Travellers Loaves, he tarried alone in the Mount, no Body at all
conversing with him. There he kept looking upon it as his own Home. The
Sarazens having observed his Intent and Proposal to himself in Living there,
designedly passed often that way, and gladly supplied him with Bread. He had
also a little Refreshment from the Palms.

25. And afterward the Brethren, like Children mindful of their Father, took
care to send to him. But Antony considering that some were toyled upon the
account of bringing him Bread, and being willing to spare the Monks that
trouble, deliberated with himself how he might prevent it; and so, at last,
desired those that came to him to bring him a Spade, and a Mattock, and a
little Corn. When he was supplied with Materials, he walked a little way, and
having found a little piece of Arable Ground, he Tilled it; and having Plenty
enough of Water to water it, he sowed his Grain there; and thus, ever-after, he
was supplied with Bread enough every Year; rejoicing because he was troublesome
to none, and could keep himself without being burdensome to any one. After
seeing some coming to him again, he Tilled some more Ground, and Planted a few
Herbs, for the Refreshment of any tired Traveller. At first the Wild Beasts of
the Desert came, out of pretense for Water, and damaged his Standing-Corn. One
Day, therefore, he pleasantly took hold of one of the Beasts, and said to them
all, Why do ye hurt me, since I don't hurt you? Get ye gone, in the Name of the
Lord, and come no more near this Place again; and from that time they, as it
were, receiving his Command, never came again: So he kept alone in the inner
part of the Mountain, attending to Prayer and Exercise. But his Brethren came
and ministered unto him, entreating him to let them come once a Month and bring
him some Olives, Beans, and Oil, because he was now grown Ancient. Whilst he
lived there, how many Conflicts he under-went, (not with Flesh and Blood, but
with Devils, his grand Adversaries,) we know very well from those who went to
him, who heard Tumults, Voices, and Noises, like those of the trampling of
Horses, and clashing of Arms, and saw the Mount full of Wild Beasts in the
Night, and him as it were Fighting and Praying against them: But he emboldened
the Hearts of those that came to him, and strove upon Bended Knees in Prayer
with the Lord. And it is worth our while to consider, with Admiration, that he
(though all alone in such a great Wilderness) was not afraid of the Devil's
Assaulting him, nor of the Fierceness of many Wild Beasts and Creeping
Creatures; but did literally (as it is written) trust in the Lord, like Mount
Sion, having a Mind unmoved, and void of Fluctuation: So that (as it is written)
Job 5.23. the Devils fled, and the Wild Beasts were at Peace with him. The
Devil, therefore, (as David sings, Psalm. 34.16.) gnash'd upon him with his
Teeth when he saw him. But Antony was comforted by our Savior, and continued
unhurt, notwithstanding all his Subtleties and Stratagems. The Devil sent all
the Beasts and Snakes out of their Holes and Dens gaping upon him, and
threatening to bite him. But he understanding the Device of the Enemy, said to
them all, If ye have received any Authority over me, I am ready to be devoured
by you; but if ye are suborned by the Devil, tarry here no longer, but get ye
hence in an Instant; for I am Christ's Servant: and they fled at his Word as
fast as from a Whip.

26. A few Days after that, as he was at work, (for he always took Care to
labor) one standing at the Door, trained after him with his Heels some of his
plyant Twigs which he had wrought together; (for he made little Baskets, and
exchanged them with those that came to him for what they brought him) and as he
stood up, he saw a Beast, down to the Thighs like a Man, but with Legs and Feet
like an Ass. Antony only signed himself with the Sign of the Cross, and said, I
am a Servant of Christ; If thou art sent hither against me, lo! I am here. But
the Beast with his Devils fled so fast, that he fell and died for Haste. Now,
the Death of the Beast signified the Overthrow of the Devils; for they did all
they could to bring him out of the Wilderness, but could not prevail.

27. Soon after this he traveled with some of his Brethren Monks that came to
see him, and requested him to come and live with them a little while. Now the
Monks had a Camel to carry their Loaves and Water, (for that Desert was
Waterless, neither was there any drinkable Water thereabouts, but by the Mount
where his Monastery was, and thence they had the Water that they took with
them.) Wherefore, their Water failing them whilst they were upon their Way, and
the Heat being very great, their Lives were in Danger; for having searched all
the Places thereabouts, and found no Water, they were not able to walk any
longer, but lay down upon the Ground, and dismissed the Camel to shift for its
self, despairing of their own Lives. Now the Old Man seeing them all in Danger,
was very much troubled and groaned, and having stepped a little way aside and
knelt and prayed, the Lord presently made Water spring forth out of the Place
where he had prayed; and they all drank and revived, and filled their Bottles,
and having sought the Camel found him; for (as it happened) the Halter twined
about a Stone, and held him fast; so they brought him, watered and loaded him,
and traveled safe to their Journeys End. And as soon as he came to the Outer
Monasteries, they all came and saluted him, as a Father. And now there was Joy
again in the Mountains, and a new Emulation of Proficiency and Consolation by
mutual Love and Faith. It rejoiced Antony mightily to see the Forwardness of
the Monks, and his Sister grown old in Virginity, and become a Governess over
other Virgins. In a short time after he returned to his own Mountain, whither
many that were Diseased came to him.

28. He would be continually charging all the Monks that came to him, to
believe in the Lord, and love Him, and to keep themselves from filthy Thoughts
and carnal Pleasures, and (as it is written in the Proverbs) not to be deceived
by the Fullness of the Belly, and to avoid Vainglory, and to pray continually,
and to sing before Sleep and after Sleep, and to lay up the Precepts of the
Holy Scriptures in their Breasts, and remember the Acts of the Saints, that the
Soul being minded of those Precepts, may be conformed to their Zeal: but
especially he advised them to have St. Paul's Saying in mind, Let not the Sun
go down upon your Wrath; and to apply this in Common to every Precept, that the
Sun may not only not go down upon their Wrath, but upon any other Sin
whatsoever; for it is but fitting, that the Sun should not condemn us for any
Wickedness in the Day, nor the Moon by Night, for any Sin or Thought. If we
would be truly Beautiful, St. Paul's Advice must be kept, 2 Cor. 13.5. Judge
your selves: Try your selves. Let, therefore, every one of you take an Account
of both his Day and Night Actions; and wherein he has offended, let him leave
off; and wherein he has not, let him not glory; but let him continue in that
which is Good, and not be Negligent, or contemn his Neighbor; neither Let him
justify himself till (as the Blessed Apostle says) the Lord come, who
searches into the most secret things; for we are often, even to our selves, in
the dark; as to what we do we are ignorant; But the Lord comprehends all
things. Wherefore, yielding and ascribing Judgment to him, let us be Patient
one with another, and bear one another's Burdens, and Judge our selves; and
whereinsoever we are behind hand, let us strive to fill up our Defects. And
pray let me desire you to take this Rule as a Preservative against Offending:
Let all of us mark and write down all our Actions and Motions, in order to
declare them to one another; and ye may be confident, that if we always blush
to be known, we shall forbear offending, nay, so much as thinking any ill
thing; for, Who would Sin a Sin for which he must presently undergo open Shame?
By this Means, who-ever offends cannot be secret without lying. By this Means
we should never fornicate, as being always in one another's Sight. But by
writing and communicating our Thoughts, we shall keep from inward Impurity,
through Shame of having it known. Let our Paper therefore serve us instead of
the Eyes of our Fellow-Asceticks, that our blushing, when we write them down in
order to be seen, may prevent our Lusting amiss in any case. By keeping close
to this Model of Discipline, we shall have Power to subdue the Body, and so
please the Lord, and to tread the Wiles of the Enemy under Feet. This he said
to all that met him. He used to sympathize and pray together with all
Sufferers; and in many Cases the Lord heard him. When he was heard, he did not
boast; and when he was not heard, he did not murmur: But he always, and in all
Circumstances, gave Thanks unto the Lord. He exhorted Patients to
Longsuffering, and made them know, that Healing was not from him, or from Men,
but of the Lord, who acts as he pleases, both as to what he does, and as to the
time when he does it: Such Discourse as this was to them as a Cure, none
despising his Lectures: But those whose Illness continued, learnt from him to
be patient; and those that were Cured, not to give Thanks to him, but to God
alone. Among others, one Fronto, a Courtier, (having a terrible Sickness, which
eat his Tongue, and just affected his Eyes) came in the Mount, and desired
Antony to pray for him: St. Antony, at his request, prayed to God for Fronto,
and bid him be gone, and he should be Healed.

29. But Fronto having got into his Cell by Violence, and tarrying a whole Day
there, Antony said, Whilst you tarry here you cannot be cured. Be gone, and by
that time you come within Sight of Egypt, you shall see a Sign wrought upon
you. St. Antony speaking so positively, he was satisfied, and went his way; and
as soon as he saw Egypt he was rid of his Malady, and became a Sound Man, as
Antony had assured him. There is another Remarkable Cure which I must not omit.

30. A certain Virgin of Tripolis had a very terrible and foul Distemper; for
her Tears, and her Snot, and the running of her Ears, turned into Worms after
it fell upon the Ground; besides too, she was very Paralytical, and had very
unnatural Eyes. Her Parents having been informed of St. Antony by some Monks
that were traveling to him, and trusting in our Lord, who (as we read, Matt.
20.) cured an Issue of Blood, requested that she might travel with them: They
granting her request, the Child and her Parents went with them; and when they
came, tarried without the Mount with Paphnatius, a Confessor and a Monk. The
other Monks went in to St. Antony, and just as they were going to acquaint him
with it, he prevented them, and told them of the Child's Disease, and her
Traveling with them. Hearing this, they requested the Child might be permitted
to enter; but St. Antony denied their request, and bid them go out, and they
would find the Child either Healed or Dead: For (said he) Healing is not an Act
of mine; Why should she come to me, who am a miserable Man? To Cure is the
Property of our Savior, who exercises Mercy in every Place, over all that call
upon Him; and therefore has favored her and her Prayer, and has manifested
this particular Instance of his Philanthropy to me, (viz.) that he will cure
the Child's Disease there. This caused great Admiration amongst them; and they
went out and found the Parents Rejoicing, and the Child Healthy from that time.

31. About this time, there had Two Brethren entered upon a Journey, and for
want of Water, one died upon the way; and the other was not far from Dying too,
and therefore, having no Strength to travel, he also lay upon the Ground,
expecting to die. Now Antony was sitting upon the Mount, and called Two Monks
to him that were hard by, and said to them, Pray take a Pitcher of Water, and
run Egypt Roadway; for one of two Fellow-Travellers is already dead, and the
other will die too unless ye make haste; for this was discovered to me as I was
a Praying. Accordingly the Two Monks went and buried their dead Brother, and
revived the other, and brought him to their venerable Father, who was at the
distance of a whole Day's Journey from them. If any one should ask, Why Antony
did not speak before the other died? he asks an improper Question; for the
Sentence of Death did not belong to Antony, but to God, who determined Death
for the one, and a Recovery by Antony's inter-Agency for the other. That which
is to be admired in Antony, is, That he had a Soul so stayed and sedate, as to
be showed things at such a distance by the Lord upon the Mount.

32. And a little after, as he was sitting again upon the Mount, he saw one
lifted up on high from the Mount, and a great deal of Joy in all that met him:
He could not but admire, and call the Company Blessed, and prayed to know what
that might be. Then presently came a Voice, and told him, that 'twas the Soul
of Ammun, a Monk of Nitria. Now the distance between Nitria and that Mount is
Thirteen Days Journey. The Monks seeing the Old Man (for he continued an
Ascetick to his Old Age) in such a Maze, desired to know the reason of ^t. St.
Antony told them that Ammun was dead: For this Monk was very well known among
them, because he often came thither, and many Miracles were done by him; of
which, this is one. Having once an Occasion to go over the River Lycus, (which
was a great Inundation of Waters) he desired Theodore to go at a distance from
him, that they might not see one another Naked, as they swam over. Then
Theodore withdrawing, he blushed to see himself again Naked: And as he was
blushing and solicitous, he was of a sudden conveyed to the other side.
Theodore therefore (who also was a very Religious Man) having seen him got
over, and not at all wetted with the Water, requested to know the manner of his
Passage: But finding him loath to tell him, he took hold of his Feet, and
protested he would not let him go before he knew. Ammun observing the
Earnestness of Theodore, for the sake of his Protestation, consented to tell
him, after he had engaged him to tell no Body before he was dead; and so told
him how he was carried over after an invisible manner, and laid on the other
side: He did not walk on the Water, nor was the manner of it possible to Men,
but only possible to those whom our Lord permits; as he did St. Peter. This
Theodore told after Ammun's Death. But to return to St. Antony. The Monks to
whom St. Antony told what he saw noted down the Day in a Book: And some
Brethren that returned from Nitria inquired about Thirty Days after, and
brought word that Ammun died the same Day and Hour in which Antony saw the Soul
lifted up on high; and they greatly admired the Purity of Antony's Soul, and
wondered how he should immediately know what was done at Thirty Days distance,
and how he saw the Soul carried up a-loft. But we have fresh Matter of Praise
and Wonder from St. Antony still.

33. For Archelaus Comes having found him praying by himself in the Outer
Mount, entreated him on the behalf of Pelycrateia, (who was an admirable
Virgin, and full of Christ) for she had a Pain in her Stomach and her Side, by
reason of extreme Exercise, and was very weakly all over her Body: Wherefore
Antony prayed, and Archelaus marked down the Day whereon Antony prayed; and
when he returned to Laodicea, he found the Virgin well; and having asked them
what Day she was first released from her Weakness, he took out the Paper in
which he writ down the Time when Antony prayed for her, and immediately showed
them the same time writ down in his Paper: So that they were all convinced that
the Lord delivered her from her Pains when Antony was, by Prayer, forwarding
the Goodness of our Savior toward her.

34. He did also oftentimes give Notice, many days before hand, of Persons that
were coming to him: Nay, sometimes he would tell the reason of their Journey a
Month before hand; as that some came only to see him, others because
Distempered, others because Possessed. And this we all know of all, That none
that came to him thought the Labor of his Journey a Trouble, or a Loss; for
every one returned from him with a Sense of some Benefit received: But
notwithstanding he spoke and saw such strange things, yet he would not have any
one admire him for it; but rather to admire the Lord, who, by his Power, has
granted us (though but Men) a Capacity and Liberty to know Him.

35. Another time having went down to visit the Outer Monasteries, and been
prevailed upon, by request, to go into a Vessel and pray with the Monks, He and
He only perceived a wretched and terrible Stink; the Company said there was
some salt Fish in the Vessel; but he perceived another kind of Scent: And
whilst he was speaking, a Young Man that had a Devil, and had entered in before
them and hid himself, cried out, and the Devil was rebuked by St. Antony, in
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and came out of him, and the Young Man was
restored to his Wits: And then they all knew that 'twas the Devil that stunk.

36. There came to him also a Nobleman that had a Devil. Now that Devil was so
trouble, that the Person that was Possessed was not so much as sensible that he
came to St. Antony, and ate his own Ordure. Wherefore, they that brought him
begged of St. Antony to pray for him. Antony commiserating him, prayed for him,
and sat up with him all Night; and the Noble Youth, on a sudden, run against
St. Antony and hunch'd him. Now those that came with him were very much
disturbed at it: But Antony said, Don't ye be angry with the Youth; for it is
not he, but the evil Spirit within him: (for being rebuked, and commanded to
post away into some waterless Places, he was enraged, and did this) Therefore
glorify God for his doing thus against me; for that is a Sign that he is a
going out. No sooner had Antony said so, but the Youth was well and himself,
and knew where he was, and saluted the Old Man, giving Thanks to God.

37. Many other such like things did the Monks tell of him; and they all agreed
in their Relation. But as wonderful as these things are, there are stranger
things yet to be related; for, as he was going to pray before he eat, about the
Ninth Hour, he was in a Rapture; and (which is a Paradox) as he stood up, he
saw himself without himself, and some other Beings by himself, as it were in
the Air; and, afterward, some other bitter and terrible Beings standing by him
in the Air too, and willing to stop him, so that he did not pass: But the
Angels, his Guides and Conveys, withstanding them; they pretend to exact an
Account of him, to see whether he was not liable to them. Now, they would have
took the Account from his Birth: But St. Antony's Guides would by no means
allow of that; and told them, That the Lord had blotted all Faults since his
Birth: But ever since he became a Monk, and promised to God, they might exact
an Account. Then they having accused him of what they could not prove, the
Passage became free, and presently he saw himself, as it were come to himself,
in a standing Posture, and whole again. Hereupon, having forgot to eat, he
continued all the remaining Day and Night Groaning and Praying; for he wondered
to see how many we fight against, and through how great Difficulties any Soul
must needs pass through the Air. He could not but, upon this Occasion, call to
mind that Saying of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.2. According to the Prince of the Power
of the Air: for, here it is that the Enemy exerts his Power in Fighting, and
attempting to stop those who pass through: for this Reason he the more earnestly
exhorts Christians, Ephesians. 6.13. Take ye the whole Armor of God, that the Enemy
having no Evil thing to say of you, he may be ashamed: But we, when we had been
informed of this, remembered the Apostle: Whether in the Body, I know not; or
out of the Body, I know not: God knows. St. Paul was wrapped up as far as the
Third Heaven, and heard unutterable Words: But Antony saw himself going up into
the Air, and contended till he was free.

38. He had also another particular Favor: for, as he was sitting on the Mount
in a Praying posture of Soul, and perhaps gravelled with some doubt relating to
himself (for not long before he had been conferring with some who had been
conversant with him about the State of his Soul, and what place it should have
after this Life) in the Nightime; (so that we may truly say, he was one of
those Blessed Men, who are taught of God) one called to him from on high, and
said, Antony, Rise, go forth and look; So he went out (for he knew whom he
ought to obey) and saw a certain terrible, tall, deformed Personage standing,
and reaching up to the Clouds, and, as it were, winged Creatures ascending, and
him stretching out his Hands, and some of them he saw stopped by him, and others
flying beyond and above him, and those that passed them carried higher still,
without the least Solicitude; upon these the Tall Person gnash'd his Teeth; but
over those that fell, he rejoiced. And the Voice said unto Antony, Consider on
what thou have seen. And his Understanding being opened, he perceived that
'twas the Enemy of Souls, who envies the Faithful, and seizes on (and hinders
the Passage of) those who are accountable to him; but that he is not able to
seize on those who were not persuaded by him; for they get out of his reach.
Being minded by such a Sight again, he strove the more to make a Proficiency in
his Holy Purposes.

39. But I must do him Justice, by acquainting you, that he did not tell of
these things willingly. But being he was long at his Prayers, and admiring with
himself, those that were with him would be importunately asking him; so that he
was forced, as a Father who could not hide them from his Children, to tell
them: Besides too, he knew the Purity of his own Conscience, and that the
Declaration of them would be profitable for them; for hereby he showed the
Blessed Fruit of Perseverance in Exercise, and that in great Difficulties God
condescends to render Consolation to his Servants, even by Visions. I might
also tell you, how Patient he was under Afflictions, and how Humble of Soul,
and how that Frame of Spirit made him revere the Canons of the Church with a
peculiar Tenderness of Disposition, and how willing he was that every
Clergyman should be preferred before him; for he was not ashamed to bow the
Head before Bishops and Priests: And whenever a Deacon came to him, to be
benefitted by him, he discoursed usefully to him: But he would resign the
Exercise of the Ministry, by Prayer, to him, not being ashamed to learn
himself: for oft-times he proposed Questions, and condescended descended to
give Ear to all that conversed with him, and owned himself benefitted, if any
one spoke any thing that was useful.

40. There was much and wonderful Comeliness in his Face. If he was present
with a great many Monks, and any one seemed uneasy, that he might have a full
View of him, though he did not know them before, yet, passing by the rest, he
would run to him, as though he were drew by the Person's Eyes. He did not
excel others in the height or breadth of his Body, but in the Constitution of
his Morals, and the Purity of his Soul; for his Soul being free from tumult, he
always had his outward Senses free from Disorders; so that his Countenance
derived Cheerfulness from his Soul, and the Temper of it was discernable from
the Motions of his Body; (as it is written) Prove. 15.13. A glad Heart makes a
cheerful Countenance: But a sorrowful one makes it sad. Thus Jacob discerned
Laban to have some treacherous Design in his Mind, and said unto the Women,
Genesis 31. Is not the Face of your Father toward me as yesterday, and the day
before? Thus Samuel knew David; For he had cheering Eyes, and Teeth white as
Milk. Thus also Antony was known; for he never looked disturbed, because his
Soul was always at Peace. His Mind was constantly in a rejoicing Posture, and
therefore he never had a louring Look. He was also very admirable and strict as
to his Faith and Piety.

41. He would never hold Correspondence with the Meletian Schismatics, because
he knew their Wickedness, and Apostasy from the Faith; nor with the Manichees,
nor with any other Heretics in a Friendly manner, any otherwise than to advise
them to turn to Piety; for he judged their Friendship and Conversation to tend
to the Mischief and Destruction of the Soul. He abominated the Heresy of the
Arians, and charged all not to go near them, or to hold with their wicked
Tenets. Some of the Areiomanites having once came to see him; as soon as he
perceived what they were, he chased them out of the Mount, alleging their
Discourses to be worse than Poison. And when the Arians told a Lie, (as though
he were of the same Judgment with them) he expressed great Indignation against
Arius; and being sent for by the Bishops, and all the Brethren, he declared
against them in Alexandria, telling them that this was the last Heresy, and
the forerunner of Antichrist; and he added, That the Son of God was not a
Creature made of the things that are not, but the invisible Word and Wisdom of
the Father's Essence. Wherefore, it is unpious to say, there was a time when he
was not; for He was always the Word co-ex^^ent with the Father. Wherefore, have
ye no communication with the Arians; for Light has no fellowship with the
Darkness: For ye, who are pious, are Christians; but they who impiously say,
that the Son and Word of God, who is of the Father, is a Creature, differ not
at all from Heathens, who serve the Creature more than God, who created them.
But do ye believe, that all the Creation groans against them, because they
reckon the Lord and Creator of all things, by whom all things that were made
were made, a Creature.

42. So publicly did all the People see that Heresy which so opposes Christ
anathematis'd by this great Man, and therefore abominated them: And all of the
City ran together to see Antony. The Greeks also, and those that were called
their Priests, came to the Temple, saying, We desire to see the Man of God; for
all called him so. Also the Lord cleans'd many that were Possessed, by him, and
healed many wounded Persons, and others that were wounded in their
Understandings: And many Greeks desired to touch the Old Man, believing they
should be benefitted thereby. By this means there were as many Christians in a
few Days, as used to be made in a whole Year. Some Persons thought the Crowd
was too troublesome to him, and therefore kept Persons from pressing upon him:
But he was not disturbed with them, and said to them, The People are not more
in Number than those Devils with which I have contended in the Mountain. When
he went away, we went before him.

43. And as we were just at the Gate, as it were, a Woman cried out, O Man of
God, pray tarry a little, for my Daughter is grievously troubled with a Devil;
Tarry, I pray thee, lest I also fall into some danger, by running after thee.
When the Old Man heard her, he willingly tarried at our Entreaty; so the Woman
drew near, and the Maid fell upon the Ground; and when Antony had prayed, and
mentioned Christ, the Maid rose up very well, for the Unclean Spirit was gone
out of her; and the Maid blessed God, and all the Spectators gave Thanks, and
St. Antony himself also was very glad, and returned to his own abode in the
Mount. He was also very prudent, and, which is very strange, though illiterate,
he was a very piercing and judicious Man.

44. Once there came to him Two Greek Philosophers, with a design to try him
(now, at that time, he was in the outer part of the Mountain.) St. Antony
perceived what kind of Men they were by their Looks, and spoke thus to them by
an Interpreter, O ye Philosophers, Why did you trouble your selves to come to
such a simple Fellow? But they replied, That he was not so, but very prudent.
If ye come to a silly Fellow, said Antony, your Labor is lost, and to no
purpose: But if ye think otherwise, become such as I am; for we should imitate
all things that are fair and commendable. Had I come to you, I would have
imitated you. Since therefore ye come to me, become such Men as I am; for I am
a Christian. But they admiring, withdrew, for they saw the Devils dreading
Antony.

45. Others also met him there, thinking to scoff at him, because he had not
learnt to read. Said Antony, pray answer me one Question; Which think ye is
first, the Mind, or the Alphabet? Whether of the two is the Author and cause
of the other, the Mind of Letters? or, Letters of the Mind? They answered, The
Mind is first, and the Inventer of Letters. Well then, says Antony, Whosoever has
a sound Mind, stands in no need of Letters. Which Answer astonished them, and
all that were with them; so they went away, admiring to see so much
Understanding in a private Man; for though he grew Old in the Desert, yet he
was not Savage in his Carriage, like a Mountaineer; but he was Courteous and
Civil. His Mind and Discourse was seasoned with Divine Salt, so that none
envied him; but all that visited him took delight in him.

46. After this, some Pretenders to Wisdom among the Greeks came to him, and
demanded of him an account of his Christian Belief, and made offers to dispute
subtly with him about the Divine Cross, in order to mock him. St. Antony
having paused a while, and pitied their Ignorance, spoke very well to them by
an Interpreter, to this Effect: Which of the Two is more laudable, to confess a
Cross, or to charge those whom ye call Gods with Adulteries and Sodomies? For
our Confession is a sign of Manliness, and Contempt of Death; but yours are the
Passions of Lasciviousness. Which is better to say, That the Wisdom of God was
not changed, but for the sake of Salvation and Beneficence to Men, assumed an
Humane Body, that by Communion with the Humane Race, he might make Men partake
of a Divine and Intellectual Nature; or, To liken the Deity to Irrational
Beings, and so worship four-footed Creatures, and creeping things, and Statues
of Men? For, these are the Adorations of your Wise Men. Moreover, How dare ye
deride us, who say, That Christ did appear a Man; when ye, deriving the Soul
from the [Divine] Mind, say, That it wandered and lapsed from Heaven into the
Body? and I wish it did not pass, not only into an Humane Body, but into
four-footed and creeping Creatures. Our Faith says, That Christ came for the
Salvation of Men; but ye erring, say, The Soul is not generated. We consider
the Power and Philanthropy of God, because this was not impossible with God;
But ye saying, That the Soul is the Image of the Mind, yet attribute Lapses to
it, and fable it to be changeable, and, by consequence, introduce the Mind as
changeable by the Soul; for, such as was the Image, such must that of which
it is the Image necessarily be: But when ye have such Thoughts as these
concerning the Mind, pray consider that ye blaspheme the Father of the Mind
himself. And as for the Cross, What can ye say of it? When ye see wicked Men
ensnare us, ye see we are ready to endure the Cross, and to contemn Death,
whenever or wheresoever forced upon us. Alas! the Fables of the Rovings of
Osiris and Isis, and the Treachery of Typho, and the Flight of Saturn, and
Gormandizings of Children, and of Paracide; What are these? Yet these are your
wise Contrivances and mighty Foundations. But, moreover, How comes it to pass,
that when ye despise the Cross, ye don't admire the Resurrection; since those
who speak os one, have also writ of the other? or, Why are ye, when ye remember
the Cross, silent of the Dead raised, the Blind who had their Sight restored,
the Sick of the Palsy who were healed, and the Lepers that were cleans'd, and
the walking a Foot on the Sea, and other Signs and Wonders, which show Christ
not to be mere Man, but God also? Truly, to my mind, ye do your selves wrong,
and have not read our Writings with Sincerity: But, pray read and see that the
things which Jesus did, show Him to be God, pilgrimaging upon Earth for the
Souls of Men: But, pray tell us of your great Signs.

47. What can ye plead for Irrational Gods, and their Savageness? Ye may, if ye
please, fly to shelter by Allegorising: Let Proserpine, be the Earth; Vulcan's
Lameness, the Fire; Juno, the Air; Apollo, the Sun; Diana, the Moon; and
Neptune, the Sea: But, nevertheless, this does not make it any more the Worship
of God: This is to serve the Creatures more than the Creator; for ye have
compacted these Stories out of the Consideration of the Creation's being
Beautiful: These Works should be admired, but they should not have been made
Gods; for, by this means, ye have given the Architect's Honor to the things
that he Built; which is just like paying that Honor to the House, which is due
to the Builder; or, the mis-placing the General's Honor, on the Common
Soldiers. Come, answer me these Questions, that we may know why Christ's Cross
should be derided: But they hesitating and looking this way and that way, St.
Antony smiled, and said, These things are their own Proof at first Sight. And
seeing ye lean so much on demonstrative Reasons, and therefore are not willing
we should worship without rational Demonstration; first of all, satisfy me
about these matters, and, especially, How the Knowledge of God is discerned? by
Demonstration of Reasons? or by the Energy of Faith? and, Which is the Elder,
Faith by Energy? or Demonstration by Reason? But they answering, That Faith by
Energy is the Elder, and the truly exact Knowledge. Very well, said St. Antony;
for Faith springs from the Disposition of the Soul; but Logic is one of those
Arts which are composed by the Soul: Wherefore, Demonstration is not necessary
for them, who have Energy by Faith; nay, it is superfluous; for what we perceive
by Faith, you build by Reasoning: So that oft-times you have not Words to
express what we see within. Wherefore, Energy by Faith is better and firmer
than your Sophistical Syllogisms.

49. We Christians have not this Mystery by the Wisdom of Greek Reasonings, but
by the Power of Faith, given us by Christ Jesus from God. And that ye may see
what we say is true; behold, we, who have not so much as learnt to spell, do
believe in God, known by his Works, and a Providence over all things. And that
our Faith is operative within, is evident; for we are supported by Faith in
Christ; but ye by Sophistical Strivings of Words. Your Spectre-Idols are
brought to naught; but our Faith is extended every where. Notwithstanding your
Syllogisms and Sophisms, ye don't persuade any from Christianity to Paganism;
but we, who preach Faith in Christ, weaken your Superstition; knowing very
well, That Christ is God, and the Son of God. By your Oracles ye don't hinder
the spreading of Christ's Doctrine; but by but Naming Christ Crucified, we chase
those Devils whom ye honor as Gods; wherever the Sign of the Cross is, there
Magic is weak, and Sorcery has no power. Tell me, Man, Where are your Oracles?
Where are the Enchantments of the Egyptians? When did all these cease, and
vanish before the Cross of Christ was? Does this therefore deserve so much
Derision? or, Do not rather the weak things that are brought to naught and
baffled by it? This also is strange to observe; Your Followers were never
persecuted, but honored by Men in the City; but Christ's Disciples are
persecuted, and yet they multiply and flourish more than yours. Your Tenets,
though celebrated and applauded, are broke; whereas the Faith and Doctrine of
Christ, though derided by you, and often persecuted by Kings, has filled the
World. When did the Knowledge of God shine so bright? or, When did Temperance
and eminent Virginity appear so much? or, When was Death so despised, as since
the Cross of Christ? But no one doubts of this when he sees the Martyrs
despising Death for Christ's sake, and whole Churches Virgins keeping their
Bodies pure and undefiled for Christ's sake: Which are powerful Signs, and such
as do show that the Christian Faith is the only true Faith for Piety. Lo! ye,
at this very moment, don't believe, but seek Syllogisms from Logic; but we, as
our Teacher speaks, 1 Cor. 2.3. Not by the Persuasion of Wisdom in Greek
Eloquence; but by Faith, do effectually persuade those that were used to the
Artificial Structures of Reason. See, here are some afflicted with Devils, (for
at that time there were some such present) do ye, by your Syllogisms, or
Magic, or any other Method that you please to choose, and by invoking your
Idols, cleanse them, or your selves; or, if ye cannot, lay aside your Quarrel
against us, be unprejudiced, and ye shall see the Power of Christ's Cross: And
having said so, he invoked the Name of Christ, and signed the Afflicted Persons
with the Sign of the Cross a second or third time, and the Men were presently
whole, and in their right Minds, and gave Thanks to God; and the Philosophers
were amazed at the Understanding of the Man, and the Miracle which he did. But
Antony said, Why do ye wonder at this? We don't do it, but Christ by those who
believe in Him: Do ye therefore believe, and ye shall see that we have not an
Art of Reasoning, but a Faith wrought by Love for Christ; which also ye may
have; and when ye have it, ye will not seek Demonstrations of Eloquence; but
then ye will reckon Faith in Christ sufficient. These were St. Antony's Words;
but they estranging at this went away, saluting him, and owning that they were
benefitted by him.

50. And now St. Antony's Fame reached the Ears of Kings and Princes; for
Constantine Augustus, and Constantine and Constans, his Sons, having heard this
writ to him, as a Father, and entreated him that they might receive an Answer
from him: But he did not set an high Value on their Letter, but was the same
Man that he was before they sent to him. When the Letters were brought to him,
he called the Monks, and said to them, Don't wonder that the King writes to us,
for he is a Man; but rather, that God has writ us a Law, and spoke to us by his
own Son. Wherefore he was unwilling to receive them, saying, He knew not how to
answer such Letters: But being warned by the Monks that they were Christian
Princes, and if they were neglected might be offended; he suffered them to be
read, and sent an Answer, Commending them because they adored Christ, and
advising them of Matters relating to their Salvation; as that they should not
regard present Grandeur, but rather bear the future Judgment in mind; and
should know and remember that Christ only is the True and Eternal King: And he
also counseled them to be courteous, and to take care of Equity and the Poor.
When they received this Letter, they were very glad. He was so obliging to all,
that all looked on him as a Father.

51. After this, he returned to the inner Monastry, and stuck to his former
Exercise; very often, as he was sitting or walking with his Visitants, he was
very silent, (as it is written in Daniel, Dan. 4.16.) and after an hours pause
he would discourse with the Brethren very regularly: But those that were with
him frequently perceived some Vision. Once he told all the Affairs of Egypt to
Bishop Serapion, who was sometimes within with him, and saw him engaged with a
Vision. Another time, as he was sitting, he was, as it were, in an Ecstasy, and
frequently groaned in the midst of his Theory; and, in an hour's time,
returning to his Friends, he first stood and prayed trembling, and then kneelt,
and continued so a good while; and when the Old Man rose he wept. The Company,
trembling for Terror, requested to know the Reason of it, and were so
importunate with him, that he was forced to speak, after he had fetched a great
sigh: Better had it been for me, if I had died before I saw that Vision. Then
they urging him to be particular; he said, Wrath will seize upon this Church,
and it will be betrayed to Men who are like Brute Beasts; for I saw the
Lord's-Table encompassed with Mules standing round about it, and Hounds barking
within, and all manner of Beasts making a disorderly Noise. Ye saw how I
sighed. I heard a Voice, saying, My Altar shall be abominated. This was the Old
Man's Vision. And, about Two Years after, there was an Incursion of the Arians,
and the Plundering of the Churches, when they took the Holy Vessels by Force,
and made them be carried by Heathens, forcing them out of their Shops to join
with them, and doing what they pleased in their Sight. Then all of us knew,
that the Noise which the Mules made pre-signignify'd to St. Antony what the
Arians now, like Wild Beasts, are a doing. But as soon as he had done saying
that, he went on, and said; My Children, don't be cast down; for as the Lord
was angry, so will he again heal, and the Church will quickly again recover its
Beauty, and shine as it used; and ye shall see the Persecuted resettled, and
Impiety again retreating into private Lurking-holes, and true Faith delivered
boldly everywhere with great Freedom: Only, take heed not to defile your selves
with the Doctrine of the Arians; for their Doctrine is not that of the Apostles,
but the Doctrine of Devils; for they are not of a right Judgment, but Barren,
and Irrational, like the Brutishness of Mules.

52. Neither should ye be Faithless, or distrust such Wonders being brought
about by a Man; for it is our Savior's Promise, John 16.23, 24. If ye have
Faith, but as a grain of Mustard Seed, and shall say to this Mountain, remove;
it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible to you. And again, Matt.
10.18. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if ye shall ask any thing of the Father
in my Name, he shall give it you: Ask, and ye shall receive. It Is he that says
to his Disciples, and all that believe in Him. Heal the Sick, cast out Devils:
Freely ye have received, freely do ye give. Antony did not Cure Majesterially
and Self-ascribingly; but he made his Prayer to, and named the Name of Christ;
so that it was manifest, that it was not he himself, but the Lord working and
showing Love to Men by Antony: Only Prayer and Exercise was St. Antony's; for
the sake of that he sat on the Mount, and rejoiced in the Contemplation of
Divine things.

53. He was very much troubled to see himself disturbed by so many, and when he
was dragged to the outer Mount: For the Judges desired him to come down into
the outer Mount, (because 'twas not possible for them to come into the inner
Mount, because of the Multitude of Clients that followed him) entreating him
that they might but just see him: But he first refused to come to them.
However, they tarried, and sent some Persons that were in Custody to allure him
to come upon their account. Being therefore necessitated, by Compassion, when
he saw them waiting, he came to the outer Mountain. This troublesome descent of
his was not Useless, but very Advantageous to a great many. He did good to the
Judges, by minding them to prefer Equity before every thing, and to fear God,
and to know, that with what Judgment they do judge, they shall be judged. Now
the Judge and others urged him mightily to tarry there some time, and discourse
concerning Matters relating to Salvation. But he having done Violence to
himself, at the request of the Judge, and the Necessitous, in coming down told
them he could not tarry with them any longer, and appeased their Urgency with
him by a pleasant Simile: As Fishes die upon dry Ground, so Monks when they
converse with you grow loose and faint: Wherefore we must hasten to the Mount,
as Fishes to the Water, lest by tarrying without some time, we forget what is
within. The Judge having heard this, and such like Sayings from him, wondered,
and said, This Man is truly a Servant of God; for, Whence should such a private
Person have such and so great Understanding, unless he were beloved by God?

54. But there was a certain great Officer, Namely, Balacius, who bitterly
Persecuted us Christians, because he was bigoted for the detestable Arians; He
was so cruel, that he stripped the Virgins, and scourged the Anachorets naked.
So Antony writ him a Letter to this Effect; I see Wrath coming upon thee, cease
to persecute the Christians, lest it fall upon thee, and take hold of thee in
an instant; for it will come. But Balaclus grinn'd, scornfully flung the Letter
on the Ground, and spat upon it, and abused the Messenger, and bid him say to
Antony, Since you are so solicitous for the Monks, I will also give you your
self a Visit. And before five Days expired, Wrath seized upon him; for Balacius
and Nestorius, the under-Governour of Egypt, went out together on Horseback to
the chief Seat or Manor of Alexandria, called Chaerea, (now the Horses were
Balacius's, and the gentlest of all that he kept) and before they came to the
Place, began jocularly to repartee together, as they used to do; and, on a
sudden, the gentler of the Two Horses, which Nestorius rid, bit Balacius, and
fell upon him and mangled his Thigh with his Teeth; so he went strait-way back
into the City, and died in Three Days time. They all admired to see Antony's
Prophecy so soon fulfilled. This was his Way of Admonishing the Bitter and
Obdurate.

55. Others that came to him he instructed so excellently, that they forgot
their Lawsuits, and called those Happy that retired from a popular Life. He
behaved himself in the case of the Oppressed, as if he himself, not they were
the Sufferers. He had Power enough to do good to all, insomuch, That many
Soldiers and others, who had Possessions, laid aside the Burdens of Life, and
presently became Monks: In short, He was, as it were, a Physician bestowed upon
Egypt by God. What grieved Person did not go back Rejoicing from him? What
Person came to him Mourning for Deceased Relations, and did not lay by his
Sorrow? What angry Person came, and was not turned into Love? What Poor Man,
who saw and heard him, did not despise Riches, and find Consolation in his
Poverty? What Negligent Man went away from him, and was not stronger and more
Fervent? What Youth came to the Mount and saw Antony, and did not presently
deny (...) Pleasure, and love Sobriety? Who came to him tempted by Devils, and
was not relieved? Who came troubled in his Thoughts, and had not his Mind made
serene by him? For, this was one great Benefit of Antony's Exercise, namely,
That, as I said before, having the Gift of discerning of Spirits, he knew their
Motions: Neither was he ignorant which way their Affection and Impetus bent.
And not only he himself was not imposed upon by them; but he also comforted
those who were troubled in Mind, and instructed them how they might baffle
their Wiles, explaining the Weakness and Subtleties of the Devils working in
them. Every one therefore, as animated by him, departed, daring the Devices of
the Devil and his Party. Virgins also who had Suitors, having only seen St.
Antony at a distance, continued Virgins to Christ. There came also some from
Foreign Parts to him, who were dismissed from him, as from a Father, with great
Benefit. When he died, they were all his Orphans, comforting themselves with
his bare Memory, and holding fast his Admonitions and Instructions.

56. And now it is but decent and fitting to acquaint you with the Nature of the
End of his Life; for, indeed, 'twas such as does deserve Emulation.

Near his Death, he did (according to his old Custom) visit the Monks in the
outer Mountain, and being informed, by Providence, of his End, he spoke to them
thus: I make this as my last Visit to you, and shall admire if we should see
one another again in this World. It Is time for me now to let go my Body, for I
am near an Hundred and Five Years Old. At this saying they wept, clung about
him, and saluted him. But he, just as it became one leaving a strange Place for
his own Country, rejoiced, and charged them not to be negligent in Labors,
nor to faint in Exercise; but to live, as dying daily, and, as I said before,
to keep their Souls from filthy Thoughts, and to have a Zeal for the Saints;
but not to go a-near the Meletian Schismatics; for, said he, ye know their
wicked and profane purpose; nor to have any Correspondence with the Arians;
for their Impiety is manifest: Neither when ye see their Judges in Power be ye
troubled; for 'twill cease, and their Opinion and Splendor is mortal, and of a
short standing; wherefore, keep ye your selves pure from them, and hold the
Tradition of your Fathers, and principally a pious Faith in our Lord Christ
Jesus, whom ye have learnt in the Holy Scriptures, and have often been put in
mind of, even by me.

57. When he had said this, the Brethren urged him to tarry and die there: But
that he would not, he showed by his silence, as for many Reasons, so especially
for this: The Egyptians love to bury the Bodies of Zealots, and especially of
Martyrs, and wrap them up in fine Linen. Now they don't bury them in the
Earth, but lay them upon Couches, and keep them in Repositories by themselves,
thinking thereby to honor the Deceased: But Antony often besought the Bishops
to warn the People against it, and also reproved many Laymen and Women for it,
saying, That that was neither Lawful nor very Holy; for the Bodies of the
Patriarchs, to this Day, are preserved in Sepulchers; nay, even the Body of our
Lord Himself was laid in one, and a Stone was laid upon it, and hid it till he
rose again; whereby he showed them that they transgressed the Law in not hiding
the Bodies of the departed, although they be Holy; for, What is greater or more
holy than our Lord's Body? Many therefore afterward buried under Ground, and
gave Thanks to God. Now St. Antony knowing the Custom of Egypt, and fearing
lest they should do so by his Body, hasted his Departure, and took his Leave of
the Monks in the Outer Mount, and went into the Inner Mount, where he used to
live.

58. A few Months after he fell Sick, and having called to those that were with
him, (for he had Two within with him, who had been Asceticks with him Fifteen
Years, and served him because of his extreme Old Age) he said to them, I now
(as it is written) go the way of my Fathers, for I see my self called by my
Lord; but be ye sober, and finish a long-lived Exercise: Be as earnest to hold
fast your Purpose, as though you were just beginning: Ye know the Devils are
plotting against you: Ye know they are fierce in Will, but weak in Power; don't
therefore be afraid of them, but breath Christ, and believe in Him, and live as
dying every day, taking heed to your selves, and remembering my Exhortations:
Hold no Communion with the Schismatics, nor the Arians; for ye know how I
declined them, because of their Heterodox and Christ-opposing Heresy. Do ye
study principally to clea^e unto Christ and his Saints, that after Death they
may receive you, as Friends and Acquaintance, into Everlasting Habitations.
Think upon and relish these Counsels; and if ye have any regard for me, and do
remember me, as a Father, don't suffer any one to take my Body into Egypt, lest
they lay me in their Houses; for for that reason I came (...). Ye know how I
have rebuked those who did it, and ^^^^g'd them to do so no more. Do ye
therefore bury my Body under Ground, and mind my Words, that no Body but your
selves may know where I am buried; for I shall receive my Body incorruptible
from my Savior in the Resurrection. And pray do ye divide my Clothes; Give one
Leathern Garment to Bishop Athanasius, and the Blanket which he gave new to me,
but is now grown old; and the other Leathern Jacket to Bishop Serapion, and
take ye the Hair-Cloth and save it, my Children, for Antony passes away, and
is no longer with you.

59. Having said this he saluted them, and gathered his Feet, and, as it were,
seeing Friends come unto him, and rejoicing because of them, (for he looked
with a cheerful Countenance as he lay) he left us, and was added unto the
Fathers. So, in fine, the Monks wrapped him up, and buried him under Ground,
according to his Command. And no Body, to this Day, except the Two Monks, knows
where he was Buried. The Vestments being distributed, according as he ordered,
every one kept them, as a great Purchase; for he that sees them does, as it
were, see Antony; and he that puts them on, carries his Admonitions about him
with Joy.

60. Such was Antony's Exercise, and such the End of his Life in the Body: And
if these things are small, in comparison to his Excellency, judge ye what sort
of Man of God he was, who, to so great an Age, from his Youth up, kept close to
his rigorous Discipline; neither conquered by Variety of Food, upon the Account
of his Old Age; nor changing the Habit of his Raiment, for want of Vigor; or
so much as washing his Feet: And yet, in all respects, he was sound and unhurt;
for he had his Eyes clear, seeing very well; not one of his Teeth was lost,
only near the Gums they were worn, because of his great Age: He was also sound
in his Hands and Feet, and much clearer in every part than those who use
several Diets, Bathings, and Variety of Garments; and as to Strength too, they
were much more ready.

61. St. Antony lived and died admired and celebrated by all every where, and
longed for by those who never saw him: A great Sign of his Virtue, and of a
Soul that truly loved God; for he did not get his Learning by Books, nor
external Wisdom, nor any Art: But Antony was renowned purely for his Devotion
to God. No one can deny that this was the Gift of God. How came he who was hid,
and sat in a Mountain, to be heard of in Spain, France, Rome, and Africa,
unless God had made his Name known every where, who promised this to Antony at
first; for although such Heroes act secretly, and are willing to lie concealed,
yet the Lord shows them, as Lamps to all, that they may know that his Commands,
which he has given to reform us, are practicable, and thence may derive a Zeal
for the ways of Virtue.

62. Read ye this to others, that they may know what sort of Life the Life of
Monks should be, and may be persuaded, that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
will glorify those who glorify Him, and serve Him unto the End; not only
bringing them to the Kingdom of Heaven, but making them, notwithstanding they
hide and retire, celebrated here for their Virtue, to the Benefit of others.
And, if there be a Necessity, read it to the Heathens, that they may know not
only that our Lord Jesus Christ is God, and the Son of God; but that those
Christians who serve Him truly, and believe in Him piously, reprove those
Spirits whom they account Gods, and tread upon them, and chase them, as those
who are the Deceivers and Corrupters of Men; and this they do by the Grace and
Strength of Christ Jesus our Lord; to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

