HOSANNA: OR, A Song of Thanksgiving, Sung by the CHILDREN of ZION; AND Set
forth in three notable Speeches at Grocers-Hall, on the late solemn Day of
Thanksgiving, Thursday June 7. 1649.
The First was Spoken by Alderman Atkins.

The Second by Alderman Isaac Pennington.

The Third by Hugh Peter's (no Alderman, but) Clericus in cuerpo.

Risum teneatis Amici? Alderman ATKINS his Speech before Dinner to the Speaker,
the General, Lieutenant General, and Lord President Bradshaw, at Grocers-Hall,
Thursday June 7.
Mr. Speaker,
OH, this is a blessed day (M. Speaker and mervailous in our eyes, to see you
become our Supreme Head and Governor, now that we have cut off the Kings head.
And as (I take it) it is one main reason of this heavenly Thanksgiving to my
Lord Lieutenant General, and Mr. General's Excellency for their great pains in
the business. Verily (Mr. Speaker) I cannot choose but weep for joy to think
on it; and yet I cannot tell you for what, though I shall tell you by and by --
In the mean time -- prithee M. Steward, set aside a couple of Custards, and a
Tart for my wife -- In the mean time (I say) I see no reason but why I may cry
as well as baul. I say Sir, I can baul as well as my Lord of Pembroke here, or
any man else my mouth was made for bauling; and I think you all know it well
enough in the House upon occasion; For you may remember, Mr. Speaker, how I
baul'd at the Apprentices, two years since, when the House of Commons had like
to have gone to wrack like a Bawdy House I am sure I was Mr. Speaker then; for
you look'^ as white as the driven Custard, and had neither tongue nor eyes, nor
ears, nor nose, nor brains, nor any thing else, but were in the same pickle as
when the King came to demand the five Members. I wonder he did not smell me out
too for a Traitor: For, I had my breeches full on it then, as I had half a year
before in Finsbury, at the general Muster of the new Militia: At which time, I
say, Sir, I was one of the City-Collonels, and came off cleanly (though I say
it:) For, being wounded in the belly, I retreated home, and having asked
counsel of a Surgeon, the Malignant Knave would not undertake me; and so the
State might have lost a Servant for want of a Plaster, but that my
Kitchin-wench made a shift to cure me with a dish-clout.

But having escaped this scouring (M. Speaker) and lived to see this glorious
day, now let us sing the song of old Simeon, and depart in peace: but first
let us have our belly-fulls. O death, I defy thee, for here is a good dinner
coming in. Twelve Bucks out of Eltham-Parke, besides those of the City; not a
Presbyterian bit (I promise you,) therefore sit down Gentlemen, and eat
lustily, I promise you it is well seasoned. I Will pass my word for the Cooks; for
I was one of the Committee that examined them, and put them Every Cook was
sworn.
every man to their Oaths, to forswear: Rats bane, Mercury and Monarchy.
Besides here is my Lord President (for more security) has brought a dozen
Tasters along with him. I hope he will lend us some of them. And now Mr.
Speaker, you are welcome; in the name of my Brethren Representative of the
City, I bid you heartily welcome; you may eat, drink, and be merry; for, you
have laid up goods for many years, and now you are laying up the Kings Goods.
More sacks to the Mill still. Sit down Mr. Speaker; you are a good old Speaker;
you are the Representative of the Supreme Authority. It was the Popes first,
next it was the Kings, and now it is yours, thank the Army. H^w daintily things
are come about, (Mr. Speaker) as well as you and I! For, as I take it, you and
I, and many more here have been at all Thanksgivings these 7. years. We have
waited upon his old Excellency Essex and the Admiral Warwick, and sung Psalms
with the Assembly men here over and over: And now those Black-birds are all
flown, and out of Tune: here is not a man of them but Thomas Goodwin, and he is
every jot as honest a man as his namesake John; for neither of them cares much
for saying Grace, Therefore sit down (Mr. Speaker) we have his new Excellency
here now, and General Cromwells honor, that cares as little as they. Indeed,
you must sit down first, and my Lord Mayor next; for, the Army (I am sure) made
us vote it so, and that the City-Sword should be yielded up to you to make a
Thanksgiving Trencher-Knife and so you were as good a man as the King, and a
better than my Lord Mayor; and so you might have been still, had you not giv^n
him his Sword again, for you lose your place in yielding up the sword: and
leave the Supreme Authority in my Lord Mayor and the Army. Howsoever sit still
( Sir,) I hope the General will not oppose the Votes of the House, now that it
is the Armies own House, but let them pass an't be but for fashions sake: and
therefore (M Speaker) for fashions sake you may sit uppermost, and next to you
my Lord Mayor.

I think too, for fashions sake (my Lord General) your Excellency may sit down
next. I would be loath to d^splease Mr. Lieutenant Generals honor, I hope he
will not be angry at your Excellency, nor me* I could wish you had voted all
your places before you came hither: But your Excellency may sit, I suppose; for
Mr. Lieut Genesis looks as if he gave you leave* On my Conscience that is a meek
humble soul, and will take some other time to set you beside the saddle.

And for you (my Lord President I should have placed you uppermost; for, I know
none so fit to have represented the Supreme Authority, as you that commanded
the cutting off that Head of it! Oh, how th^s Scarlet-gown becomes your honor!
It suits exceeding well with mine and my Lord Mayors; for, you sentenced the
old King as a Traitor, and we have proclaimed the young King to be no King, and
a Traitor, when we can catch him. It was a dangerous piece of work indeed; I
was as afraid as you are of following Docter Dorista; the people did so
threaten, as if they would have torn us for the very rags of Authority, and
cried up Charles the second, louder than we could cry him down. I think the
rest of my Brethren carried it little better than my self; for, my guts began
to crow after their, old tune, and wrought like bottle-beer, insomuch that I
wished for Coll. Pride to stop the Bung-hole, till the Troopers relieved us.

But now (my good Lord President) let us comfort one another: And though you
deserve to be uppermost, yet sit down and be content with your place. For
fashion's sake M. Lieutenant-General's honor is content to let it be so, till
he finds it convenient to turn you off as well as his Excellency. Pray take it
not ill that I whisper this in your ear; for, now that he has made you serve
his ends, he cares not so he were rid of you; since you may serve them all as
you did the King, in a new High Court of Justice, because you are pleased to
let it be so.

The next place (Mr. Lieut. Gen.) must needs be yours. By his Excellencie's
leave, you are the Savior of the three Kingdoms. You are he that has filled
our hearts this day with Thanksgiving and gladness. You trained the King into a
snare at Carisbrook Castle, and fooled and routed all his Party. You set up a
High Court to cut him off, and you lie at catch for his Son. You have made us a
Commonwealth, that is (as Malignants say) have given us power to put a finger
in every man's purse and ^ocket. You have made the people the Supreme Authority,
and left them no Laws. And well done (Sir) for what should we do with any Law
but the Sword? Or what Law like Liberty of Conscience and Power met together?
You it is that lead his Excellency by the nose like a Bear, and at last will
bring him to the stake. You have new molded the City. You are the joy of our
hearts, the light of our eyes, and the breath of our nosthrils, though
Cavaliers call you the cutthroat of our lives and liberties. For all which we
set this day apart to give thanks to God, and a dinner to you, and somewhat else
into the bargain, as you shall see after dinner. In the mean time fall to a
short life and a merry; (may it please your Honor) a short life and a merry;
and so give me leave to conclude heartily with part of the Lords-Prayer (though
I do not use it) Thy Kingdom come; or as the Thief did upon the Cross, remember
me when thou come into thy Kingdom, and I promise you faithfully I will never
beshite the Palace.

Alderman Isaac Penningtons Speech. at the presenting of the Golden Basin and
Ewer unto the General, with Plate of 300 l. value, and 200 l. in Gold in a
Purse to the Lieutenant General.
GIve ear O Heavens, and regard O earth; may it please your Excellency to open
your mouth wide and I shall fill it. I Isaac Pennington Alderman of London,
confess my self altogether unable to speak the praises due unto your self, Mr.
Leiutenant General, and all the faithful Officers and Soldiers of your Army.
Yet why should I hold my peace? I will speak though I cannot speak, and though
I cannot speak I will not keep silence. Some have been so bold as to brand me
for a cracked vessel, yet I have been meet for my Masters use, and they shall
find me as sound as sounding Brass, or as a tinckling Cymbal* Moses was a man
slow of speech, yet he was a great leader, and so have I been, and so is Your
Excellency. But as for Mr. Lieut. General, though he be such a one too, yet he
has the torgues of men and Angels so much at his devotion, that the very noise
of them drowns the fame of your Excellency, and swallows up your senses.

For my part, I ble^s God exceedingly for you both, for all your labor of love
in Gunpowder and Gosp^l, and carrying on that glorious work of Reformation,
which though I began in desperation, yet you have brought it to perfection.
Henceforth therefore all Generations shall call you blessed, and me no mad man,
though I have been as mad as any of you all; and yet I think I am fit enough to
deliver the sense of the City; who by me returns you thanks for the great
pains you have taken in purging the malignant Presbyterians out of the Common
council, as well as the House; by which means you made shift to new-model the
City, as you did the Army, turning out all that were not of your own temper; so
that we are all now of one soul and one mind, and lay all things in common for
the use of the State, but what is our own.

Add to these things your borrowing money of the City, but never paying them
again, your brea^ing all their privileges, and putting daily affronts upon
them, your imprisoning, fining, assessing, taxing, exci^ng, Free-quartering,
and fleecing all their fellows; your conquering them by treachery, and riding
through their streets in triumph, your over-awing them with the Military power,
and destroying their Trade by Land, and Traffic by Sea. For all which
unexpressible favors, with the extirpation of Presbytery, and the suppressing
of the Levellers, they conceive themselves bound to return an acknowledgment,
and rejoice in the opportunity of dedicating this day of Thanksgiving unto you
and your Bellies.

But since man lives not by bread only, but by killing of Kings and loyal
Subjects, and seizing on their goods and estates, and turning them into money.
Since Gold is the only Goddess of this Reformation, and the Saints cannot
establish their Kingdom without it; since your Excellency, and your
Lieutenant General Guardian, have vouchsafed us this favor of a visit which
you denied to the Presbyters, we here present your Excellency, with the same
golden Basin and Ewer, which you refused from their hands. It cost them one
thousand pounds, and because it was of their providing we can the more freely
bestow it upon you. I have been an old Thanksgiving-Sinner, as well as M.
Speaker, or any of them all, in the days of old Essex, who (I am sure) never
received such a present for all his pains, but was content to be fobb'd off
with a Close stool and a pipe of Tobacco; which was the reason (I conceive) why
my brother Atkins here in those days, kept so close to him after dinner.

And as for you (M. Lieutenant General) though your merits outweigh whatever
we can present unto you, and though in all the before-named exploits we must
allow you the greatest share, yet be pleased to accept of the less requital, a
poor pittance of 300 l. in Plate, and a Vision of golden Angels in a purse, to
the value of 200 l. all the cost of our own Fraternity.

As for the rest of the Lords and Gentlemen here present, I hope they will
excuse us, and think themselves well satisfied with their dinner: And in
particular, you my Lord President, who deserve much in the settling of this
Republic. But having done but one single Act toward it, if you expect more
than a dinner, we must leave you to the consideration of M. Lieutenant General,
who set you on work and in the end (no doubt) will pay your wages.

I have but one word more to say, and that is this: We have great cause to
rejoice in the happy settlement of this Common-weath; but I fear we shall not
be quiet yet. God bless us from untoward dreams and restless nights, and send
us well to digest this Thanksgiving-Dinner, and to have no more of them, nor
occasion for them in have: for the frights they put us into beforehand are
terrible, and the dinners themselves are chargeable and will prove very
chargeable indeed, if Malignants speak truth, who say this very days
Thanksgiving will costs us no less than our heads, if not our souls too into
the bargain. Therefore ( Gentlemen) in a word, I think we have but one play,
and that is to hold up the State as long as we can, and to make sure of our
heads and estates, and pillage other men's, when we can hold it no longer.

In answer to this, Hugh Peter's being well whittled with mine, made the
following Reply.

Reader, Peter's his being drunk is no Fable (I assure you) and he fell out with
the Butler.

Hugh Peter's his Thanksgiving Speech for a Farewell to the City, in the behalf
of the General and Lieutenant General.
Mr. Alderman Penningtons, and the rest of the Representatives of the City,
I Must tell you, I have been half the world over, and yet I am come back
again; and by my Faith (Sirs) I must tell you, I never saw such a godly jolly
crew as are here, all heigh Fellows together. It Is merry when Malt-men meet;
and (they say) some of us here have been Brewers, and of worse Trades too: But
uh -- uh -- let that Pass. I defy Brewing, for, I have been all over your Wine
Cellar, and that is another world, but it is as slippery a world as this, and
runs round too. What a Nicodemus is the Butler! he was loath to own Me but by
night; he bad me stay till night, and then I should have my belly-full: Now (
Sirs) I conceive a belly-full is a belly-full; and if a man have not his
belly-full, it is no Thanksgiving: And if you ( Gentlemen of the City) have not
a belly-full of this Thanksgiving, I say you may have a belly-full.

Had D. Dorista been so wise as to have staid at home, he might have had
another kind of belly-full then he had at the Hague: But a belly full still is
a belly-full, and Grocers-Hall is a better Ordinary than a Dutch Ordinary for a
belly-full. Pox of your Dutch Ordinaries, I think they will become English, and
give us all a belly-full; but in another kind (I fear) then I gave my Dutch
Land-Lady and her Daughter.

But no matter for that, a belly-full is a belly full: their bellys were empty,
and so was mine; for I had not so much as a stiver to bless my self, and they
would never let me be quiet, and I scor'd up still, and so I got my belly-full,
and they got their belly-full; which was one belly-full for another, and so at
length I was quit with them.

Then I went to New England, and there I saw a blessed sight, a world of wild
Women and Men lying round a fire, in a ring stark naked. If this custom should
(...) up in London (as I see no reason but it may, if the State will vote it)
then every woman may ^^ue her belly-full, and it would be a certain cure for
cuckolds and jealousy, and so the City would lose nothing by this Thanksgiving.

But now I come home to the point in hand, my Lord Mayor, and you Gentlemen of
the City, I am commanded to give you thanks: but I would know for what? for
your dinner? yes, I will when I have my belly-full, but your Butler is no true
Trojan; he knows not how to tap and ^oss the Stingo. Sure, he is some
Presbyterian Spy that is slinkt into office; some cowardly fellow that pines
away at scandalous sins, and the stool of Repentance, and he will never do well
till he be ^rencht for the humor: so that now I see I am like to go away
without my belly-full; and have never a Jig to the tune of Arthur of Bradley --
Sing O brave Arthur of Bradley! -- Sing O! --

But if things go thus, what should I thank you for? The States sore saw wh^t
slender good fellows you would be, o^ else some of you had been Knighted as
well as my Lord of Pembroke. Nay, it was Gods Mercy you had not all been
Knighted: For, it was put to ^he vote (I tell ^ou) whether my Lord Mayor should
be Knighted, and whether you, Alderman Pennington, and Alderman Atkins, should
be dubbed Sir Isaac and Sir Thomas of the States own Creation. But since its
resolved otherwise, I pray you bid the Butler bring up his Cannikins, and I Will
make you all Lords like my self, for now ^ am no less in Title than Lord Hugo
de santa Pietro Puntado, and every jot as merry as forty Beggars.

Now I warrant, you expect I should thank you for his Excellencies golden Basin
and Ewer. It Is true, I was commanded to do so; but what care I for a Basin and
Ewer? Give me a Pipe and a Chamber Pot: I mean a pipe of Canary into the
bargain, or else it shall be no Thanksgiving-day for me. Oh, for a Condu^t from
Malago, and that we knew how to convey Middleton's pipes to the Canary Islands,
then there would be no end of Thanksgiving.

I am commanded likewise to thank you for the Lieutenant Generals Plate, and
his Purse of Gold: and I am so much the more willing to do it, because I hope
to have a feeling out of it anon when we come home: But (as I take it) you have
more reason to thank him, than he you: For, you gave him a little purse of
money, and it is his goodness he does not take all. I observe too you have given
him but the value of 500 l. and his Excellency (forsooth) as much more. Do ye
know what you do? Could you not have asked my council before? you may chance to
be switch't (in faith) for not setting the saddle upon the right horse; and well
you deserve it, if I be not furnished with a pipe of Canary. Let me not be put
off with nothing, like my Lord President, and M. Speaker, you know whether to
send ( Sirs.) My lodging is sometimes at St. James's, but most an end in Thames
street. Ther^'^ my Maid, a handsome lass. I tell you, will take it in, as well
as my self, or else I would never keep her, Farewel^ ( Sirs) here is nothing to
do (I see.)

A Pox on your Butler and his lean joules,
There Is liberty lies in the bottom of the Boules.
Thus it is in one of our modern Authors; but I Profess I can have none of this
liberty, though it be the first year of freedom, and then judge you whether the
State, or the State's Servants have any cause of Thanks. Farewell (Si^s) I am
gone. Oh for a mill-boule, or his Excellencies Basin and Ewer now to spue in,
and make an end of Thanksgiving.

FINIS.

