AN ANSWER TO Mr. Molyneux HIS CASE of Ireland 's being bound by Acts of
Parliament in England, Stated:

AND His Dangerous Notion of Ireland's being under no Subordination to the
Parliamentary Authority of England

REFUTED; By Reasoning from his own Arguments and Authorities*

Romans 12. 3. For I say, through the Grace given unto me, to every Man that is
among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; etc.
Gal. 6. 3. For if a Man think himself to be something when he is nothing, he
deceives himself. LONDON, Printed for Rich. Parker, at the Unicorn under the
Piazza of the Royal Exchange. School.

THE EPISTLE Dedicatory, By way of PREFACE To the Modern English Nobility,
Gentry, and Protestant Inhabitants of Ireland.
Right Honorable, Honorable, etc.
ALthough you are by far the least in Number, you are yet to be esteemed as the
much more considerable part of the Inhabitants of that Country, in respect of
your Power, and the Authority which you bear there. It Is true, that upon the
first Subduction of the Irish Nation to the English Government, the Laws and
Liberties of Englishmen were granted unto them, equally with the Colony of the
Old English that were planted among them; but as they were a people that had
been always used to a sort of wild and barbarous way of Living, they did not
affect to embrace the more Civilized Customs and Manners of the English, but
for the most part kept themselves off from uniting and joining with them in the
Management of the Government, which by the Concessions made to them, they might
freely have acted in; yet they continued as a distinct and separate people,
swayed and influenced by their own petty Princes or Chiefs of Clans, even to
the breaking out into frequent Insurrections and Rebellions against the English
Government; which therefore continued all along to be chiefly administered by
the Inhabitants of the English Pale: And in this state the Affairs of Ireland
remained until the Reformation of Religion, from whence sprung such a
Revolution as produced a great Change in the Administration of the public
Affairs there: For after the Reformation had obtained in England, the Ancient
English of Ireland did generally remain of the Roman Communion, and
consequently when 'twas found dangerous to continue them in the Execution of
public Trusts, they also as well as the Irish of the ^ame Religion, were in
process of Time, by the Influence and Authority of England, utterly disabled
from acting any thing in the Government of the State; and it is in their rooms
that you have since succeeded, and are therefore looked upon and treated by
England as the governing part, and effective Body of the Kingdom of Ireland.

But when I came to consider Mr. Molyneux's. Book, I thought it very strange,
that he who designed so Elaborate a piece in your Favor, should yet give you
no stronger a Title to the pre-eminence which you bear in that Country, than
what would devolve upon you from those Concessions which were anciently made to
the Native Irish and Old English; which, as he would persuade us, did amount to
no less than the establishing them upon the Foundation of an Absolute Kingdom,
distinct and separate from the Kingdom of England, and wholly Independent
thereon; the Consequence of which, if it had been so, would have stood you in
very ill stead, for as you cannot make any pretensions to such Concessions,
because you are not (generally speaking) descended from either of those People,
but their Progeny are still in being, and acknowledged to be such; all the
Rights and Privileges which Mr. Molyneux has so strongly contested for,
should be due to them, if the Case must be taken as he has stated it; and
nothing can be more plausibly offered in their Justification, for the cutting
the Throats of the Modern English, than this Notion: And Mr. Molyneux is so
fond of ^ixing you upon this Old Foundation, that ^e even disputes the
possibility of their forfeiting, or the reasonableness of our retracti^g those
Concessions: I believe indeed, that he might forsee, that if it should be
admitted that the frequency of their rebelling and our reducing them by force
of Arms, did amount to a Reconquering of this their Independent Kingdom, (as he
makes it) that would have dissolved that ancient Concession, and spoil his
Design of entailing it upon you: However it be, I think this sort of Title does
naturally fall under an inextricable Dilemma: For, If Ireland was granted to
the Native Irish and Old English, as an Absolute, Independent Kingdom, and was
never since re-conquered by England; the Right of administering the public
Affairs of that Government (under the King) ought to remain in them, since
'twas never given up to you by their Consents; and then they have no reason to
consider you otherwise, than as having no Title more than Usurpers and
Oppressors, and that you may justly be treated as such whenever they are in a
condition to do it? But if this Independent Kingdom has been reconquer'd, the
former Concessions are actually dissolv^d, and neither you nor they can have
any more pretense to an Independent Kingdom, until you can procurea New Grant
for it: And thus Mr. Molyneux in laboring to raise you higher than your proper
Basis, has quite unhinged you.

But I have yet no doubt of your being as well Entitled to the Power and
Authority which you enjoy and exercise in that Country, as any People in Europe
are; and that it is justly derived to you, from a much more certain Original
than what Mr. Molyneux has assigned; and I have therefore undertaken in the
following Papers to controvert his Notion through every point, and to show in
Opposition to his Arguments; First* That Henry the Second, having subdued
Ireland by the means of an English Army, that Country came to be annexed to the
Imperial Crown, or Kingdom of England, but not to the Person of King Henry, in
any separate propriety from the Kingdom. Secondly, That the Subduing of Ireland
by the people of England, under the Conduct of their King Henry the Second, was
then esteemed to be a Conquest, and is much more to be accounted so, than
William the first's acquisition of the Crown of England, and that Ireland was
thereby most certainly brought under the Jurisdiction of the Parliamentary
Authority of England. Thirdly, That King Henry's Descent upon Ireland was a
just Undertaking, and that the entire submission of the People to the
Government of England, their receiving its Laws, and being endo^'d in all the
privileges of Englishmen, made them become a Member of, and annexed to the
English Empire, and gave England a just Title to exercise a perpetual
Jurisdiction over them. Fourthly, That all the many Concessions made to
Ireland, empowering them to hold Parliaments, etc. can be understood no
otherwise, than that they should be enabled to devise and enact such Laws when
Occasion required, as were suitable to the Circumstances of that Country: But
that no Grant ever did, or could make Ireland an Absolute, Distinct, Separate
Kingdom, and wholly Independent of England, or invest it with such a supreme
Legislature as is inherent in the Head of the Government only; which, with
respect to the Body of the English Empire, can never reside any where else than
in the King, by and with the Advice and Cons^nt of the Lords and Commons of
England in Parliament assembled. Fifthly, That the Presidents and Opinions
quoted by Mr. Molyneux, do not by any means assist his Argument, but do most of
them support mine against him. And Sixthly, That his Reasons and Arguments
offered on one side and the other, are as little to his purpose; but that the
English Settlements in Ireland always were, and ever must be properly accounted
as a Colony of England, and has ever been by her protected and supported as
such.

By these Principles then, and no other but such as these, can the English be
justified in their Conduct toward the Irish; whereas if they had been an
absolute, distinct, independent People, the former and latter Disturbances they
have given us, could not have been Rebellions, but were just Attempts to
vindicate their Rights against a People that had without Reason violated them;
their Lands had not been legally Forfeited, but forcibly taken from them,
against all Justice and Reason; and the Spilling of so much of their Blood must
lie heavy upon those that provoked them to take up Arms, in Defense of their
just Liberties and Properties. Is it not much more for your Interest then, to
put this matter on the right bottom, upon which our Actings toward them were
always grounded, by considering the Irish as a People that had been subdued and
brought into Subjection to the English Government, and were united to it in the
Nature of a Province of its Empire; and to esteem the English that have been
settled there as a Colony of England, which we were obliged to protect and
defend against any Insults and Violences offered them by the Natives? For this
must justly subject them to the Forfeitures and Penalties due to Rebels,
vindicate us in the Severities we have exercised upon them, support you in the
possession of the Estates which were taken from them, and return the the Guilt
of all the Blood that has been shed in the Irish Wars, upon their own Heads,
as being the Aggressors.

These things are so Obvious, that I believe, there are many of you that can
have no good Opinion of Mr. Molyneux's Book, yet I am told that there are
others, and some of good Rank among you, that are very fond of it: does indeed
with respect to you carry the face of a Popular Argument, and is artfully
written; and he that can take the Latitude of advancing his own Imaginations
and mistaken Conjectures with the Confidence of Realities and Certainties,
suggest Falsities with the utmost Assurance, and omit Material Truths; may
impose much upon an unwary Reader, especially if be thinks what is offered is
for his Interest. Quod volumus, facile credimus. But any thoughtful Man, that
will give himself leave to Consider it impartially, will find it to be one of
the weakest and most mistaken Books that ever was written with such a flourish
of Language, and show of Learning and Integrity. The Story of King John's being
made an absolute Independent King, is the main Prop on which he lays the
greatest stress of his Reasoning, and yet it proves but a mere Imagination: The
Writers indeed of these Times do say, he was made King of Ireland, but it looks
but like a Complement to him, for the Grant it self shows plainly that 'twas
but feudatory Donation, and that 'twas never intended to make him an
Independent King, because he was limited to use no higher Style than that of
Lord of Ireland.

Mr. Molyneux also deals very unfairly in many other particulars, and it
appears that he had more regard to the point he contests, than to discover the
genuine Truth of the matter; for he has not only stretched in favor of his
Argument beyond what any Authorities can warrant, but he has also concealed
diverse obvious Instances that make against him; of which I shall observe to you
some Particulars, which have occurred* to me since I had gone through with my
Answer: I have accidentally met with Sir Richard Bolton's Statutes, (which he
quotes) wherein I Observe, 28 H. 8. Chapter 2. Chapter 8. Chapter 19. 33 H. 8. Chapter 1.
that there are several Acts that declare in most express Words, that the
Kingdom of Ireland is appending; united; knit, and a Member rightfully
belonging to the Imperial Crown of England: And yet Mr. Molyneux observes this
to us with such a Diminution, as represents it but as it were united, and which
he conceives effects no more, than that Ireland shall not be alien^d or
separated from the King of England; etc. but I cannot imagine that he is so
ignorant of our Constitution; as not to know, that we can have no Notion of
uniting or annexing to the Imperial Crown of England, as appropriated to the
King's Person, distinct from the Kingdom, which if it can be sense any where
else, is yet perfect Nonsense in England. But I have met with one Prevarication
so notorious, that I must not omit showing it: Mr. Molynex in page 41. has
these words; For the Dominion and Regality of Ireland was wholly and separately
vested in King John, being absolutely granted unto him without any Reservation.
And he being created King in the Parliament at Oxford, under the Style and
Title of Lord of Ireland, enjoyed all manner of Kingly Jurisdiction,
Pre-eminence and Authority Royal, belonging to the Imperial State and Majesty
of a King, as are the express words of the Irish Statute, 33 H. 8. cap. 1. I
must confess, that I believed that this Statute had been as express in the
matter as he delivers it, but it is so far from it, that there is no mention
made of King John, or his Grant in it: The words of the Act are, Forasmuch as
the King our most gracious Sovereign Lord, and his Grace's most noble
Progenitors, Kings of England, have been Lords of this Land of Ireland, having
all manner of Kingly Jurisdiction, Power, Preheminencies, and Authority Royal,
belonging or appertaining to the Royal Estate and Majesty of a King, by the
Names of Lord of Ireland. We deny not, that King Henry the Eighth's
Progenitors, the Kings of England, had this Royal, Sovereign Authority over
Ireland* but his Insinuation, that John had it before he was King of England is
plainly false, and not warrantable by this Statute.

Again, he mightily imposes upon the World, in ^sser^ing, That before the Year
1641. there was no Statute made in England, p. 99.
introductory of a New Law, etc. but those which he had beforementioned: And
though while I am dealing with Mr. Molyneux, I confine my self to mention no
Authorities but his own, yet I will here presume for a proof of his Ignorance
or Disingenuity, to name some other old Acts binding Ireland, which have been
imparted to me by a very Learned and Observing Gentleman of our House of
Commons, whose Credit I can rely on, without troubling my self to search the
Records; and I doubt not but Mr. Attwood has been much fuller in this
particular, though I deny my self the reading his Book till my own be perfected.

The Statute of York, 12 Ed. 1st. Enacts Laws to be observed in England and
Ireland; 11 Ed. 3. cap. 3. Prohibits any Clothes to be brought into England,
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland, (for we then claimed a Dominion over Scotland
also) but such as were made in the King's Dominions, upon pain of Forfeiture;
27 Ed. 3. Erects Staple-Towns in Ireland; 34 E. 3. cap. 17. Enacts, that
Merch^^nts, Aliens or Denizons, may come into Ireland with their Merchandise,
and freely return; 43 Ed. 3. cap. 1. The Staples of Ireland, etc. shall be kept
at the places where they were first ordained; 1 Hen. 6. cap. 3. Enacts that the
Irish, that have Benefices or Offices in Ireland, shall abide there upon their
Benefices and Offices, upon the pain of forfeiting the Profits of their
Benefices and Offices for the Defense of Ireland, and mentions the like Law
made the 1st. of Hen. 5th. From these and many other instances, it evidently
appears, that England has always exercised a Legislative Jurisdiction over
Ireland, whenever fit Occasions have made it necessary.

I have also seen the Irish Acts of Settlement and Explanation, and though Mr.
Molyneux says, that they plainly show, that the Parliament of Ireland may
repeal an Act passed in England, yet I find nothing like it in those Acts; but
on the contrary, the King's Declaration, which is of the Body of the Act of
Settlement, although it takes Notice that the Estates and Possessions enjoyed
by the Adventurers, would prove very defective, if they were examined by the
Letter of the Law, because they had not strictly pursued and observed those
Acts of 42, from which they derived their Title; yet it is made the first
Business of this Act, to confirm these Adventurers in the Inheritance of all
the Estates allotted them by virtue of those English Acts of Parliament; and
it is provided, that if they should be obliged to restore any of those Lands to
Innocents, they should be first repriz'd to the full Value out of other
forfeited Lands. What more could be desired, to show the utmost regard to those
English Acts of Parliament? It Is true indeed, that the Act of Explanation
retrenches one Third of the Allotments made to the Adventurers; but this could
not be construed as any Breach upon the English Acts, for if they had taken a
greater share, than the Lands that remained forfeited would amount to, 'twas
but reasonable to reduce them to a just proportion: So that here again Mr.
Molyneux has evidently strained this Suggestion beyond the Truth of the Fact.
I have indeed, remarked these things at large in their places, but as some more
perfect Informations have since come to my Hand, I thought they might not
improperly be hinted here, for the obviating the too great Opinion of Mr.
Molyneux's performance, with which some may yet remain praepossess'd, and
preparing them to entertain my Answer with the less prejudice.

I have heard indeed, that it is not to Mr. Molyneux alone that we are beholding
for this Notion, but that it has for several Years past been talked on among
several of your People, and he has only redu^'d it into form, and now at last
brought it forth into the World; and you may observe by the Votes of our last
Parliament, that they were of the Opinion, that several Resolves of your House
of Commons gave Encouragement to the publishing of this Book. But I would yet
hope, that many of that Assembly were not so far appriz'd of the Matter, as
wittingly to Design the doing any thing that should give so great an Offense to
England: Yet I can assure you, from the Conversation I have had with several of
the Members of our House of Commons, that although they had not Leisure to
proceed further upon this Business in their last Sessions, it is however very
probable that it may be taken into Consideration again by the ensuing
Parliament, as a Matter which if it be not checked in time, may produce very
ill Effects: And you cannot but be sensible of the Dangerous Consequences of
breaking the fair Correspondence and firm Confidence that ought always to be
maintained between the Head Government and its Members; and that when
Misunderstandings and Iealousies are once entertained, they are too apt to be
improved into Extremes on both sides. You know also, that you have an Old Enemy
near you, who would be ready enough to entertain hopes of Advantage to
themselves from any such Iarrings: And you must needs acknowledge, that it is an
imprudent thing to provoke those that have not only Right, but also Power to
support it.

It has been an usual Policy with some other Governments, to keep so strict a
Hand over their Colonys, as not to suffer the Criolians, or People born there,
to bear any Considerable Office or Command therein; but the Government of
England has not dealt so ^ardly by you, and doubtless it will be always your
Interest to prevent the giving any Occasion to distrust your Fidelity, and to
think it may be needful to treat you with more Caution.

I should think therefore, that you cannot do your selves a greater Right, than
in the next Sessions of your Parliament, not only to Censure this Book, but
utterly to Disclaim also the Notion of your being a Kingdom so absolute within
your selves, as to be wholly independent of the Kingdom of England; I hope I
have been able in my following Discourse, to Convince any reasonable Person
that it cannot be so, and that instead of doing you any good, 'twould tend to
your Destruction to have it thought so: Yea, and if you should Recognize your
selves to be a Colony of England, (as I have shown that you cannot be looked
upon under any other Consideration) I believe nothing can be more agreeable to
your Circumstances, or better support your Title to what you enjoy in that
Country. It would also be well worth your Thoughts, whether it might not be fit
for you to show your Readiness to Contribute something, according to your
Ability, toward the Reimbursing of England a part of the vast Charge they have
been at, in recovering that Country, and restoring you to your Estates; whereby
you may possibly prevent the Parliament of England's requiring it of you; for I
can tell you, that since Mr. Molyneux has started the Thought, some of the
most considerable Members of our House of Commons ^ave talked on it.

I have no ill will to Ireland, I have had the Honor to have been in
Conversation with many of you, for whom I have the utmost Respect and personal
Esteem, and I have been sorry to see so much of an Inclination in some worthy
Persons, to favor this Opinion of Mr. Molyneux. The sense of Power and Profit
prevails much upon Humane Frailty; nay, it easily subdues our Reason, and makes
us unwilling to entertain Convictions against what we have believed to be our
Interest; but I have endeavored to show those that are mislead in this Matter,
that it can by no means be their Interest to be freed from the Jurisdiction of
the Parliamentary Authority of England: You know that you are not able to
protect and defend your selves against the Rebellions of the Irish, and that
the Kings of England cannot raise Money upon the People to help you, without
their Consent in Parliament; would you have them then only to have Authority to
raise Money, and appropriate it to your Service, without having any more to do
with you? Or can you think, that the Parliament of England will ever more
assist you upon those Terms? rather may they not with good Reason demand a
Reimbursement of what Mr. Molyneux owns to be due to us for former Assistances?
which would doubtless amount to a greater Sum^ than you are ever able to pay.

People that do good Offices, expect at least a grateful Acknowledgment from
those that receive them* We have never been sparing of our Blood and Treasure,
to help you in your Distresses, and yet it is too well known, that many of your
People have been apt to speak very stightingly of what we have done for you,
and to tell us, that what we did was not out of regard to them, but to our
selves: And since the Bill designed to restrain you from spoiling us in our
principal Trade of the Woolen Manufactury, by underselling us in Foreign
Markets, we have been sharply reflected upon in print, as if we were about to
ruin and undo you, and even deny you Earth and Air, and the common privileges
of Mankind^ Nay, we were after a ^ort Threatened with the Danger of your
joining with some other Interest than that of England, or of your quitting the
Country, etc. and even Mr. Molyneux has given some touche^ upon the same
string^ Give me leave to tell you, that this is not looked upon as a modest or
friendly Behavior, much less does it denote any sense of Gratitude retained in
a People that were so lately Relieved by England, and restored to the enjoyment
of plentiful Estates, which they must never have expected but through the Help
of England; and this has been done wholly at our Cost, and they have not
(hither to) been asked to Contribute one Penny toward it; some People would not
surely have so soon forgotten so great a Benefit. I am yet desirous to reason a
little with you upon this Matter, but it is hard to use so much plainness as is
requisite, without giving Offense to some, which I would as far as possible
avoid, my Design being real Friendship and Good Will to you, and I should
rejoice if I might be instrumental to Reconcile you to an even Temper of Mind;
but that is hardly to be done with such as shall persist to be of the Opinion
that they are altogether in the right: Suffer me however to tell you, that you
have ways enough to employ your Poor, without the Woollen Trade, which with you
(as to those sorts that hurt us) is a New Undertaking: You have large and
encouraging Improvements arising from the product of your Lands; your great
quantities of Provisions, Butter, Leather, etc. afford you a fair Foundation
for Foreign Trade, besides you are very capable of a Linen Manufacture, if
you will employ your Stock and Industry that way. On the other hand, England
has for many Ages, applied her self to the Woollen Manufactury, the poor are
settled in it, and have no other way of Livelihood; she has no means of
gaining Wealth sufficient to support her Government without it; but your being
able to work so much cheaper, must of consequence abate the prices to so great
a degree, as that she cannot be able to hold the Trade; which in time will
cause a decay of her Wealth and Power, draw inevitable Ruin upon her whole
Empire, and involve your selves in the same: Is it not easy then to determine,
for whom it is reasonable to give place in this Contest? 'twas upon this
Consideration, you have been restrained from exporting your Wools to any
Country but England, and is not the necessity of restraining the Manufacture
thereof much more cogent? Bear with me to say, that the evident reason of the
thing is sufficient to convince all Mankind, that England must be perpetually
obliged to preserve this Trade to her self; that she cannot suffer any of her
Members to interfere with her in it, and that to advocate against so just an
exerting of the Supreme Authority, shows only a self-seeking Temper, in Minds
that would grasp all to themselves, without having any regard to the Well-being
of the whole Community, of which they are but Members: You see the People of
Romney-Marsh, are not willing to be hindered from sending their Wools to France,
and the justice of the thing is as much to them as you, the only difference is,
that they being within the Realm of England send Representatives to the
Parliament; and yet perhaps they would have been as far from consenting as you,
if they had not been over voted: But there would be no possibility of
conserving Societies, if such Compulsions might not be exercised toward
particulars.

We must yet own that it is but a natural infirmity, for Men to be hardly
persuaded into the right reason of things which they believe to be against
their own Interest; nay, we find that they are too apt to be prejudiced against
such who endeavor to convince them of their Mistakes; and as we observe that
particular Persons are subject to prevailing Inclinations, so also there are
Habits and Dispositions, that are in some measure peculiar to distinct
Countries and People, from whence it has been usual to give general Characters
of the Inhabitants of particular Countries, according to the Virtues or Vices
that have been noted to be most predominant among them; neither is it difficult
to assign some natural causes, from whence such habitual Dispositions may
proceed; for some instance whereof, I would offer the consideration of a Colony
well settled in an abundant Country, where the People find very easy means of
subsistence and improvement, and are in great measure exempted from the
solicitious Cares and Difficulties of Life, that attend the Inhabitants of
places that are more populous and fully cultivated; and where also they have
been used to exercise a large Dominion and Power over the Natives, who have
been always kept in a servile Obedience and Subjection to them, to a far
greater degree than can be practiced in a Country where the People enjoy a more
equal share of Liberty: Is it not reasonable then to expect, that the
Inhabitants of such a Colony may be naturally Generous, Hospitable, Free of
Conversation, and of Courageous and Bold Spirits? These are Virtues, which
every Body will commend; but is it not as natural for such a People, to be less
ready to pay so entire an Obedience as may be required of them by their
Superiors, and to be uneasy under any Checks, that may impeach them in the
prosecution of such Advantages that they may find themselves capable of,
without considering how prejudicial they may be to others? may there not be an
aptness in such a People to be somewhat assuming, and to have a good Opinion of
themselves? will there not be a proness to impatience, and forwardness to
reflect, when any Contradiction is given them? may they not be likely to expect
more regard from others, than is really due to them? Is it not probable, that
they would be less considerate in giving Offense, than ready to take Offense at
others? may not height of Spirit be nearer their Temper, than true Humility?
Moreover, as they have no Concern in the transacting with Foreign Nations in
matters of Government, they may be the less used to consider of the Nature and
Reason of Political Managements, or to think how far it is incumbent upon a
Mother Nation or Supreme Government, to regulate all her Colonies or Members,
so as that the Tranquillity of the whole Empire may be best conserved; and
perhaps they may be subject to forget the Obedience and Duty which must be
perpetually owing from them to her: These are Humane Infirmities, that may be
very naturally incident, to a People under the forementioned Circumstances;
and I have met with ingenuous Persons who have been bred up in such Colonies,
that have readily acknowledged, that their Judgments have been much rectified
in these matters, when they have come to see more of the World, and been made
sensible of the better Accomplishments that are to be found in a more Polite
Conversation; they may perhaps attain to a good pitch of School-Learning, but
that can amount to no more than a very superficial Knowledge, in respect to the
far greater improvement that is to be gained by reading the great Book of the
World, and practicing the ample Study of Men and Things.

I am tender of putting these things too home, because I know that though Men
should be brought to see their own Infirmities, but few can endure to be told
of them; yet a Mariner will esteem him for a Friend, that warns him of the
Rocks and Sands that lie in his way, and a wise man will never account such an
one his Enemy, who over-perswades him into the right way, when he was
confidently going on in the wrong. I am sure, I want not good Will to the
People of Ireland, and I believe no Man that has no concern there, can wish
their Prosperity more than I do, and I am very sensible, that it is the interest
of England to encourage them in all such improvements, as may conduce to their
Happiness and Well being, provided they are such as may not prove highly
prejudicial to her self.

I shall think my pains in this Undertaking to have been very well bestowed, if
I have been able to offer any thing that may convince you, that it is your
undoubted Interest utterly to abandon the Thoughts or Desires of being looked
upon by the Parliamentary Authority of England, to be a People wholly exempt
from their Jurisdiction: And as I know my Name is too inconsiderable to add any
Authority to the Argument, I hope I may be excused in concealing it from the
Odium of such, who may not discern the sincerity of my Intentions toward you
in this Essay; and yet I will not doubt, but there are others who will believe
me to be, as I am resolved upon all Occasions to the utmost of my Capacity, to
render my self,

Right Honorable, Honorable, etc. Your Real Friend, and very Humble Servant.

AN ANSWER TO Mr. Molyneux.
OF all the Freedom that has been taken since the Liberty of the Press, we
have scarcely seen so bold an Attempt as that of this Author, it being no less
than to strike off from the Kingdom of England with a dash of his Pen, the
whole Nation of Ireland, over which it has exerciz'd a just Dominion for many
hundreds of Years; and yet I believe it will appear, that he has not shown the
want of Consideration more in his choosing an Argument of so dangerous a
Consequence, than by his superficial, confused and mistaken way of managing it,
the strength of any reasoning that he has offered, being much more applicable
to the Native Irish, with whom the Original Contract (if there were any such)
must have been made, than to the British Protestants inhabiting among them.
But it is to be considered, that the Political State of Ireland has suffered
very considerable Alterations since the first possession of it by the Eng^ish;
for though that first Submission of the Irish was so universal, as that the
English possessed themselves of most of the considerable Towns, and settled far
and wide in the Island, yet in after times, through the defection of the Irish,
and the mixing and uniting of many of the Old English with them, that part
which remained entirely under the English Obedience, came to be confined to a
Narrow Compass, perhaps not above four or five Counties, which was till very
lately di^tinguisht by the Name of the English Pale, and the far greater part
of the Country remained under many petty Dominions, possessed by the Irish
Lords and great Men, who paid but very little Obedience to the Government of
England; but on the contrary, some or other of them were almost continually
giving disturbance to the English Government that was settled there, by which
means they were shut out from having to do with the English in the Transacting
of the Public Affairs of the Country; and the Reduction of them never came to
any tolerable Perfection, till so lately as the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; so
that indeed those Ancient Parliaments, and other Managements of the Public
Affairs there, which Mr. Molyneux mentions, did scarcely operate further than
among the English Settlements, which, as I said before, extended but to a small
part of the Island.

There was yet another great Occasion which made a very considerable alteration
in the Administration of the Government of that Country, and that was the
Change of Religion; for after the Reformation came to be thoroughly established,
and the Roman Catholics were found to be continually designing against it, all
of that Religion were excluded from having to do in Public Managements; and
this shut out not only the Native Irish, but even the Old English, who mostly
continued under that Profession. But Mr. Molyneux takes no Notice of the
Distinctions that ought to be made of these different Interests, but that he
may carry on his Point, blends and confounds them all together; as if they were
to be considered alike, as one entire People, established and continuinuing upon
the same bottom of Government. If then due Regard be had to these and other
Distinctions, which must be observed upon his way of Arguing, I believe it will
be found, that this doughty piece of Irish Learning will appear but a very
indifferent performance.

I would not however detract from any thing that may deserve applause, and
therefore must commend his smooth way of Expression, and own him to be a good
Master of Words, but yet to have applied them so ill, will still continue him
under the Censure of being much wanting either in Integrity or Judgment, and
makes this Book of his to deserve no better a Character than that of Vox and
praeterea nihil. I have heard indeed, that some have been taken with the
seeming Modesty and Submission with which he introduces his Discourse, as if it
were but an innocent representation of the ancient Rights and Liberties of the
People of Ireland, and a just Remonstrance of some Encroachments and Invasions
made upon them by the Government of England; but if it shall appear, that the
Kingdom of England has a certain Jurisdiction over them, and that it has
never treated them otherwise than according to the Rules of Justice, and with
such a due Policy as becomes every Supreme Authority to Exercise over all the
Members of its Empire, for the Conservation of Peace and Tranquillity to the
whole, and in that have not exceeded the Bounds of a reasonable and just
Dominion; that part of the Empire that shall endeavor to withdraw themselves
from the Subjection which they justly owe to the Supreme Government, that has
always protected and defended them, and shall challenge to themselves
Immunities and Privileges, which never were or could be granted them, without
prejudice and injury to the greater Body of the Government, deserve not to be
considered as Assertors of their own Rights, but rather as Invaders of the
lawful Authority which God has placed over them; and certainly it must rather
be Matter of Contempt and Derifion, than of Commendation, to see a Man treat
his Superior with a strain of Fine, Smooth, Gentle Words, and Fawning
Complements, upon a Subject that is altogether imposing and odious to him. Thus
much I thought requisite to premise, and so shall proceed to the Examination of
his Discourse. In which I intend to take Notice only of such matters as I shall
think most Observable.

In his Dedication to the King, he Humbly implores the Continuance of his
Majesty's Graces to them, by protecting and defending those Rights and
Liberties which they have enjoyed under the Crown of England for above 500
Years, and which some of late do endeavor to violate. His most Excellent
Majesty is the Common Indulgent Father of all his Countries, and has an equal
regard to the Birthrights of all his Children; and will not permit the Eldest,
because the strongest, to encroach upon the Possessions of the Younger.

Here is should be Noted, that by the Crown of England he must intend the Kings
of England, as distinct from the Kingdom, (although I think this a very
improper way of Expression) which is evident from his Simile of the Eldest and
Youngest Child, as well as by the whole Design of his Argument; and this
perhaps might have served the turn in making his Court to a Mac Ninny; or a
Prince ^ond of the Irish Nation, but it looks but like a course Complement to
his Majesty, to entertain him with a mere begging the Question, when he knows
right well, at what a va^t Expense of the Blood and Treasure of England, that
Country was so lately (under his Glorious Conduct) reduced to its Obedience;
and he is too Just and Generous a Prince to endure that any Parasite should
persuade him, that any acquisition gained at the Expense of great Taxes raised
upon the whole Body of his Subjects of England, and even appropriated by the
Parliament for the particular Uses in which they were to be employed, can
appertain to him in any propriety distinct and separate from the Imperial Crown
of England. Neither is it reasonable for him to expect, that his Majesty should
believe, that the Some he means, are about to violate their Rights and
Liberties, without clearer Proof than any he has brought. But it may be worth
Inquiry, to know in what sense he brings Ireland in with us for an equal share
of Birthright, allowing us no higher Privilege than that of being the Elder
Child. If he means this with respect to the Old Irish, surely the many
Disturbances they have given us, and the many Occasions we have had of reducing
them by force of Arms, may fairly admit us to some higher Title over them; but
if he means it of the English Inhabitants, they will certainly own themselves
to be descended from England, and it would ill become them to start up and call
their Mother by the Familiar Appellation of Sister. What he hints of
encroaching upon their Possessions, cannot be taken to have any fair Meaning,
unless he intends thereby to blame us for seizing the Estates of those that
have been in Rebellion against us.

In his Preface he tells us, How unconcerned he is in any particular
Inducement, which at this juncture might seem to have occasioned his Discourse.
He has no concern in Wool or the Woollen Trade, he is not interested in the
Forfeitures or Grants, nor solicitous whether the Bishop or Society of Derry
recover the Lands they contest about.

I believe seven Eighths of those Gentlemen of Ireland, that have been so busy
in soliciting against the Woollen Manufactury Bill, might make as fair a
Protestation as this, and yet it seems they thought themselves concerned in the
Consequence of that Matter; but his Reach in this, is to show his Dislike of
the Parliament of England's meddling with the Business of the Forfeited Estates,
as well as the rest.

He says, It Is a Public Principle that has moved him to this Vndertakeing; he
thinks his Cause good, and his Country concerned; it is hard if they may not
complain, when they think they are hurt, and give Reasons with all Modesty and
Submission: The Great and Just Council of England freely allow such Addresses;
to receive and hear Grievances is a great part of their Business, and to
redress them their chief Glory, but that is not to be done till they are laid
before them, and fairly stated for their Consideration.

It Is yet but a Private Principle, to become an Advocate for a part against the
Whole; his Name shows him to be of English Extraction, and I know none of his
Neighbors under* that Circumstance, who don't reckon it a Privilege, that they
may still own Old England to be their Country, and be owned by her, though they
are permitted to live in Ireland if they please; what if they are not hurt, and
the nature of their Complaint be such, as that it cannot be thought to be
within the Bounds of Modesty and Submission? how could he be so fond of his
Project, as to imagine that the Parliament of England would freely allow such
an Address, which impeaches their own just Authority? They will never think the
publishing a Book to the World, which is little better than Sheba's Trumpet of
Rebellion, to be a fair way of stating Grievances; but that it is a part of
their Business and their Glory, when they think it worth their while, to call
such Authors to account for their Boldness.

I begin now with his Book, which as near as possible I shall follow in order,
and for the Authorities which he has quoted, I shall leave them to him very
little disturbed, but take them as he gives them, whether they are right or
wrong, only making such Observations as may result therefrom, or from his own
Reasonings.

He begins with a very fine Complement again to the Parliament of England, and
then take upon him to give them Due Information in matters wherein (as he says)
another People are chiefly concerned; Page 2.
and tells them, that he could never imagine that such great Assertors of their
own, could ever think of making the least breach upon the Rights and Liberties
of their Neighbors, unless they thought that they had Right so to do; and that
they might well surmise, if these Neighbors did not expostulate the matter,
and this therefore, seeing all others are silent, he undertakes to do, (but
with the greatest deferrence imaginable) because he would not be wanting to his
Country, or indeed to all Mankind, for he argues the cause of the whole Race of
Adam, p. 3.
Liberty seeming the Inherent Right of all Mankind.

Now it seems, from Children of the same Parent, we are become another People
and Neighbors; the Irish may be said to be another People, though they have
not been very good Neighbors to us sometimes; but the English we may justly
challenge to be our own, and not another People; and we shall hardly admit them
to be our Neighbors in such a sense, as that we should transact with them in
Matters of Government, upon the same foot, and at equal distance with our
Neighbors of France, Holland, etc. If they expect this from us, I hope they will
show us the respect of sending their Ambassadors to us, and do this Champion
of their Liberties the Honor to let him be the first. Can he think the
Parliament of England will believe themselves to be civilly treated by him,
because of his fine Words, when he is Suggesting to the World as if they acted
so unadvisedly in their Councils, as to proceed upon Surmises, and to take upon
them to do what they do but think they have a Right to, when indeed they have
none at all. But doubtless Manking will ever have a higher Veneration for those
August Assembles, than to think them as subject to be mistaken in these
Matters, as one presuming single Gentleman: But he argues for Liberty, the
right of all Mankind: A Glorious Topic indeed, and worthy of the utmost
Regard, especially from such great Assertors of it as an English Parliament:
But if People should ask for more then ever was their Due, and challenge a
Liberty of acting every thing they should think for their own profit, thought
it were to the Damage and Injury of others; to grant this would be an
Injustice, and a sinful Liberty may as well be pleaded for; such Expostulations
as these are abominable, and to assume such an equality with our Superiors as
was never granted us, is an Arrogance that might rather have been expected from
(...) Irish than an English Man. And after all this, it is not enough for a Man
to say, If the great Council of England resolve the contrary, he shall then
believe himself to be in an Error, and with the lowest Submission ask Pardon
for his Assurance; and he hopes he shall not be hardly censured by them, when
at the same time he declares his Intention of a submissive Acquiescence in
whatever they resolve for or against: Such Subjects as these (as I have said
before) are beyond the Bounds of Modesty, and cannot admit of any such
Apologies.

He comes now to tell us, the Subject of his Disquisition shall be, p. 4.
how far the Parliment of England may think it reasonable to intermed^le with
the Affairs of Ireland, and bind up those People by Laws made in their House.

This is certainly a very odd stating the Question: What need has he now to
enquire, since he knows already, how for the Parliament of England have thought
it reasonable to intermeddle? Another Blunder as bad as this, is his Talking of
Laws made in their House: Dot^ he not know, that our Laws are not made without
the Concurrence of Two Houses, and the Assent of the King also, as the Third
Estate? But we will take his Meaning to be, to enquire how far it may be
reasonable for the Parliament of England to intermeddle, etc. and join Issue
upon that.

Next he gives us fix Heads, from which he undertakes to argue, that they can
have no such power.

For the First, He pretends to give us the History of the first Expedition of
the English into Ireland, his Design being to show, That the first Adventurers
went over thither (yet with the King's License) upon a private Undertaking, p.
6.
in which they were successful; but that afterward, when King Henry the 2d. p.
8.
came over with an Army, the Irish generally submitted to him, and received him
to be their King, without making any Opposition, from whence he seems to
suggest that Ireland subjected it self only to the King, p. 12*
but not to the Kingdom of England. But he should have considered, that the
Government of England was a limited Monarchy, which was sufficiently
acknowledged, even by William the 1st. (commonly called the Conqueror) in his
Swearing to preserve the Liberties and Privileges of the People at his
Coronation, and confirming the same to them by his Charter; and though he did
indeed afterward violate them in a greater measure than ever they had been
before or since, yet neither he nor his Successors did ever take upon
themselves to be absolute Monarchs: The great Power and Prerogative of an
English King then, can only be due to them as to the Supreme Magistrate and
Head of the Kingdom, and not in any separate propriety annexed to their Persons,
as distinct from the Commonwealth. If then Henry the Second carried over an
Army of English into Ireland, it ought to be considered as the Army of the
Kingdom; for it is held as a Principle with us, that no King of England may
raise any Forces in this Kingdom, but what are allowed to be the Forces of the
Kingdom. I am not here arguing whether ever any King did or did not take upon
him such an Authority, but it is sufficient for me to offer, that he could not
by right, and according to this Authors own way of arguing, what may not be
done of Right ought not to be argued, or brought into President; if our Rights
have at at any time been invaded and usurped upon, this Nation has had many
Opportunities of Vindicating them, and we do not believe that what we enjoy at
this day have been gained or Extorted from the Ancient Authority or Just
Prerogatives of the Crown, but that they are due to us from the first
Constitution and Time immemorial, and that such Violations which have been made
upon our Constitution, by means of what was called the Conquest or otherwise,
have been justly retrieved; so that in respect of Matters which regard the
Right and Authority of the Kingdom, we may judge according to what is visible,
and without Controversy admitted at this day: The Right and Reason of Things
ever were, and ever must continue to be the same; according to these Principles
then, can it ever be admitted, that any acquisition obtained in Ireland by an
English Army, under the Conduct of King Henry the Second, could be appropriated
to the King, distinct from the Kingdom? We do indeed freequently find in
History, and we practice it no less in our Common Discourse, that the Name of
the King is used by way of Eminency, to signify things done under his
Authority and Conduct as Head and Chief, when it is never intended to be
applied to his Person; for if I should say, the King of England took Namure in
sight of the French Army, every Body would know that I meant the Confederate
Army, under the Conduct of King William took it: In like manner we say, such a
King made such Laws, when indeed the Parliament made them: And if it will but
be allowed, that the Irish submitted to King Henry not out of fear to his
Person, but for fear of his Army, I can make no doubt but that the Submission
was made to him as King, and Head of the Kingdom of England, and not as Duke of
Normandy. If he should lay stress upon their Submitting to the King and his
Heirs; that can import no more than what the Words used at this day, to the
King, his Heirs and Successors, do better explain.

The Second Argument is to show, p. 12.
That Ireland may not properly be said to be conquered by Henry the Second, or
in any succeeding Rebellion. I shall not dispute with him in how many differing
Senses the Word Conquest may be taken, I will grant to him that Ireland was not
Conquered by Henry 2d. in such a sense as to enslave the People, or subject
them to an absolute Power, and yet for all that, the Word Conquest (meaning a
forcible gaining) is much more applicale to Henry the Second's acquisition of
Ireland, than to William the First's obtaining the Crown of England; he had a
pretense, and came not to Conquer but to Vindicate his Right; he was encouraged
to come over, abetted and assisted by a great Number of the People, who hated
Harold's Government; he fought against Harold (who was not generally consented
to by the People as a Lawful King) and his Abettors, but not against the Body
of the People of England; he pursued not his Victory like a Conqueror, but
received the chief of the People that came to him with Respect and Friendship;
they chose him for their King, he swore to conserve their Laws and Liberties,
and to govern them as their Lawful Prince, according to their own Form of
Government. On the other hand, King Henry had no such Pretense of Right to the
Kingdom of Ireland; his Descent was a prrfect Invasion; he was not called in by
the People of Ireland, and his Business was nothing else than to Conquer and
Subdue the Kingdom: It Is true, the People made no Opposition, but 'twas because
his Power was dreadful to them; what is the difference between yielding to an
Invader without fighting, or after the Battle, more than that one shows want of
Courage, the other of Success? but are not both alike to the Gainer, when he
has got his point? The Irish made no Terms for their own Form of Government,
but wholly abolishing their own, they consented to receive the English Laws,
and submitted entirely to the English Government, which has always been
esteemed as one of the greatest Signs of a Conquest: But if he will be satisy'd
in what sense the People of that time understood it, let him but look again
into his Giraldus Cambrensis, and see how he can translate the words, Hibernia
Expugnata; and what is the Meaning of Qui firmissimis, p. 9.
fiidelitatis and subjectionis vinculis, Domino Regi innodarunt? But what may
put it out of all doubt, that the Body of the People of Ireland made an entire
Submission to the Kingdom of England, in the Person of King Henry the Second,
p. 10.
is his own Quotations; Omnes Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and Abbates totius
Hiberniae, receperunt eum in Regem and Dominum Hibernieae, jurantes ei and
haeredibus suis fidelitatem, et regnandi super eos potestatem in perpetuum, et
inde dederunt ei Chartaes suas, Exemplo autem Clericorum, praedicti Reges and
Principes Hiberniae, receperunt simili modo, Henricum Regem Angliae in Dominum
and Regem Hiberniae, et sui devenerunt, et ei et Haeredibus suis, fidelitatem
contra omnes iuraverunt. And in another, Nec alicujus fere in Insula vel
nominis vel ominis er at qui Regiae Majestati et debitum Domino Reverentiam,
non exhiberet. And yet after he has made these and more such like Quotations,
it is strange to see the same Man come and say, p. 17.
From what forgoes, I presume it appears that Ireland cannot properly be said
so to be Conquered by Henry the Second, as to give the Parliament of England
any jurisdiction over us. He makes out an entire Submission to the King of
England, and yet allows no Jurisdiction to the Parliament of England. Let him
show us if he can, by what Right a King of England may take to himself a
separate Dominion over a Country, brought into Subjection by the help of an
English Army, so as that it shall be no way subjected to the Parliamentary
Authority of England: But such arguing as this, must either render him very
Ignorant of the Constitution of our Government, (which I believe he would not
be thought) or wilfully guilty of maintaining an Opinion destructive to the
Rights and Privileges of the People of England.

I think him very much out, in asserting the Rebellions of Ireland to be of the
same Nature with the Commotions that have happened in England: However
Historians may make use of the word Rebellion, to please the Party that is
uppermost, yet there is an easy distinction to be made between a Rebellion and
a Civil War; when two Princes contend for the Supreme Government, and the
People are Divided into opposite Parties, they fight not against the
Established Government of the Kingdom, the Dispute being no more but who has
most right to be in the supreme administration of it: Or if the People find
themselves oppressed, and their Liberties and Properties invaded by their Prince,
and they take up Arms to restore the Government to its right Basis; in both
these Cases it may most properly be termed a Civil War; and of these kinds have
been the Ruptures in England which he instances: But if People who live in a
settled Commonwealth, where the Laws made or consented to by their Ancestors
are in force, and Justice is duly administered, shall take up Arms to Oppugn
the Legal Authority placed over them, to overturn the Government, and assume to
themselves Liberties and Privileges prejudicial to the Common Good, or to
dethrone a Rightful Prince, who has governed justly; this in its very Nature
is a Rebellion. I am not ignorant, that all contending Parties pretend to be in
the right, and that they take up Arms justly, and none will own themselves
Rebels, unle^s they are forced to it; but yet it is evident that there is a real
Right and Wrong in these things, and there have been many Instances in which
the Impartial World could easily judge where the Right lay. If it be not so, I
leave it to this Gentleman to furnish the World with some other good Reasons,
why the Old Irish and Ancient English have been so severely handled in that
Kingdom.

His Third Inquiry is, p. 18.
What Title Conquest gives by the Law of Nature and Reason?

Mr. Molyneux has shown himself a good Advocate for the Irish in what forgoes,
but if he had been a General in the Irish Army, I see not what more powerful
Arguments he could have chosen, to stir them up to fight Valiantly against the
English; than by telling them, p. 18.
as in effect he does here, That the first Invasion of the English upon them
was altogether unjust; that Henry the second was an Agressor and Insulter, who
invaded their Nation unjustly, and with his Sword at their Throats forced them
into a Submission, which he could never thereby have a Right to; p. 22.
that Posterity can lose no Benefit by the Opposition which was given by their
Ancestors, p. 24.
which could not extend to deprive them of their Estates, Freedoms, and
Immunities, to which all Mankind have a Right; p. 20.
that there is scarce one in a thousand of them, but what are the Progeny of
the ancient English and Britains: p. 19.
If the Irish were Conquered, their Ancestors assisted in Conquering them, and
therefore as they were descended from these Old English, they could never be
subjugated or brought under the Modern English. This is the Substance of his
own Discourse, p. 21.
and according to his own Notions of the Freedoms and Immunities to which all
Mankind has a Right, he might have told them in consequence, that 'twas their
Duty to exert their own Rights and Liberties, expel the English out of the
Nation as Invaders, and make themselves and their Posterity as free as any of
the rest of the Sons of Adam. Any one may judge of this Gentleman's Discretion,
by his publishing such Notions as these among the Irish, with whom perhaps they
may be taking, but the People for whom he designs his Discourse will not be so
easily caught with his Sophistry.

He grants us, p. 25.
that the Practice of the World may not come up to the Rectitude of his
Doctrines, but he is inquiring what Right they have to what they do practice.
Well we have the World of our side at least, if after a Possession of above 500
Years, we don't now much trouble our selves to inquire what Right Henry the 2d.
had to Invade Ireland with an English Army. I wish I could find out the
Posterity of those O's or Mac's, that were heretofore the rightful Possessors
of the Lands which this Gentleman now enjoys in Ireland, and which they never
parted with for any Valuable Consideration; only to see, whether he would so
much outdo the rest of the World, as to practice his own Principles, and very
fairly give up his Lands to them, as to the right Heirs at Law.

But to Dispute a little with him about this Matter: The End of all Government
is for the Benefit of Mankind, many Nations have been subdued and conquered for
their own good, and whoever has been an Invader that way, has done them Right
and not Wrong: So did the Romans, Conquer People from under the Power of
Tyrants and Oppressors, Barbarism and Ignorance, to make them Members of the
best and freest Government in the World, and to Civilize them into good Manners
and Useful Arts; and thus is Henry the second's Invasion of Ireland to be
justified and commended: He began to rescue the People from the Oppressions and
Violences of their own wild Princes, and the Blood and Rapine to which they
were frequently exposed, upon every Quarrel and Invasion of so many Petty
Monarchs, and from which in process of time they were totally delivered by the
Authority of England: He gave the People the English Laws, constituted
Parliaments, and the English Form of Government, to this, by his own Confession
they freely submitted, and doubtless they were convinced that 'twas for their
Good: But no History tells us, that he reserved not the Direction of the State
to England, and constant practice all along shows the contrary.

His plausible Arguments for the Liberty and Right of all Mankind; that
Conquests cannot bind Posterity, etc. are wholly misapplied in this Case, and
he abuses Mr. Lock, or whoever was the Author of that Excellent Treatise of
Government, in referring to that Book on this occasion; for that Worthy
Gentleman does therein argue the Case of People whose just Rights are violated,
their Laws subverted, and the Liberty and Property inherent to them by the
Fundamental Laws of Nature, (which he very accurately describes) is invaded and
usurped upon, and that when this is as Evident and apparent as the Sun that
shines in a clear day, they may then take the best occasion they can find to
right themselves. This is a Doctrine that all good Men may assent to, but this
is in no wise the Case of Ireland; they did as he owns receive (and 'twas to
their own Advantage) the English Laws, and swear Fealty to the King (that is,
to the Government) of England, and did reciprocally receive from him the
Privilege of being admitted to be free Denizons of England, whereby they
evidently gave up themselves to be incorporated into, and become Members of the
English Empire; and to this day they remain to enjoy the Liberties and
Privileges of Freemen of England, unless there happen to be such as have
forfeited the same according to the Municipal Laws of the Government; but he
endeavors to evade the possibility of their Forfeiting, by suggesting as if
they were to be considered as a Different, p. 22.
Contesting Nation: p. 23.
And therefore, 'Twould be unreasonable to put the Municipal Laws of particular
Kingdoms in Execution between Nation and Nation in the state of Nature. If a
Nation that once was distinct, consent to imbody itself into the Government of
another that is more powerful, receive it is Laws, and submit to its
Constitution without reserve, may they ever after be looked upon as in the state
of Nature, or shall they not rather be esteemed as a Member of the greater
Body, and be held to obey all such Ordinances as are calculated for the Good
and Welfare of the Whole? If after this, without any Breach made upon them on
the part of the Greater, they shall endeavor to withdraw themselves from the
Subjection they have sworn to, and shall take up Arms, and commit Hostilities
upon their Fellow Subjects, may not this be called a Rebellion in a settled
Commonwealth? and have not the Municipal Laws of the whole Empire brought them
under the Forfeiture of Life and Estate? does the being separated at a small or
greater distance by Sea, (as Islands must be) separate them from continuing
Members of the Commonwealth to which they were once joined? If these things
are to be brought in Question, the English of England and Ireland both, must
have much to ans^er for to the Ancient Irish. Yet I am in no doubt but that the
English have so fairly administered the Government, as that they can well
justify themselves in all the Severities that they have been forced to
exercise upon the Irish, as justly drawn upon themselves by reason of their
R^bellion: Have we not always owned them to be Freemen of England, and allowed
them the same Privileges as English Men? have they not been permitted to
exercise all Offices, Ecclesiastical, Military, or Civil, with the same Freedom
as English Men? If since the Reformation, the Roman Catholics have not been
suffered to act in the Government, have not the Roman Catholics of England
been as much restrained? Nay, have not the Irish been much more indulged in the
Exercise of their Religion by Connivance, than those of England? These
Treatments toward them, have given no Occasion to this Author to trouble
himself so much, in inquiring into the state of Slavery, and the Terms that
Just or Unjust Conquerors may or may not use, for it is not in the Case.

The Premises considered, methinks, he should grant us that some of the
Disturbances the Irish have given us, at least the Massacres committed upon
their Fellow Subjects, (of our own Blood) should not be reckoned as fair
warring between Nation and Nation; but that they might very well be accounted
as Rebellious; and then why may not our subduing them, give us the Title of
Rightful Conquerors over them? and if upon such delinquencies we had abridg'd
their Posterity in some of those Privileges granted to their Ancestors, upon
their first coming in to us in Henry the Second's Time, we had done no more
than what he owns Conquerors commonly do: And yet we have not put any such
hardship upon the Posterity of those People, for the fault of their Rebellious
Fathers; I know not that any Irishman, quatenus an Irishman, is at this day
denied any of the Privileges that an Englishman can challenge; if he be a
Deli^quent, or a Roman Catholic, he is used no worse than all Englishmen that
are in the same Circumstances: If we have slain, executed or banished the
Persons of those that have been actually in Rebellion, and seized their Estates
as forfeited, this is no more than what he himself has taken pains to prove
may be done by the Laws of Nature, or the Municipal Laws of Kingdoms: Where Is
then any room for Complaint, or reason for his Elaborate Arguments, on a
Subject that does not concern us?

The Author by saying so much that directly reflects upon what has been acted
by the English in Ireland, has given me the Trouble to say thus much for the
Vindication of them (and among the rest, I suppose his own Ancestors) in their
Conduct toward the Irish, and to show how well they have kept to the Original
Capitulation on their part: But I cannot end this Head without taking Notice
of his Remark, that Even a Just Conqueror gains nothing over those that
conquered with him, p. 19.
and fought on his side: Why should he trouble the World with Arguments, to
establish a Position that no Body ever denied. But if the Progeny of the Old
English, that served under Henry the Second in the Conquest of Ireland, have
since joined with the Native Irish in any Rebellion against their Mother
Country, their Crime is greater than that of the Irish; and yet would he have
us still treat them as Conquerors of our side, when they are fighting against
us? Certainly this must forfeit all the Regard that was owing to them for the
good Services of their Ancestors, and justly entitle them to the same Treatment
that is due to other Rebels. Yet for all this, p. 20.
If he or any Body else (as he proposes) claims the like freedoms with the
natural born Subjects of England, as being descended from them: I know no body
that will deny them to him, if (as I said before) he be of Capacity, and
qualified as the Law now requires: He may come here, and even be a Member of
our Legislature, (if he can procure himself to be chosen) as many others of
that Kingdom always are: And let him for ever hereafter remember, that we
receive them, and treat them all as equal Members of the same Body with our
selves; and if it be at any time requisite for the good of the whole, that we
should Enact any thing binding upon Ireland, we do it not in respect of their
Persons, but in regard to that part of the Empire they live in; and if I my
self (or any other Englishman) should think it for my Interest to become an
Inhabitant there, I must be as subject to it as he is.

His Fourth Proposition is, p. 27.
If a Conqueror just or unjust, obtains an Absolute, Arbitrary Dominion over
the Conquered, so as to take from them all that they have, and to make them and
their Posterity Slaves; whether yet if he grants them Concessions, bounding the
Exorbitancy of his Power, he be not obliged strictly to Observe those Grants?

I have shown before, that he had no reason to aggravate the Question to such
Extremities in our Case, because we have never pretended to exercise so
Arbitrary a Power over the People of Ireland.

He goes on then, p. 28.
To show by Precedents, Records and History, What Concessions have been granted
them; by what steps the Laws of England came to be introduced into Ireland; he
would prove, that anciently the Parliament of England was not thought to have
any Superiority over that of Ireland: And gives his Answers to what Objections
are moved upon this Head. But I believe we shall find this as little to the
purpose as the former.

He might have spared his pains in taking up so many Pages to convince us
against all Objections, that Henry the Second did establish the English Laws
and Form of Government in Ireland; p. 29.
p. 30.
that he gave them a Modus tenendi Parliamentum; p. 32.
that an Exemplification of it made in Henry the Fourth's Time was extant; Nay,
that They believe they have found the very Original Record of King Henry the
Second, p. 35.
and to give us so ample an Account through whose Hands it has passed; it may
be really so, or may be not so, p. 36.
for all its Venerable, Ancient Appearance, we can conclude with no more
Certainty than he leaves it, only we may believe from the Credit of the
Arguments produced by his Nephew, Samuel Dopping 's Father, the Reverend and
Learned Doctor Dopping, late Bishop of Mead, that this old Modus was found in
the Treasury of Waterford by my Lord Longford's Grandfather. My Reader may
perhaps think me as impertinent in this Repetition, but I do it to show that I
have in this abbreviated about nine of his pages, which offers no more of
Argument to the Matter, than that Henry the Second settled the Kingdom of
Ireland under the very same Coustitution of Government with England; and this
we should as readily have granted as he could have proposed; and it is
sufficiently to our purpose that he has abundantly proved; p. 37.
That all Ranks and Orders of the Irish did unanimously agree to submit
themselves to the Government of the King of England; That they did thankfully
receive the Laws of England, and swear to be governed thereby; and I know not
what has released them from any part of that Obligation to this day, himself
owning, that There cannot be shown a more fair Original Compact, p. 38.
than this between Henry the Second and the People of Ireland, and we have
desired no more from them, than that they should continue to be so governed.

He tells us, p. 38.
It is manifest, that there were no Laws imposed on the People of Ireland, by
any Authority of the Parliament of England, nor any introduced by Henry the
Second, but by the Consent and Allowance of the People of Ireland, and that
both the Civil and Ecclesiastical State were settled there, Regiae Sublimitatis
Authoritate; not only this, but the manner of holding Parliaments also, to make
Laws of their own, (which is the Foundation and Bulwark of the Peoples
Liberties and Properties) was directed and established there by Henry the
Second, as if (...) were resolved, that no other Person or Persons should be
the Founders of the Government of Ireland but himself, and the Consent of the
People, who submitted themselves to him against all Persons whatsoever.

Was it fit for the King to have carried a Parliament about with him? or
because he had not a Parliament there, must it follow therefore, that their
Authority could never have any concern in what was done? The King was now
abroad with the Forces of the Kingdom, and it is not to be supposed, that his
own Authority was not sufficient to make Terms with the Enemy if they
submitted; we do not pretend that the Power of our King is limited at that
rate, yet whatever Submission is made to his Person on such Occasions, is
doubtless virtually made as to the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom, and that I
believe every Body will allow to be in our Constitution, the King, Lords and
Commons, in all whom the Legislature resides, and not in either separate from
the rest. The King may be said to be vested with the Power of the whole, in the
Civil and Military Administration of the Government, and yet whatsoever is
acted or acquired under his Authority as King of England, must doubtless be
esteemed to be for the Account of the Nation, and not in any Propriety peculiar
to himself. To talk then, As if the Parliament had nothing to do in this
Transaction, and that King Henry the Second acted in it as if he were resolved
that no other Person or Persons, should be the Founders of the Government of
Ireland but himself, is Language not becoming an Englishman; and I wonder that
this Author could have so little Sense of what he was about, when he said this,
for in the very next Paragraph (but one) he gives us an Instance, which shows
beyond all Contradiction, that King Henry himself had no such Opinion of his
own Separate Authority.

And now he comes to the Matter, and tells us, that King Henry about the 23d.
p. 39.
^ear of his Reign, and five Years after his Return from Ireland, creates his
Younger Son John King of Ireland, p. 40.
at a Parliament held at Oxford; and that by this Donation Ireland was most
eminently set apart again, as a separate and distinct Kingdom by it self from
the Kingdom of England, and did so continue until the Kingdom of England
descended and came unto King John, after the Death of his Brother Richard the
First, which was about 22 years after his being made King of Ireland; during
which time, and whilst his Father and Brother were successively reigning in
England, he made diverse Grants and Charters to his Subjects of Ireland, wherein
he styles himself Dominus Hiberniae, and in some Dominus Hiberniae and Comes
Meritoniae; by which Charters both the City of Dublin, and diverse other
Corporations, enjoy many Privileges and Franchises to this day.

We know that di^ers of our Kings have at several Times granted out Parcels of
their Dominions to their Sons or Subjects, and endowed them with many Royal
Privileges, yet always as Feudatories of the Empire, after the same manner, so
much anciently practiced in most Kingdoms of Europe; such have been in England,
the Principality of Wales, the Counties Palatine of Chester, Lancaster and
Durham, and what was much less considerable than these, the Isle of Man was
given with the Title of King in Man, (which was more than King John had) which
continues in the Earls of Darby at this day. In like manner also have
Proprietoryships been granted to the Settlers of Colonies in America in our
time; and such and no other was this Grant of King Henry the Second to his Son
John; but what is very remarkable in this Case, is, that this Grant was made in
Parliament. Did ever* Man so expose himself in Print? what he has been
endeavoring to prove, is, that the Irish were never so conquered by Henry the
Second, as to give the Parliament of England any Jurisdiction over them, and
yet here he tells us, that this same King Henry created his Son John King of
Ireland, in a Parliament at Oxford; which to word it in the Style of this time,
is to say, that about the twenty third Year of Henry the 2d. an Act of
Parliament was made at Oxford, by which John, the younger Son of the said King,
was Created King of Ireland. Is it possible to think upon a greater Instance,
in which the Authority of a Parliament over a People can be exerted, than this
of creating a King to rule them, and that without ever asking their Consent?
and is it not plain from this, that King Henry himself did never esteem the
Submission of the Irish to have been made to him in respect of his Person,
(according to this Author's New Doctrine) but in respect of the Kingdom which
he governed? otherwise, why did he not make a King of Ireland by his own
Authority, rather than thus eclipse his Power and Right, (if he had it) by
submitting it to be done in Parliament? and I think if I should stop here, and
give my self no further trouble, to trace him through the rest of his tedious,
though shallow Arguments, all impartial People would be satisfied in these Four
Points, That the ancient Irish did entirely submit their Nation to become a
Member of, and be united to the English Empire; That the Parliamentary
Authority of England has ever obtained over all the parts of its Dominions;
That they have exercised this Authority over Ireland even from its first Union
to this Kingdom; and, That the Irish understood their Submission in this sense,
and paid Obedience to this Act of an English Parliament without regret. But
since I have undertaken it, I must go through with him.

This Creation however, as barely mentioned by him, is not Authority enough for
Mr. Molyneux to conclude positively, p. 40.
that, By this Donation Ireland was most eminently set apart again, (he seems
then to grant that 'twas at first united) as a ^^parate and distinct Kingdom by
it self from the Kingdom of England. He produces no Record for this, nor any
authentic Authority; what he offers like Proof for this perfect separate
Regality, is only the granting Charters whilst his Father and Brother were
reigning, but that is no more than what has been commonly practiced by other
Feudatorys, and proves nothing of John's having an absolute independent
Jurisdiction. But he attempts further, and tells us, The very express words of
the Irish Statute, p. 41.
33 Hen. 8th. c. 1. by which the Style of Dominus was changed to that of Rex
Hiberniae, are, And he (meaning K. John) being created King in the Parliament
at Oxford, under the Style and Title of Lord of Ireland, enjoyed all manner of
Kingly Jurisdiction, Pre-eminence and Authority Royal, belonging unto the
Imperial State and Majesty of a King.

Hitherto I have not disputed any of the Authorities quoted by Mr. Molyneux,
but here he must Pardon me, if I tell him, that if this will pass for an
Authority in Ireland, yet it will not with us: It Is only an Irish Act of
Parliament, made as late as Henry the 8th's time, that presumes that K. John
did enjoy all manner of Kingly Jurisdiction, etc. without referring to any
Record that was extant for proving that Assertion: So that this Irish Act of
Parliament is at most but a Presumptive Authority, and therefore he ought not
to think that we can be so far imposed upon, as without better Proof than so
saying, to grant that King Henry the second, and King Richard the first,
disclaimed all Title to the Dominion and Regality of Ireland, as if the same
had been absolutely, without any reservation, vested in King John: Besides,
even this Act of Parliament does not use the words Absolute and Independent.

But after all, though none of these Proofs will stand good on Mr. Molyneux's
side, I Will show him, that this whole Business undeniably proves on the other
side, that King John could at best be made no more by this Donation than a
Feudatory Kingly Lord, as I have said before. Mr. Molyneux has told us, that
King John in his Charters could not use any higher style than that of Lord of
Ireland; can any Body believe, that a Prince wholly and seperately vested in a
Dominion and Regality, p. 41.
absolutely granted unto him without any Reservation, (as he says King John
was) would content himself with any lower Title than that of King, unless he
had been limited in it by a Superior Authority? and was not that like to be
this Act of Parliament? Can an Act of Parliament be said to make a King
absolute and Indedendent, when at the same time it keeps a reservation of the
Title? Is not this an Evident Demonstration, that they would not suffer him to
be Independent, but that they laid that restraint upon him, to show, that they
would always retain in England the Supreme Imperial Power over Ireland? How
does Mr. Molyneux know what Homage, Rent, or other Reservations were made?
doubtless all the Records touching it are lost, and I presume, he has nothing
stronger for this positive Assertion of his than the Old Historians, Gir.
Cambrensis, Rog. Hoveden, Mat. Paris, etc. and they don't make out this
Absolute Independent Title, without any manner of Reservation: Is it Sense, to
think that a People should conquer, or entirely subdue a Country to
themselves, plant a Colony there, and then but five years after give it clear
away again, never to have any thing more to do with it? I would fain know what
Regalia were granted to this absolute King: The Kings in Man may wear a Leaden
Crown, I Am afraid King John was still but a Lord in that respect too, and that
he had no Crown at all given him, else sure Mr. Molyneux, if he could have
found any, would have told us on it. But what is worse than all this, is it
possible for one and the same Man to be both an Independent King and a Subject,
at one and the same time? It seems this Donation was not so absolute, but that
he was still to continue a Subject (as indeed Feudatories must to the
Sovereignty to which they belong) to Old England, and after all his absolute
Kingship, 'twas his Misfortune to be tried by his Peers, (not as King of
Ireland, but) as Earl of Morton, who found him guilty of High Treason, and
accordingly he was condemned, but at the Intercession of the Queen their
Mother, King Richard gave him his Life. I doubt this was enough to loose his
Independent Title to the Kingdom of Ireland for that time* unless Mr. Molyneux
can find him out another Creation, which I believe could not be without another
Act of Parliament; but there happened to be no need on it, for as he succeeded
to the Crown of England, Ireland came in again well enough in our Sense. Yet
further to put this matter out of all doubt, it is a Maxim not to be disputed,
that the Authority which grants, must always remain Superior to that which
receives the Grant, and therefore the Feudal Law determines that Homage and
Fealty is inseparably annexed to all such Grants: And though Mr. Molyneux
professes himself very well Learned in The Laws of Nature, and Reason, p. 117.
and Nations, and the Civil Laws of our Commonwealths, yet it seems he is
altogether unacquainted with this Feudal Law; and if he had been but as well
read in the Practice of the World as to these things, he might have been
convinced, that the many Feudatory Princes still remaining in Europe, are not
exempted from this Dependence: The Princes and Hans Towns of the Empire* if
they are by length of Time grown up to a higher degree of Sovereignty, and do
not so immediately depend upon the Emperor, who in his private Capacity was
but Archduke of Austria, etc. and but one of the Eight Electoral Princes, yet
they are still subject to the Supreme Legislature of the Empire, and the
Imperial Avacatoria reaches them: And thus we see, that how great soever that
Jurisdiction was, which the King in Parliament granted to his Son John, he yet
remained no more than a Subject of the Kingdom of England, and was treated
accordingly, in his being Tried and Condemned by the Laws thereof. Moreover it
may be noted, that upon his accession to the Imperial Crown of England,
whatever Feudatory Royalty he had before, became now merg'd and extinguished in
his own Person, which by reason of it is being Head and Supreme, could not at
the same time be capable of any Feudatory Subjection; so that there was an
absolute determination of the Former Grant, which could not ag^in be revived
but by a New Donation upon another Person. I hope I have now so far removed
this main Pillar of Mr. Molyneux's Structure, that I may take the Liberty as
often as I shall have Occasion hereafter, to deny positively, that King John
was ever made absolute King of Ireland, without any Dependence on England.

Here Mr. Molyneux had brought his Argument up to a pitch, and concluded us
under a perfect real Separation, and thus he puts it upon us; p. 42.
let us suppose, That King Richard had left Issue, whose Progeny had governed
England, and King John 's Progeny had governed Ireland, where then had been the
Subordination of Ireland to the Parliament, or even to the King of England?
Certainly no such thing could have been then pretended. But this is but a
Supposition, and fit for none but People of his size; who take up Matters by
Appearances and Presumptions, and assume the Confidence from thence to be
positive in their Assertions, giving no allowance for the possibility of being
mistaken: But we need not suppose in this matter, but may be confident, that
the Supreme Authority over Ireland must always have continued in the Kingdom of
England, as it does at this day, and he has made nothing appear to the
contrary. De non apparentibus, and non existentibus, eadem est ratio.

Yet I cannot but remark how he enjoys himself in this Supposition, when he
thought he had gained his Point; p. 42.
Where then had been the Subordination? if any such there be, it must arise
from something that followed after the descent of England to King John; for by
that descent England might as properly be subordinate to Ireland as the
Converse, because Ireland had been vested in King John twenty two Years before
his accession to the Crown of England; Yes, and 'twas the ancienter Kingdom too.

Is it likely that King John, who had not before thought so well of his Kingdom
of Ireland as to make it his residence, but chose rather to remain where he was
but a Subject, when he was now become a real King of England, should be so far
taken with the Fancy of the ancientest Kingdom, (if it were so) as to put the
greater, and by many degrees the more powerful, more pleasant, and more
civilized Kingdom, in subordination to the less, which was then of no Power or
Consideration in the World? and that he should be better pleased with the Style
of Lord of Ireland, and King of England, than that of King of England, and Lord
of Ireland? or is it likely, that England who in that very Age had subdued
Ireland, and added it to its Empire, should now be contented to submit it self,
and become subordinate to Ireland, so as that the Administration of the
Government there should direct the grand Affairs of England? is not this
perfect Jesting and Fooling with Argument?

But he tells us, p. 43.
If perhaps it will be said, that this Subordination of Ireland to England,
proceeds from Ireland 's being annexed to, and as it were united with the
imperial Crown of England, by several Acts of Parliament in both Kingdoms,
since King John 's time: This is well acknowledged, for it makes out clearly,
that Ireland is a Kingdom as firmly united to the Kingdom of England, as the
Legislature of both Kingdoms could do it: If he would yet distinguish between
the Imperial Crown (as his words are) and the Kingdom, I have shown before how
there cannot be any such distinction in England. But though in the former
Passage of John's being created an Independent King by Act of Parliament, he
shows himself to be quite overseen and blinded, by his depending so much upon
it through the rest of his Argument; yet he perceives plainly, that a fair
Inquiry into this Annexing, will not turn to account for him, and therefore
although he is not wanting to be very particular and exact in his Numerous
Quotations of other Authorities, yet here he is cautious of imparting any
further Light into this matter, than just to tell us, there are several such
Acts of Parliament both in England and Ireland: Surely these English Acts might
be said to be binding upon Ireland, and therefore too they must be concealed,
and we shall not have one Word of them anon, when he pretends to reckon up all
those Statutes that the English Parliaments have made to affect Ireland: And I
cannot find that he meddles with it any more, p. 44.
though he says, that He shall enquire more fully hereafter how this operates:
But for the present he only tells us, That he conceives little more is effected
by these Statutes, than that Ireland shall not be alien'd or separated from the
King of England, who cannot hereby dispose of it otherwise than in Legal
Succession along with England; and that whoever is King of England, is ipso
Facto King of Ireland, and the Subjects of Ireland are obliged to obey, etc.
Does not this strongly assert the Parliamentary Authority? If he had said, that
it should not be alienated or separated from the Kingdom, he had spoken
English, and set the matter right; but if he will insist upon so fine a
Conceit, as to divide between the Political Capacity of the King, and the
Kingdom, if it be not bad English, is however Language that cannot be
understood in England.

Now he tells us of King John's going again into Ireland, p. 44.
about the Twelfth year of his Reign of England, where above Twenty little
Irish Kings did again do Homage and Fealty to him, and he constituted the
English Laws and Cust^^s among them, placing Sheriffs and other Ministers, for
the Administration of Justice to the People, according to the English Laws.
This is a further Proof of the entire Resignation and Submission of the Irish
to the Government of England. He goes on, King Henry the Third, p. 45.
his (King John's) Son, in the first year of his Reign, granted to Ireland one
or two Magna Charta's, p. 46.
(but he owns that 'twas) by the Advice of his English Privy Council. Let it
again be Observed, that this King did not transact this Matter by any separate
Authority, but did it in his Privy Council, which is exactly according to our
Constitution, and that being the same Method in which all the Administration of
the Government of the Kingdom of England was directed, it shows that those
Kings governed Ireland in no other Manner than as a Member of the English
Empire.

We agree with him, that all the Rights and Liberties of Englishmen were
granted to the People of Ireland, that they had the Privilege of holding
Parliaments, and in short, that they had a Complete Jurisdiction and Form of
Government settled and allowed to be exercised among them, as far as was
requisite for the well-governing and regulating the particular Management of
the affairs of so considerable a People, that were now become a Member of the
English Empire, and were separated by Sea from the Seat of the Supreme
Government: Yet all this must be understood to be no otherwise than in
Subordination to the Supreme Authority of England, which is Evident, not only
from the Reason of the thing, but also from the Practice that has always been
Observed. Can it consist with Reason to believe, that any powerful Government
should subdue another Nation much inferior to them in strength, place a Colony
of their own people among them, make them Denizons and endow them in all the
Privileges of their own Subjects, and yet because they gave them their Laws,
and constituted the very same Manner of Government among them as was exercised
by themselves, that therefore they could not be in any Subordination to the
Kingdom that thus far subdued and settled them, but must ever after be esteemed
as a People fixed upon a distinct Foundation, and as much separated from them as
they were in the state of Nature? Sure this is too absurd to be insisted on*
But the constant practice which has been used in the Administration of that
Government, from the first times of their becoming a Member of our Empire,
shows that the Kings of England did never treat them as a Propriety of their
own, and distinct from the Jurisdiction of this Kingdom; were not these Magna
Charta's (as his own Authorities prove) given with the Advice of the Privy
Council of England? and have they not always had Governors sent them from
hence, whether under the Title of Lords Lieutenants, Deputies, Justices,
Presidents or otherwise, and that not by the King alone, but nominated in the
Privy-Co^ncil? and have not these Governors been accountable to our
Parliaments for any Maladministration there. All the prime Motions and
Supreme Managements of their Government, are likewise consulted and directed by
the King in his Privy Council here, such as the Calling, Proroguing, or
Dissolving of their Parliaments, and the Approving all their Acts, the Sending
over and Establishing what English Forces shall be kept there, the Appointing
all Officers Military and Civil, etc. Is this like a Separate Kingdom, an
Independent Government, or a Neighbor Nation as free as in the State of
Nature? Can any Man be so ignorant as to maintain, that the Privy Council of
England may have Authority, where the Supreme Legislature, the Parliament, has
none? Does this leave room to say, that England and Ireland, p. 55.
though governed under one and the same Supreme Head, yet are as separate and
distinct in their jurisdictions, as are the Kingdom of England and Scotland at
this day? The Privy Council of England never intermeddle in the Business of
Scotland, the King transacts the affairs of that Kingdom through the Hands of
the Scotch Secretaries, who always attend him in England; the Royal Family of
the Stuarts were their Lawful Kings, and when our King James the First
succeeded as Right Heir to the Kingdom of England, although he removed his
Residence hither, because this was the much more Considerable Kingdom, yet no
alteration could thereby be made upon their Jurisdiction, but the Constitution
of their Government remained as entire within themselves as before; but this
Author himself has sufficiently made out, that the Accession of Ireland to
England was in such a manner, as totally abolished their former Constitution,
(if they had any) and subjected them to become a Member of the English Monarchy.

I think I have said enough of these Matters already, to set them in a truer
Light than this Gentleman has represented them, and shall not give my self the
Trouble to Remark diverse other Passages which result from the same Erroneous
Way of Arguing, nor to meddle with his long History of what English Laws, and
in what manner they were introduced into Ireland, more than to argue some few
Points with him.

He says, p. 56.
If we now enquire what were those Laws of England that became thus established
in Ireland? Surely we must first reckon the great Law of Parliaments, etc. Is
it not the highest Sanction of the Parliamentary Authority, that all the
Subjects of the Empire must obey its Supreme Decrees? In receiving then this
great Law of Parliaments, were not the People of Ireland for ever obliged as
well as to all its former Statutes, so also to whatever it should for the
future enact, concerning the whole Empire in which they now became
comprehended? But Mr. Molyneux means that Law whereby all Laws receive their
Sanction, The free Debates and Consent of the People, by themselves, or by
their chosen Representatives. His drift in this is to persuade us, that because
it was granted to Ireland to hold a Parliament within themselves, by their own
Representatives, that therefore they ought not to be in any Subjection to the
Parliament of England, wherein they have no Representatives; and it is upon this
Point that he mightily values himself in much of his after Discourse, yet he
cannot tie this Knot so fast, but that it may well enough be undone: This
Parliament of theirs could not be granted them further than for the managing
their own Affairs among themselves; but the Supreme Legislature of the whole
Body must be permanent and fixed in its Head, according to the first
Constitution, and cannot be divided or granted away to any Member or Members of
the Body: Can any thing grant away it self? A Father may grant his Son a great
deal of Liberty, but he can never make any grant to divest himself of his
paternal Relation. But Mr. Molyneux can have no Notion of Liberty, if a Man may
be bound by Laws whereto he has not given his Consent, by either himself or
his Chosen Representative: A little Distinction now will make us agree this
Matter; It Is yet no Oppression upon him, if he neglects to constitute a
Representative, when the Privilege of doing it is not taken away from him: If a
Man go abroad, and stay many years out of his own Country, shall he not be
bound by the Laws made by the Community in his absence, because he gave no
Assent, neither in his Person nor by his Representative? In like manner if a
Colony be settled abroad, shall not the Legislature of their Mother Country
bind them, if they think fit to Enact concerning them, because they had no
Representatives in it? Yes, very reasonably, for that they are still
Fellow Subjects of the Community, and if they are permitted to live abroad for
their Convenience, the main Body of this their Mother Country must not be
hindered from acting what they shall find necessary for the Common Good, because
of their absence, even although it should respect themselves; and this without
depriving them of any their Just Rights, because their Liberty and Privilege
still remained to them of choosing their Representatives to the Supreme
Legislature, and they might have exercised it if they had stayed at home, and
may again, whenever they will please to come in place. They have indeed an
Authority delegated to them from the Head, to Enact such Laws in their
Settlement, as may be requisite for the Circumstance of that place, but no such
Privilege can ever be extended to rescind and abrogate their Allegiance and
Subjection to the Head of the Empire: But I shall come to Enlarge further upon
this by and by. And now to go on with Mr. Molyneux:

He speaks of two Acts made by the Parliament of Ireland, p. 64.
viz. 10th Hen. 4. and 29th. Hen. 6. wherein it was Enacted, That the Statutes
made in England should not be of force in that Kingdom, unless they were
allowed and published there by Parliament. It is not impossible, but that in
those days there might be some People there who were of this Gentleman's stamp,
for assuming as much power as they could, right or wrong, if they could but
color it under the specious pretense of their Ancient Rights and Privileges;
and they might think the Reigns of those two Princes a Favorable Conjuncture
for such an Attempt. The first of them got the Crown of England by his Sword,
and managed things as smoothly and easily as possible, and perhaps never
thought himself so secure as to exert the utmost Authority of his Government,
on every Occasion that might offer. Henry the Sixth was a weak Prince, governed
and managed at different times by the two Factions of York and Lancaster, from
whence arise Civil Wars, and his own Deposing: A better time could never
happen, than during the Troublesome Reign of this King to attempt such
Innovations. But what if the Parliament of Ireland did enact a Law, derrogating
from the Authority of the Parliament of England, could this abate any thing of
that Right which England had before? But it is plain, that if they did any such
thing, they did but think that English Acts of Parliament could not in any case
bind Ireland; for it is certain, both from the Reason of the thing, and former
Practice, that in some Cases they might and did, and even in the Second Year of
this King Henry the Sixth, (as he quotes it) the Staple Act, expressly naming
Ireland, was made; surely the Parliament of England must consist of much more
Considerable Men than the Parliament of Ireland in those days could, and they
were most likely to know best what they had to do: And it seems as if the
People of Ireland themselves had no Opinion of the Validity of these
invalidating Acts, in Mr. Molyneux's Sense, because they did not plead them in
Bar of the Staple Act, in the Case of the Merchants of Waterford, which he
gives us hereafter. There is yet much more reason to believe, that these
Statutes were made on the very Occasion which he hints, to remove Scruples, or
satisfy the Judges in relation to some Laws for the administration of Justice
that were extant in England, and they might have some doubt, whether they ought
not also to obtain there, since the generality of the English Statutes were
reciev'd in Ireland, and therefore the Parliament of Ireland for the clearing
any such difficulty for the future, might possibly declare that such Statutes
were not of force there, 'till they had been established by them. And I may
easily grant him, that the End and Intent of the Institution of a Parliament in
Ireland was, that as they were separated from England by the Sea, they should
have Authority to make and adapt Laws among themselves, suitable to their own
Circumstances, and fit for the well-ordering of the Affairs of that Kingdom;
and therefore the Parliament of England did not think fit to impose upon them
such Laws as were from time to time enacted, suitable to the Occasions of the
Realm of England, but left the People of Ireland at Liberty to choose or refuse
such as they thought fit; and from this Reason it must be, that so many of the
English Statutes as he instances, have been introduced into Ireland, by passing
them into Laws in their own Parliament. The generous English Constitution does
not impose any Laws of this Nature, or for raising Taxes upon any of the
Subjects of their Dominions, without their own Consent by their
Representatives; this is The Great Charter of Englishmen. And because 'twas
thought that the People of Ireland could not conveniently send Representatives
to the Parliament in Englaand, they were therefore authorized to hold
Parliaments among themselves for the tran^acting such Affairs; we allow it to
all our Colonies in America; and even Wales, after their submitting to the
Government of England, was not Taxt, 'till they were admitted to send their
Representatives to Parliament. This I speak of such Laws which regard the
administration of Commutative Justice, regulating their own particular Affairs,
or raising Taxes. But there is yet a higher kind of Law inherent in the
Constitution, whether it may be called the Law of Parliaments, or the Common
Law, I leave it to Men of more Judgment in these Matters than my self to define
it, but I mean that which comprehends the Subjects of the whole Empire, and
must be of Authority to ordain certain Regulations which shall be binding upon
the Whole in extraordinary Cases, where the well-being of the Universality is
concerned: England must be allowed to be the Head of this Empire, from whence
all its Members do derive their Being, and must depend for their Support and
Protection, the Riches which she attracts from the Benefit of her Foreign
Trade, is the only means she has to support her Power, and maintain such
Fleets and Armies as are requisite for the Defense of all her Territories, she
must therefore prosecute all justifyable Methods for the preserving her
Commerce, and has the utmost reason to restrain her Members from any
prejudicial interfering with her in her Trade, because this has a direct
Tendency to weaken her Power, and render her incapable of supporting the great
Charge of her Government: For this end then, or the like Extraordinary
Occasions, those Laws have been made by which the distant Dominions are bound,
and such have been the Acts of Navigation, the Acts for hindering the
Transportation of Wools from Ireland to Foreign Parts, etc. And though these
Statutes are enacted when the Occasion requires, yet they are not so much to be
looked upon as New Laws, (to use his own Expression) as it were declaratory of
the Supreme Authority, virtually inherent in, and inseparably united to the
Imperial Constitution; and which has been always exercised by this Kingdom,
and all other Governments that have had Colonies or Territories lying at a
distance from them. It Is only the Exercise of this Supreme Salutary Authority
that the Parliament of England pretend to, and not to break in upon the Just
Constitution so anciently granted, and ever since continued to the People of
Ireland, of Enacting all such Laws by their Representatives in their own
Parliaments, as they think fit to be governed by, or may be conducive to the
well ordering the Affairs of their own Country; and therefore this Gentleman
has no Reason to Tax us so often as he does, with any Attempts upon their
Rights and Properties, breaking in upon their old Settled Constitution, and
rendering them the most unfortunate of all his Majesty's Subjects, by weakening
their Rights to a greater degree than ever was done before. If Poyning's Law be
some Check to them, 'twas made in favor of the English Interest in Ireland,
and Mr. Molyneux finds no fault with it, but that still leaves them at Liberty
to consent or dissent to such Laws as the King in his English Privy Council may
propose to them. The Rights that were granted them, were large enough to secure
them in the full Enjoyment of their Liberty and Property, in the same Manner as
if they had lived in England; these we have preserved to them inviolated, in as
large a manner as ever they were granted; let him show any Law from England,
that has ever innovated upon their Judicatories, their Persons, or their
Estates; his Exclamations can no way be applicable to us, unless it shall
appear that we have wronged them in such Rights as those: But this Supreme
Imperial Authority was never granted to them, nor can reside any where as long
as the Monarchy lasts, but in the King, House of Lords, and House of Commons in
England; the absolute Separation he pretends to in the Persom of King John,
proves a Mistake, so that his many peremptory Conclusions drawn from thence
must fall, as having no Foundation. The Progeny of Englishmen wherever they
live, (and are acknowledged to be such) cannot be exempted from owing
Allegiance to this Supreme Jurisdiction; it is known, that it has Power to
Command its Subjects out of the Territories of any other Prince, upon the
highest Penalties, yea and to desert its Colonies, and call home the People, if
Extremity shall so require: He that shall deny it these Powers, denies the very
Essence of a Supreme Government; and how hard soever this Doctrine may seem to
People that have lived out of England, and have never considered these Notions,
yet the Reason of the thing must obtain upon every impartial Man, and convince
him, that other Principles than these, would have a Tendency to scatter and
break to pieces all Humance Societies, and bring People back again into the
State of Nature. Men cannot therefore shake off the Duty and Obedience they owe
to the Community, and say, that an unbounded Liberty is the Right of all
Mankind, because this Liberty was given from them when they were in the Loins
of their Ancestors, who consented to the Terms of the Constitution, when they
first entered into Societies, and which must continue as long as that Society
shall have a Being. It Is plain then, that all just Liberty must be bounded by
the Laws and Agreements of the Community, and no Man ought to challenge to
himself more Liberty than that allows him. To apply this then to our Argument:
The People of England may not go out of the Kingdom, and settle themselves in
any other Country, in manner of a Colony, without leave first obtained of the
King, (as Head of the Kingdom) neither may they enter into a New Society, and
erect a New Form of Government different from that of their own Country, in any
such Settlement, but they must have Directions and Authority from the King, by
his Charters, Letters Patents or Commission, whereby he grants them the
Exercise of the Laws of England, and the Power of calling together their own
Representatives, to Enact such further Laws (not repugnant to the Laws of
England) as shall be requisite for the good Government of their Affairs, in
relation to which they are left to their own Liberty and Free-choice, and not
interrupted by the Government of England: If after all this, the King in
Parliament shall find these People or their Posterity, attempting any thing in
this Settlement, which if it be not stopped, must prove very prejudicial and
destructive to England: Will any Man pretend to argue, that the Kingdom which
permitted, assisted, and protected these People in their Settlement, has no
Authority left in her self, to restrain them in matters that tend to her own
Hurt and Damage? And yet such Restraint is not to be accounted an Invading the
Rights and Liberties of Englishmen; it is only a limitting them from acting or
doing something in the Place where they are, that however profitable it might
be to themselves, would yet be very damnifying to the greater Body of the
Community, of which they are a Member; neither is this Restraint any more than
in regard to the place, their Persons are still free, and they may if they
please, return to their own Mother Country, and practice the same thing there,
with as much Freedom as any other of their Fellow Subjects. If the Reader
should think I have been too tedious upon this Point, I hope he will consider,
that if many Words be necessary at any time, it is then when we are to persuade
People out of that wherein they believe their own Interest and Profit greatly
consists.

I think the Report of the Case of the Merchants of Waterford is an Authority
which very much confirms what I have said; p. 90.
but because he lays much stress upon it, not only here, but in another place,
when he treats upon the Lord Chief Justice Cook 's Opinion, I will transcribe
the Latin Record at large as he gives it: Dicebant quod terr. p. 91.
Hibern. inter se habent Parliament. et omnimo^o cur. Prout in Angl. et per
idem Parliamentum faciunt Leges and mutant Leges and non obligantur per statuta
in Anglia, quia non hic habent Milites Parliamenti, sed hoc intelligitur de
terris and rebus in terris illis tantum efficiendo; (I believe it should be
efficiendis) sed personae eorum sunt Subject. Regis, et tanquam Subjecti erunt
obligati ad aliquam rem extra terram illam faciend. contra Statut. sicut
habitantes in Calesia, Gascoignie, Guien, etc. dum fuere Subjecti; et
Obedientes erunt sub Admiral. Angl. de re fact. super Altum Mare; and similit.
brev. de Errore de Iudicio reddit. in Hibern. in Banco Reg. hic in Angl.

I shall now take the Liberty to vary somewhat from the Verbal Translation, and
render it in that sense that I think this Opinion of the Judges of the Court of
Exchequer may be taken: They say that the Land of Ireland has a Parliament
within it self, and Courts (of Judicature) every way like to those in England;
and that they make and Change Laws by (the Authority of) this (their)
Parliament, and (therefore) the Statutes (which are made to bind) in England,
do not bind them, because they have no Representatives here, (in the Parliament
of England.) But it is always to be understood, that this (the Laws made in the
Parliament of Ireland) must only have relation to that Country, and to such
Matters as are transacted (among themselves) therein: But they (the People of
Ireland) are in their Persons Subjects of the King, (and Kingdom of England)
and as Subjects, they shall be obliged not to do any thing out of that Country,
against Statutes, (made in England to prohibit them) like as the Inhabitants of
Calais, Gascony, Guien, etc. while they were Subjects; and they shall be
obedient to the Admiral of England in all things done upon the High Sea: In
like manner also a Writ of Error upon Judgment given in Ireland, lies from the
Court of King's Bench in England. I Confess this Opinion is oddly worded, but I
shall make no further Comment upon it here, having Occasion to speak at large
to it in another place, where it will appear, whether the Sense which I have
put upon it, may not be more agreeable both to the passage it self, and to the
Opinion which we shall afterward find the Lord Chief Justice Cook gave of it,
than to that turn which Mr. Molyneux has given it. But he Notes upon it, that
upon a second Consideration of this Case before the Judges in the
Exchequer-Chamber, the 1st. Hen. 7. Hussy the Chief Justice gave his Opinion,
p. 92.
That the Statutes made in England shall bind those of Ireland; which was not
much gainsaid by the other Judges; notwithstanding that some of them were of
another Opinion the last Term. And he is offended at this Opinion, and suggests
as if 'twas the Presence of the Chief Justice that influenced those other
Judges, which had not been of the same mind: He Notes also, That Brook in his
Abridging this Case, makes a Note upon it, intimating thereby, that Hussy 's
Opinion was not reasonable. Yet this is no more than Mr. Molyneux's
Construction of this Intimation; but if he had any such Scruple, is it strange
thing for Lawyers not to jump in their Opinions in some Cases? yet it seems
those that were present with Hussy, and heard the Arguments, were so far
convinced as to become of his Mind, without saying much against it: But I
cannot believe that Judges were so ea^ily to be influenced, contrary to their
Judgments, by a Lord Chief Justice then, more than now, when we have seen Two
of them persist in an Opinion, against the other Ten. He Comments also upon the
first Opinion in this Case, and says, that those Judges were not so concluding
upon them as Hussy, And they did almost seem to extend the Jurisdiction of the
English Parliament over the Subjects of Ireland, p. 93.
only in relation to their Actions beyond Seas: Even this is handle enough for
us to lay hold on, for the doing whatever we shall think requisite for the
preserving of our Commerce. But he says, This will appear unreasonable, because
by the same Argument Scotland may be bound by English Laws, in relation to
their Foreign Trade, as they are the King's Subjects. The Scots are Subjects
of the King, only as he is King of Scotland, and we have no pretense to meddle
in their Government; but Ireland is upon another Foot, it is not an Independent
Kingdom; though it has a Parliament, it is not complete in its own
Jurisdiction, but is subordinate to England, and they can transact nothing of
weight in their Administration, without Orders and Directions from the
Government of England, all this I think is clearly made out already. But he
makes all the advantage possible of the words, Personae eorum sunt subjecti
Regis, etc. and tells us, If being the King of England 's Subjects be a Reason
why we ought to submit to Laws, (in relation to our Trade abroad) which have
not received our Assent, p. 94.
the People of England will consider, whether they also are not the Kings
Subjects, and may therefore (by this way of Reasoning) be bound by Laws which
the King may assign them, without their Assent, in relation to their Actions
abroad, or Foreign Trade; Or whether they had not been subjected to the King
of France, if our Kings had continued in the possession of that Country, and
then if France had been the strongest, it might seem that the Subjects of
England might have been bound by Laws made at Paris, etc. What a parcel of
Argument is here? I repeat so much on it only to expose it. It Is evident, that
the Judges in their Opinion, by the Words Subjecti Regis, mean the same thing,
as if they had said Subjects of the Kingdom of England; for they say
afterward, that while they are Subjects, they shall be under the Admiral of
England, etc. If they had said the King's Admiral, could we have thought of any
other than the Admiral of the Kingdom? Having Noted this Distinction, I will
say no more to the rest.

He tells us, p. 96.
that In the Reigns of Edward the First, and Edward the Third, Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses, were chosen in Ireland, to serve in Parliament in
England, and that they have so served. What? and could Ireland be then a
distinct and separate Kingdom? Surely our Ancestors* would scarcely then have
admitted them to sit together with themselves in their Grand Senate. I hope
after this, what I have before alleged of Ireland's having been always in the
Condition of a Member of the English Empire, ever since its first accession,
will never more be doubted: They have been, when the Circumstance of Time has
made it convenient, admitted to send Representatives to the English Parliament,
and may again, if our Parliament think fit.

He admits of the Acts made in the 17th. p. 100.
of King Charles the First, for encouraging Adventurers to raise Money for the
suppression of the Rebellion there, to be binding in Ireland, but then they
were made for their Good; and afterward when the Acts of Settlements were made
by the Irish Parliaments, these English Acts were made of no force, which shows
that they have a power of repealing such Acts made in England. From hence it is
apparent, that our Parliament have not been ready to exercise this Authority,
but when the Welfare of the Whole Body required it, and that they were then
contented to take no Notice of such Alterations made by them, which might be
needful and of use to them, and he has reason to acknowledge their Tenderness
to them in this respect: But I believe these English Acts were not repealed,
and therefore this Instance will not maintain the Assertion which he raises
from it; That the Parliament of Ireland may repeal an Act passed in England, in
relation to the Affairs of Ireland.

The Acts of King Charles 2d. p. 103.
Reign, Against planting Tobac^o in Ireland, for encouraging Shipping and
Navigation, and for prohibiting the Exportation of Wool from Ireland to any
Country except England, p. 104.
He acknowledges, Do name and bind them too, p. 104.
so as they do not transgress them, and he has nothing to urge to take off
their Efficacy; but how rightfully this can be done, is the Question. I answer,
by that Right which, as I have shown before, must be inherent in the Supreme
Legislature of the English Empire, for conserving the Well-being of its Body.
The Acts of his present Majesty's Reign, he acknowledges To be such as the
Necessity of the Time required, p. 106.
and to be made in their Favor; but that these should be argued as a Precedent
of their Submission, p. 110.
and absolute Acquiescence in the Jurisdiction of the Parliaments of England
over that Kingdom, is what they complain of as an Invasion of their Legislative
Right. We have Reason and Precedents enough to vindicate the Just Authority of
the English Parliaments in these matters, and they are not under any ne^cessity
of dating this Power as commencing from the first of these Acts, not over
thirty seven years past; so that he need not be concerned to think, that they
can make any ill use of these Precedents: But whatever this Gentleman's
Principles may be, his following Expressions seem very arrogant, from a Person
who at first pretended to so much Submission; but I hope the Body of the
Protestants of Ireland understand their Duty, and their own Interest better,
than to Offer at throwing off the Authority that the Kingdom of England has
for so many Ages had over them; and I doubt not but they will believe, The
hazard of doing it would be much greater, than any inconvenience they have ever
found in England's way of Protecting them.

We are now come to his Fifth Article, p. 115.
viz. The Opinion of the Learned in the Laws, relating to this Matter: And he
begins with the Lord Chief Justice Cook, for whose Name he bespeaks a great
deal of Respect, although he treats him but somewhat roughly; but this seems to
be the Gentleman's particular Talent.

He says, the Lord Chief Justice Cook quotes many Authorities to prove that
Ireland is a Dominion divided and separated from England, p. 116.
and in particular the forementioned Case of the Merchants of Waterford, but
he finds fault with him for citing it unfaithfully and brokenly. The Chief
Justice does indeed abridge it, (and it seems by the alteration of the Words as
if he had cited it by Head, not transcribed it out of the Book) which is a
thing not unusual, nor to be esteemed a fault in such Authors, if they give the
passage its due weight, and that I think he does, as to the matter for which he
quotes it; but what he especially blames, is, that the Chief Justice upon the
Words of the Report, That the Statutes of England don't bind them, (Ireland)
adds in a Parenthesis, (which is to be understood, unless they be specially
named) and that Herein he concludes magisterially, p. 117.
so it must be, this is my definitive Sentence, without giving any other Reason.

It is not unusual for Men of this Judges Authority, when they Note their
Opinion transiently, not to dilate upon it; if that be not the Point they are
directly handling, yet Mr. Molyneux confesses, p. 117.
that In another place he gives this Assertion a Color of Reason, by saying,
That though Ireland be a distinct Dominion from England, yet the Title thereof
being by Conquest, the same by Judgment of Law, might by express Words be bound
by the Parliament of England. But this does but make the Matter worse with him:
He has before enquired how far Conquest gives a Title: But he would fain know
what Lord Cook means by Judgment of Law; whether the Law of Nature, and Reason,
or Nations; or the Civil Laws of our Commonwealths, in none of which senses,
he conceives, will he or any man be ever able to make out his Position. And now
he gallops away with this, that there is no stopping him for two or three pages,
bespattering the Chief Justice all the way; and though there is a great deal of
his sort of Reasoning in it, yet I think it not worth the Readers Trouble to
repeat more of it, than That he conceives my Lord Chief Justice Cook to have
applied himself so wholly to the Study of the Common Laws of England, p. 119.
that he did not much enquire into the Laws of Nature and Nations, else sure he
could not have been guilty of so Erroneous a Slip. Nay, This Assertion of his
is directly contrary to the whole Tenor of the Case he cites, p. 120.
for that very Act of Parliament on which the Judges debated, and which they
deemed not to be of force in Ireland, does particularly name Ireland, so that
here again Lord Cook 's Error appears most plainly.

Well, if he will be but a little Cool, we may deal well enough with him in this
Matter too, wherein he thinks he has so much advantage: But now after all Mr.
Molyneux's Inquiries, he has not said enough to Convince me, that the Lord
Chief Justice Cook is in the wrong, to believe that England has a Title to
Ireland by Conquest: Nay, I do believe further of the Chief Justice's side,
that that Conquest has given her so just a Title to all that Supreme Authority
which she pretends to hold over Ireland, as that by Judgment (or in Reason) of
Law, her Parliaments may bind Ireland, if named in the Law, and that she is
warranted therein by the Laws of Nature, Reason, and Nations, (the Civil Laws
of particular Commonwealths I don't understand) and also by the Fundamental
Laws of the Original Constitution of the English Government, and I have already
endeavored to make out this Position so clearly, that I shall say no more to
it here, but leave the Matter referred to the Reader's Judgment. The Censure
which he passes upon so venerable a Person as the Lord Chief Justice Cook, that
he must be very little acquainted with the Laws of Nature and Nations, should
methinks but ill become a Writer so little known in the World as Mr. Molyneux,
especially when in this first Essay of his he has discovered much more of his
Assurance than Judgment. But now to Vindicate the Chief Justice from the gross
Errors with which he Charges him, we must look back again upon the Opinion of
the Judges in the Exchequer-Chamber, as he has delivered it in Page 90, 91.
They were Consulting, whether the Staple-Act, made in England, could bind the
People of Ireland; they argue after this manner, Ireland has a Parliament of
its own, which makes Law's for the ordering Matters among themselves, and
therefore the Statutes made in England don't bind them; by which they must mean
such Statutes which are made in general Terms, and for the particular Occasions
of England; for it is plain, that what they intend when they say, that The
People of Ireland, as Subjects of the King, are obliged to act nothing out of
that Country against the Statutes, is, of such English Statutes as name
Ireland; for the Subject of their Debate was about a Statute wherein Ireland
was named. These Judges of the Exchequer do here make two Conclusions, that
seem contradictory: First, They say our Laws don't bind them, but that is in
respect of things transacted within themselves, wherein the Parliament of
England don't meddle; but then in the Second Place, They say, our Statutes did
bind the People of Ireland, in Matters not relating to what was done within
themselves, and therefore they Concluded that this Statute did, because they
were particularly named, else there had been no such Dispute about it, and this
reconciles both these Conclusions. Soon afterward (as is aforesaid) when this
Cause came to have a Second Hearing before the Judges in the Exchequer Chamber,
the Chief Justice Hussy declared, That the Statutes made in England shall bind
those of Ireland, to which the other Judges agreed, without saying much against
it: But doubtless this Opinion is to be understood of such Statutes only which
name Ireland; and as to this Statute they all agree, that it had its full
Effect upon the People of Ireland: Where then is this Erroneous Slip of the
Lord Chief Justice Cook? In repeating the Words of the first Opinion, that Our
Statutes don't bind them, he Notes in a Parenthesis the Tenor of the latter
Opinion, ( unless they be especially named^;) this is not contrary, but
agreeable to both the former Opinions, how then does he differ from them?
indeed the first Opinion says only, that they should be obliged in matters done
out of that Country: But Hussy and Cook take no Notice of this Distinction,
but give their Opinion somewhat more General. Cook infers, that if Ireland be
specially named, our Statutes do bind them, which still is not contrary to the
Case which he cites, for that entirely agrees with him, excepting only in this
difference, he infers that Ireland is bound, that asserts that the People of
Ireland as Subjects of the King are bound, the Case stands stated alike to
both, it is if they are named in an English Statute. If this Distinction will do
Mr. Molyneux any good, let him enjoy it, for me it suffices, if I have shown
that the Lord Chief Justice Cook's Assertion is not directly contrary to the
whole Tenor of the Case which he has cited: He Notes, that the English
Statutes don't bind Ireland, unless they are specially named; this Case shows,
that because Ireland was named in it, those Judges were of the Opinion, that
the People of Ireland as Subjects were obliged to pay Obedience to this Staple
Act, as far as it required; I see therefore no contrariety to it in this his
Assertion, but a great deal in that of Mr. Molyneux, where he says, 'Twas the
Unanimous Opinion of all the Judges then in the Exchequer Chamber, p. 120.
That within the Land of Ireland the Parliaments of England have no
Jurisdiction, whatever they may have over the Subjects of Ireland on the open
Seas. I appeal to the Words of the Opinion, whether it denies, that the
Parliament of England has any ( manner of) Jurisdiction within the Land of
Ireland, there is nothing in it so positive; if it says, that Ireland has a
Parliament within it self, it Notes also, that it is only for ordering of
Matters fit to be transacted among themselves: If it says, that the Statutes in
England don't bind them, because they have no* Representatives there, it may
well be understood of such Statutes that are directed for the particular
Occasions of England, wherein Ireland is not named; it does not in the least
offer at the denying the Jurisdiction of the Parliaments of England, in naming
Ireland; for it directly concludes them to be Subjects of the King, which
cannot be meant in any separate Sense from the Kingdom, because it says, they
shall be under the Obedience of the Admiral of England, and the King has no
Admiralty or Navy distinct from the Kingdom: Nay; their quoting the lying of a
Writ of Error in the Courts of Ireland, (after they had owned them to have such
Courts, as well as a Parliament, in the very same manner as those in England)
from the King's Bench in England, could be he here to no other purpose, than to
show that England had Jurisdiction over Ireland in some Matters; and certainly
where England has any Authority at all, it cannot be severed from the Supreme
Legislature. But since he lays so much stress upon the Words, Ad aliquam rem
extra terram illam faciend. (though it is to be noted by the way, that this
Deliberation was upon a Statute respecting only matters to be done out of the
Kingdom) yet I Will do him all the Reason possible, and if I should take the
Words in the strictest sense he puts them, and grant that those Judges at that
time had not considered the Matter further, than to think that the Jurisdiction
of the Parliaments of England did not extend to enact Laws, binding within the
Land of Ireland, he must yet allow that Judges are sometimes mistaken in their
Opinions, and we do not admit their Sentences to have the force of Laws, as
neither will he himself the Opinions of the Lords Chief Justices Hussy and
Cook; if then the Reason of the thing, as well as ancient Practice, be quite
otherwise, (as I hope I have sufficiently shown in this Case) we may very
warrantably conclude this Opinion of these Judges to be Erroneous, if they
intended it in the same sense which Mr. Molyn^ux takes it.

He has not yet done with the Lord Chief Justice Cook, but tells us, That this
Assertion is likewise inconsistent with himself in other parts of his Works, p.
121.
where he says, that the Laws of England had been granted to Ireland, and
thereby Ireland being of its self a distinct Dominion, and no part of the
Kingdom of England, was to have Parliaments hold^n there as in England. The
Chief Justice might well say, that Ireland had a distinct Dominion, and
Parliaments within themselves, every Body must own it needful, because of their
being divided from England by the Sea, that they might thereby be enabled to
regulate Matters among themselves as the Circumstances of Time and Place should
require. May not the City of London be said to have a kind of a distinct
Dominion, and a sort of a Parliament held within themselves, even after the
Pattern of the Grand Parliament of the Kingdom? the Lord Mayor, after the
manner of the King, calls and dissolves their Assembly; the Aldermen (after
once Chosen) have Right of Session for their Lives, as the House of Lords; the
Common Council-men (resembling the House of Commons) are chosen Annually by the
Respective Wards, (like the Counties) all these assemble in Common Council, and
there Enact Laws for the good Government of the Citizens, which the Grand
Parliament rarely, if ever, control; and though their Jurisdiction be much
less than that of Ireland, yet it is a certain Jurisdiction, so firmly
established, as that it is held that it cannot lawfully be taken away, or
altered, by any Power in England, but the Supreme Legislature, and that it must
stoop to; and the same the Lord Chief Justice Cook says of this distinct
Dominion of Ireland; that notwithstanding it has a Power, Jurisdiction, and
Authority, which is complete within it self, yet it must pay Obedience to the
Supreme Legislature of England, whenever any Extraordinary Occasion shall make
it needful for that to name it specially; and therefore the Tenor of his
Judgment upon this whole Matter shows, that by his terming them no part of the
Kingdom of England, (because they have such a distinct administration among
themselves) he does not in the least intend, that they should be looked upon so
separated, as to be out of all Reach of the Supreme Imperial Authority of
England; so that in all this there appears no Inconsistency; he never asserts
what Mr. Molyneux assumes, that the King and Parliament in Ireland is a
Legislature equally as Supreme as that of the King and Parliament in England,
and it must be very unaccountable in any one to do so, who knows that all Irish
Acts of Parliament must be approved in the Privy Council of England; I Will
warrant him, they will take care that they shall never Enact different or
contrary Sanctions, p. 121.
so that he need not from this fear the Consequence of Ireland's having two
Supreams. He has one Touch more at the Lord Chief Justice Cook; he quotes him,
p. 122.
saying, If a King has a Christian Kingdom by Conquest, (as King Henry the
Second had Ireland) after the Laws of England had been given them for the
Government of that Country. etc. no succeeding King could alter the same
without Parliament: Which by the way seems nothing contradictory to all that
Mr. Molyneux has quoted, of what he says concerning Ireland, but is a farther
Indication that his Opinion was always steady, that the King and Parliament of
England, and not the King alone, held the Supreme Authority over Ireland. And
now he Has done with this Reverend Judge, and I am very glad on it, because I
doubt I have tired my Reader with such an abundance that I have been forced to
say for the Judg's Vindication; but to make amends, I Will try to divert him a
little, by telling a short Story upon my self: When I was a Boy, I thought once
that I had espied a fault in a performance of my Master's, and I had the
assurance to tell him on it; he first fairly convinced me, that I had not taken
the thing right, and then very gravely told me with a bent Brow, that 'twas
more like my Boyish Confidence to find Faults where none were, than the
Solidity of his stronger Judgment to commit such.

Now for Pilkington's Case: p. 122.
The King first grants a Patent for an Office in Ireland, to be held by
Pilkington or his Deputy; but after this, the same King grants the same Office
to A, who who sues for it, and pleads an Act of Parliament in Ireland, that no
Person might execute any Office there but in his own Person, on pain of
Forfeiture; he proves that Pilkington acted by a Deputy; the Judges thereupon
decide in favor of A. What Is this to the Parliament of England's Jurisdiction
over Ireland? it shows no more than that the Judges of Ireland were of the
Opinion, that the Kings Letters, Patents could not overruled an Irish Act of
Parliament. Indeed he tells us, p. 124.
that in the Pleadings 'twas offered, That Ireland time out of mind had been a
Land separated and distinct from England, and ruled and governed by its own
Customs, that they could call Parliaments within themselves, etc. It seems two
of the five Judges held this Prescription void, and tho I will not dispute (as
it seems they did) about the Word Prescription, yet it is well known, that what
Jurisdiction they had, was granted them by the Supreme Authority of England,
and I know no Body denies it them, only we cannot admit them to strain it,
beyond what was ever intended: It says further, that Two of the Judges
affirmed, and the other three did not deny, that a Tax granted in England,
could not affect Ireland, except it be approved in the Parliament in Ireland:
This is not what we Contest about, I never heard that England did ever raise
Taxes upon any Members of her Empire, without the Consent of their
Representatives.

As for the Merchants of Waterford's Case, we have both said enough to that
already: That of the Prior of Lanthony in Wales comes next; He sues the Prior
of Mollingar in Ireland, p. 125.
for an Arrear of an Annuity, and obtains Judgment against him, both in the
Common Pleas and King's Bench in Ireland; Mollingar Appeals to the Parliament in
Ireland, and they Reversed both Judgments; upon this Lanthony removes all into
the King's Bench in England, but that Court would not meddle in it, as having
no Power over what had passed in the Parliament of Ireland: Lastly, He Appealed
to the Parliament of England, and it does not appear that they did any thing in
it. What of all this? The Court of King's Bench in England, although they had
Authority to determine upon Matters brought before them by Writ of Error out of
Ireland, yet they did not believe, they had any Power over the Parliament of
Ireland: Doubtless they were in the right; but it seems 'twas then believed
that the English Parliament had, else Lanthony had never Petitioned; but it
does not appear that they did any thing upon this Appeal, the Petition only
being entered at the end of the Roll: Why? that is a plain Sign, that 'twas the
very last thing of the Session, and the Parliament was Dissolved, Prorogued, or
something, before they could go upon it, or perhaps the Matter was agreed, or
the Prior's dead before next Sessions, or fifty Reasons more that might be
offered against his sleeveless Suggestion, That the Parliament of England did
not think themselves to have a Right to enquire into this Matter, because
nothing more than the Petition is found upon Record; but I Will tell him a better
Reason of our side, it is not probable that they would have received the
Petition, if they did not believe they had Right to decide upon it.

The next thing is about the Acts of Recognition, and this he begins with an
ingenious Confession, p. 127.
That the Kingdom of Ireland is inseparably annexed to the Imperial Crown of
England, and the Obligation their Legislature lies under by Poyning's Act,
makes this Tie indissoluble: This is enough to make out all our Pretensions
upon them; it is strange to see a Man writing a Book against the Natural
Consequences, when yet he so easily agrees upon the Premises. The Imperial
Crown of England denotes the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom; the Material
Crown is but a Badge of this Authority, and is given to the King, not as his
own separate Propriety, but as an Ensign of the Authority which he enjoys, as
Head of the Kigdom; if any Body should steal this Material Crown, and break it
to pieces, as Blood did, the Supreme Authority of the King and Kingdom remains
entire and inviolated: This Supreme Authority always resides in the
Legislature, which in our Constitution is inseparably vested in the King,
Lords, and Commons; there can be no annexing to the Imperial Crown of England,
distinct from the Supreme Imperial Authority of the Kingdom; if any Territory
shall be annexed to this Imperial Crown, it must become a Member of the Empire,
otherwise it is no annexing; and because there can be but one Supreme
Legislature, every Member or part of the Empire must be in some Subordination
to that Supreme Legislature, whatsoever other Jurisdiction it may retain, as
necessary to its own particular Regulations within it self; otherwise it can be
no Member, but must remain a perfect Body of it self. I think these are
Positions that will not easily be disproved, and we have a complete Instance of
them in the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, as they stand related to England;
Scotland is an ancient, distinct, and (saving the old Pretensions of England
upon them) independent Kingdom, has an Imperial Crown of its own, worn by a
long Succession of Kings, whose Posterity came to inherit the Kingdom of
England, and remove their Seat hither, yet 'twas not in their Power to annex
the Kingdoms, without their Joint Consent, so that they remain an entire
Sovereign Kingdom, governed according to their own Constitution, without any
Subordination to England to this day; and therefore in the late Happy
Revolution, when King William and Queen Mary had obtained the entire possession
of the Crown of England, they did not pretend to that of Scotland, 'till the
States of that Kingdom had conferred it upon them by a free Election. On the
contrary; Ireland (whatever it was anciently) was no entire Kingdom, when the
English first took Possession of it, but divided into many Jurisdictions, under
Petty Princes; it had never any Diadem or Ensign of Royalty, that ever I could
hear of; it was entirely subdued, and brought under the English Government by
Conquest, (as all Authors, except Mr. Molyneux, agree) it was brought into the
form of a Kingdom, and afterward had that Title conferred upon it, and was
endowed with Laws, and a Constitution of Government, by the Authority of
England, who from the Beginning reserved and exercised a Superiority over them;
and (Mr. Molyneux being quite mistaken in the Grant made to King John) it was
never separated from being a Member of the Empire of England, but (even as Mr.
Molyneux confesses) remains annexed to it to this day. The Supreme Legislature
of England (then in being) presented the Title of it to King William and Queen
Mary, at the same time with that of England, without asking the leave of the
People of Ireland; in like manner, they have proclaimed all the English Kings
with that Title at their first Accession, and have, as he owns, concluded
Ireland in all Acts of Recognition. What if the Parliaments of Ireland have
also recognized? 'twas but to own their Allegiance; our Kings were as
effectually vested in the Dominion over Ireland before, by the Authority of
England, and double doing in such a Case can be no harm; neither can this be
any Argument to prove, p. 128.
Their having all Jurisdiction to an Absolute Kingdom belonging, or that they
are not subordinate to any Legislative Authority on Earth.

Now he tells us, p. 128.
As the Civil State of Ireland is thus absolute within it self, likewise so is
the Ecclesiastical; and just so it is, but that is without any absoluteness in
either. The multitude of the Native Irish, and the Old English, were doubtless
very averse to the Establishment of the Reformed Religion, because they have
continued Rom^n Catholics ever since; and yet this Reformation was begun there
by no other Authority, than an Order of the King and Council in England, to the
Lord Deputy, to Cause the Scriptures and the Common Prayers to be used there in
the English Tongue; from whence it is evident, that they did not then think
their own Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction so absolute, as that they could oppose it
to the Authority of England.

He quotes a Record out of Reyley, p. 129.
That Edward the Second, upon a Motion of his Parliament at Westminster, had
sent his Letters Patents to the Lord Justice of Ireland, that he should Order
that the Irish might enjoy the Laws of England concerning Life and Member: From
whence he infers, That the Parliament did not then think, that they had
Jurisdiction in Ireland, otherwise they would have made a Law themselves to
this effect: Can this be any more than an Instance of what I have all along
said? that our Parliaments have always been willing to leave the People of
Ireland, as much as possible, to the Exercise of their own Form of Government,
in Matters relating to themselves, and not to interpose their own Supreme
Authority, but upon Extraordinary Occasions, wherein the Welfare of the whole
was concerned? But can it be any Argument, that they thought they had no such
Authority, because they did not think ^it on this Occasion to use it?

Mr. Molyneux finds, that the lying of a Writ of Error from the King's Bench in
England, on a Judgment given in the King's Bench in Ireland, lies heavy upon
him, and therefore he labors mightily, and turns it every way to get rid on it;
first he says, it is The Opinion of several Learned in the Laws of Ireland, p.
131.
that this is founded on an Act of Parliament in Ireland which is lost. How
Learned soever this Opinion may be, I am sure it is not very Judiciously offered
here; for no Body will believe that the Legislature of a Kingdom that thought
it self absolute, could do so foolish a thing as to make a Law themselves, that
should put them under the Administration of another Kingdom, in so high a point
as the Controuling all their Judicatures; and therefore if ever they made such
an Act of Parliament, it is not to be doubted but that at that time they were
very sensible, that whatsoever Authority they had among themselves, was all
derived from, and in perpetual Subordination to the Supreme Authority of
England. Indeed he comes and says after, p. 136.
That this Suit is made to the King only, the matter lies altogether before
him, and the Party complaining applies to no part of the Political Government
of England for Redress, but to the King of Ireland only, who is in England:
That the King only is sued to, the Law books make plain, etc. for above two
Pages. Fine, very fine spun are these Arguments, but withal so extreme ^light,
that they will not hang together: If the King was ever used to ^it there in
Person, was there not always four English Judges constituted in that Court,
(whom the King in those days could not remove at pleasure) who had Authority to
judge, whether the King were present or absent? Or does he think, that when an
Irish Appeal came before them, these Judges could not meddle in it? or if they
did, whilst the King was present, they were all on a Sudden swallowed up, or
consubstantiated into the King? or if they acted in his absence, an Irish Cause
would immediately transubstantiate them all four into the real presence of one
King of Ireland, in his proper Person? But if this should be too gross to put
upon Mr. Molyneux, we must even resolve it the other way, and conclude, that he
thinks the Judges and Courts of Judicature are no part of the Political
Government of England: He has abundance of other pretty Conceits, how and
which way this Business of the Writ of Error might come about, and in what
sense it may be thought to operate; but I Will leave him in the quiet and
peaceable Enjoyment of them, because I think it not worth while to trouble my
self or the Reader more about them ^* We may be sure he would not have us to
Conclude, p. 139*
That if the King's B^nch in Ireland ^e subordinate to the King's Bench in
England, that therefore it must follow, that the Parliament of Ireland is
subordinate to that of England; and though, as he sees, we have a very good
Argument for that, a fort^ort, yet what I have said before may satisfy him,
that we have other Demonstrations enough, to assure us in the constant
Subordination of that Kingdom to this, besides the lying of this Writ of Error,
which the very Reason of the thing (maugre all his Endeavors to shift it) will
evince, that this pre-eminence must infallibly have been preserved to England
from the first annexing of Ireland; for after they were become obliged to be
ruled and governed by our Laws, whether should they resort to have them
explained, but to that Authority that gave them? I cannot omit observing, how
very pertinently He concludes this his Fifth Article, with a Memorable Passage
out of their Irish Statutes: p. 140.
And that is the Act of Faculties made in ^^^land the 28th. Hen. 8. reciting a
former Act, in the Praeamble of which it is declared, That this your Graces
Realm Recognizing no Superior but your Grace, has been, and yet is free from
any Sub^ection to any Man's Laws, but only such as have been devised within
this Realm, for the wealth of the same, or to such others, as by sufferance of
your Grace, and your Progenitors, the People of the Realm have taken at their
free Liberties, by their own Consent; and have bound themselves by long Use and
Custom to the Observance of, etc. Now this very Declaration, with the other
Clauses of the said English Act, is Verbatim recited in the Irish Act of
Faculties. Behold the mighty force of this Argument! The People of England did
in an Act of Parliament make a Declaration of their ancient undoubted Rights
and Liberties, proper and peculiar to their own Constitution: The Parliament of
Ireland pass the same Act there, and take upon them to ape the very Words of
this Declaration in their Act, though the same could not be proper or rightly
applicable to the Circumstances of their Constitution, (for the Laws given them
at first from England, were never devised within that Realm) therefore the
People of Ireland cannot be under any Subordination of the Parliament of
England.

And now he is come to the 6th. and last Article, p. 142.
viz. The Reasons and Arguments that may be further offered on one side and
the other in this Debate: And here Mr. Molyneux opens a very diverting Scene, but
fitter for Ridicule and Disdain than Argument: He tells us, p. 142.
There remains another pretense or two for this Subordination to be considered;
and one is founded on Purchase: It Is said, that vast Quantities of Treasure has
been spent by England from time to time, for reducing Ireland, which has given
them a just Title at least to the Lands of the Rebels, and to the Absolute
Disposal thereof in their Parliament, according to the Examples in Forty One,
and the late Rebellion in this Reign.

I am sorry that he has so little sense of the great Benefit which the
Protestants of Ireland have received, by the interposing of the English Power
in their Favor. It Is not to be disputed, that the late King James had all the
Haereditary Right that was entailed upon their Independent (as he terms him)
King John; and although he had Abdicated the Crown of England, yet by this
Gentleman's Notions, he had still an undoubted Title to the Kingdom of Ireland,
which he came to possess, by the assistance of a very considerable Power from
France; and (if Mr. Molyneux's Doctrine be sound) could any body then blame the
Irish, and Old English, of his own Religion, to join with him, in the asserting
his ancient Right to that Kingdom? For my own part, I must own, that I know no
other Reason that can justify us in our engaging in that War, for the Recovery
of Ireland, than the Old English Principle, that Ireland was our own, as an
inseparable Member of the English Empire; and I am sure, all the English
Protestants of Ireland were then glad to have us assert that Right, or else
their fair Estates in that Country must have left the greatest part of them to
go a Begging at this day, unless perhaps they could have reconciled themselves
by turning Papists; it being well known, that they were so far from valuing
themselves upon their own Strength, that (excepting that Gallant and Resolute
Resistance made by the People of the North, at Londonderry and Inniskilling)
they gave up all, and generally (meaning the People of Note) fled to England;
(though many are of the Opinion, that they might have done more for themselves
than they did, if they had staid:) Thus were their Estates lost to them, beyond
hopes of Recovery, but by the strength of England: Indeed when we had sent over
an Army, some of them went back again, and together with those that remained in
Ireland, did expose themselves, and acted a fair part in the War; yet all they
were able to do, was so inconsiderable, in regard of the whole Management of
the War, that I believe it will not be pretended, that we were made Masters of
Ireland one day the sooner for their help. The vast Charge of an Army, A^ms,
Artillery, Ammunition, Provision, Shipping, etc. all this have we born, and
paid for, by raising Taxes upon our own Estates, when we knew they were not
able to Contribute any thing themselves; and after all this, what of a Man can
have the Impudence to dispute with us, whether we have any Right to the
forfeited Estates in Ireland? If the Kingdom of England has no just
Jurisdiction over Ireland, I will affirm, that the Irish were in no Rebellion,
but were in the Exercise of the Natural Allegiance, and in the Discharge of
that Duty which they owed to their Lawful King; there was no Act of their
Parliament to declare King James abdicated, and the Throne vacant, neither
indeed was there any pretense for it; because he came, and was actually present
among them, and in the full Exercise of his de facto Kingly Power, as to them:
But (as I said before) the People of England having in their Convention (which
at that time was the Representative of the Nation) conferred the Crown of
England and Ireland, and all other Territories and Dominions belonging to the
English Empire, upon King William and Queen Mary; the Kingdom of Ireland, as a
Member of the English Body, was as much bound to submit to that Revolution, as
New England, or any of the rest of our Colonies; and therefore the Opposition
made by the Irish against it, was a perfect Rebellion, and rendered them liable
to all the Pains and Penalties which the Municipal Laws of the Kingdom could
inflict upon Rebels: This then justly forfeited their Estates to the King, as
he is the Head, but not as in any separate Capacity from the Kingdom of
England: We know however, what Authority the King has to dispose of these
Estates, to such as may have deserved well; and if the Parliament of England
shall acquiesce therein, that is no Argument that therefore they have no
Authority to intermeddle in that Matter, and their former practice (as he
confesses) has shown the contrary.

He owns, p. 143.
that In a War, the Estates of the Unjust Opposers, should go to repair the
Damage that is done; but theirs do not resemble the Common Case of Wars between
two Foreign Enemies, but are rather Rebellions, or Intestine Commotions. And
so we say. But, he continues, If the Protestants of Ireland, by the Assistance
of their Brethren of England, and their Purse, do prove Victorious: A fine Turn
indeed; the Matter of Fact is, that the Army of England proved Victorious, and
that without any thing that might reasonable be called Assistance from their
Brethren, (as he, though somewhat assumingly in this case, calls themselves)
the Protestants of Ireland, and yet forsooth the Victory must be theirs: No Man
of Modesty, as this Gentleman would bespeak himself, could dare to put upon the
World at this rate. Well, but he tells us, p. 143.
The People of England ought to be fully repaid; but then the manner of their
Payment, and in what way it shall be levied, ought to be left to the People of
Ireland, in Parliament Assembled. He owns the Debt, and that we ought to be
paid, but how, and which way, and when, ought to be left to them; a pretty
New-fashion'd Privilege this Gentleman is inventing for his Country; provided
they own the Debt, the Creditor must be contented without any Security, without
any Terms, and (consequently) without any Interest, how long soever he may be
kept out of his Money; he ought to leave all that to the Good Will and Pleasure
of his Honest Debtor; but I believe Mr. Molyneux would be loath to pass for such
a Fool, in his own way of Dealing in the World, and sure he must measure us by
an Irish Understanding, if he thinks this sort of Reasoning will go down with
us. He goes on, And so it was after the Rebellion of Forty One; that is a
Mistake, (though it deserves a harder Word) for he tells us, The Adventurers
had several Acts of Parliament made in England for their reimbursing, by
disposing to them the Rebels Lands; so that it was not then left at the
Discretion of the People of Ireland: p. 144.
But after all, it was thought reasonable, that the Parliament of Ireland
should do this in their own way, and therefore the Acts of Settlement and
Explanation made all the former English Acts of no force, or at least did very
much alter them in many particulars. Here'tis plain, that Acts of Parliament
were made in England, for disposing the forfeited Estates of Ireland, which
were be liev'd to be of Validity, and a sufficient Security to the Adventurers
at the time when they were made, otherwise People would not have advanced their
Money upon them; and though I am no Lawyer, and don't think it concerns me to
look after those Acts, yet from the Reason of the thing, I cannot believe that
those Persons that advanced this Money, could afterward be legally deprived of
the Interests granted them by those English Acts, by any after Authority of an
Irish Parliament: If any were, I would advise them yet to s^e to an English
Parliament for Relief. It Is true, there had happened a Revolution, and perhaps
some People that had those Lands, might be looked upon as under Delinquencies to
the Government that then came to be uppermost, and we know that some of the
Irish Papists were very strangely restored to their Estates, and the Possessors
put out; yet if some Injustice was done, at such a time when many things were
carried by Extremes, nothing will prove an invalidating of those English
Statutes, less than either a total Repeal of them, and that he seems not to
stand upon here, (though he suggested it in another place;) for he only says,
they were made of no force, or at least were very much altered in many
particulars; which is a certain Sign they were not repealed: Or to show that
they were so altered, as to take away all the Lands that were possessed by any
of those Adventurers, or their Descendents, by Virtue of those Acts of
Parliament: If that cannot be made out, (which sure he will not pretend to) it
will remain, that those English Acts of Parliament did really dispose of the
Rebels Lands in Ireland; and if there be any after Settling or Confirming them
to the Safety of the Proprietors, by Act of Parliament in Ireland, that cannot
impeach the Authority of the first Acts.

Well, p. 144.
he still allows, That we shall be repaid our Expenses; all they desire, is,
that in preservation of their own Rights and Liberties, they may do it in their
own Methods, regularly in their own Parliaments: And if the Reim^ursment be all
that England Stands on, what avails it, whether it be done this way or that
way, so it be done? A pretty loose way of Talking this; he speaks as
confidently of reimbursing us, as if that were a small matter, and they had
this way and that way, ways enough to do it; and they are so well prepared,
that they desire nothing else but Liberty, to let them do it in their own
methods. I am sorry we have not heard one word like this offered in their
Parliaments, 'twould have looked much better from them, than from Mr. Molynellx,
to have taken Notice of this great Debt to England, and to have at least
declared their Intent of paying it; but he is a Member, and perhaps he knows
their Minds better than I do; and because he proposes so fairly, I am willing
to strike a Bargain with him; if he will undertake on the Behalf of Ireland, I Will
undertake ont the part of England, that if they are in good Earnest, willing
and able to pay us his Debt, the Parliament of England (and I hope my good
Intention in this matter, will obtain their Pardon for my presumption) will
leave them entirely at Liberty, to raise it according to their Methods, as
regularly in their own Parliaments as he desires; and this being (as he says)
all they ask, let him but publish himself in Print once more, and engage to
pledge his own Estate (which by the way he may value the less, by how much he
is indebted to me, and the rest of the good People of England, for what we have
paid to redeem it) to the Public, for the performance; I Will engage not only my
Estate (which is somewhat to me, if it be not so great as his) but my Life too,
that the Parliament of England will assent, to give them what time they please,
for the payment of the Principal, if they can but give Security for the payment
of the Interest at 6 per Cent. (though the Interest of Ireland is 10) and I
believe I might adventure to promise, that upon the performance of such
Articles, they would make him as Complete a King of Ireland as ever his King
John was, and also give him a better Estate to support that Dignity, than was
given to that Prince. I don't love Banter, but how can a Man treat such
Discourse otherwise? is it not certain, that we have expended more Money
(besides the invaluable Blood of our People) in the Reductions of Ireland, than
all the Lands in the possession of the English are worth? and yet we have been
so generous to them, as hitherto not to ask for one penny of Reimbursment from
them. But see the inconsiderateness of this Gentleman, he has been so far
overseen, in the saying any thing that he has Thought could give the least
support to his unreasonable Argument, as not only to scatter many pernicious
Notions, which the Irish may lay hold on to the Prejudice of the English; but
here also he has started a Thought, that is capable of being improved more to
the Benefit of England, than to the advantage of his own Countrymen, (as he
distinguishes) the English of Ireland. Is there not Reason, that those who
receive the greatest Benefit by the Public Expense, should contribute a
proportion toward it? The People of England receive but a distant advantage by
the Reduction of Ireland, and yet they have born the whole Charge; the
Protestants of Ireland have receive'd an immediate Benefit, by being restored
to very great and improving Estates, and yet they have paid nothing; the
Government of England is extremely in Debt, and the Taxes will continue to lie
very heavy upon the Inhabitants of England, where the Means of Sustsistance is
much harder; but Ireland is recovered into a flourishing Condition, and through
the great Plenty and Cheapness of Provisions, the People there by a little
abatement of their abundant way of living, may spare Taxes much more easily
then England: What then if the Parliament of England should entertain this
Thought of his, and become of his Opinion, that they ought to be repaid their
Expenses; and that the People of Ireland are now in a Condition to Contribute
something toward it? especially since they are already become so Upish, and
retain so small a Sense of Gratitude for the great Support we have so lately
given them, as that not only this Gentleman, but others also have shown their
Readiness to fly at our Heads, and even threaten us with the Consequences of
their Resentments, for our only offering to Check their Progress in a
Manufacture, which cannot be carried on there but to the Ruin of England: I
say, if upon these Considerations, and so extraordinary an occasion, they
should require a Certain Sum from the People of Ireland, I know not but that
it may well consist with that Supreme Authority, which (as I have endeavored
to show) must be of the Essence of every Complete Empire; and that it would be
no Violation upon that Constitution which was given them, if our Parliament
should be content, That in preservation of their own Rights and Liberties, they
may have Liberty to raise it in their own Methods, regularly in their own
Parliaments. Perhaps Mr. Molyneux will tell us, that they have a Negative upon
us; but he has before put us in mind of an Unlucky Hank that our Admiralty
has on them. I doubt the Gentlemen of Ireland will not be well pleased with me
for touching upon this Point, but they must reflect upon their own Advocate,
but for whom it had never come into my Mind; and they ought not to be offended
with me, for answering him in such a Way as his own Arguments require: I never
designed them any ill Office, and if any advantage should be taken by this, I
am as ready as Mr. Molyneux himself, for my part in it, with the lowest
Submission to ask their Pardon.

What follows next may be prefac'd with a Monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens,
cui lumen ademptum.

We have an Example of this in Point between England and Holland, p. 144.
the Glorious Revolution under his present Majesty; Holland in Assisting
England expended Six Hundred Thousand Pounds, and the English Parliament fairly
repaid them: It would look oddly, for Holland to have insisted on disposing of
Lord Powis's, and other Estates, by their own Laws, to reimburse themselves.

An Example in Point; then Holland must once have Conquered England, and have
ever since retained a Title to this Kingdom, and exercised an Authority over
us, in directing all the Principal Managements of our Government: Neither can
there be any Semblance of their assisting us at that time with Six Hundred
Thousand Pounds; that Assistance was advanced wholly on the Credit of their
Stadtholder, the (then) Prince of Orange, and the Assistance we had was only
owing to him, who by the Success of that Glorious Expedition came to be Elected
our King; and then the Parliament of England considering, the Inestimable
Benefit England had received by that most Happy Revolution, thought it
reasonable to repay them the full Charge which the States had advanced on this
Account: Besides, if the Fact had been true, the Dutch knew we were well able
to repay them, and they have had their Money to their Content, but we knew that
the People of Ireland, if they would have beggared themselves, could never have
reimburst us, and therefore we have not, and perhaps (then) never intended to
ask them for it: May this be called an Example in point too? After this, can
there be a more Odious Comparison than what he infers, that the Dutch had as
much reason to insist on the disposing Lord Powis's and other Estates, as our
Parliament had to meddle in the matter of the Forfeited Estates of Ireland? I
have sufficiently shown how the Government of England has a Just Right to the
For^eited Estates in Ireland, but surely the Dutch cannot pretend to any Right
to Estates forfeited in England, by our Municipal Laws; and it does indeed look
oddly enough in him, to Controvert this with us, before we are repaid one
Farthing of a vastly greater Expense, and tell us, here is an Example in Point
for us: Such Treatment as this would raise the Blood of an Englishman, and
though a fitting Modesty and Regard to my Reader does restrain me from venting
the Resentment due to so great an Indignity put upon the English Nation; yet I
hope I may be indulged to imprecate upon my self, if ever I should discover so
little Thought, as to make use of Examples highly reflecting upon my
Superiors, and yet no way agreeing with the Fact in hand; may I be Censured
for an Eternal Blockhead, and condemned to wear my Book affixt on my Back, as a
perpetual Badge of my Insolence and Folly.

I am weary enough of this Head of Purchase, and yet I will take the pains to
transcribe the last Paragraph on it from end to end: He says, p. 154.
It Is an ungenerous thing to vilify good Offices, I am far from doing it, but
with all possible Gratitude acknowledge the mighty Benefits Ireland has often
received from England, in helping to suppress the Rebellions of this Country;
to England's Charitable Assistance our Lives and Fortunes are owing: But with
all humble Submission, I desire it may be Considered, whether England did not
at the same time propose the preventing of their own Danger, that would
necessarily have attended our Ruin? if so, 'twas in some measure their own
Battails they fought, when they fought for Ireland; and a great part of their
Expense must be reckoned in their own Defense.

If Mr. Molyneux had had a due sense of what he was saying, he could never have
so solemnly protested against the ungenerousness of Vilifying good Offices, and
yet in the next Breath attribute no more to England, in what she has done for
them, than just her helping to Suppress the Rebellions: Is not this Vilifying
with a Witness? after we have Reduced Ireland, and put them into the Possession
of their Estates, upon our own proper Cost and Strength, to have it lessened to
no more than a little Lending them a Hand at a dead lift, and for which they
are very willing to repay us (in Words)? Why, this is not worth his
acknowledging with all possible Gratitude, the Mighty Benefits they have
received from England, etc. But after all, this Mighty Hodge-Podge of an
Harangue is but to tickle us into a good Humor, that he may slyly usher in his
Plea in Abatement of Damages, and so pay us all off with the Flap of a
Fox-tail; It is to be Considered, whether England did not at the same time
prevent their own Danger, and consequently in some measure fight their own
Battles: We have been pretty well used to this ungrateful Complement from
others of his Country men, who have been apt on all Occasions to reflect upon
us, that 'twas not for their sakes, but our own, that we reduced Ireland; only
Mr. Molyneux, like himself, gives it us in finer Language: What if we also have
received some Advantage by this Reduction? I should think that a People who had
any due sense of Gratitude, might remain so well Content with the great Benefit
that accrew'd to themselves, by the re-enjoyment of the Estates which they had
lost, as not to upbraid us with any such reasonable Convenience which we might
draw from it, without Prejudice to them. Can they think it had been fit for us
to engage in so mighty an Expense, for no other Reason than to recover their
Estates for them? Well, suppose we had thought fit only to fight our own
Battails, and when we had done, to have bridled the Irish by strong Garrisons,
and had no reguard to have restored them to their Estates; perhaps we might
have as well secured our own Interest that way: However, the Tenderness we had
for them, (how ill soever some of them seem to have deserved it) would not
suffer us to use so Severe a Policy, which yet if we had practiced from the
beginning, and kept our own People at home, would have turned to much better
account to us, than if we should at last be so far overseen, as to suffer a
Colony of our own to Contest with us for our Trade. But yet I am for Complying
with Mr. Molyneux in this matter, and I am content that a part of this Expense,
in proportion to the Benefit England shall be thought to have received by the
Reduction of Ireland, shall remain upon our Account; but then I hope the vast
advantage which immediately aocrews to the People of Ireland by the Recovery of
their Lands, and the fair time we have spared them from Contributing any thing,
may be thought justly to entitle them to the far better part of this Charge;
and if Mr. Molyneux can with as much Ingenuity find a way to pay it, as he has
been ready to own it, he will very much oblige the Government of England, at a
time when their own Occasions do so much want it.

So much for Mr. Molyneux's feigned pretense of Purchase, which can be but an
Invention of some such pregnant Brain as his own; for I never before heard,
that the People of England had set up any pretention for their Superiority over
Ireland upon that foot; such another is that which follows. p. 145.
Another thing alleged against Ireland is this; If a Foreign Nation, as
France or Spain for instance, prove prejudicial to England in its Trade, or any
other way; England, if it be stronger, redresses it self by force of Arms, or
denouncing War; and why may not England, if Ireland lies cross their Interests,
restrain Ireland, and bind it by Laws, and maintain these Laws by Force? He
discusses this Point very gravely, but since no Body ever thought of making
this any Argument but himself, and we never pretended to have so little to do
with them as with France and Spain, I Will trouble my self no further about it,
but let it pass for a Mere Whimsie.

Mr. Molyneux tells us, p. 148.
The last thing he shall take Notice of, that some raise against them, is, that
Ireland is to be looked upon as a Colony from England: Here he attempts to
delude us with a falacious Argument; but that is very easily solved by an
Obvious Distinction. If he would not have Ireland looked upon as a Colony, yet I
believe there can be no Notion of a Colony clearer, than that the English
planted there, are so in the strictest Sense, and that I shall undertake to
prove anon, although he calls it, The most Extravagant of all Objections
against them; and then without doubt it must follow, that, As the Roman
Colonies were subject to the Laws made by the Senate at Rome, so ought Ireland
by those made by the great Council at Westminster. I may add, or any where
else, where our Parliament may sit to Enact Laws. But he would not have this be
thought To have the least Foundation or Color from Reason or Record; does it
not manifestly appear by the Constitution of Ireland, that it is a Complete
Kingdom within it self? I say No, it is but the Form of a Kingdom; for since
'twas first subdued to England, Governors have always been set over it by
England, and it never had Authority of it self to Exercise a Legislature, but
by Directions from England. But now he is resolved he will confute us, though
Bellarmine stood in the way; Do not the Kings of England bear the Style of
Ireland, (and why did he not mind the Arms too) among the rest of their
Kingdoms? Is this agreeable to the Nature of a Colony? do they use the Title of
Kings of Virginia, New England, or Maryland? Don't the Great Turk bear the
Title of a great many Kingdoms? Yes, and some of them have a more Complete
Dominion among themselves than ever we gave Ireland; are they therefore all
Complete Kingdoms within themselves? The Kings of Spain have so many Titles of
Kingdoms, that they have quite lost the Knowledge where some of them grow; they
have used the Styles of King of the East and West Indies, and yet their
acquisitions there have been but Colonies; Mexico and Peru are not Complete
Kingdoms within themselves, though they have that Title, yea, and their
Governors, have the Style of Viceroys, and that is a higher Feather than ever
those of Ireland wore, (I should have excepted their absolute King John:) The
Kings of England have never called Virginia, New England, or Maryland, by the
Name of Kingdoms; is there such a deal of weight in that? The Potuguez gave the
Style of a Kingdom to Goa in the East Indies, but they never did to Brazil,
thought it be much the more Considerable Colony: And now I think on it, we were
once about making our Dominions in America into a Vice-Royalty, under the Duke
of Albermarle, sure then they must have made as Complete a Kingdom as Ireland;
for they have as absolute a distinct Dominion within themselves, and I believe,
are endowed with Authority for the regulating the Affairs of their own
Governments, as ample in all Respects as Ireland, excepting only the Punctilio
of a Titular Kingdom, and the Denomination of a Parliament, to the very same
thing that in the others is called an Assembly: Are not all these things done
or not done, according to the Humor or Fancy of Princes? Is there any thing of
Essence or Reality in them? If the English of Ireland are in all other respects
under the Circumstances of a Colony of England, will any Body besides Mr.
Molyneux imagine, that this Title of a Kingdom does exempt them? But he has
more to say; Was not Ireland given by Henry the Second, in a Parliament at
Oxford, to his Son John, and made thereby an absolute Kingdom, separate and
wholly independent on England, till they both came united again in him, after
the Death of his Brother Richard without Issue? No, he continued a Subject of
England, and was Tried for his Life as such; the Parliament of England limited
him from using the Style of King: Can the King of a Separate Kingdom be
limited, and yet his Kingdom remain wholly Independent?

He continues, p. 149.
Have not multitudes of Acts of Parliament, both in England and Ireland,
declared ireland a Complete Kingdom? but never Independent: Is not Ireland
styled in them all the Kingdom or Realm of Ireland? Do these Names agree to a
Colony? Yes, are not the Names of Colonies agreeable to Mexico and Peru,
because the Acts of State in Spain style them Kingdoms? Have we not a
Parliament, and Courts of Judicature? Do these things agree with a Colony? Yes,
and other Colonies have effectually the same. Neither does this involve so many
absurdities as he thinks, if we do but consider what sort of a thing a Colony
is.

When People began to multiply in the World, and fill those Tracts that were
first inhabited, they were necessitated to spread themselves farther and
farther, for the better Convenience of Living; and thus the remoter Parts came
in process of Time to be peopled, with such as are called the Aborigines of
Nations: In the first and innocent Ages of the World, these lived in an
undisturbed Quiet, contented in the Enjoyment of such things as with their own
easy Cultivation, Nature plentifully bestowed in an abundance, sufficient for
the Support of all Mankind, 'till the Malice and Enmity of the Devil, operating
upon the depraved Minds of Men, through the Curse entailed upon on them, for
the Disobedience of our First Parents, stirred up in them the Unnatural Desire
of living according to their own Wills, without regard to the Principles of
Reason, and the Laws of Nature, which God had eternally stamped upon their
Minds: This soon began to break the first Harmony and good Order of the
Creation, and came in time to change the whole Face of Humane Affairs, and
introduce a very different kind of Economy among Men. Hence it was, that the
more powerful Communities, if they found their own Borders too strait for them,
would not give themselves the Trouble of removing to distant uninhabited parts
of the Earth, but took the Liberty to incroach upon their Neighbors, and
possess themselves of what the Industry of other Men had made their own just
Right and Property. These Violations of the Law of Nature taught the more
scattered People to enter into Societies, and unite together for their Mutual
Defense against the Invasions of others; and for the Well-ordering of Matters,
and preventing private Injuries that might occur among themselves, they thought
upon the constituting Laws, for the defining of Liberty and Property, and
executing Justice upon such as should offend against them; they applied
themselves also to the inventing of all such further Policies as might be
conducive to the acquiring and preserving the Good of the whole Society; and
whether they thought best to commit the Chief Conduct of their Government to
one Person as Supreme, to rule them with the assistance of subordinate
Ministers; or that they placed this Supreme Authority to govern in several,
with joint Power, the end and intent was still one and the same, to procure and
conserve the Good of the whole People, though the Names were differing, as that
of Kingdom, Commonwealth, etc. Those that institu^ed the best Policies, and
most suitable to their Circumstances, generally became the most power^ul; a
Sense of their Strength, and an Opinion of their Skill in Politic Managements,
made them Ambitious to gain Dominion, and Rule over others: Some united through
Fear, or for Convenience, and others were subdued by Force; thus from small
Beginnings grew up Mighty Empires, who applied their whole Power to bring and
keep all they could reach, under their own Dominion; by which means the Frame
and Constitution of many Kingdoms and Countries came to be altered from their
Original Settlements. There were yet another sort of Invaders, whose Manner was
only to make room for the too Numerous Broods of their Offspring, who did as
it were swarm out in huge Multitudes, to take up new Dwellings, where they
liked best; with no intent to erect any United Empire, or to return again to
their Native Countries; these destroyed, drove away, or oppressed the Aborigines,
or former Inhabitants, where they came, and possessed themselves of their
Habitations. Of this latter sort have been the Ancient Scythians, the Goths,
Vandals, Huns, and others of their Descendents, branched out into many other
Appellations; but these may by no means be said to settle Colonies, because
they retained not any dependence upon their Original Countries, but erected New
and Absolute Governments upon their own Foundation. Of those that aimed at the
gaining and keeping together of a Mighty Empire and Vast Dominions, the Romans
were the last, who grew to the greatest height, and excelled all others in
Power and Policy, and the present Kingdoms and States of Europe retain many of
their Notions and Principles of Government to this day, though in many places
with a large Mixture of the Gothic Constitution; but it is from them that we
have principal'y learned the way of Settling and Managing of Colonies, and to
their Practice we ought to have recourse in such Matters as relate thereto: And
though we are not to expect, that the Circumstances of other Governments, and
latter times, were obliged to follow the Roman Pattern in every particular, yet
I believe, upon comparing them it will appear, that few have traced it nearer
than we did, in the Subduing and Settling of Ireland.

When the Romans had by Conquest, or any other Means, brought any Country under
Subjection to their Government, they then gave the Country the Name of a Roman
Province, possessed themselves of the most Considerable Towns and Fortresses,
wherein they placed Competent Garrisons, and then withdrew the Body of their
Army, appointing a Governor in Chief over them, whom they at any time
afterward recalled, and sent another at their Pleasure. Did not the English in
their subduing Ireland, so far imitate this way of Management, as that the
Country became united to their Empire, in the very Nature of a Roman Province?
As the Inhabitants of the Country made more or less Resistance against them,
the Romans granted them the more or less Liberty, so that they put Considerable
Tributes or Services on some, and suffered others to enjoy great Franchises and
Privileges': In like manner, the Irish making little or no Resistance, had the
Laws and Liberties of Englishmen granted them. This is the Nature of a
Province, but a Colony is yet another thing: If the Romans liked the Province,
and saw it convenient for them, they sent sufficient Numbers of their own
People to settle in this Province, divided out such Lands to them as had been
gained, to cultivate and manure for their own Advantage, and the Possession
thereof to remain to their Posterity; the Exercise of the Roman Laws was
granted them, and sometimes also they had a Senate allowed among themselves,
who might enact such things as the Circumstances of their own Affairs did
require; they and their Posterity always remained free Denizons of Rome, and
were always protected and defended by her, as long as she had Power to do it;
but they were ever obliged to pay an entire Obedience to the pream Decrees of
the Senate of Rome, and were subject to be called home, if the Romans thought
fit to dissolve the Colony. Let the Reader apply this to the Circumstance of
Ireland, and consider whether it be not a better Example in point, than Mr.
Molyneux lately gave us.

I have taken the pains to say thus much on this Head, that if possible I might
open the Understandings of Mr. Molyneux and his Admirers, that they may no
longer lie under a Mistake in this matter: If the Inhabitants of Countries and
Nations can be made up of no more than these three sorts of People, Aborigines,
swarming Invaders, (if I may so call them) or Colonies; (as I think it is
impossible to find more original Stems, whatever Branches or. Unions there may
be). I am sure the English of Ireland will not pretend to be Aborigines there;
neither can they reckon themselves to be upon the same bottom with the Gothic
Excursions, for that was quite out of Fashion, and the Practice forgotten, Ages
before they were born; all these parts of the World were settled under Kingdoms
and Polite Governments, which with little alteration, (I don't say in their
Forms of Governing, but) by Conquest, or otherwise, except by Unions, continue
much the same to this day: They have frequently needed Help, and had been many
times destroyed, or driven quite away, but for the constant Protection and
Support they have always had from their Mother England; and they have ever
received a Governor, and Directions for all the Principal Managements of their
Government from her; these Circumstances can be no way agreeable to an Original
Gothic Settlement; and since there is nothing else left, if Mr. Molyneux will not
let them be a Colony of Old England, I see no room for them to take up any
where, but in his Notion of the State of Nature, and then there will be need of
reducing them again to Order as Wildmen. And though I take the Liberty to
answer Mr. Molyneux after this manner, no Body can imagine that I could think
of such a Reflection upon the Worthy English Gentlemen of Ireland, I am sure
they will be much more ready to agree with me in the same thoughts of their
Duty to their Mother Country, which I have Discoursed in Page 75, and 76.

Mr. Molyneux thinks, p. 149.
he has now answered The only remaining Arguments that are sometimes mentioned
against them, and so He proceeds to offer what he humbly conceives,
demonstrates the Justice of their Cause; and this takes up about twenty four
pages to the end, in which he has summed up his Discouse; much of which is a
Repeating over again, What are the Natural Rights and Freedoms of Mankind; That
no body can be bound without their own free Consent in Parliament, quoting Mr.
Hooker, etc. and telling us again, of the Concessions made to them: But he
might have spared himself and the Reader this Pains; we value Mr. Hooker, and
all the rest that have written upon that Excellent Subject, as much as he; we
have maintained the People of Ireland in the full Enjoyment of all that could
be granted them in the first Constitution; they act as freely in their own
Parliaments, in matters pertaining to themselves, as ever any Body of Men in
their Circumstances did in the World; our Parliaments have always shown that
regard to the Legislature which they own to be their Right, as that we have
rarely meddled with it, and never but upon very extraordinary Occasions, either
to help them in the time of their Distress, and when they were not in a
Capacity to act for themselves, (as he confesses;) or when the Good of the
whole English Empire (of which they are a part) did eminently require it, and
which we should have done as effectually if they had sent Representatives to
our Parliament, as we have done it without them, and as we do it to Kent and
Sussex, in restraining the Owling Trade, notwithstanding they do send
Representatives, who cannot hinder, if they Vote against; and to be sure, if
they Vote for those Laws, act against the Confent of those that send them; and
then why may not they complain of the Infringement of the Rights due to all
Mankind, by putting Laws upon them, without their Consent? but Mr. Molyneux may
say, they have Representments; what if they don't consent? may not these People
then strongly insist, that they are not bound? Yes, sure, if General Notions of
Liberty must be swallowed all in a Lump, without distinguishing; but here is a
Majority in the Case, and that Obliges; if it be asked further, why should a
Man be bound by ever so great a Majority, so as to be restrained from doing
what he will with his own, according to the Liberty inherent in all Mankind, by
the Law of Nature? Because he that is not born in the state of Nature, is
effectually bound by the Consent of his Ancestors, to submit to the
Constitution of his Country, and that with us determines that the Majority
shall bind. Public Societies can never be kept together, nor the Good of the
whole conserved, without some such binding, such Limitations of Freedom as
this; and this is what we have reason to require from the English of Ireland,
who are certainly a Colony of England, sent thither by us, bred up, cherished
and protected by us, in the Enjoyment of good Estates and ample Privileges,
sufficient to preserve the entire Freedom of their Persons and their
Properties, in all manner of Liberty and perfect Enjoyment; excepting only,
that if they should presume to extend it to such a Latitude, as would be highly
injurious and prejudicial to England, and consequently to the whole English
Empire, by wounding its Head; whereon also themselves always have, and must
rely for assistance, so that in whatever they weaken her, they work their own
Destruction: And the World will easily judge, that as we have the utmost of
Reason on our sides, so if we are a perfect Government, we must have sufficient
Power residing in our Constitution, to act upon all Extraordinary Occasions,
whatever we shall find absolutely necessary to our Preservation, even to the
binding of all the Members of our Empire, without being obliged to ask their
Assent.

The rest is little more than dilating upon Conclusions, arising from such
Premises, which I hope I have sufficiently refuted in my former Discourse, and
therefore I shall meddle no more with it, but to touch upon two Passages: The
one is, where he tells us, p. 166.
that It is against the King's Prerogative, that the Parliament of England
should have any coordinate Power with him, to introduce New Laws, or repeal
old Laws established in Ireland: But his Argument upon this is either false
Printed, or downright Nonsense, or at least so Confused, that I Confess I
cannot unravel it, and I Will beg the Reader, if he would see it, to look for it
in page 167. for it is too long to Transcribe and Comment upon, where any on it
is intelligible: But to take it in the gross, it is no more than a weak attempt
to raise a Jealousy, about hurting the King's Prerogative, when yet nothing
that he has offered looks like it, but rather shows the King's Prerogative to
be less there than in England. I wonder Mr. Molyneux should render himself so
ignorant of our Constitution, in magnifying the Negative Vote, which their
Parliament has upon whatever Law is sent to them from the King in his Privy
Council, as if that were a higher Privilege than the English Parliament has;
whenas a little Inquiry into these Matters would have informed him, that the
King can, if he please, bring a Bill into Parliament here, and either House may
reject it, if they don't like the Law: But then what Laws he sends to their
Parliament, must be first approved in the Privy Council here, and does not that
show that an Authority inferior to our High Court of Parliament, has a sort of
Coordinate Power with him in the Legislature of Ireland? And is it not an
evident Demonstration, that the King does not act any thing in relation to
Ireland, upon any distinct Prerogative, as various and differing from what was
inherent in the Imperial Crown of England? Nay, is not the King's Prerogative
exerted in a higher degree, in the manner of his passing an English Law, where
he comes into the House of Lords, and exercises in his own Person alone, (and
without taking the Advice of the Privy Council of either of his other Kingdoms)
one full Third Part of the Legislative Authority, and in Power above one half,
as having the Casting Vote, by which he can deny against the other two Estates?
And when he thus passes any Law, affecting Ireland, can any thing be more
absurd, than to suggest, p. 167.
That he thereby suffers a precious Jewel of his Crown to be handled roughly?

The last Passage I shall observe, p. 172.
is his Parting-blow, the last three Pages, wherein he Cautions us two or three
times over, how Unsafe it may be for us to assume a Jurisdiction, whereby the
Lords and People of Ireland may think themselves ill used, their Rights and
Li^erties invaded and taken away, and they may be driven into Discontent; from
whence he hints, there may be ill Consequences: We may easily see his Meaning
to be a Menace, and though there may be some few of them as inconsiderate as he
is, yet we have a better Opinion of the Body of the English Protestants there,
than to believe that they will ever give us Occasion to think, that we have
need of Exercising severe Methods, to keep them in their due Obedience; Nay,
had we the least doubt of this, it would behoove us not to suffer any
Gentleman, who has an Estate in Ireland, to bear any Command in our Army
there, 'till he had given us the utmost Assurance that he was not tainted with
Mr. Molyneux's Opinions. However, let me tell him, that a Supreme Authority
ought not to be set upon at the Rate he does.

And now I will take leave to show the Lords and Gentlemen of Ireland, some of
the ill Consequences that may attend them, if Mr. Molyneux's Positions should
gain an entire Credit.

First, If the Parliament of England should be persuaded, that they ought to
look upon Ireland as a Distinct, Separate and Absolute Kingdom, with which they
have nothing to do; they might not think it unreasonable for them, to demand a
speedy payment of all the Expenses England has been at, in the many
Assistances which they have given them; and if they shall refuse to pay it,
whether it may not be just to recover our own from any Neighbor Nation by
Force, if we shall think our selves able to do it?

Secondly, If the Kingdom of Ireland belongs to the King as his own Propriety,
distinct from the Kingdom of England; if the Irish should at any time hereafter
believe that the King of England could not be able to protect his Potestant
Subjects there, without the Assistance of Men and Money from his English
Parliament, and should thereupon make another Attempt to drive them out, and
seize their E^tates; whether the Parliament of England would think themselves
obliged to be at any further Expense, to protect a People with whom they had
nothing to do, and who had shown so little Gratitude for what had been done for
them formerly.

Thirdly, If Ireland be such an Absolute, Independent Kingdom, by virtue of the
Conce^^ions formerly granted to them by England, those Concessions were made to
the Native Irish and Old English settled there; all that Mr. Molyneux has
argued is entirely their Case, and they alone have Right to be considered, and
treated with as the Body of that Kingdom; but the Modern English Protestants
can have no Interest in these Ancient Grants; they are still our own People,
went thither with our leave, and may not stay there without our permission; if
then the Government of England should think fit to recall them, (as they may
those that are in France, Holland, etc.) Whether the Irish Papists could either
have Will or Power to protect or keep them from us?

And now as I have been necessitated upon several former Occasions, to show
that Mr. Molyneux has started many things, that may be made use of to the
Disadvantage of the English of Ireland; so I think, I have also demonstrated,
that upon the foregoing Considerations, his Notions, if they should be thought
reasonable, so far as to obtain upon the Parliament of England, to believe that
they ought to quit all manner of Pretensions of their Superiority over Ireland,
as amply as he desires; the Consequence must draw immediate Destruction and
Ruin upon them; which I should think might sufficiently convince the Gentlemen
of Ireland, that Mr. Molyneux has not deserved well of them in writing this
Book: And I hope they will think, that I have employed my time much more to
their Advantage, if it may convince any that have been lead into his Mistakes,
that it is the true Interest of the Protestants of Ireland, to remain constant
and firm in their Loyalty and Obedience to the King and Kingdom of England, and
to esteem it their great Happiness, that they a^e annexed in so easy a
Subordination, to a Kingdom that is so well able to protect them, and has
required so little from them; and never more to think that their being
restrained from interfering with us in our principal Trade, can be too great a
Re^^ibution for the many Benefits and frequent Preservations which they have
received from us, especially since they are in much easier Circumstances than
the People of England to live without it; whereas the Robbing England of it,
must inevitably introd^ce a Decay of her Riches and Power, and render her
incapable to give I^elind that large Assistance that she may pos^ibly at some
time or other need again. England has been, and must still continue to be at a
mighty Expense to maintain her Navies, and the Civil List, from all which they
receive the Benefit of being protected in their Estates and Trade, without
being hitherto asked to pay one penny toward it, so that they may clearly see,
that 'twill be much easier for them to continue in such a Subordination, than
to aspire to the Dignity of an Independent Kingdom, which they cannot be able
to suppo^^.

I have now done with Mr. Molyneux's Book, and since I have taken so much pains
with it, I hope I may be permitted to give it such a Character at parting, as I
think to be in a most peculiar manner agreeable to it: It Is an abundance of
Well chosen Words, and Fine Rhetorical Turns to prove nothing; it is a multitude
of Arguguments and Authorities, brought together to confute its own Author; and
it is a promulgating of such inconsiderate Notions, as would ruin and undo the
People, for whom it undertakes to be a Zealous Advocate.

If it should be thought by some, that I have been too sharp in some
Expressions, there are yet others, whose Judgment I have taken, that are of the
Opinion, that so In^olent an Argument merits no less; and I think such a
Discourse cannot well be treated with that Coolness and Indifference, which
might become a Modest Controversy: Subjects that so rashly undertake to
disturb the Minds of People, and assail the Authority of a powerful Kingdom, in
matters of so high a Nature, deserve at least to suffer such a Correction, that
others may be deterred from the like Bold Attempts; let it be remembered, that
Salmasius was lashed to Death by a Pen, provoked in (what in those times he
thought) the Cause of his Country, and Mr. Molyneux may be thankful, that we
have no Mil^on living to handle him. I am a perfect S^ranger to the Gen^leman,
and can have no personal Disrespect for him; and if he will give me leave to
distinguish, as nicely as he does between the King and the Kingdom, it is his
Book, not him that I would expose; after all, if in regard to his Person, I do
with the lowest Submission ask his Pardon in the End, I hope I shall come off
with as good Manners, as he does with the (...) of England, in ^asking theirs
in the Beginning of his Discourse.

Last of all, to r^flect a little upon my self, I ought to ask Pardon of the
World for what Mistakes I may have committed; for I cannot think so well of my
self, but that some may have slipped my own Observation: Reading has not been my
Business, and therefore it may seem somewhat strange, that I should have
undertaken to deal with a Book that prof^^ses so much; I was resolved therefore
to handle it in such a way wherein I might be most safe. There was inde^d room
enough for me to show, from undeniable Authorities, that Mr. Molyneux has very
extra* vagantly erred and fallen short, in his Representation of this Matter;
for there are many English Acts of Parliam^nt extant, which prove, that as well
in ancient times, as since Poyning's Law, the constant practice of England has
been to make Laws binding upon Ireland, as oft^^ as they saw fit; whereof he
has tak^^ (...) manner of Notice; which must conclude him either to have dealt
very disingeniously, or what will no less reflect upon him, that he was too
igno^ant in Matters of Fact, for so considerable an Attempt: But this part
being undertaken by a much able^ Pen, I was resolved to let all that alone, and
meddle with no Autho^ities but what Mr. Molyneux has produced; and as far as
possible to admit of his own Arguments, and only endeavor to turn the Reason,
which Naturally flows from them, against him. Can there be a fairer Opposition,
than to fight a Man at his own Weapons? I have indeed he^e and there, as
Occasion has required, asserted some things that may have occurred to me,
through that small stock of Reading or Conversation that has fallen to my
share; and ^f my Memory don't serve m^ so well as to be able to prove them out
of Authors, I don't think 'twill be thought any great Fault; it may be
sufficient for ^e to say, that they are become Principles to me; and I think
them so conspicuous, that the reasonable part of Mankind don't disagree about
them: Besides, I was ^esolv'd to have a Care of Mr. Molyneux's Failing, least I
should chance to quo^e any Authorities which might with more advantage be used
against me. I had never meddled in this Matter, but that I saw Mr. Molyneux was
so egregiously out in it, as that a Man of indifferent Reasoning might
undertake it, and 'twas that part only that I was willing to attempt: Neither
did I resolve to go on with it, when I was told that a very Learned Gentleman
had an Answer in Hand, 'till showing what I had written to some Gentlemen of
better Judgments than my own, I was encouraged by them to go through in the way
I had begun, because they believed Mr. Attwood would principally handle the
Learned part, and mine might also have its Service. How meanly soever I have
been able to perform it, I am sure it will appear that my Intentions were
right, and I need no more to recommend me to the Charitable part of Mankind,
and he that is afraid of the rest, ought of all things in the World* to forbear
Writing in this Critical Age.

FINIS.
Some few Faults have escaped the Press, which the Reader is desired to Correct.
Page 14 of the Epi^^le, Line 4 Rea^ (...) Feud^tory. Page 13* Line (...) Read
as with. 34 14 Reb^llio^s. 75 14 Person. (...) 13 I^dep^^dent. 1^8 ^ this Debt.
156 8 Representatives.

BOOKS Printed for R. Parker, under the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
OF Wisdom three Books, written Originally in French by the Sieur de Charron,
with an Account of the Author, made English by George Stanhop^, D. D. late
Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, from the best Edition. Correcte^ and
Enlarged by the Author a little before his death.

The Roman History, from the Building of the City to the perfect Settlement of
the Empire. By Augustus Caesar; containing the Space of 727 Years, designed as
well for the Understanding the Roman Authors, as ^he Roman Affairs. By Lawrenc^
E^hard, A. M*

The Roman History from the Settlement of the Empire by Aug^^^^^ Caesar, to the
removal of the Imperial Seat by Constantine the Great, containing the Space of
355 Years, Vol. 2. for the use of his Highness the Duke of Gloucester, By L.
Eachard, A. M.

The History of the Revolutions in Sweden, occasioned by the change of
Religion, and alterations of the Government in that Kingdom. Written originally
in French, by the Abbot Vertot: Printed at Paris; and done into English by I.
Mitchel, M. D. With a Map of Sweden, Denmark and Norway. The Second Edition. In
which the whole Work is Revised and Corrected; and almost the whole Second
Part, which was done by another Hand, newly Translated.

A Relation of a Voyage made in the Years 1695, 1696, 1697. On the Coast of
Africa, Streights of Magellan, Brasil, Cagenna, and the Antilles, by a Squadron
of French Men of War, under the Command of M. de ^ennes. By the Sieur F^oger,
Voluntier^Engineer on board the E^^glis^ Falcon. Illus^r^ted with diverse
strange Figures, drawn to the Life.

The Modest Critic, or Remarks on the most Eminent H^storians, ancient and
modern; with useful Cautions and Instructions as well for Writing, as Reading
History; wherein the Sense of the Greatest Men on this Subject is faithfully
abridg'd, by one of the Society of the Port Royal.

Poems on several Occasions, written in imitation of the manner of Anacreon,
with other Poems, Letters, and Transla^ions. By Mr. Old^ixon.

The Gentleman's Journal, or the Monthly Miscellany, by way of L^tter to a
Gentleman in the Country; consisting of News, History, Philosophy, Poetry,
Musicks, etc. Complete Sets or single Ones. By Mr. Motteux.

Busby's Greek Grammar.

Cambridge Phrases.

Dr. Syden^am's complete Method of curing almost all Diseases, and description
of their Symptoms, to which are now added, five Discour^es of the same Author,
concerning the Pleurisy, Go^t, Hysterical Pa^sion, Drop^ie and Rheumatis^s,
abri^g'd and faithfully translated out of the Original Latin, with short and
useful Notes on the former Part, written by a Learned Physician, and never
before Printed. The Third Edition.

The Art of preserving and rest^ring Health, explaining the Nature and Causes
of the Distempers that afflict Mankind. Also showing, that every Man is, or may
be his own Physician. To which is added, a Treatise of the most simple and
effectual Remedies for the Diseases of Men and Women. Written in French by I.
Hammond, M. D. and faithfully translated into English.

Mr. Brady's Sermon at the Funeral of L. General Tolmash, at Hel^ing^am in
Suffolk, I^^e 30. 1694.

His Sermon at the Death of the Queen, preached before the Countess of D^rby
and the Mourning Ladies, March 3. 1695.

His Sermon before the Company of Apothecaries, Sept. 12. 1695.

His Sermon on the Occasion of the late Horrid Plot, March the 1st. 1696.

His Farewell Sermon at Cree Church, June 29. 1696.

Mr. Butler's Fast Sermon before the Lord Mayor, 1680.

The Usefulness of the Stage, to the Happiness of Mankind, to Government, and
to Religion: Occasioned by a late Book, written by Jeremy Collier, M. A. By Mr.
Dennis.

PLAYS.
Marriage Hater Matched, a Comedy by Mr. D'urfey.

Intriegues at Versailes, or a Jilt in all Humors, a Comedy by Mr. D'urfey.

Plot and no Plot, a Comedy by Mr. Dennis.

Love's last Shift, or the Fool in Fashion, a Comedy by Mr. Cibber.

Agnes de Castro, a Trajedy by a young Lady.

Neglected Virtue, a Trajedy.

Unhappy Kindness, a Tragedy by Mr. Scott.

Traitor, a Tragedy by Mr. Rivers.


