AN ACCOUNT OF The Town and Castle of Charlemont IN IRELAND, Besieged by a
Detached Body of the Duke of Schombergs Army, under the Command of Lieutenant
General Douglas.
Licensed,

November. 5th. 1689. J. Fraiser.



SInce the Landing of Their Majesty's Forces, under the Command of his Grace
the Duke of Schomberg in Ireland, almost the whole Province of Vlster, and part
of Connought, have been effectually Subdued and brought to Submission, the only
place remaining Obstinate and Unconquered, being the Castle and Garrison of
Charlemont, and because the said place has been heretofore Famous for enduring
a Seige of some VVeeks against Oliver Cromwell; whose Fortune overrun in few
Days many places of more seeming Importance, it may not be thought amiss here
to give a small Description of the Natural and Artificial Strength and
Situation of both the Town and Castle, as also of the Garrison now in it, how
Defended and Provided; as also an Account of the Forces Detached by our
General, in order to Reduce it: The Town and Castle of Charlemont was part of
the Inheritance of the Lord Cawfield, Baron of Charlemont, and lies situate in
the County of Ardmagh, within Five Miles of Ardmagh; from Dublin it lies
Norwest, and is about Sixty Seven Miles distance from the same, and from
Dundalk where the English now lie Encamped, somewhat above Thirty Miles, the
Castle is situate on a steep Hill, and on one side, near the foot of the same,
lies a Lough, called the Black-Water, it had formerly some Advantages of Art
which King Charles the Second thought worthy to be Improved, and having first
bought off the Entail of the House and Land from the late Lord Charlemont, gave
Commandment to Mr. Rabinson his Surveyour-General of that Kingdom, to raise
some Additional Eortifications, who accordingly raised several Bastions, and a
Demilune, or Half Moon, about it; and surrounded it with a double Trench, each
of which is One and Twenty Foot broad, and Palisado'd, besides several Pieces
of Cannon well mounted, so that it is looked upon as one of the most Regular
Works in Ireland: The Lord Tyrconnell upon the sense of his mistake in
dismantling Derry, and several other Garrisons in the North, about the
beginning of our late happy Revolutions, took speedy Care to Plant a sufficient
Guard therein, and presently sent 4 Companies of Foot, and Two of Horse, under
the Command of Major Teague O Regan, Storing it pretty well with Ammunition and
Provision. His Grace the Duke of Schomberg upon his Advance to Dundalk, being
informed how uneasy a Neighbor that Garrison might probably prove to the
adjacent Country, as also being unwilling to leave the least appearance of an
Enemy behind his Back, thought fit to Detach Three Regiments, viz. under the
Command of Lieutenant General Dowglas's, Colonel Hastings, and Colonel
Hamilton's, who by Letters of Octrber the 24th, are said to have Actually
Besieged it; and considering they are wholly destitute of the least hopes of
Relief, and that we have the advantage of Bombs and Granado's, which Cromwell
very much wanted, we may Modestly hope in a short time to have a very good
Account of the Place. The Town it self is of small Importance, having scarce
Twenty Houses in it; the Castle is of the Old Fashioned Buildings, with large
wide Windows, and of little Strength; and but for the Old Fortifications, which
have since been well Improved, was Famous for little but the Noble and Ancient
Family to whom it appertained.

LONDON, Printed for Edward St. John, near the Exchange. MDCLXXXIX.


