HELL Illuminated. OR, SANCY'S ROMAN CATHOLIC Confession,

WHEREIN Are such Lessons, which if studiously practiced, it is much to be
feared, the Devil himself will turn JESUIT.

LONDON, Printed for L. Curtis in Goat-Court on Ludgate Hill, 1679.

THE PREFACE, By way of Dialogue between a Roman Catholic and a Protestant.
R. Cath. HAve ye heard the News?


Pro. No Sir.


R. Cath. Well, because it is to your prejudice, I Will tell it ye. The Devil
having lately made public Confession, and received full absolution of his sins
from his Holiness himself at Rome, has taken a Resolution, to forsake the Pomps
and Vanities of his own wicked world, and in his old age to enter into one of
our holy Orders, according to the example of Charles the Fifth.


Pro. I took him to have been of your Religion, ever since Constantine's time.


R. Cath. That Is your mistake, He was of none at all, till now -- I confess he
had like to have bin converted by Martin Luther, when he was so long with him
in his study; and John of Leiden with his back-sword Logic, made him stagger
cursedly, so that he was just tumbling headlong down the Precipice of
Huguenotism, had not the strong hand of Ignatius Loyala snatched him from the
misfortune of the fall.


Pro. Why then, if the Devil have the least spark of Gratitude in him, that
must be the Order he intends to honor.


R. Cath. It Is so.


Pro. In troth, you make me smile --


R. Cath. Why so?


Pro. Why so! because I see you do not perceive the Devils design -- For he,
having intelligence out of the Revelation, That he is to Reign a Thousand
Years, upon Earth at his full swinge, and resolving to make use of the utmost
extent of his Tyranny, beleives it his best way to hide his cloven feet with
the Jesuits Cassock, foreseeing, that successful pretense of Mankind, Religion,
to be the only way for him to carry on his intended mischief. Tho there be some
that say, be does it out of Fear. For though Broughton, Napier, Sedgwick, and
the rest of those modern small Prophets, have promised him a full Thousand
Years upon their Honors, yet I know not what kind of mistrust overrules him.
He is loath in the full Gallop of his fury and revenge upon Heaven, to be cut
off by the hands of an enthusiasm'd Ravilliac, or be shamed out of five hundred
of his thousand years, by a pair of perfumed Gloves. And therefore like a Devil
of Prudence and Foresight he inserts himself into this Order.


R. Cath. These are mere inventions and reproaches cast upon honest worthy good
men -- Nay, you make those Actions to be Criminal which are not so, and then
throw 'em upon the Jesuits. For if a man have a Capital Enemy, you would have a man
love him -- It Is true, there is something of the Dove, but where is the Serpent?
There Is Christianity indeed, where is the Policy? -- where is self preservation,
and the Law of Nature? The Law of Nature was from the beginning written in the
heart of man -- the Law of God long after only cut upon two pieces of stone,
and by Moses broken all at one clap. Is it not a shameful thing to see a huddle
of old rotten wood'n Buildings disgracing the modern Piles of Brick and Stone
Structure? therefore is Fire honestly made use of there, to refine and
beautify. The Jesuits are looked upon as the most polite and high soaring of
the Catholic Orders -- and therefore if they should not do extraordinary
things, from whom extraordinary things are expected, their Reputation would
dwindle away, and dye of a Consumption.


Pro. But do you think it any honor to your Order, to have the Devil of your
Society?


R. Cath. Why truly; I cannot tell -- If Satan will make a Confession, and
throw himself into the Arms of his Mother, the Church of Rome -- I know that
our holy Father the Pope, has forgiven many an Incarnate, worse then he -- we
are apt to remember whatever we think the Devil does amiss -- why should we
forget what he does well? And indeed, I would fain know what it is that you
Huguenots rail so much at the Devil for? -- You Will say that He maintains a
general Antipathy against Heaven; -- so do the Danes maintain a National Enmity
against the Suede; -- the French against the Spaniards; the Imperialists
against the French -- And yet these National Antipathies are allowable, as
mainly conducing to cherish that Pride and Animosity which defends, and many
times crowns them with Victory. I would fain know, why a man might not write
the Life of Satan, as well as Katherine de Medecis; unless it were out of civil
respect to him, not to let the World see that a Woman could outdo him.
Therefore good Mr. Protestant be not so Captious -- but read these following
sheets. Consider what the Prince of the Air says in his own justification,
weigh his Tropes, and his Figures, and if he don't argue like a Gentleman, and
a Scholar.


Pro. But hold a blow, you say this is Signior Diavolo's Confession, when the
Title says, it is M. Sancy's Confession.


R. Cath. For that, you know, Sir, it is the common practice of men of no
reputation, to borrow the names of men of fame -- The Devil has learning, but
no fame -- He knew Sancy to have both --


Pro. Indeed I have heard much of this Sancy, that he is both a witty, and an
impartial Writer -- which makes me wonder, that he being a man of learning,
should be drawn aside to be the Devil's Confessor --


R. Cath. Oh Sir, it is no dishonor to be deluded by the Devil -- Popes and
Emperors themselves, have frequently bin gulled by him, that is more -- but
Sancy was not so -- for when he heard his tale, he presently smelt him, and
found his Civility to be but an act of Moralty, well knowing that had the Devil
bin put to have published his Confession in his own name, not one in a Thousand
would have believed the Father of lies --


Pro. A very great piece of Civility indeed.


R. Cath. Yes, and I think, as I said before, of Morality too -- For when he
heard how Lucifer spoke his Conscience, and knew it, as he did, to be real, it
had been a point of dishonesty to have hindered the discovery of such truths to
the World, by the knowledge of which, the Jesuits have become a mighty Order,
and the Roman Catholic Religion has bin highly advanced*


Pro. I am satisfied -- now to the Confession it self.


THE CATHOLIC CONFESSION OF THE Sieur de SANCY. FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the Authority of the Church, and of its Head.
IT has been a Controversy frequently debated in these times, whether the
State be in the Church, or the Church in the State. Amongst those that would
have the State to be in the Church, there are some who allege, That it would
not be universal, should it be circumscribed within the State. Others, taking
the same things for Examples, Do ye not see, say they, how the State submits it
self to the Church? How this haughty King, after so many Armies vanquished, so
many flourishing people, so many great Princes, his Enemies, laid at his feet;
at length for all his Grandeur, prostrating himself at the feet of the Pope,
receives his commands at the hands of his Monsieur Confessor* and Cardinal D'
Ossat. Which two were laid upon their bellies jigg by jowl, like Mackarel upon
a Gridiron, while you might have read half a Mass. They say moreover, That
there was the same play to be played over again, between his Majesty and
Monsieur the Legate, but that was to be done gently and under the Rose. They who
would turn the Holy See quite out of doors, instance the boldness of the Court,
which being a Fugitive, as far as Tours, yet ventured to burn the Bulls of his
Holiness by the hand of the common Hangman. After that, they tell of a second
piece of Audacity of the Court united together, which was the Banishment of the
Jesuits out of France, a high contempt of the Romish See. But I answer to that,
That we have no reason to repent of it. Witness the good Catholic City of
Tournon, and in imitation of her, the Parliaments of Toulouse and Bourdeaux,
who both, in spite of Fate re-established these stout Champions of the Church.

Thus you have the proofs of the one and the other side by Consequences and
Effects. Now for proofs by reason; and let no man wonder at this way of
proceeding. It has been the humor of France for many years to mind the effects,
and not the reason of things. Then I must tell the Reader, that a man may
sooner venture his Neck and get a hundred thousand Crowns, then disengage
himself out of the labyrinth of such difficult affairs. I shall therefore only
say this, That I believe the Pope to be more then all the rest of the World
together, nay then all the Saints, and all the Angels. I Will show ye certain
passages which Monsieur Confessor gave me, to confirm me in this opinion.
Bernard of Sens calls him Prince of the Bishops, Heir of the Apostles; for
antiquity of dignity, Abel and Noah; as a Patriarch, Abraham; as to his Order,
Melchisedec; as to his Priesthood, Aaron; as to his Sovereignty, Moses; in
Judgment a Samuel, in power a Peter, in authority, Christ. I remember the words
of one of the Bulls of Clement the 6th. The Pope is to be admired; The Pope is
the astonishment of the World: Neither God nor Man, but as it were between
both. The Glossary upon q. Sect. 1. cap. 17. is positive, That the Pope is no
man. I have also read the Distinct. and Canon, Proposuit de con. prae. 19. c.
Si humanarum. Where it is pithily observed, That the Pope, according to the
latitude of his Authority, has power to give a dispensation against any Law.
And 5. Transub Epist. 5. in Gloss. he explains himself farther, saying, That
the Pope can turn injustice into justice. Monsieur Confessor, never admire at
these last passages, when I shall tell ye, by way of reinforcement, that the
Pope can make infecta facta; that is, he can make Something out of Nothing, and
Nothing of Something. By one History alone will I undertake to prove, that the
Pope can do all this. That high and mighty Pope, Sixtus Quintus, who in his
time caused above four thousand pair of shoulders to want heads; and envied the
Queen of England for nothing more, but that she had the Honor to cut off a
Queen's Head; who put down the Bawdy houses, and consequently took away
fourscore thousand Ducats of rent from the Church. He that was wont say,
There Is no trusting in this Religion, for it will not last. He whom the King
called Mr. Sixtus, who was made Pope, that he might bring his Hoggs to a fair
Market. This Great Personage having unfortunately entered into a Contract with
the Devil, and having read how Alexander the Sixth, for that he had usurped the
Chair by force, was cozened in his term of years, made his bargain absolutely
for seven years; but notwithstanding all his wit, the Scrivener he had to deal
with, found a way to get loose from his Articles. For after he had reigned five
years very formidably, he fell sick the last day of the five years, at what
time there came to his Bedside in the sight of his chief Chamberlain, a
certain grave Abby-Lubber, with whom the Pope entered into a very high Contest,
insomuch that they in the next Room could hear the Pope call the the other
perfidious; asking him withal whether he had not promised him seven years, and
whether there were any more then five past? To which the Devil's Envoy made
answer with a loud voice; It Is true, said he, I promised thee seven years, and
there are but five elapsed, and yet for all that I am no perfidious Person. For
do but remember, That when you had a desire to put to death the Son of such one
-- for such a Crime, -- when you were informed by Justice, that Legally he
could not be put to death, till he was Seventeen years of Age -- I say then, do
but remember, how you said you would lend him two of yours: Now five and two
make seven, and therefore you must go, there is no remedy. By this Story we find
the absolute power of the Pope, and a confirmation of the forementioned
Characters of his Grandeur. For by putting the young Lad illegally to death, he
dispensed with Law against Law. That Justice which should have saved the Lad,
he turned into Injustice. And the Devil and he made out the third point: For
the Bargain which was for seven years, at first imperfect, by the power of the
Pope and the Devil became a good Contract, as the Devil made it out by the
Pope's own Act and Deed. And therefore that buffonly President of Beaulieu,
when the Pope had excommunicated the Mass which had been said when the King was
crowned, together with all that assisted at the Coronation; did not much amiss,
according to his rambling Divinity, to say, That where there was an Assembly of
Ecclesiastics, it was such because there was a God among them. The Chancellor
going about to reply, By the body of -- Sir, cried the Belswagger, you shall
grant me that God was present at that same Council. The Chancellor not daring
to deny; the other demands, if any Heretic were there, who durst venture to
bound the puissance of his Holiness? Every one shrug'd up his shoulders,
choosing rather to allow the Excommunication of the God of Heaven, then limit
the power of a God upon Earth.

CHAP. II. Of Traditions.
WE puzzle the Heretics infinitely, when we demonstrate to them, that the
Authority of the Church and Traditions teach us to acknowledge the Scriptures,
although the Canonical Writings teach us not to acknowledge either Traditions
or the Authority of the Church. In truth, we must hold to the Legends of the
Church, and not to Canonical Scripture, otherwise the Heretics will goad us to
Eternity with their Texts out of the Bible. But that I may seem to have done
something more, I made use of this advice, not to reck'n for Tradition-Mongers
those ancient Doctors of the six first Ages, wherein the Church was not as yet
fully nobilitated; when her Sumptuous Buildings were not as yet reared; when
the Popes lived up and down in Caverns, and in short might pass for the first
Promoters of her troubles: at what time the Church smelt somewhat strong of
Huguenotism, or rather of the Faggot. I say they wrote nothing boldly or
over-confidently in those first times: and therefore I allow for Traditions,
the Books corrected by the devout Council of Trent. For some time after that,
we have seen at the Court, and we have still some Doctors, who affecting
squeamishness of Conscience, play the Demi-Huguenots, and Appointers of
Religion. This ought to be a fair example to Monseiur Benedict, and his
Compagnons, Berenger, and Chauveau in their Deaths of Melancholy or Poison.
These Hero's would fain persuade the suppression of a Book, entitled Index
Expurgatorius. Accordingly, it was one Result of the Council of Trent, whereby
all Printers were commanded to expunge or correct the most boistrous passages,
wherewith the holy Fathers had besmeared the belief of the Church, with a
Catalogue of such Sentences as it was convenient either to stifle or amend, to
the end the Heretics might make no use of them. These Prudent Worldlings,
esteeming themselves wiser then the Council, would needs have this Expurgatorie
Index suppres'd, to conceal^, as they said, the shame of the Church, which was
not to plead for its self upon false Evidences. But they have displayed the
shame, by thinking to hide it: For about 11. or 20. years since, the Book (I
mean a copy of it, signed by the Council) fell into the hands of the Family of
Antwerp, and is now carefully preserved among the Rarities of the Elector
Palatine. And which is worse, some Doctors, among the rest Baronius, who were
chosen to make this Reformation, are reformed themselves, and have confessed in
their printed writings, that one of them had for his part alone, altered above
sixty of those passages. Thus the design of the Council being discovered, in
going about to suppress this Book, we might suppress the Authority of the
Church, and make it questionable, whether it be not lawful to change the
Expositions of the Doctors, and something of the Text of the Ancients?
Certainly, the Affirmative is to be maintained, and that the Church ought to
change both the old and new Testament, without bogling any more at the
Translation of the Septuagint, then at the Translation of fifteen Score, if we
would have all the main Principles on our side. The Primates of Bourges and
Lions, would discard out of the number of Traditions, the Conformities of St.
Francis, the Pattern of Wisdom, the Garden of disconsolate Souls, Marial; the
Sermons of Menot, Manipulus Curatorum, Stella, Lavacrum Conscientiae, Summa
Peccatorum, dedicated to the Virgin Mary; the Golden Legend, the Book of Rates,
and the Life of Christ. A Preacher whose name was Christi, preached at Nantes
to the Ladies, in these words* My dainty quaint Ladies, if I find a Bible or a
new Testament in any of your hands, you shall taste of my Whip: but have always
between your fingers the good Vita Christi, the Vita Christi, who made
Vespasian and Titus Christians, and brought about the design of the Siege of
Jerusalem, to revenge the Death of Christ; and then he condemned and vilifi'd
all other Historians, to establish the truth of that Book. But one of those
Prelates might sooner have instructed himself to believe in God* then us to
believe in Him; and it is as difficult a thing to make us quit our love of
those Books, as to make him quit the love of his kind Sister. For those books
are the only foundation of our belief. Neither do they allow the defeat of
Monsieur Cayer. They say, that the Tales of St. Francis were made at Geneva.
That Is well for the Alcoran of St. Francis. However the studies of these
abstemious Find-faults, are full of those books of the old Impressions. 'Twere
better for them to defend them, and say that they were made with a good
Intention. As when we read of St. Francis living with his Wife of Snow. We
ought to speak the best, and say the good man did it to cool not only his own
naturally sinful heat, but as a president to his posterity. When he preaches to
the flesh* thereby it is intimated, that when his offspring should preach, they
would require a mute Auditory. When he preached it up for a Miracle, that God
would not suffer the flesh to be drowned in the Deluge, thereby he insinuates
that the Miracles of the Church of Rome ought to proceed from natural causes,
as Richeome labors to make out. When he calls the Wolves his Brethren, and
strokes them with his hand, he did it to show, that the Franciscans should be
rough footed, and surprizers of the Innocent sheep. He calls the Swallows his
Sisters, because their Brothers like them, all morning prayer time, build their
nests in the Country-mens Houses. When the Angel told St. Francis, as he was at
his devotions, that Antichrist should be born of his Order, that was, because
it should not be thought an Indignity to make the Franciscan Friars Popes. And
when he disrobed himself before the Women, and set up his Crucifix, what was
that but to display the beauties of Nature, as not having eaten of the Tree of
Knowledge; and to lay open, if not the understanding, yet the nakedness of
Father Adam? When St. Germain raises a dead Ass, wherefore should not he, out
of his brotherly love, and Asinine commiseration, being alive, give life to
Asses, who had bin the death of so many at St. Germans de prez, and Auxerrois.
Blase of Anjou, who threatened his Son with Excommunication, if he offered to
read one line in the Scripture, especially the Commandments, at length at the
intercession of Aubraye a good Catholic, gave him leave to read the Maccabees.
As for Friar Jacopon, when I was a Huguenot, there was nothing made me laugh
like the Legend of that pious Saint; and among the rest, how he made Confession
of his sins to one of his Brethren by signs.

These things seem absurd; but they work this effect among the people, as to
lead them into a belief that there is no absurdity in the World. And therefore
it is, that St. Paul calls the preaching of these things the folly of
preaching. From whence Monsieur Cayer draws this notable Syllogism: It pleases
God to save Believers by the folly of preaching; the folly of preaching is the
preaching of Legends: therefore God is pleased to save believers by preaching
of Legends. If any person requires the note of Universality, and insists, that
nothing is to be concluded ex puris particularribus, he may do well for the
Schoolmen: However to conclude from pure particulars is rather the Logic of a
Banker, then a Scholar. The Legend of the Saints, is the Garden of the Soul.
Images are the Books of the Ignorant. Yet in this Garden there are certain
Herbs to be found, which if they do no farther mischief, yet cause a general
stupidity. A brave fellow, who understands the fashion of the World, knows what
it is which the Country people call Robbery. If he find that his disconsolate
Soul is not able to change its way of living, he may see in the Legend, the
bright example of a Knight, who without mercy robbed the poor as well as the
rich, and was acquitted for saying an Ave Marie once a day: and it is indeed
the general practice of the Soldiers at this time. If a Lady of the Court find
in her disconsolate Soul, that she cannot pass for a devout Votaress, and a
voluptuous Liver both at the same time, has she not wherewithal to comfort her,
like the Egyptian St. Marie, who from twelve years of age till she was grown
contemptibly old, never refused any man in her life? Are not the ancient
Chronicles full of the noble acts of St. Mandlin? Do not the Legendary Poets
tell us, how many persons of good Families have been forced by the power of her
Enchantments to sell their Estates for her sake? How many other courageous
Blades have valiantly cut their own throats, being jealous of her love? and yet
she was no sooner exhausted with age, but she was presently canonized. If any
poor Priest have not the pour to preserve his Chastity, it is his fault, if he
make not use of the Canon, Si quis Presbyter Concubinam non habuerit; and
thereby be as shamelessly happy as Abbot Ephraim, who made no scruple, like
Diogenes, to supply his wants in the open Marketplace. There Is the Authority
of the Chapter, inter opera Charitatis, where it is said, that he that couples
with a Magdalen, multum profuit in remissionem peccatorum. If any Bishop or
Cardinal becomes amorous of his Page, let him comfort himself after the Example
of St. Francis, who calls his Amors with Friar Maccus, sacred. As to what the
said Book affirms, that St. Francis was all inflamed, beholding Friar Maccus,
and that he often cried out the same day, as the one held the Chalice, and the
other the little Cruises, transported with the fury of his love, praebe mihi
teipsum: there is much to be collected from thence. I will tell ye bythe by,
that you may hence conjecture where Monsieur Confessor lays his foundation,
when he calls the Amors of Quailus, and his Master, Sacred; and whence this
Title was first derived. There is another book whom I have so often mentioned,
which they would fain have quite extirpated, but the holy See would never
permit the loss. De Sparde was the first that labored in it these words,
Habeat jam Roma pudorem, ejusmodi mores toto mundo prostituere desinat. Let
Rome at length be ashamed, and cease to prostitute such Customs to all the
World. This is the book of Rates, where a good Catholic may see the cheapness
of sinning, and observe in a moment the price of forgiveness. Whoever shall
deflour a Virgin, shall pay six groats. He that shall carnally know, by consent
of parties, his own Mother, his Sister, his Cousin-German or his Godmother
shall be acquitted for five groats; but if it be known publicly in the Church,
not under six. He that kills his Father or his Mother, shall pay a Duckat and
and five Cartines. I could tell ye more, but I shall rather let ye know that
these things are to be seen in the Chapter of perpetual Expenses. The book was
printed at Paris in the year 1570. by Toussain Denis in St. James-street at the
Woodd'n Cross, being entitled Cancellaria Apostolica. A Poictovin asked me one
day whether I could resolve him a quaint Question, why Sodomites were more
zealous against the Huguenots, then any of the Roman Catholics? I laughed at
the Question at first, but afterward I called to mind, what I had heard from
the mouth of the brave Marshal d' Aumont; There are none, said he, that so
violently persecute us, as these Sodomites, and labor the utter expulsion of
the Huguenots. I remembered also, that there are not any who so earnestly
solicited the King's Conversion, as those who were most suspected for that
Crime. Which was the reason, that I resolv^d to understand the Interest of
these Monsieur Catamites. You know, said the Poictovin, that there are several
persons who are polluted with this peccadillo; who though they do not
over-credulously believe that there is any Hell, or any Paradise, yet being
still in doubts and fears, would, as the Decretalists say, make use of
absolution by way of caution. Now should a man come to an honest Divine and ask
him by what means, a detestable sinner may be saved? He would reply, by
embracing the death of Christ, with a true and sincere faith; by praying with a
contrite heart, and a real repentance; by relying upon the mercy of God, and
putting on a resolution of amendment of life, and perseverance therein. But the
mischief is, that the honest people of this age, are not easily allured to
furnish themselves either with this same Faith or Patience. Then comes the holy
See, composed of persons of high birth, that carry a great sway in public
affairs, who observing that such Soul-physic was not at all toothsome to great
Personages, and being unwilling that Beggars and Tatterdemallions should
out-brave Kings and Grandees with their Theological virtues in the other World,
have found out a more pleasing and quaint Expedient. For if you ask a Jesuit
concerning that nice and intricate sin of Sodomy, he will fit your humor better
then a Country Parson. He Will send you to Cardinal Sourdis, who by his Bull
alone, shall acquit ye both of Sodomy and Incest. He will put about your neck a
wreath of the last requests by Master Jacques David, Bishop of Eureux. If you
are a French man, he will bestow upon ye certain grains of Paradise, out of the
19. Art. will cause ye to say certain words out of the 7. Art. as Domine Jesu,
suscipe, and such like, which are printed at Paris by -- And this Application
rightly managed, gives ye a full and absolute Indulgence and Remission of all
your sins, as well in reference to the Crime as to the Punishment. Which is
expressly quoted by Monsieur Confessor as a new thing. For we said before, that
Antiquity durst not be so hardy nor adventurous. Do ye think it strange then,
that the Religion of the Huguenots, of which I will say what the learned Julian
said of Christianism, that it was the Religion of Beggars and Vagabonds; I say,
do you think it strange, that Kings, Princes, Prelates, Cardinals, Popes and
other Grandees, should from the bottom of their hearts, abominate Huguenotism,
and Huguenots, and embrace a kind and favorable Religion, by the precepts and
freedom whereof, the gates of Paradise are always open at a minutes warning? A
Religion that affords Remedies for all transgressions and distempers, In Spain
to the Cavalleros, The Spanish Proverb.
in France to Lord and Pedant, in Germany to few, but in Italy to all in
general.

CHAP. III. Of the Intercession of He-Saints and She-Saints.
OUr Gallants for want of Arguments prove the most part of the points in
Contoversie by pleasant Similitudes, and jocular Comparisons. As for Example
you shall see how we prove the Intercession of the He-Saints, and She-Saints.
'Twas never known that all persons whatsoever went higglede pigglede to present
their Petitions to the King, but by the Mediation of others, as Princes,
Princesses, Counsell^rs of State, and Masters of Request. Ergo, we must believe
that the Male and Female Saints order the Affairs of Heaven, as we order our
affairs on Earth. And here I might undertake to prove that God never concerns
himself with the affairs of this World, by the help of the same comparison.
True it is, that that Heretic Rosny will have him take another course; and acts
the Publican and the honest man both together, contrary to the Maxim, That two
contraries cannot subsist in the same subject. I hope that one of the two will
submit by the assistance of my Conversion, and the Intercession of the Saints.
Who doubts the Efficacy of Saints Intercession? Consider that no crimes have
been so great within these 15 years, but that both the crime and the punishment
have been quite abolished by their Prayers. No services have been so
praiseworthy, but that they, who thought to steal a reward, without the
Intercession of these holy Persons, have been deceived, and have lost their
time and the acknowledgment which they deserved. This is that which Hortman
observed in his Book de Regno Vulvarum. I shall have no great trouble to
persuade them to believe this point, who have had business to do since my
reign. The General of the League having but two places that held out for him,
could not reconcile himself with this King as he did with the other on purpose
to entrap him. By that he gained more than by catching cold in his Trenches.
The Reigning Saint had given him a general pardon, and placed him in the
highest place of the Terrestrial Paradise. Madam de Montpensier, whom we would
hang in Effigy, has in the same manner expiated the Assassination of the late
King. Villeroy has also luckily made his peace the same way. Sourdis the Oncle
recovered Chartres, and that head which tottered upon his shoulders, but they
did not give him the Master-ship of the Horse, because the Pages began to ride
uneasily, which produced the following short Lampoon.

And must Sourdis lose his wages?
What Is the Crime that thus enforces?
Oh! he spurrs the little Pages,
Instead of spurring the great Horses.
Without the help of this Saint, Le Grand had also been expelled; but he
carried a Candle to the Saint rather then to his merits. I have taken away my
sons from Rochel, and will not have them any more to study either Greek or
Hebrew; but will order 'em to learn the Sciences of Monsieur de Lignerac,
Varenne, Cachat, and La Bastide, who will teach them to say their Ora pro
nobis's with a good Grace. Let 'em know their hours according to the Custom of
Chartres; say yes, and ask what was said, and to faign being a fool, be so in
good earnest. If they see any nastiness at Court, I would have them to be
punished if they have Noses to smell it. Let 'em learn, like Monsieur d'
Espernon the little Images of the Court, assist them to wipe their tayls; nay
offer their tongue, if there be neither Linen nor Paper in the way. By that
means they shall obtain an Intercession, and that Intercession is
All-sufficient. Lignerac can do nothing but laugh; he that is the Amalgama or
Cement of the two houses of Estrees and Lorain. Cachat knows more than only how
to speak French. He it was that made the Peace of Provence. Varenne began to
learn to read but last Winter, and yet he made up the Peace of France at the
same time. Intercessions thus bestow the merit, as well as the reward. And
therefore we have it thus in our Prayer-Books, Da nobis ut mereamur fieri
participes, etc. Words which the Huguenots that laugh at them, do not
understand at all.

CHAP. IV. Of Purgatory.
GEntlemen, since you Courtiers will have a Purgatory, we must of necessity
find out a place for this Purgatory, without going to seek it in St. Patrick's
hole, as Henry Stevens discourses in his Apology for Herodotus. I find what he
says to be very smooth and pleasing, but it is not at all approved by the
Sorbon. Truly were I to manage this business like a Divine, I fear me, I should
be very much puzzled. I went and consulted Monsieur Confessor, who laughed at
their Curiosity; I asked him, where any mention was made of Purgatory in the
Holy Scriptures: But he produced me nothing but dark and doubtful Sentences,
whence there was nothing of Truth to be collected. I inquired concerning the
Fathers; he told me, St. Austin spoke of Purgatory in his 11. Book upon
Genesis. In his Comment upon St. John, Treat. 47. And in his Book of the City
of God c. 8. And in several other places, but finding nothing to the purpose, I
resolved to surcease all farther Theological Scrutinies. to say truth, my
Divinity-reading has quite bauk'd me; and I defy the whole Sorbon to tell me
where it is. I also desire to know where that third party is, so much talked of
in France; the dread whereof struck a farther stroke to the King's Conversion
then that of Purgatory. Now I maintain that I find this same Purgatory, and
this third Party are lodged both together at Nogent. Some there are that place
Purgatory in Auvergne, where they have also confined the Count of Auvergne. But
he is delivered from this Ambulatorie Purgatory at this fortunate juncture of
time, when all the fair Rooms in Paradise are all richly hung, and
magnificently furnished for the Sons of Strumpets. He has nothing but laughed
at the overturning of his Coachman, and is ready to re-establish in that
Sacred place those Amors, of which he was instructed in his absence. There are
some other little Purgatories in France, but they make no great noise, because
that pardons are so cheap there. The Grand Purgatory is then at Nogent, where
the Count of Soissons at his Vestals fire, purifies his own Train, which is the
Third Party; there where he hears talk of the joys of the Paradise of the
Court, and laughs at them after the manner of St. Medard. Some Angels or
Mercuries, such as Varenne, will visit him as they pass by: and they say, he
will take leave of his good Lady, and return to undergo his full sufferings.
The other imaginary accomplices of the Third Party, wandering thereabout, as
being vagabond Souls for want of Earth and Bastions to interr them. They
farther say that Nogent is a very proper place to play at Fiste-Cuffs in; and
that the Third Party which constrained the King to his Conversion, will soon
compel him to persecute the Huguenots, or to make his condition alternative.
The Count of Lude, having sometime since taken me for his Chieftain, asked of
me whether I did not think his fortune to be very good. When you ride Post,
said I, do you take any pleasure in a Jade whose knees are brok'n? He answered
me, no. Consider then, that when this great Captain quitted the Deceased King's
Party, on purpose to turn Huguenot; and then left the Huguenots, for that they
had seen him set his tail in the Manger at Courtrac, when he mutiny'd against
all the appearances of the battles, and avenues of the Duke of Parma, when he
ravished Madam invisibly, he has a Cure for all these accidents, as having
seven times clapped his knees upon the ground. Now my dear friend Monsieur Le
Comte, would you lay your Saddle upon an over-ridden Hackney, with broken knees
to boot? By such arguments as these have I seduced the Constable of the Third
Party out of the Purgatory of Nogent. Laverdin would have thrust his Nose in;
but they demanded money for his entrance; he told me he had made such a
regulation in the first Army of the Third Party, that it should never oppress
the people. And in truth I find that the Great Officers of the Exchequer and
the Magazines have had leisure enough.

To this purpose they quote me the Answer which the King made, when the Count
wrote to him, that he lay there to pray to God. The King to be quit with him
sent him word, That he would take care to the end his prayers might be the more
perfect, that they should not want fasting. The Thunder of St. Denis was found
to be too violent for a Purgatory-fire, and forced the Thunderer to surcease
his Determination. The Tail of Bourbon, whom the Huguenots call the head of
Marotte, and which Monsieur William never took for a man but for a shadow; This
diminutive Priest turned over his Breviary, and met by good fortune with this
Text of the Gospel, Non habet filius hominis ubi requiescat caput; and
thereupon he said to Bellozone (he for whose sake it was reported, that my Wife
is fair among the Asses;) that is to say, that my Brother has no place that
holds for us. But Monsieur William opposes him, and says, that there are four
places still left for the Third Party, places well protected from the fire of
Heaven, Sodom, Gomorra, Adma, and Iseboin. The Author of the Visions of the
said Master William treats very largely upon this subject. I shall conclude
this Chapter, with a Remonstrance to the Authors of the Third Party, and of the
third Place. Know then most zealous Catholics, that this Party is neither
condemned nor absolved, as having done neither good nor harm, and therefore
only reduced to Purgatory. Your misery is, that you are not authorized by men
of courage, but only by such as call cowardice, patience. The Pope has not
established Purgatory only by words. It was not your business to raise so many
Disputes about the Princes of the blood; the Pope has settled Purgatory by
fulminations, and you must have an Army of Thunderers for your design. He shows
the Keys of St. Peter, as infallible Openers, not only of the Gates of Heaven,
but of the purses of all Fools in general. There Is a necessity also for the
pains of St. Paul to be even with those that oppose the Decretals, and to
establish the Third place. Thus when the Lutherans would dispute it out, they
were made to feel the fire of Purgatory by burning them, that mis-believ'd it.
When the Huguenots attacqu'd the Spiritual Canons, they made use of the
Temporal. So that upon occasion I have compared the Third Party to Purgatory
which was only in Potentia. The other was never in Act, and indeed the Question
is of no great Importance, witness -- who at sixty years of age, married a
young maid of twenty, of whom he grew as jealous as a Tigre, and of a most
jealous old Fool was made a most Catholic Cuckold. Against which he used all
the Applications of Hans Carvell. His friends asking him one day, how he came
to play the fool so? After he had rubbed his Ears, and wiped his Fore head,
scratching the hinder part of his Pole, with a down-cast look upon the
Evidences of his frailty; These Huguenots, said he, are the cause of my
misfortunes. For in former times our Ancestors had a resting place to bait by
the way, as they went to Paradise, but now these Tatterdemallions have
dismantl'd Purgatory, we must go directly to Heaven, therefore I got me thi^
Hackney to ride now and then, as I saw occasion, but never dreamt she would
have stumbl'd at this rate.

CHAP. V. Of Justification by Works, and of other Acts of Merit.
ACcording to this holy method of arguing points of Divinity by Similitudes,
there is no necessity for all Christians to trust to the Intercession of
Saints. For there are a sort of honest people and of very good fashion, who
gain Heaven without it, by their own brave and good deeds; as by the taking of
one Rouen, to be made Commanders of Toulouse, Narbonne, Carcasson, and other
places. Another to be made Governor of Orleance, Bourges, and the
dependancies, another of Poictiers; another of the three Frontiers of
Bretaigne. These are works by God's Authority, which have been justified; and
without saying, ut mereamur, they have merited, or at least obtained general
pardon and favor. They that wrought these meritorious deeds have guelt the
public Exchequers and are justified thereby. Let the Heretics with their St.
Paul preach Faith and Grace as long as they please, these with their St. James
F. -- St. James of Spain, have proved their faith by their works. Upon this
ground it is, vain Huguenots, that we must not admit Justification of works to
be difficult, after such works have been justified. They have obtained a Law,
and this Law has been a Law of Grace; but when you shall have an occasion to
require a Law, yours shall be so lean and meagre, and got with so much trouble,
that you shall be forced to confess with me, that there is a necessity of
Impetus by works, and not of faith; you do not believe in the Popes
Indulgences. Now mark but the Indulgencies of a King, who is not a Pope, and we
shall find that these good works which you make scruple to justify, are become
so meritorious as to have gained poor Villars the Admiralty of France. Other
Marshals, though they have no Mints of their own, yet can coin what money they
please. And whereas other superstitious Hypocrites spend their time and their
money to buy pardons for so many thousand years; these can show ye thousands of
Crowns got in a few months. Insomuch that the payments of the merits of the
League being cast up, the whole sum amounted to above seven millions, seven
hundred and sixty thousand Crowns. More then this, these good works have
extended their benefits and supererogations to others, who have taken lesser
Towns and Villages under the chief Leader, so that the Followers have been
canonized for the super-abounding merit of the Commander. I do not bring into
this rank, either Merceur or Espernon. They are yet to know more, what it is to
trust in works. Now then let us see who they are that are so diligent in
prese^ving their faith to their King and Country, believing That the just
shall live by faith. These are they That do deeds worthy of Repentance, but not
good works, not considering that faith without works al-a-mode is a dead faith.
Whence it comes to pass, that some are starved to death; others attend in the
low Court of the Loure, mangled Captains, consumptive Majors, maimed Soldiers,
wooden-leg'd Engineers, Spies and Discoverers, with their Stockins out at
heels, that walk all together in the Switzers-Hall, and have nothing to do, but
to exclaim against Madam Ingratitude in genere petitorio, non suasorio.
Captains carrying the Basket, the poor Soldiers the Mattock; some showing their
wounds, others numbering the fights they have been in; the Estates they have
lost, some mutt'ring libels, others modelling a Reformation, and others
studying where to get a meal upon the Coin of Reputation. But some person or
other will say, have not all these poor Miscreants by your relation toiled
sufficiently? Tell us some of their works; I answer, they were works of
Iniquity, in regard it is an ill thing to serve the ungrateful: And Limaille
reproaching the King with the long continuance of his services, and his
patience; and how he had rendered himself irreconcilable to his neighbors for
having faithfully executed his Majesty's commands, concluded his discourse
with telling him he had not wherewithal to buy himself a Dinner: Ventre St.
Gri, said the King, who was not wont to swear after the Roman manner, my
Kingdom has been a pillaging for these so many years last past, why did not you
rob something for your self? Rob as the rest do. Nothing, shows that works of
that nature are not works; and by consequence unworthy of reward. The poor man
continued to his dying day, and considering his condition, carried off the
greatest share of the honor of the Siege of Amiens, where he died in the Mines
of the Wall; and this is called doing nothing. He that would see this subject
more learnedly handled, let him read the King's Apology, composed by Monsieur
Catrier, then chief Minister to Madam. The King showed it me for the style of
Madam de Rohan. An Apology full of prevarication, which Roquellaure hearing
read, cried out, Mort dieu, They that wrote this, how much do they know of our
business? Some there are who accuse La Ruffie, in regard that after a discourse
concerning the humor of the King, which was to punish good Services, and
recompense Crimes, he said to them that complained of his Majesty, you ought to
blame your selves not him. For since you understand his humor, if you expect
rewards, you should do well to merit them by works worthy of recompense. After
that, he speaks of those who have the honor to be a kin to his Majesty; and
those he renders worse used, then the meaner Servants; which makes me suspect
La Ruffie to be the Author of this writing, wherein he calls himself one of the
King's kinsmen. Witness the speech that his deceased Mother made to Madam at
Bergerac, I recommend, said she, to your care that poor knave, La Ruffie. You
have more reason to love him, then any other; For the same reason that I have
known the King your Father. So have many others besides you, replied Madam. To
which the Perigordine made answer, so vostra gratia prou intendi so l'honordi
die guard and de la Compania, Carnaument. Afterward La Ruffie was honored with
the Office of a Spy at Chastellerault, where he did a deserving act, for he
stole certain papers, and was made Counselor of State, and Cuckold general
under pay. He that desires to read more of this Story may read the Last Will
and Testament of Salbeuf, a Gentleman of Gascognie, who though he were a good
Catholic, accompanied the K. in his flight from Paris until the Siege, sold
seven Horses which belonged to his Train, making known to the King his daily
losses. At length shame drove him away from the Court. But the desire he had to
dye in his Prince's service, detained him in the Army, where he listed himself
in one of the Companies of the Guards, commanded by his younger Brother. It
happened that when the Cannons had ruined the shops under the Gate St. Honor,
this very person desired to be set the outmost Sentinel in the Ruins:
whereupon, the King visiting his Guards, and his Approaches in the nightime,
the Captain from the corner of a house, showed him his Eldest Brother. The King
seeing himself touched so to the quick, went away without speaking one word.
Some few days afterward, this poor Gentleman having again tried the inclination
of his Prince, at length overcome with grief and labor of body died; and
though unlearned, made his Will; wherein he first begged pardon of God and then
of the King his Master, for having served him in his Amors with Katharine de
Luc d' Again, and several others; some of whom were also themselves starved to
death with the Children which they had by the King. There was also much about
the same time another Will made by the younger Son of the Chancellor of the
Hospital, who having left his Estate, betook himself to attend the King in all
his afflictions, and to stick to the Faith and Religion of his party, who
thinking to have found a Sanctuary for his Errors at Quillebeuf, which of a
small Village was made a Garrison, was shamefully repulsed and disgraced by the
Sieur du Plessis. Thereupon pronouncing with his own mouth, the Sentence of his
death, he called for Paper, and made his Will, which contained much of the same
subject: but more openly and plainly detecting the King's secrets: but his
servants, violated the last commands of their Master, and surrendered up the
Copy, which as they say fully justified my opinion concerning the Justification
of Works.

CHAP. VI. Of Miracles and Pilgrimages.
THE Deceased Cardinal, of happy memory, in regard of his birth, as being of
the house of Lorrain, understanding that the Marshal de Fervaques, of happy
memory also, had discovered a young Girl, whom Belovet the Priest, otherwise
called the holy man, had instructed how to counterfeit a Demoniac, or person
possessed with a Devil, on purpose to make out a Miracle the Easter following;
this great Prelate pronounced Fervaques guilty of a high piece of Impiety,
saying, That though Miracles were false, they were useful to make out pious
frauds: and certainly he did a very great kindness to the Country; for in a
place uninhabited before, in three years there were built up above fourscore
Houses, and fifty Inns, which nevertheless were not sufficient to entertain the
Pilgrims that came from all parts, and some of them Personages of great Quality
living in other Countries. Now, were there no other Miracle then that of the
building of the Houses, the far spreading, and the long continuance of an
opinion firmly and really believed without any foundation, methinks there is no
Schismatic, but should confess it to be somewhat strange; and indeed this it is
which madds the Heretics, to see the people enflamed with zealous intentions.
True it is, that I would fain admonish the good Fathers that manage these
things to carry their business a little more prudently and closely. He that
taught the Demoniac of Laon to bid us labor the extirpation of the Heretics
or Huguenots was a mere fool; for, as Postell observes, That would seem to
intimate that the Devil is the commander of our happiness. Therefore when
Prelates design any such Inventions, which are not well laid, or well disguised,
they ought to dress them up again, polish and put a value upon them, not by
opposing them, as did the Bishop of Angers when two young religious Friars,
full of zeal, brought him a young Lady, exactly instructed in demonology, who
played her part so well, that she played the Devil for God's sake. The Bishop
caused the Demoniac to be brought before him, and made a most nice inquisition
into the business. He demanded which were the most violent signs by which they
conjectured her to be so crammed with Devils. One of the Devil-masters made
answer, That there were two things by which they knew the violence of her
Torments; one was, if her skin were touched with any Cross, but especially one
that were made of the Wood of the true Cross; the other was, by her bounding,
and leaping, and yelling, and roaring, when any Text of the Gospel was read to
her. The Bishop had then about his neck one of those Crosses of which we shall
speak in the Chapter of Relicques. For his Father, from whom I learnt the most
secret passages of the deceased King's life, could not want Jewels that was so
dextrous as he was, and so often entrusted with the King's Jewels. One of the
Devil-teachers espying this Cross, pulled up the Maid's Coats, almost as high
as her Knee, as she lay upon the ground, and desired the Prelate to touch her
skin gently with the Cross. Upon which this wicked Bishop pulls off his Cross
indeed, but at the same time slily pulls out a Key out of his pocket, and
touches the Girle's Leg; She, no sooner felt the cold of the Key, but she
almost frighted the people out of their wits to see what Curvets and Capers she
made. To make the second proof, the Bishop pulled out of his pocket a Petronius
Arbiter, instead of his Breviary, and began to read Matrona quaedam Ephesi:
With that she fell a foaming at the mouth, and wonder-working at a prodigious
rate, but when the Bishop came to read placitone etiam pugnabis amore? The
Devil, who never loved in his life, grew so impatient, that the poor Creature
not able to endure his twinges, sounded away upon the floor: upon that, the
Bishop, like a demi- Lutheran, said, he could not smother such an imposture:
but he had not read an ancient Doctor, who says it is better to let people go on
in their Superstition, then spoil their Devotion. The Bishop was well reproved
for his rashness, so that he did not show himself so much a misbeliever to the
second Demoniac that was presented to him, whose name was Martha, and brought
by an honest Capuchin. She had two Devils within her, the one was called
Beelzebub, and the other Astarot. The first was a churlish, boystrous, hectoring
Devil, a great Enemy to the Huguenots; he fought with all the World, and he had
drubb'd Monsieur Matros of Angiers himself, had he not taken a good Cudgel in
his hand, crying out, Mr. Fly-catcher Beelzebub, if thou playest thy tricks with
me, I will swinge thee like a Devil indeed. Astarot was an honest Devil, young
and gentle, who desired that Martha should be well treated and handsomely clad;
in which Equipage she was presented to the Clergy of Angiers. The Clergy
desired that these two Devils of quality should be first examined by the
Church. One of the Judges of the City said, that it concerned their Honor, and
upon the Examination of these two Spirits began to speak Latin, and then Greek;
at that Beelzebub began to be in wroth and told 'em, if they would, he would
answer 'em as well in Greek as in Latin; but the Capuchin, to furnish the
Devils with an excuse, replied, my friend Beelzebub, you must know that here are
Heretics in the Room, and therefore I advise ye not to speak at all. Then they
went to posing of Astarot, but he excused himself by reason of his Youth.
Beelzebub made his excuse by saying he was a poor Devil. Upon that arose a great
dispute, whether the Devils were bound to go to School. The Lawyers maintained,
that it was proper in quarto modo for Demoniacks to speak all Languages, as he
did at Cartigni in Savoy, who was tried in 16 Tongues: So that the Ministers at
Geneva durst not attempt to exorcise him. They of Angiers were more hardy, who
began thus, Commando tibi ut exeas Beelzebub and Astarot, aut ego augmentabo
vestras poenas et vobis dabo acriores. The second time he was more fierce,
Jubeo ut exeatis super poenam Excommunicationis majoris and minoris. The third
time in a pelting chafe, Nisi vos exeatis, said he, vos relego and confino in
infernum centum annos plus quam Deus exordinavit. The Counselors were about
to laugh, and to have discovered the fraud, but the people mutiny'd, and the
Bishop to make his peace, alleged that he had suppressed a Catholic Printer by
Excommunication, who was about to print a book of Duplessis, and that if they
pleased, he would excommunicate Hauttain of Rochel. That which is the greatest
blot to the Reputation of these incarnate mock-shews is, that the affront
redounds to our Lady of Ardilliers, there being a necessity for her Curate to
cast out Devils by the power, and in the name of that good Lady, that scorned
to stir at the name of God; which has mainly augmented the devotion and number
of her Pilgrims. Some said, that this Miracle was reserved for precedencie's
sake, to Friar Ange, Lugulis, Lieutenant to the grand Provost, and a great
Adversary of these Fable-mongers, who would make us all turn Heretics; but if I
believe 'em, quo he, would I were hanged. When I replied, that he did not do
well to speak so plainly, he made answer; that there were two thousand Souls in
Heaven, and as many upon Earth, that would answer for him, that he was no
Huguenot: we laughed at him, and would not suffer him to raise the Huguenots
blood, seeing so many lame, blind, deaf, leaprous in mind, as well as body,
flocking to our Lady of Ardilliers, and the whole Level full of comers and
goers, who if they are not cured, it is for want of Faith, as Belovet told his
Pilgrims. And therefore you are not to be scandalized, to see the diseased
return as they came; for the operation of the Miracle never appears, till after
belief. Upon which score that Priest persuaded some of the blind to say they
did see, and some of the deaf to say they did hear when they did not. He had
never a trick in his budget to help the crooked and lame, and therefore they
had nothing to say, but only this, that they could not go at all before they
were brought thither. According to that, Obedientiam expostulat Ecclesia. Or as
Bernardus Ochinus says, That the Miracles of the Mass are invisible. He that
knows not his Trade, must shut up his Shop. Could but the Heretics convert into
Miracles, the Cures which are done at the Hot-baths, they would have a fine
time on it, and therefore our people have dexterously canonized the foundations
of Pougnes, and every where else established very passable natural Miracles. It
behooves us to give a small sample of the Miracles of our good Lady, that shall
endure to the Resurrection, by the notable story ensuing; Madam de la Chastre,
being become extraordinary jealous of her Husband, and of one of her Daughters,
reconciled her self to the Sieur de Montigni, to whom she had bin an utter
Enemy before the Wars. Neither was there any need of much invitation to recall
him to her friendship, in regard he was very much a friend to La Marcoussi. The
first office of Reconciliation was to kill La Berthelemy, the Discoverer of the
Amors of the Father and the Daughter. And it was probable enough that the
Murder would take effect, in regard that she had in truth combined against
Montigni. After all satisfaction and content in the belief of the execution,
comes post to the House, riding a straddle, Madam Avoy de St. Lawrence of the
waters, who after she had made the sign of the Cross, began the harangues of
Nathan and David. Which being done, these two fair Ladies resolve after
Confession, to go and do Penance at Ardeliers. Madam Avoye causes a new habit
to be got for her self; the habit of Madam La Castre was put on by Suardaine,
and she put on the habit of Madam Avoye: The Mistress called her self
Mademoiselle de St. Lawrens, La Sourdaine went by the name of Celestine. Being
come to Ardilliers, the Curate of the place heard the Confession of the Murder,
with sighs and sobs: but at length it was concluded first by the Curate, and
then by Celestine, that our Lady should repair this loss rather by a
Resurrection, then by an Intercession. By which means it came to pass that the
poor -- -- which was thought to have bin buried, was raised again through the
merits of the Curate. A most delicate Vision, when after nine days, Madam
Celestine lying prostrate before the Altar; her Mistress, Mademoiselle St.
Laurens, holding the Curate by the tail, that the Host (for there were no other
Witnesses) should behold the plump La Berthelemie come from behind the Altar;
who throwing her winding sheet to the ground came forward to pardon her
Mistress, then habited like a penitent Sister; who presently fell upon her
knees before the naked Soul, which she took at first for an apparition, but
finding her entire and every part safe and sound, Madam Avoye ran to embrace
her, Madam La Chastre kissed her; after that they interkiss'd one another, and
the Curate kissed 'em all four. The main trouble was to cover the nakedness of
the party risen, for the Pilgrims were out of patience to find the Doors of the
Chapel so long shut: Thereupon Madam Avoye, and Madam La Chastre divided their
own Vestments: Madam La Chastre gave her her* Petty-coat, and Celestine gave
her her Cap, and so they carried her, crying out a Miracle, a Miracle, to the
Curat's House, where Montigni lay concealed. He that would know the rest of the
story, may see the Process in the Grand Council, which will not be cancelled
this Shrovetide, whatever it be the next. The Heretics commenting upon the
Story, say, That it was a Sheep which Montigni murdered, La Berthelemie her
self had buried it in a Garret, and afterward Madam de la Chastre, when she
had danced the Canaries about the blood, and sung an I am revenged, La
Berthelemie returned, and assisted to draw away the dead body, and so threw it
into the house of Office. They say also, that it was Montigni who caused Madam
Avoye to take Post, to scare that enraged Woman out of her house, to the end
that while she was from home, they might the better send away La Berthelemy
from Boyancy, and convey her to Saumur, where she might be useful to her
Benefactor, after her Resurrection, in his Amors. They say, That the Curate of
Ardilliers was paid in good flesh, which La Berthelemy provided for him during
the nine days; but that he found Madam de St. Lawrence and Celestine so lean,
that he was satisfied with one meal. I could tell ye the whole Story, the
Prisons broken, the Skirmishes between the Guards of Marshall de la Chastre,
and the Ladies Pages, the Preparatives of Marcussi to poison his Wife. But the
Secretary of Molier of Poictou has wrote a Relation thereof to celebrate the
Miracle, after which I was satisfied that it went somewhat beyond the limits of
Theology. I will conclude this Chapter with the Epitaph made at Ardilliers by
Madam Avoye in the style of St. Innocent.

Here she lies, yet lies not;
A Mutton in her place was put.
Nor did Montigni, as they cry,
Murder plump Barthelemie.
That she was killed is truly said,
Because she showed her self so busy
To pimp for Wife of young Marcussi;
But the Priest of Ardilliers
Raised her sweetly by his prayers,
When fifteen Months she had bin dead.
If you find this Sepulcher in any other place, the treaty of Miracles requires
it at your hands.

CHAP. VII. Of the Relicques and Devotions of the deceased King.
ONe of the things which moved me most of all to contemn the Church, was to
read certain books, which are utterly suppressed (heaven be praised) at this
time, as the Book of the Merchands, the Christian Knight, Ransack and Fragments
between the Pope and Christ. But above all, the Inventory of Relicques; with
several others which I will not name, for fear of sending to read them Wits too
curious of their Salvation, and too much inclined to reject the works of
authentic writers. One day I saw an Austin Friar, with a wallet on his back,
crying out, Will ye buy any Paradise. A Huguenot saw me scandalized at the
passage, and took his time to show me all those little books which I forbid all
persons whatever for the repose of their Consciences to read, who intend to
live at rest and quiet in the Catholic Religion. It is known that I have bin
thirteen times an Ambassador, for which reason, as I have traveled at another
man's Cost, I have bin so ill adviz'd, as to justify this inventory of
Relicques, and another book entitled, Le Cose mara vigliose del alma Citta di
Roma The wonderful things of our Mother Church of Rome, printed at the same
place, Anno 1545. with License of the Superiors, by Giovanni Osmarino
Gigliolo. This book confirms the Inventory which Calvin made. This I found in
my Travels, and the reading of such books taught me to contemn the Relicques of
Saints, finding 15 or 16 Bodies of St. Peter, 18 of St. Paul, seven or eight
Bodies of every Saint, ten thousand Martyrs buried in the compass of a small
Chest; the prints of the footsteps of our Lord, and the Angels; the prints of
the Buttocks of St. Fiacre en Brie upon a stone. At Josse in Auvergne, in
Catalogne and other places, a linen cloth of the Virgin's own fowling; when
she might have made the same excuse that Rachel did. The feathers of the Angel
Gabriel. The Hatchet of Joseph the Carpenter. The stones of the Window where
the Angel entered. The Virgin's Milk: At Maillerais, in una parva pursa satini
Rubri, the parings of her nails. Several heads of St. Denis and St. John; in
sundry places some of his blood, which they say boils upon his Festival day;
and the sneezings of the Holy Ghost. As I was a Heretic, I laughed at these
things, and wondered at such a dissipation of the members of the Saints,
especially when we reproach the Huguenots for having so far disturbed their
repose, as they have done already* I am also to desire the pardon of Monsieur
Confessor. For I must confess in good earnest in this Chapter, That I have
laughed at the great blessings and benefits, which he caused to be printed the
last year, for the reasons which the Reader shall find by what follows. I have
strange stories to tell, to prove the virtue of Relics. For I protest, I had
rather see the Huguenots laugh at the great power and efficacies of St. Goyaux,
then publish such stories as these, were they not common to Lacquayes and
Pages. For we ought to conceal the Vices of our Princes: but since they are
discovered, we must seek to defend them by the authority of the Statutes of the
Holy See. St. Luke was the first that discovered the Mystery. For he fled to
Brouage, when La Sarbarante and the Angel, which he counterfeited, to terrify
his Master and rescue his own Carcass, were discovered by his companion, the
Duke of Joyeuse. Rochefort was too blame, to make the Anagram of St. Luke, Cats
in cul. He poor boy abominated that sort of Villainy, and was absolutely forced
to it the first time; the King causing him to take a book out of a Chest, the
cover of which the grand Prior and Carmelle clapped down upon his Reins; and
this they called privately among themselves, taking the Hare in a trap. So
clear it is that this honest Gentleman was forced to the trade, and thereupon
so terrified his Master, that he had either sorely repented or died for it, had
not the Duke of Joyeuse discovered the enterprise, to prevent the utter ruin
of his fortune. I do not think I do ill, to discover the story of the
Tapistry-maker; for the King seeing him at the top of his two ladders wiping
the dirt from the Candlestics, became so enamored of him, that he fell a
weeping before he went forth, and called out for Monsieur Le Grand to be sent
for to him, who to him himself discovered the love of one eyed Reveillon,
Captain of the Guides, who was laid hold upon, through impatience of expecting
a young guide which he had promised; and those Amors of the Duke, and of
Espernon, and He, when upon the very day of the death of the deceased King, he
fell upon his knees in the Chamber, between the deceased King and him that is
now living, before two hundred Gentlemen, and which is worse, the greatest part
of them Huguenots, at what time he cried out, with tears in his eyes, Cousin,
pardon me, for the King forced me to it at first, and I have not taken your
place, to do you any wrong. Espernon ashamed, but better adviz'd, replied, you
talk like a Woman, I know not what you mean. Siblot at a public audience, the
King having sent for him to make sport, and informed him touching Master -- who
to cause him to restore a Livery Horse, failed in his bargain, to tax him with
so much violence concerning his Governor, but because he does not well explain
his meaning, I shall say no more of it. However Loignac went away snobbing and
crying all the way to Poictiers, where being visited by the chief of the Town,
who thought him still in favor, he made them sad complaints of his Honor
lost, and of his being turned out of Service and not paid, almost all at the
same time. After came to light those of the Wife of Salettes, by means of a
Letter taken, among the Baggage of the Duke of Joyeuse at Coutras. St.
Severine, for this very act afterward called the wild Colt, having escaped out
of the King's Cabinet, by the overturning of Duhalde and Soupitre, who kept the
doors of the two high Chambers, fled among the Guards to tell the Marshal
d'Aumont, that the King had sent Montigni to find him out; and that he, joyful
to be admitted into the Cabinet, made have away thither, where the King
demanding of him, Who that Mistres^ was, for the sake of whose love he could
never have his company, and he again replying in brok'n French, that if he had
^ Mistress of Gold, he would serve none but hi^ Majesty, the King made answer,
I find yo^ take the Women's part, but yet you a^^ not ignorant of the sacred and
philosoph^cal Love, who I, said St. Severin, I am ^ Soldier, and no
Philosopher. Here the dispute ended. For at the same time the Master laid hold
of his Codpeice, Montig^ flew to his neck, and Monsieur d'O. to h^ points. Now
they run after the poor Gentleman to appease the Guards, dissatisfied with his
Hat and his Cloak. The worst was, that the old Frenchman had like to have
killed him, after he had heard his tale, Swearing he would be hanged if this were
true. More then that, he must to Prison. That imprisonment completed the
Tragedy. He was kept close for a Month, and some say longer. True it is, that
afterward he surrendered himself to the Duke of Mayen: but those of Paris not
believing this story, took him for a Zopyras, and sent him to be kept in safe
Custody at St. Germans de Prez; and some few Months after that, he was slain,
together with two or three hundred Gentlemen more, attempting to regain the
City. Stories like these, and many others were brought by the Courrier of the
Duke of Longuevile, from whom the King demanded the other Packet, before he
had seen that of Papier; after which he returned with his post-boy to carry the
news of their actions into Picardie. The Constable's Courrier made the same
complaints as far as Languedoc, above all things complaining of the Count of
Mauleurier who produced him. But his Master reprehended him for bogling at a
small matter, and sent him back again with his pacquets. Is not this enough to
satisfy the World, that these secrets were not divulged by me alone? Should I
relate what the Prince of Conde privately told me, when they spent a whole
night highly pleased in the Apprentiship of the Count of Avergne to his Navel.
Or should I relate the banishment of young Rosny, for being ill supplied: Or of
Noailles for having written over his bed these Verses, No happiness, no good
contents me,
That from my Deity absents me.


To which the King of Navar added with his own hand.

Never exalt my Aunt so high,
She loves too well Humanity.
By that, a discovery was made, that he loved women, contrary to the Rules of
the Holy Love, which caused him to be kicked out of doors, like the Duke of
Longuevile, for requesting his Colors of the King by a Letter written in guilt
Paper. Should I relate the Espousals of Quelus, and that other Contract signed
with the blood of -- and Monsieur O. by which he espoused Monsieur Le Grand.
Should I rehearse the words of that Prince, kneeling by the body of dead
Maugiron, with his lips where they ought not to have been, I should displease
the Count of Curavas, who having lent them his Chamber, spied them through a
hole in his Cabinet. Should I discover the door which the Constable made at
Tolembray, for his private converse with Le Grand, Men would blame my too
Satirical humor: should I relate what was told me by Le Pont, how he was taken
by the Collar, at a time when Le Grand was impatiently expected, who durst not
pass by, for fear of the Duke of Espernon, who walked in his way, with his Hat
pulled down over Eyebrows, and Sword his in his hand, swearing like a
Bell-founder, There was no passing that way to day. Did not the young Deputies
of the Estates of Blois, make their complaints to the Provinces that sent them,
That they were sent only to be abused in their Chastities, as the only means to
corrupt their Fidelity? But to draw advantage from these things thus divulged,
I say, and I know (for my services gave me the convenience of access) that the
King having conciev'd a wonderful dread of these things in the time of
Sarbatane, became so fearful, that he trembled at the least flash of Lightning,
or at the least noise of Thunder. Monsieur Roe, cured him of the greatest part
of this fear, with an Agnus Dei blessed by the hand of his Holiness. But after
that, he changed his fancy from active into passive, and grew so timid, that he
was afraid of the whistleing of the very winds; and then the good Prince stood
in need of more violent remedies, and by the counsel of Father Ange, who
grieved for him, and showed him, how he had committed Masculine Incest, because
he was Brother to the Duke of Joyeuse, they laid the foundations of the
Capuchins, Jerosolimites and Fueillants, a sort of begging Friars that wear
brown habits; where you have seen the D. of Joyeuse in his Glory, and whither,
as they say, he intends to return, when he finds himself fully glutted with the
pleasures of this World. Notwithstanding all which, the devout Prince, being
not yet quit of his fears; several Fraternities of Penitents were erected, and
other pious Orders which are to be seen up and down in France. But the
exquisite artifices of the Voluptuous heightened these fears, when Monsieur
Confessor lent his helping hand with more potent Amulets. He sent from Rome for
Chaplets, and blessed beads, which the King presented to the Fraternity of the
Cabinet, being adviz'd to practice their pleasures athwart the said Chaplets;
which was afterward also practiced in the public Stews of Paris to preserve
them from the foul Disease. Monsieur Pinars affirmed to me, that a Jesuit
confessed that he approved of the remedy, and because some of the sacred band
had been too severely wounded in their Chamber-Wars, that the Mass was added,
which an Almoner read upon a board which was laid upon the Bed of the Cabinet.
A holy Mass no doubt, whose Ornaments were accommodated to the Sin: as the
application of a Cross made of holy wood to the shoulders; Fomentations of the
Chine, and Clysters of Holywater, beads, which they call blessed, other wise
profane trifles and fooleries. We have heard how about 20. years since the
Convent of Franciscans was burnt at Paris, by fire from Heaven: but we never
heard how that the King having found it out, that those Franciscans were
dealers in Sacred Amors, and that the Relics of St. Francis and Father Mace
served them in the same stead as we make use of Laurel against Thunder;
thereupon the King made the Guardian his Confessor, upon condition that he
should purloin those Relicques, which had not been long in the King's Cabinet,
but the Convent was fired, juxta illud 12. tit. 7. Fulgura de sursum depellit.
The same Guardian also taught him that that sin was no sin in the Habit of a
Franciscan, and committed with a good intention to be conformable to St.
Francis, and Father Mace, his Mignon. For which reason they into whose hands
the King's Prayer-Books fell, have showed their familiar friends, the names of
all those that are mentioned in this Chapter, and at the end of the said
Prayer-books, the names of those he could not bring to his bow; among the rest
Chastillon and Chambret, the first with his sleeves thrust back, to show his
plump white Arm, and his Motto, non pro amor, ma pro vendetta; Not for Love,
but for Revenge. This is a kind of a secret, but not such a one as felt that
fatal clap of Thunder, which in a clear day, at one of the Clock in the
afternoon, in the view of five hundred Gentlemen, and as many Swisses, and with
no more then one single clap, brake into the low Chamber of the Count of
Soissons, where Monsieur Le Grand, and he were at their beloved Recreation; and
two others upon another bed; and parted company, killing two and leaving the
third at the Window half dead; in this more memorable, that the lightning
entered the Criminal members, and issued forth behind. And here observe the
advantage of adorning the hair like a person in Orders; for the two which
escaped had both the Popes Chaplets upon their heads; but they that were killed
had none. I suppose that the fifth, who lay like one half dead for two months
together, had lost not above half his. Thus you see the Experience which
authorizes Relicques, and take notice that you shall never see any of the
Brethren of the Sacred Society without Agnus's, Crosses, or Chaplets about
their Arms. To the purpose of Relicques, that wicked Count of Rochefoucaut,
dining one day with the Queen's Maids of honor, who peck'd at him by express
order, and asked him for some of the fine Relicques which he had plundered at
Towrs in the first Wars, he replied, That he had made them all away, looking
upon them as gewgaws and trifles. But they being importunate, at length he
promised them, that upon condition they would all come and kiss him, he would
give them one of S. Katherine's Wast-coats, that should make their breasts as
hard as when they were Maids. For my part if I do not make such a stir about
Relicques, or do not worship them as others do, you must excuse me; for going
one Evening to Bosnis, two Leagues from Orleans, which is the seat of the
Masters of St. Lazarus; I was strangely surpised, to hear in the morning as I
rose, so many little Bells about the House, as also to see the Banner, and the
Cross, and a great number of the Canons of St. Agnan in Orleans, and not only
so, but to see as many Banners and Crosses, as could possibly enter into a
little Gallery leading to the House of Easment. The business was, a young Girl
belonging to the Chevalier Salviati, grand Prior of the Order, had found
certain Chests, which in the time, of the Wars had been thrown into the Privy.
As she was picking them open, to see what she could steal, in one of them she
found a little box, upon the which was written R. d. Coti. The Commander being
advertised thereof, made have to the place, together with his Secretary
Valderio, who took the R. with the Print, for the Father of St. Katherine.
Thereupon strict charge, was given not to touch the box upon great penalties,
and the Master and the Man, went both to the Bishop of Orleans. The Doctors,
and among the rest Picard, being called to consultation, the result was, That
this box was to be opened by the Sacred hands of the Bishop only, assisted with
the Neighboring processions. Thus they came one morning, and after a Mass of
the Holy Ghost devoutly said, the Bishop washes his hands in holy water, makes
three steps to the Coffer upon his knees, opens it and there finds a Box of
good Marmalade of Orleans; and thus as Prophesies are never understood till
they are fulfilled, they found that R. signified the Remainder, and d. C. of the
Cotignac.

CHAP. VIII. Of Vows.
MR. Peter Foncet, a Gentleman Preacher, he that when Monsieur d'Espernon taxed
him for making people laugh, made answer, that he caused many more to weep.
This honest man, one day preaching among the Mathurins, made a long discourse
upon the miseries of the Chartreux, that they fed upon nothing but fish, of
others that fed upon nothing that ever had life, of the Capuchins that wear
nothing upon their feet, of the Fueillans that are so poorly clad, and vivunt
in diem; of the Friars Ignorant of Italy, who dare not presume to know any
thing; of St. Anthonies Porkers near Roanne, and the Penitents that whip
themselves. This Preacher caused abundance of people to weep; and from all
those Devotions, and austere Vows drew this argument, That if the Romish
Religion were false, men would never keep Vows so difficult and uncomfortable.
I invited the said Foncet and Renardier of Bretaigne to dinner* where we
brought all his reasons to the test; and that fool Renardier put the other into
a great heat, telling him that those austeritics of Vows and manner of living,
were rather marks of a false Religion, then of a true. Witness, said he, that
the Sacrifices of men were forbid to the Israelites, and observed among the
Gentiles; and those mad Codsheads in Turkey, the Caloyer, who all the year long
wear no other covering for their nakedness, then Nets. Only they carry in their
right hands a great Razor, with which they make a new stream of blood, when the
first begins to close up* and as to their fasts and abstinencies, that from
Wine, which is enjoined to all persons, is the most difficult to be observed.
When they fast they neither eat nor drink. As to their Pilgrimages, where do we
find so impetuous a devotion as that of the Pilgrims to Mecca, of whom there
are many, who after the hardships of a tedious journey, and the sight of
Mahomet's Sepulcher, put out their Eyes, as unwilling to see any thing
profane, after the sight of a thing so holy? Afterward he alleged the strange
zeal of the Calignois, and how we might find in the Grand Temple of Mexico, the
walls besmeared with the blood of Infants offered to the Devil by their Fathers
and Mothers, and this blood above two fingers thick, through the whole inside
building; which I have heard confirmed by the Franciscans of Mexico, and
others. Renardier concluded from thence, that all such inventions were very
fanatical, or rather diabolical, which enforce men to such hardships. Thereupon
this good man Coxcomb fell upon Antiquity, and I cannot tell where he picked up
his learning. Do you not know, quo he, that the French and English Druids
sacrificed upon certain days, and accounted those Sacrifices most acceptable,
when they put men to the most cruel deaths? The Carthaginians took the Children
of the most Noble Families, put them on Royal Apparel, and sacrificed them;
neither were their Parents permitted to rescue one, so that being vanquished by
Agathocles, out of an opinion which they had, that their Gods were angry at the
discontinuance of such Sacrifices, they knocked of the head above 200 young
Gentlemen for the service of their Altars. The Rhodians and Cretans were wont
to make their Victims drunk before they offered them up. In Chio and Salamine
they tore men limb-meale to sacrifice them to Diomedes. The Arcadians whipped
their Damsels to death. The Spartans did the same to their Children upon the
Altars of Diana and Mercury. Others made a great Pen of hurdles, and filled it
up with men, of which Theopompus was one. The Thracians slew their Victims with
Lances at the Altar of Tamelus. Some of the Germans and Burgundians carous'd
blood at their Sacrifices. The Persians, Greeks, and some of the English,
buried their Sacrifices alive. I will not stand to repeat several other
abominations practiced upon Boys and Girls; and other follies committed by the
Corinthians and Bretons. I say therefore that these austere and cruel Vows have
been in all Ages a great part of the worship given to the Devil. From thence
Renardier betook himself to his Theology, quoting in the 16 chap. of St.
Matthew, the words, My yoke is light, with several others, and told us withal,
my Masters, quo he, the best Vow that we can make is to St. The Madmens Saint.
Mathurin, for I assure ye that the wisest among us is but a fool. All the
World did not know Renardier; he was one that would speak the truth to the
deceased King, who desiring to have his charges defrayed by his Marshals of the
Camp, told him one day that he did more then God; for he said, by the labor of
thy hands thou shall live commodiously. But you, said he, let your Marshals of
the Camp live more then commodiously, by that labor and calling, of which they
understood nothing. At last Poncet was in a pelting chafe and replied, that he
discoursed like a Huguenot. The other went on smiling, and began to spend his
rallery upon the Pythagorisms of the Chartreux, and other honest fellows, among
the rest, he did not forget Mr. -- Neither did he omit to tell us that Mr. de
Bouchage, being weary of the King's scourge, and imprisoned between four
screens, made his Confession to one of his companions of the buttock-trade, who
having heard of the violences of the Cabinet, persuaded him to forsake the
World, and urged it to him withal, that if he would undergo a Capuchin's life
for some time, he doubted not but to see him Pope. This is that which the
Cunning-man Raoul has confirmed to him, and you shall see, said Renardier, that
from hence in time he will return thither, mark a fool's Prophecy. Poncet and
I laughed at him: which made the good man very angry: well, said he, you are a
couple of as naughty Companions as Marshal Biron who scoffed at poor Friar
Ange, when he went to act the Passion before the King at Chartres, causing
himself to be whipped and carrying a Cross, that would have weighed down Goliath.
There, was Monsieur de Montpensier enquiring who was Master of the Ceremonies
of this Mortality. Sure 'twas not he that flung away the spiggot of his
Gascoigne Wine because that Monsieur Babelot told him it was fit to be the
blood of a Martyr. 'Twas he that to get a good gobbet, went to hear Vespers
among the Austin Friars. The Marshal thereupon drawing himself aside; this
widgeon, said he I warrant ye fares well below the wast, though paradventure he
may miss of Paradise. To whom the Duke returned, by St. Slash-back, quo he,
this fellow plays well, but that his Music is a little too sharp. It was a
Cantle of Earth, which he had rubbed off from an Oven as he drawl'd his Cross
along for which the Baker was not forgetful with a good palt to make him sing
Lacrimae. Such as you were those devout Bishops of Lyonnois, who called a Synod
to reform the Custom of St. Anthony in that place. They are obliged to make
eight meals to show the frailty of Mankind. There were some Jesuits, Friar
minors, and certain young Bishops, who made smooth and long Harangs, to show
that such Constitutions might be altered habita ratione temporum. And that what
our Ancestors had formerly done with a good intention, was at this day
ridiculous. But to all these reasons the sub Prior of St. Anthony, who was a
great snoarer, made answer only with one grave and remarkable Sentence; Let us
not intrude Innovations upon our Age. They began again a very fair speech
against the scoffers of this Age, but the sub Prior with four Chins retorted,
le, le, le, le, let us -- Hickup -- take care, etc. But you will say that under
the umbrage of Devotion many great follies are committed. By St. Anthony I know
it well enough. But it is none of the Churches fault. Who has exclaimed more
then I against the King and his Minions; who had like to have told i'my Pulpit
the following Story?

The King falling in love at Lion with the Wife of the Sieur -- The bargain
being made with the woman by the Count of Maulevrier, the next thing was, how
to cajole the Husband out of the way; so jealous, that he refused an honorable
Employment, and a profitable Commission, as to the Salt of Peccaise to boot.
Thereupon he applies himself to a Franciscan, Confessor to the jealous Husband,
declaring to him that the Chief men of Lion had their Eye upon this poor man,
as looking upon him to be a Heretic, because he was not of the Fraternity of
the Penitents. To the point answered the Cordelier; Sir, I am no such fool to
suspect you of Devotion. Speak to me in the Language of St. Francis, and you
shall find that the Franciscans are good Companions. By all that is virtuous
then, replied the Count, we have a private kindness for his Wife, and there are
thirty Crowns for thee. To which the Franciscan, get ye gone, quo he, like
Lords as ye are, and leave the business to me. Six days after that, you might
have seen the poor Gentleman in the Vestry preparing to carry the Cross as the
youngest Novice. In the mean time the King, the Count, and Clermont d'Entragues
go to play their Game; and in a short while after they saw through the Window
of the Chamber, the Procession and the Cross-bearer, who in the midst of his
devotions could not choose but have strange Whimseys and Imaginations in his
head, which so intoxicated his Pericranium, that he fell in a Swoon before his
own door. Thereupon the Procession stopped, to change the Cross-bearer. There
was now a necessity to open the door, and to hide the three Adventurers in the
best manner they could, in a small Compting-house, Where they had bin in great
danger, but that the Franciscan and one of his Brethren overrul'd the devout
Cuckold, that it was a religious duty incumbent upon him to carry back his
habit to the Vestry. Who has exclaimed more then I, against the deceased King,
who carried the names of his Minions in his prayer books, illuminated with the
light of St. Francis? Did I not know the Duchess of Guize and Nevers, who
carried Roquemont and the Baron of Fumel, painted in the Crucifix both in their
Prayer-books and Cabinets; and they their Mistresses also in the same manner
like the Virgin Mary? But you other Heretics, you do ill to blame the Church
for this. I broke the design of Poncet by saying, that the invention of Habits
and Prayer-books is no way guilty of ill Customs. But to reimburse ye both, for
your unlucky tales, I will tell ye one spick and span new. What was the reason,
think ye, that the Count de la Chapelle forsook the World? Whuh! said
Renardier, that was, because the Cardinal of Florence fooled him, and promised
he should be Pope. With that I shook my head; Why no said Poncet as well as
Pope -- who was taken up at the door a poor boy, because the Cardinals
she-monky fell in love with him? Some say she loved him for the number of Lice
he had about him. However it were, being once well cleans'd and furbish'd up,
he pleased his Master, was afterward advanced, and called Cardinal della
Simia, and last chos'n Holy-Father. At what time the College checked him, that
he had made a Beggar, and an ignorant Fellow, Cardinal, he replied, it is but
the same that ye found in me, and if he live to be old, it is that will make him
Pope. The reason was this; His Mother being weary of him, partly because he was
troubled with the falling sickness, and for that she found him a fool, but
chiefly because his Maiden Brother began to grow ripe, she therefore sent him
into Italy, and gave him Father Jeronimo for his Confessor. He knew so well
how to pick the worms out of the nose of this Calf, that he made him a
Confession of such sins as I am ashamed to tell ye, for the expiation whereof,
he made him believe there was no other way, but for him to forsake the World,
and devote himself to the Church. I know, said Renardier, more then you dare
say. I once heard at the Window of the Stable of St. Denis of one who
importuning his Companion to tell him whether the Count de la Chapel were a
coming? this answer was made, I know no more then I can divine, who had his
Maidenhead; whether his Father or his Mother, his Uncle or his Sister But to
the purpose; this Vow being as severe as the Penance for his offenses, as that
which Aretine describes in the person of Master -- His Mother believing she
should dye for grief of having born him, devoted him to be a Cardinal in
humility. This is he upon whom Pasquin jokes; What has the Cardinal done, has
he left his Eleemosynarie at the Hospital? At length Monsieur Poncet grew weary
of the discourse and told us if you, and other sort of Huguenots, had not come
athwart us, we had tought the deceased King the value of Vestments, shavings
and secret Vows. For we had put him in the great Chartreuse, being fortified
with good Bulwarks instead of Reasons. We had Habited him like the Ingles in
his prayer-books. We had changed his Crown for a shaved Circle, and to bid ye
God-buy and end our discourses, we had answered his motto, The last Crown in
Heaven.
Manet Vltima Caelo, with a Distic that was assix'd to the Dyal of the Palace.

Qui dedit ante duas, unam abstulit, altera nutat;
Tertia Tonsoris nunc facienda manu.
Once two Crowns were thee designed,
But the Donor changed his mind.
One he retook, and this does shake,
The next the Barber is to make.
Farewell Gentlemen, I am sorry to see ye make such ill use of pious works. Thus
Poncet took his leave, but Renardier staid to make an end of his story. This is
the reason said he, that the Bishop of Xantes is one of the best Companions in
the world. There is also an Abbess in the Suburbs, whose Convent is more like a
Court, then a Religious House. Where with Maubusson's good leave, at the Seige
of Pontoise, there lay no less then eight godly Virgins sick of the Crinkums,
and five newly brought to Bed. Let it not offend Longchamp nor Mont Martre,
that this place was called the Magazine of the Engines of the Army. Nor let it
offend the Trinity of Poictiers, Vilmur of Albigeois, Lys, the true Seminaries
of Children in Red Coats; the Abbey of the Holy Ghost, the Nunnnery whither
Suresne brought Fervaques some few days ago, and told the Abbess, who is her
Daughter, that she ought to show the honor of her house to the new Duke and
Peer; his design being only to debauch a young Religious Nun, which was the
real cause of their journey. In half an hours time Suresne returned and
whispered her fellow-traveller in the Ear, Go fall on, Mortbieu, the Slut has
put me to some trouble, but the business is done. Have makes wast of the body,
quoth Fervaques; for I have played two Acts with the Abbess. How? She Is my
Daughter: Then I am your Son in law, said the other. The Abbess of Xantes is
inferior to none of them all, for Gallantry, Courtship, and Mascarading. And
in a word, there is nothing acted there, but what is acted at Court. Only
sometimes the Bishop and the Abbess steal abroad to some remote and convenient
places; and then the Nuns fall to their Orisons, in regard that Monsieur and
Madam are gone to perform works of Charity. Every one was much concerned what
pious works those should be: But the Prior of Pont l'abbe having discovered
them one day, wrote to Monsieur de Potonville the following Lines.

The Bishop and Abbess of Xantes
For their works of piety, Saints,
Are often in private together:
But a Nun more witty then either,
Made a hole in the Wall,
And there she spied all.
She was paid for her peeping,
For now she knew more
Of Piety-works then ever before.
He concluded with the answer of Verville touching so many piles of building
for the entertainment of Franciscans, Jesuits, Capuchins, and the like; to
prevent the folly of men, that let fools put out their eyes.

You Huguenots that so severely frown,
And all our Monasteries would pull down
Should Knaves and Fools change places tell us, you
Whether you would not think 'em then to few
CHAP. IX. Of the several ways of Angling for Men.
WHatever St. Peter did, his Successors have strangely altered the course of
his Vessel. For all the while that the times of darkness continued, the Church
of Rome has fished in the fire. They have not spared for Wood, by which means,
they have consumed the bodies of them, who were too apprehensive of the fire of
Souls. The Converters of these times made it their business to convert the Soul
by terrifying the Body, or else by converting the Body into Cinders. When day
and light appeared, and that fire began to be out of request, then they fell to
fish in troubled waters; and this they do in all times of troubles, and then
several persons exiled from their houses fell into the fishermens Nets. When
the water ceases to be troubled, they fish in the calm, and then they never
spare for unguis odoratus, which the Druggists of Italy furnish them withal.
With this bait were taken the more weighty sort of fish, such as were the
Marshals of Montmorancy and de Cosse. After that, they lay their baits for the
larger sort of fish, so was Antony King of Navarre caught by Rovet, and Lovis
of Bourbon by Limeul; but this latter being a strong fish, and feeling himself
in the Net, brake the meshes, and so escaped. Some there are, that are
destroyed by following the Dolphins; such are the Dog-fish, Barbels, Macquerel
and all the lesser fry that follow the Court, who following their Master,
enter with him into the belly of that profound and vast Whale, the Church of
Rome. The little fry is caught with more labor, while they are put to force
them out of their lurking holes by beating with their long Poles. By this
means, there is never a small Parish in France, where the Huguenots, beaten out
by good and holy intelligence, more then others, are not forced into St.
Peter's Nets. The Winters of affliction cause several to remove to the Springs
of Honor and Greatness, as the Courts of Rome, the Emperor, France and Spain.
By this means, we have caught in these later Seasons several haughty minds,
impatient of meanness and poverty, and among the rest La Morlas, who not being
able to reconcile the lowness of his Birth, and the greatness of his Courage,
removed to those Springs, when the Huguenots were in a low condition. And also
to draw advantage from others, he made use of a new artifice. In that somewhat
resembling the nature of the Dolphin, but only in the event. He carried his
Believers to the dispute with Monsieur Confessor. He admonished them first to
take a care of him, as being a dangerous impostor, and exhorted them to stand
firm; but afterward suffered himself to be caught in their company. I saw him
one day bring to the line of the Net the little Baron de Courtemer, to whom he
gave his hand sidelong in the middle of the dispute, and cried, Courage, my
little Baron; however we ought to consider what Monsieur Perron says.
Thereupon with an artificial and sanctified prevarication he suffered himself
to be vanquished after a dissembled resistance. I my self have several times
bin disintangl'd out of the same Net. Monsieur de Chastillon was informed by
his Father's old Servants, That the design to bring him to Court was, as well
upon his Body, as his Conscience. Monsieur Confessor, one of the best
Fishermen that has belonged to the Church, has more luckily then others
observed in these Seasons, the way of fishing with the Line: For he has got a
trick to put the worm so far on upon the hook, that the fish is caught before
it has swallowed the bait. Witness poor Desponde, whose bait was laid for
another, and who having sacrificed his Soul for the Church, has bin so wickedly
gulled, that before he died, he saw his Children go a begging, his Wife in the
Stews, and himself in the Hospital. Witness poor Cahier who gaped after the
Abbey promised him, but saw nothing but the Walls and the Steeple. The Holy men
of former times fished with Preaching, and baited their hooks with Salvation.
But now a days we suffer that sort of coin to grow rusty; for the fish is too
much awake, and will not be caught by licking the mud. Dandelot cost little,
for he was taken with the hand, and that was a riddle to the good Companions. I
will say this moreover in a word, for the prudence of Monsieur Confessor, that
he fishes best in still waters. Not such waters as Desponde caused to swell at
M. de Guerres: but because he has an eye upon those whose Families are going to
rack; like a Pond that drains it self through its own Sluices and so becomes
dry; as it happened in the case of the Baron of Salignac, when his Wife
converted him. Some are caught by the foresight of such accidents, like my
self, that I might fish on in still waters. Monsieur Confessor has taken the
pains to come and fish and preach at St. Merry, in the face of the people:
there where they take Frogs sleeping, there he preaches like a Deacon to a
Subdeacon; His Brother and some others of his Apostles have a seat laden with
good Livres just before the Pulpit. They open the bags upon the quotation of
passages; they tie them up again as fast as they can to awaken attention. But
this great Personage is so full of talk, that the greatest part of the auditory
sleep three hours together, and get terrible Colds; and so the faculty of
Theology becomes very profitable to the faculty of Physic.

CHAP. X. Of Transubstantiation.
WE cannot say much upon the point of Transubstantiation; for it is more
difficult to prove then pronounce, though the word be somewhat of the longest.
But as Monsieur Confessor says, confessing that it was an absurd point, yet it
ought to be debated for the honor of the Church. Though not to dive too far
into the will of God, he forbid me to read the most part of the Ancients,
especially St. Austin l. de agone Christiano, c. 25. De Praesentia Dei ad
Dardanum. c. 17 in Psalm. 33. and 34. In Evangel. Johannis. tract. 27. ad
Bonifac. Epist. 23. In Sermon. Infant. l. 3. de doctrina Christi. c. 9. and 16.
He also forbad me to read the rest not corrected by the Index expurgatorius,
and taught me to insist upon nothing in this dispute but Omnipotency. Now
therefore hear the arguments which I have picked out of my own invention.
Wherefore cannot we change and alter the substances of all things in the name
of God, seeing we do the same thing in the King's name, whereby we see such
strange Transubstantiations and Metamorphoses performed every day? The sweat of
a miserable Labourer into the fat of prosperous Partisan and Treasurer? The
marrow of the fingers of a Vine-dresser of Gasconie rejoices the heart of every
one, and fills the belly of a Parasite. The tears of the Widow ruined in
Bretagne caused Santory's Wife to grow fat. The blood of a Soldier slain, to
chase Espernon out of Provence turns to Hypocriss. The Host of the Rose at
Bloise we find now transubstantiated in M. Bussy Guibert. The Imposts of France
have transubstantiated the Plough-fields into Pasture, the Vinyards into wast
land, and the Husbandmen into Beggars; The Soldiers into Thieves, with little
or no Miracle; The Plough-joggers into Gentlemen, the Lacqueys into Masters,
the Masters into Lacqueys, the Horsemen into Halberdeers. The Curtisans of
Princes are transubstantiated into Women, and Women into Curtisans. Panders
become Marquises. Varenne has undergone such Transubstantiations would make your
hair stand an end. Pardon Morlas, if he seemingly believe Transubstantiation;
He who in his Cradle was changed from a Bastard of Sallette into the Son of a
Botcher, and from that time bred up by the alms of the Churches of Pau;
afterward a Scholar at the Queen's charge; from a Scholar he became a Minister
and Spy upon the Huguenots of Paris, from a Spy a Gendarme, from a Gendarme a
Disciple of Perron, thence a Pandar, so a Traitor, and last of all Proveditor
General. Who can reck'n the notable Changes of Lansac Laverdin, the Marquis de
Bell'ilse, Monluc and Balgagny? The deceased Bishop of Valence, who believed
nothing of Transubstantiation, what would he have said to have seen his Son de
Champis a Captain, from a Captain a Sovereign Prince, from a Prince a Poltron,
from a Poltron an Exile, from an Exile a Marshal, from a Marshal a Cuckold,
just such another as Marshal Vulcan? But that which convinces me more of the
truth of Transubstantiation is the Proverb, Know thy self. When I consider how
many times I have bin my self transubstantiated, from a Sholer to a
Counselor, thence to an Ambassador, thence to a Bankrupt, thence to a
Coney-catcher, thence to an Excise-man, thence to a Colonel, Captain, and
Constable of Petty Chalons. It had bin also a fair argument to prove the
wonderful Transubstantiation, had Prince Maurice bin as quick to contribute the
400. M. Crowns, as they of Bearn and Geneva were the 10. M Crowns for the hire
of my third Conversion: But let that pass, only let me tell ye, had I bin Earl
of Burgundy I had paid my Swisses in salt. We have seen the lower Hall of the
Loure changed into a Comic-Stage, from a Comic-Stage into a Tragic; from a
Palace Royal, into a place of Execution, when President Brisson and his
Companions were there hanged. To which I will only add the example of the Duke
of Merceur who from a petty Prince, became the King's Brother in Law; from
thence Governor of Bretaigne, from a Governor a Tyrant, from a Tyrant a Duke,
and in his own fancy the Terror of France, and the hope of Spain. And indeed
he is so transubstantiated, that the new Proverb of Spaniards calls him, The
scorn of France, the shame of Lorrain, the disdain of Bretaigne. He is neither
Duke, nor Tyrant, nor Governor, and he that had bin Victorious in Battle, has
suffered that fair Fortune to go to Ruin, without the shot of one single
Pistol; only one Escape which he let the other day in cold blood, in the
presence of the King.

THE CATHOLIC CONFESSION OF THE Sieur de SANCY. SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. A Dialogue between Madam Mathurine, and young Peronne.
I Have lately received here, such an odd piece of Divinity, that methinks I
cannot but for shame stick it in among the rest, because it looks so all of a
piece. It Is a very modest discourse, that truly considering the times, may very
well pass muster. By the contents, you will find what a strange sort of Cattle
our careful and provident Mother, the Church, employs to bring men back into
the broad Road. Dame Mathurine, that Mad Girl, was coming from Madam de
Monlukes, where she had been tutoring Vignoles, and met with Perronne going
thither to perform the same Office. He blushed to see Mathurine, and stroking
his bald Pate, thus accosted her. Well met, Madam; I hear you boast about the
Town* how you have converted St. Mary du Mont.

Math. Who told you this merry news, my good friend?


Per. By my troth, it is very probable -- you are, indeed, a dainty She-Divine.


Math. It Is very true, where men are to be converted by Smock-learning. And now
I think on it, don't you remember, that he engaged to meet me this night? With
that, I went to carry the joyful news to your Brother, and as good luck would
have it; for 'twas somewhat early in the morning, who should I meet but Madam de
la Cour just tripping out of his Chamber?


Per. Hold, my dear brisk Madam, hold a little; you do ill to bespatter so
renowned a Prelat and Father of the Church.


Math. Why Sir, -- such delights and innocent sports as those don't hinder the
work of Conversion. Besides, La Chesnay is a witness; for he going to visit
him, as I did, a little more early then ordinary, saw fairly in the Chamber the
accoutrements of a certain female among the sanctified Garments of thy Brother
in Orders.


Per. Pray leave off these gigling stories; I shall be angry else at your
impertinence. I don't say, but that Msr. de St. Mary gave you a promise; but
the day before I had made a handsome progress i'my undertaking: For the day
before that, I had caused three whole Porters loads of Books to be sent in to
the Lady Marquesses Lodgings.


Math. Think you that I am ignorant what game you were at instead of disputing?
But I would have you to know too, that 'twas I that first tickled his humor;
'twas I that played the same Ledger-dumain with him below the wast-band, as I
did with you when we were first sweet together: I taught him to be a good
marksman, and to swim without water* Thou did not so much as speak with him
till two months after that, at least, and then you were forced to wait wi'your
gravity, when I was still sent for, and circumspectly ushered in.


Per. Truly your Introductions were very Ceremonious -- but can any man imagine,
that with the air and levity of a Curtizan, thou should be admitted to talk
of such a difficult matter as Conversion?


Ma. And can you imagine, by that silly invention of yours, of interpreting the
familiar Epistles of Cic. to become familiar with him? I have heard La Brosse
the Pedagogue say, that when he was Regent of the third Classis in Burgundy, he
would have lashed his boys, if they had not translated better.


Per. Do you think I have taught him nothing else? He was at first a mere
Novice, and a block-head -- I have taught him to cite the Fathers, without ever
reading them; to quote the Councils which he never saw. I have not only taught
him to chop Logic like a Sorbonne Mountebank; but to talk of State affairs; to
admire the great Kingdom of Spain, and to propose projects of Government
according to the humor of the Church of Rome. Instead of naming the Pope, I
have taught him to say his Holiness. Instead of calling the King, the King, I
have taught him to say -- His Majesty. Before he cried -- plain Little Roche,
Zamet, Varenne, as if they had been mere Dwarfs, Lackies, or Turn-spits. But I
have taught him to say Monsieur Varenne, and to snarl out the r. with a grace.
He began to laugh, when I told him that to speak otherwise was a piece of
High Treason. But I showed him how that unmannerliness only befitted morose
Antiquity, and that to honor by halves the Darlings of a King was below the
Politeness of this Politic Age. I have taught him also with his right
forefinger and his left Thumb to thunder out Maxims of State, to disclose and
complain of distempers of Government, to nod his head and cry mark the End
on it; to accept of a fair proffer, to mind his fortunes; and to season his
discourses with the true terms of Art; as for example, To have a jealousy, to
ambitionate, intregue, to take his measures, and the like, -- the true Phrases
whereby a man may be judged capable of business.


Math. A Coxcomb you mean -- I confess I have not taught him so many scrapps of
State -- Gibberish. -- But I have taught him all his Clock-work Motions to a
hair -- to walk as upright as a Gentleman Usher -- to bow often -- and not to
laugh without a serious cause -- I gave him the Postures of Monsieur Le Grand
-- I taught him to turn his heels inward -- to walk in State like a Goose -- to
shrink up his shoulders -- to give an admiration -- start -- to screw his head
gently a one side upon dislike -- all the quarter and half quarter Motions of
the Al-a-mode scrape -- to laugh a one side of his mouth -- and grin like a Dog
when we give him Garlic -- to speak in the Throat -- to comb his Periwig -- at
least while his friend speaks -- to cry by my faith -- hay -- instead of plain
by my faith, I have taught him, and that quickly too, all the knick-knacks of
Admiration -- as Jesu! drawl'd out -- But that you say it, I should never --
well -- He! -- Ave-Maria! -- When he meets any of the painted Ladys of the
Court, to make a stop, and cry -- how beautiful you appear to day; Madam! fair
as the new blown Rose and then to discourse of the colors of her Ribands
according to Art, and not to take notice how ill they become the Rotten Harlot.
I have taught him to dissemble like the Court Marquesses, who are scarce worth
groats a piece -- I have taught him to pull his hat down upon his Periwig,
though he wear his band without starch, as when high Collars were in fashion. I
gave him six of these bands the other day, that reach down half way his back,
and as many pair of Cuffs, that turn up to his Elbows.


Per. Truly you very much obliged him -- For when he went the other day, to
dine with the Marquess of Beuvron, after they had washed, the Marquess d'Arly,
sneering at the strangeness of the Vision, took one of his Cuffs to wipe his
hands instead of a Towel. But I have taught him more serious Lessons; as to
guess betimes at such as are creeping into favor; to cry, Monsieur, twenty
times in forty words; to pretend modesty and respect, and to withdraw into a
Corner; to Complement the Servants of those that the Sun shines upon; and not
only the Servants of Princes, but also of the Counselors of the long Robe, as
-- D'Aubeville, and Caumartin, men learned in the modern laws; who know how to
manage a Court Cause, and to take a Dinner at the Chancellor's by way of return.


Math. Do you say, there is nothing in the motion of the hand, not to order the
folds of the band, according to the mode? Are all the Mops and Mows of Fecan
nothing? which caused the Marshal d'Ancre to call him the fair Egyptian, and
the only Minion among the Beautiful -- In short, I have entered him; for which
he seems to be so much endebted to me, that he curls and turns up his hair like
a very Narcissus.


Per. Go -- go -- by St. Denis, you are a mere baud -- In a word let them dare
to say at Rome, that you have converted St. Mary. What will the Huguenots say?
-- They Will say, that to bring Whore-masters to the great Whore of Babylon, bauds
are the only decoys.


Math. How long, dear Brother, have you been a despiser of the Trade? How did
you get your Living, before your Brother came to be a Bishop? Have you forgot
your frolicks at the University with the Booksellers, and Chandlers Wives? I
could name ye twenty, that have hired ye for fifteen pence a time. But now
since your Brother has set ye a Horseback, and hung that furred Cloak upon
your shoulders, now all your attempts are upon Counselors and Presidents
Ladies -- as if thou were aiming to be Pandar General to all the Courts of
Parliament* and so by degrees to the Court it self. Why should your ambition
seek the Ruin of Madam Tillet, and my self* by taking away our Trade? She
brings forth only to get Credit; and I, that am a poor Maid, had need to make
use of all my parts. A my word -- if Madam du Tillet once give ye a blow of the
shins, there will a scar remain. I hear that the Queen has already said to the
Marchioness of Guercheville, I understand this Perronne begins to delight in
Ruffianry.


Per. By St. Francis, thou art a foul mouthed Baggage, I care not a fig either
for du Tillet, or Tignaville either -- How dare thou speak to me at this
rate, thou that art a common Prostitute to the Foot-boys, Pages and Switzers?
Thou that has't sent Le Pont de coulay and Engoulevent to the Surgeons already;
and in short has hansell'd Vignoles also, under the pretense of conversion.
Thou that have got a Horse to thy green Velvet Gown, as a reward for the
maidenhead of thy little -- offered up to Monsieur Le Grand? I name no body.
Thy very skin is parched, thy head scorched with the flames of thy Lust: Thou
art a mere Carcass above ground -- Hence to the Devil -- Thou turn'st my
stomach to see thee.


Matthew. How! ye stale Fornicatour! Sodomite both Active and Passive, Does your
Chuch preferment make ye grow saucy? Don't I know that thy Brother sold thee to
the Lust of the Abbot Tyrone? Shall I publish to the World what I know of thee,
and of thy Amorous Godfather, and then reck'n up as many Sodomies,
Bestialities, Witch-crafts, and Poysonings, as are mentioned in two books
called L'Abolition de la Fin, and in the Legend of St. Nicate?


Per. Mortbieu, Don't let me lay my hands on thee -- If I do -- I shall tie
that tongue of yours.


Math. Do and ye dare -- Tom Totty -- there is Flamberge will pay ye off --
don't venture upon me neither, you know I have been shot through the thigh
already, and am a piece of a Soldier.


Per. I know thou have bin a Soldier, as having marched with the Regiment of
Picardy. But why should we play the fool and upbray'd one another, that are
both of a feather? Be satisfied, that I am the person that has converted M. St.
Mary. I did it by the Arguments of Visibility and personal Succession.


Math. Thou art a liar -- For he answered thee, that If a Visible Head were
needful in the Church, there would be required also a Visible Holy Spirit. And
to thy argument of the personal Succession he replied, Where should be then all
the Bastards, seeing that the Priests were none of them married? But I
surpised him -- having lain two or three nights at St. Martin, to understand
the arguments of Dr. de Cahier. I taught him, that Cain sung Mass, and offered
up the Sacrifice of the Altar, in the person of Abel his brother.


Peron. Murrain take him -- there is a foolish argument indeed -- does Cahier
pay his Hostess with no better coin? Have not you bin playing the little man?


Math. Not I by my Virginity. He must sweat once more --


Per. I mean, have not you bin helping him to blow the soft fire under the
Eggshel, with you know what in it, together with the Crimson Silk, and the
Magicians choicest Diet, the little Mandrake, etc.


Math. Indeed he showed me in his Closet, that which they call the work of the
Creation, but stay till thy hair be grown, and then we will speak more of that.


Per. Thou will do me an injury at one time or other in my Visits to the
Princess's Palace. But as to thy argument; were it true, Judas, the Jews and
the Murderers of Christ had bin the predecessors of our Priests. But I stopped
him and put him to a nonplus with an infallible argument. For quo I, do you
believe the Pope to be Antichrist? -- Yes -- said he -- Then said I, This
Antichrist is to sit in the Temple of God, which is his Church: Therefore the
place where the Pope sits is the Church; and the Church, that cannot err.


Math. I remember you did argue thus learnedly with him, and that he was mute;
but at night he told me that it had very much perplexed him, that there was no
other way to prove the Church of Christ, but by the Kingdom of Antichrist. To
which I answered him with another argument, invented by Bonniere, or else by
Guedron, and Gouroy, who have converted him.


Per. Oh! I confess that might well be -- for he chose rather to cry peccavi,
then take upon him the superintendency of Chartreux.


Math, Pray give me leave to speak -- The Huguenots say that the chief of the
Church of Rome are Thieves, and such as prey upon the poor people. Now the Text
says, My House is a House of Prayer, but you have made it a Den of Thieves. Our
Church is a Den of Thieves, and therefore that House of Prayer of which the
Text speaks.


Per. By St. Dominic, I must needs tell thee thou art a quaint Slut -- The
reason is profound and good; and of the same nature with that which is
concluded upon these words, The Scribes and Pharisees sat in Mose 's Chair.
Now our Works and Doctrine show us to be both Scribes and Pharisees, and
therefore we sit in Moses's Chair. But to pay thee with thy own coin, I will
tell the another argument which I keep a purpose for Vignoles. To prove that
St. Peter was at Rome, we cite his Epistle, where he sends his Recommendations
from those that were with him at Babylon. Now we cannot deny to the Huguenots,
but that Rome was thus called, especially in the Revelations. Seeing then that
Babylon is Rome, St. Peter of necessity wrote from Rome.


Math. This Reason may serve with the help of Monluke -- Well -- convert as
many as you can -- I Will do my endeavor -- I hope to debauch some of your
brother Apostles, as I have already done by the Trumpeters of his praises, La
Bross and Beau Lieu -- I will give them such variety of dishes, that they shall
talk of my Conversions, as they have begun at the Lady Constables, at a Dinner,
where they declared, That I had more inclined St. Mary to be converted, then
your brother, the Master-worker of Conversions. Alas! men are tired with
expectance. Thy brother was promoted by the Encomiums of Abbot Tyron; but no
body is promoted by the Recommendations of your brother. So that they have very
fairly told me, they will cry him up no more. Wherefore has not he satisfied
them, since they were hired to cry him up?


Per. As for Duret, the Devil's in his tongue; He was so impudent one day at
the Arsenal, as to say in my hearing, that he would never Dine where the Abbot
and my Brother were, if the drinking Glasses were not marked, because the one
was rotten with the Neapolitan disease, and the other with the Leprosy. It Is a
brave World, when such smell-feasts as He shall compare themselves with my
brother. In my opinion they deserve the same sharp rebuke, that the Count of
Tonnerre gave to Beaulieu, who talking of a Masquarade, cried ever and anon;
the Counts of Soissons, Auvergne, and I. Whereupon the Count of Tounerre put
him in mind of the Fable of the T -- S. We Apples also swim. My Brother is none
of their friend, nor will he ever assist them to unravel this yarn. They shall
not swim together, because the Count has commanded the Captain of his Guards to
cut off his hands, and cast him into the River. Thereupon he went to the King,
and upon his knees besought him to give him a Grant to commit a murder, which
was to be done the same day the Grant was made. Was it not a cursed piece of
Impudence to report, and write in Rhyme doggerel, That the King and Monsieur
Rosny, to save Charges, were about to dismiss the Comedians: Tho it is true
indeed that the King, out of his particular inherent, wisdom, has bethought
himself of a neat sham for the poor Players. For he has threatened to suppress
them, unless they will admit him in without paying; which liberty he has also
attained for Madam Marchioness. So that now they say they have a Play every
Month which costs them nothing. But notwithstanding all this, this Varlet Duret
(perhaps he aims to be Treasurer himself) still advises the King to put the
Players down, telling him, That he has a complete Company in his own House.
That he had for a Captain Vpance Vitray, well peppered with the distemper; The
Count of Soissons, who plays the Doctor, when he reads his military lessons
like a Schoolmaster, at the door of his Closet. He says the King has provided
among the rest, that the Italians shall act Gallows take thy due -- being
already like to starve; but there are Camp-masters and Captains in the lower
Court, who are as able to act that part as they.


Math. In good faith, thy Brother would do well to show 'em the way at a
distance -- He had little to do, to discontent Sallette, and another of his
Apostles, for that Strumpet Condel. But he cannot endure a companion, and
therefore he cannot endure himself. And so you, because you have got a little
Latin by surprise, cannot endure that I should share with ye, in the
Conversion of St. Mary Mont.


Per. If there be any difference between us two, the younger ought to submit to
the elder by right of Nature.


Math. Take heed of establishing that maxim, and advise your Brother likewise;
for the Huguenots would make a wicked advantage of it. Don't you know very
well* That all the Catholic Ceremonies of Calicut, where the Church visibly
adores the Devil, are like the Ceremonies of the Roman Church, both in respect
of their Monks and Nuns, their auricular Confessions and Fasts. Nay their chief
Priest is likewise called Papa, having also a Papal Crown which has not one
nail less then that (...) Rome. The Jesuits excuse it, by saying that the Devil
is God's Ape upon Earth But the Huguenots on the contrary maintain, That the
Pope is the Devil's Ape, for that very reason which you have alleged because
the Devil is eldest.


Per. Speak softly, the Devil's a fool. Se^ yonder the Baron of Salignac.


Math. It Is all one, he is one of my choice Fathers.


Per. Proselytes thou meanest, dissembling Hypocrite as thou art. So, -- he is
gone by; sometimes he curses himself for having bin converted, and at other
times he never minds it: I would not for twenty good Pistols, that he had
overheard us; or any other. who was not well resolved in his mind. Thou have
called me Pimp, and I have called thee Whore, which is the more honorable of
the two? Who would think that such Doctors are fit persons to recall revolters
from Heresy, or to save Souls that are in jeopardie of Perdition.


Math. For thy part, Pimp-major, as thou art such a one, it is a thing without
example. In reference to my self, it is not so, who as I am a good honest
insinuating Whore, may promise my self better success, for such a one was
Rahab. There Is a president for ye. Rahab the Harlot, thou know received and
saved the Spies of Israel. Thus have I done; I have saved M. St. Mary, who
though he were no Spy of Israel, yet acted as one of the King's Spies among
the Huguenot Israelites.


Per. Give me thy hand -- I am thy humble Servant; and if ever I hear any body
scandalize thee, and say, that thou have given St. Mary the foul disease, I
will tell 'em, no, -- thou have it still i'thy own custody for them, if they
please.


Math. Go too, say thou have found a Mistress of me -- Good morrow -- I Will go
and repeat all our discourse to Guedron.


CHAP. II. Of the reunion of Religion.
IT being a task of great difficulty to destroy the opinion of the Huguenots by
Disputes, we have designed what is more probable, a reunion of Religions, by
the discoveries and intelligencies of the gained Ministers: but of six that
there were, there are five dead, and one banished. Without doubt there would be
no great danger for them to quit several Theological Tenets, provided the
authority of the Church and the Pope remain entire. The reason is plain, for
that they having submitted to the authority of them, they might easily
afterward lose their arguments by virtue thereof. And when our Jesuits made
opposition to several Articles, which the other were willing to grant, they did
not smell the design, in regard that some of them aimed rather at a civil War
then p^ace of Conscience. Now you shall see what we, of the other Club of
honest good fellows would have had the Romish Church let go. First, That the
obedience should rest in the French, provided they dismissed some of their
Drolleries which caused the people to laugh, as the beginning the Mass with an
etc. and other absurdities, which are distinctly and sutly discussed by Bernard
Ochinus in his Treatise della Nativita della Messa. As to the Ceremonies, take
away the most ridiculous, and for the rest, make answer to what Bernard Ochinus
says, That it is the Lord's Supper disguised, and clogged with Ceremonies to
make it appear more holy. Next, that the Priests should be permitted to marry,
and to leave their Wives when they grow irksom. In all cases to make use of the
holy Decree, and its liberties, as you find it in the Canon, is qui non habet
uxorem, loco illius, etc. It is notably said in the Rubric of the Decree, Quod
qui non habet uxorem, loco illius debet concubinam habere. Ita nefas Episcopum
creari nisi saltem unius Concubinae dominum. Distinct. 34. qu. 9. per de var.
stud Vol. l. 4. sect. 5. Villavinceni ibid c. 4. Were these privileges rightly
observed and established, he were the son of a Whore that would not be of the
Church of Rome. Then we would abolish all Fasts, unless it were to the poor,
and the sick; dismiss the Terror of imaginary Purgatory, yet without any
injury to the mediation of Saints, for fear of ruining the Church. I do not
without reason advise the abolition of Purgatory. There is nothing has made so
many Souls very curious of their Salvation at their latter end, as the story
which follows. A Priest when he comforts a sick person, tells him, That the
pangs of death are the entrance into the Gehenna's of Purgatory; A Minister
teaches him, that they are as the pains of Childbearing, that lead into
eternal life, and builds his argument upon this Text, This day shall thou be
with me. I will boldly say, That the Index expurgatorius ought to take notice
of this passage. Now the relish of these two differences of dying, has caused
several good Catholics to renounce Purgatory upon their death beds, where the
hopes and fears of this world give way to those of the other. We would have
allowed them for their Markets, Wednesday and Saturday, Lent and Vigils, but
that Policy has otherwise order^d it, and thus we had made a perfect peace with
St. Paul in the 4. of the 1. to Timothy. This is also a forgetfulness of the
Index. Also we ought to withdraw these marks of the Faith, of abusers, of
Preachers of lies, Hypocrisy, and the Doctrine of Devils. Calvin could not
have said more. That no person read St. Paul, till the agreement be made, and
firmly signed, and the pensions of the consenting Ministers well assigned. At
the same time the other Church shall reassume their Pomp, their Music, their
Dancings, great Feastings, and the vast Revenues of their Church. These
Ministers I would they might keep their Coaches, Hounds and Hawks. We would
have established a free Liberty, especially to expel that troublesome
Discipline that has lost us so many good people. We would not have accounted
for sins, simple Fornication, nor Adultery for love, according to Cahier in his
learned book, upon the re-establishment of Bourdeaux, and his admirable dispute
upon the 7. Commandment. I say the seventh, because we have released the
second, which the Council of Trent would needs take away. For this 7.
Commandment, which is, non moechaberis, forbids the sin only to the Children of
Onan, in regard that according to our modern Theology (...) is derived (...)
and (...), quod est humidum fundere. It had bin a brave Religion, which had
rejected what was irksom to either, and had established what was plausible and
agreeing to both. Every one had bin received and satisfied, no one excluded. I
know the Aristarchians will oppose my good intentions; but against them I say,
First, that the Church ought to have its arms open to all sorts of people. Now
the expulsion of vices or incoveniencies is no reception. The Huguenots cry,
That the Church is only of the elect; but this is too severe. Secondly, I would
fain ask these sowerlings, whether they would be wiser then the Apostles, who
desired to enter Judaism with honor? You see in the Epistle to the Galatians,
how M. St. Peter, conformed and complied like a complaisant Gentleman to the
humors and infirmities of the Jews. St. Paul reprehends him; but Friar Gilles
said, he might better have held his tongue, then spoken so many things that
smelt of the Faggot. But let us also examine what our Holy Fathers said, when
they went about to give Paganism a decent Funeral. They taught us to paint our
Lady after the ancient Model of Vesta, holding little Jupiter in her Lap: the
Trinity, like Medius -- Fidius. They have brought in the Cornival instead of
the Saturnalia; Twelf-day instead of the Lupercalia. The first of May belonging
formerly to Cloris, they gave away to St. Thais, canonized for that purpose.
The Pervigiliae are solemnis'd at Beaucaire upon St. Magdalen's day in
commemoration of her first Life. The Curtisans have a Mass particular to
themselves, which after they have said, they betake themselves to their
Callings. Candlemass, what is it but the Februaria of the Ancients, when they
lighted their Candles. Their Feast of St. John answers to the Palilia in honor
of Pales, goddess of Sheep -- What the ancients called Supplications, are no
more then our Processions, especially at Poictiers, where they go in Procession
to request water from the Naiades; and at Paris La descendente de la Chaste de
S. Geneviesve is the same thing. In imitation also of ancient Gentilism,
instead of their Lustral we have our Holy water, and set Bread and Wine upon
the Graves of the deceased: of all which things honest Benedict one day said,
Ista Paganismum sentiunt. In the same manner the Institutors of our Ceremonies,
have not bin ashamed of the most ancient leudnesses of Antiquity, as having
adored the Garden God Priapus in several parts of France. Witness St. Foutin de
Varailles in Provence, to whom are consecrated the secret parts of both Sexes,
formed in wax. The Chapel is well furnished; so that when the wind blows a
little brisk, it causes no -- small disturbance in the devout thoughts of those
that come to honor that Saint. When the Huguenots took Embrun, they found
among the relicques of the chief Church a Priapus a l'antique, which had bin
unseemingly colored with red Wine, with which it had bin often washed: of
which Wine the Women afterward made a holy Vinegre, for uses altogether as
strange and absurd. When those of Orange ruined the Church dedicated to St.
Eutropius, they found another of the same kind, much bigger and more naturally
set out; which was publicly burnt by the Heretics. There is another St. Foutin
in the City of Auxerre; a third in Verdre upon the Confines of Bourbonnis;
another in the Diocese of Viviers, in low Languedoe, called St. Foutin de
Cives; another at Pontigni, to which the Women resort, when they are with
Child, or desirous of Children. Thus you see how our Doctors have made
Paganism and Christianity accord. It became them either in the name of God, or
of some body else, only to unsow, and not tear in pieces like those hotheaded
Ministers, who desire the purity of Christian worship. I find Riviere, the
King's chief Physician of a better humor then these people. He is a good
Galenist, and a very good Paracelsian. He says that Galen's method is
honorable, not contemptible in the cure of diseases, but exceeding profitable
to the Shops. The other, provided you follow the true precepts of Paracelsus,
is an excellent Method for truth, suttlety of knowledge, and thrift. Therefore
he deals by his Soul, as by his Body: being a Roman Catholic for his Profit,
and a Huguenot for his Salvation. Monsieur Gervaise, Philosopher of Magne, goes
higher: For he maintains that all our Wars proceed from want of Grammar. For
had we followed Grandem Matrem, we had spoken well; speaking well, we should be
understood, and consequently agree; for we never fall out about discourse, but
because we do not understand one another. His first rule is, That we should
make a great abatement of Financiers, who are the participles of interjections,
to silence the exclamations of the Pulpit: as also of several Nouns and several
Adverbs; as Corporally, Transubstantially, Carnally and the like. This brave
Blade boasted that he knew more of the state of Religion, then Bisouze, or his
Footman, or M. de Royan, Ambassador at Canada. But yet to fortify my design
more strongly by example, Roquelaure said, That he who refused to put all
differences to the determination of three throws of the Dice, as Bridoye, ought
to shut up a dozen of Doctors, and as many Ministers in a Room with Victuals
for one day; but not to let them have any more, till they had let down by a
Rope out at the Window their final determination legally and firmly signed. The
Curate of Eschillets said, That that would be foul play, in regard the
Ministers are accustomed to live upon little or nothing. As for his part,
because he would not concern himself in troubles, he set all things to right in
his Parish; so that when they brought him a Child to baptize, he asked of what
Religion the Father and Mother was of? If they cried, we are of the Religion of
our Fathers, then he whisk'd to the Altar half dressed, and began, Adjutorium
nostrum in nomine Dei. If they said, That they had the knowledge of God by his
Grace, then placing himself at the back of a Chair, and laying his hands upon
it. Our Savior teaches us what our first beginginning is; Poverty, etc. If it
be a Marriage, after the same question demanded, he either falls to his old
Adjutorium, etc. or else -- God the Father, after he had formed man. This was a
man of a yielding temper, not such a passionate Son of Thunder as Friar John
Bonhornme, who let a loud F -- for very madness in his Pulpit, crying out upon
the Conversion of the King, Courage, -- my Parishoners, the Heretics are
confounded, they dare no more call us Papishes, nor eat flesh in Lent before
all the World. They shall make holy day upon holy days; They hang their heads
like Bulrushes, while you exalt your horns, and flourish like the Cedars of
Lebanon. And thus you have my own sentiments touching the Union of the two
Religions.

CHAP. III. Of the Causes that moved me to my second Reformation, which was my
third Conversion.
DAniel, as he says in his own book, prayed with his Windows open, with his
face turned toward the East. Oh! how I saw Monsieur Confessor, triumph one day
upon this Text. In truth, he is a wonderful man, when he finds a Text proper for
his purpose. Therefore, said he, as Daniel when he prayed, turned his face
toward the rising Sun, so it always behooves a man of Virtue to address his
Devotions to the rising Sun, to growing greatness; and to turn his tail upon
them that are sinking into disgrace. I made little account of the King after
the feast of the Barricado's, but having made a quick judgment of his
prosperity, I vear'd my Devotions toward the beams of that fair rising Sun, who
having dissipated all Clouds, got into his hands all the forces of the deceased
King, and brought the League to lie at his feet. I returned from Auvergne and
the confines of Italy, where I understood that the common Themes of the public
Disputes at Rome were the Comparisons between the King of Spain and France.
Those Figure-casters found by their art in Geomancy, by Prophesies, by the
fatal name of Bourbon, that this Prince was born to change the Hierarchy into
an Empire, the Chair into a Throne, and the Keys into Swords, and that he was
to dye Emperor of the Christians. The Venetians adored the rising Sun with so
much devotion, that when a French Gentleman passed only through their City,
they ran after him with the same ardency, as the Frantic Dotrels ran after
Rablais's Pope, crying out, have ye seen him. Upon the Gentleman's affirming he
had, the best of their Painters presently drew his picture by imagination, and
so soon as the first picture was finished, the Gentleman was publicly treated.
And after their Grandsigniour-ships had stood staring upon it, with their Chaps
four fingers asunder for a quarter of an hour together, the Painter was paid to
his heart's content, and the Picture hung up as safe as St. Marks. The Court of
the Emperor, and Poland rang with nothing else but public thanks for putting
the Empire into such happy and victorious hands, and nothing but reunion of
Religions, or a toleration of all, was in every man's mouth. Much talk there was
of bringing Italy to this, that the King of the Romans should be really so, and
not merely titular. And for the reduction of the Pope to his Bishopric, the
Duke of Saxony caused several Sermons to be Preached before him, upon the
similitude between David and this King; honored and rewarded those that were
more in favor with this, then the former King; and sent a chain of Gold as far
as Zurick to the Author of Carolus Magnus Redivivus. This high luster of
Reputation seconded with so many warlike exploits, what did they not promise
from this Prince? had he made use of the divisions already created betweeen the
Muscovites, Poles, and Swedes, the Transilvanians, and the Emperor; and well
knowing the infirmities of the King of Scotland, the several designs in England
upon the old age of the Queen, the revolt of Ireland, the decrepit years of the
King of Spain, the ambition and suttlety of his Daughter, the small reputation
of his Son, the designs of the Princes of Italy to recover their liberty, upon
the declining years and affairs of their Tyrant. The Court of the grand Duke
open to the King; Caesar of Ferrara attempting the succession in France, which
he saw beginning to fail. The Duke of Savoy disputing about the accomplishing
the Articles of his Marriage. La Bresse lost; the rest almost ruined by Les
Diguieres, and ill succored by their own. Above all things, the preparations
of the Turks, mainly distracted both the minds and forces of Christendom. These
Occurrences designed the King for the supreme Head of Christendom, in regard
that all people beleiving in their hearts, that this King was acceptable to God
for the purity and sincerity of his Religion, prepared themselves either to
suffer or follow him. At the same time I also began to think of throwing off
the Popes yoke, and so bring all Benefices without Curates into the treasury at
War, by changing the Order of Priesthood, into the Order of Knighthood. This
was to be done, by putting into the Princes hands four times le Peron, without
the expense or hazard of Convoys. I came to Court big with overtures, full of
advantages, to be a partaker of such great expectations, Master of such a
Treasury, and a good Servant to my Conscience by the same means, which was the
chief consideration. Judge. now, Gentlemen, if this change of judgment were not
maintainable. In truth I was not sufficiently verst in the Cabals of the World,
the infirmities of Princes, and less in the grand interests of Councellers of
State to uphold the Diana of Ephesus.

CHAP. IV. An Apology for my long stay among the Heretics.
MAnifold are the considerations by which I was allured to a Religion once
already tasted and followed, whence I was thrown out by the miseries that
attended it: which miseries seemed to be permitted to afflict a poor Church,
which instead of Militant, took the course to become Triumphant. Some light of
Salvation also enticed me; and whoever has at any other time experienced such
combats of the mind, will excuse me for having considered and paused a while
before I resolved. But having withal seen at a distance, what a leap I was to
take, I took a resolution to assist the Catholic Party, assisting my Master to
jump the first frisk, that the Servant might be the less ashamed to follow him.
The question was, how to weaken the Huguenot Party; and to bring that to pass,
nothing more conduced then to undermine their two main Pillars; the first of
which, was that distinction of condition, by which, under the Law of Truces
they were separated from our Politic Regiment. The second was that difference
of Religions, which it was requisite to render less, that it might be
afterward utterly annulled. We had a touch at the first of these, when the
Huguenots lived in full prosperity, when very unhappily they concluded, That
having a King and a Protector in one and the same person, these two qualities
were inseparable without the loss of the thing. Upon this point we dispatched
away that M. Busie-body du Fay, deservedly a deceiver, and as deservedly
deceived; as appears by his Will and Testament, wherein he confesses, That he
had betrayed the people of God, to raise his own Fortune. But we are forbid to
speak of that Will. He having a smooth tongue in his mouth, and impudence
enough upon his Forehead, in a months time he sent the Mass where he pleased
himself, put down all the Chambers of Justice, caused them to quit their
Treasuries, taught their men of War to dispute concerning States, to
acknowledge none but the King, who having obtained that point, soon after laid
the Protectorship aside: for finding the name of Protector too weighty for his
shoulders, he buried it near the King's, at the door of St. Denis's Church. For
the bringing about these fine preparations, to all those who demanded of Fay,
his particular Commission, Du Fay for answer, showed the Key of Madam Martine's
Love Letters, which he said, was the key of the Seals of Nature. Some malicious
Huguenots endeavored to oppose this conspiracy; the other Huguenots, either
out of simplicity, or being brought over, call the War the Horn-war, and accuse
their Brethren to the King. So that now the whole power rests in one man's
hands. Their Judicature and treasure fall into the hands of Madam Formality, by
which means we withdrew from them in a little time, the strong holds of
Clermont, Joynville, Chasteaudun; and in Lorain, Stenay, Ville Franche, Dan and
Beaumont, Chavigni, Aubena, and several other places. Thus I may safely boast
to have given the most considerable strokes toward the undermining the Rampart
of this distinction. For the second, God rest the Soul of the deceased Morlas;
For if he and his Companions had acted their part as well for the business of
Religion, as for du Fay's Estate, there had been no Huguenots in France, but
such as were good for nothing but to be burnt: for the Huguenots of State, or
of the Sword, which you please, had made up their pack. Yet we endeavored, to
astonish the more Godly, to have gained the proudest and most stately Six of
their Ministers; who had sworn, that being chosen for the dispute, after they
had boasted very high, they would make use of a Holy prevarication. That it
might not be so, my Master Rotan, whispered me in the Ear, as he was going to
the dispute at Mantes, that he would do like Otho, when he killed himself, that
is, he would quit all his particular Interests to save Christianity from utter
Ruin; but he was taken with a fretting in the Guts which prevented him. His
Second was not so honest as he; He had prevailed with the Huguenots to choose
him in all affairs, and he was generally president. He had proposed the
Question among the Synods, whether if the Church of Rome were not the Church of
Christ (...), or at least (...), we might not be assured of Salvation therein?
And this was the loop-hole out of which, the King and many others crept. He
caused the word Papists to be left out of their Prayers, when they mixed them
with Infidels, and taught the young Ministers to speak mildly. Judge now
thoroughly, good brother Catholic, in the midst of these holy Exercises, whether
I have been an unprofitable servant to our Religion. Had I been as Impatient as
Cahier, or a solliciter of Assignations, like Serres, I had never procured in
the name of the Huguenots, the Election of the Chamber. I had not had the
Credit to send away Choupes, before the Parliaments rejected him. For that old
man had been invincible, had he not thought me very zealous. I know not who it
was that went about to bespatter the Dialogue of Rosny and Revel; I am sure I
was ready to dye for fear, when I read my name there. For had I been discovered
by that Divine, as well as by Morlas, I had lost my credit for ever. It was my
Invention, during the Assemblies of the Huguenots to dispatch ten men into
their ten several Provinces to sow the Darnel, which has so advantagiously
prosper'd there ever since. They had all their dispatches under my hand, and
were the rather encouraged to go upon that design, believing me to be of the
same Religion with them; especially Sowrce, an ancient person; de la Cour, that
has made so many excellent Sermons, and Marmet of Nerac. He, tho we had
mortified him by a tedious Famine, protested he would neither have accepted my
money, nor taken my Instructions, but out of his assurance of my piety at that
time. I taught the sprucest of the Huguenots this Lesson. Tarda sunt quae in
publicum postulantur, privatam gratiam cito mereare, cito accipies. Do thy own
business, and let the public alone. I do not speak of those Aphorisms of State
which I taught little Bisouse, his little Lacquay, Lomeny, Mainville, and M. de
Royan. So well it appears, that I did the worst I could; like them who are
afraid in the Siege of a Town; before they leap over the Wall, they scare their
Companions, what in them lies; and when they are over, being carried before the
Commander of the Siege, they speak the worst they can to save themselves from
disgrace. Moreover there are no Catholics so zealous, or that do more mischief
to the Huguenots, then your new Converts. For proof whereof, I will make an
Apology for the Jesuits, who are accused for setting all the World together by
the Ears; for thereby they show themselves true followers of J.C. coming as he
did, to raise War against Father and Son, and to set Father and Son at
variance; not to be the messengers of Peace, but to carry Swords. And these are
those little weapons, which they slide out of their sleeves, when they find it
convenient to rid the World of a Monarch that will not submit to their Maxims.
It Is requisite that Proselytes should sign their zeal with the blood of their
former Companions. And Fougasse, Tutor to the Prince of Conde, has promised me,
that he will breed up his Pupil to be the most treacherous and bloody Enemy of
those, who have followed his Grandfather and Father, upon all occasions, where
he can kill them, without being killed himself.

CHAP. V. Of the Miseries of the Huguenots.
SEeing I have displayed so large a field to the Brothers, for the discovery of
my Conversion, I am resolved to satisfy the more curious, to show that I made
a serious conscience of what I did. Every one is inquisitive what induced Sancy
to this revolt? I ask, what constrained the King to the same? If they answer,
to save his Bacon; that is my answer too. Ay, but that is ignominious -- Poverty
is more -- Then Poverty there is nothing more difficult to undergo -- which
makes men contemptible and ridiculous. Hastening to the Port designed -- but
changing the voyage and the wind, let us philosophize a little upon the
Question. This is not to follow, but always to pursue the same end. My end has
been the same without Alteration, Profit, Honor, Ease, and Security. So then I
pursued my aim, but only I changed the means. Now for profit, what means has a
poor Huguenot to advance himself in time of peace? if he be a Countryman, the
Catholics are the Assessors and Receivers, the Huguenots only Collectors. If he
be a Gentleman, and expect any thing from the King, we our selves have left him
nothing to dispose of. If Monsieur Huguenot pretends a title to any Benefice,
we have made all the Ecclesiastics take their Oaths, to strike out their names,
and not to keep their words, according to an Article made by the Council of
Constance. Their Titles will serve them in as little stead as those of
Cheradame. This was a Huguenot of the Ancient simplicity. I asked him one day
whether he did quietly enjoy the Benefice of Bandoville, which the King had
given him? Yes, said he, for it is one of the Benefices of which it is said,
The blessed shall inherit the Earth. Well, said I, but what Title can you show
that it belongs to you? A very good one said he, The Earth belongs to the Lord.
Have you no better Foundation then that, said I; for those words mention
nothing of Bondaville. How can I have a better assurance, said he, then from
Holy Writ; Thou have laid his Foundations in the Sea, now to show you that
those words are spoken of Bandoville, if you have ever been there, read what
follows, he has enriched it, and environed it with many waters. All the
reasons which the Huguenots can bring to our Judges, will signify no more then
these of Cheradame. As for honor, what content can they have among people that
dare not give them respect; if the Edict will permit them to come to Court? who
if they be merry with their Neighbors, shall have a supervisor set over them,
that shall stick as close to their skins as a scab. If it be in time of War,
what can a man of my Estate expect in those affairs? can they cant after our
fantastic formalities? Honor is not to be got among us, but by dint of hard
blows; which I must confess I never much cared for in my life, though they made
me a Colonel of Swi^zes. As for the point of Ease, what ease can it be to be
clasped up in a Cuirass, like a Tortoise in his shell. And for security, they
have only God to trust to upon all occasions, in whom a man of my humor seldom
puts more then a moderate confidence. But to handle this matter a little more
generally, I saw in France that their resolutions were agitated to the wish of
their Enemies; That they sought their security other-where then one among
another, or within themselves. That they fixed their resolutions in their
Enemie's Country and not at home, as the Switzers do; look upon the Peace as
concluded, before the Treaty was begun, and bereaved themselves of their
advantages, and distinctions before it was proclaimed. Which is worse, we have
gained three in four of their principles, which caused them to treat as already
sowed up in the Kings party; not in War, for they bore Arms for him; not in
Peace, for that their necessity urged them to treat; not in Truce, because they
had quitted their Distinctions, their Judicature, their Treasure, and their
separate Forces. So that being neither in War, nor in Peace, nor in Truce, they
fancied a fourth condition, which never was, tossing up one leg in the Air,
which could be no steady march. Some there were that cried shame upon these
proceedings; others would not seek to remedy these things, unless the Grandees,
who were gained by the King, would return among them, to buoy up their party,
now patched up of several pieces, choosing rather to be fat, then healthy. They
apprehended their own weakness, without considering the distinction of affairs
of State. Hence they began to treat with respect, to conclude without security.
They did enough to offend, but not to defend. Thus were these poor people
condemned in their simple fidelity, to be the sport of the great ones,
persuaded to have pity upon France, when France had no pity upon them; to
preserve it, when they had no interest in it; to fortify it, when they had
expelled themselves out of it. But when men have their hands tied by the fear of
God, and a bashful respect of their Prince, they should be advised of their
first motion; for whatever Peace they make, can be no Peace, but a Contract of
Servitude.

CHAP. VI. An examination of some Books of these times.
WHen Monsieur Confessor came to my Lodging, he sent in three Porters Load of
Books to enhance the Ceremony of my Conversion. Some Censurers of these times
have observed that we did not lash one of them, but that after Dinner we spent
all the day in playing at Cent. But I will show those that were so careful to
spy what was done that day, that I have well employed others in modern
Theology: to authorize my design, I have read the Answers to the book of
Plessis Mornay. It Is very great pity he has not had leisure to follow his
studies as he did some 18. years ago. But since, he has had so many affairs of
State under his hands, so much authority to sustain, such a large Family to
govern, nothing has appeared lately from him. The Theologist of Xantes seeing
all our Dogs upon that Bear, and that none bit him, or durst so much as take
him by the Ear, gave a leap at him; I would every one would do as much. For
though he answered little to the purpose, yet what one cannot do singly, many
may. There is the same method to be used against this person, and matters must
d^ boldly asserted without coming to the point of close argument; for mischief
might come of it. As for Richeome, the Heretics are constrained to confess,
that the style is the genteelest of any that has lately become public, at least
the Preface: and if they say it is none of his, yet it is his either by way of
gift or purchase. If the body of the work be dull and flat, is it not a common
Custom for the Youth of these times, to wear the fore part of their Dublets of
Satin, and the hinder part of Canvass? Does he not do well to bring three
Battalions before the King to persuade him to admit the Jesuits? Though in
truth, three Battalions of eight Thousand men apeice, and fifty great Guns,
would be more persuasive, and prove better Advocates, then the book of truth
defended. Now in pursuit of my design, I put on my Spectacles, as when I play
at Tables, and viewing at hand these three Battalions, in the first Rank I saw
none but a Company of Whipper Snappers with Morrions guilt with leaf Gold. But
any thing for a Civil War. At the head of 'em rode a fair Argument to prove
Miracles. Nature is able to perform this or that. Such and such things have bin
produced contrary to the order of Nature, Ergo. The Miracles of Ardilliers are
not false. The Colors were of good Taffata. He that carried the Collonel's
colors, having a mind to play the Coxcomb, and flourish his Colors under Leg
as they do at Paris, strained himself so hard, that he befowl'd himself. This
is the Confession of deceased Beza, who bequeaths all to his Wife, and the rest
to the Franciscans, dies a good Roman Catholic, and this is that which became
of him. I am told, an old arch Heretic read this book with a great deal of
pleasure. I would make a slight answer; but perhaps he will burst himself with
laughing, which would be an argument to prove Miracles, which is the subject of
the book. I know abundance of Catholics look upon the supposition of his death
as a strange thing. But in a book that treats of wonders, can any discourse be
thought Miraculous? For my part I affirm and maintain it to be as true as other
Miracles, That Beza is dead. First, by the argument by which we prove
Transubstantiation, God may cause him to dye. Ergo he is dead. Then again, This
book which is in the rank and number of Traditions ought to be sooner believed
then the Bible, as the Curate of St. Gervaise but lately preached. Traditions,
said he, are sooner to be believed then the Old and New Testament, provided
that they are authorized by Traditions, and not Traditions by them. More then
this, Beza is Civily dead, by Banishment, and Spiritually dead, by
Excommunication. But grant he be not dead, this news has always served, the
news has bin still made use of like a Vultur's-skin to the stomach of some weak
Catholics, to advance the pious frauds of honest Mr. Cardinal, according to
this book, and that of the deceased good Queen his Play-fellow. Think you that
that same book of St. Clement, which Capil the Venetian found in the Isle of
Crete, has not mainly conduced to the establishing private Masses. For all the
World has not such a quick understanding, when they see the letter by which St.
Clement advertised St. James of St. Peter's death, to know that St. James was
dead seven years before the other. It Is a great benefit for an ingenious man to
understand who tells truth, whether Anaclete, who styles himself Successor to
Clement, or Ireneus and Eusebius, who say that Clement succeeded Anaclete, who
notwithstanding that, wrote a very complete Letter to Clement after he was
dead. He speaks of the Temple of St. Peter, but it was an hundred years before
the Christians had any Church. I alleged these things in imitation of that
pious Father, who living three hundred years before Constantine, nevertheless
is so prudent as to call Byzantium, Constantiople, to the end ye may not laugh
at the letter which -- wrote to the Virgin Mary, and that other which J. C.
wrote to the three honest Catholics, under the Cross at Aze in Poictou, op'nly
read by the Curates of the Parishes. But not to injure the Chapter of Miracles,
and to show you that I was not converted out of Ignorance, I have read almost
all Bellarmin, and I took great care, being resolved upon my Conversion, not to
meddle with Whitaker, Lambert, or Reynolds. I have read the Declamations and
Fictions of Campanus, where I saw so many Martyrs of the new Catholic Church,
It Is the best way to read that book without examination. I did more, for I
stopped my Ears against a Heretic, that would have made me believe all those
Martyrs to be lies and fables, alleging that there were two Characters of
Martyrdom, the one, that it must be purely for Religion, and the other, that it
be at the Parties own choice, whether he will live or dye. I began to swear
that the Queen of Scot's was a true Martyr. Oh, said the Heretic, what a
miserable Religion is yours, that has no Martyr purer then a Homicide, nor any
more chaste, then a Strumpet. I could have found i'my heart to have banged him,
but he was a man of the Sword. I have read the Amorous Sermons of M. S.
Panigarole, but cannot find what the Heretics report of his Catamit: As to his
Mistress indeed ye say something, for whose sake he begins one of his Sermons
thus, It Is for you, fair one, that I dye. Nor can I find fault with his
Complement, for presently after he added, said Christ to his Church. He was a
bold Preacher, yet not so bold neither, but that I have read in some of his
Sermons preached at Turin, that although the Saints were Canonized, he did not
believe them all to be in Paradise. A wary man, not to be a general voucher for
every body. I have read the Thundering Sermons of the Bishop of Bizonte, which
hard'nd my heart for the Massacre at hand. Whoever read a more substantial
Clause then this, Che la crudelta loro era pietosa, That their Cruelty was
Mercy. I have read the writings of Reboul, who has told tales out of School,
because he had bin whipped there. That book will serve excellently well for a
Farce, after those Tragedies, which afflict the squeamish and raw Conscience of
a Convert newly galled with his Conversion. I have read Dr. Boulanger, who has
written like a Devil, all ran dan and without premeditation; they that will not
believe me, may believe their own eyes. He is better skilled in Logic now, then
when he disputed at Miot, and had he now to do with that blind zealot, he would
conundrum him in another manner then he did. For he has answered the Preface of
Duplessis, at least he gives him good words; being resolved like the chief
Captains of the holy Party, to observe this maxim, That in great undertakings,
it is enough to show a good intention. In the same manner I could not forbear
laughing, when I read the I'ambonicum of Michau against him. It Is well known
that the Sorbon has forbid him to write upon a Letter of M. Confessor. But in
the reply of Michau I blame him for saying, That the Boulangers are of Troy in
Champagne. He was ignorant that they came from Lions, where they could not stay
as being too near Provence, where they had seen M. Auguste upon the Scaffold or
upon the Ladder. I read the beginning of Doxemel, but he put me out of humor:
At first I was pleased with young Sponde's manner of arguing: for we have a
young Sponde, as well as a young Nostredamus. They say the Widow wrote it;
which causes many to admire, because it was verily thought that she had made
all public before. I have not spoken at all concerning the Treatises of the
Husband; because the first disgrace the later; which do not seem to be made
with so good a will nor in so good an humor as the first. Those are full of
discourse enliv'nd only by pomp of words, the first moving, and persuasive ad
fidem faciendam. But the young man treating of consecrated Churchyards, draws
from the sum of his discourse this consequential Argument. The Jews were very
curious in reference to their Sepulchers. The Turks account their Sepulchers
Holy, and go in Pilgrimage to Mecca; The Pagans erected lofty Pyramids,
canonized their dead, and ordained them Supplications. Ergo; The Christians
ought to do the like, in imitation of the Jews Turks and Pagans. But not to
bereave any person of the honor which is due to him, we are well assured that
this was the offspring of M. Raymund's brain, or rather of his Host, who is
also reported to have made the preliminary Epistle to Richeome. Let it be as it
will, both together have taught me very fine fancies. First, that it is a duty
to carry the Pope upon our Shoulders. Thus the Pagans exalted their Druids and
Vestals. The Romans were carried by their Slaves in Litters. The Chinese in
Tunquin carry their Religious Orders a Cock loft in the same manner, and the
Country people in Xantoigne upon their wedding days, are hoisted after the same
fashion, as it is also the Custom in Lorrain. Ergo; We are to carry the Pope,
Cardinals and Bishops upon our Shoulders, to show our selves Pagans like the
Chinese, or Slaves, as among the Romans, or else in imitation of the Courtly
fashion, of the Country Bumpkins of Xantoigne and Lorrain. The same Author
tells, That Madam Simonite, he meant Sunamite kissed Elisha's feet, Ergo; all
Kings, who are Simonites, ought to kiss the Pope's feet. This Monsieur Raymund
and his Companions, speak very well to the Huguenots and their printed
Complaints, by declaring to them that they do not complain without a cause. For
as Raymund says to Rabesne, contentiously wrangling to make a Huguenot Lady
lose the Guardianship of her Children; The Laws are not to be observed
according to humor, or to please proscribed persons: and afterward
soliciting to have a Huguenot put to death, for a Murder which a pious
Catholic had committed, we need not make any scruple to destroy the Estates of
those whose lives are under Condemnation; or to cut off particular Members
where the Body is under the general attainder of the Church. I have also read a
book, much after the same rate, and which I believe to be a chip of the same
block, mainly endeavoring to extirpate the memory of Papes's Joan. And to show
you that I have studi'd, and that I keep a Correspondence with the Learned, I
have sent him an Epigram upon this subject, which begins Foemina quod mentita
virum, to which I expect his answer.

CHAP. VII. Of the Arrogance of the Huguenots.
IF ever any Prince would reign so exactly, That neither Justice nor the word
of God should have any cause to blame his Government, it behooves him to
exterminate the Huguenots: For they are a sort of strange people, that when the
Honor of God comes in competition, trample under their feet the Honor of men,
yea even of Princes. But those of this Age are a little more respectful. It Is
publicly known what strange reports they raised against the Mother of the late
Queen Mother, taxing her with unseemly familiarity with the Cardinal of
Lorrain, as if she, that she might take the care of men upon her, had despoiled
all other women of their Vices. They made verses upon the said Cardinal for a
good turn procured him by the Prince of Portian. But St. Nicaise, the said
Cardinal's natural Son, honorably poisoned the said Prince. These Knaves
impudently reported over all France the news of a certain Picture, where the
Cardinal, the Queen of Scots, and several other persons were lovingly
entertained with a strange piece of workman-ship. And all these Stories printed
after the great contests and execution of St. Berthelemy. At the same time they
were so Arrogant as to demand peace at Millaud, and cause him to order a peace,
when they had no more then four or five Holds, more advantageous for them, then
the last peace which was granted them by the Court of Parliament. You would not
believe how little respect they gave the Queen and the Councellers of State
that attended her. Monsieur de Pibrac had made use of two pair of Topics, to
frame a petition, which he addressed to the Deputies of the Huguenots, in the
presence of the Queen. He wiped his eyes with his Hankercher, the Duke of
Montspensier snivell'd, Richelieu sighed, Gadagne showed nothing but the whites
of his eyes. When he came to Dixi, the Queen asked them, well, Friends, what
have you to say to this? Now you shall hear the answer of limping La Meausse.
Madam, because Monsieur has made such a fair speech, must we therefore perish?
The same person halting by the Chamber of the Maids of Honor, overheard Altri
saying, Must we be confined to this Cursed Gascony, only for the Deputies four
rusty Swords? Mademoiselle, answered this same Vulcan, I confess they are not
so well scoured as your Engines. It Is incredible how these people have bearded
the greatest of Princes; and made head against them with their smart and brisk
replys; as for example, that of the Prince of Conde to the Queen Mother, who
seeing a Troop of white Coats march by, reproached him, that his Soldiers were
Millers. Yes Madam, replied the Prince, to handle your Asses. The same Prince,
at another time, when the King asked him, why he did not acknowledge the Virgin
Mary for the Queen of Heaven, made answer, Because 'twas pity, so fair a
Kingdom should be governed by a Distaff. To give you fresher marks of their
Boldness; The King, then King of Navar, having sent Aubigny to Hen. the 3d. to
restore him the honor of his Alliance, before he did himself right, either for
his Sister, or the injuries which had bin done him; the King in a great fury
replied, Let your Master, if you call him so, have a care what he does, if he
knows me to be his King, I shall put such a weight upon his Arms, as would make
the great Turk stoop. To which this impudent Huguenot made this answer, Sir,
the King of Navar my Master, has to his great grief bin bred up under this
Burden. Without Threats, the homage of his Life and Fortunes is at your
Majesty's Devotion; But the homage of his honor he will yield to never a
Prince in the World, so long as he has a drop of blood in his Body, and a Sword
by his side. But not to relate the sawciness of them, who make profession of
it, what think ye of the poor Potter M. Bernard; to whom the King one day said
these words, It is now five and forty years since you first served the Queen,
my Mother, and me, we have suffered you in the midst of Flames and Massacres,
to enjoy the freedom of your Religion all this while; but now I am so perplexed
by those of Guis^ and my people, that in spite of my teeth I must be forced to
put those two poor Women and you in Prison, both they and you shall be burnt to
morrow, if you change not your opinion. Sir, answered Bernard, Yesterday the
Count Mauleurier, came to proffer those two Sisters their Lives, if they would
each of them permit you a nights lodging. They answered, They would be Martyrs
as well for their Honor as for their Religion. You have told me also several
times you would have pity upon me: But I take pity upon you, who have
pronounced these words; I am constrained; you do not speak like a King. Those
Virgins and I, who I hope have a share in the Kingdom of Heaven, will teach you
this Royal expression, That neither the Guisarts, nor all your people, nor you
your self, shall constrain a poor Potter to bend his Knee to Images. Did ye
ever hear such an impudent Scoundrel? You Would swear, he were one of Seneca's
Disciples, qui mori scit, cogi nescit. He that knows how to dye, know's not
what compulsion means. More malapartness then this appeared in these people at
the last Treaty of Peace, and at the Assemblies which continued four years,
where these self-willed moody Mules withstood not only the honestest Deputies
which the King could pick out of his Council of State, but all the Grandee
Lords of their own party. These forheads of Brass cried out, These Propositions
do not answer the good opinion which we had conceived of those which were sent
to us. They were asked the meaning of these words, La Valiere stands up; the
meaning, quo he! The meaning is, That ye go about to betray the Church of God.
Monsieur Le Villeroy told me, that being sent once to parley with these
Malcontents, while Calignon was endeavoring with a Sugercandy-speech, to
soften their fury, that Lubber Chamier, having laid his Cloak under his
Buttocks, leaned with his left Elbow in the very middle of the Table, and in
that posture fell a paring his nails, which were so long, that the Splinters
flew in the Oratour's beard, one hit de Rosny in the eye; yet no body durst
reprove him; for his very Countenance showed how little it would be to the
purpose. Choupes was so audacious as to carry to the very Privy Council the
refusal of all the Parliaments of France, and could hardly be hawl'd from the
door by the honest Huguenots of the Court. Aubigne was so void of modesty, that
when the King had given him a handsome reception at Senlis, and did but only ask
him a civil question, what he thought of the wound that Chastel had given him
in the lip, this unmannerly Clown made answer, I say, Sir, said he, that that
same God, whom as yet you have only denied with your lips, has only smitten
your lips, but so soon as you shall renounce him with your heart, he will
strike and pierce that heart. I could name another, that was an ancient Deputy,
who sitting one day with the rest of his associates upon a Trunk in the
Antichamber, took notice that M. d'O. young Rosny, and some others of the
Court Gallants laughed to see the Deputies in their old fashioned Garments.
These airy Courtiers having a mind to show their Wit, says one to the other,
I Will say he is a brave fellow that dare's but go and ask that old Curmudgeon of
a Heretic his name. D'O. to show his valor approaches the old man, and full of
high flown conceit, Sir, says he, these Gentlemen and I have an earnest desire
to know your name. If I knew how to call you, said the other, I might perhaps
give you an answer; I am a Gentleman, but not at your Conmand. Sir, said the
Courtier my name is D'O. It may be so, replied the Deputy, had you bin in as
many Battles as I, you needed not have asked the Question. As for O it is a
Cipher better known in the Chamber of accounts, then where I have bin. The
Brethren of the Cabinet fell a laughing, but the poor Messenger was more dashed
out of countenance, upon what the Deputy added. Go, friend, go, go kill
somebody, that the King may bestow some favor upon ye, otherwise ye may
chance to go without it. The Sieur Bellevre being sent by the King, to the King
of Navar at Mont de Marsan, every morning, through the window of his Lodging,
saw the Countess de la Guiche, then Miss in waiting, going every morning to
Mass attended by d'Espent, little Lambert, a Black, the Baboon Bertrand, an
English Page, a shock Spaniel, and a Lacquey. Of all which the great Senator
took notice to a Huguenot in these terms. I have several times, said he, seen
some Mistresses of our Kings, who are with them in such esteem, that the
greatest Peers of the Nation think themselves happy, if they can but watch
their coming out in a morning to pay their respects. But here I see a Lady of a
noble Family, who turns and winds the King as she pleases, walk to the Church
in a morning, fitted for all purposes with a Monkey, a Shock, and a Buffoon. Oh
Sir, the reason's plain, replied the Huguenot, for in this Court there is
neither Ape, nor Shock, nor Buffoon, but what you see. The French Courtier was
not a little nonpluss'd at the reply; but much more when he knew the St.
Maxants Curse upon the cheek of Madam Duras.

CHAP. VIII. Of Martyrs after the Romish way.
OF all the Books, which are enough to make a man a Heretic, or of which at
least a Roman Catholic ought to be very careful: I find none, next to the Bible
to be so dangerous as this great Volum of Martyrs. For it is a great matter to
see five, six or seven thousand dead people, with all the Marks of real
Martyrdom, as probity of Life, purity of Religion, and full freedom to choose
either Life or Death. This has deprived us of abundance of people that beheld
those Preachers, who had no other Pulpits then the Scaffold, the Ladder or the
flaming Faggot. These are the glorious Nicks of time, when vain hopes are said
to give place to Zeal and Virtue. They order their affairs now more prudently,
both in Italy and Spain. There does not a Year go about, wherein they do not
put to death some hundreds. But their constancy has no other witnesses then
Goalers and Hang-men, who are like the Cranes of Pyrrhus for keeping secrecy.
It Is not above Thirty Years ago, that all the Processes, of which this
dangerous book is full, and which testify the truth of it, were ordered to be
taken off the files of all the Courts of Parliament. But is their no way to
stifle the memory of these things, and to cry down all these Stories for
Fables, though the eyewitnesses are living? What shall we do? I am of opinion
that the best way will be, to make Choice of some florid style, like that of
the Count de Permission, and to write a Book, of which the Title shall be, The
Martyrs a la Romana, or after the Romish manner; Wherein we will not have so
much as one finger of a Martyr of the Primitive Church; in regard there is some
debate concerning them, between the other and us; as also for that, these
blessed Reformers cry that the Church has bin as long reformed as it has bin
persecuted, according to what Pope Silvester said, when Constantine freed him
from the Rocks of Soracte, Farwell Poverty, Farwell Purity. Now then we must make
it out, that we have Martyrs of this Age of as good Families as any of others.
The Bel-weather of the Flock shall be the Curate of St. Medard in Paris, who
was wounded in ringing the Alarm Bell. The Curate of St. Crespin in Tourain,
who was hanged in the Bel-rope performing the same Office: both taking pains to
stir up the people to make another sort of Martyrs. From thence, to disguise
the Story, we will take a frisk to Japan, where the Jesuits say some of them
have bin crucified, and where they have done several Miracles, which could be
done no where else but at Japan, because of the incredulity of the rest of the
Indians. Moreover we will condemn all the Huguenots in France to go thither, to
see if what they say be true. Our Fathers the Jesuits, foreseeing the necessity
of this book, and that there will be more Confessors then Martyrs; On the
other side, the Huguenots, instead of putting men to death for the Faith,
busying themselves in praying to God for their Conversion: The sharp-witted
Projectours have provided a remedy for both; having set up at Rheimes and at
Rome, two Colleges of young English, chosen out of a Melancholy adust humor,
the most part Exiles, Thieves or defamed persons, who when they are put into
these Colleges, as Marius Navarrus writes in his 3. book of Councils, by an
established Papal constitution, are bound to swear, That after so many years
they shall return into England to publish what they have learnt. And because it
has bin observed that much good has come of it, witness Cardinal Alain, in his
Apology for Seminaries, the Pope has redoubled their Pension. Hereupon, I guess
Baronius in his Roman Martyrology said these words, That the holy Priests, as
innocent Lambs, fatted in the Sacred Cloisters, by the holy society of Jesus,
with divine instructions for Martyrdom, Sacrifices acceptable to God and the
Sacred Colleges of Rome and Rheimes, have bin put to death, because they
preached in England the Doctrine of the Holy Romish Church. I wish he had not
said it, in regard they are Envoys of the Society of Jesuits: because they are
accused to be liberal enough of other men's blood; and therefore though it be a
commendable thing to meet Martyrdom, yet I would not have them guilty of
sending people merely upon that errand. Then to breed 'em up as Victims to God,
that looks as if we Sacrificed them our selves; and smells a little of
Baal-peor. Again, the word Cloister sounds like a Prison, as if we kept them in
Sties to force them to keep their Oaths: and upon this the Heretics would be
upon our bones, and say of the God to whom we sacrifice them; That it must be
some God of this Age, or else some God of the Earth; for that the God of Heaven
requires now no more Sacrifices at all, nor never did those of human blood. But
that which spoils all is the word, -- fatted or greased. I asked Archbishop
Valgrand, what the meaning of it was; he sent me to the Saturnalia of Lipsius
l. 1. c. 14. There I found that the Term was proper to the Gladiators who were
picked out of the condemned persons or miserable Slaves, and afterward
maintained in their sacred or rather execrable Seminaries, to the end they
might purchase their fat by their death; of whom Propertius.

Qui dabit immundae venalia fata saginae. Bellarmin did very ill to put us in
mind of the ninescore taken at Menerbe, who, every one of them chose rather to
be burnt, then to deny the least tittle of their Religion. And Antonine did
very ill to write, that they gave the Prisoners their choice, either to abjure
their Religion and have their liberty, or dye; whereupon a hundred and
fourscore chose rather to be burnt. For which reason I would not have him that
makes our book of Martyrs meddle with your ear-lulling Latin; which affected
persons, to show their gift, make use of to our prejudice, and the discovery of
our business. The Balderdash Latin which Monsieur Confessor uses, will be good
enough for us. And in pursuit of our design we must gain in England some
Ministers or other Officers, that when they hang our people there, may
discourse to 'em some point of Religion, and not of Warlike preparations,
Seditions, Petars, Guns, Mines and Poisons from the Pope's Apothecary. Then
upon the Ladder they must have their choice either to turn, or turn off the
Ladder. For those Heretics never account for Martyrs any but those, who have
such a choice proposed to them, and such as it appears by their Enditements,
that they dye for the sole point of their Religion. According to this Rule they
never list for Martyrs, those that are armed for their defense, but only such
as have no other Weapons but their Prayers. Such as were the 17000 Albigeois
slaughtered in one day, and the 30 or 40000 Souls sent upon St.
Bartholomews-day to the furies of St. Bartholomew. But as for us, who have a
better view of things, I am not of opinion, that we should be so nice, but let
us muster, for default of others, in our Martyrology all those that are slain
in Battails, Seiges, Skirmishes and Duels. Especially such as have fought
against the Heretics; and all the Irish, their Wives and Children that are
starved to death in the streets of our Cities. These are the Victims of that
great Sacrificer Sanders, and other Doctors, who notwithstanding several
pardons, caused them to make use of the Bull of the Holy Father Pius the V. as
Bellarmin reports, by virtue whereof they made no scruple of violating their
Allegiance to the Queen. And as for them, that lay sculking in the Niches of
Pont Neuf, not then finished, and in the night time Robbed all those that passed
along, and then threw them into the River, if there be any scruple of
canonizing them, we must be careful what we do, lest we should injure them that
did no harm but only to the Heretics. There are some who believe the Bishops
ought to tain the poor; But my thoughts are, that they are for the generality
very uncharitable, out of a good intention to fill our Book with the sweet
scented Sacrifices of their starved Bodies. Of which number were those poor
people, whom the Bishop of Mayence caused to be burnt, out of a good intention,
to save Corn. If the Huguenots refuse these at the Muster, we will in spite of
their teeths, pass them for Martyrs whom we allege to have died in the Wars. We
have a good Title to it: For the Fathers of the Society of Bourdeaux have
learnedly consulted about it, and wrote them down by parcels in the Treatise of
the Massacre at Coutras, of which Pamphlets Paris was full. All honest men
believe, that the Huguenots being forced to the Battle, gained the Victory by
Treachery, in regard they had hid their Canon under ground, and by that means
made our people fly in the Air like so many Birds. By this Ladder we mount to
Heaven much more noble Martyrs then the Heretics can do. St. Foy was made
Bishop of Senlis, for having placed the last Charles among the Martyrs. If so,
there is a Bishopric due to me, for having mustered up such a scroll of Martyrs
as I have done. But to return to my Text, the King, said that good Preacher,
had so much trouble to massacre the Huguenots, that he died for grief, because
he could not finish his design, nay some say, that he died blaspheming for
madness. It Is a Gentile expression which some of our Doctors use, to some
concerning the Millers Bridge, I mean those Catholic Bigots, who believe that
God overwhelmed that Bridge, as being the Scaffold of the Butchery, and that it
was a notable mark of Celestial Vengeance. But I say no, 'twas not for the
Cruelties exercised, but because they exercised no more, by which default of
theirs, I warrant ye, we lost above six or seven hundred fresh water Martyrs.
But may we not search for those who have died in cold blood? Of that sort the
most bright-shining Martyr is the Queen of Scots, who had blown up her Husband
before, constantly resolved so to do, notwithstanding all the kindness and
amorous humility which he showed her. It Is true indeed, her heart taught her
what belonged to gunpowder. But it is all one, she shall be canonized, and in
spite of the Heretics teeth, she shall be placed in the Almanac next to St.
Mary the Egyptian, only for distinction sake, she shall be called St. Mary
Morterpeice. At her feet we well place Peter Edmond, and -- with their Company
of a hundred and ten, according to the account of Baronius. The most part of
these were brave Soldiers, excellent Petardeers of the Seminary of Maurevel,
and the ancient de La Montagne, who for a small sum would have taken any man
out of your way that offended ye, or obstructed your designs, having always an
intention against Heresy. The Souls of these we must believe to be saved, for
they would fain have damned 'em themselves, but you know what is said of them
that willingly lose their Souls. Maurevel was so zealous a Catholic, that in
hatred of misbeleivers, for a small sum of money which the Queen had promised
him, having failed at Moncontor to kill the Admiral, however he offered a
bloody and sweet smelling Sacrifice to her Interests, by murdering Mosny, who
for a long time had maintained him, and raised him. He was afterward martyred
by Mosny the Son. As for old de la Montagne, he was a shrewd cunning Fellow,
and as I may say, the Patriarch of the Jesuits. For by assuring his zealous
Assassinates of his counterfeit Paradise, he sent them away overjoyed, to dye
themselves, to murder the Heads of the Christians. This Paradise was the Model
of a Chamber of Meditation. For the more variety and ornament of this our
design we will bring in all the Crucifixes, Statues of Saints, both Male and
Female, whether of Stone or Wood, in whose faces, as Baronius observes, the
Huguenots have spit, or have any other way abused, by treading them under their
feet, pulling out their eyes, or cutting off their ears or noses. To these we
may add the bodies of dead Saints, which they have burnt, as that of St.
Claude, together with the Abbey, in the year 1654. It Is very true, that some
pious Christian or other put in its place the Body of one that was hanged at
Dortaile. For new Martyrs we have Chesse, Bencharde, and that fair List of
Plessis de Cone, and Fontenelle. Nor must we forget the Martyrs of Blois, the
Father of whom was a canonized Martyr at Rome, under the name of St. Francis
the Pistoleer of Orleance. Their Posterity shall be also canonized, that is to
say, Henry of the Barricados, and St. Denis Captain, and Cardinal. On the other
hand we will put M. St. Clement, and M. Sponde, one martyriz'd by the
Procurator General, the other by his Wife. These two zealous Personages I have
put together to spite the Huguenots, who mistrusting to what end they were
canonis'd, one so soon after the other, married them together in the following
Epigram.

Qui modo Clementem voluisti jungere divis,
Et Spondam Divis annumerare potes.
In vitas Regum fuit insidiator uterque:
Ille animum Regis sustulit, hic animam.
What shall become of St. Chastel, S. Burgoign, St. Guinan, St. Barriere, St.
John Nilhet, and St. Garnet? We must also have room for the President Brisson,
and the five Martyrs, and the St. Hangman who was executed with them. Among the
rest must be admitted the twelve St. Franciscans of Chasteau Villain, whom the
deceased Admiral caused to be laid hold on for murdering the sick Soldiers of
the Army, wherever they met with them. The greatest grief to the rest was, that
two of these poor Martyrs quarreled, who should have the Commission to perform
the Execution. To decide this Ambitious debate, each of the two had a Rope
given them, to try who was the most dextrous at the sport. Never did two nimble
Skip-jacks show more dancing Bear tricks to avoid the Noose, then these two
Rascals did; of which one at lenth was seized, as he was giving a jump upwards.
The Victor having securely strangled his Compagnen, hanged all the rest. For
the hangman and the persons executed were all of the same Livery. This shoot of
St. Francis, so long as the War endured, never changed either his employment or
his habit; but knowing where there was a young Novice, who had escaped out of
the Covent, sent for him to be his journeyman. After that they went on
cheerfully with their business, and were very useful toward the Discipline of
the Army, it being a common word of admonition, ware the Franciscan. Among the
Neoterics are also Father Henry d'Anvers, and S -- de Saumur, who were burnt
for being Roman Catholics, according to the Interpretation of the Count of
Rochefort. They confessed a very strange exercise of their piety, without which
confession the latter could not have bin burnt; For the Scholar and the
Sergeant were only whipped for having devoutly attempted to murder du Plessis,
that arch Heretic. Here M. S. Biron comes in for a share, who having all his
life time lived in contempt of all Religion, all of a sudden grew so sottishly
superstitious, that if he found in his way any little remainder of a broken
Cross, he stopped and crawled upon his Knees fourscore or a hundred paces to
kiss the dirty stone where it was fixed; insomuch that near Bretigny in
Burgundy he kissed another between two T -- He was one of the Churches great
Gates: for he had renounced God, and sworn to kindle a War in France against
the Huguenots. He was the Devil of a man, but of a plausible behavior. Don't
you believe that he swore like a Huguenot, any more then Cotton, when he was
run through the left Buttock. You have a notable Martyr of M. S. Bosnier, whose
story the wicked Feneste stole from us. But he forgot the difference between
his Wife and the Countess of Norton about the Gown and Petticote which the
She-Physician got by doing and not doing. For the Countess having declared to
her Husband tha she had made a Vow for Chastity for four days in a week; her
Husband made another, for the other three. The poor Lady died for grief, and is
now a Martyr Alamode.

CHAP. IX. The Corollary.
ONE day, that it thundered, Monsieur Confessor came to visit me, and found me
in a great confusion, shortly after my Conversion. I had not slept well the
night before, and without lying, I could have wished my Conscience had lain by
its self. That which troubled me in the Evening was the cursed company of idle
stories that were brought me, how the Huguenots began to enter into new
Consultations concerning their affairs. That Coxcomb Luat had opened my eyes to
see, how that after my Conversion, the King put no confidence in me; on the
contrary, that Rosny who continued a firm Heretic got ground in the King's
favor, and thereby great Authority in France. In the midst of these thoughts,
I called to mind the miserable ends of Sponde, discountenanced by the King
after his Conversion; of Morlas, of Clairville, grieving at his death to have
damned himself to gain something, and yet never to taste the pleasure of
enjoyment; of du Fay who died altogether slighted, and despairing to that
height, that he publicly questioned, whether the Church of Rome were the Church
of Christ. Barrilliere like him, was upon the same strain. Sallettes, who
steered the same course, as having bin taught by his Wife, That he who greatly
fears God, is also afraid of men; She that never fearing nor refusing the men
of this World, was bold against God. The ends of these men pestered my
thoughts, with many others of the same sort. While I was in this Agony, I saw
M. Cahier walking in the lower Court. To him I ran, and asked him what was
become of the Minister Le Vaux? Sir, said he, that unfortunate person, after
the fair promises which he had made to Monsieur d'Evreux, and the money which
he received from him for the performance thereof, a Rascally Fever seized him,
and he is gone, into his own Country, tearing and raving that the cause of God
was betrayed by him, and five of his Associates, whom he fairly charactered,
without naming them. To this, he added, that he hoped God would pardon him,
into whose hands he was going to surrender his Soul, so soon as he came to
Millaud. He offered in the mean time to write to M. d'Evreux, in recommendation
of some able person, and withal discovered the prevarication of the dispute at
Mantes, and the other preparatives of de Roan and Serres, who you know, had
offered their perfidious mediation at a lucky time. The Huguenots were so silly
as to refuse the offer, saying, That the Church of Christ was not established
upon tricks and fallacies. A little while after, added he, when he came to
Millaud he continued his cries and lamentations especially upon the day that he
died; upon which day he walked out of the City with his friends, supped well,
but so soon as he was a-bed, he called his Wife, told her he should dye,
repeated these Lines of the Psalmist.

A Soul with true Repentance filled,
Is thy most grateful Sacrifice;
A brok'n and a contrite heart
O God thou never wilt despise.
And having so said, he expired. After I had mused a while, I took a little
heart a-grace, and asked him, how it fared with Rotan, Serres and others* Those
two answered Cahier, are forced to hide their heads, for they are both under
ground: and I Will tell ye how: so soon as they had heard of Vaux's confession,
they encouraged one the other by Letters, got themselves chosen by the National
Synod of Montpelier, with a resolution, like Caesar, to pass the Rubicon; but
before they went, to try to gain something with the Confederates. But such was
their misfortue that they both died before the sitting of the Synod. I am very
sorry for the money which Serres carried to his Wife, for she died the same day
that he did, like Ananias and Saphira, so that that money might have better
have fallen into my hands -- Sir, If you please to order me a sum, and take --
I would not suffer him to go on, but kept the Beggar who was very importunate,
at staves end, making have to bed, though without hopes of repose. By break of
day my Servants having informed Monsieur Confessor of my restlesness, and
continual exclamations, he comes into my Chamber, takes a Chair, and began
these honey-dropping words. Sir, I have bin informed by your Servants, this
morning, and yesterday in the Evening, by M. Cahier, of the strange
disturbancies of your mind; and something I find my self by the vehement motion
of your pulse; but I desire ye to take a taste of my words, as assuaging
Remedies for your exterior Distempers; for no outward violence, no promise,
hope or fear can change the inward distemper of Opinions. Reason alone, which
moves and puts them into a ferment at first, is to them the proper application;
seeing that her prevailing power produces either hopes or fears in a distracted
mind. When I speak of hopes and fears, I mean, in reference to the affairs of
this World. For in truth, when the dispute extends its self to the World to
come, then the hope of good, and the fear of evil, practice their force as well
upon the one as the other. Do you not think your self happy in that you feel no
other then the soft reign, and natural power of your thoughts, and not the
violence of necessity? Know then, that all men are reduced to this point, to be
at an ill pass either with their Consciences, or with the affairs of the World.
But because there is no perfect felicity, wise men finding a persecution upon
the liberty of their thoughts, they fly to the privacies of the heart; so that
if your Conscience cannot reconcile it self to the temper of the times, fly to
the secret retirements of the wise, reserving to your self, those things, of
which you your self are Judge, and leaving to others those things which fall
under the scan of Foreign judgment. Our external Actions may be censured by
those who are in power, and for that they have the knowledge thereof, you cannot
prevent them from dealing in their own Element, or from punishing or rewarding
as they deem most proper: but they cannot control your thoughts, which they
can by no means impeach. Sir, I speak these things as well in reference to my
self, as you; beseeching ye, that the Combats of our Consciences may not vent
themselves: or if the Conscience struggle to get loose, at least to lull it
asleep, if you cannot stifle it in the Cradle. Cahier informs me that you are
very much surpised at the sudden ends of our new Converts. The Baron of
Salignac and my self are still alive. His Wife, and the Wives of Salette,
Sponde, Morlas are also yet living. The reason is plain: They that are dead
would not stifle their Consciences; and they choked them. We must therefore
kill our Consciences, as I can boast to have done by mine; or lay them fast
asleep in the Bed of Stupidity, as the Baron and his Wife, and others, have
done by a thousand little charming pastimes of Love. Come, I will give ye a few
precepts, which I make use of my self. Many men render deservedly culpable
themselves through their own ill conduct. Loyalty, though it be highly to be
applauded, becomes liable to punishment, when it sustains them who are
depressed by Fortune. We ought to follow favor, honor those who are in
prosperity; spurn at the miserable. For never wise man made choice of the
unfortunate for his Friends. We ought to change as the times alter, and abandon
that Party, from which we can hope for no support. There is as much difference
between profit and right, as between Heaven and Earth, water and fire. The
greatest Families in the World would soon decay, should they make any account
of Justice. A tied respect to Honesty would overthrow Citys and Castles. The
liberty of committing all sorts of Impiety, supports Kingdoms. Though it went
against thy Nature to observe any measure in evil-doing, yet he that acts by
appearance shall easily find impunity, when the fact is committed. Let him
abstain from the Court, that will needs be pious. Truth and Grandeur are always
at daggers drawing. He shall always be in fear. Why should a wise man be
ashamed to follow the example of his King. Wickedness renders them equal who
are equally contaminated. It Is not a thing that deserves a little praise to
deceive a Prince. Honesty, not accompanied with felicity, is always
contemptible; and for poor Virtue, see how it is forced to suffer the scoffs of
the Vulgar. Thus you see, Sir, how I have endeavored to employ your
contemplation, not doubting but you will make your advantage of what I have
said; as being the most proper Physic for your disease. I returned my most
humble thanks to Monsieur Confessor, and applauding his discourse, Sir, said
I, what follows, I speak by way of Confession, in acknowledgment of your
kindness. I recommend my honor to your care. And to show ye that your Doctrine
is sowed in a good ground, I am so far from contradicting your grave advice,
that henceforward I intend to piss upon the friendship of the miserable. I have
learnt from you, that the best way is to eat fowl when they are mortified, and
to make advantage of men when they are suppl'd by their misfortues. To this
purpose, I will tell you a brave Act which I did upon my second Conversion. We
were at Orleans, the Abbot of -- and I when the Massacre was committed. The
Abbot advised me to go forth into the street with my Sword i'my hand and to do
as the rest did, to save my own Life. Seeing that his Counsel succeeded, and
that for having my Sword in the guts of a poor Hat-maker, I was welcome among
the Massacrer's, it put me in mind of a Gentleman, to whom I had bin beholding
for four Months entertainment. I went to the door with -- and other Consorts.
The good man was upon his knees in the Chamber preparing himself to dye. When
he heard my voice he came running down, received me full of joy, crying out,
with his eyes lifted up to Heaven; O God thou have sent this man as an Angel to
succor me in my affliction. That is, thought I, to put ye quite out of your
misery, and thereupon I presently sheathed my Sword in his heart to do him a
freindly office. I saved his Wive's Life, of whom I and -- and the rest of the
company made some small use as the time would permit. Afterward for grief of
the Injury done her, she ran foolishly into the heat of the Massacre and was
her self knocked of the head. I missed killing a Varlet Huguenot, who would never
do as I would have had him. So that for want of sufficient help, I got no more
than fourscore Crowns, and a green Camlet Suit. And this is that wherewith you
have heard me openly tax -- when they returned with me to Paris. A noble Act,
cried M. Confessor, and I think it was almost in the same Coin that you paid
M. Gennes, though you did not cut his throat, when he importuned ye to repay
the 100000. Crowns. Such discourses as these cheered me up for a time. So that
I resolved to harden my heart; never think of what was past, but altogether
mind the future. I have now only two little Fears that disturb me; the one in
reference to my Estate, the other, my Religion. The first is, if the Huguenots
should mind their business as they might do, then would the greatest part of
France fly to their embraces. But in that case, God be thanked, we know how to
go, come and return again. Let me alone to counterfeit Eubolius, and to roll my
self in a Sack to the St. John's Gate in Rochel, with an humble Petition in my
mouth, Christians tread me to dirt, who am but salt without savor. But the
fear of my Conscience is, least a burning Fever should surprise, and deceive
me, as it did Morlas. However, let the worst come to the worst, it may be God
may pardon me; if he does but see me kick a woodd'n Saint topsy turvy in sign
of Repentance.

FINIS.

