The Lord Chief Baron Atkyns's Speech to Sir William Ashhurst, Lord Mayor Elect
of the City of London, at the time of his being Sworn in Their Majesty's Court
of Exchequer, Monday the Thirtieth of October, 1693.
My ^^rd Elect,
T^^ Duty of that place wherein as yet I serve Their Majesty's, does oblige me
to say something to your Lordship upon this great and solemn occasion. I
thought I might have been excused by reason of great indispositions of body
that are present upon me. But since it is my Duty, By the Grace of God I will
endeavor to discharge it with all faithfulness and freedom. And I am the more
encouraged to undertake it, because of the great Merit of the Excellent Persons
that are before me, to whom I must more particularly apply my self in what I
have to say.

I s^^ll raise my Discourse from Two Heads, and they are very vulgar, and they
are very short, each of them consisting but of two words in Latin, Foris Arma,
Consilium Domi: Wars abroad, but Counsel at home; The first tells us of our
danger, the latter teaches us our duty.

Foris Arma: It pleases Almighty God, that after some years gone over our
heads since the last Revolution, and after so much Blood spilt, and so much
Treasure spent, we yet continue in a State of War, and that with a Prince who
is very powerful, is highly enraged against us, and is very prosperous. His
power at Land appears in this, that he has raised three great Armies, and
maintained them, and with his single Force is able to Cope with almost all the
United Forces of Europe. His Power at Sea appears in this, that he can
encounter with the united strength of three great Nations, the English, the
Dutch, and the Spaniards; each of which (single) not long ago, had been too
hard for him.

I shall tell you in a few words, what the Design of this Great Enemy of ours
is; not that I mean to tell you news, for I suppose there are none here present
but know it; but I am afraid, we are not so sensible of it as we should be, we
do not so well consider it as we ought. But however, I must mention it, because
it induces much of what I have to say.

The Design of this Great Prince, the King of France, is this: First to make
himself Universal Monarch of the West; and if that were all, it were not so
bad: Fot it does not so much concern the world who Governs, as how they Govern.
But in the next place, it is to establish an Absolute Arbitrary Power every
where: He would rule us with a Rod of Iron: His will and pleasure must be the
only Law. And in order to this, he does endeavor to make all other Princes and
Monarchs seek to be Absolute and Arbitrary too, in their Dominions, that he
alone may have the power of Ruling them, and that they may have their
dependence alone upon him: And therein he would have the Prerogative that
belongs to Almighty God, to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: He would be
the great Proprietary Owner and Disposer of all Estates and Possessions at his
will and pleasure; to lay what Taxes and Burdens upon them he pleases; they
shall toil and moil, they shall plow and sow, and he shall reap and divide all
among his Bashaws and Janissaries, and Men of War. He would destroy the
Protestants, and root out their Religion, and suffer no Religion to be
professed any where, but the Popish; and that not out of Zeal or Love to
Religion, but he would make it a State-Engine, that pretended Religion being
most suitable to serve his Ambitious Designs.

These are his Designs, and I shall prove it to you by some most manifest
undeniable Instances. And I have them already collected to my hand by an
Excellent Author, and his name is Dr. King (late Dean of St. Patricks in
Ireland, but who since that, was made Bishop of London-D^rry) in a
Thanksgiving-Sermon of his preached at St. Patrick's Church in Dublin, upon the
reducing of that Kingdom, before the Lords Justices of Ireland. It is in print,
and any one may have recourse to it.

In the first place, He does state this to be the Design of the French King, as
I have stated it; and then proceeds to the proof of it. And the first thing is
a Paper found in the Closet of the late Lord Tyrconnell, then Colonel Talbot,
where the Design is laid open, it is dated in July 1671. (now two and twenty
years ago) There is the first Scheme of the Design laid between the French King
and our late King, King Charles the Second; and it is a Scheme of such a Design
as I have told you of; and then it proposes the means for effecting of it.

First, To procure Popery to be established in England by a Toleration; next,
To supress the Insolency (as that Paper calls it) of the Dutch: And the last
is, To have a strict Alliance between the French King and the King of England.
And by this means (as that Paper concludes) would the King of Great Britain be
absolute Monarch over his own Subjects.

Another Proof he produces, is a Memorial delivered in to the States of
Holland in the year 1688. and that was by Monsieur d'Avaux, the French
Ambassador, then at the Hague* In this Memorial all this Design is stated
bold-faced. There he tells the States, There was a Treaty between our then
King, formerly the D. of York, and his Master the French King in the year 1671
and that was to this purpose; To bring about such a Design as I have spoken of:
by which means (as that Paper has it) the French King would be Universal
Monarch, and the King of England Absolute over his own Subjects; and by this
means there would be a Re-establishment of Popery in these three Kingdoms. That
is his Second Proof. The Third is a Letter written by Moloony the Popish Bishop
of Killalo^ in Ireland, and directed to another, wherein he states this to be
the Design of the French King, that I have mentioned, and the means the same to
effect it. In which Paper, says my Reverend Author, there is great anger
expressed, that some Trimmers about the late King do disown any such Treaty
with the French King.

So that here are clear Proofs, that this was the Project between the two
Crowns of England and France, of a very long standing. They are Proofs in
Writing, and under the Hands of those who were eminently instrumental in the
carrying on of the Design. But had I time, and were it so pertinent (especially
here) I could make that Design between England and France elder than 1671. And
particularly, I need but mention the business of Rochel. You may see how that
Achievement of that King (this French King's Father) by the management of this
public Minister Cardinal Richlieu, is celebrated with wonderful Encomiums by
him that was then Secretary of State. They date their Freedom (as they call it)
and their Power over the Protestants, from that acquisition, and acknowledge
that it came by the help of England; which is a great shame to be said. The
poor Protestants in France, particularly in that City, prayed Aid from hence,
and they had some Ships, six Merchant Ships sent them; they expected their
deliverance by this means; but when they came, instead of helping them, their
Men and Provisions were delivered over into the Power of the French King; which
when they saw, they presently threw open the Gates, and submitted to mercy. And
ever since that; the French Kings have been absolute over their own Subjects.

But I must not enlarge much more upon that Head, else I could tell of some
great Designs of the same kind at the same time here at home. The striking out
of that part of the Ancient Oath in King Charles the First's time, at his
Coronation by Archbishop Laud (that the King should consent to such Laws as the
People should choose) and instead of that another very unusual one inserted,
Saving the King's Prerogative-Royal. I do not deny but the King of England has
a large Prerogative, as much as a good King can desire: He has a Prerogative to
do good; He is only restrained from doing hurt: For our Law says, The King can
do no wrong. He has we say a Prerogative that is part, and an eminent part of
the Law; but it is not above the Law.

And I could tell you of something more of that kind done since in the time of
the late King James, at the time of his Coronation, there was much more struck
out of the Coronation Oath, which might be well worth the enquiring how it came
about. But I let that pass; I have made out to you what our great Enemy's
Design is; I will now tell you by what means he has endeavored to effect it.

He does first confederate with the Great Turk, that professed Enemy of the
Christian Religion; he has brought him into Europe to destroy Christianity: And
as this Enemy of ours, the French King, would destroy Protestants, so would
that Confederate of his destroy and root out all Christianity; and yet must
this great Prince the French King (forsooth) be called the most Christian King.

He does break through all the Bonds of Religion, Morality, and common Justice;
he has openly and publicly professed he would not be a Slave to his word and
Oath. He values not all the Edicts, under which the poor Protestants of France
had their Protection. He did take a Solemn Oath, and he took it upon the
Sacrament, that he would renounce all Pretensions of Title to the Spanish
Netherlands; and yet you see he is gaining the Possession of it through a Sea
of Blood. He does (as we have great reason to suspect) by his Agents and
Ministers, corrupt with Bribes and Pensions (or at lest endeavors to do it)
those that are Agents, and employed under his Opposers, to get Towns and
Fortresses into his hands, those Unmanly, Ungenerous, Unprincely Means. And we
have reason to suspect him to have had an hand in designs of assassinating
those that are his Enemies, and to have joined with Dealers in Poisonings.
This, I say, we may very justly suspect, though we cannot offer undeniable
Proofs of it. But after all, I should instance in that base corrupt way of
sending Midianitish women, according to the Counsel of Balaam, to lull Princes
asleep; and dive into their Counsesl and betray them to Death.

But besides, There is one piece of Policy of his, wherein he outdoeth all
other Princes whatsoever; and that is the great thing of maintaining and
managing Intelligence. He can tell when your Merchant-Ships set out, and by
what time they shall return. Nay, perhaps, he does take upon him to know by the
help of some Confederacy with him that is Prince of the Power of the Air, that
the Wind shall not serve in such or such a Corner, till such a time. He knows
when our Royal Navy is to be divided, and when it is united.

And shall I ghess how he comes to have such Intelligence? that were well worth
the hearing; I would but ghess at it; and I would in my ghesses forbear saying
any thing that is dishonorable to any among our selves. We all know the
Scripture tells us, That the good Angels are Ministers of God for good to the
Elect. It is the comfort of all good men that they are so. It is said, He will
give his angels charge over thee to preserve thee in thy way; and, I hope, we
are every one of us in our way. But we have reason to believe, that the wicked
Angels are very instrumental in carrying on such Designs as this great Man has
undertaken.

It is a vulgar Error that has obtained among some of us, That these Wicked
Spirits are now confined under Chains of Darkness in the place of Torment. I
remember that Expression of some of them to our Savior, Art thou come to
torment us before the time? It was not then the time of their being tormented.
It is rather to be believed, that they are wandering about in the Air, and there
fleeting to and fro, driving on such Wicked Purposes as this our Enemy is
engaged in.

We know Grave and Serious Historians give us Instances of Correspondences held
by both Good and Bad Spirits here; the Wicked by God's Permission, the Good by
his command, and particular good Providence.

So the Death of Julian the Apostate Heathen Emperor, who was killed in his
Wars in Persia, was known in the very moment of it at the City of Rome, at a
great distance from the place of Battle, to the no little Joy of the
Christians. And this I supose was by the Ministry of a good Angel.

We have Instances of another nature, of what has been done by Evil Angels. In
the Instant of our Savior's Passion, if we may believe credible Historians, it
was known at a vast distance from Jerusalem, at Sea among some who were then in
a Voyage. They heard a Voice in the Air, crying out of the Death of the great
God Pan. After which followed great Howlings and Screechings; whence we may
suppose by the Expression, that this was by some wicked Spirits that were
hovering then in the Air, and did communicate this piece of Intelligence.

I shall say no more on this Subject; but before I go off from this Head of
Foris Arma, I would observe one word that may afford Your Lordship and us some
comfort, or at least some Mitigation of what may else be afflictive upon this
account. We have Arma in the Case, but they are Foris; the War is Foreign. We
have cause to bless God it is not yet in our own Country, We are not sheathing
one another Swords in the Bowels of one another, as some of us know it
heretofore has been. It is abroad, we know not how soon it may come home to
our own doors. But it pleases God of his great mercy, that our Nation wherein
his Providence has placed us, in an Island which lies not so open to the
Incursions and Invasions of a Ravenous Enemy, as the continent does. What a
desperate condition had ours been, if it had not been for this our situation,
long e're this. Consider what a sad condition those poor creatures are in, who
live in the Seat of War; themselves, their Wives and Children, all Slaves to
the Conqueror's Sword, daily under Oppressions, Rapines and Cruelties; one day
under one Power, another day under the opposite Power. This is their Condition;
Blessed be God it is not yet ours.

I shall say no more upon this Head, but resort to the other Head that I
mentioned at first, Consilium Domi. And it is a mercy from God, that we have an
opportunity yet left us for Counsel, a Winter before us to consult in; and
wherein, tho we do not doubt but our great Enemy will be very active, yet he
cannot make such a vigorous progress in his designs, as he may at another time
of the year. We have yet time to consider, and confer together.

And it is the Happiness and Blessing of Almighty God, that we have the so near
prospect of the Great Assembly of Parliament, that will be Consilium Domi
indeed. If there be any miscarriages, any ill Intelligencers, any inbred
Traitors and Enemies within our selves, they will, we hope, take care about
them. The House of Commons, we know, is the Grand Inquest of the Nation. It is
one of their great Offices and Duties to make Enquiry after, and prosecute such
Offenses; and we doubt not they will do it.

It is not lightly and groundlessly to be suspected, that those who lie in the
bosoms of Princes should betray them. But yet I will tell you, that no Prince
has reason to be secure in that point. I cannot read that Passage of the Royal
Psalmist without a great deal of Compassion of the Condition of Princes in this
respect. David was an Holy Man, beloved of God, of great Courage, Parts, and
Piety, yet consider what he makes his own Case to be. My Familiar Friend, he
that eat of my bread, has dealt treacherously with me. But he describes him
further than that; We took Sweet Counsel together: So that it should seem he
was a Privy Counselor, as well as a Familiar Friend. Nay, yet further, We went
to the House of God together: So that he was of David's Religion; he was one
that joined in the same worship with him; he was no Dissenter. Nay, he was one
that professed great Love to the House of God; possibly he might be a great
Champion for the Church, and the Head of the Party. Yet such an one David
describes him to be, who had betrayed him.

We have besides this, (which brings the matter home to what we have now before
us) great need to take care to choose Excellent Persons into Offices of
Magistracy, especially for this great City, upon whose good depend many things
that I shall tell you of by and by, and on which depends so much the good of
the Nation.

And, my Lord, here we have cause to rejoice that that Great and Wise Body have
made such a Choice for their prime Magistrate as your Lordship, one every way
so fitted and qualified for that great Office. My Lord, I will tell you what
comfort I hope for from it, and I make no doubt, many others that are here do
the same; That hereby we have a Token for good in the Inclinations of the
Citizens, we feel their Pulse, we know what their temper is, and we rejoice in
it; it is spoken in their Choice of you. They appear to be Lovers of their
Country, lovers of their Religion, lovers of the true English Interest, and
well inclined to set the world at liberty, as to their Civil and Religious
Rights.

My Lord, I have a further Comfort in this matter; the Election of Officers is
a deliberate Act, it is the Fruit of Counsel, (which is the Head we are now
discoursing of) and the Result of wisdom. But, My Lord, we may look higher,
even in this Action of the Citizens, there is, as in all, great human actions
the Primus Moter, to be considered, the Mighty God that governs in the Hearts
of the People, He has put it into their Hearts to fix upon you. What do we
gather hence? Vox Populi est vox Dei; Almighty God has chosen you.

It is a mighty Curse as we read in the Book of God, to have a wicked Ruler set
over a people: On the other hand, it is a great comfort and happiness to see a
good man chosen to bear Rule among us. Almighty God has given us in this an
Earnest and a Pledge that he will not yet leave and forsake us, and I raise to
my self a good ground of great Comfort from it.

My Lord, in the third Century, after the time of our Savior, there was one
Antenor the eighteenth or nineteenth Bishop of Rome died, and the Sea became
vacant, and the Christians in a great Body met together to choose a Successor,
and being in the Field together, a great many Names were tossed to and fro of
Persons that might be fit to be chosen. But there was in the Crowd one that was
known to a very few of that Multitude, he was among the Ignota Capita, one
Fabianus, who was a plain Country Person, very obscure, but a pious meek Man,
who little thought of, or sought the Bishopric. As they were tossing about
several Names, at last, in the open view of the Assembly there was a Dove
lighted upon the Head of Falianus, which when the People saw, they presently
with one Voice chose him to be Bishop. You have the Relation in Eusebius, an
Ecclesiastical' writer of great Note and Credit.

A Dove lighted on his head! an excellent Emblem for a Bishop, who ought to be
of a meek and Dove-like temper and disposition: Amari non timeri debent
Episcopi. It was the Blessed Spirit of God in that similitude which lighted
upon the Head of our Savior, to give Testimony to him as the Son of God at his
Baptism. And it was a Dove that brought the Olive Branch into the Ark. It is an
excellent Emblem of a Magistrate, who ought to be like a Dove without Gall.

My Lord, indeed there was no Dove lighted upon your Head at your Election, nor
was there need of any; for Miracles were never done in vain: it had been a
Miracle if you had not been chosen. Your every way being so fit and qualified
for this Trust and Command, did bespeak your Election.

It is a dispute among the Learned, whether Government be of Natural Right or
Human Institution. I remember the Learned Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity,
says some Persons have a natural Right to be Governors; that is, Men of great
Virtue, Parts, and active Spirits, that are Mercurial: Others again are fitted
for Subjection, being of duller tempers, and more sluggish heavy Spirits; some
are fit for Hands, others for Heads.

There was a Noble Roman, who was called Mecoenas, of whom Tacitus tells us, He
was never Consul in Rome, nor Senator, but yet had a great authority both with
Senate and People, as any of those who had triumphed, because of his excellent
Parts and great Virtue. It might have been said of him, He loved our Nation,
and has built us a Synagogue; that is, he delighted to do them good; and they
would all listen to him upon all occasions, though he never had any of the Badges
of Authority conferred upon him.

It is taken care of by our Law, That that Coin which is current among us must
not be of the baser Metals, but of one of the two ^^ner species, Silver or
Gold; it must have intrinsic value, as well as the Royal Impress. This
Election of your Lordship, and ^ur Swearing you and all this Ceremony, gives
but the stamp and ^mpression, it was your own intrinsic value before that
entitled ^ou to the Office.

My Lord, I shall say no more upon this Subject, but shall make all the have I
can to conclude with that which is my duty, to give some Advice to your
Lordship. Not but that you know your duty as well as I can teach it; but I must
not neglect any part of my own.

My Lord, I must advise your Lordship to take care, First, of Religion, and of
the Service and Worship of God in the City, to keep it up in power, and in
purity. If we would have God to be our God and our Friend in a time of
Distress, we must carry it toward him Dutifully and Religiously, and then we
shall have him always our Friend, our Father and Protector. Therefore, my Lord,
be severe upon all open prosane persons, Swearers, and others, and those who
are not afraid to vent their Atheistical loose Opinions in Religion. There are
a great many professed Atheists amongst us; and there are, I fear, a greater
number that pass under a new Name of Deists, that are of as pernicious
Principles, and indeed, I fear, more dangerous; who throw off all revealed
Religion whatsoever. Pray have a care of these, and such as lead dissolute and
debauched lives; for if they be tolerated, they will prove great Snares and
Mischiefs to us all; and therefore I hope your Lordship will look carefully
after them.

In the next place, pray, My Lord, take care of the Peace, and Quiet of the
City, upon which the Peace of the Nation so much depends. We have those among
us, and a great many, who, what with false Rumors and Reports, and other
artifices and cunning Contrivances would disturb the Peace of the Nation, and
put Frights and Fears into the Multitude. It would be a desperate Remedy, that
of Insurrections and Tumults. Your Lorship will do well to have an Eye upon
them, and prevent the beginnings. (...) are well joined together in Holy writ;
it is Almighty God (...) that can still the the Raging of the Sea, and the
Tumults of the People. Whatsoever may be the Pretenses upon which they are
first got together, we know not what they may turn about to when once they have
a Head.

My Lord, You will likewise do well to take care, that the Proceedings of your
Courts of Justice be clear and speedy, and not too chargeable to the Suitor.
And here I cannot but renew the mention of a thing that I have spoken of. I
wish there were a good Law against selling of Offices in the City, and every
where else; it does corrupt the Fountain of Justice. I speak not so much of
your other Offices, but of those in your Courts of Justice; it may prove the
ruin of the City, and the destruction of the Government.

Pray, My Lord, take care of Charity; look after the poor, especially in this
hard Winter, and now there is such Scarcity of Corn, and the Dearness of Coals:
Your Lorship in great Prudence and wisdom, and of your great charity, will, I
hope, think of it in time, and provide Stores for the poor People, that they
may not be in extreme Want as to Food or Fuel.

I beg of your Lordship to be vigilant over those who meet together, and cabal,
and study how to disturb our Peace. My Lord, they do now appear open-faced, and
effect to be known as Enemies to the Government. They will not join with us in
observing our Fasts, but take occasion on those days to feast and be jolly with
one another; they purposely pride themselves in paying double Taxes, because
thereby they are known to be against our present Settlement. These must have a
strict Eye kept upon them.

I had much more to say upon that Point, but I have been too long already. I
come now to the last part of this Work, that lies upon me, that is, to offer
your Lordship some Considerations, that may encourage you in the cheerful
Discharge of your Office.

Among other things, you have the good Examples of your two last Predecessors,
who indeed are so honorable and worthy persons, that they may be counted among
the Worthies of David; and, in particular, your immediate Predecessor that
stands by you, who has, during his time, well preserved the peace of the City,
and delivered it fairly into your Lordship's hands. Tho we ^^nnot say, he has
brought the Ship into Harbor, yet he hat^ ^^^ly performed his part of the
Voyage, notwithstanding the Ro^ghness and Tempestuousness of the Season.

My Lord, You have the Example of the King himself to encourage you, who has,
with great Courage and Love to our Nation, exposed his Person to the utmost
Perils and Hazards for us. And it is not only his Virtue that may be an
Encouragement, but it is evident now to all the world, that there has a
Blessed Providence attended him in the greatest Danger, to preserve and protect
him. In the businness of Fights, there is not a Bullet that flies, but it is
under the Government and Direction of Providence. And it is to a Miracle
apperent, that the Hand of Providence is continualy over the Head of our King.

When Julius Caesar was in great Distress, Pompey his Enemy having possessed
himself of all the Power, and shut him up under great Difficulties, he puts
himself into a Disguise, with a purpose to make his escape, and embarked
himself in a sm^^^ Vessel. When he was there, he could not prevail upon the
Pilot to put to Sea, it was rough and tempestuous, like the Times we are now
in; all the Arguments he could use would by n^ means do with him: At length he
was forced to throw off his Disguise, and show himself, and tell him, Caesarem
and Caesaris fortunam v^bis: You have Caesar abroad and Caesar'^ good Fortune.
That which he called Fortune I will call Providence: And that Providence which
preserved the King, I make no doubt will protect you in your Great Station*

My Lord, You have under your Care (and I am glad the Care is in such hands)
the Worship and Service of Almighty God and his Glory is engaged on your side.
Our great Enemy, that I have spoken so much of before, most blasphemously and
impiously arrogates Glory to himself, which is God's Prerogative. My Glory,
says God, I will not give to another. But the French King snatches at it; he
declares openly. That the Dutch are an Hinderance and Diminution to his Glory;
and we may Expect to have the same said of our selves.

My Lord, I say, you have this Glory of God on your side and you have the
Prayers and Assistance of a great many that love God; a Great many in your
City, I dare pronounce, more than in any place under Heaven. The Prophet
complained, That he was left alone to serve God. But God answered him, that he
had seven thousand in Israel which never bowed the Knee to Baal. I may multiply
that number of Seven as our blessed Savior does in the case of Forgiving our
Brother, There are seventy times seven thousand in this City, and about it,
that never bowed the Knee to Baal, never had a hand in all the Miscarriages and
illegal Actions of the late Times, would never own Popery and Arbitrary Power.

And I question not there are a great many more in the rest of the Kingdom:
These may be an encouragement to you. You have the Interest of all the
Protestants in the world, and all that are concerned for their Civil Rights,
and their Religious ones too on your side.

My Lord, I shall only conclude with one word: Your Entrance into this great
Office is very hopeful; we all of us heartily wish your Exit and Conclusion may
be as happy.

FINIS.
Dublin, Reprinted for M. Gunn at the Sign of the Bible in Essex-street near
Essex-Gate. 1694.


