A MEMORIAL Of His Excellency The Count D' Avaux, Ambassador Extraordinary from
His Most Christian Majesty.
Presented to the States General of the United Provinces on the 29th of April,
1684.

THE Count D' Avaux, Ambassador, or Extraordinary from the Most Christian King
finds himself obliged, to satisfy the Orders he has received from the King his
Master, to put your Lordships in mind, how that since Spain has declared War
against France, and that His Majesty could in no wise dispense himself from
Employing his Arms in the Low-Countrys, in order to the bringing that Crown to
prefer the Re-establishment of the Peace before the Continuation of the War,
His Majesty was willing at the same time to use all the Facilities that could
reasonably be expected from him, toward a speedy Accommodation. Your Lordship
too has effectually seen, by the Memorial which the said Count D' Avaux
presented to your Lordships in the Month of February last: He has moreover
offered to your Lordships on the behalf of His Majesty, all the Expedients the
most capable of disposing the Spaniards to consent to this Truce, or at least
to remove the War out of the Low-Countrys; and there was so much the more
appearance, that these Expedients would produce all the good Effect which His
Majesty might promise himself from thence, and that they left you not any
occasion of uneasiness for the Barriere, and gave you the time necessary for
the prevailing with the Catholic King, to consent to the said Truce, or to any
Accommodations heretofore proposed.

Nevertheless the Intrigues and Solicitations of the Ministers of Spain, have
still had such Power and Prevalency at the Hague, as not only to hinder your
Lordships from Deliberating upon the late Offers of His Majesty, but also to
take the Resolution of fortifying with all the Troops you had left, the refusal
of the Spaniards; insomuch that it is at present in the power of those who
Command the said Troops, to Engage by any Act of Hostility, all the United
Provinces in a War against His Majesty, and to break for ever the good
Correspondence which the Cities and Provinces, the most firm to the Ancient and
true Maxims of the Commonwealth believe it still necessary to keep with France.

This it is which determined His Majesty to depart forthwith, to put himself at
the Head of his Armies, and to make his way to a Peace by force of Arms, after
he had found all the means of Gentleness and Moderation ineffectual. But tho
His Majesty is entirely disengaged from the Offers he made, by the Expiration
of the time he had fixed for the agreeing upon those matters; and that he well
knows he might Attaque Places whose Conquest might be more easy, and of a
greater advantage to his Crown, than that of Luxemburgh; yet he has resolved
upon the Besieging of that Town, as well because it is entirely divided from
all that ought to make up the Barriers of the Low-Countrys; and that it may not
give any just occasion of fear to those who take Interest therein, as because
the Design which His Majesty has of making himself Master thereof, tends rather
to facilitating the Peace and Safety of his own Subjects, than the incommoding
those of the Catholic King, to whom this Place cannot be of any use: And
moreover, His Majesty already possessing all the Countries which surrounds it,
the Spaniards are only wedded to the keeping it, out of the hopes they have it
will ever furnish them with the occasions of renewing the Wars, and with the
means of doing more damage to France than any other in the Dominions of the
Catholic King. Yet as His Majesty only makes War with Intention of Concluding
Peace upon Reasonable Conditions, He declares by the said Count d' Avaux, that
if before the 20th of the month of May next, the Governor of the
Low Countries, whether upon his own motion, or the request and solicitation of
your Lordships, will effectually put into the power of His Majesty, the said
City of Luxembourg, with 14 or 15 Villages and Hamlets which are of it is
Dependence; His Majesty will not only consent that the Cities of Dixmuyde, and
Courtray, after His Majesty shall have caused their Walls, and Fortifications
to be levil'd, should be restored with their Dependancies to the Catholic
King; but that he will also desist from the demand he made of forty Villages,
which were severed by the Treaty of Nimeghen, from the Government of Tournay,
and which have reunited to the Chasteleny of Aeth; And that he will only
detain of all the Places he has possess't himself of, since the 20th of August
last, that if Beaumont, with three or four Villages which remain of it is
Dependancy; Bouvines, which has not any, and Chimay, with twelve, or fifteen
Villages which depend thereon; so as by the means of this Reciprocal Cission,
or Renunciation, namely, on the part of his Majesty, all the Rights, and
Pretensions upon Alost, the old Borough of Gaunt, and other Places demanded by
his Procurator General, at the Conferences at Courtray, and all he has
possess't since the 20th day of August last, bating the said Places of
Beaumont, Chimay, Bouvines, with the little which depend thereon; and on the
behalf of the Catholic King, as well the said Places of Beaumont, Chimay,
Bo^vines, and Dependancies; as the City of Luxemburg, and the Villages of it is
Provosty; the Peace may be Established, and all sorts of Occasions of Division
removed, which might alter it in the future; Otherwise leaving France and Spain
in the same state of Possession, in which they were at the raising of the
Blockade of Luxembourg, without any pretension, being likely to be started on
either part for any reason whatsoever. Thus his Majesty has reason to believe,
that if your Lordships have no other prospect than the re-establishment of the
Peace with the Conservation of the Barriers; or will oblige the Spaniards to
guarrant themselves by the speedy acceptance of those last Offers of his
Majesty, of all the Consequences of the War, which cannot be to their
advantage; or if the Catholic King has no regard to their Remonstrances, His
Majesty expects, that your Lordships will take such measures, as that your
Troops may not come to any act of Hostility against his Majesty.

But as the sincerity of his Intentions for the repose of Europe, has hitherto
prompted him to open to you, the ways which may procure the Re-establishment of
the peace; if you continue to neglect them, and to keep so little measures with
him, as to suffer your Troops to act at the pleasure of the Spaniards; His
Majesty declares to you at this present, that upon the first act of Hostility,
they shall commit upon his Troops bating in the fortified places, belonging to
the Catholic King, he shall think himself bound, (tho with grief, and
unwillingness) to give immediately Orders for the seizing on all the ships,
Merchandises, and Effects, which shall appertain unto their subjects, and
consider and treat you henceforward, as those who foment and maintain with all
their forces, the stubbornness of the Spaniards, and who make War no less upon
his Majesty, than his declared Enemies.

This his Majesty has ordered the said Count d' Avaux, to make known unto your
Lordships, and to demand of you a positive Resolution, at the farthest within
fifteen days; which his Majesty will expect, in the Head of his Armies: Now
declaring, that time being expired, he pretends to be neither tied to any of
the Propositions, he has heretofore made, nor to those he makes at this present.

Given at the Hague, on the 29th of April, 1684.
The Second Volumn of Lucians Works, Translated from the Greek, by Ferrand
Spence, in Octavo.

Printed for William Bembridge, at the Half Moon in Wood-street.

London, Printed for T. Malthus at the Sun in the Poultry.


