A Short DESCRIPTION OF THE True Ministers and the False How they Differ in
their Call, Ministry, Doctrine and Fruits; that any that are desirous may know
the one from the other.

Also, Something concerning the Apostasy, and Departing from the Faith and
Power of God, which was in the Apostles days.

How the Woman fled into the Wilderness, where she had a Place prepared her of
GOD: The False Church and Antichrist got up in Her stead.

The Woman's Return Witnessed, with the Fall of Antichrist and the False
Church.

Something further concerning the True Ministers of Jesus, Testified by One
that has been a True Witness of all that he has here written.

J. Aynsloe.

Luke 9.1, 2. He called his Twelve Disciples together, and gave them Power and
Authority over all Devils; and he sent them to preach the Kingdom of God, etc.
[But of the False Prophets its said]

Jer. 23.21. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they Run; I have not spoken to
them, yet they Prophesied.

Printed in the Year, 1672.

AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
FRIEND,
LEt it not seem a strange thing to thee, nor a small thing in thine Eye, that
God has appeared in these latter days in his large Loving Kindness unto the
Sons of Men, to discover again that which has been hid from Ages and
Generations past, by reason of the long and dark Night of Apostasy, which did
cover all as a Vail over the Heart, since the Apostles days; in which the true
Church has been in the Wilderness, and the true Ministers not known; and the
false Church and false Ministers got up in their place, and Antichrist has
been worshipped, and the Beast and false Prophet born rule; and all that time
the Lord was as a Stranger in the Earth, and his Appearance by his Light and
Spirit was known but to a very Few; so that it was taken for granted by most
people, That Revelation was Ceased; and that no other Knowledge of God was to
be looked for, then from the Scriptures; being Ignorant of him of whom the
Scriptures testified Christ Jesus, the true Light, that lights every man that
comes into the world, that all through the Light might believe: This Key of
Knowledge being veiled from the people, and Humane Learning and Tradition
instead thereof has been admired and followed by the most of people (in the
Night of Apostasy) as the Only Way to the Knowledge of God, which is the Cause
why people are so ignorant of God and Spiritual Worship; Crying up Lifeless
Forms for Religion, and the Inventions and Traditions of Men for True Worship;
withstanding (as much as in them lies) the Powerful Appearance of the Lord, in
this the Day of his Power, wherein he has appeared to bring every thing into
its right course again; and has raised up (by his Power) Ministers and
Witnesses again, as in the Apostles days, induing them with Power from on
High, That they may be Instruments in his Hand to turn many from Darkness to
his Blessed Light, that shines in the Heart, to give the Knowledge of the Glory
of God in the Face of Jesus Christ: And many are gathered unto the Lord, and
into the Worship of the Spirit, and are taught of God, and bear their Testimony
to the Truth, as it is in Jesus; and God is still adding to the Number of his
Chosen People, notwithstanding all Opposition, that the Excellency of the Power
(by which he carries on his Work) may be seen to be of God, and not of Man; to
him only be the Glory and Honor forevermore.

J. A.

A Short Description of the True Ministers, and the False; how they differ in
their Call, Ministry, Doctrine and Fruits; that any, who are desirous, may know
the one from the other, etc.
TRue Ministers are called of God, as the Apostles were: and God has committed
to them now the Word of Reconciliation, as the Apostles had; and they are now
sent of God, To preach Glad-tidings to the Poor, and Peace and Good Will unto
men; To Proclaim the Day of the Lord to all that sit in Darkness, and under the
shadow of Death; Preaching to the Spirits in Prison, that the Prison-Doors may
be opened, and the Prisoner of Hope come forth out of the Prisonhouse, that
the Clouds of Darkness may fall of, and the Bonds of Iniquity may be broken;
that many may be turned from Darkness to Light, from Satan's power to God: And
freely they have received, and freely they minister; coveting no man's Silver,
or Gold nor Apparel, no more then the Apostles did. And they preach Christ
Jesus, not themselves; but the same Jesus that was Crucified without the Gates
of Jerusalem, that Rose again the Third Day, and Ascended up into Glory, and is
at the Right Hand of God, far above all Principalities and Powers, according as
the Scriptures declare.

And they preach him as they have received him; for they did not know him by
the reading of the Scriptures, no more then Paul did by reading of the Law; but
as he is revealed in them: And their Eyes do see, and their Ears do hear, and
their Hands do handle the Good Word of God, which they declare unto others: And
God has given them a Good Understanding, that they know him that is True, even
Jesus Christ, whom God has sent: And they have not labored in vain, as those
who have beat the Air; but have been Instruments in God's Hands, to turn many
from the Evil of their Ways, to walk in the Light of the Lord; and are brought
to know and dwell in that City, even the New Jerusalem, which is from above,
that has no need of the light of the Sun by Day, nor of the Moon by Night, but
the Lamb is the Light thereof.

And the true Ministers need no Humane Authority, to Authorize their Ministry;
for they have a Witness in every man's Conscience: Neither are their Mouths
stopped with the Commands of men, neither are they afraid to appear for God in
their public Testimony, in preaching the Everlasting Gospel, though Laws of
great Penalties be made against them; but rather are made willing to adventure
all, whatever is dear and near unto them in this World, then to incur the
Displeasure of their Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, or to bring the Blood of
any upon them; for they Labor Night and Day with the Lord, in the Travel of
their Spirits, that they may be clear of the Blood of all men; going from
Country to Country as they are moved (with their lives in their hands) that
they may preach the Everlasting Gospel to all that dwell upon the Earth.

The False Ministers are such as are brought up at Universities, and are Seven
Years studying Philosophy, etc. and are made Masters of their Arts; and from
Humane Learning is their Ministry; and for their Gain is their Call; and are
only sent of Man, being Ordained by Man, and then have License to preach. They
are only Ministers of Traditions, and their own Conceptions on the Letter (not
of the Spirit) having only a Form, but denying the Power; calling the Letter
the Gospel, and preferring the Letter before the Spirit, and putting it in the
Spirit's place, calling it, the Word of God; saying, There is no other Way to
cone to the Knowledge of God; so are boasting of another man's Lines made ready
to their hands: and are saying, Thus says the Lord, when he never spoke to
them, as the False Prophets did in the days of old; denying Revelation, or any
Immediate Call from God, as the Apostles had, saying, There is no such thing to
be looked for now; that was Extraordinary, and is Ceased.

And are such as are always Teaching, and People never the better, bringing
nothing to Perfection; saying, There is no Freedom from Sin on this side the
Grave: And Denying the Light (that convinces of Sin) to be sufficient to lead
to Life and Salvation; calling it, Natural and Insufficient; like the
Unbelieving Jews, who said, Is not this the Carpenter's Son?

They say, That Sprinkling of Infants upon the Face is Baptism; setting up that
in the place of the Baptism of the Spirit. They call Bread and Wine the Lord's
Supper, being ignorant of the Bread of Life, and the Communion of Saints in the
Sanctifying Spirit. And thus much, in short, concerning their Call, Ministry
and Doctrine.

Now I shall show their Marks and Fruits, Christ saying, By their Fruits ye
shall know them: They are such as go in Long Robes, and have the Highest Place
in the Synagogues, and are called of men Master, and have the Uppermost Rooms
at Feasts, Matthew 23. Jude's Epistle
and have men's Persons in Admiration because of Advantage.

They Preach for Hire, they have Gift and Rewards for their preaching, they
cannot afford it for Nothing having bought it for Money; they take Tithes,
imitating the Priests in the Law; they Sue men at the Law that cannot put into
their Mouths; they cast men into Prison for the Exercise of their Consciences;
they stir up the Magistrates to Persecution, saying, They must Defend their
Gospel, or else it will Fall; using the Carnal Weapon against the Outward Man.

All which are contrary to the Scriptares of Truth, and Practices of the
Ministers of Christ, in former Ages, and in this Age: Their Weapons were not
Carnal, but Spiritual, mighty through God, to the bringing down of the Strong
Holds of the Man of Sin.

They must have Letters Patent from the Bishop, or some other Man, or Men,
before they can or must Preach; and then they Read or Preach by the Hourglass,
at a certain Place or Time, as they are ordered by Men.

They despise Prophesying; and if any are moved to go into the Place of their
Worship, in the Time of their Worship, to speak in the Name of the Lord, they
call that A Disturbance; calling to the Officer or Magistrate, to take him or
her away, and sent to Prison; allowing none to speak but themselves, contrary
to the Orders of the Churches of Christ; who might all speak one by one.

They are Changeable, as the Powers of the Earth change; and are Silenced if
Man commands them; and take away their Gain, their Gospel cease; and it the
Magistrate take away his Shoulder, and men were not Forced, few would put into
their Mouths.

By these their Fruits, Marks, Doctrines, Ministry and Call, they may very
easily be known who they are, by any that are desirous to find them out: [For]
the Light of the Lord is come and the Glory of the Lord is appeared, to
discover every False Way and Thing, and nothing is hid from his All-seeing Eye;
and he is making it known to those that believe in his Light, and follow him in
the Regeneration; for the Night is past unto many, and the Day of the Lord is
broken forth, in which Perfect Freedom is known from the Yoke of Bondage, Sin
being fled away as the Morning Cloud; and the Glory of the Lord does rest upon
his Tabernacle; and the Sons of the Morning Rejoice together; and Praise waits
for the Lord in Sion. But this is hard to be believed by most of the Sons of
men; Night having been their Habitation, and Darkness over them so long, that
they look not for any other state, willingly contented in that in which they
are, in a Receiving of things they preach by a Report of others; some
believing, That there is a God, because the Scriptures say so, having no desire
of further Knowledge or Fellowship with Him; and that is the Ground or Inlet to
all Liberty in Sin and False Worshipping, every man's Way seeming Right in his
own Eyes, he being (or at least, would be) sole Judge in all things that pass
in his own Mind, and would not admit of any other Judgment, or Judge, to be
near him, for to reprove or condemn him for the Evil of his Ways; but would go
on without Control, passing away his Precious Time in daily sinning against
the Lord, taking no notice of any Reproof or Call from the Lord to forsake the
Evil of his Ways: And the long continuance in this state has proved very
Dangerous, that many are got into a Belief, That it will not be otherwise with
them; nor can they believe, That it is otherwise with any.

Which Conclusion arises from the Counsel of their own dark Hearts, Darkness
being as a Vail over the Heart, the Eye of the Understanding being blinded by
the God of this World; O! how sad and lamentable is the Case of all such! They
would not that Christ should have any place in Heir hearts, or they come into
Obedience unto him; but are like to the Unbelieving Jews, who said, We will not
have this Man to Rule over us; and at last did choose a Barrahas, rather then a
Jesus; and this is the state of many now called Christians, who choose rather
to have their Murdering Lusts, to live in them, then Christ Jesus the Savior;
and following the spirit of Persecution, and Sin-pleasing Doctrine for Term of
Life, [rather] then the meek and self-denying Jesus, his Spiritual Appearance
in the Heart, in their Self-denial, and taking up the daily Cross, which seems
to them unpossible to be done; choosing rather, to please themselves and others
with a Talk thereof: and if that would serve, Christ would have a great many
that would follow him, the Way being broad, giving what Liberty to the Flesh it
desires, to the fulfilling of the Lusts of it. [But] the Way is Narrow that
leads to Life, and admits of nothing that is of Self, or Flesh, or any thing
that tends to such Liberty; but of a Birth born of the Spirit, who delights
in Holiness, and cannot live in Sin, who runs with Cheerfulness, despising the
Shame because of the Glory that is set before it, Christ Jesus being the Mark
of its high calling, believing God, that its Covenant is ordered aright unto
it, and sure; though it meet with many Enemies, Trials and Hardships by the
way, and Reproaches and Scoffs not a few, [even] from those that are ready to
say, as the Jews did, We have Abraham to our Father: yet this Birth Immortal,
having received the Blessing of the Dew of Heaven, is not discouraged; though
they that have the Fatness of the Earth for their Portion, make more Noise and
greater Show in this World, and labor what in them lies to stir up Enemies
against this Blessed Innocent Seed, and to Persecute all those where its
Apperance is. But this is my Testimony concerning it, They shall never prevail,
no Weapon formed against it shall Prosper, their striving against it is to no
Purpose, they only making themselves Manifest what spirit they are of: For the
Lord God Omnipotent has raised it up in this the Day of his Power, that it may
bear witness to his Name, through his Faithful Witnesses; in whose Hearts God
has raised it up, by his own Mighty Power and Outstretched Arm, after a Long
and Dark Night of Apostasy, since the Apostles days, which soon (after the
Apostles) did creep in; only having the Form without the Power, lost the Life
of Religion, and Motion of the Spirit of Life in the Inward Man, which was to
be Guide unto all Spiritual Worship and Obedience unto God, according to
Christ's Saying, The Time comes, and now is, that he that worshippeth the
Father, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth: This being lost by many since
the Apostles days, and never known by others, has been the great Cause,
Ground and Rise of the many Sorts and forms of Religion, made in man's Will,
and he giving way to his own Self-will, the Enemy of his Soul did easily
prevail with him to be of that Form of Religion which most suited the
Inclinations of his Heart, blinding the Eyes of his Understanding, and made him
Insensible of the many inward Strivings of the Lord with him; and although
Reproved in secret, yet not regarded, or at least, not believed it to be the
Grace, Light, and Spirit of God: so that the Continuance of the Apostasy and
Unbelief, that came in by it, were from one Generation to another, out of the
Remembrance of the Appearance of the Lord, of his being near to man, or of
Jesus Christ Within; they grew into the Subtilty of the Serpent, and having
eaten of the forbidden Fruit, got unto himself Coverings of his own making;
serving only himself, and his own Interest, that he could turn to be of any
Form of Religion to save himself. [Thus] Painted Jezebel got up, and the False
Church did begin to flourish, with her False Teachers, False Doctrines and
False Worships; Then she held forth a Golden Cup, full of Abominations, unto
all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People; and they drank of the Wine of her
Fornication, and were drunk with it; and then the False Church got up, and
False Prophet began to ride upon the Beast, and they made War with the true
Woman, and the Remnant of her Seed that remained upon the Earth; and they
prevailed for a time: and the Woman, the true Church, fled into the Wilderness,
where she had a Place prepared her of God, and the Man-Child was caught up to
God, and there she remained as a Widow alone, and as a Dove without a Mate,
(according as it is written) until the time of her Mourning and Widdowhood
should be accomplished: and all this while the Harlot, the false Church, bore
Rule both within and without: and all that would not receive the Mark of the
Beast and of Antichrist on their Foreheads, and on their Right Hand, should be
put to Death, or should not be suffered to Buy or Sell.

Then was set up Outward Force, to Compel all to bow to their Worship; for the
Power and Spirit of the Lord, that was in the Apostles days, was lost, that
made peoples hearts tender, and gathered them to God, into his Spiritual
Worship, and the Form without the Power was set in its place, and so fell short
of the Power and of the Order that was in the Spirit: Then Humane Learning,
Arts and Inventions got in the Powers Place, thinking to supply what was
wanting, which an Immitation of the true Church, and the Order that was in the
Apostles days could not do.

But finding their shortness, both in Doctrine and Conversation, that Sin and
Evil had Dominion over them, and that (erring from the Spirit) they could not
be without sin; then they set it up, as a Foundation Doctrine, That no man
could be without Sin and Corruption on this side the Grave; and this they have
desended as well as they could, by Word and Writing: but where that fell short,
they made their Inquisition, Fire and Faggot, and Strong Prisons, to make it
out with the rest of their False Doctrines and Practices, resolving their Trial
by Outward Force and Compulsion. and if any Eye were in measure opened, to see
beyond any of their Dark Doctrines or Ceremonies, and so could not bow unto
them, then were they branded with the Name of Heretics; and if they would not
put out that little Sight which God had given them, and become as Blind as they
were, then they Persecuted them, and put them to Death.

This has been the Practice of the False Church for several Hundred Years, and
Examples thereof were before, and in Queen Mary's days, and since. But now the
Time is come, That Babylon is come up in Remembrance before the Lord, and as
she has done unto others, so will the Lord do unto her* for, Strong is He that
is risen to judge her: And he has made an Entrance into her Borders, and is
laying waste her pleasant Pictures, and discovering her Whoredoms, and drying
up the Tongue of the Egyptian-Sea, so that many begin to suspect her, and
others do see she is but an Harlot, not withstanding her being covered with
Scarlet-colored Robes; [so] she shall not deceive the Nations much longer; and
as she had a time of Rising, so must she have time to Fall; and surely the time
is at hand, and her Overthrow is witnessed in many Hearts; and as it has been
within, so must it be without. And this has been the Ground of the many
Testimonies that have been born against her in this Day and Generation, wherein
the Lord has appeared in his Might and Power, beyond what has been in times
past, and revealed himself unto many by his Light and Spirit, and has made
known the Way of Life and Salvation, as in the Apostles days; and the Man-Child
is come down from God again; and she that fled into the Wilderness, and was
Childless, is now coming out, leaning upon the Breasts of her Beloved,
according as it was written of her, Rejoice thou Barren, that did not bear,
and break forth into Joy, thou Virgin, Daughter of Jerusalem; for more shall be
the Children of the Barren, then of the Married Wife; and this is the Lord's
bringing to pass, that he may take away her Reproach. For many have brought
forth (though a false Birth) while she has been barren; for none could give her
Children but the Lord; and he is wiping away her Tears, and the Time of her
Mourning is coming to an end; and now the Woman does appear, which John saw in
the Spirit, to be clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her Feet, and now
is as a Bride preparing for her Husband; and she is the true Church, the Bride,
the Lamb's Wife; to her I bear my Testimony, to be known, and in being again;
and a Son of this Woman I profess my self to be, and of none other, of her
Faith and Doctrine, of her Life and Practice; who has no Power upon the Earth
to take her part, to defend her Faith and Doctrine; but the Lord God Almighty
and the Lamb is her Defense, Covering and Shield for evermore.

And thus in Faithfulness have I wrote these few things, as the Lord put them
into my heart, for the sake of those that are inquiring after Sion, with their
Faces set thither ward; that all Stumbling Blocks may be removed out of the way
of the Simple; and that in Singleness of heart every one may close in with that
holy Appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the inward of their hearts, by his
Light and Spirit; and that none may resist the Day of their Visitation, but
haste out of Babylon and Egypt, from the Fleshpots and Garlic, toward the
Land that flows with Milk and Honey, where there are Vineyards ready planted,
and Wells ready dig'd, the free Flowings forth of the Father's Love unto their
Souls.

Something further as a Testimony concerning the True Ministers of Jesus Christ.
THat there are True and Faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, as were in the
days of the Apostles, in this Day and Generation, that do I witness, and bear
Testimony unto in the Name of the Lord; who are Ministers of the Spirit, and
have ministered the Spirit and Spiritual things unto many; who have not fed
themselves with the Fat, but have fed the Lambs of Christ; having the Word of
Reconciliation committed to them, and have not been slack in dividing it
aright; judging that which was for Judgment, [but] tender in Love and
Compassion toward the Poor and Needy; lending a Hand to the Helpless, and
turning many to the Light and Power of God, which abounds in themselves;
being as Trumpets in the hands of the Lord, giving a certain Sound, that many
have heard and believed through their Word.

They have not sought themselves, but the Glory of God, and the Good of all
People; and God has been with them, and made them successful, and to see the
Travel of their Souls, and be glad: And God has given them Power to lose on
Earth, and it is losened in Heaven; and to bind on Earth, and it is bound in
Heaven: And they have Power over Unclean spirits, and their Poison cannot hurt
them: Their Weapons are Spiritual, mighty through God, to the pulling down of
the Strong Holds of the Devil; they War not with Flesh and Blood, but against
the Spiritual Wickedness in the High Places of the Heart; their Sword is the
Sword of the Spirit; their Armor is the Armor of Light; their Breast Plate is
the Breast Plate of Faith; and their Helmet is that of Salvation; and having
put on the whole Armor of God, are furnished against all the Powers of
Darkness: They preach not but as they are moved by the Spirit and Power of God,
being ordered of him, when to Speak, and when to be Silent: They serve not
themselves and their own Bellies, but the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Followers;
not striving who should be Greatest, but serving one another in Love. Into this
Ministry was I called of God, in the year 1657. and ever since the Lord has
continued me in that Work and Service that he set before me, requiring of me no
more but Faithfulness in that I had received; and through great Trials,
Tribulations and Exercises has he preserved me Faithful unto this day; Glory
to God. Peace on Earth, and Good will toward Men, Amen, Amen.

Postscript. SOme may say, There are several sorts of Professions, who have
Ministers, and all of them hold forth some of these Doctrines, or have some of
these Marks, and bring forth some of these Fruits; do thou conclude them all
to be False Ministers?
To which may be Answered, They that are not against us are with us, as Christ
answered those that came to complain of some that preached, and walked not with
them.

But these have all appeared against the Lord and his People, in this the Day
of his Spiritual Appearance, and have joined together either in Word or Deed,
Public or Private, as one Man, making up one Great Image; Head, Gold; Breasts,
Silver; Thighs, Brass; Feet, part Iron, part Clay, to withstand the Little
Stone, cut out of the Mountain without Hands; but it has and will prevail
against the Image: And these are the Sons of one Woman, differing only in
Speech and Complexion, having all one and the same Nature, as Experience has
showed: For all have Persecuted, and stirred up to Persecution, and the most
from those that had the greatest Profession, as largely may appear by the
Sufferings of the People of the Lord (called Quakers) both in this Nation and
elsewhere; several of them being Imprisoned by the Priests till Death, and
others put to Death in New England, only for the Exercise of a Pure Conscience:
Such things the Ministers of Christ never did, neither do; but were and are so
done unto. These, with several other Reasons, makes me conclude them all to be
False Ministers.

John Aynsloe.

THE END.

