THE JUDGMENT OF THE LEARNED and PIOUS St. Augustine, CONCERNING PENAL LAWS
AGAINST CONVENTICLES, AND FOR UNITY in RELIGION. Delivered in His 48th Epistle
to Vincentius.

LONDON, Printed for James Collins, and to be sold at the Kings Arms in
Ludgate Street, and at his Shop the King's Head in Westminster Hall, 1670.

To the READER.
IT will not be thought Impertinent to publish this short Epistle, after so
many Learned Discourses upon this Subject, if we consider the several
Advantages which this may have above those, in these particular respects.
First, because of the Great Esteem, which this Holy and Learned Prelate has
always had in the Church of Christ, and especially in that part which has
accounted it self the most Reformed; and, we see, that most Men are more led by
the Authority of the Writer, then the Strength of the Argument: Besides,
whereas those who have Written amongst us are charged by the Adverse Party to
be Partial, by reason of their Interest in the Present Controversy: This
cannot be laid to the Charge of Him, who dyed so many hundred years before OUR
PRESENT DEBATE. But, that which is most Considerable, is His great Experience
of the Happy Success of those LAWS, (made in His Time,) by Christian Princes,
against CONVENTICLES and FACTIOUS ASSEMBLIES; whereby whole Cities were reduced
to the True Christian Faith and Unity: Which happy experience made Him Recant
His Former Erroneous Opinion, namely, That Christians were not to be urged by
Penalties in such Cases, but only by Arguments; and Confirmed Him in this
Judgment, that Kings cannot serve God better, then by making Strict Laws for
the Profession, and Exercise of Christian Religion, in the Unity and Communion
of the CHURCH, as you may see in the ensuing Discourse. Which experience, as it
Convinced him, so it is hoped it may Convince these who are yet of that
Erroneous Opinion, and encourage AVTHORITY to persist steadfast in the EXECUTION
of such LAWS, which have in all Ages been so Advantageous to the Peace and
Quiet of CHURCH and STATE.

The JUDGMENT of the Learned and Pious St. Augustine concerning PENAL LAWS
against CONVENTICLES, and for UNITY in RELIGION.
I Received a Letter, which I believed to be yours: He who brought it was a
Catholic Christian, who, I think, durst not tell me a Lie: but, whether it
were yours or not, I thought it fit to give an Answer. You may well think me
now more desirous of ease and rest, then when you first knew me at Carthage,
when Rogatus was alive, whom you succeeded. But, the Donatists are too unquiet,
who ought to be Restrained and Corrected by the Powers which are Ordained by
God: We Joy already in the Correction of many, who so earnestly Hold and Defend
the Catholic Unity, and Rejoice in their Deliverance from former Error; that
we, with great thankfulness admire them, who formerly, I know not by what force
of Custom, could by no means be brought to think of a Change for the better,
till, affrighted with the Terrot of the Laws, they set their hearts seriously
to the Consideration of the Truth; least, if they should suffer punishments not
for Righteousness, but for Stubborness, and Foolish Presumption, their Patience
would be fruitless and vain; and, they should find afterward no other Reward
from God, but the Punishments due to Wickedness, because they had Despised his
Gentle Admonition and Fatherly Correction; and, by this Consideration being
made Teachable, they found the Truth. Should I so far envy their Salvation, as
to endeavor to take off my Colleagues, from using this Fatherly Care, by which
we see so many brought to Accuse their former Blindness?

These late Enemies of the Church, who disturbed our Peace and Quiet with
diverse kinds of Crafts and violent Assaults, if We should so far Contemn and
Tolerate, as not to Provide and Use some Means to Terrify and Correct them,
surely we should Return Evil for Evil: For, if any Man should see his Enemy
(made Frantic by a high Feavor) striving to run down a Precipice, Should he
not then rather be Judged to return Evil for Evil, if he should willingly
suffer him to run on to ruin, then if he should take care to bind him fast
from running? And yet he would then appear to the distempered Man most
troublesome, and most his Enemy, when he was most Merciful, and kind to save
him: But certainly, when this man had recovered his Health and Wits, he would
give him the more Thanks, because he was, as he thought then, so severe.

O that I could show you how many, even of the Plundering Troopers, now become
very good Christians, condemning their former Life, and miserable Error,
whereby they thought, whatsoever they did, through their Unquiet Rashness, was
for the Glory of God; who, had never been brought to this present soundness of
Belief, unless they had been bound like Madmen, with the Cords of those very
Laws which you find fault with.

There is another sort of Diseased persons who have not that turbulent
boldness, but are oppressed with Sloth and Restiffness; who, when We persuade
them to the Truth, say to Us, We cannot tell what to answer; but, it is hard
for us to Leave the Trad^tion of our Fathers: Are not these to be awakened with
fear, or smart of Temporal Punishments, that so Arising from their Lethargick
Sleep, they may Awake unto Salvation? How many are there amongst us, of them,
who, joying now with us, accuse their former sloth, and confess we did well to
molest them thus; lest otherwise they should have perished by the Disease of an
Old Custom, as by a deadly Sleep.

But, these Penalties, you say, have done some no good: What then? Is Medicine
to be neglected, because some Men's Plague is incurable? it seems you take no
notice of any, but those, who are so hard, that they cannot receive this
Discipline; of such, the Prophet speaks, Jer. 2.30. In vain have I smitten your
Children, they have received no Correction: and yet they were Corrected in
Love, not in Hatred. But, you ought to consider also, the many, of whose safety
we Rejoice.

If these Men were Terrified, and not Taught, it might seem wicked Tyranny:
Again, if they were Taught, and not Terrified, they being hardened by old
Custom, would be slowly moved to take the Right Way of Salvation.

Many, whom we know, when we Manifested to them the Truth by Reason and
Scriptures, answered us, they desired to be received into the Communion of the
Church, but they feared the displeasure of some of their Party; These Men's
Infirmities must be borne with a while, nor may we forget that of our Savior,
John 13.36. Thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow me after. But
when sound Teaching is added to this useful Terror, so that the Light of Truth
may expel the Darkness of Error, and the Force of Fear may break the Bonds of
Evil Custom, we do Joy, as I said, in the Salvation of many, blessing us, and
Praising God for making good that his Promise, That the Kings of the earth
shall serve our Lord Christ, by thus curing the Diseased, and healing the Weak.
He is not always our Friend who spares us, nor he always our Enemy who
strikes us: Better are the wounds of a Friend, then the kisses of an Enemy,
Prove. 27.6. It is better to love with Severity, then to deceive with Lenity; It
is better to take the Bread from the hungry, if feeding him makes him neglect
Righteousness; then to give him Bread to continue him unjust.

He that binds a Madman, and awakens a Lethargick, is troublesome to both, but
loves both: Who can Love us more then God does? yet he does not only teach us
kindly, but also profitably terrifies us; To his gentle Lenitives adding the
bitter Medicament of Tribulation: He exercised the Pious and Religious
Patriarchs with hunger, the stubborn People with greater Pains. He takes not
from the Apostle the Thorn in the Flesh, though Thrice entreated, that he might
perfect Strength in Weakness.

Let us Love our Enemies, for this is just, and Gods Command, that we may be
like our Heavenly Father, who makes his Sun to shine upon the good and bad.
But, as we commend his Gifts, so let us think of his Stripes, wherewith he
scourges every Son whom he loves.

Think you that no man ought to be Compelled to Goodness? when you read how the
Father of the Family sent out his Servants to Compel them to come in whom they
found, Luke 17.23. When you read of Saul, afterward Paul, compelled by Christ
himself with great violence, to receive and defend the Truth? Is Money dearer
to Men then the sight of their Eyes, yet Christ struck him blind, and did not
restore him to his sight, till he was Incorporated into Holy Church; and, Do
you think that there is no Force to be used to Free Men from Dangerous Errors,
when you see God who loves us (no one better) by diverse Instances doing the
same? and hear Christ saying, No man comes to me unless the Father draws him;
which is done in the hearts of all, who turn to God for fear of his
displeasure. Have ye not sometimes known a Thief, scattering Meat before the
Sheep, to draw them away and steal them; and, a Shepherd with his Rod driving
back the straggling Sheep to the Fold? We read of Sarah Chastising her stubborn
servant Hagar, expelling her and her Son; and yet St. Paul says, That as then
Ishmael, he that was after the Flesh, persecuted him that was after the Spirit,
Gal. 4. So it is now: By which you may understand, that the Church rather
suffers Persecution, by the Pride and Wickedness of Carnal Men, whom she
endeavors to amend by Temporal Punishments and Corrections: Whatsoever
therefore the TRUE MOTHER does in this Case, though it may seem harsh and
bitter, she does not render evil for evil, but endeavors, by wholesome
Discipline, to expel Sin; not out of hatred, or desire to hurt, but out of a
love to heal.

When good and bad Men, do, and suffer the same things, they are to be
differenced, not by their Deeds or Sufferings, but by their Causes.

Pharaoh exercised the People of God with hard Labor, Moses Chastised the same
People when they did wickedly; These did both the same things, but they did not
aim alike at the Peoples good; in one it was Domineering Pride, in the other
Pure Charity: Jezabel killed the Lords Prophets, Elias slew the false Prophets:
I suppose the Merits of the Doers were as diverse, as those of the Sufferers.
View the times of the New Testament, when Meekness and Charity were not only to
be kept in the Heart, but are to Shine before Men, when Peter's Sword, by
Christ's own order, was Commanded into the Sheath, and we thereby Taught, that
the Sword must not be drawn, no, not for Christ; yet, there we read, God
delivered up his Son to Death; The Son gave up Himself to Death: And, it said
of Judas, That Satan entered into him, that he should deliver him to be
Crucified. Why is God good and j^st, and Man guilty and sinful in this Act, but
because in the same thing which they both did, there was not the same cause for
which they did it? There were three Crosses in the same place, on one hung the
Thief that was to be saved, on another the Thief who was to be damned, Christ
in the midst, who was to save one and condemn the other. What more like then
these three Crosses? What more unlike then the three that hung thereon? Paul
was delivered to Prison to be bound, 1 Cor. 5. St. Paul Delivers a man to
Satan, worse then any Jailer, for the destruction of his Flesh, that the Spirit
might be saved in the day of the Lord. Let us learn to Discern Difference or
Intentions in the same Actings; nor let us shut ou^ eyes, and Slander, and
Accuse Good Men for Persecutors, 1 Timothy 1.20. when the same Apostle says, That
he delivered some to Satan, that they might learn not to Blaspheme: Did he
render evil for evil? Did he not rather Judge it a good Work to amend Ill Men
by the Evil One? If it were always Praiseworthy to suffer, it had been enough
for our Lord to have said, ^lessed are they who suffer: he needed not to have
added, for Righteousness sake. If it were always a Fault to make any man
suffer, it would never be Just to inflict Punishment: Sometimes therefore he is
Unjust who suffers, and he Just who afflicts. Certainly at all times have the
Evil persecuted the Good, and the Good punished the Wicked: those unjustly, to
hurt; these, to amend by Discipline: Those Cruelly, these Mercifully; those
serving their Lust, these their Charity: For, he that Kills, considers not how
he Butchers, but, he that Cures, takes heed how he Cuts; the former aims at
destruction, the other at health and recovery.

Wicked Men killed the Prophets, and the Prophets put some Men to death. The
Jews whipped Christ, and Christ whipped the Jews. The Apostles were delivered to
the Secular Powers, and the Apostles delivered some to the Power of Satan: In
all these we must consider who Suffers for the TRUTH, who for INIQUITY; who
Afflicts to Hurt, who afflicts to amend. Nebuchadnezzar made a Decree, That
whosoever would not worship his Idols should be put to death: he made another
Decree afterward, That whosoever should Blaspheme the God of Shedrac, etc.
should be put to death. The first was a wicked Law, punishing the God^y, the
second was a Pious Law Correcting the ungodly. Who of us, nay, Who of you, does
not Commend the Laws of Emperors made against the Heathen Sacrifices, yet,
there, the Penalty was Capital. But, in the Laws against Schismatics, such
moderation was used, that the Laws seemed rather to Admonish, then Punish you:
For, perhaps it may be said of you, what St. Paul said of the Jews, Romans 10. I
bear them witness that they have a Zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge; for, they being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going about to
establish their own, have not submitted to the Righteousness of God: For, What
do you else but establsh your own Righteousness, when you say, None can be
Godly but those of your own P^rty? you are altogether alike, except those
amongst you, who know the Truth, and yet out of Stomach and Crossness fight
against the Plain truth; the wickedness of these perhaps is worse then
Idolatry: But, this cannot easily be proved, for this lodges in their own
breast, therefore all are Prosecuted with the like gentle Correction.

You who are called Donatists, from Donatus, seem milder then some other Sects,
for you do not Rage and Range about with Troops of Cruel Soldiers plundering:
But, no Beast is called tame, if he hurts no body, because he wants Teeth or
Claws. You say, You would not hurt; I think you cannot: you dare not with your
small numbers attempt the strength of your Adversaries. I am sure that Sect,
which you were of formerly, have severely executed the Laws of the Emperors
against Schismatics and Heretics, against you and other Sectaries, this we
can prove upon Record: Nay, you were not separated from them, when in their
Petition to Julian, they said, That with him nothing but Justice prevailed,
whom yet they knew to be an Apostate and Idolater: so that they must confess,
that either they did shamefully Lie, in saying so, or else that Idolatry was
Justice. But, suppose there was a Mistake in the word, What think you of the
Fact? if nothing, which you call unjust, must be desired of Princes, Why did
you then ask of Julian that which the World counted unjust: But, you may, say
you, Petition the Emperor for the recovery of your own, you must not accuse
any, or desire to restrain their Liberty, because we find no Example amongst
the Apostles for this: And, Where do you find any President amongst them for
the former?

When your Predecessors Accused Caecilian Bishop of Carthage, as a Criminous
Person, before the Emperor, you did not then Pet^tion for your lost Goods, but
you slandered an Innocent, (as we think, and the event proved*) Then this, What
could be more wicked? but, if you did deliver a Criminal indeed, to be Punished
by the Secular Powers, Why do you blame us for doing that, which you your
selves did before, and we do not blame you for doing it, but for doing it
Maliciously, to ruin an Innocent, not to Correct a Guilty one.

We justly complain of you, who account it a Crime in us, to Complain to a
Christian Emperor, of the Enemies of our Communion; when as your Predecessors
put in a Libel to the Emperor Constantine against Caecilian, and contrary to
the Canons of the Church; You Complained of him to the Emperor, before he had
been Convicted by his Colleagues. The Emperor proceeding more Regularly,
Remitted the Cause back to the Bishops; but, you would not then submit, but
appealed to the Emperor again; accusing not Caecilian only, but all the
Bishops, whom the Emperor had appointed Judges of the Cause; and, when the
Emperor had determined, ye would not then yield to Truth and Peace.

What could Constantine determine against Caecilian and his Party, had they
been Convicted by their Accusers, but the same that he did determine against
those his Accusers, who failed in the Proof of their Accusations? He determined
in the Cause, That the Goods of those who were Convicted of False Accusation,
should be Confiscate. If this Sentence had been past against Caecilian, upon
your Accusation and Proof of of the Crimes laid against him, you would have
been called Friends of the Church, Defenders of Peace and Unity: but, when this
Sentence is past against you, who falsely accused the Bishop, and would not be
entreated to submit to the Unity of the Church, you cried out of Persecution.
You Contend, That no man ought to be Compelled to the Communion of the Church:
We must not return evil for evil. Was it not well said of you long since, What
we Will, is good and holy? It is not unreasonable to believe, That Constantines
Decree against your Ancestors is of force against you; and, that all Princes,
especially the Christian, ought to follow that Pattern, when ever your
Obstinacy compells them to it.

It is better to be urged to the Embracing of the Truth, by the fear of losing
your Earthly Possessions, then to be suffered, by the Temptation of Vainglory,
to resist the Truth. It is no Persecution to be Compelled to that which is good:
It is true, no man can be made good against his will; but, the fear of
Suffering may make him leave off his Animosity against the Truth, or make him
willing to receive the Truth, which he formerly knew not, and persist in it,
when he knows it.

This would perhaps be said to you in vain, if we could not make it evident by
many examples; We know many, not single persons only, but whole Cities, that
were Donatists and Separatists, now become good Catholic Christians, heartily
Detesting their Devilish Schism, and as heartily loving the Unity and
Communion of the Church. All which were made such Converts, through the fear,
which you dislike, of the Emperors Laws, made by Constantine, and continued
even to our present Emperor.

These Examples propounded to me by my Colleagues, made me to change my Opinion,
for I was first of that Opinion; That no man ought to be Compelled to the Unity
of Christ; That this was to be done only by Argument, and Force of Disputation;
That Men were to be Convict by Reason, not Compelled by Laws, for this I
thought could do nothing, but make open Heretics or Schismatics, Hypocritical
and Counterfeit Catholics: but, this Opinion I was Convinced to be an Error,
not so much by strength of Argument, as by Experience and Example.

Mine own City, which was formerly wholly Schismatical, of Donatus Party, is
now Converted to the Unity of the Church by the fear of the Imperial Laws, and
do so perfectly detest their former stubborness, that you can hardly believe
them ever to have been guilty.

Many other Cities more I knew so Converted, that I found by experience in this
Cause, the truth of that which is written, Prove. 9. Give Instruction to a Wise
Man, and he will be yet wiser. For, How many do we know who had a mind to
return to the Churches Unity, being sufficiently satisfied of their duty, but
deferred their return, only out of fear of displeasing their own Party? How
many are hardened against the Truth, by long Custom and Continuance in Error?
How many have therefore thought their Party to be the True Church, because
Security has made them slothful, and careless to know the Truth? How many have
been hindered from Communion with the Church by false Reports and Slanders of
the Holy Service, and our Governors? How many continue in their several
Schisms, upon this Opinion, That it is indifferent of what Party they be, so
long as they Profess Christianity, if they were born and bred up in Donatus
Party, there they continued, and thought that they ought not to be compelled to
the Unity of the Church.

To all these the Terror of the Imperial Laws has been so profitable, that
now some ingeniously confess, We had a mind to return to the Church before, God
be thanked for these Laws, which have given us occasion to do it speedily, and
cut off all our former delays. Others say, We believed the Church to have the
Truth, but old Custom detained us in our Error, God be thanked who has thus
broken those Bonds, and brought us to the Bond of Peace. Others say, We knew
not the Truth, nor had we any mind to learn it, but the fear of these Laws has
made us inquisitive after it, least by a foolish perseverance in our errors, we
should lose our Temporal estates, without any recompense in another World; God
be thanked, who has thus quickened our negligence, by the Terror of the Law,
and made us sollicitous to seek, what formerly we did not care to find. Others
say, We were Affrighted by false Rumors from entering into the Church, which we
should never have known to be false, if we had not come to Church; and, we
should never have come to Church, if we had not been compelled: God be thanked,
who has cast out this Fear, by the fear of the Law, and taught us, by
experience, to see what foolish and vain stories, LYING FAME Casts out upon the
CHURCH.

Henc^ we believe, That what the Authors of this Sect Accused the Church of,
was false, since we see their Posterity has Feigned Things more False and
Worse. Others say, We thought it had been no matter where we Professed the
Faith of Christ; but, God be Thanked that we have been Compelled to the Unity
of the Church, and brought from our Schism to serve the one God in Unity.

Should I oppose the Execution of these Good Laws, and deprive the World of so
much Benefit and Advantage? No: Let the Kings of the Earth serve Christ, by
making LAWS for Christ.

The Terror of Temporal Powers, when it Opposes the Truth, is to the Patient
Sufferer a Glorious Trial, to the VVeak a dangerous Temptation; but, when it
Presses the Truth upon those who are in Error, it is to the Wife and Sincere a
Profitable Admonition, to the Senceless and Regardless an unprofitable
Affliction.

CONSTANTINE, the first Christian Emperor, finding the Church Disturbed by
several Schisms, made a LAW against all CONVENTICLES; by which LAW the
Memory of Heretics and Schismatics was Destroyed: Historiae tripartitae, lib.
3. c. 11. Sozomen. Eut. Histor. lib. 2. c. 30.

GRATIAN the Emperor gave LIBERTY to all, to Communicate in what RELIGION they
pleased, which divided the Churches again, which he could not Quiet but by a
Law against Heretics, and those who Divided from the Church. Hist. Tripart. l.
9. cap. 5. and 7.

FINIS.

