THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING, Very useful Both for all those that are not yet
resolved what Religion they ought to embrace: And for them that desire to know
whither their Religion be true or no.

Written by S. Augustine.

LONDON, Printed by ROGER DANIEL In Lovels Court, near Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

The Preface, To the well-disposed READER.
Learned Reader,

I Know thou art not ignorant, that of all the affairs and businesses in this
world, there is none of that consequence and importance unto thee, as the
saving of thy soul: and that our Blessed Savior who knew best of all the
inestimable value thereof, and vouch^^^ed to redeem it at so dear a rate as
with his own p^etious blood, plainly declared the importance thereof, when he
said in the Gospel, Mat. 16. 16. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the
world and loose his own soul? Or what shall he give in exchange ther^of?
Wherefore let me advise thee to seek out and embrace the true Faith and
Religion, for that without such a Faith (according to the Apostle, Heb. 11. 6.)
it is impossible toplease God, and without pleasing of him, it is impossible to
be saved. If thou think that thou ha^t found out the truth already, and that
thou do embrace it, then give me leave to tell thee, that the world at this
present abounds with an hundred here^ies at least the embracers whereof shall
not (according to S. Paul's doctrine, Gal. 5. 20.) inherit the kingdom of God,
and yet (as the same Apostle does affirm, Ephesians. 4. 5.) there is but one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism: so that it is an hundred to one, but that thy Faith
and thy Religion are false, and thy salvation is in danger thereby. Is there
not then great reason that thou should well consider, whither the Faith and
Religion which thou embracest be true or no, when upon this resolution depends
thy fr^^tion of unspeakable bliss, or intolerable suffering of endless pa^ns
for all eternity? How to find out the true Faith and Religion it is a matter of
very great difficulty, not only by reason that there are many faiths and
religions in the world, and of all these there is but one true, and all the
rest be false, but also for that the controversies debated now adays are so
many, and so intricate, that few have leisure to study them, and fewer ability
to conceive and understand them: yet the zeal of learned Writers has not been
wanting to satisfy men herein. But what age since the Apostles days has
brought forth any man so able to perform so great a task, as was that
incomparable Doctor S. Augustine lib. 3. de Eccles. fol. 170. who (as Doctor
Field asserteth) was the greatest and chiefest of the ancient Fathers, and the
most famous of all the Divines which the Church has had since the Apostles
time: and as Doctor Covell affirms in his answer to Master Burges page 3.)
has far excelled all others that have been or are like to be hereafter
(those only excepted that were inspired by the Holy Ghost) both in Divine and
Humane knowledge. What man since the Apostles days, could ever so well discem
true doctrine from false, truth from error, and true faith from heresy, as
could that great S. Augustine who did not only like another David, fight
against the Goliath of one heresy, but like another Joshua fought the battles
of the Lord against all the force and power of heresy in his days, for forty
years together? Wherefore if this great Doctor should have left any advises or
instructions behind him unto any of his dear friends that were then heretics,
whereby he taught them how to find out the true faith and religion, amongst so
many heresies^ ought not such instructions to be greatly desired, and if any
such could be found to be highly esteemed, and diligently perused? Surely thou will say, that coming from so great a Doctor, and being so proper and
necessary fot these times, without doubt they ought. Why then Learned Reader,
give me leave to pre^ent unto thee a learned Treatise of his, which he sent
unto his dear and learned friend Honoratus, to draw him from the Manichean
her^sie to the true Religion; I durst not presume to tender it unto thee in
this poor English habit, were I not confident that thou seek more after the
true Religion and the saving of thy soul, then after vain eloquence, and the
entising words of humane wisdom; 1 Cor. 2. 4. but I will assure thee, under
this poor attire thou will find a rich and a learned discourse of great S.
Augustine, not only very profitable for those that are not yet resolved in
point of Religion, but also for them that dear to be satisfied whither the
faith and Religion which they embrace, be true or no. If the style be
displeasing and ungrateful unto thee, know that very many of the African
Fathers have harsh styles, besides consider how hard a matter it is to teach a
native African to speak true English.

In this work, first he shows how the old Testament is to be expounded, and
defends the Authority or it against the Manichees that rejected it. Secondly he
overthrowes that Manichean principle. That nothing is to be believed in point
of Faith which is not first by reason made manife^t and evident unto the
Believer. In the third place he advises ^ervent and frequent prayer, peace and
tranquillity of mind, and a sequestration of affections from terrene things, as
aids necessary ^or the finding out the truth: then declaring that Christ has
raised a very great and a famous Church consisting of all Nations, which is to
continue very visible and conspicuous even to the worlds end, he exhorts
Honoratus to address himself unto the Pastors and Teachers thereof, and to
learn of them the true faith and Religion.

This way of proceeding to find out the truth, is far more short and easy then
by the examination of all the points of controverted doctrine by their
conformity to the holy Scrip^ures, for it consists in two points only, first,
in seeking out which of all the Churches is the Church of Christ, and secondly,
whither this Church can err or no.

For the finding out of the Church S. Augustine proposed four marks unto
Honoratus, Unity, Universality, Sanctity, and Apostolical Succession, the
which are set down very plainly in Scripture.

The Unity of the Church is twofold, in body, and in faith; in regard of the
first, our Savior faith, his Church is one fold and has one shepherd Joh.
10. 16. and the Apostle calls it one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. In respect of the
second, S. Paul earnestly exhorted the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 10. to speak the
same thing, and that there be no division amongst them: but that they be
perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judg^ment: and he
beseeched the Ephesians to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, Ephesians. 4^ 3, 4^ 5. affirming that there is one body and one
spirit, one hope of their calling, one Lord one Faith, one Baptism; and the
Scripture testifies that in the Apostles days the multitude of Believers were
of one heart and of one soul. Acts 4. 32.

The Universality of the Church is also twofold, in time and in place; this
later was foretold by the Prophet Moses relating Gods promise made to Abraham
of an ample posterity, and that all the nations of the earth should be blessed
in his seed: Genesis 22. 18. Gal. 3. 8. by the Royal Psalmist^declaring that God
the Father would give unto his Son the heathen for his inheritance, and the
uttermost part of the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2. 8. and that he should
have dominion from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth:
Psalm. 72. 8. and by the Prophet Isaiah, affirming that all nations shall flow
to the mountain of the Lords house, Isa. 2. v. 2. For the accomplishment of
these Prophecies our Blessed Savior declared, Luke 24. v. 44. that all things
must be fulfilled which were written in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets,
and in the Psalm^s, concerning him: and v. 47. that repentance and remission of
sins, should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem; and for the performance hereof, he gave a commission unto his
Apostles to teach all nations, Matthew. 28. 19. and to preach the Gospel to every
creature, Mar. 19. v. 15.

That the Church of Christ should be universal for time, and continue
perpetually unto the worlds end, it was plainly foretold by the Prophet Isaiah,
who speaking of our B. Savior, says, that of the increase of his government
and peace there shall be no end. Upon the throne of David^ and upon his
kingdom shall he sit to order it, and to establish it wit^ judgment, and with
justice from henceforth even for ever; and that no doubt may be made of the
performance hereof, the Prophet add^s, the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will
perform this. And by the Prophet Daniel affirming that in the days of those
Kings shall the ^o^ of heav^n set up a k ngdome which shall not be left to
other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all those kingdoms, and
it shall stand for ever, Dan. 2. 44. All which was confirmed by the Angel
Gabriel, saying, The Lord shall give unto Christ the throne of his Father David
and he shall reign over the house of Jacob, and of his kingdom there shall be
no end, Luke 1. ver. 32, 33. For the perpetual settlement and establishing of
this Church, Christ said unto S. Peter: Upon this rock I will build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Matthew. 16. 18. Touching the
sanctity of the Church of Christ, God by the Prophet Ezekiel says, I will set
my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore: and the heathen shall know that
I the Lord do sanctifi^ Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them
for evermore, Ezekiel. 37. v. 26, 28. and by the Prophet Malachi, Mal. 1. 11. From
the rising of the sun, even to the going down of the same, my name shall be
great among the Gentiles: and in every place incense shall be offered unto my
name, and a peace offering. Unto this sanctity our Blessed Savior exhorts us,
saying, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 5. 16. and Mark 7. v. 13,
14. Enter ye in at the strait gate, for strait is the gate, and narrow the way,
which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. And teaching how to
distinguish the good from the bad, he says, v. 20. By their fruits ye shall
know them. As for Apostolical succession, S. Paul says, Ephesians. 4. v. 11, 12,
13. that Christ gave some Apostles, and some Prophets: and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and teachers, for the perfecti^g of the Saints, for the work
of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we ^ll come into
the unity of faith, and of the unity of the Son ne of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, that is, (as Doctor
Fulk against the Rhem. Test. in Ephesians. 4. sect. 4. fol. 335. and Mr. Calvin in
his Instit. cap. 8. de fide, sect. 37, 38. page 233. 234. do expound) for ever.

As for the second point, whether the Church of Christ can err or no, S,
Augustine says, that neither the violence of heathens, nor the subtilty of
heretics can overthrow it, which agrees with our Savionrs promise, Matthew. 16.
18^ that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; and, to preserve her
from all error and heresy, Christ promised to be always with her even to the
worlds end, Matthew. 28. 20. and God made this covenant with her: Isa. 59. 21. My
spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, ^or out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever; by which words
(says Mr. Calvin in Comment. hujus loci) God promises that the Church shall
never be deprived of this inestimable benefit, to be governed by the Holy
Ghost, and to be suported by heavenly doctrine: and to this effect he sent down
the Holy Ghost to teach the Church all truth and to remain with her for ever,
Joh. 16. 13. Joh. 14. 16. Thus thou see how S. Augustines instructions for
finding out the truth are grounded in Scripture, but more expressly in S.
Paul's doctrine, who tells us, Romans 10. 17. that faith comes by hearing, and
hearing is by ^he word of God; if we ask him how men may come to hea^e the word
of God^ he answers, v. 14, 15. How shall they hear without a preacher? and how
shall they preach unless they be sent? So that faith is bred in men by hearing
and believing the word of God, made known unto them by preachers lawfully sent:
which preachers (as he says to the Ephesians) Ephesians. 4. v. 11, 12, 13. are
always to be found in the Church of Christ, and are placed there, ver. 14.
that from henceforth we be no more children tossed to fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine by the sleighs of men, and cunning craftiness
whereby they lie in wait to deceive; which is an office that cannot be
performed by men that are frail and subject to error, unles the Lord by his
divine assistance, does preserve them from erring. Doctor Field having
considered the facility and solidity of this method, does advise all those to
practice it, that desire to be satisfied in matters of Religion in these terms,
Epist. dedic. of the Church. Seeing the controversies in our time are grown in
number so many and in nature so intricate, that few have time and leisure,
fewer strength of understanding to examine them: what remains for men
desirous of satisfaction in things of such consequence, but diligently to
search out, which amongst all the societies of men in this world, is that
blessed company of holy ones, that household of faith, that Spouse of Christ,
and Church of the living God, which is the pillar and ground of truth: that so
they may embrace her commuuion, follow her directions, and rest in her
judgment? Now that thou may be the better able to follow this wholesome
counsel, let me advise thee with care and diligence to peruse this e^suing
treatise, and that thou may ^eceive much benefit thereby for thy souls
health, thou have already the prayers of S. Augustine, and thou s^alt have the
hearty wishes and desires of

Thy charitable Welwisher. A. P.

The TABLE.
Chap. I. HOW S. Augustine came to be de^eived by the Manichees. Page. 1. II.
That the Manichees do condemn the old Testament. 11 III. Of the four ways of
expounding the old Testament. 15 IV. 3. ways whereby men fall into error. 31
V^ Of the truth of the holy Scripture. 37 VI. That the holy Scripture is first
to be loved before it can be learned 4^ VII^ That we ought not to judge rashly
of the holy Scriptures: and how, and with what care and diligence the trve
religion is to be sought for. 49 VIII. Of the way to the instruction of piety:
and of the wonderful pains S. Augustine took to find it out. 63 IX. Of
Credulity. 68 X. Why Credulity is the w^y to Religion 75 XI. Of under standing,
belief^ and opinion 83 XII. That it is the safest w^y to believe wise men. 93
XIII. That Religion takes her beginning from believing. 98 XIV. That Christ
chiefly exacted belief 104 XV. Of the most commodious way to Religion. 114 XVI.
That miracles do procure belief. 117 XVII. The con^sent of nations be^^eving in
Christ. 124 XVIII. The conclusion by way of ex^ortat^^n. 129
The Profit of Believing.
CHAP. I.
How Saint Augustine came to be deceived by the Manichees.
O Honoratus,

IF any Heretic, and a man believing Heretics did seem unto me to be one and
the same thing; I should think fit to be silent at this present, and to abstain
both from speaking and writing in this cause: But now whereas they do verymuch
differ (For he is an Heretic (according to my opinion) who for some temporal
benefit, and chiefly for glory and his own preferment, either broacheth or
followe^h false and new Opinions: but a man believing Heretics, is one that is
del^ded with a certain imagination of Piety and Truth) I held it to be my duty
to deliver thee my opinion, touching the finding out and embracing the Truth,
with the love whereof we have both (as thou know) been greatly enflamed even
from our youths. Truth is a thing far differing from that which vain men do
conceive, who having too deeply lettled their affections upon these bod^ly and
corporal things, do hold and imagine it to be nothing else, but what they do
perceive and discer^ by those five most known Messengers of the Body: and they
toss to and f^o and rerevolve in their minds the impressions and images which
they have received from these things, even when they endeavor to disbeliev^
their senses: and by a deadly and a most deceitful rule taken from thence,
they think that they do frame a right and perfect judgment of the ine^^fable
Secrets and Mysteries of Faith. There is nothing more easy (my most dear
friend) then for a man not only to say, but also to think that he has found
out the Truth: but how extreme hard it is to find it out indeed, thou will (as
I hope) acknowledge and confess upon the perusal of these my writings; which
that they may prove beneficial unto thee, or at least not hurtful, and unto
all those into whose hands they may chance to light, I have beseeched the
divine Majesty, and I do beseech him, and I hope it will come to pass, if mine
own conscience can but bear me witness that I came to write them not with a
desire of vain renown or frivolous ostentation, but with a pious and a
serviceable mind. My intent therefore i^ to prove unto thee, if I can, that it
is sacrilegiously and rashly done of the Manichees, to speak bitter words and
inveigh against those, who following the authority of the Catholic faith^ are
fortified and strengthened befo^ehand by believing, and are prepared to receive
the light of the Divine grace, before they can behold that Verity and Truth
which is seen and beheld with a pure and clean mind. For thou know, O
Honoratus, that we put our selves into the company of such men for no other
cause, but for that they said, that, the terror of authority being set aside,
they would with plain and admirable reasons bring their hearers and followers
unto God, and free them from all error. For what else was it that enforced me
to follow them, and to hearken to them attentively, almost for the space of
nine years, having despised and contemned the religion which by my parents was
ingraffed in me, being a little child, but for that they affirmed that we are
terrified with superstition, and commanded to believe, before any reason is
given us of belief: and that they importune and urge none to believe, until
the truth be first discussed and made manifest unto them; who would not be
allured with these promises? especially the mind of a young man desirous of
truth, a babbler, and one that was puffed up with pride upon ^isputations had
with some skillful and learned Schoolmen: and such an one they found me then to
be, namely, who despised (my former religion) like old wives tales, and desired
to embrac^ and with greediness to receive the manifest and sincere Truth which
they promised to teach and deliver. But again, what reason withdrew me and
called me back that I did not wholly adhere unto them, but kept my self in the
degree of Hear^^s, as they use to call them, and did ^ot forgo the hopes and
affairs which I had in this world; but for that I also noted and observed, that
they were more eloquent and copious i^ consuting others, then firm and certain
in proving^ and maintaining their own grounds? But what shall I say of my self,
who was now become a Catholic Christian: who being almost exhausted and greedy
after a very long thirst, was now with an ardent affection returned again to
the breasts of the Church, which I shaked and wrung, much weeping and
lamenting, to the end I might not only draw from thence sufficient comfort for
my misery and a^fliction, but might also recover my former hope of life and
salvation? What then shall I say of my self? And as for thee, thou did so
vehemently hate and detest them, that I could hardly draw thee by entreaties
and exhortations to hearken unto them and try them: and when thou hea^dest
them, with what other thing I pray thee went thou taken and delighted (for I
beseech thee, call it to remembrance) but with a certain great presumption and
promise of reasons? But because for a long time they made many large and
vehement discourses touching the errors of un^k^^full men (which every one
that is but meanly learned can easily do) it was late before I came to the
knowledge thereof. And if they delivered any thing unto us out of their own
men, we thought there was a necessity to receive and embrace it, when as other
things up on which we might rely, occurred not: wherein they dealt with us as
deceitful Fowlers are wont to do, who prick down limetwigs by a waters side,
to the end they may deceive the thirsty Birds: for they stop up, and by some
means or other they cover the other waters that are thereabouts: or they drive
the birds from thence with frights and fears, that not by their own free choice
and election, but merely for necessity and want of water they may fall into
their snares. But why do I not return this answer to my self, that such neat
and pretty similitudes as these, and such like reprehensions may be both most
civilly and most snappishly objected by any enemy or adversary whatsoever,
against all those that deliver any thing by teaching or instruction? But yet
for this cause I thought it necessary to insert some such thing into these my
writings, that I may warn and admonish them thereby to leave off all such
manner of proceedings: to the end that (as a certain man said) the toys of
common places being set aside, one thing may contend and strive with another,
one cause with another, one reason with another: wherefore let them forbear to
say, what they hold in a manner necessary to be spoken, when any one forsakes
them that has long been their hearer, The light is passed through him. For
thou my greatest care (for I am not too solicitous for them) see how vain a
thing this is, and how easy a matter it is for any one to blame and reprehend
it; this therefore I leave to thy wisdom to be discussed. For I am not afraid
le^t thou should think that I was deprived of light, when I was entangled
with a worldly life, and had a remote and obscure hope of a beautiful wife, of
the pomp of riches, of the vanity of honors, and of other hurtful and
pernicious pleasures: for I ceased not to desire and hope for all these things
(as thou know right well) when I was their follower and heard them
attentively: not do I attribute this to their doctrine^ for I confess they
diligently warned and admonished me to beware of these things: but to say that
I am now desti^ute of light, when as I have al^enated and withdrawn my self
from all these shadows and ^emblances of things, and have resolved to content
my self with such food only, as may seem necessary to the health of my body:
and that I was enlightened and shining before, when I was addicted unto those
things and was entangled with them, is the part of a man (to speak in the
mildest manner) who less con^iderately ponders the things of which he much
desires to talk and discourse. But if you please let us come to the matter.

CHAP. II.
That the Manichees do condemn the old Testament.
THou art not ignorant how the Manichees reprehending the Catholic Faith, and
especially renting and tearing in pieces the old Testament, do move and disturb
the unskilful people: who truly know not how those things are to be
understood, and how being taken they may profitably descend and be conveyed
into the veins and marrow of tender souls. And because there occur certain
things in those books which may give some offense to those that are ignorant
and careless of themselves (as the greatest part of the common people is) they
may be plausibly reprehended and blamed, but cannot be plausibly defended by
many, by reason of the mysteries which are contained therein; and those few
that can do it, affect not public and open conflicts whereby to divulge their
fame and renown, and for this cause they are not known at all but unto those
only, who with much care and diligence do seek and enquire after them:
wherefore touching this rashness of the Manichees, in reprehending the Old
Testament and the Catholic Faith, hear I beseech thee, the things which move
and trouble me; the which I desire and hope that thou will receive with such an
hearty mind and good will as by me they are delivered and spoken; for God, unto
whom the secrets of my conscience lie open and are manifest, knows, that I deal
not maliciously in this speech, but as I conceive, it ought to be understood in
proof of the truth, unto which long since I have addicted my self, and that
with an incredible care and solicitude, lest I should err and go astray with
you, which I may easily do; when as to hold the same course with you^ and yet
to embrace and keep the right way, it is a matter (not to speak too harshly) of
extreme difficulty. But I presume that even in this hope which I have of your
attaining together with me unto the way of wisdom, he, unto whom I have
consecrated my self, will not leave nor forsake me: when days and nights I
endeavor to behold: and for that I perceive my self to be weak and infirm, by
reason that the eye of my soul is for my sins, and the custom thereof
wounded with the stripes of inveterate opinions, I beg it oftentimes with
weeping and tears, and as it happens unto men's eyes, which after the
sufferance of a long blindness and d^rknesse are hardly open: they have a
great desire to see light, and yet by their twinkling and turning away, they
refuse to behold it, especially if any one should endeavor to expose them to
the light of the Sun: so it falls out with me at the pre^ent, for I acknowledge
that there is a certain unspeakable and singular good of the soul, which may be
seen and contemplated with the mind, but I confess with tears in mine eyes and
sighs from my heart that I am not yet fit nor able to behold it: wherefore the
Divine goodness will not forsake me, if I fain nothing, if I speak according
to my duty, if I love the truth, if I affect friendship, and if I take a great
care that thou may not be deceived.

CHAP. III.
Of the four ways of expounding the Old Testament.
THose that earnestly desire to know the Old Testament, are to understand that
it is taught and expounded after four manner of ways: according to the
History, according to the Etiologie, according to the Analogy, and according to
the Allegory. Think me not foolish for using Greek names: First, for that I
have so received, and I dare not deliver this otherwise unto thee then as I
have received: Next thou also observest, that we have no usual names for these
things: and if I had framed any by-interpretation, I should be less apt to be
understood: and if I should use any circumlocution, I should be less quick and
less ready in discoursing: this only I entreat and beseech thee to believe,
that howsoever I may err, I do it not out of any arrogance or pride. The
Scripture is treated according to the history when it is declared therein what
is written, or what is done: and what is not done but written only as it were
done. According to the Etiology, when it is showed thereby for what cause any
thing is either done or said. According to the Analogy, when it is demonstrated
that the two Testaments, the Old and the New, are not contrary the one unto the
other. According to the Allegory, when it is read therein that certain things
that are written, ought not to be understood according to the letter, but
according to the figure. All these manner of ways of alleging Scripture, have
been used by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the Apostles. He cited Scripture
according to the History, when, unto those that objected that his Disciples had
plucked the ears of Corn upon the Sabbath day, he answered, Have ye not read
what David did, when he was an hungered, and they that were with him: how he
entered into the house of God and did eat the loaves of Proposition (or
Shewbread) which it was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them that were
with him, but for Priests only? Mat. 12. 1, 3, 4. 1 Samuel 21. 6. Exodus 29. 32.
He alleged Scripture according to the Etiology, when having forbidden the
dismissing of wives for any cause but only fornication, unto the Pharisees,
who told him that Moses had given men leave to dismiss them, having first
given them a bill of divorce, he said: This Moses did for the hardness of your
hearts. Deuteronomy. 24. 1. Mat. 19. 8. for here a cause was rendered, why that was
well permitted by Moses for a time, to the end that this which Christ commanded
might seem to show and demonstrate other times but to declare how the divine
Providence has with a certain wonderful disposition ordered and composed the
courses and order of these times, it is a long work. Now touching the Analogy,
whereby appears the accord and consent of both the Testaments, what shall I
say, but that all those have used it, unto whose authority the Manichees do
give place, when as they may consider with themselves how many things they are
wont to say are thrust into the divine Scripture by I know not what co^rupters
of the truth? which I always thought to be an extreme weak speech even when I
heard and followed them: neither was this my opinion only, but thine also (for
I well remember it) and it was the opinion of us all who endeavored to be
somewhat more careful and wary in judging, th^n was the common people and
multitude of believers. And whereas they have expounded and declared unto me
many things that did much move and trouble m^ (namely those wherein they
boasted and bragged oftentimes, and that more abundantly because more securely,
as not having any adversary to resist and oppose them. I think they have spoken
nothing more impudently or (to speak more mildly) with less circumspection and
more weakness, then that the divine Scriptures are falsified and corrupted:
when as it ought but lately to have been done, and yet they cannot convince it
to be ^o, by any copies that are now extant: for if they did say, that they did
not think that they ought to receive those Scriptures at all, because they are
written by such Authors as they did not conceive to have written the truth,
their pretense of rejecting them would in some sort be more hidden, and their
error more humane and pardonable: for upon this ground they have rejected the
book which is called the Acts of the Apostles: at which their proceedings, when
I well weigh it and consider it with my self, I cannot sufficiently wonder and
admire; for they wanted not only humane wisdom herein, but even a reasonable
and an indifferent judgment: for that book has so many things, which are like
unto those which they do receive^ that it seems to me to be a great folly not
to receive this also, and if any thing displeas^th them therein, presently to
say it is false and put in: now if they judge such a speech to be impudent (as
indeed it is) why should they conceive those things to deserve any credit and
est^em in S. Paul's Epistles, and the four books of the Gospel, wherein I know
not whether or no, proportionably speaking, there be many more things then
there could be in that book, which they would have men believe, to have been
thrust in by falsifiers and corrupters? But this indeed is my opinion, which I
request thee to weigh and consider with me, with a very clear and peaceable
judgment: for thou art not ignorant how the Manichees endeavoring to bring in
the the person of their author Manicheus into the number of the Apostles, do
say that by him we have received the Holy Ghost, whom our Lord promised to send
to his Disciples: if therefore they should receive those Acts of the Apostles
wherein the coming of the Holy Ghost is evidently declared and set down^ Act.
2. 2. they could find no ground to say why that was inserted and put in: for
they pretend I know not what corrupters of the divine books to have been before
Manicheus his time: and that they were corrupted by those that desired to
confound the law of the Jews with the Gospel of Christ; but this they cannot
say of the Holy Ghost, unless perad venture they will affirm that the
corrupters could foretell things that were to come, and thereupon did put into
their books that which might be produced against one Manicheus who sometimes
was to come, and who should say and aver that he had sent the Holy Ghost; but
of the Holy Ghost we intend to speak more plainly herea^ter; but now let us
return to our former matter; for I think that I have sufficiently demonstrated
and shown, that the historical sense is to be found in the Old Testament, and
the Etiologicall and Analogicall in the New: it remains that I show also the
Allegorical therein. Our Redeemer himself alleges in the Gospel an Allegory
out of the Old Testament, saying: This generation seeks after a sign, and
none shall be given unto it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas: for as Jonas
was three d^yes and three nights in the Whales belly: so shall the Son of man
be three days and three n^ghts in the heart of the earth. Mat. 12. 39 40.
Jonas 1. 17. And what shall I say of the Apostle Paul, who also in his 1 Ep. to
the Co^inthians c. 10. to the 12. v. signifies, that the ^^story it self of
Exodus was an Allegory of the Christian people that was to come? Moreover
Brethren, I would not (says he) that ye should be ignorant how that all our
Fathers were under the cloud, Exodus 13. 21. Number. 14. 14. Deuteronomy. 1. 33. Psalm. 78.
14. and all passed through the sea: Exodus 14. 22. Josh. 4, 23. Psalm. 78. 13.
and were all Baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea: and did all eat
the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink: (for
they drank of the spiritual Rock that followed them, and the Rock was Christ)
but with many of them God was not well pleased: Number. 24. 28. and 26. 65. for
they were overthrown in the wilderness. Now these things were our figures (or
examples) to the intent that we should not lust after evil things, as they also
lusted. Psalm. 106. 14. Neither let us worship Idols, as some of them did, as
it is written, Exodus 32. 6. The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up
to play. Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them did, and there fell
in one day three and twenty thousand men, Number. 25. 9. Neither let us tempt
Christ, as some of them tempted him, and were destroyed by serpents. Numb. 21.
6. Neither let us murmr, as some of them murmured, and they perished by the
destroyer. Numb. 14. 37. And all these things happened to them in a figure (or
for an example) but they were written for our admonition upon whom the ends of
the world are come. The same Apostle uses also a certain Allegory, which is
much to our purpose, because the Manichees are wont to allege it in their
disputations, and boast of it, when writing to the Galathians he says, Gal. 4.
22, 23, 24, 25, 26. For it is written that Abraham had two sons, the one by a
bond-maid, Genesis 16. 15. the other by a free-woman^ Genesis 21. 2. but he that was
by the bond-maid was born according to the flesh; but he that was by the
freewoman was born according to promise: which things are said by an Allegory:
for these are the two Testaments, the one from the mount Sina which gendreth to
bondage, which is Agar (for Sina is a mountain in Arabia adjoining to
Jerusalem that now is) and is in bondage with her children: But Jerusalem
which is above is free, which is the mother of us all. Here therefore those too
too wicked men whilst they endeavor to frustrate the Law, do enforce us to
allow and approve of those Scriptures: for they diligently observe that it is
said, that they are in bondage that are under the Law, and they often allege
that last above the rest, Galath. 5. 4. Christ is become of no effect unto you
that are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace. We grant all these
things to be true, neither do we say, that that Law is necessary, but only for
those unto whom bondage is yet profi^able and expedient; and therefore tha^ it
was fitly and commodiously ordained that such men as could not be reclaimd and
withdrawn from sinning by reason, ought to be constrained by (...) ^^mely by
the threats and terrors of those (...) even fools themselves can perceive and
apprehend: from which when the grace of Christ does free us, it does not
condemn that Law, but it invites us for the time to come to obey his charity,
and not to serve and be subject to the terror of the Law. For that is a Grace,
that is to s^y, a Benefit, which they that yet desire to be under the bonds of
the Law, do not understand that the Divine Majesty has imparted unto them;
whom Paul the Apostle does deservedly reprove, as though they were In^idels,
because they did not believe that they are now freed by our Lord Jesus Christ,
from that servitude and bondage whereunto they were subject for a certain time
by Gods most just order and disposing. Hereupon it is that the same Apostle
says. Gal. 3. 24. The law was our Peda^^^^^ (...) ^^ere^ore gave unto men a
Pedagogue whom they should fear, who gave them afterward a master whom they
should love: and yet nevertheless in those precepts and Commandments of the
Law, (which it is not lawful for Christians now to use, such as are either the
Sabbath or Circumcision or the Sacrifices, and whatsoever is of that sort) so
great mysteries are contained and comprehended, that every godly man may
understand that there is nothing more pernicious and hurtful, then that
whatsoever is comprised therein should be understood according to the letter,
that is, to the native sense of the words: and nothing ^ore wholesome and
profitable, then to have it expounded according to the spirit or spiritual
sense and unde^standing: hence it is that the letter kills, but the spirit
quickens or gives life. 2 Cor. 3. 6. hence it is, that in the reading of the
Old Testament, the self same veil remains untaken away, because in Christ it
is made vo^d: verse. 14. for not the Old Testament, but the veil thereof is
made void in Christ, to the end that may be understood and made manifest by
him, which without him is hidden and obscure: and therefore the same Apostle
immediately after says: But when thou shall turn to Christ the ve^l shall be
taken away, verse. 16. but he does not say that the Law or the Old Testament
shall be taken away: they are not therefore taken away by our Lo^ds grace, as
though unprofitable things lay hidden and were covered there, but rather the
veil or cover is taken away, wherewith wholesome and profitable things were
covered and kept close. This is the benefit which they reap and receive, who
with a studious and a devout mind and not with a troubled and wicked spirit, do
se^k after the sense of those Scriptures: and both the order of things, and the
causes of what is s^id and done^ and so great an accord of the Old Testament
with the New, even to the last tittle, and so great mysteries and secrets of
figures are ^^^^ly and plainly (...) and shown: that all the things that are
found out by interpreting them, may enforce men to confess and grant that they
are miserable and wretched^ that will condemn these things, before they have
attain^d to the knowledge of them.

Touchi^g t^ose words of the Apostl^: The le^^er kills, but the spirit
quickneth, as they are here expounded by S. Augustine, he passes this
judgment, that he did more conveniently in his op^^io^^ expound them in his
book De Spiritu and Litera, though this sense is not to be rejected. Lib. 1.
Retract. ^. 14.

CHAP. IV.
Of three wa^es whereby men fall into error.
THat for the present the depth and profoundneste of knowledge and science
being set aside, I may so treat with thee, as I think I ought to treat with my
familiar friend, that is, as well as I can, but not so well as I have admired
to see very learned me^ been able to do: there be three kinds of error into
which men may fall when they read any thing; I will speak of every one of
them. The first kind is, when that is thought to be true which indeed is false,
and was thought to be ^o by the Author that wrote it. The second kind not
being of so large an extent, yet no less damageable and hurtful then the
former, is, when that which is false, is thought to be true^ and was thought to
be so by the Author that wrote it. The third kind, is, when some truth is
learned out of another man's writing, which the Author himself that wro^e it,
understood not: in which kind there is no small profit, yea if thou do
consider it attentively thou shall find that the Reader gains unto himself the
whole profit of the reading. An example of the first kind is this: If any one
should say and believe that Rhadamanthus hears and judges in hell the causes
of the dead because he read it in Virgils verses; for this man erres two manner
of ways: first, for that he believes that which he ought not to believe; and
secondly, for that the Author which he read, is not thought to have believed
it. An example of the second kind may be this^ because Lucretius writes^ that
the soul is made of atoms, and that after death it is dissolved into the same
atoms and perishes, if any one should think that this is true, and that he
ought to believe it: for this man is not less unhappy for persuading himself
certainly in so great a ^atter that to be true, which indeed is false, for that
Lucretius, by who^e books he was deceived, was of that opinion; for what does
it avail him to be certain of the Authors opinion, when as he has made choice
of such an author, not by whom, but with whom he might err and be deceived?
An example of the third kind is this: if any one having read some place in
Epicurus his works wherein he praises continency should affirm, That he placed
the chie^e^t good and felicity in Virtue; and that therefore he ought not to be
blamed nor reprehended; now though Epicurus believes that the chiefest
happiness of man consists in corporal pleasures, yet what prejudice does this
man receive and sustain by his error, when as he holds not so filthy and
hurtful an opinion, nor for any other cause is he pleased with Epicurus, but
for that he conceives him not to have held so bad an opinion as ought not
indeed to have been h^ld and maintained? this error, is not only humane and
pardonable, but also oftentimes most worthy of a man: for what if a man should
make me this relation touching one of my loving friend^ that my friend when he
was come to man's estate, told him in the hearing of many, that his infancy and
childhood had been so plea^ing and delightful unto him, that even he swore he
would lead such a l^fe afterward: and that I had received such certain proofs
of the truth of this matter, that I could not without shame and impudency deny
it: should I seen worthy of blame and reproof, if I should think that when he
said this, he meant and intended to signify thereby, that he took much delight
in an innocent life, and a mind alienated from those appetites and desires
wherewith mankind is wont to be involved, and thereupon my love and affection
toward him should be much increased, although perhaps the young man having
been foolish in his tender age, had greatly affected a certain l^berty in
playing and eating and sluggish rest? for suppose he had died after I had
received this relation touching him, and no body could be found that could tell
me what his judgment and opinion was herein: would any one be so mischievous
and wicked, as to fall out and be angry with me for praising his resolution and
intention according to the intelligence which had been delivered and imparted
unto me? Yea what if a just valuer and esteemer of things should perhaps make
no difficulty to praise and commend my good will and opinion, for that I was
taken and delighted with innocence, and being a man would rather frame a good
conceit of another man in a doubtful matter, even when he spoke otherwise then
he ought to have done?

CHAP. V,
Of the truth of the Holy Scripture.
NOw thou have heard the three kinds of error into which men may fall that
read any thing: hear also so many conditions and differences of the same
Scriptures, for it is necessary that so many do occur; for either some one
has written a profitable work, and another does not rightly and profitably
understand it: or the writer and the reader have both bestowed their labors
unprofitably; or the reader does well and rightly understand, but the Authors
work is useless and unprofitable. Of these three kinds the first I d^^allow
not, the last I esteem not: for ^hether can I blame an Author whose work is
not well and rightly understood, if he be no way guilty of that fault, nor can
I be troubled to see an Author read that has not known the truth, when I see
that his readers do receive no hurt nor prejudice thereby: wherefo^e, there is
one kind that is most approved, and is most purged and cleansed from error,
which is, when not only good works are set forth, but are also well and
rightly understood by their readers; yet notwithstanding that also is divided
into two kinds, and it is not wholly free from error: for it happens
oftentimes that the writer has a good meaning^ and the reader has so too, but
another then he, and oftentimes a better conceit, oftentimes a lower, and yet
one that is commodious and profitable: but when as we attain to the true sense
and meaning of the Author which we read; and the work much conduces to the
leading of a good life, the truth appears abundantly therein, and there is no
gap nor passage that lies open to falsehood and deceit. This kind is very
seldom to be found, when the discourse is about things that are extremely hard
and obscure; neither in my opinion can it be clearly and manifestly known^, but
only be believed: for by what proofs or arguments can I so perfectly gather
what the will of a man is, that is absent or dead^ that I can swear and take my
oath what it is: when as if he were asked even being present there might be
many things which he might most officiously conceal and hide, although he were
not a wicked man? but to know the quality of the Author I think it nothing
avails to the knowledge of the matter: yet nevertheless he highly deserves to
be reputed and esteemed to be a good man, who by his books and writings affords
great assistance unto mankind and to posterity. Now I would have the Manichees
to tell me in which kind they place the error (which they conceive) of the
Catholic Church. If in the first it is a grievous fault indeed, but we need
not seek far to know how to defend it; for it is sufficient to deny that we
understand it, as they conceive, when they inveigh against it. If in the
second, it is no less ^grievous, but the same words will serve to confute it.
If in the third, it is no fault at all. Go to then, and hereafter consider the
Scriptures themselves: for what do they object against the books which are
called the Old Testament? do they say that they are good, but that we do not
well and rightly understand them? but they themselves receive them not. Do they
say that they are neither good, nor rightly understood by us? but this is
sufficiently ^onvinced by the former defense; or will they say, that we rightly
understand them, but that the books be naught? what is this, but to acquit and
absolve their living adversaries, with whom they are in debate, and to accuse
those that are formerly dead, with whom they have no contention nor strife?
Verily I do believe that all the works which those men left to posterity, were
profitably written, and that they were great and very holy men, and that that
Law was made and published by Gods will and command: and although my skill and
knowledge be but very little in books of that kind, yet this I can easily prove
to be true unto one that bears an equal and an impartial, and not an
obstinate and a refractory mind; and I will do it, when thou will afford me an
attentive and a courteous hearing, and mine own occasions will permit. But now
is it not sufficient for me, howsoever that business goes, not to have been
beguiled nor deceived.

CHAP. VI.
That the holy Scripture is first to be loved before it can be learned.
OHonoratus, I call mine own conscience and God, who inhabits pure souls, to
witness, that I judge and esteem nothing to be more (...) nothing more chaste,
nothing more rel^gious then all those Scriptures be, which under the name of
the Old Testament, are held and embraced by the Catholic Church. I know thou
admirest to hear me talk thus, for I cannot disguise nor dissemble the matter,
we have been exhorted and persuaded to believe far otherwise: but truly, a
rasher act cannot be committed (rashness being a fault unto which we were
addicted being yet but children) then to forsake the judgment of the
Exposit^urs of any kind of books who profess that they can receive them, and
can teach and deliver them to their disciples: and to require their judgment
and opinion of them, who being constrained, I know not for what cause have
denounced a most sharp and bitter war against their authors and compilers?
and that I may speak of those sciences whe^ein perhaps a Reader may (...)
without any heinous crime or off^^ce, who ev^r thought that the exposition of
the profound and obscure books of Aristotle ought to be received from his
enemy? or who being desirous to learn the Geometry of Archimedes, would take
Epicurus to be his master, against which he disputed very sti^fely and eag^^ly,
and yet (as ^ conceive) he understood nothing thereof? Are those Sc^iptures of
the law most plain and easy, against which they proceed with violence in vain
and to no purpose, as though they were exposed and lay open to the capacity of
the common people? I think these men are like to that woman which they
themselves do laugh at and deride, who being angry to hear the praises of the
sun, and to have it recommended unto her by a certain Manichean woman to be
worshipped, as she was religiously simple, starts up upon a sudden, and
stamping often upon the place, which the sun with his beams had enlightened
thorough a window, began to cry out, Behold I contemn and tread under foot the
sun and thy God. That this was done altogether foolishly, and like unto a
woman, no man can deny: but do not those men seem to resemble her, who casting
forth violent speeches and curses against the things they understand not,
neither why they were written, nor what manner of things they be (which seem as
t^^^g^ (...) ^ere low and contemptible, but to them that understand them they
are subtle and divine) think to receive some benefit thereby, because
unskilful men do countenance and applaud them? believe me whatsoever is
contained in those Scriptures is high and divine: there is truth altogether in
them, and most fit instruction both for the amending and reforming men's minds:
and it is certainly so well digested and ordered, that every one may receive
from thence that which is sufficient for himself, if he comes prepared to take
it with such piety and devotion, as true Religion does require. Should I go
about to prove this unto thee I must allege many reasons, and entertain thee
with a longer discourse: for first I must persuade thee not to hate the
Authors themselves, and then to love them: and this I must effect by a^^ (...)
^eans^ rather then by expounding their opinions and their writings: and
therefore if we did hate Virgil, yea if we did not love him upon the
commendation of our Predecessors before we understood him, we should never be
satisfied in those innumerable questions touching him wherewith Grammarians are
wont to be much perplexed and troubled: nor should we give ^are to any man that
could resolve those questions to his honor and praise, but we should give
countenance and show favor unto him who by those questions would endeavor to
show that he erred and doted; but now when as many men do labor to expound
them, and that after diverse manners, and every one according to his skill and
ability, they receive the chiefest commendation and applause, by whose
expositions he is found to be a better Poet, and he is conceived and believed
even by those that understand him not, not only to have committed no fault nor
error, but to have said nothing which does not de^erve much glory and praise:
and therefore if a Master fails but in a small question, and knows not what to
answer, we are rather angry and offended with him, then we will conceive that
by any fault committ^d by Maro he is silent and dumb: but if a Master should in
his own defense, (...) that so great an Author has committed a fault, he
would loose so much credit and reputation thereby, that his scholars would
hardly continue with him even though he should hyre them with wages and
rewards. How great a matter were it for us to give so much credit to those
Writers by w^ose mouths the Holy Ghost has spoken as Antiquity confirmed by a
long continuance does testify and declare? but we forsooth being very wise
young men, and wonderful searchers of reasons, not having so much as perused
those books nor sought o^t Masters to expound them unto us, nor somewhat
accused our own slownesse herein, nor held them to have any judgment or
understanding who affirmed that those works had for a long time been read, kept
and expounded thorough the whole world, though that no credit was to be given
unto them, being moved by their words, who were their enemies and offended with
them, by whom we were enforced with a false promise of reason to believe and
embrace unheard of millions of fables and ^ales.

CHAP. VII.
That we ought not to judge rashly of the holy Scriptures: and how and with
what care and diligence the true Religion is to be sought for.
BUt now if I can, I will accomplish that which I have begun, and I will treat
with thee after such a sort, that in the mean time I will not expound the
Catholic Faith, but I will show unto them that have a care of their souls some
hope of divine fruit, and of finding out the Truth, to the end they may search
out the great mysteries and secrets of Faith. He that seeks after the true
Religion, does without doubt either believe already that the Soul is immortal,
unto whom that Religion may be commodious and profitable, or he desires to find
her to be so in the same Religion; and therefore all Religion is for the souls
sake: for the nature of the body howsoever it does put him to no care and
solicitude, especially after ^eath, whose soul has taken a course by which it
may become blessed. Wherefore true Religion if there be any, was either only
one chiefly instituted for the souls sake: and this soul erres and is foolish,
as we see until she gets and possesses wisdom, and that perhaps is the true
Religion, if I seek out and enquire the cause of her erring, I find it to be a
thing which is extremely hidden and obscure. But do I send thee to fables? or
do I enforce thee to believe any thing rashly? I say our soul being entangled
and drowned in error and folly, seeks after the way of verity and truth, if
there be any such to be found, if thou find not thy self thus inclined and
disposed, pardon me, and make me I pray thee, partaker of thy wi^dome: but if
thou do, let u^, I beseech thee both together seek out the truth. Imagi^e
with thy self that no no^^c^ had as yet been given unto us, nor no insinuation
made unto us of any Religion whatsoever. Behold we undertake a new work, and a
new business. Professors of Religion are I believe to be sought for, if there
be no such thing. Suppose then that we have found men of diverse opinions, and
in that diversity seeking to draw every one unto them; but that in the mean
time, some amongst these do surpass the rest in renown of ^ame, and in the
possession of almost all people. Whether they embrace the truth or no it is a
great question; but are they not first to be examined and tried, that so long
as we err (for as men we are subject to error) we may seem to err with
mankind it self? but thou will say, Truth is to be found but amongst a few
certain men: if thou know amongst whom it is, why then thou know already
what it is. Did not I say a little before that we would seek after the truth,
as though we were yet ignorant thereof? but if by the force of truth thou do
conjecture that there be but few that embrace it, and yet thou know not who
they be, what if those few do lead and rule the multitude by their authority,
and can dive into the secrets and mysteries of faith, and can make them in a
manner plain and manifest? do we not see how few attain to the height of
eloquence, and yet the schools of Rhetoricians do make a great noise throughout
the whole world, wit^ companies of young men? Do all those that desire to
become good orators, being terrified with the multitude of unskilful men,
think that they ought to addict themselves rather to the study of the orations
of Co^cilius and Erucius, then to those of Tullius Cicero? all men affect the
things that are strengthened and confirmed by the authority of their
ancestors. The simple sort of people endeavors to learn those things which a
few learned men have delivered unto them to be learned: but very few there be
that attain unto great eloquence, fewer there be that practice it, but fewest
of all that grow eminent and are famous. What if true Religion be some such
thing? what if a multitude of ignorant people frequents the Churches, it is no
proof nor arg^ment, that therefore none are made perfect by those mysteries?
and yet if so f^w should study eloquence, as there are few that become
^loquent, our parents would never think it fit to have us recommended unto such
masters. When as therefore the multitude, which abounds with a number of
unsk^lfull people invites us to these studies^ and makes us earnestly to affect
that which few do obtain, why will we not admit that we have the like cause i^
Religion, the which peradventure we contemn and despise to the great peril
and hazard of our souls? for if the most true and most sincere worship of God,
though it be but amongst a few, yet it is amongst those with whom the
multitude, though wholly addicted to their appetit^s and desires, and far
from the purity of knowledge and understanding^ does con^ent and agree, which
without all doubt may come to pass: I ask, what answer are we able to give if
any one should r^prove our ^ashnes and folly for that having a great care to
find out the true Religion, we do not diligently search it out amongst the
masters and teachers thereof? if I should say the multitude has discouraged
me. Why then has it not disheartened men from the study of the liberal
sciences which hardly yields any profit to this present life? why not from
seeking after money and getting wealth? why not from obtaining dignities and
honors? moreover, why not from recovering and preserving health? finally, why
not from the desire of a blessed and an happy life? in all which affairs though
many men be employed, yet few there be that ate eminent and excel. You will
say that the books of the Old Testament seemed to contain absurd things. Who
are they that affirm it? namely enemies, for what cause or reason they did it,
is not now the question; but yet they were enemies, you will say when you read
them you understood so much by your own reading. Is it so indeed? if thou had
no skill in Poetry at all thou durst not take in han^ Terentianus Maurus
without a master; Asper, Cornutus^ Donatus, and a multitude of other Authors
are thought requisite for the understanding of any Poet, whose verses deserve
no greater esteem then the approbation and applause of a stage: and thou
without a guide do undertake to read those books, and without a master
dare pass thy judgment upon them, which, howsoever they be, are
notwithstanding by the confession of almost all mankind, published to be holy
and replenished with divine matters: nor if tho^ find some things therein
which seem unto th^e absurd, do thou rather accuse the dullness of thy wit^
and thy mind corrupted with the infection of this world (as the minds of all
fools are) then those books which peradventure by such kind of men cannot be
well conceived and understood. Thou should do well to seek out a man both
pious and learned, or one that is esteemed and reputed so to be, by the
approbation and consent of many; by whose instructions thou might become
better, and more expert and skillful by his learning. Such an one (say thou)
was not easy to be found: it would be some labor and trouble to seek him.
There was none such in the land wherein thou did dwell. If so, what cause
could more profitably enforce thee to travel? if he lay hid in the continent
or firm land, or were not there at all; thou should sail beyond sea: if he
were not there to be found by the shore, thou shoulde^t make a voyage even unto
those lands, wherein the things which are contained in those books are said and
reported to have been done. O Honorat us have we done any such thing? and yet
when we were but most wretched and silly boys we did at our own pleasure, and
in our own judgment, condemn a Religion, and that perhaps a most holy one (for
I speak, as yet, as though some doubt were to be made thereof) whose fame and
renown has already possessed the whole world. What if the things which ^eem in
those Scriptures offensive to some that are ignorant and unskilful, be for
this cause so written and set down, that when such things are read as ^gree not
with the sense of all sorts of men, but much less with theirs that are holy
and wise, we may with more care and diligence seek out a secret and hidden
meaning thereof? do thou not see how men labor to interpret the pastoral
Catamite, upon whom the rough shepherd poured out his affections: and how they
as^irm that the boy Alexis (upon whom Plato is also said to have made some
love-ver^es) signifies I know not what great and mysterious matter, but that it
surpasses the judgment and understanding of unskilful men: when as indeed
that Poet abounding in his inventions may without any detestable crime or
offense be conceived to have published lascivious songs? but were we indeed
hindered and withdrawn from seeking out the true Religion, either by the
publishing of some law against it, or by the power of them that oppose it, or
by the contemptible show and appearance of men dedicated to the service of God,
or by any base or di^honest report; or by the newness of the institution, or
by some hidden profession thereof? No, no, none of these things did withdraw
and hinder us: all laws both divine and humane do permit men to seek out the
Catholic faith, and certainly it is lawful according to humane law to hold
and embrace it, if so long as we err, we be uncertain of the divine law. We
have no enemy that puts any fright or terror into our weakness: although truth
and the salvation of our souls, if it be sought after, where it is lawful to
seek it with most safety; and it cannot be found, ought to be enquired for with
any danger and hazard whatsoever; the degrees of all powers and dignities do
most devoutly impart their service unto this sacred and divine worship: and the
very name of Religion is most honorable, and has a very great esteem and
renown. What hinders us then at last to seek out carefully, and to examine
with a pious and diligent search, whether here be that truth which though few
do know and retain after the sincerest manner, yet the favor and good w^ll o^
a^l nati^^s does con^^i^e therein? All this being so, imagine (as I said) that
we now make our first enquiry what Religion we ought to embrace, both for the
cleansing and reforming of our souls. Without doubt we must take our beginning
from the Catholic Church, for there are now more Christians then if the Jews
were joined with the worshippers of idols. And where^^ of the same Christians
there be diverse heresies, and all would have themselves thought to be
Catholics, and do call others besides themselves heretics; the Church is one,
as all do grant, greater in multitude, if thou considerest the whole world, and
(as those that know do affirm) more sincere in truth then all the re^t; but as
for truth it is another question. But that which is sufficient for those that
seek it, is, that the Catholic Church is one upon which other heresies do
impose diverse names, when as every one of them is called by its proper name,
which it dares not deny; where by we may understand by the judgment of^
Arbitratours not hindered by any favour^ unto whom the name Catholic which all
seek after, ought to be attributed. But lest that any one should think that
this thing ought to be debated with much babbling or superfluous discourse^
there is one Church indeed wherein even the humane Laws are after a sort
Christian. Yet I will have no preocupation of judgment to be drawn from hence,
but I judge it to be a most fit beginning for the seeking out of the truth. For
there is no fear least the true worship of God relying upon no proper force of
its own, should seem to stand in need to be upheld and supported by them whom
^t ought to sustain and support: but certainly it were a perfect happiness, if
the Truth could there be found, where with most security it may be sought and
retained: but if it cannot, it ought to be sought for in another place, what
danger and peril soever be incurred.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the way to the instruction of piety, and of the wonderful pains Sa^nt
Augustine took to find it out.
HAving thus resolved and determined these things, which in my opinion are so
right and just, that I ought to prevail in that cause with thee, whosoever were
against it: I will recount unto thee as well as I can, what course I took to
find out the true Religion, when as I sought it with such a mind and resolution
as I have now declared, that it ought to be ^ought for. When I was departed
from thee beyond the Sea, now staggering and doubting what I ought to embrace
and what to reject (which doubting daily increased in me from the time that I
gave ear unto that man, whose coming unto us, was as thou know) promised as
from heaven, for the resolving of all the difficulties where with we were
troubled, and I knew him to be a man like other men, but only that he was
cloquent, I held a great debate and deliberation with my self being now in
Italy; not whether I should continue in that sect into which I was sorry and
grieved that I had fallen, but by what means I might find out the truth, for the
love whereof thou can bear me witness, how I sighed and groaned. I was often
of an opinion that it could not be found out, and the great waves of my
thoughts and cogitations moved me to assent to the Academicks. Oftentimes again
when I considered as well as I could, that the mind of man is endued with such
vivacity and natural strength, with such wisdom and sharpness of wit, and
with such quickness of judgment and understanding, I did not think that Truth
could lie hidden and be concealed, but only that the manner of Seeking it was
hidden and unknown, and that that manner was to be received from some Divine
Authority, it remained that I should enquire what that Authority was, when as
in so great Dissensions and diversity of Opinions every one did promise that he
would Teach and deliver it. Whereupon there occurred unto me an intricate Wood
or Labyrinth into which it was very tedious and irksome to enter; and my mind
remaining restl^sse am^ngst these things, was toss^d to and fro with a great
desire of finding out the truth: yet nevertheless by little and little I brake
off from their company more and more whom I had already purposed to forsake,
and there was nothing now remaining in so great perils and dangers, but that
with tears and pitiful words, I should beseech the Divine Providence to
assist and help me; and this I did deliver gently and carefully, and now I was
almost shaken by some disputations had with the Bishop of Millan S. Ambrose, l.
5. conf. c. 14^ so that not without some hope I desired to enquire many things
touching the Old Testament, which (as thou know) being discommended and
dispraised unto us we abhorred and detested. And I had resolved to remain so
long a Catechumen in the Church unto which I was delivered by my parents,
until I could find out that which I desired, or could persuade my self that it
ought not to be sought for. Wherefore if there had been any one then, that
could have taught me, he might have found me a most apt scholar and very
docible. After this manner and with the like care and anxiety of thy soul thou
see that thou have been long troubled and afflicted, and if thou seem to
thy self to have been already sufficiently tosse^, and would make an end of
these labors and pains: Follow the way of the Catholic Discipline, which has
proceeded from Christ himself by his Apostles even unto us, and from hence
shall descend and be conveyed to posterity.

CHAP. IX.
Of Credulity.
THou say my advice is foolish and ridiculous, seeing that all men do make
it their profession to embrace and deliver Catholic doctrine. That all
Heretics do profess this I cannot deny, but after such a manner, that unto
those which they entice and allure unto them, they promise to give a reason for
the most hidden and mostobscure things: and chiefly for this cause they blame
and reprehend the Catholic Church, because those that approach and come unto
her are commanded to believe: but they glory and boast that they impose not
upon their followers the yoke of Faith and Bel^eving^ but open unto them the
fountain it self of teaching and instruction. What (say thou) could be
uttered or spoken more redounding to their praise and commendation? It is not
so. This they promise having no power nor ability to perform it, but that by
the name and pretense of reason they may win and allure much company unto
them; for the soul of man naturally rejoices at the promise of reason, and not
having regard to her own forces and weakness, by a desire she has to eat the
meats of those that are in health (which are not prudently given to the infirm)
she hastily falls upon the poison of the deceivers. But as for true Religion it
can by no means be well and rightly received without some weighty command and
force of authority, unless those things be first believed, which every one may
afterward attain unto, and learn if he carries himself well, and be thought
worthy of it. Perhaps thou requirest some reason hereof, whereby thou may be
induced and persuaded to believe that thou ought not sooner to be taught by
reason, then by Faith and Belief. Which I can easily give unto thee, if thou will accept and receive it from me with an equal and impartial mind. But that
it may commodiously be done, I would have thee as it were answer to such
questions as I shall propose unto thee. And first of all I would have thee to
tell me: why do thou conceive that we ought not to Believe? Because (say
thou) credulity it self, from whence men are called credulous, seems unto me to
be a certain vice, else it would not be a custom to object this name by way of
reproach. For if a suspicious man be culpable and faulty, because he suspects
things not certainly known: much more does a credulous man deserve to be
blamed, who differs herein from a suspicious man, that he that is suspicious
makes some doub^ in unknown things, but he that is credulous makes none at
all. In the mean time I admit of this opinion and this distinction; but thou
know also that we do not say a man is curious but by way of taunt and
reproach, but when we call a man studious, we speak it in his praise and
commendation: wherefore if you please, mark what difference you concei^e to be
between these two. Thou answerest, that although both be moved with a great
desire of knowing, yet in this they dif^er, that the curious man enquires after
the things that belong not unto him, but the studious on the contrary after his
own affairs. But we grant that a wife and children and their welfare do belong
unto a man, and therefore if any one being gone a far off out of his native
soil should make a diligent enquiry of those that come from his parts, how his
wife and children do, he has certainly a great desire to know it, and yet we
call not this a studious man, although he be desirous to know, and even those
things which do chiefly belong and appertain unto him. Wherefore now thou
understandest that that definition of a studious man is herein defective and
imperfect: that every studious man desires to know the things that belong unto
him, but that every man that has such a desire ought not to be called a
studious man; but he who exceedingly seeks after the things which belong to
excellent breeding, and to the adorning of the mind, we rightly call (in
Latin) a Student, that is, a desirous man, especially if we add what he
desires to hear. For we call one also studious of his friends, that loves his
friends only: yet neve^thelesse we think him not worthy of the common name of
studious men without any addition. But one that desires to know how his friends
do, I wonld not call him studious or desirous of hearing, unless having a good
fame and credit he should often desire to hear the same thing, but if he should
but once desire to hear it, I would call him a Student or desiring man. Now
reflect upon a curious man, and tell me whether if any one should willingly
hear a short tale not conducing at all unto his profit, that is, of things not
belonging unto him, and this not with great eagerness and often, but very
seldom and very modestly, either in some banquet, or in some meeting or
assembly, would thou think him to be a curious man? I conceive not, but
truly he that has a care of that thing which he would willingly hear might
seem indeed to be so. Wherefore the definition also of a curious man ought to
be corrected by the same Rule as is that of a studious man. And therefore
consider also, whither the things formerly spoken ought to be amended. For why
is he not unworthy of the name of a suspicious man, who sometimes suspecteth
something, and he of a credulous man that sometimes believes something?
Wherefore as there is a very great difference between one that is desirous of
any thing, and one that is altogether studious, and again between one that has
a care of a thing, and one that is curious: so is there between a believing man
and a credulous man.

CHAP. X.
Why cre^^lity is the way to Religion.
BUt thou will say, Now see whither we ought to believe in Religion. For
neither if we grant it to be one thing to believe, another to be credulous,
does it follow, that it is no fault to believe in matters of Religion: for what
if it be a fault both to believe and to be credulous, as it is both to be drunk
and to be a drunkard? whosoever thinks this to be certainly true, can in my
opinion have no friend at all. For if it be a thing unreasonable to believe any
thing, either he commits a foul fault that gives credit to his friend; or if he
believes him not, I see not how he can call himself a friend, or the other.
Here peradventure thou will say, I grant that something ought sometimes to be
believed: now declare how in Religion it is not ^ thing unreasonable to believe
any thing before we know it, or understand it. I will if I can. Wherefore I ask
thee, which do thou conceive to be the greater ^ault, to instruct an
unworthy person in Religion, or to believe that which is said by the
instructours and teachers thereof? if thou understandest not whom I call an
unworthy person: such an one I mean as comes to receive and embrace Religion
with a feigned and dissembling heart. Thou grantest, as I conceive, that it is
a thing more worthy of blame to expound to such an one the holy mysteries of
faith, then to give credit to religious men, affirming something of Religion it
self. Neither would it become thee to give another answer. Wherefore now
imagine with thy self, that the man were present who is to in^truct thee in
point of Religion: how will thou make him believe that thou come with a true
and an unfeigned mind, and that thou usest no deceit nor dissimulation in this
business? thou will say that upon thy good conscience thou feignest nothing,
assuring it with all the words thou can use, but yet with words. For being a
man thou caust not so open the corners and secrets of thy mind to another man,
that he may know thee inwardly. And if he shall say: Behold I do believe thee:
but is it not more fit that thou also should give credit unto me, seeing that
if I hold and embrace any truth, thou art to receive the benefit thereof, and I
to impart it? What answer shall we give, but that he ought to be believed? but
say thou, Had it not been be^ter to allege reason unto me, that I might
followit without any rashness whithersoever it should lead me? Perhaps it had
been: but seeing that it is so great a matter for thee to know God by reason,
do thou think that all men are capable of understanding the reasons whereby
the mind of man is led to the knowledge of divine things^ or the greater part
of them or but a few? I think, thou say but a few. Do thou believe that
thou art in that number? Thou say, It is not my part to answer to that
question. Thou think then that it is his part also to believe thee in this
matter: which he does indeed. Only let me put thee in mind, that he has
already twice given credit unto thee, speak^^g uncertain things: and that thou
would not so much as once believe him, when he religiously warned and
admonished thee. But suppose this to be so, and that thou come with a ^incere
mind to embrace Religion, and that being one of those few men, thou can
understand the reasons by which the divine power i^ certainly known^ do thou
think that Religion is to be denied to other men, that have not so great wi^s
and judgments as thou have? or do thou conceive that by little and little
they ought to be led by certain degrees to those chiefest secrets? thou plainly
see what course of proceeding is the more religious. For thou can not think
that any man ought by any means to be forsaken or rejected in the desire and
affection of so great a matter. But art not thou of opinion, that unless a man
first beli^ves, that he shall attain unto that which he intended, and bears an
humble and a suppliant mind, and being obedient to certain great and necessary
precepts^ be very w^ll purged and made clean by a certain course of life, he
cannot otherwise obtain those things that are purely true? indeed thou think
so. If then they, who by certain reason can most easily conceive the divine
mysteries, (one of which sort I believe thee to be) should proceed in this way,
wherein those walk that first do believe, would they receive any hu^t thereby?
I think not. But yet thou say, what necessity is there of delay? because,
although by their proceedings they shall not prejudice themselves at all, yet
they will endamage others by their example. For there is hardly any one, that
has so high a conceit of himself as he can have; and he that thinks too humbly
of himself, ought to be raised up, and he that thinks too high, ought to be
repressed, that neither the one may be overcome by despair, nor the other cast
down headlong by boldness and presumption. Which is easily brought to pass,
if even those that are able to fly, should a little be enforced to go, lest
any should be dangerously invited thereunto, and thereby also a sufficient care
may be had of others. This is the Providence of true Religion: this God himself
has appointed and command^d: this has been delivered by our Predecessors of
happy m^mory, this has been observed even until our days; to go about to
overthrow this order^ is nothing else but to seek out a sacrilegious way to
true Religion. Which whosoever do, cannot attain unto that which they intend;
though that be granted them which they desire. For howsoever they surpass and
excel in wit, unless the divine Majesty does aid and assist them, they creep
upon the ground. Which assistance he then affords when they that tend and walk
toward him, have a care to proceed according to the course of humane society.
Then which degree and step toward heaven nothing can be found more firm and
stable. Verily, such is the force and efficacy of this reason, that I cannot
re^i^t it, for how can I say, that nothing ought to be believed unless it be
known? besides all friendship is taken away unless something may be believed
which cannot be demonstrated and proved by certain reason: and oftentimes
without offense credit may be given to such stewards as are servants to Lords.
But in matters of Religion what can be done that is more unreasonable and
unjust, then that Gods Prelates should believe us, when we promise that we come
to embrace Religion with an unfeigned mind; and we refuse to give credit unto
them, when they teach and instruct us? Finally, what way can be more wholesome
and profitable, then by believing those things which God has appointed as
preparatives for the culti^ating and adoring the mind to be first disposed, and
made fit to understand and receive the truth? or if thou be already
sufficiently disposed thereunto, rather to go a little about, where thou may
walk with the greatest safety, then both to be the Author of danger to thy
self, and an example of temerity, and rashness unto others.

CHAP. XI.
Of Understanding, Belief and Opinion.
WE have showed already how without offense we may follow those that command
us to believe: it remains that we consider for what cause they are not to be
followed that promise to conduct and lead us by reason. Some are of opinion
that they can ^earken and give ear to these promisers of reason, not only
without any blame or dispraise, but also with some commendation and praise; but
it is not so, for there be two sorts of persons that deserve praise in point of
Religion: the one which has already found out the true Religion, which we
ought to judge most happy and blessed: the other which with the greatest care,
and after the rightest manner, does seek after it: the first sort is now in
possession of it, the second is in the way, by which notwithstanding most
certainly they will arrive at it. There be three other kinds of men which are
indeed to be misliked and detested. The first is, of those that are opinative,
that is, who think they know that which they know not. The second is, of those
who truly do perceive their own ignorance, but do not so seek that they may
find. The third is of those that neither think they know, nor have any will or
desire to seek. There are also three things in the minds of men, near as it
were the one unto the other, most worthy to be distinguished, to understand, to
believe, and to think. Of which, if they be considered by themselves, the first
is always without offense, the second sometimes faulty, the third never
without a fault; and this we ought to reserve to the same beatitude and
felicity. For in this life how much soever a man knows his knowledge does not
as yet make him most blessed, for that there be incomparably more things
whereof he is ignorant. For to understand great and worthy, and divine things
it is a most blessed thing. But it is not hurt full to understand superfluous
things, but perhaps it was prejudicial to learn them, when as they took up the
time of necessary things. Also it is not a miserable thing to understand
hurtful things, but to do or suffer them. For if any one understands how his
enemy may be slain without endangering himself he becomes not guilty by
understanding it, if he desires it not: yea if he be free from such a desire,
who is more innocent and guiltless then he? In believing a man is then to
blame, when either he believes some unworthy thing of God, or gives too facile
and easy credit unto the things reported of man. But in other things, if a man
believes any thing, he commits no fault by believing, though he understands
that he knows not the thing which he believes. For I believe that in times
past, most wicked conspiratours were put to death by the power and authority of
Cicero: but this I do not only not know, but also I know assuredly that I can
by no means attain unto the knowledge thereof, To be opinative or to be led by
opinion, is for two causes an unseemly thing: First, because he cannot learn a
things if it be to be learned, that has persuaded himself that he knows it
already. And secondly, for that rashness is of itself a sign or token of an
ill disposed mind. For although any one thinks that he knows that which I said
touching Cicero (as there is nothing that can hinder him from learning it) yet
because he can have no certain knowledge of it, and for that he understands
not, That there is a great difference, whither any thing be comprehended by
certain reason of mind, which we say is to understand, or whither it be
committed to common fame or writing, to be profitably believed by posterity, he
erres indeed; and there is no error but has its foulness and deformity.
Wherefore that we understand we attribute it to reason: that we believe, to
authority; and that we are opinative, to error and mistaking: but every one
that understands does also believe: and so does every one that is opinative:
but not every one that beli^ves, understands: and no man understands that is
opinative. If therefore these three kinds be referred to those five sorts of
men whereof we made mention a little before, to wit, to the two approved kinds
which we put in the first place, and to the other three vicious kinds; we find
that the first kind (which is those that are happy) does believe truth it self:
and that the second kind (which is those that are desirous and lovers of truth)
does believe authority: in both which kinds the believers deserve praise. But
in the first of the vicious kinds (that is of those that think they know that
which they know not) there is indeed a faulty credulity. The other two
disallo^ed kinds (that is, both those that seek after truth with a despair of
finding it out, and they that seek not after it) do believe nothing; and this
is only in things belonging to some doctrine or discipline, for how a man can
believe nothing in the other actions of his life I understand not. Albeit even
amongst those that affirm that in their actions they follow probable opinions,
some there be that will seem rather not able to know any thing, then to believe
nothing. For who does not believe that which he does approve? Or how is that
which they follow profitable, if it be not approved? Wherefore there may be two
kinds of those that oppose the truth: the one that opposes knowledge only,
and not faith: the other that condemns both the one and the other. But
whither any can be found that use such proceedings in humane af^airs, I am
wholly ignorant. These things are spoken that we may understand, that believing
the things which we do not as yet fully know nor understand, we are vindicated
and defended from the rashness and temerity of opinative men. As for them that
say that we ought to believe nothing, but that which we k^ow, they have ^nely
regard to the name of opinion, which I confess is but base and ignominious:
but if any one will consider attentively, that there is a very great difference
between these two things, whither a man thinks that he knows a thing, or
whither being moved by some authority, he believes that which he understands
that he knows not, he shall certainly shun and avoid the crime both of error,
inhumanity and pride.

Observation.
S. A^g^stine in his first book of Retractations and fourteenth Chapter, would
have those words. (The one which has already found out the true Religion which
we ought to judge most happy and most blessed) so to be understood, that they
are most blessed not in this life, b^t in that which we hope for, and unto
which we go by the way of Faith, for (says he) they are to be conceived to
have found out that which is to be sought for, who are there already^ whither
we by seeking and believing^ that is by embracing the way of Faith do desire to
arrive.

And again he affirms that those words: To understand great and worthy and
divine things, it is a most blessed things ought to be referred to eternal
beatitude.

And upon these words: (There is a great difference whither any thing be
comprehended by certain reason of mind, which we ^ay, is to understand: or
whither it be committed to common fame, or writing to be pro^itably believed by
posterity;) and upon these: (That we understand we attribute it to reason: that
we believe to authority) he makes this explication: This is not so to be
understood that in common discourse we should be afraid to say we know that
which we beli^ve by credible witnesses, for when ^e speak properly, we are
only said to kuow that which we comprehend by firm reason of mind. But when we
speak with words more fit to be commonly used, as the Scripture also speaks,
we make no doubt to say, that we know both that which we perceive by our
corporal senses, and which we believe upon the report of credible witnesses,
but yet so that we understand what difference there is between the one and the
other.

CHAP. XII.
That it is the safest way to Believe Wise men.
IF that which is not known ought not to be believed, I ask then how can
children obey parents and embrace them with mutual love and affection, whom
they may believe not to be their parents; for that who is their father, it
cannot be known by reason, but it is believed upon the word and authority of
the Mother: and as for the Mother, she often is not believed, but Midwives,
Nurses and Servants: For if her child may be stolen from her and another put in
the place, cannot she deceive being deceived? and yet notwithstanding we
believe, and that without any doubt and staggering at all, that which we
confess we cannot know: and unless this were so, who sees not but that Piety
the most holy tie and bond of mankind would be violated and defiled by a most
proud wickedness and offense? For who, though he be a mad man, can think him
worthy of blame, who does perform his obliged duties unto those whom he behev^s
to be his parents, although indeed they were not? On the contrary who will not
think fit to have him cast out of the society of men, who will not love those
which perhaps are his true parents, for fear les^ he should love those that are
false ones? Many arguments may be brought to show that nothing at all remains
safe and secure in humane society if once we are resolved to believ^ nothing
which we cannot know nor understand. But now hear tha^ whereby I am confident I
shall at the present more easily draw and persuade thee, that seein^ the
question is concerning Religion, that is about the worship of God, and the
knowledge of Divine things) those are les^e to be followed, and hearkened unto,
who most readily promising reason, do forbid and prohibit us to believe. No
man doubts, but that all men are either fools or wise men; I call not those
wisemen here, that are prudent, ingenious, and witty but those that are endued
with as firm and certain a knowledge both of Divine and Huma^e things as man is
capable to receive and do lead their lives and frame their manners conformable
thereunto: but as for others, how learned or unlearned soever they be^ or
whither they deserve to be praised or d^spraised for the manner of their lives^
I repute and account them in the number of fools: which being so, what man,
though but of a slender understanding does not plainly see, that it is more
wholesome and profitable for fools to obey the precepts and commands of wise
men, then to frame and order their lives according to their own judgments and
fancies? For every thing that is done, if it be not rightly done, it is a
fault: nor can any thing be by any means rightly done, which does not flow and
proceed from right reason; now right reason is virtue it self; But amongst what
sorts of men is virtue to be found, but in the mind of a wise man? wherefore
the wiseman only offends not; but every fool offends, unless it be in those
actions wherein he does obey a wise man; for such actions do proceed from right
reason^ nor is the fool to be accounred Master (as I may say) of his own
actions^ he being as it were but the instrument or servant of the wise man.
Wherefore if it be better for all men not to offend then to offend^ verily ^^l
fools would live better if they could be servants to wise men. And if this
without doubt be ^^t and expedient in things of less moment, as in buying or
tilling a field, in marrying a wi^e, in the education and breeding of children,
and finally in the managi^g of private affairs: much more is it expedient in
matters of Religion. For Hu^ane things are both more easy to be known then
Divine: and in all things that are more holy and more exce^lent, we sin so
much the more g^ievously and dangerously^ by how much we ow^ unto them a
greater honor, reverence and re^pect. Wherefore thou ^^^st that from hence
forth there remains nothing more for us to do, so long as we are fools^ but, if
we desire to lead a good and a religious life, to seek out wi^e and prudent
men, that by obeying of them we may not so much feel the dominion of ^olly,
whilst it is in us, and at the length we may become wise men our selves.

An Observation.
S. Augustine in his first book of Retractions, and fourteenth chapter
advertiseth that his division of men into wise men and fools, is to be
understood of men after they come to the use of reason, whereby they are
distinguished from beasts, as we say all men desire to be blessed, wherein
little children cannot be included for they cannot yet desire it.

CHAP. XIII.
That Religion takes her beginning from Believing.
HEre again arises a question of great difficulty: for how shall we that are
fools be able to find out a wise man, ^eeing that diverse do indifferently
challenge that name unto themselves, although almost none dare presume to do it
openly, when as they do so disagree amongst themselves about those things, in
the knowledge whereof wisdom does consist, that it is necessary to think that
either none of them are wise men, or that there is but one certain wiseman. But
when a fool enquires who that is, truly I s^e not by what means he can be
plainly discerned and perce^ved: for a man cannot know any thing by any signs
whatsoever, unless he knows the thing it self, whereof these be the signs; but
a fool knows not wisdom. For wisdom is not like gold and silver and such like
things, which thou may both know when thou see, and yet not enjoy and
possess them: he that wants wisdom cannot see nor behold it with the eye of
his mind: for all the things which we perceive with our corporal senses, are
outwardly proposed and presented unto us; and therefore we may behold strange
and external things with our eyes albeit we have not any of the things, nor
any thing of that kind: but that which is perceived by the understanding^ is
inwardly in the mind, and it i^ nothing el^e to have it, but to see and behold
it. But a fool wants wisdom, and therefore knows it not, for he cannot see it
with his eyes; for he cannot see it and not have it: and he cannot have it and
still continue and remain a fool: wherefore he knows it not, and whilst he
knows it not, he cannot know it in another place: and therefore no man so long
as he remains a fool, can by most certain knowledge find out a wise man, by
obeying of whose precepts and commands he may be freed from so great an ev^l as
folly is. Now it is God only that can give satisfaction to this mighty
difficulty, and afford remedy for this great evil; and because our question is
about Religion, unless we both believe that there is a God, and that he gives
assistance to humane minds, we ought not indeed to inquire and seek for true
Religion. For what do we desire to find out at length by so great an endeavor?
What wish we to attain unto? Whither do we long to arrive? Is it unto that
thing which we believe not to have a being nor to belong and appertain unto us?
Nothing is more perverse then such a mind. When thou durst no^ beg a favor of
me^ or with impudence durst crave one do thou come to demand how Religion may
be found out, when thou think not that there is a God. and that we care not
whither there be any or no? What if it be so great a matter^ that unless it be
diligently sought for, and with all might and power it cannot be found out?
What if the extreme difficulty of finding out the meaning and understanding of
that which shall be found out does vex and trouble the mind of the seeker? For
what is more pleasant and familiar to our eyes, then this light is? and yet
after long obscurity and darkness they cannot endure it. What is more fit and
commodious for a body that is consumed and exhausted with sickness, then meat
and drink? Yet we see that those that are upon recovery are restrained and kept
back that they may not pres^me to feed so plentifully as well men do, lest by a
full diet they should return to their former di^ease. I speak of those that are
recovering their health: but what do we not enforce the sick men themselves to
eat something? which is so great a trouble unto them, that certainly they would
not obey us^ did they not believe that they shall escape that sickness
thereby. When therefore will thou settle thy self to a most painful and
labo^ious search? When will thou adventure to take so great care and labor
upon thee, as this business does deserve, when as thou do not believe that
there is any such thing as that which thou seek? Wherefore it was rightly
instituted and ordained by the majesty of Catholic discipline, that before all
things they should be induced and persuaded to believe, that come to receive
and embrace Religion.

CHAP. XIV.
That Christ himself chiefly exacted belief.
SEeing my discourse is concerning th^se that desire to be called Christians^ I
pray tell me what reason can that heretic allege unto me? What can he say to
draw me from Believing, as from a rash and incons^de^ate thing? If he commands
me to believe nothing^ then do I not believe that there ^s any true Religion in
the world: and because (...) do not believe that there is any such thing, I do
not ^eek after it. But he (as conceive) will show it to the ^eeker; For so it
is written: He that seeks shall find. ^here^ore I would not c^m^ to him that
^orbids me to b^lieve, unless I believed something. ^s there any greater
madness, then that I should displease them only with a belief which is
supported by no knowledge^ and yet that belief alone ha^h b^o^ght me to the
^elf same man? What shall I say^ but that all Heretics do exhort us to believe
Christ? Can they be mo^e oppo^ite and contrary to themselves? Wherein they are
to be pressed two manner of way^s. First they are to be asked, where is the
reason which they promised, where the re^^^hension and blaming of rashness
where the presumption of science and knowledge? for if it be an ab^u^d thing to
be^^eve anyone without reason w^y (...) expect^ why do thou go (...) to have
me believe any one without ^eason that I may ^o^e easi^y (...) by thy reason?
^ill thy rea^^n bu^^d any thing that is firm and stable upon the foundation of
temer^^y and ^ashnesse? I speak according to them whom we discontent and
di^please by believing. For to believe before reason, when thou art not yet fit
to conceive and understand it, and by faith it self to prepare the mind to
receive the seeds of verity and truth, I judge it to be not only a most
wholesome and profitable thing, but also so necessary, that those that have sick
and feeble minds cannot recover their healths without it: which because they
conceive to be a ridiculous thing and full of rashness, it is impudently done
of them to persuade and exhort us to believe Christ. Moreover, I confess that
I have already believed Christ, and have p^rswaded my self, that that is true
which he has said^ although this my belief be supported by no reason. This is
the first lesson O heretic which thou will teach me; but because I have not
seen Christ himself, how he vouchsafed to appear amongst men, who is publicly
reported to have been seen even by the eyes of common people give me leave a
little to consider with my self upon whose words I have believed, that there
was a Christ, that being already guarded and fortified by such a faith, I may
give ear and hearken unto thee; I perceive that I believed and gave credit unto
none, but to a settled and confirmed opinion, and to a most renowned fame and
report of people and nations: these people also I see in all places to be in
possession of the secrets and mysteries of the Catholic Church. Why shall not
I then chiefly enquire of them diligently what Christ has commanded^ by whose
authority being moved, I have already believed that Christ has commanded some
profitable thing? Will thou better expound unto me what^ Christ has said? whom
I would not think to have been, or now to be, if thou did recommend it unto
me to be believed. This therefore (as I said) have I believed upon a famous
report of men, confirmed with consent and antiquity: but you who a^e both so
few, and so turbulent, and so new, it is certain you can produce and bring
forth nothing which may de^erve c^edit and belief. And therefore what a
madness is this in thee (to say) Be^ieve them (the known multitude of
Christendom) that we ought to be^ieve Christ, but learn of us (Manicheans)
what Christ has said: Why so I beseech thee? Verily^ if that known multitude
should fail^ and could teach me nothing: I should much more easily per^wade my
self, tha^ (...) ought not to believe Christ at all then that ^ ought to
believe any thing concerning him of any others bnt o^ those by whose means I
first believed him. O migh^y confidence, or rather folly! I will (say thou)
teach thee what Christ has commanded, in whom thou art already persuaded to
believe. What if I did not believe in him at all, could thou teach me any
thing concerning him? But (say thou) it behooves thee to believe. What, upon
your warrant and recommendation? No (say thou) for we do by reason lead those
which do alre^dy believe in Christ. Why then shall I believe in him? Because it
is a grounded report^ was it grounded upon you, or upon others? Upon others
say thou. Shall I believe them first, and be afterward taught an^ instructed
by thee? Peradventure ^ ought to do so, were I not above all things admonished
by them not to come at all unto t^ee: for they say that you h^ld pernicious
doctrines. Thou will answer^ they lie. How ^hen may I believe them concerning
Christ whom they have not seen: if I may not believe them concerning thee whom
they will not see? Here say thou, Believe the Scriptures. But all Scripture,
if being new and unheard of, it be alleged or commended but by a few^ and has
no reason to confirm it, receives no credit nor authority at all, but those
that allege it: wherefore if you that are so few and unknown commend those
Scriptures unto me, I refuse to believe them: besides also you proceed against
your promise, rather by commanding belief, then giving any reason thereof. Here
again (for the authority of Scriptures) thou will call me back to the known
multitude of Christendom, and to common report. Restrain at length thy
obstinacy, and I know not what unruly appetite of worldly fame: and rather
admonish me to seek out the chief rulers of this known multitude, and to
enquire for them diligently and painfully, that rather I may learn something of
them touching these Scriptures: who if they were not I should not know whither
any thing ought to be learnt at all or no. As for thee, return into thy corner
and lurkinghole, and delude us no more under a show and pretense of truth,
which thou endeavourest to take away from them, unto whom thou grante^^
authority and credit: and if they also deny, that we ought not to believe
Christ^ unless an undoubted reason can be rendered thereof, they are not
Christians. For certain Pagans do allege that against us, foolishly indeed,
but yet not contrary nor repugnant to themselves. But who can endure that those
men should profess that they belong to Christ, who strongly asfirm that
nothing ought to be believed, unless most evident reason can be given even
unto fools, concerning God and divine matters? But we see that Christ himself
(as that history teaches which they also believe) desired nothing more
principally, nor more earnestly then that he might be credited and believed:
when as they with whom he was to treat about those affairs were not yet fit to
learn and conceive the divine mysteries. For to what other purpose did he work
so great and so many miracles, he himself also affirming that they were done
for no other end but that men might give credit and belief unto him? He led
the simple sort of people by belief: you lead them by reason: he cried out that
he might be believed you cry out against it: he commended those that did
believe, you blame and reprehend them. But unless he had turned water into
wine, to omit his other miracles, could men have been brought to follow him, if
he had done no such things^ but only taught and instructed them? Or is that
word of his not to be regarded: 1 John 14. 1. Believe God and believe me: Or is
he to be blamed for rashness in belief, who would not have Christ come into
his house, because he b^lieved that by h^s command only his sick son conld
be cu^ed? Mat. 8. 8. He therefore br nging a medicine which was to cu^^ ^he
most corrupt manners, did by m^racles w^nne authority^ by author^^y deserved
belief, by belief dr^w ^^ge^her a mult^^ud^ by a mult^^ude ob^ained an^^qu^ty
b^ antiquity st^^ngthened and confirmed Relig^on: which no^ only ^h^ most
foolish novelty of h^re^icks endeavoring by dec^^s but ne^^her the ancient
error of the Gentlies being vio^^ntly ben^ against it could in any part
abolish or destroy.

CHAP. XV.
Of the most cemmodious way to Religion.
Wherefore albeit I am ^ot able to teach thee, yet do I not cease to warn and
admonish thee, that (because many men will seem to be wi^e, and it is not easy
to discern whither they be fools or no) thou beseechest the divine Majesty with
very much earnestness and fervent desires with sighs and sobs, or al^o (if it
be possible) with weeping and tears^ to free and deliver thee from the evil of
error, if thou desire to lead a blessed and an happy life. Which may more
easily be brought to pass, if thou will willingly obey his commands which he
has been pleased to have confirmed and strengthened by so great an authority
of the Catholic Church. For seeing that a wise man is by his mind so united
unto God that nothing is interposed and set between them, which may divide and
separate them, (for God is truth, and no man is to be accounted a wise man that
does not attain to the knowledge of truth) we cannot deny but that the wisdom
of man is interposed as a certain medium between his folly and the most sincere
truth of the Divine Majesty. For a wi^e man according to the ability which he
has received, does imitate God: and a fool has nothing nearer unto him which
he may profitably imitate and follow^ then a wise man: when because (as I said)
it is not easy to understand by reason, it was necessary that certain miracles
should be proposed and set before men's eyes (which fools do use much more
commodiously then their unde^standings) to the end that the life and manners of
men moved with authority, m^g^t first be purged and made clean^ and so they
might be enabled to understand reason. And therefore when as man was to be
imitated, and yet no confidence to be placed in him: how could the Divine
Majesty show greater signs of his favor and liberality th^n that the sincere
eternal, and uncha^ge^ble wisdom of God, unto whom it behooves us to cleave
and adhere should vouchsafe to take hum^ne nature upon him? who did no^ only
do those things, which might serve to invite us to follow G^d: but did al^o
endure and suffer those things, whereby we were discourag^d from following of
him. For whereas no man can ob^ain the most ce^tain and chiefest good, unless
he does fully and pe^fectly love it, (which by no means will be brought to
pass so long as men fear the miseries of the body, and the things that ^re
subject to fortune and chance) he by his wonderful birth and admirable works
has purchased for us love and charity: and has excluded terror and fear by
his death and resurrection. And finally he has showed himself to be such an
one in all other things (too long to be here expressed and set down) that we
may know and perceive hereby how far the divine clemency can reach and be
extended^ and how far man's infirmity can be elevated and extolled.

CHAP. XVI.
That M^racles do procure Belief.
THis, believe it, is a most wholesome authority: this at the first is a
withdrawing of our minds from an earthly habitation: this is a conversion from
the love of this world to the true God. It is only authority which move^h
fools to make haste unto wisdom. So long as we cannot understand sincere
things, it is indeed a miserable thing to be deceived by authority: but truly
it is more miserable, not to be moved thereby. For if the Divine Providence
does not rule and govern humane affairs, we ought not to busy and trouble our
selves about Religion: but if even the frame and species of all things, which
we must believe proceeds and flows from some fountain of the truest beauty,
does as it were publicly and privately exhort all the more noble and braver
spirits both to seek God, in I know not what inward conscience and to serve
him: we ought not to despair^ but that the same God has constituted and
ordained some authority^ upon which if we lean and rely as upon a sure step, we
may be elevated and lifted up unto him. This authority, (reason being set
aside, which to understand to be true and sincere, it is a very hard matter for
fools to do, as I have often said) does move and excite us two manner of ways:
partly by miracles, and partly by the great number and multitude of followers.
It is certain that a wise man needs none of these things, but now we are
discoursing how we may become wise men, that is, how we may cleave and adhere
unto the truth: which is a thing that doubtless cannot be done with a foul and
impure mind: the uncleanness whereof, is (to expound it briefly) the love of
all things whatsoever besides it self and God: from which fi^th by how much any
one is more purged and cleansed, by so much the more easily does he behold the
truth. And therefore to desire to see the truth that thou may cleanse the
mind, when therefore it ought to be cleansed, that thou may see the truth,
is certainly a perverse and a preposterous thing. Wherefore to a man that is
not able to behold the truth that he may be made fit to see it, and may suffer
himself to be purged and cleansed, authority is at hand, which without doubt
receives her str^ngth and vigor partly by miracles, and partly by the number
and multitude of followers, as I said a little before. A miracle I call any
hard or unwonted thing whatsoever, which appears above the expectation and
power of the wonderer. In which kind nothing is more fit for the common people,
and for men that are absolutely ^ottish and foolish, then that which is applied
and proposed to the senses. But these again are divided into two sorts: for
some there be that only move men to wonder and admiration: and others which
besides do win and purchase great favor and good will. For if any one should
see a man fly, he would only wonder at it, because it is a thing which besides
the beholding of it, yields to the spectatour no commodity nor profit. But if
any one being afflicted with a grievous and desperate sickness, shall so soon
as the disease is commanded to depart, recover his health, he shall overcome
the wonder of the cure by the charity of the curer. Such things were done as
many as were sufficient, when God appeared to men in the shape of a true man:
The sick were cured, Mat. 9. 6, 13, 15, 16. Mat. 9. 7, 22. Mar. 3. 5, 10. Joh.
4. 53. the leaprous were cleansed; Mat. 8. 3. Mar. 4, 2. Luke 5. 3. and 7. 22.
going was restored to the lame, Mat. 11. 5. sight to the blind, and hearing to
the deaf, Luke 18. 42. Joh, 9. 7^ The men of that time saw water turned into
wine, Joh. 2. 9. five thousand people filled with five loaves of bread, Mat.
14. 20, 21. men walking upon the sea^ Mat. 14. 25. Joh. 6. 19. and 21. 7. and
the dead rising from death to life, Luke 7. 15. and 8. 55. So some miracles
were done for the cure of the body by a more manifest benefit, and some for the
cure of the soul by a more hidden sign, but they were all for the help of
mankind by the testimony of the Divine Majesty: thus did the Divine Majesty
then draw unto it the straying souls of mortal men. Why (say thou) are not
these things done now? Because they would not move unless they were
wonderful, and if they were common and usual they were no^ wonderful. For
bring unto me a man when he first sees the courses of day and night, and the
m^st constant order of celestial things, the 4. cha^ges of the year, the
falling and returning of the leeves unto the trees, the infinite virtue of
seeds, the beauty of light, the varieties of colors, sounds, smells and tastes,
and if we can but speak with him, we shall find him wholly astonished, and
quite overcome with the sight of these miracles: and yet we despise and we make
and account of al these things, not because they are easily known (for what is
more obscure then the causes of them?) but for that we are accustomed
frequently to see them those things are therefore most fitly done, that a
multitude of believers being gathered together and propagated by them
profitable authority might be co^verted into customs themselves.

An observation.
S. Augustine in his first book of his Retractations and 14. Chapter alleges
these words: (why say thou) are not these things done now? because they would
not move, unless they were wonderful, and if they were common and usual,
they were not wonderful) and expounds them thus: This I said because not so
great nor all miracles are done now, but not that none are also now done.

CHAP. XVII.
The Consent of Nations believing in Christ.
ALl customs have such virtue power to winn the love and affection of men,
that we sooner can condemn and detest even the things that are naught and
wicked in them then forsake or change them: and this for the most part comes to
pass, when as our unlawful appetites and deseres have gotten a dominion and
predominancy over us: do not thou think that great care has been taken
about the affairs of mankind, and that they are put into a good state and
condition, that not only divins most learned men do argue and contend, that
nothing that is earthly, nothing that is fiery finally, nothing that is
perceptible by the corporal senses ought to be worshipped and adored for God,
but that he is to be prayed unto, entreated and supplicated only by the
understanding or intellectual power: but also that the unskilful multitude of
both sexes does in so many and so diverse nations both believe it and publish
it? that there is continency and forbearance of meats, even to the most
slender diet of bread and water, and fastings, not for one day only, but also
continued for diverse days together^ that there is chastity even to the
contempt of marriage and issue: that there is patience even to the contemning
of crosses and flames: that there is liberality even to the distribution of
patrimonies to the poor: and finally, so great a disesteeme and contempt of
all things that are in this world, that even death it self is wished and
desired. Few there are that do these things, fewer that do them well and
prudently: yet the people do approve them, hearken unto them, and like them:
yea they love and affect them; and not without some progress of their minds
toward God, and certain sparks of piety and virtue, they blame and reprehend
their own weakness and imbecility that they cannot do these things. This
the divine Providence has brought to pass by the predictions of the Prophets,
by the humanity and doctrine of Christ, by the voyages of the Apostles, by the
contumelies, crosses, blood and death of Martyrs, by the laudable and excellent
lives of Saints, and by miracles done at convenient times in all these things
worthy of so great matters and virtues. When as therefore we see so great help
and affi^tance from God, and so great fruit and entrease thereby, shall we make
any doubt or question at all of retyring into the besome of that Church, which
even to the confession and acknowledgement of mankind from the Sea Apostolic
by succession of Bishops^ has obtained the sove^eignty and principal
authority, heretics in vain barking round about it, and being condemned partly
by the judgment of the people themselves, partly by the gravity of Councels,
partly also by the majesty and splendor of miracles? Unto which not to grant
the chief place and pre-eminence, is either indeed an extreme impiety, or a
very rash and a dangerous arrogance, for if there be no certain way for the
minds of men to wisdom and salvation, but when faith prepares and disposes
them to reason; what is it else to be ungraetfull unto the divine Majesty for
his aid and assistance, but to have a will to resist an authority which was
gained and purchased with such labor and pains? And if ^very art and trade,
though but base and easy, requires a teacher or master that it may be learned
and understood: what greater expression can there be of rash arrogance and
pride, then both to have no mind to learn the books of the divine mysteries
from their interpreters and yet to have a mind to condemn the unknown.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Conclusion by way of exhortation,
Wherefore if either reason or our discourse has any ways moved thee: and if
thou have a true care of thy self (as I believe thou have) I would have thee to
hearken and give ear unto me, and with a pious faith, a cheerful hope, and
^incere charity to address thy self to good Masters of Catholic Christianity:
and to pray unto God without ceasing and intermission: by whose only goodness
we were made and created, by whose justice we are punished and chastized, and
by whose clemency we are freed and redeemd, by which means thou shall neither
want the instructions and disputations of most learned men, and those that are
truly Christian, nor books, nor clear and quiet thoughts, whereby thou may
easily find that which thou seek. And as for those verbal and wretched men
(for how can I speak^ more mildly of them) forsake them altogether: who found
out nothing but mischief and evil, whilst they seek to much for the ground
thereof. In which question they stir up oftentimes their hearers to enquire
and search, but they teach them those things when they are stirred up, that it
were better for them always to sleep, then to watch and take great pains after
that manner, for they drive them out of a lethargy or drowsy evil and make
them frantike: between which discases, whereas both are most commonly mortal:
yet nevertheless there is this difference, that those that are sick of a
l^thargy do die without troubling or molesting others: but the frautike man is
dreadful and terrible unto many, and unto those especially that seek to assist
him. For neither is God the author of evil, nor has it ever repented him to
have made any thing, nor is he troubled with a storm of any commotion or
stirring of the mind, nor is a particle or piece of earth his kingdom: he
neither approves nor commands any heinous crimes or offenses, he never lies.
For these and such like things did move and trouble us, when they did strongly
oppose them and inveigh against them, and fained this to be the doctrine of the
old Testament which is a most absolute falsehood and untruth. Wherefore I grant
that they do rightly blame and reprehend those things. What then have I
learned? what think thou, but that when they reprove those things, the
Catholic doctrine is not reprehended? so that the truth which I learned
amongst them, I hold and reteyne: and that which I conceived to be false and
untrue, I refuse and reject but the Catholic Church has also taught me many
other things, whereunto those men being pale and without blood in their bodies,
both gross and heavy in their understandings cannot aspire, namely that God
has no body, that no part of him can be perceived by corporal eyes, that
nothing of his substance and his nature is any ways violable or changeable, or
compounded or framed, which things if thou grauntest me to be true (as w^e
ought not to frame any other conceit of the divine Majesty) all their subtle
devises and shifts are subverted and overthrown. But how it can be, that God
has neither caused nor done any evil, and that ^here neither is, nor ever
has been any nature and substance, which he has not either produced or made,
and yet that he frees and delivers us from evil, is a thing approved upon so
necessary reasons and grounds, that no doubt at all can be made thereof:
especially by thee and such as thou art, if so be that to their good wits they
join piety, and a certain peace and tranquillity of a mind, without which
nothing at all of so great matters can be conceived and understood, and here is
no report of great and large promises made to no purpose, and of I know not
what Persian fable, a tale more fit to be told to Children then to ingeni^us
and witty men, and as for truth it is a far other thing then the Manichees do
foolishly imagine and conceive, but because I have made a far longer
discourse then I thought to have done, let me here end this book: wherein I
would have thee to remember that I have not yet begun to refute the Manichees,
and impugn those toys: nor to have expounded any great matter of the
Catholic doctrine, but that my only intent was to have rooted out of thee if I
could, the false opinion of true Christians which has been maliciously or
unskilfully in^inuated unto us, and to stir thee up to the learning of
certain great and divine things. Wherefore I will put a period to this work:
and if it makes thy mind more quiet and contented I shall peradventure be more
ready to serve thee in other things.

FINIS.

