An ACCOUNT OF THE VICTORY Obtained by the KING in IRELAND, On the First day of
this instant July, 1690. Published by Authority.
ON the 30th of June, 1690. by break of day, the King marched from his Camp at
Ard^^ toward Drogheda, where he found the late King James's Army encamped
along the River Boyne, above the Town; but it being late before the Foot and
Artillery arrived, His Majesty could do no more that day than visit the posture
of the Enemy, and the Fords thereabouts, which he found very difficult to pass.
His Majesty encamped his Army in reach of their Cannon, which had almost given
us the most fatal Blow in the World, His Majesty receiving a Shot on His right
Shoulder, the Wound was large, but not deep, raising only the Skin; and as soon
as it was d^ess'd, the King took Horse, and continued on Horseback for four
hours. In the evening, His Majesty commanded Count Schomberg with the right
Wing of the Horse, two Regiments of Dragoons of the left Wing, (...) Brigade of
Foot, and five small Fieldpieces, to go early the next morning, being the
first of July to 2 or 3 other Fords about 3 miles higher than our Camp, and
there endeavor to find a passage, and either attack the Enemy in the Flank, or
at least oblige them to decamp. The Count, upon his arrival, found eight
Squadrons of the Enemy ready to receive him; but in a little time, and without
much resistance he beat them off, and passed the Ford, driving them before him,
and drew up his Men on the other side, ready to march toward the Enemy as soon
as he should receive the King's Orders, to whom he sent the news of it. Upon
this, the Enemy detached a great number of their Troops, who put themselves in
order as if they would give Battle; His Majesty understanding that the right
Wing had passed the Ford, and was posted over against the Enemy commanded three
Attacks to be made: The first at a good ford before a small Village, which the
Enemy had advantageously possessed. At the second, the Foot waded up to the
Armpits; And as the third, the Horses were fain to swim. The Dutch Regiment of
Foot-Guards passed over first with the Water up to their Middle, bearing all
the Enemies Fire, and not returning it till they came up close to them.
Hereupon, all that were in the Village, and behind the Ditches, gave back, but
before the third Battalion of the said Regiment had passed the Ford, five of
the Enemies came up at the distance of a Pike's length to beat us back, but our
Men fired so thick upon them, that they were forced to retire with the loss of
a great many Men, and one of their Colors. After this, our Men advancing
beyond the Village, were twice vigorously attacked by the Enemies Horse, but
all in vain. In the mean time, the Danes came up to the lest, as also the
Brigades (...) (...) and Meloniere to the right, the first were attacked only
by the Dragoons and the other by the Horse, neither of them could do much,
because they had no Pikes. In the mean time, ^o Officers and others of the
Enemies Life Guard coming fiercely up, were all killed here, who endeavoring
to escape through the Village, unfortunately met with the Duke of Sch^mberg,
who was there killed with a Pistol Shot, but excepting this great Loss, we have
little to complain of. The Guards abovementioned, who have chiefly suffered,
lost but one Captain, and 4 other Officers hurt. In the other Regiments,
Colonel Calimot is wounded, 2 French Captains killed; one Brandenourg Captain
killed, and another wounded.

The King then marched with the few Horse he had about him and with 17
Battalions of Foot, to the assistance of those Troops which were engaged with
the Enemy, who in the mean time had not advanced much toward our right Wing;
whom His Majesty reinforced with 12 Battalions of Foot, and 9 Squadrons of
Horse, and with them marched against the Enemy, who, without staying till he
came near them, retired immediately in great have, and as much confusion. Our
Horse pressed on to overtake them, leaving even the Foot behind, and taking only
five small Fieldpieces, which did some execution. After which our Dragoons,
backed by the Horse, attacked their Rere-Guard, at which time the King
appearing with his Troops upon the Mountain, they all fled; the Country being
full of Boggs and narrow Passages, and the Irish being naturally good Footmen,
they easily escaped. Our Foot pursued them to Duleek, which is four miles
distant from the place where we first attacked them, and here the King stayed,
the Horse-still pursuing them four miles further, until the night coming on
parted them. The King then commanded the Horse to return to the same place
where the Foot remained, and sent to the Camp at Drogheda for the Tents and
Baggage, intending to encamp there, and rest his Troops for a day, they being
much tired, and then continue his march in pursuit of the Enemy. We cannot as
yet particularly say what the Enemy has lost; we have many Prisoners, whose
Names we know not. Lieutenaut-General Hamilton is one of them; and he says,
That the Lord Carling ford and Colonel Parker are killed. We have taken many
Chariots and Tents, much Cannon, Baggage, Ammunition, and Arms, the number
whereof we do not exactly know. His Majesty has commanded the Town of Drogheda
to be attacked, in which there is a Garrison of about 3000 men.

Some other Particulars mentioned in a Letter dated at Duleek, 3 Miles South of
Drogheda, and 17 Miles from Dublin, July 2. 1690.
WE have taken Lieutenant General Hamilton, and do believe, that the Earl of
Carlingford and Lord Dungan are killed; we have taken 8 or 9 of the Enemies
great Guns, 5 or 6000 of their Arms, 70 or 80 Wagons, besides great store of
Tents and Baggage, some Plate, etc. Near this place was the greatest Struggle,
and the greatest number of Arms taken, those of two Regiments being found here
laid down in perfect Order; their Horse made a good Retreat, conducted by the
Count de Lauzune. The King was in the Head of all this Action, pursuing the
Enemy from Hill to Hill for 7 miles about, and came not hither till about 10 at
Night. His Majesty has given Orders for sparing all that lay down their Arms;
and just now a Scotch Soldier is to be hanged in the face of the Army, for
killing 7 poor Wretches that were not able to escape out of Ardee. We have
taken some Inferior Officers, and killed others, but have lost the Duke of
Schomberg* who was slain yesterday about Noon. Thirty of the Dutch Regiment of
Foot-Guards having passed the Boyne at the Ford, about a mile above Tredagh,
his Grace rode after them with a small Attendance; the Regiments of Cambon and
Hanmer, with some other, followed him. The Duke had not above 300 behind him
when first the Enemies Horse made a desperate Charge, in which he received two
Cuts in the forehead, but not very considerable, the French behind him firing
very fiercely; it is thought he received from one of them the Wound, of which
he dyed. A little before, Dr. Walker, who behaved himself so gallantly in the
Defense of Londonderry, having passed the Ford, received a Wound in the Belly,
and dyed of it. The business of this day had often stopped, if His Majesty had
not with great Vigor pursued the Enemy, and by his own Example encouraged his
Men. Last night he stood so near the Enemy when they were drawn up, that a
Bullet from a long Gun touched his Boot, and shot a Horse that was next to him
in the Leg. The Wound in his Shoulder was dressed this morning, and is in a
fair way of being healed in two days. His Majesty has sent Colonel de la
Melloniere to summon Drogheda, and to let them know, That if they force him to
bring his Cannon, they must expect no Quarter. We hear, that one of the
Regiments in Garrison there consists of new-raised Men; if we gain the place, we
expect great Steres of all sorts, which are laid up there.

P. S. News is just now come that the late King James retired yesterday to
Dublin, and that he has quitted that place to day, and is gone toward Athlone
and Connaught.

Printed by Edward Jones in the Savoy, 1690.


