A LETTER Sent by the GRAND VIZIER TO THE Duke of Lorrain, In His CAMP at
ZALUOCK, On the Eighteenth of September, 1687. In which He earnestly Entreats
for PEACE.
CHARLES, Great Captain, Lord and Commander of the Christian Army,
WE with our faithful Services, do let you know, that the Great God for a long
time has punnished us for unjustly taking up Arms against You; Our grievous
Losses being certain demonstrations and marks of an angry and provoked Deity,
whom by all means We would seek to appease, and doubt not by the Righteous and
Gracious God from the Chastisement that is now upon Us, will fully satisfy and
atone his Wrath, and that he will again take us into his Grace and Mercy, and
remove Our many Afflictions, and raise Our Heads and Hearts, so much from the
influence of Heaven depressed.

Most Noble Duke, consider the Evils and Discommodities of a long War. How
fertile Countries are devastated, pleasant Cities and Villages consumed by
Rapine and Fire. The number of Mankind deminished, all living Creatures
destroyed, the Fruits of the Earth trampled under Foot, and Trade and Commere
the Sinew of an Empire, wholly lost and at a stand

Now We with Our whole Hearts, wish no other than Love and Peace: So kind and
benign to Mankind are its effects, that Kingdoms flourish, the People multiply,
and the Husbandman after his toil gathers his Fruits with quietness.

In fine, as War destroys and overturns all, so Love and Peace brings and
restores every thing to its height and perfections, which with Our whole Heart
We court, not in the least doubting to find the same good sentiments and
inclinations in your Highness, being the only Treasure and Happiness of the
World.

Considering how without cause We began this War, We must needs acquiesce and
say, Our Punnishment is just, and less than we deserve. Yet, We hope Our
Humiliation has appeased Our angry Prophet; as Our acknowledgment and
condescension will Our Conquering Foe; and that at last it will enter into Your
Highnesses Heart, and consideration; the benefits a firm and general Peace
would occasion: Hoping Our endeavors for the same will not be fruitless,
through Your Highnesses Liking and good Offices.

But if all this moves not Your Victorious mind, let the consideration of the
vast quantity of innocent Blood that was spilled the last Campaign, which cries
to God for Revenge: Lest as great unhappiness (as we at present feell) return
on Your Highness, and Christian Allies, for being an Enemy to the preservation
of Mankind.

Give us therefore, Great Sir, Your sudden thoughts about this Affair, which
shall be received with Honor and Respect.

By Solomon Mahomet Azen, Vizier.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1687.


