MEMOIRS OF THE COURT OF SPAIN.

In Two Parts.

Written by an Ingenious French Lady.

Done into English by T. Brown.

Vtile Dulci.

LONDON, Printed, for T. Horn, at the Royal Exchange, F. Saunders, at the New
Exchange and T. Bennet, in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1692.

TO His Honest Friend Mr. WILLIAM PATE, Of London Woollen-draper.
I Know no occasion wherein all sorts of people have taken greater liberty,
than in their Dedications, both in regard of the persons to whom the Complement
is made, and of the things that are usually said in them. All Authors pretend
to disclaim flattery upon these subjects, and yet were Historians to draw Great
Men according as they are represented in Dedications, abundance of Persons
would pass* with Posterity for men of wit, who never made a jest in their
lives, and for honest Patriots, who were only mere Fripons at the bottom; but
tho most Authors are agreed to wheedle and flatter in their Dedications, yet I
see they are not so well agreed in the choice of their Patron; some have chose
whole Corporations, or Societies for this Office, and indeed this conduct would
be politic enough, if the Parties, who are concerned in the Dedication were
obliged to espouse the Author's quarrel; others have gone a step further, and
dedicated their Books to the respective Countries where they live; and lastly,
some of a more Universal Spirit, have offered them to the whole World in
general, without any restrictions or limitations, as it consists of the four
known parts, Europe, Asia, Africa and America, and comprehends persons of all
sorts and characters, those that can read as well as those that cannot, and
those that have a Religion as well as those that have none at all. But the
generality of Writers decline this course of Dedication, because Bodies
Politic, and Countries, and the World it self, as large as it is, seldom
reward the Author, for, as we say, what is every man's business, is no man's
business, and therefore they generally make choice of particular persons, and
those for the greatest part of the best Estates and Fortunes; not because an
Illustrious name gives any better protection to a Book than a Meaner would do,
although this is always pretended, but because such persons are best able to
reward an Author, and consider him for his incense. As I never knew a bad Book
sell a farthing the better for having a gaudy Title prefixed to it, so a good
one never fared the worse because it appeared without a fine Fiocco: For in
short, if the world has a mind to be censorious, a Person of Quality's name is
as feeble an Amulet against the Critics, as a Silver Horseshoe nailed upon a
threshold would be against Witchery and Possession; for I am of opinion, that
an Horseshoe made of Iron is full as powerful a preservative as the other. Now
I had two reasons, Mr. Pate, to address the following Translation to your self,
the first is because you are my Friend, with whose entertaining learned
Conversation I have been often diverted, and the next is, because I can
approach you without any of that Ceremony and Fineness, which uses to embarras
a young Author so much, when he addresses himself to Quality, where, as he is
obliged to say several things against his Conscience, so he cannot assume that
familiarity and openness, which makes all sorts of Discourses agreeable.
However I would not have you think, that I am so unreasonable as to desire you
to stand Surety, or (what in a few years will become a scandalous word with us)
Godfather to my Translation, because I am sensible there are several faults in
it; nor yet to defend the little Poetry in it, because I understand Spanish no
more than I do Arabic, and consequently was forced to copy after the French
Paraphrase; nor lastly to stand up for the Author of this Epistle, for then you
must resolve to combat all comers and goers: All I require of you is that if
any of your acquaintance should enquire either after the Book or the
Translator, you would only tell them that the Book gives a good account of a
certain Prince's Court, who at this present writing is one of our Allies and
Confederates, and that the Translator is a very honest fellow, who between a
little French and less Latin makes a shift to get a sorry livelihood.

I have been often reproached, and particularly by your self for fitting idle a
whole year, and writing nothing of my own; now the I must confess a certain
party amongst us has given us almost daily provocations to encounter them, yet
I find they are a generation that are never to be edified by Satyr, and indeed
all wholesome advice is effectually lost upon them. Suppose you or I should
tell honest Mr. Partridge yonder of Covent Garden, that it was not civily done
of him to leave the thirtieth of January, Good Friday, and the twenty ninth of
May all at a clap out of his Almanac, and that John Gadbury and he may now
shake hands together, like a couple of bigoted Rascals as they are, perhaps
next year, (as who knows how far a turbulent Reformer's zeal may carry him) he
will leave us never an Apostle in the Calender, to the utter confusion of the
poor people in the Country, who make no other use of the Apostles, but only to
direct them to the next Horserace or Fair. To say the truth, we have too many
ridiculous follies, and divisions amongst us ever to be cured by writing, which
puts me in mind of what Mr. Burgess, who has made all the Town merry with his
Preaching said lately upon this Argument. We Englishmen, cries he, have been
famous in all ages for our wars and jars, and strife and life, and so forth:
Why, what do you think Virgil said of you sixteen hundred years ago? Even
penitus toto divisos orb Britannos, i.e. the Britains are the most divided
people in the whole world. Thus you see, Mr. Pate, what little encouragement a
man has to write, since it is so unlikely that he should ever cure any of those
distempers that are so inveterate in our Climate, but I have a more particular
reason still behind, which obliges me to sit a spectator, and purely respects
my self; for as I have had the ill luck to displease the Moderate Party by
attacquing the merits of the Comprehension in my last Dialogue, so I have
fallen under the indignation of the Critics by being too profuse and lavish of
my similes. As for the first I have nothing to say to them, because they are a
sort of Gentlemen, to whom I never designed to make my Court, and as for the
last, before I go about to justify my self, I will tell you a short Story. I
happened some years ago to make a visit to an honest decayed old Captain in
Alsatia, and his Chamber was a perfect Wilderness: Pipes and Napkins, and ends
of Candles, and old Cloaks were jumbled all together, but what was most
remarkable a Loaf and a Cheese lay upon his Close-stool. I asked him the reason
of it, and the Captain honestly told me that he did it only for want of room.
And this Mr. Pate was my own Case exactly, for there were several Persons in
the world for whom I had a kindness, and these for want of a better convenience
I was often forced to throw into a simile, and to say the truth some, of them
were such sad wretches that they did not deserve to have a Paragraph bestowed
upon them.

But now to speak a word or two in behalf of these Memoirs, I am in good hopes
they will be favorably received, both because they were written originally by
a Lady, which will go a great way you know with the Ladies, and admirers of
Ladies, as also because they give us a true Idea of the Spanish Court, with
which the generality of men amongst us, are utterly unacquainted, and lastly
because they provide an agreeable entertainment to all sorts of people: For
here is Rain and Sunshine, and Earthquakes and Shows, and Masquerades, and
Processions, and the Lord knows how much History in Sippits to divert the
zealous Admirers of Stow and Hollenshead: And then for Persons of better Palats
here are abundance of political reflections, and judicious observations, with
the true reasons how this vast Monarchy, which in the last Century made so
considerable a figure in the world, is in this become so feeble and Paralytic;
so that not to flatter the Work, I should scarce believe it was written by one
of the fair Sex, but that several French Gentlemen here about the Town have
fully satisfied me of the truth of it. I will only take notice of one Instance
among the rest to give you a true taste of this Lady's ingenuity. Don Juan,
while the administration of affairs was lodged in his hands removed a poor
Dominican from Salamanca (which place you know a certain Doctor who pretends he
has received more stripes on his back than St. Paul and all his Brethren did,
has made remarkable in Story by the Chimerical Degree he took there) and made
him the King's Confessor. He thought by this means to have secured the Monk for
ever to his own Interests, and to have had a trusty Confident upon all
occasions near his Majesty's person: But he found himself mightily mistaken in
his expectation, for this beast of a Religious, soon abandoned his Patron's
party, and herded amongst his professed Enemies. Some People, says this Lady,
pretend that he did it out of a Principle of Conscience, but as for my self I
am of another opinion, il est impossible que l' ingratitude puisse jamais avoir
de bons Principes. It is impossible that ingratitude should ever flow from any
good Principle. I am sorry that this honest Doctrine is not in better Reputation
with some People amongst us, for I am satisfied that no pretense whatever can
atone for so black and ungenerous a Sin as Ingratitude is.

I should here, according to the laudable Custom of all Authors, take occasion
to say something in your prai^e, but besides that I will not offer that
Violence to your Modesty, I cannot handsomely commend you, for so great a
variety of Learning in so much Youth, but but at the expense of the City, and
you know I have too great a respect for our honorable Metropolis to do any any
thing of that nature, or indeed without a reproach to our selves, who cannot
pretend such excuses, as the perpetual distractions of Trade and Business.
Indeed if your good fortune in the world prove answerable to your merits, you
may for all I know dye a richer man than Gresham or Sutton: But I must tell
you, my dear Friend, that good Fortune and Merit are two as different things as
any are in the world. I knew a Gentleman who made a pleasant remark upon this
occasion. I have, said he, in my time laid out for two things, viz. Preferment
and a Red Nose, with as much zeal and application as any man in Town. To attain
the last I have dutifully drank my Gallon of Claret every night, and a dull
sober Sot, a Neighbor of mine, with his single penurious Pint has arrived to
it before me: and as for the former I have wearied out my Patience in waiting
at Court, and at Noblemens Levees, and yet could never stumble upon any; and so
he concluded that several men come by Preferment and Red Noses, who never
deserved either of them.

After all, Mr. Pate, if my wishes will do you any good, I wish you store of
Customers, but never a Poet, or Courtier, or disbanded Captain, or Player
amongst them all. May I be so fortunate as to behold you advanced to the
highest Pinnacle of honor in the City, to furnish new matter for Elkanah
Settle's Triumphs of London, to sentence light Butter and Bread on Horseback,
to terrify Sabbath Breakers, and those that forget to hang out their Lights, to
appear in the next Edition of Baker or Stow, and arrive to the Privilege of
sleeping in your Gold Chain at Guildhall Chapel. In short, may you be the
wealthiest, happiest man within the Bills of Mortality, and may you ever
continue to love

Your Friend and Servant, T. Brown.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. Line 3. instead of usually read generally, p. 13. l. 10 instead of
Corogne r. Groyne. p. 19. l. 15. instead of having taken the Horoscope of
Flanders, r. having had his Nativity calculated in Flanders.

MEMOIRS OF THE COURT OF SPAIN.
WE must not expect to find in a general History those particular relations of
things, that generally entertain the Reader better than the History it self:
but when any person is once acquainted with them, he often reflects upon them
with a great deal of pleasure. I imagine I may without any flattery pretend my
self to be capable of writing several secret passages, that happened at Madrid
from the year 1679, to the year 1681. However I think it not amiss to begin
these Memoirs from the time of Philip the IV. in order to render the following
discourse more intelligible, and to give the Reader a better Idea of the Genius
of the Spanish Court.

Elizabeth of France, his Queen, being dead, he espoused Mary Ann of Austria,
Daughter of the Emperor Ferdinand, and Sister of him that reigns at present.
She was young, of a fair flaxen complexion, her humor was lively and pleasant,
and she was no less agreeable than witty.

She departed from Vienna, in order to go to Spain ^n the year 16^9. She loved
the Archduke her Brother very affectionately, and as both of them were weeping
when they took their leave of one another, she demanded of him what it lay in
her power to do for his service: My dear Sister, says he, it lies in your power
to have an Infanta there, which you may give to me in marriage. This accident
is so much the more observable, because the Archduke having at that time an
Elder Brother, who died afterward King of the Romans, and being himself
designed for the Ecclesiastic State, there was little probability that he
should ever arrive to the Empire, and marry, as it since fell out, the Eldest
Daughter of the Queen his Sister.

Amongst several other persons, whom the Emperor gave the Queen his Daughter to
accompany her into Spain, he chose Father John Evrard Nitard, a German Jesuit,
to be her Confessor. His extraction was mean and obscure, and he employed
almost all his thoughts in the advancing of his fortune. He was of a supple
complaisant temper, he exactly studied the respective characters of those
persons to whom he belonged, and took care never to differ much from them as to
matters of opinion. He finished his Studies in the Jesuits College at Vienna,
and there took upon him the Habit of his Order, and afterward was sent to
govern one of their Seminaries, in which office he acquitted himself very well.
When he came back again to Vienna, he began to make himself known in the world,
and several Ladies of the Court desired him to be their Spiritual Director:
they omitted no opportunity to do him all the good offices they could with the
Emperor; and in fine, spoke in such advantageous terms of him, that he was well
enough contented to let the Queen take him along with her.

This Princess was extremely surprised at all the Spanish Customs, which those
who came to wait upon her from the King, caused her to observe in the first
days of her Voyage. I have have been told that as she arrived to a certain City
under the dominion of the King of Spain, where the principal Commodities of the
place consisted in Frocks, Wastcoats and Silk Stockings; they made her a
present of a great quantity of them, of different colors; But her Major Domo
Mayor who religiously observed the Spanish gravity, despised the present, and
so taking up a bundle of Silk Stockins, threw them at the heads of the Deputies
of the Town.

Aveis de Saber, says he to them in a very furious tone, que las Reynas de
Espagna no teinen piernas, that is to say,

I would have you to know that the Queens of Spain have no Legs; meaning, that
they are so far elevated above others by virtue of their rank, that they have
no Feet to touch the ground like the rest of their Sex. However it was, the
young Queen, who was not as yet acquainted with the niceties of the Spanish
Language, took it in the literal sense, and began to weep, saying that she was
fully determined to go back to Vienna* and if she had known before her
departure from thence that they designed to cut off her legs, she would rather
have died, than stirred a foot.

It was no difficult matter to assure her of the contrary, and she continued
her Voyage.

When she came to Madrid they told the King of this innocent simplicity of his
Queen, he was so mightily pleased at the story, that he vouchsafed to laugh a
little at it, and this was the most extraordinary thing in the world for him to
do, for whether it proceeded from affectation, or was the effect of his
constitution, it was observed of him that he never laughed above thrice in all
his Life.

The King showed a great respect for Father Nitard because he was the Queen's
Confessor, who reposed an entire confidence in him, but whatever desires she
had to see him advanced, he left him peaceably in his post, without conferring
any other Dignities upon him, and he had unquestionably continued a long time
in the same condition, if the King had not happened to die.

When that Prince found himself to be dangerously ill, and saw he could not
bequeath the care of his Kingdoms to Cardinal Sandoval, upon whose management
of affairs he always depended, because he was at that time extremely sick, and
to say the truth, died but 20 hours after him; he made his will, wherein he
ordered that the Queen his Spouse should be Regent of the Kingdom, and
Governess of the young Prince, who was then four years and an half old, Since
the time of Don Loys de Haro, the Kings of Spain have had no Privado or chief
Minister. The Duke di Medina de las Torres had the management of the Northern
affairs, and the Count de Castrillo of the rest.
he named the Cardinal of Arragon, Archbishop of Toledo and Inquisitor General;
the Count of Castrillo President of Castile, the Count de Penarauda, Don
Cristoval Crespi Chancellor of Arragon, and the Marquess d' Aytona; to the end
that these six Ministers should assist the Queen in her Councils; and thus the
King died in the month of September 1665. The six Ministers that composed the
Junta, were those that were or should be Archbishop of Toledo, the President of
Castile, Vice-Cancellor of Arragon, and Inquisitor General. And besides these a
Grandee of Spain, and a Counselor of State.


The Queen resented the great loss she sustained with abundance of sorrow, but
she had been still more sensible of it, if she had found her self in the
condition of the other Queens of Spain, who are obliged to enter into a
Convent, when they are Widows, unless the King orders the contrary before his
decease; Nor was she insensible of the sweets of Governing. The first use she
made of her Authority, was in favor of Father Nitard: For Don Pascal of
Arragon having been made Archbishop of Toledo and grand Inquisitor, in the
place of Cardinal Sandoval, the Queen sent for him, and by her repeated
importunities prevailed with him to quit the last of these two Dignities. The
Cardinal of Arragon being Grand Inquisitor, and afterward named to the
Archbishopric of Toledo, quitted the post of grand Inquisitor, because he
could not not have two places in the Junto.
He could not be brought to comply with this request without a great deal of
trouble, for he almost chose rather to be Inquisitor General, than Archbishop
of Toledo, although that Archbishopric is worth 366 thousand Crowns per annum.

But he was not able to refuse the Queen a thing she so passionately desired,
who as soon as she saw her self in a capacity to dispose of that important
charge, bestowed it upon her Confessor.

As she engaged her self in this affair of her own proper inclination, without
consulting any thing else but the desire she had to see him made superior to
the other Ministers, so she took occasion to discourse of it to them, who
immediately began to murmur amongst themselves.

They read over the will of the late King, where they found it expressly ordered
that the Queen should do nothing without consulting their advice, and yet
notwithstanding all this precaution of the deceased, they saw with no little
concern that she had without ever communicating the matter to them, disposed of
one of the most considerable Offices in the Kingdom, and that to a mere
stranger, who had been born and bred up in the Although it is very true that he had
been formerly a Lutheran and it was objected to him, yet he vehemently denied
it, because it might have made him incapable of that Office.
Lutheran Religion till he was 14 years of age. The desire they had to preserve
their own authority, and the jealousy which it is natural for all men to have
of a Favorite, made them speak very fiercely in the matter: However the Queen
being informed of their discontent, took the true measures to appease them. The
charming manner of her deportment, and particularly the obliging things she
spoke to them upon this occasion, prevailed with them to lay aside their
murmurs, so they agreed to dispatch Letters of Naturalization for the
Confessor, without which it was impossible for him to execute the office the
Queen had given him.

Although all those difficulties that at first threatened to hinder the Elevation
of Father Nitard, were removed without any great trouble, yet he did not fail
to raise several secret enemies upon himself, who envied his growing Fortune.
They beheld with a great disdain and impatience the extraordinary confidence
that the Queen reposed in him, for she determined nothing without advising with
him, and so great was his credit, and interest with her that he durst offer to
resolve things of the greatest importance, without speaking a word about them
to the Queen.

Don Iuan was one of those that was the most offended at the advancement of
Father Nitard: He was sensible that they would turn him out of all by little
and little, upon this score he gave way entirely to the Father Confessor, whom
the Q. had made Counselor of State; he then retired to Consuegra the ordinary
residence of the Grand Prior of Castile, of the order of Malta, and said very
imperiously, that after he had seen himself President of the Privy Council of
the King his Father, he could never endure a Companion that was so much his
inferior. But the Queen who was wholly busied in advancing her chief Minister,
never disquieted her self with thinking what reflections people might make upon
him, so that without taking the least notice of Don Iuan's discontent, she
suffered him to depart, and he continued a long time without visiting the
Court, until the Queen sent him particular orders at Aranjues, whither he was
gone to divert himself, to come immediately for Madrid upon some important
affairs, which she was willing to communicate to him

He was the natural Son of King Philip IV. and a certain Actress whose name was
Maria Calderona. He was privately brought up at Ocana near Madrid, and of all
the natural Sons that King had, he only acknowledged him, whether it were
because he loved his Mother better than any of his other Mistresses (and to say
the truth she was the most charming person in the world.) or because Count d'
Olivarez procured this good Fortune for him; for it is commonly given out that
the Count had a Son named Don Julian de Gusman, whom he had a mind to own, and
therefore used this artifice of persuading the King to begin with Don Iuan,
that so he might follow his Example.

Whatever the matter was, Philip loved this young Prince very tenderly, although
some people suspected he was the Son of the Duke of Medina, of the house of
Gusman, who had formerly been passionately in love with the young Calderona,
and was in his time the most accomplished handsome Cavalier in Spain, and Don
Iuan very much resembled him. But if some persons were of this opinion, others
could never believe it, especially when they considered the great kindness and
fatherly affection that the King had for him, and besides reflected upon his
extraordinary good qualities, which declared him to be worthy to be the Son of
so great a Monarch. He was brave even to a contempt of all dangers whatever,
gallant and agreeable, well-shaped, obliging, liberal, and a person of great
honor; he had abundance of wit, and was master of a Genius that extended it
self to all Arts and Sciences. As there is never a Court in Europe where
natural Sons are treated with such advantageous distinctions as they are in
Spain, so this Prince could scarce perceive that the unhappiness of his birth
did in the least prejudice his advancement; and it is indeed a certain truth,
that we see in this Country, the legitimate Sons bred up with those that are
not so in the same Father's house, without any distinction between one and the
other. But this custom is not altogether observed with relation to the natural
Sons of the Kings of Spain: For example, they never bestow the title of Infant
upon them, and Don Iuan who passionately desired to have it, used his utmost
efforts to accomplish it, but had not the fortune to succeed in his designs.

From the year 1643 the King had given him the Government of the Low Countries,
He held as his proper right the Government of the Low Countries.
of Burgundy and Charolois, and he always enjoyed it, excepting the time when
the Archduke Leopold governed there.

Don Iuan contributed very much toward the reducing the Kingdom of Naples to
the Spanish Obedience: He took Piombino and Portolongone, and in all his
Campaigns he performed a world of actions that equally testified his bravery
and conduct.

The King his Father having conceived no less an esteem than tenderness for
him, communicated to him the most weighty affairs of State, and chose him to be
chief of an Assembly of the chief Ministers of his Kingdom.

He was scarcely arrived at Madrid but a Council was held, where he came to be
informed that the King of France was resolved to espouse the interests of his
Queen, to whom Brabant and some other states of the Low Countries escheated by
right of devolution, upon the death of the Infant Don Balthazar her Brother;
that his most Christian Majesty had published a Manifesto wherein he proved the
justice of his claim, and that not thinking himself obliged to consume any time
in unprofitable contestations, he had turned his arms toward that side of the
Country; that he had matched his Troops with incredible diligence, and made
considerable conquests as soon as ever he appeared. Upon a serious examination
of the present state of the Monarchy, they were convinced that it was
impossible at the same time to maintain a war against France and Portugal, and
that it was necessary for them to lay hold of a certain conjuncture that made a
very plausible appearance; that Don Alphonso King of Portugal, having by his
extravagant conduct lost the hearts of his people, was dispossessed of the
Government, and his Subjects freed from the Allegiance they owed him; that the
Infanta Don Pedro his Brother had taken upon him the administration of affairs;
that things of this considerable importance could neither be begun nor ended
without some disturbance, during which they must have occasion for their own
Troops, and therefore if it was judged expedient they should lay hold of this
opportunity to advance proposals for a peace.

After every one had delivered his own opinion of the matter, the Queen came to
this conclusion. A Letter was dispatched to the Marquess de Liche, who was at
that time Prisoner of war at Lisbon, wherein he had all necessary instructions
given him. In fine, he managed the affair so dexterously, that the Regent Don
Pedro listened favorably to the proposals, and so a treaty of peace was
concluded on the 13th, of Ian. 1668.

This news was entertained at Madrid with a great deal of satisfaction, because
the affairs of Flanders grew every day worse and worse, and it was necessary to
take some speedy measures to preserve it, or else to abandon it for good and
all. New levies of Soldiers were ordered in Gallicia and elsewhere, and the
Queen cast her eyes upon Don Iuan to send him thither to command the Troops;
for besides that no body was more capable of so great a trust than he was, she
had observed that during the little stay he made at Madrid, his aversion to F.
Nitard daily increased, and this reason alone was sufficient to incline her to
resolve upon his removal. She was not able to endure those biting reflections
which Don Iuan by way of raillery very liberally bestowed upon the Father
Confessor. One time among the rest when the Ministers demanded of him who was
fit to send against the King of France. I am clearly of opinion, says he, that
we had best send Father Nitard, he is a Saint to whom Heaven can refuse
nothing; the post wherein we behold him at present is an undeniable proof of
those miracles, which he can command upon all occasions.

The Confessor answered, with a very melancholy air, That he was of a
Profession which taught him to hope every thing from the divine mercy, but that
it did not belong to his function to be a General of an Army. Oh my dear
Father, replies Don Iuan, and don't we see your reverence every day employed in
things that are full as unsuitable to your profession.

As I said before, it was resolved to send the Prince with the new supplies to
Flanders, and a recruit of nine hundred thousand Crowns, with which they
furnished him out of the silver that was brought in the Gallions.

Necessary orders were likewise dispatched to Cales, and so the Admiral who had
charge given of this Sum, set Sail with eight Vessels, from thence at the same
time when Don Iuan was marching toward Gor^^ne, where the rendezvous was
appointed to be.

The French Fleet cruised upon the Coasts of Gallicia, and was composed of 36
Vessels and 6 Fireships. Don Iuan finding his Forces much inferior to the
Enemy was not willing to hazard all in a fight, where in all probability he
could not avoid a total defeat. Therefore he thought it more advised to send
his Troops in small bodies to Flanders, where they arrived without any danger.

The formidable power of his most Christian Majesty not only alarmed the
Spaniard, but the English and Dutch, who after a bloody war at last concluded a
peace at Breda in 1667. and having ceast from all acts of Hostility toward one
another, entered into a League, in the beginning of 1668. to oblige the King of
Spain to accept of one of the two alternatives proposed by the King of France,
who still persisted in his Offers.

After their Example the Archbishop of Triers, the Duke of Bavaria, the Elector
Palatine, and Duke Ernest Augustus of Brunswick Bishop of Osnabruck, concerted
their resolutions for the common safety, and made a League, whereby they
obliged themselves to endeavor the adjusting the differences between France
and Spain, or else to declare war against either of the two Crowns that should
refuse their mediation, and act against the Treaty. The Pope likewise entered
into the League, and a peace was concluded at Aix la Chapelle.

But these things were not so speedily determined, but that other matters of
consequence happened at Madrid and other places, which strangely perplexed
those persons that were interested and concerned in them. Don Iuan as was
before mentioned, was at Corogue upon the point of imbarquing himself, when he
received certain informations of the death of Joseph Mallades a Gentleman of
Arragon whom he entirely loved. It was told him to his unexpressible amazement,
that he had been secretly arrested at Madrid about eleven a clock at night; and
that by an order of the Queen written by her own hand, he was strangled two
hours after. The great care they took to keep this execution private only
contributed to make it spread the faster, and it was not doubted but that the
Queen sacrificed this unfortunate Gentleman to the security of her Confessor.

Don Iuan was extremely concerned at the tragical death of a person whom he
loved so well, and yet more enraged at the injury which he imagined himself to
have directly received from Father Nitard, resolved not to go to Flanders. They
would never have exposed me to the puissance of the most Christian King, (says
he to Don Diego de Valasco, for whom he had an extraordinary affection) but
only with a design to complete my ruin. They will certainly take care to keep
back those succors from time to time, of which I shall stand in need, and
whatsoever good conduct I may use in the management of the war, there is no
question to be made, but that they will make me answerable for all the ill
success we meet. You see I am now at the port, and yet they have executed a man
who was guilty of no other crime than of wearing the character of my friend.
What will they do then if I were once in Flanders, all my friends would
undoubtedly find themselves exposed to the malice and hatred of the new
Favorite.

He searched the most plausible pretenses he could think of, to excuse his
going for Flanders. For some days he feigned himself to be indisposed, and sent
word to the Queen that he was troubled with a defluxion on his breast, that the
Physicians had made him apprehend the fatal consequences of it if he undertook
so long a voyage, and therefore he beseeched her to dispense with him. An
alteration so little expected made a great noise at Court, and gave no small
mortification to her Majesty and Father Nitard. They easily guessed at the
cause, and if they had imagined the Prince was no farther off, perhaps they had
not sentenced Malladas to die so soon. The Q. ordered Don Iuan to resign his
employ to the Constable of Castile, who was to go to Flanders in his room, and
also commanded him to go immediately to Consuegra, without presuming to come
nearer than 20 League of Madrid, which he accordingly obeyed. But it seems this
obedience was not enough to satisfy the Queen's Indignation, who was so
exasperated at him, that in August 1668. she carried into the Council with her
own hands a Decree against the Prince; wherein she represented to them the
disobedience he had shown at so pressing a juncture, and the reasons which
ought to have obliged him to set sail, although the indisposition he pretended had
been really true* that a lie from a Subject to his Sovereign was always thought
worthy of the highest punishments, and especially under such important
circumstances.

Don Iuan was informed of all that this Decree contained against him, and he
was the more sensibly concerned at this ill usage, since he had trespassed so
much upon moderation, in not making a louder complaint of the death of Malladas.

The man that served altogether to estrange his inclinations from the Queen,
was a Captain, whose name was Don Petro de Pinilla, who having asked leave to
speak with the Queen, threw himself at her feet, and entertained her an hour in
private without any bodies knowing what he said to her. It is not doubted by
what happened afterward but that he discovered something of importance against
Don Bernardo Pategno, Brother to Don Iuan's chief Secretary because he was
seized the next morning with 2 of his Servants. These informations were kept so
secret that no one knew the matters they contained: The Marquess de Salinas,
Captain of the Spanish Guards, received orders from the Q. to post away with
fifty of the reformed Officers, and arrest the Prince at Consuegra; but although
he used the utmost diligence in this affair, yet he was not able to find him.
This, as it happened, did not prove unlucky to him, for Don Iuan had about him
at that time a great number of his Friends and Domestics, who would all have
hazarded their lives to preserve him from being taken; but by his great
prudence he avoided the exposing any single man of them, for being advertised
of what had passed he withdrew in time, and only left a Letter behind him to
the Queen, dated October. 21. wherein he spoke to her with greater liberty than
he had hitherto used. He there takes an occasion to acquaint her, That he would
have certainly gone for Flanders, if it had not been for the surprising and
tragical death of his friend Malladas, that he had all the reason in the world
to believe that Father Nitard was the instrument and author of it, that so
horrid an injustice ^^ied out aloud for vengeance against the man that had
committed it, that he found himself possessed with an earnest desire to contribut
what lay in his power toward the removal of so wicked a man, that he humbly
beseeched her both for the good of the Kingdom in general, as also for her
Majesty's glory to consent to his banishment; that he hoped he should never be
constrained to have recourse to any other methods than those of prayer to chase
him out of that place, where his presence was become odious to all the world;
that he found himself obliged to go and seek a Sanctuary against the violences
of this stranger, and that this was a cruel necessity for a person of his
quality; that he hoped her Majesty would be pleased to make serious reflections
upon the whole, and apply necessary remedies accordingly.

The reading of this Letter awakened all the resentment and indignation that
the Queen had naturally to Don Iuan: She flew into the greatest passion
imaginable, and had made it appear in a terrible manner, if the Grandees and
People had not testified less inclination for her. 'Twas a new subject of
displeasure to the Queen and Father Nitard to see that all the world agreed to
set themselves free from his Ministry, and that they had the hardiness to tax
him publicly with the murder of Malladas, and the imprisonment of Patigno.

This obliged the Queen to set forth a Declaration, wherein she assured the
world that both those persons came to Madrid to execute the wicked designs of
Don Iuan, that she was fully informed of the whole by their ^wn proper
confession, and that she had never proceeded so far as to take away Malladas's
life if she had not been assured of his crime.

At the same time Father Nitard printed and published a sort of an Apology, in
which he accuses Don Iuan with having frequently endeavored to assassinate
him; he spoke of this design as a thing beyond contest, and declared his own
innocence with relation to the death of Malladas, and the imprisonment of
Patigno. He pretended to give an undeniable proof of this assertion, in
alleging that when the former was strangled, he was saying over his Breviary
along with Friar Bustos; and that when the second was arrested, he was setting
his Papers in order in his Cabinet. Then he took occasion to enlarge upon the
Nobleness of his birth, and upon the considerable services which his Ancestors
had done for the Emperors. This Article only served to set people on work to
examine the obscurity of his family. He addressed this writing to the Queen,
and she for her part forgot nothing that might make his attestation be the
better believed.

Some time after she presented to the Council a second complaint against the
Prince, charging him with having (...) Flanders; in which 'twas easy to
discover the high and mighty expectations with which he fed his ambition. That
such an insufferable curiosity had been always punished as a crime of High
Treason, that it was not only necessary to examine the fault, but also the
quality of the person that committed it, that the debate was about a man of
design, who could by no means pretend to sin out of ignorance; and an
ungrateful rebellious Subject loaded with favors and rewards by the Crown;
that it was absolutely requisite to chastize him, for fear lest a connivance
should authorize his wicked designs, and put him in a capacity of accomplishing
them.

The Prince had too many friends, not to find some amongst them who had the
courage to defend him; there was scarce any thing to be seen in all manner of
company but multitude of writings, the bitterness of which only served to
animate the interested parties, and make them more inveterate.

Those that appeared in behalf of Don Iuan, maintained that he was incapable of
forming so mean and low a design as that of assassinating Father Nitard; that
if it had ever entered into his imagination, the execution of it could have been
no difficult matter; that the difference was only about a Stranger of an
Ecclesiastic, without Friends or Relations, supported by a Q. who ought to have
abandoned him to vengeance, when she was informed of his wicked conduct; that
the best proof one can bring to show that the Prince had no inclination to do
any such thing was, because it was not done; that far from endeavoring to take
him off privately, he had demanded in public to have him removed from his
Ministry, and that for attempting his removal, he exposed himself to all the
indignation of the Queen: That at the bottom, Father Nitard would have no
reason to complain of his ill usage, since he was permitted to retire with the
punishment only of a pension of 60000 Crowns per annum, which he has hitherto
enjoyed, besides some other private benevolences that don't appear; that so
considerable a Revenue one would think might content the Ambition of a simple
Ecclesiastic; who was himself of so vindicative a nature, that he would fain
have assassinated the Prince at Barcelona and Consuegra; that it was not the
effect of any particular resentment which made Don Iuan press the Queen so
earnestly to send him home to his own Country, being generous enough to forget
any private injuries; but that he was too good a Subject to bear any longer
with a man, whose rash and violent counsels might some time or other prove the
occasion of a general revolution in the Kingdom of Spain. To this they added
several other things, which I shall pass over in silence.

The Court and the City were divided upon this point, every one engaging
himself in the affair, either as his own sentiments led him, or as he was
influenced by the reports of others. Nay the Court Ladies entered into the
quarrel, and for a distinction of the party they embraced, some were called
Austrians, and others Nitardines.

Thus I have given you a Relation of what past at Madrid, during the time that
Don Iuan kept himself at a distance from it, and approached to Barcelona. The
Queen was ignorant what way he took, and her disquietudes doubled upon her,
when she considered with her self what dangerous effects an affair of this
nature might carry along with it, especially seeing it began with so much heat.
When he was arrived there he writ a very respectful Letter to the Queen, but
did not conceal the resolution he had taken, to demand of her constantly the
removal of her Confessor; he advised her to it with very forcible reasons, but
they only provoked her the more against him, and she could never suffer her
self to be persuaded, that she ought to deprive her self of the man in whom she
reposed so entire a confidence, and for whom she preserved so great an
affection. She found that Don Iuan meddled with an affair she had no
inclination to, and that since the Council which the late King had assigned
her, could find nothing to except against the Father's conduct, she was not
obliged to gratify an aversion, which the Prince had so injustly entertained
against him; that it would be for her Glory, to testify to the world the
firmness of her mind in this rencounter; and that if she abandoned her Servants
at the first Chimerical objections that were raised against them, it would be a
dangerous matter for anyone to serve her. In fine, the extreme desire she had
to keep Father Nitard with her, furnished her with such specious reasons, that
no body durst combat them.

The Father on his part knew not where to turn himself, he was pleased without
question to see himself beloved and protected by so great a Queen, and to enjoy
an absolute power next to her; but on the other hand, he was not without
sensible emotions when he considered what an enemy he had to deal with: He was
apprehensive of being poisoned or assassinated, and tho the Council had not as
yet spoken against him, yet he was not ignorant that he was but ill beloved by
all the Ministers. and that if ever it was his fortune to be turned out, the
greatest part of the Grandees would commend the courage and constancy of Don
Iuan. These reflections so palled his Spirits, that he often went and threw
himself at her Majesty's feet, with tears in his eyes, humbly to beg the favor
of her to suffer him to depart: but she always assured him of the continuance
of her protection, and forbad him any more to mention that thing, which gave
her so much pain and uneasiness.

The Prince did not content himself with writing to the Queen, but writ also to
the chief Ministers, in such vehement terms, that they evidently saw what it
was he desired to do with the Father Confessor, and likewise that he would
never depart from his resolutions. He prayed them to second him with her
Majesty, and to represent to her, of what a mighty consequence it would be to
the State, to send this stranger home.

These Letters mightily augmented the troubles of F. Nitard, his friends were
afraid that Don Iuan would betake himself to violent methods, and his enemies
had the satisfaction to consider that the Prince would employ his u^most
efforts to turn him out of Spain. But those that beheld the whole Scene calmly
and without passion, judged that the Queens obstinacy and the opiniatrete of
Don Iuan, would necessarily involve the Kingdom in some great disorders, where
every thing would be equally confounded. The Queen fell into the greatest
passion imaginable, whenever the matter was mentioned to her, and finding her
person to be no where else in safety, she ordered the Cavalry to come to Pardo,
which is a Royal Palace within two leagues of Madrid.

It Is certain, that if she had had less fears upon her, she had at that moment
declared Don Iuan Rebel. She communicated this design to her Father Confessor,
who approved of this way of procedure well enough, but others that were
consulted about it, opposed it with all their might. They represented to her,
That in case this was done, the Prince would no longer observe any measures
with her, that perhaps he waited for a favorable pretense to declare himself;
that he was brave in his own person, well beloved by his friends, and besides
had the people on his side; that less causes have occasioned great revolutions;
that there was nothing left but good usage and gentleness that could make him
return to his duty, or at least convince him that nothing had been omitted to
inspire him with a true sense of it. Although this advice was extremely opposite
to the Queens resentments, and by her good will she would never have treated
with a Prince, by whom she supposed herself to be injured, yet she was at last
persuaded to follow this good counsel. So she wrote a very obliging Letter to
him, wherein she conjured him to return to Consuegra, and she engaged her Royal
word for the security of his person.

Don Iuan made some difficulty at first of obeying these orders, whether it
were, because he was apprehensive, as he told the Queen, of putting himself
into the hands of Father Nitard, whom he had but lately escaped, or for some
other reasons that are unknown: but the Duke d' Ossone, who was then at
Barcelona, spoke to him with so much zeal, and so vigorously solicited him to
obey her Majesty's orders, that he submitted to his reasons, and so departed
with three Companies of Horse, which the Duke had given him for his guard.

The Queen having received advice of it, contrived to give him some affronts
upon the road. She knew that he was to pass through Arragon, and therefore she
writ to the States of that Kingdom to show Don Iuan no manner of respect, nay,
even to seek out some opportunities to disgust him; but herein she was ill
obeyed. The States sent her word back again, that they could not dispense with
themselves from paying to the Son of the late King, and the Brother of their
present Monarch, those devoirs that were due to his quality and merits. To say
the truth, they acquitted themselves herein with the greatest zeal; and when he
approached Saragossa, all the inhabitants went out above two leagues to meet
him on the way. The press was so great that he had much ado to get through it,
they cried all with one voice, Let the King live, and the Lord Don Juan, let
him always have the better of his enemies, and curses light on the Jesuit that
persecutes him.

Every one scattered flowers before him, such as the season of the year
furnished them with, and sprinkled him with perfumed waters; the Ladies better
apparelled than they used to be on the most solemn days, made a double lane for
him with their Coaches; the air was filled with nothing but the benedictions
and praises they bestowed upon him: in a word, the joy was universal in this
great City.

The Queen and Father Confessor, who received a faithful relation of the whole
proceedings, were sensibly concerned, she to see the contempt wherewith her
orders were entertained, he to find himself so inveterately hated by the people.

The report of Don Iuan's extraordinary reception spread it self as far as
Madrid; and amongst several persons that received it with joy and satisfaction,
there were many that apprehended some disorder at the return of the Prince.

In order to prevent those evils that seemed to threaten them, the Regidors and
other Magistrates of that City assembled on the first of February. They sent
four of their body to the President of Castile, to represent to him the great
mischief that might be occasioned by Don Iuan's arrival with his Troops, at a
time when the Court was so weak, and the people so insolent and disposed for a
revolt; that notwithstanding the Prince was well affectioned toward them, yet
he would not be able to prevent the lamentable effects they had reason to fear.

The President waited upon the Queen, and the Council immediately met, where it
was ordered to dispatch a Courier to Don Iuan, with her Majesty's Orders to
send back his Guards without delay.

He received the Order, but hastened his march, making the Courier follow him
two days, on the third he gave him a Receipt for his Order, and sent him back
without any answer.

In the mean time that he delayed the Couriers coming back, they were alarmed
at Court with the ill success of his Voyage, and their uneasiness was much
increased in the Palace, when they saw him sent back without any Letter. Some
of the Lords went thereupon to find out the President, to desire him to tell
the Queen, that they were ready to undertake any thing in the world for her
service. The Cavalry was drawn up together, and preparations were making at
Madrid to sustain a siege, the event whereof appeared very doubtful, although they
had to deal with a Prince who was only attended by 300 Horse.

'Twas in effect this Guard that occasioned the greatest trouble; the Queen
ordered the Marquess de Penalva to assemble the reformed Officers together,
with those that should offer themselves, to go upon this occasion, and tell the
Prince, that her Majesty ordered him to send back the three Troops of Horse, he
had brought along with him.

The Marquess de Penalva was disposed to obey, but he demanded an order of the
Council Royal, and the Secretary of State refused to expedite it, alleging
that the Queen could do nothing without the Council of the Government, and that
she had never consulted them about this affair. The Queen being provoked, sent
the Secretary word, That he ought seriously to consider what difficulties he
was going to start at so ill an exigence, and how little they were to the
purpose. The Cardinal Arragon, the Count de Penarauda, and the Vice Chancellor
came to wait upon her Majesty; they represented to her, that the Secretary was
in the right, and gave the President of Castile a severe Reprimand for giving
way by his counsels to an Order that might have produced very evil consequences.

They resolved at last not to take up arms; and to dissipate the apprehensions
the people were under at Madrid, 'twas publicly proclaimed that Don Iuan had
sent back his guards, or that if he had not done it as yet; yet he would send
them back at the first warning.

The Queen having no hopes at all of seeing her self obeyed by force, betook
her self to more gentle methods, to try if she could by that conduct oblige Don
Iuan to send back his Soldiers: She writ to him by Don Diego de Velasco, who
was his great Confident, and the Letter was very courteous and civil.

The Prince, who came secretly to Madrid to discover the state of affairs, the
dispositions of his friends, and what he might be able to effect there, very
resolutely sent the Queen word again, that there lay no obligation upon him to
expose himself to the revenge of Father Nitard, therefore he positively
demanded to have him turned out of the Kingdom; that after this were once done,
none of all her Subjects should pay a more dutiful submission to her Orders
than himself.

This was to demand a thing of the Queen, which she had no manner of
inclination to grant; The Noncio Borromee, the Council of State, and the
Grandees gave themselves a great deal of trouble to no purpose to adjust the
matter. In the mean time the Prince appeared so firm in his resolution, that
all the world judged it would go very happy for the Confessor, if he could
escape with his life. He himself was sensible enough of the danger he was in,
so he redoubled his importunities with the Queen to suffer him to depart. She
returned him no answer but by her Tears and Sighs, insomuch that he chose
rather to expose his own life to the utmost extremity, than disoblige her by
leaving her service.

News arrived, that the Prince was come with his Troops to Torrejon-dardos,
which is but four leagues from Madrid. Those that were of the Queens party were
mightily disquieted at it, and she her self was more afflicted than the rest.
They heard her several times repeat these words, Oh Heavens! this good Father
will be the first Sacrifice.

The Council of the Government met, and desired the Nuncio to carry Don Iuan
the Letter the Pope had written to him, wherein he conjured him to preserve
those sentiments of respect and submission for the Queen, which a subject owed
his Sovereign.

The Nuncio went to find him* and came back about midnight. No body almost in
this great City went to bed, but attended his return with impatience, for they
knew the occasion of his journey; and the people ran up and down the streets in
great bodies, asking each other who they were for. The news the Nuncio brought
back with him did not at all please the Queen, he told her that he had
earnestly requested the Prince to go to Guadalajara, or at least to stay where
he was a few days, that new measures might be taken to satisfy him, but that
the Prince refused both the one and the other, and said, that if on the Monday
following the Co^f^ssor would not go out of the Gate, he would throw him out at
the Window, and enter Madrid on purpose to put it in execution. It was
afterward known, that this Negotiation passed after another manner, viz. that
the Prince had agreed to let Father Nitard be with the Queen, provided she
would grant some advantages to him which he proposed; but that the Nuncio, who
had no kindness for the Father, was resolved to break the Treaty all to pieces
by concealing the favorable inclinations of Don Iuan.

Father Nitard was informed of all that happened, he Confessed the Queen the
next morning, and afterward threw himself at her feet, beseeching her not to
expose him to the outrages which he might expect to suffer from an incensed
Prince, that his life was at stake, and that there was no other way to preserve
it, but by submitting to the present necessity. The Queen answered him with
abundance of tears, that she was not able to consent to his removal, that he
should not disquiet himself at all, for she would take care to set things to
rights again.

He was well enough satisfied of her own good will for him, but he questioned
whether her power answered her inclinations; nevertheless he resolved at last
that he would be torn in pieces by the people, before he would leave Madrid
without her Order. So he tarried with her, having all the apprehensions upon
him that a man, who every moment expects his death, can be capable of.

These affairs came to this upshot at last, that on Monday the 25th of
February, the great Court of the Palace was filled with numbers of people of
all conditions, who in a disorderly manner, that was not easy to be
suppressed, loudly demanded to have the Confessor discarded without any more
delay, That no body was ignorant of what Don Iuan had said to the Nuncio, that
the City would go near to be exposed to plunder and desolation for the sake of
a Jesuit who was a stranger, and had no other merit to recommend him but his
pleasing the Queen.

The Duke d' Infantado and the Marquess de Liche seeing such a vast multitude
assembled together, ran to the Queens Apartment, who was then in Bed: She had
not closed her Eyes all night long, and had not enjoyed one moment of rest,
having it seems received some information of what had past. One of her Ladies,
whose name was Donna Eugenia, was upon her knees by her to comfort her in these
extremities. Alas, said the Queen to her, what signifies my Grandeur, and these
high Titles they give me, since I am not allowed the liberty to keep the good
man any longer with me, upon whom the consolation of my life depends? There is
never a Lady in Spain but has the privilege of keeping her Chaplain, and no
body finds fault with it. But I am the only woman in the Kingdom, that is
persecuted upon this score, and whose Confessor must be taken away from her by
force.

The Council sat immediately because the disorder still increased in the City,
and it was to be feared that it would augment more and more. Some of the
Ministers, who were in the Queens interests, were for finding out some
expedient to hinder the departure of Father Nitard; but others pretended there
was no room left for an accommodation, and said that if the business was any
longer delayed, all would be lost: that Don Iuan would soon enter Madrid, and
then Friends and Enemies would fare alike, that their debate at present was
only about a poor Ecclesiastic, whom the people hated even to madness, and
never mentioned without the bitterest execrations, although at the bottom he never
deserved them, and was an honest man.

Her Majesty happening to be in Bed, when the Duke d' Infantado, and the
Marquess de Liche demanded to speak with her, they could not see her, because
it is the custom in Spain for no body to go into the Queens Chamber when she is
gone to Bed. So they went to the Cavacuela, which is a place under ground
belonging to the Palace, where the Who is called in Spain Secretary del
Defpacho Universal.
Secretaries of State abide. They spoke to Don Blasco de Loyola, and would have
given him a memoir to deliver to her Majesty; but the great haste they made in
running up to the Queens Apartment, and afterward in hurrying down stairs
again to the Privy Council, together with the great ado they made to get in,
caused several persons that met them, to follow after them, so that when they
entered the Chamber where the Ministers were assembled, to inform themselves of
what had past, These two Lords were not of the Junta of the Government.
they found a great rabble of people who entered along with them, and began to
cry out all together, Deliver us from the Jesuit, and send him packing.

The Ministers continued a while surprised, and looking upon one another, while
the Rabble renewed their importunities, adding at the same time some menaces
against those that should offer to stand by the Father Confessor.

Without demurring any longer upon the matter, they resolved to send Don Blasco
de Loyola to wait upon the Queen with a Decree, with which they entrusted him.
He brought her word that the Council had determined that Father Nitard should
depart Madrid within three hours warning. The Order was already drawn and the
Queen discovered no emotion in reading it; she signed it with great steadiness
of mind, and without shedding one tear; but being desirous that her Confessors
removal should not seem to be extorted by force, but that he made an honorable
retreat, she procured an Order of Leave to be drawn up in these words,

Whereas F. John Everard Nitard, of the Society of Jesus, my Confessor,
Minister of State, and Inquisitor General, has humbly entreated me to give him
leave to withdraw himself out of these Kingdoms; although I am fully satisfied not
only of his integrity and his other good qualities, but also of the great zeal
and application wherewith he has always served the Crown; yet nevertheless upon
the account of his earnest supplications, as well as for diverse other important
reasons, I have given him my permission to go where he pleases: And since I
desire that this may be done in a manner that is suitable to his merits and
dignity, I have ^hought it expedient to give him his choice of going in the
quality of Ambassador Extraordinary either to Germany or Rome, with all the
emoluments and advantages that belong to that charge. Given at Madrid the 25 th
of February, 1669.

As soon as Don Blasco was gone, the Queen using no farther violence with her
self to keep in her tears, shed them very plentifully, and casting herself upon
the bed with all the grief imaginable cried out incessantly, Alas! alas! to
what purpose is it to be a Queen and Regent! On the other hand the Council
commanded the Cardinal of Arragon, and the Count de Penaranda to go and
acquaint Father Nitard with the order her Majesty had signed. He who had long
expected this tempest, seemed not to be surprised at the News, but was
persuaded by the Nuncio's importunities not to go to Council as he had
designed, for he told him the people were so highly incensed against him, that
he would infallibly run the risque of being torn to pieces, if he offered to
show himself.

The Superiors of the Jesuits were come to wait upon him to prepare him for
this fatal stroke. The Admiral of Castile came thither also, telling him with
great fierceness and that freedom of Conversation, that so peculiarly
distinguishes Persons of Quality from others, that he had drawn all these
Misfortunes upon himself by his own ill measures, which he there particularly
enumerated to him. The Father who had been never accustomed to these
Reprimands, replied that this discourse was not fit for an Inquisitor General
to hear before all the world.

When the Cardinal of Arragon arrived, he found the Father extremely afflicted.
The necessity of parting immediately without so much as taking leave of the
Queen his Mistress touched him to the quick. The Cardinal was not able to
refrain tears at beholding it, whether from a consideration of the incertainty
of humane affairs that have no sure Foundation, or else from the particular
esteem he always had for him. He offered to furnish him with a thousand Pistols
for his voyage, and the Count de Penarauda with letters of Exchange for thirty
thousand Ducats, but he would not accept of them, saying, that as he came
thither a poor Ecclesiastic, so he knew well enough how to depart from thence
under the same circumstances.

The Cardinal comforted him as well as he was able, and told him that he would
accompany him to Fuencaral, then he withdrew to leave him at liberty to set his
own things in order, and toward the Evening came to take him up in his Coach,
which was well guarded: He asked him immediately whether all his things were
ready, I have no other things, replies the Father, save only my Habit and
Breviary, so they departed, being accompanied by all the Officers of the
Inquisition. As soon as ever the people saw Father Nitard, they fell a crying
and throwing stones at him, and followed him with Curses and Imprecations: It
happened well for him that he was in company with a person of the Cardinal's
Dignity, for otherwise he had been exposed to the fury of the rabble. The grief
that so rude a treatment possessed him with, obliged him several times to say
with tears in his eyes, that God had now tried him by throwing him into this
furnace of tribulations, and that he should be very happy to be found good
alloy. As he passed through the streets, he said to the people who pursued him
with contumelious reproaches, Farewell my Children, farewell, I am a going.

He was not willing to accept of the Embassy to Rome, although the Queen writ a
very obliging Letter to him at Fuencaral, and reiterated the offer to him. She
sent him two thousand Pistoles for his Voyage to Rome, some Precious Stones,
and an augmentation of two thousand Crowns by way of pension. When he was gone,
his Domestics found a Hair-cloth and some Disciplines in his Cabinet.

When there was now no longer any fear of displeasing the Father Confessor by
showing respect to Don Iuan, every one went to see him at Consuegra, and
testified their zeal for him. He wrote to the Queen to thank her for sending
away his inveterate enemy, as well as that of the State, and prayed her to give
him leave to come to Court, and kiss the Kings hands. But instead of granting
him that request, she ordered him to retire a dozen leagues from Madrid. He was
sensibly touched at this unexpected severity, and complained of it as of a sort
of banishment. Nevertheless this did not hinder him from demanding by Letters,
as well to the Queen as the Council, to take the public good into their
consideration, and to fill Father Nitard's places with persons that were
capable of discharging them well: he represented to them, that those dignities
ought to be taken from him, since it was equally as important a matter to
hinder him from coming back again into the Kingdom, as it was necessary to make
him leave it.

He demanded also that they should take away the Place of President of Castile
from the Bishop of Placentia, since he was the man that issued out the Decree,
by virtue of which Malladas was strangled; and that the Marquess d' Aytone, his
capital enemy, should no longer have the liberty of passing his judgment in
those affairs that concerned him.

The Queen was very much offended at the manner wherein the Prince wrote to
her, and yet more enraged at what had happened, sent him a very unpallatable
Message, and ordered him forthwith to discharge his guards, as he had engaged
to do.

He complained of this to the Cardinal of Arragon and the Nuncio, giving them
as well as the Queen to understand, that he could not part with his friends
that accompanied him, till such time as he was certainly informed that Father
Nitard was out of the Kingdom, because he had still reason to fear some
mischief from that quarter.

Hereupon the Council met, and judged it convenient that the Cardinal should go
to Guadalajara, to engage the Prince to comply with the Queens desires; he
consented to it at last and dismissed his guards, after the Cardinal had managed
a sort of a Treaty between that Princess and Don Iuan, by which she confirmed
him in the government of the Low Countries, and passed her word that the Father
Confessor should quit his places; that the President of Castile and the Marquis
d' Aytone should not meddle with the cognizance of those things wherein the
Prince was concerned; that as for himself, he might settle wherever he thought
convenient; that they would take particular care to ease the people of their
grievances; that no body should be admitted to any of the Military Orders of
Castile, who had not served ten years by Land or by Sea; that the Pope should
be the Depository of the Queens word for the security of the Prince. There were
many other Articles besides these, but not of the same weight and
consideration, all tending either to the satisfaction of Don Iuan, or the ease
of the people.

He forbore making his usual remonstrances till the month of May, at which time
he received information that the Queen was setting on foot a Regiment of guards
for the Kings service, whereof she had made the Marquis d' Aytone Colonel.

He wrote very sharply to her about this matter, and represented to her, that
it was against the custom of the Kings of Spain to have any other guards but
the Inhabitants of Madrid, that this Regiment would be an everlasting reproach
to the City, and would occasion abundance of ill effects, which he there
enumerated at length. It is worth the observing, (and I could not forbear to
take notice of it) that in this same Letter he complained, that the Queen did
not answer him with her own hand; but used that of the Cardinal of Arragon,
under pretense that she was troubled with a megrim; telling her in plain
downright terms, that a man of his rank and quality was not able to bear such
a contempt. The world may learn from this remarkable passage on what grounds
the natural sons of the Kings of Spain pretend to stand.

All the Courts of Judicature as well the chief as the subaltern, the body of
the City and the people made several Remonstrances to the Queen, to hinder the
setting up this Regiment in Madrid, but to no purpose. In fine they importuned
her so often upon this score, that she signed an Order, by which she prohibited
them to speak to her any more about it, and so without any more delay she
completed the Regiment.

She afterward commanded Don Iuan, under very rigorous penalties, to remove
from Guadalajara: He obeyed her Orders with a great deal of respect, although he
was in a condition, by the the help of his friends, that were come to him from
Arragon and other places, to do what he pleased; the report ran, that he was
coming within a little distance of Madrid, and this gave several persons
abundance of uneasy thoughts.

To pacify their spirits, the Queen wrote to him and desired him to repair to
Arragon, in the quality of Viceroy and Vicar General of the Kingdoms dependant
upon it.

This Order affected him with a very sensible joy, and he took care to testify
it by the thanks he returned the Queen, to whom he writ a very large Letter,
desiring her Majesty to consider seriously of the education of the young King.
In it he represented to her the great consequences of it, as being a man, that
was master of a great deal of wit and honor. He wrote likewise to the Pope on
the 7th of June, to conjure him to oblige Father Nitard to quit his Offices.

In the mean time some of the Queens enemies set about a sham decree, wherein
she gave orders to the Council to disarm the people immediately, and return
their Arms into the Common Hall. It was an easy matter to persuade the world
that this was her real intention, and indeed this pretended innovation so far
estranged the peoples hearts from her Majesty, that they were just upon the
point of making an insurrection.

This reason joined with the horrible disorders that were committed by the
Regiment of the Scambergues (for so the people nicknamed them because they
were clad a la Francoise, and the Spaniards copied this mode from M. de
Schomberg) this reason, I say, obliged the Council Royal to present another
Remonstance to the Queen, wherein they desired her to send these new Soldiers
to the Frontiers; but she did not think fit to comply with their requests,
because she imagined this body of military men would keep the City in awe and
subjection.

Don Iuan was now at Saragossa, beloved by the Nobility, and adored by the
people: the Queen could never forgive him the irreparable injury he did her, in
forcing her to part with her Confessor, who made but a sorry figure at Rome, so
that by way of raillery it was frequently said. That the Queen of Spain had so
invincible an aversion to the Spaaiards, that she would never consent to the
ruin of Father Nitard, till he was naturalized a Spaniard.

But however she still preserved so great an esteem and affection for him,
thatshe employed her utmost endeavors to procure him a Cardinals Cap. For this
reason she gave secret orders to the Marquess de S. Romain, her Ambassador
ordinary at Rome. This soon came to be known at Madrid, and the news alarmed
the people exceedingly, every one apprehending that if ever the Father
Confessor was made Cardinal, he would certainly by those steps come back to
Spain, and they were all persuaded that the Queen maintained the Regiment of
the Schombergs for no other end, but only to favor this design.

The Council being really afraid lest the intrigue should succeed, bethought
themselves of some means to defeat Father Nitard in his pretensions, and for
that purpose they dispatched a Courier to the Marquess de S. Romain to propose
to the Pope some other Subjects of Spain, who better deserved the purple. The
Queen made as if she consented to the busine^s, but under hand renewed her
orders: but the Ambassador, who was no friend at all to the Jesuits, managed
his affairs so prudently, that his Holiness rejected Father Nitard, and besides
obliged him to resign his other Places.

The General of his Order, whom he had formerly neglected, and who for that
reason owed him a great deal of ill will, thought he had now an opportunity in
the reverse of the Father's fortune to pay the debt, so he sent him immediately
to one of their Houses near Rome.

He retired thither with a spirit of moderation that was very exemplary, and of
all his Train he kept no one with him but Friar Bustos his Companion: Behold
here a continued series of Thunder claps one upon the neck of another. This
harsh usage appeared so terrible to the poor Queen, who did not in the least
question the success of her negotiation, that she fell sick of a Tertian Ague,
which continued a long time upon her.

It Is easy to believe, by what I have already related, that her resentments
became more violent than ever against Don Iuan: from her natural disposition
she was inclined to make him him responsible for every thing that gave her any
disquiet, and when she saw at the same time the Bulls for the Charge of
Inquisitor General arrive at Madrid, she did not doubt but it was all of the
Prince's doing. In fine that place which she had seen so deservedly filled by
Father Nitard, was possessed by Don Antonio Balladores, President of Castile; and
Father Nitard for his part continued still near Rome, but subject to all the
ill treatment, with which the General of his Order thought fit to mortify him.

The Queen was not able to endure, that a man who had formerly enjoyed so great
a share in her friendship and confidence, and who had governed the whole
Monarchy of Spain so absolutely should continue exposed to all the resentments
and caprices of his General, Therefore she employed all the credit she had at
Rome to place Father Nitard in another condition.

Clement IX dying in the Month of December 1669. Cardinal Altieri was chosen
Pope, and took upon him the name of Clement X. The Queen, who did not doubt but
that this Pope would bestow a Cap upon her Confessor, named the Father to be
Ambassador extraordinary of Spain at his Holiness's Court, an employment which
she had formerly offered him, when he departed from Madrid, and which he was
not then willing to accept of; she procured leave for him to return to Rome,
and in fine, managed this affair with his Holiness so successfully, that Father
Nitard was created Archbishop of Edessa. She continued to solicit his
promotion with a great deal of vigor and application. The Pope being thus
importuned, made him Cardinal Priest in the month of April 1672, and gave him
in the Month of August following, the title of St. Bartholomew d' Isola, and
gave him a place in the 4 Congregations.

This news filled the Queen with a very sensible joy, and all those persons who
were of her party did not fail to compliment her upon this occasion. The new
Cardinal writ a very obliging Letter to Don Iuan in hopes that this civility
would draw another from the Prince, and that finding by this correspondence a
means to reconcile himself to him, he would at last consent to his return into
Spain. But he was mightily mistaken in his project, for Don Iuan sent him no
answer back again. Cardinal Nitard seeing that the Prince still continued his
aversion to him, laid aside all hopes of going to Madrid, till the time of the
King's Coronation.

But since what I have written concerning Cardinal Nitard, has insensibly led
me to the time of Don Fernand de Valenzuela, I think my self obliged to speak
of him.

He was originally of the City de Ronda in the Kingdom of Granada, and was
supposed to be an Hidalgo, that is to say a Gentleman, and not a Cavallero. For
they make this difference in Spain between a Cavalier and a Gentleman, that the
former is descended of an ancient family, or at least allied to some
illustrious house, and pays neither taxes nor tribute, whereas the latter is
exempt from nothing, tho he perhaps has acquired the quality of a Gentleman.

Valenzuela came very young to Madrid, where the Duke de l' Infantado took him
for his Page, when he went Ambassador to Rome. He was handsome and well-shaped,
of an agreeable mien, had a great deal of wit, loved his studies, and was
naturally a Poet. The character of his verse was tender and passionate, there
are several pieces of his to be seen that are composed after this fashion, and
among the rest some Comedies which he caused to be represented for the
diversion of the Queen Mother, at the time when he first began to have the
honor of being in her good graces.

The Duke de l' Infantado being returned out of Italy, made Don Fernand Knight
of St. Iago. It Is by this means ordinarily that great Persons begin to
recompense those of their Domestics, for whom they have the greatest
consideration. But he received nothing else but this bare title for the many
years service he had waited upon his Master, because it so happened that the
Duke died, before he did any farther kindness for him.

He found himself therefore all at a blow destitute of a Protector, and so
miserably poor, that he was obliged to become Passean^e en Corte, which is as
much as to say, a man that lives by his wits. To say the truth, he was Master
of very happy Talents, which put him in a condition to accomplish every thing
he undertook, so that after he had seriously examined with himself the meanness
of his fortune, he imagined the best conduct he could use to advance it, was to
make himself acquainted and known to some persons, that were particularly
devoted to the interests of the Queen. He searched out means to effect this
design with so continued an application, that at last he found access to Father
Nitard; he chose him immediately for his Patron, and indeed could not have
pitched upon a better; and soon insinuated himself into his favor by his
exemplary submission and diligence. The Father taking notice that he wanted
neither address nor wit, and besides that he was capable of keeping a secret,
communicated to him some of his own, and afterward entrusted him with those of
the Queen, acquainting him with the resentments she had entertained against Don
Iuan of Austria. He knew very well what advantages to make, both of the
discovery that was made him, and of the favorable disposition of the Father
Confessor, and rendered himself so necessary to him that he could not almost be
a moment without him. This obliged him to give him admission into the Palace,
whether he often came to give him on account of the several things he had
entrusted him with.

As soon as ever Valenzuela was introduced into the Palace, he lost no time
there, but improved all his favorable moments to the best advantages; he played
very well at Cards, and being informed that amongst the other women that waited
upon the Queen, there was a German Lady, whose name was Donna Eugenia, in whom
her Mistress entirely confided, he presently resolved to use all means to see
her: He walked often under her Chamber window, and being an handsome agreeable
young fellow, she for her part failed not to take due notice of him.

In short they spoke to one another, he pleased her at least as well as she
pleased him, she gave him leave to Galantear her, for that is the fashionable
word with them there, when any person devotes himself to the service of any of
the Court-Ladies: And it is a thing so common among them, that although a man is
married, yet he does not forbear to treat his Mistress in public with all
those Ceremonies, that are usually paid to the Lady, whom they design to marry.

Donna Eugenia did not receive the Testimonies, that young Valenzuela gave her
of his passion with the least coldness or indifference, and he pursued the
point so vigorously, and pressed her so earnestly to consent to marry him, that
she discoursed the Queen about it.

Her Majesty had already taken notice of him, and he had the good fortune not
to displease her, so that to tie him the faster to her interests she consented
to let him marry her Favorite, and afterward bestowed a Gentleman Querry's
place upon the new Bridegroom. About this time the differences between the
Queen and Don Iuan daily increased, and as Don Fernand was a man of address
enough to sound the bottom of any intrigue, so he did not omit to do the Queen
all the useful services that lay in his power. She beheld his zeal with a great
deal of pleasure, and took him so far into her consideration, that she daily
gave him some fresh assurances of her confidence.

Father Nitard placed all this to his own account, and voluntarily contributed
to Valenzuela's advancement, because he looked upon him as his own creature:
But tho Fortune now began to dese^t and leave him, yet she absolutely declared
her self in favor of Valenzuela, about the time when Don Iuan returned from
Arragon to Castile, and caused the Father Confessor to be turned out of Spain.

Valenzuela continued the Queen's sole Favorite without any spy upon him, for
the Prince returned back to Saragossa in quality of VicarGeneral of the
Kingdoms of Arragon. The Queen was so extremely perplexed and mortified by the
removal of Father Nitard, and her enemies knew so well to make their advantages
of it, that it was some time before she could tolerably recover herself from
the impression that so rude a Shock had made upon her: but having considered
the necessity she lay under to have a faithful person near her, whom she might
entrust with her most secret affairs, she cast her eyes upon Valenzuela, who
for his part still continued very much amazed at the misfortunes of Father
Nitard.

One day the Queen spoke to Donna Eugenia to bring her Husband with her
privately toward the Evening, because she had a mind to discourse with him
alone: Donna Eugenia who wanted neither wit nor ambition, was transported with
joy to think that Valenzuela was going to have such particular conversations
with the Queen, and exactly obeyed the Orders she had received.

The first time he entered into the Queen's Chamber, he was very cautious and
fearful, for he came armed with a Broquel, which is a sort of a Buckler, that
they generally carry with them in Spain, when they go to a place where they
apprehend any danger: His hair, that was very fine and delicate, he had tied up
in a Ribbon knot, he had not his Golilia on, for it is the fashion there to
leave them off at night, in short he forgot nothing that might render himself
charming and agreeable to the Queen. She appeared in a deshabille that sat
much better upon her, than the Widows habit she wore in the day time, which
very much resembles that of a Religious woman.

Valenzuela threw himself immediately at her feet, and after he had returned
her his most humble thanks for the great honor she was now pleased to do him,
he assured her, that his blood, his life, in a word every thing that lay in his
power was so entirely resigned to her service, that he had the presumption to
believe none of all her. Subjects was devoted to her Majesty, after so
particular a manner as himself. The Queen gave credit to his words, and after
this meeting scarce a night past over his head, but she caused him to come
privately to her Apartment.

His Wife always conducted him thither, and the Queen ordered her to be present
all the while to take away all Suspi^ion and umbrage. Here it was that he gave
her a particular account of every thing he knew, and informed her of all the
most secret intrigues that were carried on in Court or City, of the designs of
Don Iuan, of those Lords that were of the Prince's Faction, of the measures
that were taken against her, so that she knew all the most private affairs,
although to appearance she spoke with no body. It was commonly said at Court that
there was a Duende in the Palace, that is to say a familiar Spirit, that
acquainted the Queen with all the news, and secret designs: But some time after
when it came to be publicly known, that Valenzuela was this Esprit folet, this
Familiar Spirit, he was usually called el Duende de la Reina.

The affection she had for him increased to such a degree, that all the world
knew it, and the Courtiers all endeavored to please the new Favorite: No
favors were to be obtained but through his Intercession, and the Credit of the
other Ministers sunk so low that they stood only for Ciphers, So they began to
murmur amongst themselves. To what purpose was it, said they, to remove Father
Nitard and send him away, since a new Favorite is started up, that succeeds
him in his place, and acts with more Authority than the other ever did.

This good fortune of Valenzuela occasioned him a thousand enemies, they spoke
of the Q. with all the freedom and liberty imaginable; both Grandees and people
made no scruple of saying in public that a young ignorant Favorite without
fortune or merit governed all Spain, and that it was a shame to endure it. The
Q. being informed of what was said, resolved to advance Valenzuela's fortune
without delay, to the end that he might feel the good effects of her
protection, before they were able to hurt him. Upon this consideration she gave
him the charge of Master of the Horse, without having any regard to the custom,
by which she was obliged to concert it with her Ministers, as is the way in
Spain, when they are going to dispose of any considerable post, because she
apprehended they would have opposed her designs; so that without entering into
any manner of consultation (that is the usual term in Spain) she ordered his
Commission to be dispatched.

The Marquess de Castel-Rodrigo who was at that time Master of the Horse,
opposed it with all his power, and peremptorily refused to give him admission
into that place, alleging abundance of very disobliging reasons against the
pretensions of Don Fernand, and particularly that he had no Title to make him
hope so great an honor. The Queen removed that difficulty very easily, for she
created him Marquess de San-b^rtolome de los Pinares.

When the World observed so advantageous an alteration in the fortune of
Valenzuela, no b^dy questioned but that he was a Valido, that is to say a
Favorite. The report immediately spread it self through all Spain, attended
with some circumstances that deeply concerned her Majesty's reputation, but she
made no account of them; whether it were, because she thought those persons not
worth her consideration that had the boldness to talk so freely of her, or
because she had some particular reasons to herself not to alter this conduct.

Some time after, the Marquis de Castle Rodrigo, Master of the Horse, happened
to die, and the Queen bestowed his Charge upon Valenzuela: if the Grandees
formerly murmured when he was advanced to a less considerable post, it is an
easy matter to imagine the excess of their dissatisfaction and jealousy, when
they behold him settled in a place, which all of them could have wished to have
enjoyed, and of which they believed themselves to be infinitely more deserving*
But they ceased to make any farther clamours about this business, when they
found they had a Subject to talk of that was a great deal more surprising. Her
Majesty made Valenzuela a Grandee of Spain of the first Class, with a double
gold Key. At this piece of news all people looked upon one another, and
continued mute for some time, not being able to express the astonishment they
were in. The Lords as they met one another said nothing else but Valenzuela
made a Grandee, O tempora, O mores: In fine the Queen declared him her sole
Favorite, so that he issued out all Orders for her as Chief Minister, or to
speak more properly, as an absolute Master. No body was surprised at this new
honor that arrived to him, for they made no question, but that after such
strange unaccountable beginnings, he was marked out and designed for the
Ministry.

Being elevated to so eminent a post, he wanted nothing but some friends to
help and support him, if it ever should be his ill fortune to make a wrong
step. And it was no difficult matter for him to effect it in so advantageous a
situation, where all favors, all the money, all the the offices and benefices
were at his entire disposal. But as soon as ever he procured a favor for any
^ingle Grandee, he at the same moment disobliged above twenty more, who from
that time dated themselves his mortal enemies, and heartily wished his ruin,
because he did not prefer them: So that he was often heard to complain and
regret his fate, for that he could not satisfy all the world, And as the number
of his friends was infinitely inferior to that of his enemies, so the latter
began to cabal against him, and think of some way or other to oblige Don Iuan
of Austria to return, out of an expectation that he was the fittest person to
remove this universal grievance, this new Creature Valenzuelae.

This Cabal of Malcontents increased so mightily, that there was almost
nothing to be seen but Pasquils, Lampoons, and Satyrs both in prose and verse
against the Queen and against him. Nay they had the boldness to give out, that
he hindered her Majesty from recompencing the services of several persons, who
otherwise might have expected considerable employments. In short, their
insolence proceeded so far, that one night very near the Palace, they hung up
the portraiture of the Queen with Valenzuela. He had at his feet all the marks
that represented his several places, a Sword for Constable, an Anchor for
Admiral, a Golden Key for Gentleman of the Bed Chamber, a Collar of the Fleece
for Knight of that Order, and so of the rest. He pointed at all these things
with his hand, and below was written Este se Vende, that is to say, all this is
sold. And the Queen leaning her hand upon his heart with this inscription Yeste
se da, that is to say, and this is given: The report ran very strong, that he
sold all Office; and Dignities at high rates, at which some persons of the
highest quality were extremely offended, and his avarice drew upon him
abundance of Enemies.

But what is still the most remarkable is this, that all these various reports
made not the least impression on the Queen. She said That her rank placed her
above these little contumelies, and that she should be angry with her self if
she were capable of being disquieted at such miserable reproaches, that were so
infinitely below her indignation; that the most effectual way to punish and
extinguish these licentious abuses was to take no notice of them, that the
reason why they were so inveterate against the Marquess de Valenzuela proceeded
only from their envy, that she was resolved not to abandon and sacrifice one of
the best Subjects that the King her Son had, to gratify the insatiable humor
of some Malcontents that were never to be satisfied. So that now it was
apparent, that all the methods they took to destroy this Favorite, served only
to confirm him so much the deeper in the affections, and good graces of the
Queen.

Nevertheless he used all possible means to procure the good will of the
people, he took care that Madrid should be always plentifully supplied with
provisions, necessary for life; and that all sorts of commodities should be
sold at cheap easy rates. He often entertained the City with Bull Feasts, where
he generally made his appearance in a black habit, embroidered over with
silver, and wore black and white Plumes, as being in second mourning, because
the Queen was a Widow: But as soon as ever he entered the Lists, and according
to the custom of those that design to combat the Bulls, came under the Queen's
Balcony making her a profound reverence and demanding permission de Taurear,
(as they call it there) she sent a Messenger to forbid him to expose himself.
'Twas observable in one of these courses, that he wore a Scarf of black Taffata
embroidered over with Gold, with the device of an Eagle gazing steadfastly upon
the Sun, and for the Motto these words, Tengo solo Licentia, that is to say, it
is only permitted to me. Some days after he appeared at the running at the
ring, having an Eagle painted upon his Buckler, (for they always wear them at
this sort of Course, which is an ancient diversion of the Moors) armed with
Jupiter's thunder, bearing the same Motto, It is only permitted to me. There
being no hazard to run in this sport, the Queen was willing that Valenzuela
should show his dexterity, which he did, and carried away the prize from a
great number of young Lords, that disputed it with him, and received from the
Queen's hand a Sword beset with Diamonds. They talked hotly at Court of the two
devices of the Favorite, and every one was ready to explain them according to
his own fancy and inclination. He caused some Comedies of his composing to be
publicly represented on the Theater, and all the Town had the liberty of
seeing them for nothing. This was the most taking way in the world to gain the
hearts of the Spaniards, for they are such passionate admirers of all public
shows, that they will lay up the money, which ought to be spent in maintaining
their poor Families, to purchase a dear seat at a Bull-feast. Valenzuela was
not satisfied to cultivate the affections of the people by these magnificences,
but sought other ways to win their hearts. He set several noble buildings on
foot, rebuilt the great Square, the better part of which had been consumed by
fire, and particularly the House where their Majesty's went to behold the
Courses at the Bull-feasts, and running at the ring. He caused a bridge to be
built at the gate near Toledo over the Mancanares, that cost a million of
Ducats, and another bridge over the same river at Pardo, which is a house of
pleasure belonging to the King. The Frontispiece and place before the Palace
was finished by his order, as also the Tower of the Queen's Apartment was
raised much higher.

He employed all his thoughts in contributing to the diversion of the Queen,
and the King her Son; this young Prince now began to go to all the meetings of
Sport and Pleasure that were kept at Aranjues, the Escurial and the other Royal
Houses. One day when the Marquess de Valenzuela had received Orders of the King
to prepare a Chase for him, and the Court was then at the Escurial, the King
designing to shoot a Stag, shot his Favorite and wounded him on the Thigh; the
Queen being terribly affrighted broke out into great Lamentations, and fainted
away between the arms of her Ladies. This accident occasioned some people to
predict the approaching ruin of Valenzuela, whereof this odd adventure seemed
to be a presage.

The time being now come to order the King's Household, the Marquess made choice
of all the O^ficers, He made the Duke d' Albuquerque Mayor-Dome Mayor, the
Admiral of Castile Cavallerizo Mayor, and the Duke de Medinaceli Sumiller de
Corpse, this Officer is the same in effect with High Chamberlain, and puts on
the Kings shirt: The name is originally French, and comes from the Dukes of
Burgundy, from whom the House of Austria is descended. After the same manner he
disposed of the other places.

Now as there were abundantly more pretenders than places to fill, he drew upon
him by this means a considerable number of Enemies, who could not digest the
affront of having nothing given them, and were less inclined to pardon him for
that which directly concerned themselves, than for what related to the Interest
of State. At this time they thought more earnestly than ever of Don Iuan,
hoping that he would come to revenge their quarrel upon Valenzuela, and besides
they labored underhand to convince the King, how necessary it was for the
better management of affairs to have the Prince about him.

The Queen being informed of what was designed against her, passed many
sorrowful days, and more melancholy nights, although she had almost continual
conferences with the Marquess; but she could never represent to her mind the
killing thought, that they would treat the Marquess after the same cruel manner
as they had used Father Nitard, but she fell a weeping and discovered all the
signs of a real concern. She knew very well, that the Grandees frequently
assembled together, and that they spoke of the Government with all the freedom
imaginable; that the Libels and Pasquils, that were insolently scattered
abroad, all tended to defame her administration, were publicly owned and
acknowledged by the Authors themselves, and that she was obliged to seem, as if
she knew nothing of those matters, because she was not in a capacity to punish
them.

Valenzuela for his part was not without his uneasy moments, the elevation of
his fortune only served to make him sensible of the terrible precipice he was
falling down, from which he did not perceive any visible means to secure
himself.

In the mean time Don Iuan, who continued still at Saragossa, was discontented
at his banishment, how honourable-soever it appeared, it is sufficient that it
was not voluntary, and that was enough to make him disrelish it. The Queen and
he had still the same mutual aversion to one another as formerly, and
notwithstanding the fair appearances of his outward behavior, he labored
under hand with his friends to get himself declared, Infant de Castile. At
least people report it of him; it is indeed very true, that he was never able to
accomplish that design, but they pretend that he was not absolutely without
hopes to effect it.

However it was, he made so great a Faction, by the means of some considerable
persons about the King* who were for promoting his return, that his friends
sent him word, that the King desired it, that every thing was disposed, and
ready to receive him, and that the credit of the Queen would never be able to
stand in competition against his.

This good news obliged him to quit Arrag^n, and make all the haste he could to
arrive at Buenretiro 1677.

To bring about this affair with more facility, they gave the King to
understand, That he was not only under the Tutorage of the Queen his Mother,
but under that of Valenzuela. They afterward represented to him the constraint
he lived under in such lively colors, that he protested he would free himself
immediately from this servitude. And although the Queen had always her eye upon
him, for fear he should be seduced by any ill Counsels, and take contrary
measures to what she prescribed him, yet he found the opportunity one night to
steal out of the Palace with only one Gentleman of his Bedchamber, who lay in
his room, and so muffled up in his Cloak he walked on foot to Retir^, which was
far enough off: From thence he dispatched an Order immediately to the Queen not
to stir out of the Palace.

It is easy to imagine what entertainment such mortifying news found with her,
and what effects this sudden reverse of fortune caused in a Princess, who had
been accustomed to govern.

She employed the remainder of the night in writing to the King, conjuring him
in the most tender terms to give her leave to visit him, but he still refused
it.

While the King tarried at Retiro, the people being informed of his intentions,
flockt in multitudes to salute and acknowledge him. All the Lords of the Court
made him very considerable presents, so that some persons valued them at a
hundred thousand Crowns, either in Money, Plate, Tapistry or Diamonds. There was
an universal joy at Madrid upon this occasion, and that for these two reasons,
which equally caused it. The first is, the exceeding affection the Spaniards
have for their Prince, the second, because the Queen was so ill beloved, and
besides the people could never forget some words that dropped from her once, viz.
That she should never be at rest, till she had brought them all to be clothed
with Esterac. This is a sort of a course Matt made of Rushes, that serves them
for Mattresses and their bedding.

The next night after the King's retreat, they made Illuminations in all the
streets.

As soon as Don Iuan arrived, he obliged the King to remove the Queen from
thence, so she was sent to Toledo, with positive orders not to stir out of that
City. The unfortunate Valenzuela took his leave of her with all the Testimonies
of grief and duty, that so short a time would allow him, and retired to the
Escurial according to order.

Thus there being a new face of affairs, every body made his Court and
Application to Don Iuan, and the King by his extraordinary caresses,
sufficiently testified how joyful he was to see him again. He commanded him to
take care of all his affairs, and indeed Don Iuan rendered himself so absolute a
Master, that his authority became much greater than that of the Queen, and her
two chief Ministers.

Don Iuan earnestly desired to have Valenzuela's person in his power, but could
not tell whither he was gone. At last being informed that he was to be found at
the Escurial he showed a great deal of joy at the news. This is one of the
King's Houses, and is of so prodigious an extent, that if we take in the
Buildings, the Park, and a Convent of Religious Ieronomites, which is contained
within the Precincts of it, it is thought it is several Leagues in compass, and
is all enclosed with Walls:

The King commanded Don Antonio de Toledo, Son to the Duke of Alva, to go
thither in person and arrest Valenzuela; he departed immediately with the Duke
De Medina Sidonia, and the Marquess de Valpa rayso, Don Fernand de Toledo,
several persons of great quality, and two hundred Horse. The Marquess was then
walking in an adjoining Forest full of heaviness and melancholy, but hearing
on a sudden a great noise about him, and being informed at the same time, of
what had happened, by a certain Messenger, whom some of his Friends had sent in
all speed to acquaint him with the news; he returned hastily to the Escurial;
and finding out the Prior of the Convent of the Ieronomites, who was a very
honest man, and particularly concerned at the misfortunes of this Favorite, he
told him in a few words what danger he was in, and what reasons he had to
apprehend the loss of his life, in case he was taken; praying and conjuring him
with all imaginable earnestness to conceal him in some place of safety.

The Prior immediately ordered a hole to be contrived in a Cell, belonging to
one of the Religious, of whose Confidence he was well assured* This Cell it
seems was all over wainscoted, so that taking down one of the Pannels of the
Wainscot, and making a cavity in the wall which was of a considerable
thickness, in manner of a nitch, they threw in a few Mats, and there the poor
Marquess was shut up.

It being very well known, that the Marquess was retired into the Convent,
there was no place or corner left unsearcht by Don Antonio de Toledo, and those
that accompanied him. They had so small a respect to the most holy places, that
they almost turned every thing in the Church upside down.

But their search was to no purpose; and Don Antonio could not tell what to
resolve upon. He had been upon the hunt there several days to find out
Valenzuela, who, as he now began to imagine, had certainly found the means to
save himself: When the unhappy Marquess being almost stifled in the Hole for
want of air, and besides disordered with his late afflictions, fell so
dangerously ill, that there were little hopes of his life. Finding himself
therefore in this desperate condition, he cared not what became of him: But the
Father Prior having first taken the Surgeon of the Convent's word to keep
the secret inviolably, sent him to the Marquess to let him blood: This
treacherous Villain within a quarter of an hour after discovered the whole
mystery to Don Antonio, who had been it seems in the Cell, where poor
Valenzuela lay immured, almost every day since he began to make the search
after him. He then immediately entered the Convent, and all on the sudden
commanded the Panel, which covered the Marquess, to be taken down. He f^^nd
him fast asleep* but very much altered by his indisposition and misfortunes;
his arms lay ready by him, and if he had been awake, there is no question to be
made but that he had resolutely defended himself, being a person of great
courage and bravery: And besides what would not a man attempt in so deplorable
a condition?

He was conducted to the Castle de Consuegra, which belongs to the Grand Priory
of Castile, of the order of Malta. Don Iuan chose to make this the scene of his
confinement, because the Castle depended upon him. Valenzuela lay there
dangerously sick, and often said in the hearing of his Guards, Oh heavens! and
there is no hope then that I shall dye immediately, must I still live after I
have endured so many afflictions?

When he was somewhat better, he was removed to the Castle de los Puntales at
Cadiz, where he suffered a very close imprisonment; nevertheless heshowed a
great deal of constancy and resolution, in the midst of all his ill usage and
disgraces.

At last he was embarked in a Vessel to be sent to Chile in the Philipines.
These are certain Islands in the extremest part of the East Indies, almost
adjoining to China. It Is a long and tedious Voyage thither, and they generally
transport their most notorious Criminals in Spain to those places, where they
are forced to work in the Quicksilver mines. They seldom tarry above two years
in that slavish employment but they die, or at least are troubled with a
general trembling in their limbs, which makes them suffer infinitely more than
death it self.

Valenzuela was in^ormed before his departure, that he was degraded from all
his honors, and that the King had taken away all his Offices, leaving only his
bare name to him. I perceive then, says he very pensively, that I am under more
unfortunate circumstances by far, than when I first came to Court, and the Duke
de l' Infantado took me for his Page.

But tho they took care to acquaint him with what related particularly to
himself, yet he could learn nothing of the Queen's destiny, or what became of
his Wife, and Children. They had shut up her Majesty together with them in a
Convent at Talavera de la Reine, and strictly commanded the Abbess, not to let
them stir abroad, or speak to any body.

It Is commonly reported, that at the time, when he was at the Port of Cales
ready to embarque, a woman of an extraordinary size, handsomely dressed, and
covered with her veil, as it is the Spanish Fashion, bustled through the Guards
close up to him. Take courage Valenzuela, says she to him, thy Enemy will die,
and thou shall once more see Spain.

Those that heard her say so, would have stopped her, but she found out means to
make her escape. What she told him afterward proved in effect to be true, for
Don Iuan died, and one of the first graces that the Queen Mother begged of the
King at her return to Madrid, was to have Valenzuela recalled home. So a Vessel
was sent to the Philippines to bring him back, but he found to his sorrow, that
d' Eguya hindered his return, although the Queen so earnestly desired it.

The Pope having received information of what had passed, as well in the Church
as in the Convent, when they dragged Valenzuela by force out of the Escurial,
excommunicated all those that were concerned in the fact; so that before the
Lords could prevail to have the Ecclesiastical Censure taken off, which by this
violation of the Churches Liberty they had incurred, they were obliged in white
Sheets and Halters about their Necks to walk to the Imperial College, where
Cardinal Mellini, who was then Nuncio at Madrid, made each of them undergo some
blows of Discipline.

All the Kingdom testified an extraordinary satisfaction to to see Don Iuan
enter upon the Government, and we may safely say, that all the hopes and
expectations of Spain were lodged in him.

As he was master of a great deal of wit and vivacity, so that it was natural
to believe that the different empl^^m^^ts of his life, whether in peace or war,
rend^^ed him extremely capable of repairing the breaches and reforming all the
irregularities of the State. Several of the Grandees had entered into a sort of
an Association for his return; and now they had leisure to make severe
reflections upon the weakness of the late Government, where they found nothing
but private intreagues and little factions, that were extremely disadvantagious
to the Public Interest.

A German Queen, an Infant King, a Foreigner Chief Minister of State and
Confessor, Valen^uela made a Favorite and Minister; without birth and without
capacity, raised upon the sudden by a strange caprice of Fortune, and thrown
down again into his primitive nothing: In fine, all their hopes centred in Don
Iuan, and they had long expected him almost to a degree of impatience: but when
he was once arrived, and they beheld him at a nearer view, presently all those
great and glorious Ideas, which they had conceived of him, vanished away like a
dream.

This is commonly the fate and destiny of all great Ministers; the high place
they possess only serves to expose them the more to the envy of their
inferiors. Even those persons that took the greatest pains to place them in
that condition, think they have labored all the while for an ungrateful
wretch, and if he fails to shower down all his favors upon them, will be sure
to give him less quarter than any men else. So small a distance there is from
public favor and admiration to public hatred. This rule which generally
holds a^ all ^imes and in all places, did not fail to be accomplished in the
person of Don Iuan.

Most people were concerned to see what harsh usage he gave the Queen, and
could not forbear to accuse his obstinacy, for refusing to enter Madrid, till
the Queen was gone out, and on her way to Toledo.

He was not content with this affront that he put upon her at his first
appearance, but to humble her still the more, he added another that was full as
mortifying, he descended into a severe examination of her past conduct, the
particulars of which had not the least relation to the present state of
affairs, and only tended to defame her.

This Princess suffered with an incredible grief a treatment so unbefitting her
high Quality, and so injurious to her reputation, but all other ways of showing
her resentments were denied her, and she had nothing left to exercise, save
only her patience and virtue.

But several persons of Quality that were still linked to her whether out of
affection or duty, could not without a sensible affliction, behold the
oppression she lay under. They generally spoke of it with heat and indignation,
and spread abroad a report, that although Don Iuan was no legitimate Prince, yet
he flattered himself that he should one day become absolute Master of the
Monarchy.

Abundance of people maintained the contrary, alleging that he was never
guilty of such a design, and that if he had been capable of harboring any such
thoughts, he might easily have succeeded in them, by the assistance of his own
party which was very numerous, and by his own power; that the King was but
fifteen years old, and besides was equally destitute of authority and
experience.

What occasioned this suspicion was his establishing of some innovations that
were never practiced by any Minister before him. One that made the greatest
noise was this, that in his Chamber of Audience he would neither give the right
Hand nor a Seat to the Ambassadors. At first they showed themselves extremely
disobliged at it, but at last the Nuncio and the other foreign Ministers
submitted to this Rule, and visited him without difficulty. The Queen's
Creatures made a greater bustle about this affair than even the Ambassadors
themselves, who were only concerned in it, and whether they discoursed of it
with too much freedom, or Don Iuan only suspected their private sentiments, he
caused several of them to be banished. Among the rest were the Admiral of
Castile, the Duke d' Ossone, the Prince de Stillano, the Marquess de Mansera,
the Count d' Humanez, the Count d' Aquillar, and the Marquess de Mondejar. The
last of whom was accused for making the following Verses, but they were
mistaken in the Author, for they were written by the Admiral, who was a person
of extraordinary wit.

Un frail y una Corona,
Un Duque y u^ Cartelesta
An dubleron la lista
De la bella Calderona.
Baylo y alguno blasona
Que de quantos han entrado
En 'la danca ha averiguado
Quien Ilezo el prez del bail:
Pero yo atingome al frail,
Y quiero perder doblado.
I have here translated these Verses into English, although it is certain they
have nothing of the bell air and Spirit the Spanish have.

Fair Calderona, the pride of the Stage,
In her youth did with many a Lover engage.
Dukes, Actors, and Kings, in spite of their state,
And Monks so demure on her Triumphs did wait.
The kind coming Nymph, as besitted her station,
Received the Addresses of half the Creation.
And very well knew, (as Sh' had reason enough)
Who played his Cards surest, and came the best off.
As for me, without giving my Wherefore or Why,
The Monk, the fat Monk did the business, say I.
De tan santa Confradia,
Procidio un hijo fatal.
Y coco al man principal
La pension de la obua pial.
Claro esta que les diera
Lo que qui siesse su Madre
Pero no haura a quien no quadro
Vna rason que si offrece:
Mirese a quien parece
Porque aquel sera su Padre.
Sole tiene u^a Sefial
De nuestro Rey Soberano.
Que en nada pone la mano.
Que no le succeda mal.
A ca perdio a Portugal.
En las Dunas su aroganciae
Dio tantos triumphos a Francia,
Que es cosa de admiracion
Que dar tanta perdicion
En un hijo de ganancia.
Mande pues Carlos secundo
Ber si le huvo sin recelo
El Rey que vi^ ^el Cielo
De unia muger del munda:
En misterio tan presundo
Solo puedo de^ir yo
Que por suyo le jusgo
Mas si contodo es estrasio
No sea el primer engasio
Que Felipe padecio.
In this Blessed Conjunction a Bantling was got,
And the King, as best able, did pay for the shot:
He got him nursed up in a little blind quarter,
And had it been the mode there, would have given him a Garter,
The Politic Dame, ^o Iilting well used,
With a thousand strange stories, her Lovers amused,
But, we, that have no inclinations to flatter,
Are resolved to be ruled by our Eyes in the matter,
And him, for the Brat's real Father we'll find,
Whom most he resembles in Body or Mind.
Of our late piou^ Monarch, no marks he retains
But a constant ill conduct, ill luck, and no brains:
Through him all our hopes were in Portugal crossed,
And Dunkirk alas! by his folly was lost:
The Plague of our Counsels, and Cause of our Woes,
Fresh losses attend him where ever he goos.
Well Fortune I Will call thee a Strumpet no more,
For were thou in truth and in earnest a Wh^re,
Thou oughtst to have favored him more than another,
And shown him respect for the sake of his Mother.
Let Charles send an Envoy to the Mansions above,
And let the late King all our doubts to remove,
Tell us whether he will (...) Don John for his Son,
Since more were conce^^d, as the runner does run.
His Mother, we know, was a good natured Dance,
That strove to oblige all Strangers that came.
If Philip at last in his judgment was gulled;
Pray is this the first time that the Monarch was fooled?
En sus definios penetro
Por una y por otra acion.
Que no tiem otra entencion
Don Iuan, que empefiar el Cetro:
Abrenuncio vade retro
Hi de Dame para el,
Reyno, Enrique y a un fiel, Don Enrique II.

Noble y valiante le admira
Hasta el dia de oy suspira
La Lealtad porel cruel. Don Petro el cruel Matado por Don Enrique Su^rm^no
natural.

OCarlos gran Rey de Espana,
No te espantes ni te admire,
Que el mundo todo suspire
Con oppression tan estrana
Noes porque el pueblo engana
El pretexto del rumor,
Si no que es tanto el aemor
De la plebe lastimosa
Es solo ana vos quexosa
Que les oprime el dolor.
By his Conduct it is plain both to Country and Town,
That his ^aughty designs tend all to the Crown;
But durst he aspire, and make such a pother,
If he would ever reflect on the Strumpet his Mother?
^ave Henry the Bastard King of Gastile.
Henry it is true, tho a Bastard, did reign,
^ut tho his exploits are so famous in Spain,
So seldom to serve our true Prince we have failed,
That in spite of the Tyrant, Don Pedro the Cruel, King of Castile, turned out
of his Kingdom by Henry the Bastard in 1366, and 1367.
Pedro's bewaild.
Awake mighty Charles, and thy Scepter assume,
Let the Arrogant Wretch feel the weight of his doom.
And be not amazed that the People thus cry,
Under all the oppressions and burdens they lie.
Though too loudly they rail at the Plague of the Age,
Their Zeal to thy Person excuses their Rage.
And if they Repine, and are heard to Complain,
It proceeds from the smart and excess of their Pain.
Don Iuan found these Verses upon his Toillette, and in several other places of
his Chamber; he was more concerned at them, than in reason he ought to be, for
certainly he could never be so vain as to imagine that he was equally
acceptable to all the world. These resentments having sowred and exasperated
his spirit, he observed that the conversation of the Count de Monterey diverted
the King; this was enough to render him suspected; and although this Nobleman had
set himself at the head of a party, which declared for the Prince's return, yet
all his services were forgot, and the prejudices of jealousy, which are
sometimes too headstrong to be mastered, made Don Iuan ^end him to command in
Catalonia.

He afterward banished him, and what is more, ordered a Trial to be commenced
against him about the affair of Puicerda: thus the unfortunate Count saw
himself all in a moment removed from Court, where he flattered himself long to
continue in the King's and Princes favor. But that Monarch was young, and
destitute of experience, and besides labored under the ill effects of a bad
education; for a Minister that regards nothing in the world but what has a
particular relation to his own interests, will be sure to keep back those
lights from his Prince, that may help him afterward to discover by what an ill
conduct he is managed. Don Iuan was very well acquainted with the policy of
this Maxim, and accordingly took care to conceal the affairs of State from the
King, with as much precaution as the Priests keep their mysteries from the
people. To make himself always necessary to him, he never instructed him in the
art of governing, but perpetually amused him with some little insignificant
diversions, that possessed his tender years with a spirit of laziness, which
could never fail to produce ill consequences afterward, and never gave him
leave to stir a foot out of the Palace but in his own company.

The people that are never sensible of events, but at the very moment when they
feel the smart, had perhaps looked upon the banishment of the Lords, and the
captivity of their King with an indifferent Eye, if they had not been sufferers
themselves. But the great scarcity of provisions that were daily inhanced, the
irregular administration of justice, and the disorderly management of the
Finances, made them soon sensible, that the changing of Masters is not always
for the better. And as it is natural to run headlong from one extreme into
another, and the just limits of carrying on a reformation are known but to very
few persons, so they began to disrelish the Regency, and to show a
dissatisfaction, that might easily have been improved into an insurrection, but
that the anger of the people of Spain is generally weak and feeble, and it is
not only upon these occasions that the apparent fierceness of that Nation goes
off, and vani^hes. For it is very true, that the people content themselves there
with railing and murmuring, so that if there was any thing to be feared it was
from the Grandees, who notwithstanding their banishment, left very considerable
Relations and Friends behind them at Court: These being concerned to see them
exiled, began privately to join and associate for the same Cause; they
proceeded so far as to signify to the Queen that they passionately desired her
return, and that she ought to attempt something on her side as they were
resolved to do something on theirs, and in short they took an occasion to
discourse the King about the matter.

They made him sensible that he was under a slavish ignominious dependence, and
confirmed him in his natural inclinations to take the government of the State
into his own hands.

He relished very well the overtures they made him, and the Queen likewise
received her informations not without pleasure; but it was not enough to wish
well, something of Action was necessary: for the King was young, wanted
assistance, and every one shifted it off from himself to another. The pleasures
of the Court, and that laziness which is so peculiar to the Spaniards made them
advance so slowly in their affairs, that Don Iuan had leisure enough to destroy
in one day the foundations they had been laying for several weeks. The Queen
for her part was under a confinement, which held her chained to the place, so
that she could attempt nothing without being discovered. She was afraid too of
finding Traitors among her own Servants, and drawing new disgraces upon her,
whilst she endeavored to free her self from those she lay under at present.
What was past instructed her in some measure to fear and avoid what was to come.

As she is naturally of a slow disposition, so after long reflections upon the
matter, she was of the opinion, that she ought not by any precipitate actions
hazard the future repose of her life.

Don Iuan on his side was alarmed with continual fears and jealousies; and
having abundance of Spies about him, he was instructed of what he did not care
to hear, the unwearied designs that were daily formed against him.
Notwithstanding the great authority and power, with which he was invested, he
could not forbear very sensibly to apprehend the bad consequences of an
aversion, that began to be entertained so generally against him.

He was in a manner responsible for all the good and all the bad successes of
the State, and the weight of so cumbersom a Monarchy hung very heavy about him.
He sometimes considered with regret the tranquillity he had formerly enjoyed in
Flanders and Arragon; in fine his spirit was not in its natural sphere, and we
may say of him, that he even overbought the pleasure of making so great a
figure on the Theater of the World.

The war that was kindled 1672. between France and Holland, interested several
Princes of Europe, who took their sides in it, either according to their
several inclinations, or else the particular engagements they had to the
powers, that were then at variance. Spain, which is always inseparable from the
interests of the Empire, neither spared her Money nor Forces upon this occasion,
when the Hollanders made a peace with France first in the year 1678. The
Emperor and some of the Princes of the Empire followed their Example, nay Spain
could not hinder it self from doing the like. The King of Denmark and Elector
of Brandenburgh, who as yet kept their Swords in their hands still, laid them
down likewise, and a peace was concluded at Nimeguen, that gave repose to all
Europe.

In the mean time the King of Spain was upon the point of Marrying the Arch
Duchess, the Emperor's Daughter: this affair was so far advanced, that the
Articles were regulated, and the Contract signed. This marriage was of the
Queen's doing, who earnestly desired the accomplishment of it; but Don Iuan at
his return broke off this match, not being desirous to strengthen his enemy's
party, as it must assuredly have been by the accession of this young Princess,
who was of the same Name and same Country with the Queen, and besides all this,
was her Grand Daughter and Neice. He too much feared the ill consequences of
this affair to give his consent to it.

The King about his nineteenth year seemed to be settled in a healthful state of
body, which promised Successors to the Crown, and he expressed a great
inclination to be married; he considered that of the House of Austria he alone
was left remaining of the Spanish branch, and that his whole Kingdom had an
equal interest to see him have Children.

The circumstances of the Peace, that happened to be concluded at Nimeguen, made
him cast his eyes upon Mademoiselle, Eldest Daughter of Monsieur, who was the
Kings only Brother. She was almost of his own age, amiable, well-shaped, of a
sweet disposition, witty and charming: all her inclinations were noble and
virtuous, and Lewis the Great took an extraordinary affection to her, because
her humor so exactly suited with his, so that all the Courtiers were surprised
at it.

The King had accidentally seen some portraitures of this Princess, and several
Spanish Lords who had been at the Court of France spoke of her as a Prodigy.
These advantageous testimonies so luckily concurring, sensibly affected him, he
could not take his rest a nights, he carried her Picture next his heart, and
held long conversations with it, as if it understood him. But what is the most
incredible thing of all, and yet is related for a certain truth, is this, that
before he became enamoured he could not endure any woman near him, but these
dispositions were altered in him upon this occasion, and he beheld the fair Sex
never after with aversion.

All the people were ravished with joy to hear that the King desired
Mademoiselle. The memory of Queen Elizabeth of France, the first Wife of Philip
the IV. was so deeply imprinted upon the hearts of all the Spaniards, that they
desired to see one of the same blood sit upon the Throne again.

Don Iuan agreed with the King's inclinations, as well as those of the people
in relation to this Princess. He sent orders to the Marquess de los Balbazez in
Flanders, who was come from Nimeguen, where he had assisted at the treaty of
peace, to go and demand Mademoiselle for the King his Master.

Every one was surprised that the Prince lent his helping hand to this affair.
True policy would have required him to protract as long as he was able and to
delay the Marriage, because as it gave a Wife to the King, so it might perhaps
give an Enemy to the Favorite.

And here many people could not forbear to call to mind the first Ideas of that
ambition, of which he was suspected, now it was for good and all to abandon the
design of making himself declared Infant, to content himself with reigning
after the King, in case he had no Children. Many persons do likewise pretend,
that notwithstanding the great earnestness he showed in public, yet he had no
over great desire to have the match succeed. They allege this for a reason,
that he ought to have done something before so open an Embassy, by way of
secret dispatches, which might absolutely have had the success of a
negotiation: but that at the bottom, whatever he did or whatever he said to the
contrary, he did not heartily desire it; that he was afraid lest a French
Queen, supported by the authority of the greatest King in the world, would
never truckle to him; that now he was Master, but hereafter would become no
more than a Companion, Others were of the contrary opinion, and said that he
had a fair prospect of being well received by Mademoiselle, especially since he
had broke off the marriage with the Arch Duchess, and given the preference to
her. These different considerations embarrassed and perplexed Don Iuan to such
a degree, that he knew not which way to determine himself, and even at the very
time that the Marquess de los Balbazez demanded the Princess in France, he very
cunningly got the King at Madrid to see the portraiture of the Infanta of
Portugal, who was a Lady of admirable beauty: He talked exceedingly of her
charms, and not knowing as yet that her marriage with the Duke of Savoy was
agreed upon, he underhand made a proposal to give her to the King; but he was
too deeply gone to alter his affections.

The Demand made by Don Balbazez was very agreeable to his Most Christian
Majesty, and Don Iuan who received advice of it, did not at first doubt of its
success. Therefore he ^ow endeavored to overshoot the favorable dispositions
of France, either to promote his own interest by it, or else by demanding
things that were too great, to meet a refusal, and by that means to find a
plausible pretense to break off. In effect, he pretended that Mademoiselle not
being the Daughter of a King, they ought therefore for that reason on the side
of the French Court to enter into particular considerations, and restore to
Spain some of those places, that were yielded up to France by the last Treaty
of Nimeguen.

Upon this he held a Council, where he was desirous to insinuate his own
sentiments into them, but he found no body inclined to hearken to them. Every
one concluded, that they ought to have nothing else in view but the King's
satisfaction; that they were happy enough in finding out a Princess, that was
beautiful and capable to give them a Sovereign, and that they ought not to take
pains to destroy a thing of that consequence, which all the world so earnestly
desired to see accomplished.

The Queen who continued still very solitary at Toledo, and who was consulted
in no affairs, wrote a Letter to the King, wherein she told him, she had
received information that he was going to be married, that she counseled him
in the mean time, while that affair was carrying on, to go to Arragon, and
Catalonia, to confirm the ancient privileges of those people. The King sent
her barely word again that he would do it, without explaining himself more
openly upon his marriage.

Ever since the twenty fourth of January 1679. the King had nominated those
persons who were to fill up the respective offices of the House of the new
Queen. The Duchess de Terra Nova was made Camarera Major, that is, first Lady
of Honor, but her power is of a greater extent than that of the other Ladies
of Honor; because she is Mistress of all the Women that serve the Queen in her
Palace. She is the Widow of the Duke de Terra Nova, who was of the House of
Pignatelli, and a Grandee of Spain. She in herited a vast fortune that
descended to her from Fernando Cortez, for her Mother bore the name of that
famous Captain, who left her a small Kingdom in the West Indies, tho he might,
if he pleased, have left her a more considerable one in that part of the world,
where he made so great a progress.

She is descended of a branch of the House of Arragon, that settled a long while
ago in Sicily; she is extremely rich, of a fierce imperious humor toward
persons that are above her, insupportable to her equals, but kind and obliging
to her inferiors. She has a world of wit, is fixed in her resolutions, and is
of a deep penetrating spirit: her temper cold and serious, still preserving her
Spanish gravity, and never steps a foot backward or forward unless she has well
considered of it before. She thunders out her I will, or I will not, enough to
make one tremble.

She is a meager pale woman, of a long and wrinkled visage, her eyes little and
severe, in short she makes a dangerous terrible Enemy. Don Carlos of Arragon
her Cousin German was assassinated by the Banditti, whom she caused expressly
for that purpose to come from Valentia, because he demanded of her restitution
of the Duchy of Terra Nova, which was in her possession, although of right it
belonged to him.

The terrible noise this affair made in the world, obliged her to retire into
Arragon, where Don Iuan resided at that time, deeply afflicted at his
misfortunes.

Both of them imagined, that they had reason to complain of the severity of
their fortune, and this soon occasioned a certain friendship between them, as
it usually happens amongst persons of their Quality when they come to be
involved in the same circumstances. After they had frequently conversed with
one another, the Prince found out part of the Dutchesse's humor; he knew she
was ambitious, but as all the other ill qualities of her soul were outwardly
set off by the appearance of a great devotion, he never took her for so
malicious and spightful a Devil, as she really was. He therefore cast his eyes
upon her to make her Camarera Major for the Young Queen.

The Marquess d' Astorgas was nominated at the same time to be Grand Master of
her House, Don Iuan had some thoughts at first of conferring this Office upon
Don Vincente Gonzaga of the House of Mantua, and made him quit his Viceroyship
of Sicily to come and possess it, which the other freely left, in consideration
of the place, that was now offered him. But his expectations were deceived; for
the Marquess d' Astorgas, who had heaped up a prodigious wealth when he was
Viceroy of Naples, having proffered the use of it to Don Iuan, who mightily
stood in need of money at that time and accepted the profer, was preferred to
Don Vin^ente, who was admitted however into the ^ouncil of State, where his
great abilities, without question, did great service.

Although the Duke d' Ossone continued as yet in exile, Don Iuan did not forget to
nominate him for Master of the Horse to the Queen; he bestowed that place upon
him only that he might have an opportunity to take away from him that of the
President of the Orders, where his conduct it seems did not please him. He
affected a certain air of devotion that sat very disagreeably upon him,
because he mixed too much Bigotry with it, and it was a strange sort of Bigotry
too; for this good Duke one evening caused the Count d' Humanez to be set upon
in the streets by some men of Valencia, who never come to Madrid but to commit
murders and other crimes of that nature. The occasion of the quarrel was this,
the Duke was passionately in love with a certain Lady, and soon after came to
discover that the Count was a more fortunate man than himself. Nevertheless the
Count escaped the danger. This affair made a great bustle; Don Iuan who was
particularly disgusted at the Duke, laid hold of this opportunity to banish him
the Court, but now procured this considerable post for him, that he might gain
over to his party a man of so great an importance; besides it was his interest
to see the Chief Offices of the Queen's House filled with those persons that
were at his devotion, and might prepossess the mind of that Young Princess in
favor of him. The other Officers of her House were likewise nominated about
the beginning of March.

At the same time the Marquess de Mansera Mayor Domo to the Queen Mother was
fined a hundred thousand Crowns, which he paid upon the nail. After this manner
the King sometimes punishes the crimes that the Grandees commit against him. He
was soon after banished to the Castle de Cocchia, and his place was given to
the Count de Chincho^. But the Queen being highly incensed at these
proceedings, declared that she would never suffer it, alleging that the Widow
of Philip the fourth, and Mother of Charles the second ought not to be treated
after this unworthy manner, so they were forced to let the matter drop, and
proceed no farther in it.

There happened a little after another business, that occasioned a great
clamor. Don Francisco de Toledo, second Son of the Duke of Alva, the Count de
Mirande Grandee of Spain, the Marquess de Valero Son of the Duke de Bejar, and
the eldest Son of the Duke de Sessa occasioned the escape of a man, that was
accused of great crimes. The manner whereby they brought it about, was this.
They sent a woman with a basket of Fish to stand near the Prison, she sold such
good pennyworths there, that a man appointed for the purpose having informed
the Jailer, and the Keepers of it, they presently ran to the place to buy some
Fish. The woman amused them with abundance of foolish stories so well, that she
succeeded in her design, for in the mean time the abovementioned Lords broke
open the Prison Gates.

The King ordered all of them to be arrested, however this affair, like others
of the same nature at Madrid, brought no ill consequences upon them.

The King took all the care imaginable to have the young Queens Apartments in
the Palace fitted up, and made ready. He was to have gone according to the
usual custom, in the month of April to Aranjues, but Don Iuan hindered him,
because that place was too near Toledo, so he went to Buen-Retiro. The Queen
Mother wrote to him thither, desiring that he would be pleased to come and see
her; but tho she pressed it with a great deal of tenderness and importunity, she
was not able to succeed in her desires.

He diverted himself every day with hunting and seeing Comedies, either at
Pardo or Zarzuela, which are two Houses of Pleasure belonging the King of
Spain. The Opera d' Alcine was represented before him, it cost a world of money,
but was miserably performed.

There was likewise a Bull-feast kept, where two young Cavaliers unfortunately
perished: On the following day there was running at the ring.

About this time the Prince de Ligne arrived, and a day or two after kissed his
Majestys hand, and took his place at the Council of State. Father Francis de
Relux a Dominican came likewise from Salamanca, where he had been Professor of
Divinity, and was chosen by Don Iuan to be the Kings Confessor. The Duke of
Alva had engaged that he should submit himself entirely to Don Iuan's will, who
accepted him upon his parole. At this time the Cardinal de Portacarero
Archbishop of Toledo returned from Rome. The Court at Madrid was very full and
numerous.

On the twentieth of January the King of France named the Marquess de Villars
to be his Ambassador in Spain, who was at that time under the same Character at
Savoy. He was known to the Court of Spain, for in the year 1673. he resided
there in quality of Ambassador; he arrived at Madrid on the seventeenth of
June, and those persons that were well acquainted with the disposition of Don
Iuan, very much doubted whether he would meet with that reception, which he
might reasonably promise himself: they knew well enough that the natural
haughtiness of Don Iuan would never comply with the instructions of that
Minister, who to be sure would never go to visit the Prince, unless he were
assured beforehand of receiving the honor of the Hand, the Step and the Chair;
that Don Iuan would never consent to this proposal, because it was not to be
imagined that he would easily give up the rights he had obtained over the other
Ambassadors, and that it would be an inconvenient thing for him of France not
to treat directly with the chief Minister. What people surmised upon this
occasion really happened, for the Prince would not bate him an ace, and the
Marquess de Villars kept fast to his instructions. Therefore they looked upon
one another with great coldness, but nevertheless this did not hinder the
Ambassador from having a private Audience of the King on the eighth of July,
and a public one a little after, upon the conclusion of his Marriage with
Mademoiselle.

Don Iuan had three fits of a Tertian Ague toward the beginning of July. On
the thirteenth the Secretary of the Marquess de los Balbazez arrived, who
brought word that the King had consented to the marriage of Mademoiselle with
the King of Spain: Nothing is equal to the joy that he showed upon this
account, for he had expected the news with the greatest impatience. He ordered
Te Deum to be sung at our Ladies d' Atocha, all the Houses in the City were
illuminated with white Wax Tapers, and Bonefires were to be seen in every
street. An hundred and fifty Cavaliers of the best Families in the Kingdom
performed a Masquerade on horseback, that consisted only of some embroiderie,
Tiffany Ribbons and Feathers; for they were apparalled in black as they used to
be, but were not masqued at all. After this manner they ran all night, every
man carrying a Flambeaux in his hand: all these divertisements lasted three
days and three nights. A Courier arrived soon after, who brought the contract
of the King's marriage, this was soon communicated to the Queen Mother, who
expressed a great deal of joy at it. The Ratification was presently sent back,
and Bonefires were made as before.

While the people did thus endeavor to express their zeal to the King, the
servants of the Queen Mother were busied in finding out some means or other to
advance her return. The Marquess de Villars had refused to follow the example
of the other Ambassadors in the conduct they used toward Don Iuan upon the
occasion of those new customs, which they suffered him to establish; and this
seemed a favorable opportunity to persuade the enemies of the Prince, that
Monsieur de Villars had some secret instructions which were not favorable to
him. They flattered themselves immediately with the hopes of making him one of
their party, and believed it would extremely strengthen their own side if they
could once bring him over to them. Upon this consideration, the greater part of
the Courtiers applauded him mightily for his constancy, and made him abundance
of complements upon that score. He was respected at Madrid, and had the good
fortune to find out several of his friends again, and the Queen Mother showed a
particular esteem for him. She gave him a very obliging proof of this, when he
came to wait upon her at Toledo; for after public Audience was over, she was
pleased to entertain him in private about her own Affairs, and testified what
an entire confidence she reposed in him: But although several proposals were made
to him, to be of a party against the Prince, and besides his own natural
disposition led him to espouse the quarrel of those persons who opposed a
Minister, whose civilities he had no great reason to applaud, yet he was of
opinion that in this present conjuncture it would be his best way to remain
Neuter.

He considered still, that the marriage of the King of Spain with Mademoiselle
would bring along with it some agreements that were not to be expected before
the arrival of that Princess, that it was a sure unfailing way to oppose one
power to another, that this young Princess would never suffer theMinister of
France to be run down in that Court where she was to become the Mistress and
sole delight, that it was certain she would link her self to the interests of
the Queen Mother; that the most Christian Queen who loved both the one and the
other very affectionately, would be sure to give her this in charge before her
departure amongst the other counsels, which she was always to observe; that
their credit being united together and seconded by all those persons, that
desired another Government, Don Iuan would without question find himself
obliged to give way. Most persons reasoned after the same manner upon this
affair, and encouraged one another to stand firm against the Favorite; they
now began to speak those things aloud which before they were almost afraid to
mutter in private, they complained of him, and importuned the King to call the
Exiles home, and openly promoted the return of Queen Mother. Don Iuan was now
more disquieted than ever: the appearance only of his fall had prevailed with
several persons, who ought to have been his Creatures, to abandon him for good
and all; and as for those that remained, they had neither authority, nor merit
enough to support him. He could scarce find any comfort but when he was alone,
but this sort of conduct does not always afford a man a Sanctuary; for even the
silence, the retirement, and the infinite reflections we make are rather apt to
perplex and disturb, than to relieve our spirits. He was still more afflicted,
when he saw some of his friends, or at least such as he believed to be so,
embrace the interests that were directly opposite to his, and he knew they
employed the Confessor's credit with the King to bring all these matters about.

I have already told you, that Don Iuan was the man who caused him to come from
Salamanca, and after he had advanced him to this preferment, thought he might
ever after have him at his devotion. Nevertheless, whether he had promised him
nothing, or really broke his word, it is certain he quitted the Prince's party,
and caballed amongst his enemies. Some people pretend that this proceeded from
a principle of Conscience, but it is impossible that ingratitude should ever
flow from a good principle. However it was, he obtained for the Princess de
Stillano, who was the Duke of Alva's Daughter, the return of her Husband. Don
Iuan had absolutely refused it, and found so little credit upon this occasion,
that he was sensibly afflicted at it: for the thing it seems was pushed so far,
that the King out of pure complaisance to his Confessor said it signifies
nothing that Don Juan opposes it, it is enough that I would have it so. These
few words very much increased the Prince's melancholy; but as misfortunes
seldom come unattended, there happened another mortification upon the account
of the Duke of Ossone, who was in the number of the Exiles. The Prince had sent
him notice by some of his friends, that he desired him to throw up his place of
Master of the Horse to the new Queen, which he had lately bestowed upon him,
but he rejected his proposal with the greatest scorn imagi^able. Don Iuan was
mightily enraged at it, and would have banished him farther off, to make him
sensible of his power, and of the affront he had done him in pretending to
oppose his intentions: but he was so far from succeeding in his project, that
he saw the Duke de Medina Celi, who hitherto kept fair measures with him, had
prevailed with the King to recall the Duke d' Ossone. The Son of the Duke de
Medina Celi had married the Daughter of the Duke d' Ossone, and this occasioned
the great friendship between them. The pretense was, that it was necessary for
him to be with the Queen, and the Duke de Medina Celi, having found a
favorable opportunity, told the King that he was not a little concerned to see
a man of the Duke d' Ossone's quality, who had the honor to possess one of the
highest Offices in the Queens House, banished so far from Court, at a time when
all those persons that ought to serve her, should be making preparations to
meet her. The King consented to his return, as likewise to the Count de
Montereys, upon condition that they should neither make nor receive any visits
at Madrid.

A general custom seldom fails to hold true for any particular person, and it is
an usual observation, that when we begin to receive any one misfortune, we
ought to expect another. Don Iuan being persuaded that he was not happy enough
to be excepted from this invidious rule, was desirous to strengthen his party
by the Authority of the Constable of Castile; but he met with a very unlucky
rub in his way, for having engaged the Duke of Alva to propose an accommodation
to him, the Constable calling to mind the insupportable pride wherewith Don
Iuan had formerly treated him, and therefore still looking upon the Prince as
his formidable enemy, answered very coldly, that the time was past. To increase
his troubles, all those that were exiled came into favor, for they took an
opportunity to solicit their return whilst he was sick, and made such
advantages of that conjuncture, and pushed matters so home, that the King was
resolved to call home the Queen Mother. While they were deliberating upon the
conduct, that was to be observed in this affair, the King held a long
Conversation with the Inquisitor General; he sent his Confessor to acquaint the
Duke de Medina Celi of the House de la Cerda, and the Count d' Oropeza of the
House of Braganza to meet at an appointed hour at the Inquisitors. When they
were met, the King sent them word by the aforementioned Father Relux to advise
him of the best method to remove Don Iuan, and recall the Queen Mother. The day
was spent in Conference, and after all, it was unanimously agreed that the King
should depart from the Palace as if he were going out to hunt, and that before
his return he should send word to the Prince to withdraw immediately. This
project was not put in execution, the Prince knew not a syllable of the matter,
and for want of resolution and courage the design fell.

On the twenty sixth of June, a Bull feast was kept, where there was very good
sport, at the same time the Marquess de Fuentes got to be ^^de Counselor of
the military Affairs. The K^^g gave Orders to the Gentlemen of his Bedchamber,
who were to meet the Queen upon the way, to furnish themselves with three suits
of clothes a piece, and two of them were to be after the French fashion.

Our Ambassador made his entry on the thirteenth of August, and we did not fail
to go to some of our Friends to behold the Show. It Is a custom there for the
King to send the Ambassador a certain number of Horses out of his own Stable
both for himself and his attendants, for the Ambassadors make their entry on
Horseback; next morning the Major Domo in waiting, the Conductor of the
Ambassadors and his Deputy accompanied him from his own House to the Palace. In
his public Audience, which he had of the King, he always spoke in French; the
procession of his Entry was a long time interrupted by the opiniatrete of the
Ambassador of Malta, who pretended that his Coach ought immediately to follow
that of the Venetian Ambassador, who was the last Ambassador of the Chapel, in
such manner that he was got before the second Coaches of the Marquess de
Villars: but to put an end to the dispute, the Conductor of the Ambassadors was
sent to the Palace, where every thing was adjusted to the advantage of the
Ambassador of France, and the pretensions of him of Malta, who was Don Diego de
Bracamonte, were adjudged to be ill grounded, since the Ambassadors of Crowned
Heads never gave him the Right Hand at their Houses. After some instances on
his side, his Coach withdrew; he is the first Ambassador of Malta that ever
aspired to this honor.

Don Rodrigo de Silva de Mendoza, Duke de Pastrane and de l' Infantado, having
been named by the King to go Ambassador extraordinary into France, and to carry
the presents of Marriage to Mademoiselle, went immediately to Toledo to receive
Orders of the Queen Mother, and being returned to Madrid, he departed from
thence with a dozen Postillions, and six Trumpeters clad in green Velvet
embroidered with Gold: He had several Gentlemen, and Pages with him, and his
two Brothers Don Joseph, and Don Gaspar de Silva accompanied him in his
journey. Donna Catarina de Mendoza his Mother gave him twenty thousand
Pistoles, and five thousand to each of his Brothers. He was descended in a
right line from Father to Son of Rui Gomez Prince a' Eboli, who was made Duke
de Pastrane by King Philip II. whose Privado or principal Favorite he was, as
his Wife, whose beauty has made so great a noise in the world, was his
Mistress. The King named the Marchioness de Mortare, the Marchioness del
Fresno, the Countess de Santorcas, the Countess Dayala, and the Marchioness de
Castra Forte to be Ladies of Honor to the Queen; and for Maids of Honor the
Daughters of the Duchess de Sessa and de Frias, those of the Marchioness d'
Alcanisa, of the Countess de Villambrosa, of the Marchioness de Villa Franca,
of the Marchioness de Villa Manriquez, those of the Dukes d' Hijar and d' Albe,
of the Counts de Paredes, and d' Arcos, the Sisters of the Duke de Vareguas,
and the Marquess de Godar; the Daughters of the Duke d' Hijar, and Pastrane
were to be Menines or young Ladies of Honor: they are not above ten years old,
and are the prettiest Ladies I have seen in Spain. Donna Laura d' Alarcon was
named to be the Mother of the Maids of Honor, the Sons of the Marquess de
Villa Manriquez, and of the Count of St. Stephen to be Menins or Pages to the
Queen, the Marquess d' Astorgas Major Domo Major, the Duchess de Terra Nova to
be Camarera Major of the young Queen. All these Ladies went to Toledo to take
their leave of the Queen Mother, and at their return they went strait down to
the Palace, where the took possession of those Chambers that were allotted to
them. The King presented a thousand Pistoles to every Maid of Honor to bear
the expense of their journey, with a pension of a thousand Ducats. He gave the
title of Grandee to Don Francis Maria Spinola a Gentleman of Genoa, Duke de S.
Pierre, and Son in Law to the Marquess de los Balbazez: He was a young Lord
very well shaped and accomplished. At the same time the Count de Talara brought
the King a resignation of his Office of Master of the Horse, the aversion
between him and the Admiral of Castile made him unwilling to execute his
Orders, and since he saw himself recalled from banishment, he thought it the
best way to leave the Court.

A Courier arrived from Cales on the twenty-second of August, who brought the
news of the safe arrival of the Gallions tha^ were computed to be worth thirty
Millions, but above half the treasure belonged to the Merchants. They were once
minded to seize the whole Cargo to defray the charge of the Marriage, and to
serve for other occasional expenses. However after a long consideration, the
Council finding it would utterly ruin all commerce, desisted from the design.

The Ministers and Grandees went to complement the King on St. Lewis's day,
because it was the Birthday of the young Queen; he received them with with a
more pleasant air than was his usual manner, and having abundance of precious
Stones in his Hat, he told them that he wore them for the sake of the Queen.
The Cardinal Portocarero came to wait upon his Majesty, he went from Madrid to
Toledo very much discontented; and told some persons, that if the King did not
receive him with more honor, than he did the first time, he would never come
back again to Court; but he had reason enough now to be satisfied, for as he
came out of the Coach he found the Halberdiers of the Guards under their Arms,
touching the pavement with their Halberds, as they always use to do when the
King passes by. So great and so welcome a reception made him resolve not to give
the right hand to Ambassadors and to the Grandees, which at first a little
displeased some people, but the Dukes de Medina Celi, d' Ossone, and Alva, the
Popes Nuncio, and the Venetian Ambassador having made him a visit, were pleased
to submit to the new regulation he had established, which some others followed
after their example.

When it was known at Madrid, that our King was to swear to the Peace at
Fountainblea^ on the last day of August, the King of Spain came about four a
clock in the afternoon to the great Gilded Hall of the Palace, to perform this
Ceremony on his side. The Marquess de Villart came to the Palace, where he was
received by the Master of the Ceremonies: the Constable of Castile followed by
all the Ma^^^ D^^^'s received him at the Gate of the ^^^st Hall; he passed,
through several rooms, each more magnificent than the other, and hung with the
richest Tapistry in the world. At the upper end of the Hall there was a
Scaffold erected, covered with Persian Tapistry gounded with Gold, it was
ascended by three steps, the King's Throne was placed upon it, all imbroidered
with large Pearls and precious Stones of admirable beauty and splend^r. The
Cardinal Port^carero sat upon a Chair of State, the Constable of Castile upon
a little low Stool; our Ambassador seated himself upon another B^nch, the
Patriarch of the In^ies continued standin^: The King came followed by his
Grandees and sat down* and those w^ose right it was to sit down and be covered
did it. Don Pedro Colonna Secretary of State read with a loud voice the
Commission which our King had sent to the Marquess de Villars to assist at this
Ceremony in his stead. A little Silver Table was set before the King, on which
a Crucifix and the Gospel was placed. The King kneeling, set his right hand
upon the Book* all the while that the Cardinal read aloud the Oath which his
Majesty took to keep peace with France. When this was over, the Ambassador
approached and made a Complement to the King, who briefly answered him
according to the custom, and returned presently to his Apartment.

All the Court was now filled with joy: A Masquerade on Horseback was kept in
the great Cour^ of the Palace* it was divided into two Squadrons which ran
against one another. Prince Alexander Fa^^ese Brother to the Duke of Parma led
one and the Duke de Medina de las Torres led the other. The King named the
Constable of Castile and the Duke de Medina Celi to be Judges and Arbitrators
of the Course.

The Marquess Defiat arrived at Madrid from the part of Monsieur* to make his
Complements to the King of Spain. He received him very kindly and as a person
of his merit deserved: he went to Toledo to wait upon the Qu^en Mother, and
came back immediately. On the ninth of August a Courier from the Marquess de
(...) B^lbara^ arived at Madrid, who brought the happy ne^^ that the marriage
of the King with Mademoiselle had been solemnized at Fountainbleau, and this
gave occasion to the Masquerades on Horseback, and the bonefires that were to
be seen for three days together.

All this public rejoicing did not in the least diminish Don Iuan's
melancholy; and it is certain, the great perplexity of mind he was under very
much impaired his health, and the vigor of his constitution. He was at a stand
what party to take, for as he had too much bravery ever to think of giving way
to his enemies, so his credit was not strong enough to put him in capacity of
resisting them. In this violent condition, he was sensible enough tha^ he
should never be able to sustain the weight of his affliction, and to say the
truth, it cost him his life at last: But great men seldom complain when they
become the sport of fortune, and after their example Don Iuan expected his last
day with the constancy and steadiness of a Hero: His Tertian Ague seized him
again, and on the seventh of September he found himself so extremely ill, that
the Physicians acquainted the King that there was but little hopes of his
recovery. At this news his Majesty wept, and testified a sensible grief, He
ordered Cardinal P^rtocarer^ to go to him and learn what condition he was in;
he appeared but little concerned, and prepared himself for death like a ^ood
Christian and Philosopher: He comforted (...) his friends with a wonderful
presence of ^^nd, A man has lived long enough, said he to ^^em, when he dies
without having any thing to (...) him, I mean in r^la^ion to Honor: (...) for
what concerns my d^ty to God I have been too deficious, and the time of my
repentance cannot be too long. He received the Holy Viaticum, and the King
almost every other moment came into his Chamber, testifying a great deal of
friendship for him, and tenderly complained, that he would abandon him at a
juncture, when his assistance was become so necessary to him. Don Iuan made his
Will, by which he constituted the King his Heir, he left almost all his Jewels
to the young Queen, and the Queen Mother, and named Cardinal Portocarero, the
Duke de Medina Celi, the Duke of Alva, and the President of Castile to be his
Executors. He likewise gave order, that as soon as ever he was dead, they
should remove his Cabinet, which was filled with Papers of great importance,
out of his own Apartment to that of the King. This extreme illness of the
Prince put some stop to the public rejoycings that were resolved upon, and
particularly to a Bull-feast, but however it did not hinder them from making
fine artificial Fireworks in the Court of the Palace; nay he desired it
himself, although he was troubled with a furious pain in his Head, that might very
well be increased with the noise of Rockets and Crackers. All this while his
Physicians, who knew nothing of the profound melancholy wherein he was plunged,
punished his body for an indisposition, that was properly lodged in the mind^
and made him suffer a sort of martyrdom by the several torments they inflicted
upon him. In fine, this poor Prince died on the seventeenth of September 1679.
on the very same day that his Father Philip IV. did. He was born in 1626. and
abounded with a thousand good qualities. A little time after his birth, his
Mother received the habit of a Religious Woman from the hands of Pope Innocent
X. who was then the Pope's Nuncio to King Philip IV. this action of her
retiring out of the world, justified her from abundance of suspicions, which
people entertained upon the score of her imprudent conduct. The King did not
acknowledge him till the year 1642. He had the Grand Priory of Malta in Castile
bestowed upon him, and was sent against the Portugueses with the Title of
Generalissimo of the Armies by Sea and Land. After this he reduced the City of
Naples to its obedience, and went to Flanders to command the Troops there. He
was Governor of the Low Countries, of Burgundy and Char^lois; but he came back
to march once more against the Portugueses. After the de^^h of the King his
Father, he passed his time, as it above mentioned, at Consuegra, the ordinary
residence of the Grand Prior of Castile, and when the present King came to be
of age, he continued near him. On the twentyeth his body was carried to the
Escurial, and was interred in the Pa^theon, for so the place is called where
they lay the bodies of the Kings of Spain, but those of the Princes and
Princesses of the Royal Family are placed in a Vault which is not far from it;
nay they don't lay the bodies of the Queens of Spain in the Pantheon unless
they have had Children. He left a very beautiful Daught^r behind him, whom he
had by a Person of Gr^^t Quality. She is a Religiou^ among the Carm^lit^^ at
Madrid, who are called las Descaltas Re^les.

The first journey the King made after the death of Don Iuan was to go and
visit the Queen Mother, he parted the very same day from Madrid, and lay on the
way at Ara^juez, and arrived the next day at Toledo. The Queen received him
with great testimonies of tenderness, they mingled their Tears together as they
embraced one another, and dined, and afterward entertained one another a long
time in private. All those that accompanied the King, kissed her Majesty's
hand; so after the day was ag^eed upon for her to come back to Madrid, he left
her. We may easily believe, that she took but little time to prepare her self
for a journey that was so welcome to her. The King parted from Madrid on the
twenty seventh, he lay again at Aranj^^z and the next day he set forward to
meet the Queen on the way that leads to Toledo. As soon as they met, he desired
her to come into his Coach that they might discourse in private, and so he
brought her to Buen R^t^r^, which is one of the King's Houses situate at the
end of the City. There she rested her self for some time, till the House of the
Duke D^^eda could be fitted up for her, which it seems she chose to reside in,
because the Palace was not spacious enough to lodge the two Queens. It would be
an endless piece of trouble to reckon up all the Persons of Quality, besides
the vast multitudes of people that accompanied their Majesty's at their
arrival, and indeed this mighty alteration of fortune was very remarkable on
the Queen Mothers side. There was an universal joy for her return in the very
same City, where but two years ago Don Iuan was seen to enter as the Deliverer
of his Country, and the Queen to go out like a mere Fugitive under all the
weight of the public hatred. The King ^arried there till evening, and there
scarce passed a day over his head, from the time he went to meet the Queen
first on the Road, but he dined with her, and staid a long time in her company.

All the new Queens Family were just upon the point of going to meet her; the
Duchess de Terra Nova made great preparations, and since every body in a
manner envyed her for having so advantageous a Post, and Don Iuan her Protector
was dead, 'twas commonly believed that she would be obliged to resign it: but
she foresaw and prevented all this by taking possession of her Apartment in the
Palace, from whence it was not so easy a matter to eject her now, as it would
have been before. She departed on the twenty sixth of September with the
Marquess d' Ast^rgas, and the whole Family of the Queen except the Duke d'
Osso^e, whose equipage could not be got ready, because he was but just returned
from his banishment.

But before I carry on these Memoirs any farther, I judge it not amiss to speak
a few words of some of the Lords that belonged to the Court when I was there. I
shall particularly enlarge upon those that were of the Council of State, for it
will be no small satisfaction to the R^^der to know the Characters of those
persons, whose names he meets so frequently. I shall not here speak of the Duke
de M^dina Celi, nor of the Cons^able of Castile, neither do I pretend to name
them according to their rank and order, but shall only place them as they occur
first to my remembrance, and shall begin with.

The Duke of Alva or Dalbe of the Family of Toledo, he has a vast estate and a
considerable revenue, and yet for all that is not before hand in the world; he
enjoys several good places and a large pension at Court. He was a witty
obliging person, and showed but little kindness to the Queen Mother. He was 67.
years old.

Don Pedro de Arragon was formerly known by the name of the Marquess de P^bar,
he endeavored to relieve Perpig^^^, when he was General of the Horse, but had
the ill luck to fall into the hands of the French, amongst whom he continued a
Prisoner for some time. At his return to Madrid, the King made him Governor to
the Prince Don Bakazar his Son, who died by overheating himself, and was
afterward let blood in vain. The King upon this enraged against Don Pedro,
banished him. When the King was dead, the Queen Regent called him home and sent
him Ambassador to Rome. After this he was made Viceroy of Naples, where
according to the custom he heaped a great treasure together, and what is more
remarkable, knew how to keep it, for this is not the genius of that Nation. He
was 77. years old.

The Admiral of Castile of the family d' Henri^^^, descended from a Bastard of
the Kings of Castile, was a great Lord, and better shaped than any in the
Court: he was tall of statu^e and well proportioned, the air of his face was
great and noble, and he had a world of wit, was a of gentle easy deportment,
and had nothing to trouble him, but only his being 58. years old. He had an
excellent talent at writing of Verses, which flowed naturally from him, and in
these diversions he employed himself more than in his ^^^mestick affairs. He
was born a Libertine, and lived private, and could not fix himself so as to
make a regular Court either to the King or the Chief Minister. He was of
opinion that whatever is done by constraint cannot be recompensed by all the
favors of fortune, he communicated himself to a very few persons, whether it
were, because he had too exquisite and nice a taste to accommodate himself to
all the world, or because he was a lover of solitude, which the most delicious
Gardens and the finest House in Madrid recommended to him. Formerly he kept
some Mistresses, for whose sakes he almost ruined himself. He was Master of the
Horse to the King.

The Marquess d' Astorgas of the family d' Ozorio was in his time a person of
the greatest gallantry in the world, and notwithstanding the disadvantage of
being 68. years old, continued still to be so. He was of a cheerful lively
Spirit, and talked justly and well upon all occasions. He was Grand Master of
the young Queens Horse; his Lady having entertained an implacable jealousy and
hatred against a young beautiful woman, for whom he had an extraordinary
affection, found an occasion to kill her, took out her heart and made a Ragoo
of it. When her Husband had eaten part of it, she asked him how he liked it, he
answered very well. I am much surprised at it, says she, for it is the heart of
your Mistress, and immediately drew out her Head, all bloody as it was, from
under her Farthingal, and so threw it upon the Table, where he was with several
of his friends. It Is easy to imagine how ^^eply he was concerned at so
tragical a sight, she saved her self in a Convent, whither she retired full of
rage and jealousy, and never stirred out of it. The Marquess's affliction was
so great, that it had like to have made an end of him. He was exceeding rich.

The Prince de Stillano of the House of Gusman, and Duke de Medina de las
Torres, had abundance of wit, and if he had joined a little more experience to
his natural parts, had assuredly been capable of the greatest things. But he
was never out of Madrid, and lived an effeminate lazy life there, which
alienated his mind from all manner of business. He lived at la Floride near the
Gates of Madrid, where he had charming Gardens, and continued there under so
unconcerned a state, that he neither received nor made any visits, and never
endeavored to draw any advantages from the Court; he had a prodigious estate,
but for all that it was sufficiently entangled, for want of putting every thing
in order. When he married the Daughter of Duke d' Albe he ordered a Sedan to be
made for her all covered over with plates of Gold, and garnished with Coral;
but when it was finished, no body was found strong enough to carry it. He was
42. years old, and was deeply in the interests of the Queen Mother.

The Duke d' Ossone of the House de Giron was Master both of good and bad
qualities, that equally distinguished him. He loved his friends passionately,
and served them freely with his credit and purse, he was of a liberal temper,
and a great adorer of Ladies, sparing no cost to ingratiate himself with them;
he was an irreconcilable enemy, and withal was of a proud naughty imperious
humor, that made him insupportable to all the world; and yet his conversation
was diverting and pleasant enough, when he could leave off his grandeur and
Rhodomontadoes. He was a man of an inflexible steadiness, and always had some
quarrel or other in Court or City. He was one of the richest Noblemen in Spain,
and might be about 49. years old. He had been Vice Roy of Catalonia, Governor
of Milan, President of the Orders, and was Master of the Horse to the young
Queen.

The Count de Chinch^^ was formerly called Marquess de Bayon^a: He had been
General of the Spanish Galleys, was a brave man, he neither was rich, nor
desired to be so. He was 60. years old.

Don Vincente Gonzagua, Prince de Guastalla, had never been married, he was a
very polite witty person, and came very young to the Spanish Court, where he
ran through most of the considerable Posts, and always acquitted himself well
in them. He had been Viceroy of Catalonia and Sicily, and being a man of
singular integrity, Don Iuan caused him to come to him to Madrid, in order to
give him a place in the Council. He was 74. years old.

Don Louis Portocarero, Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo, possessed the
greatest Benefices in Spain. He was extremely rich, and his Archbishopric was
worth three hundred and sixty thousand Crowns per annum to him. He did
abundance of good in his station, was very obliging and courteous, of an easy
temper, and had the repute of being an honest man. He might be about 52. years
old.

The Marquess de Liche, who carried the name of de Haro Gusman, had two very
opposite qualities, he was liberal and yet covetous, he carried his
magnificence even to an excess, considering his rank in the world, but
especially toward his Mistresses; nevertheless he sometimes showed his
frugality in things that did him no credit. He had but an ordinary mein, and
was ill-favored, but was master of all the wit, penetration and vivacity
imaginable. He was a great Lord, full of ambition and so naturally forward and
adventurous, that they feared him at Court, and kept him always at a great
distance. He was Ambassador at Rome, and was 42. years old.

The Count de Monterey was Brother to the Marquess de Liche; more meddling in
all affairs. and no less ambitious, but more discreet, and more moderate,
gallant, liberal and witty. He had a great deal of experience, and people were
well contented with his conduct in the Government of Flanders. He was not above
40. years old. 'Twas observable, that he was well-shaped, and his Wife very
deformed, whereas the Marquess de Liche, his Brother, was very deformed, and
his Wife exceeding beautiful.

The Marquess de los Balbazez a Geniese, of the House of Spinola, was very
rich. He was not without justice reproached for falling into an excess in the
manag^ment of his domestic concerns. He married the Sister of the Constable
Colonna: The bigness and and figure of that Lady were very remarkable. It must
be owned that he had both zeal and capacity for the service of his Master. He
had been Governor of Milan, and afterward was Ambassador at Vienna and at
France, and Plenipotentiary at Nimeguen. He was 50. years old.

Don Diego Sarmiento was originally of Gallicia, his birth was not illustrious.
The Queen Mother protected him, and procured for him the place of Councellor of
State, because he was altogether devoted to her service. He was a person of
great abilities and prudence, and reckoned to be 58. years old.

The Duke de Villa-Hermosa of the House of Borgia, mightily increased his
fortunes during his stay in Flanders, where he was Governor. He passed for a
person of great bravery, and had the Character of a sweet-tempered affable man.
He was not very rich, and might be about 50. years old.

Don Melchior Navarra owed his elevation to his good fortune, and to the Queen
Mother. He was a man of great merit and knowledge, and was a member of the
Council Royal. He left Spain in the year 1680. to be Viceroy of Peru, and was
supposed to be 50, years old.

The Marquess de Los-Velez was Son to the Marchioness de Los-Velez, who had
been Gover^^nte to the King: he married the Sister of the Duchess de Medina
Celi, he was Viceroy of Naples, and made himself to be beloved there for his
good qualities. He was master of a great fortune, but of greater virtues, and
was but 30. years old.

The Count d' Oropeza, who carries the name of Toledo conjunctly with that of
Portugal, was young and not above 30. years old. His stature was somewhat of
the lowest, otherwise he was well enough made as to his person, of a smiling
agreeable countenance, and a sweet and infinuating conversation, open in
appearance, but in effect very reserved and close, not always speaking as he
thought, and generally intent upon nothing but to deceive and amuse. He
pretended to be devout, and under the exterior show of unconcernedness for the
world concealed his great ambition, to which he might be prompted perhaps by
his illustrious birth: he was of the House of Portugal, and presumptive Heir of
that Kingdom in case the King had no Children. The King at that time loved him
exceedingly, and this love has been since wonderfully increased; he is become a
Favorite and chief Minister.

The Marquess de Mansera had been formerly sent. Ambassador into Germany, and
afterward was made Viceroy of New Spain, where he enriched himself, and came
back to Madrid: he was of so unhealthful a constitution, that he could not fill
the chief places of the Government, which otherwise he might have done, being a
person of great capacity, in regard of his experience and judgment. He was 59.
years old.

The Duke d' Albuquerque was General at Sea, he was very brave, and was not
destitute of wit. He married the Daughter of his Eldest Brother to keep up the
name of his Family, which was that of Cueva, and was very ancient. He might be
about 48. years old.

Don Iuan Ieronimo d' Eguya was born at Gesue, but his family was of Nav^^re,
and his Father had been Gentleman to the Duke de Turcis: he was well shaped and
agreeable, had abundnace of wit, and lived in the quality of a Page to Don
Pedro Fernandez del Campo, Secretary of State: his Master loved him
exceedingly, and made him his chief Commissary. He afterward rose to be
Secretary; for Don Pedro del Campo not being in the good graces of Valenzuela,
d' Eguya was chosen to officiate in his place by a Commission, and after some
time had the good fortune to get it for himself, for he, to whom it belonged,
died of grief because he was not permitted to exercise it any longer. The King
had a great kindness for him, and he behaved himself toward his Majesty with
all the Address imaginable. His Office was under the King's apartment, he was
called Secretary of State and del Despacho Universal. He was never of the
Council: his employment directly fastened him to the person of the King and
chief Minister. He kept the Bolfillo, without being obliged to give up his
accounts. Now these are the fines that come to the King, as well from Spain as
the Indies; they amount to a prodigious sum, and are employed for secret
services, either by way of presents or pensions.

All these persons, whom I have mentioned, were very eminent and considerable,
and possessed the Chief Offices and greatest employments.

There is another Class of Courtiers still behind, which is only composed of
young Lords, who are there called Guaps, as we call them in France les petits
M^^tres. The most witty and wellshaped among these are reckoned to be the Duke
d' V^zeda, the Marquess de Penaranda, the Count d' Altamire, the Sons of the
Duke de Cessa, the Prince de Montoleon; Don Antonio and Don Francisco de
Toledo, Sons of the Duke Dalbe, and Don Fernand de Toledo his Nephew, the two
Silva Brothers to the Duke de Pastrane, the Marquess de Leyva, the Duke de
Medina Sidonia, the Marquess de Quintana, and the Son of the Duke de Medina
Celi. Although the eldest of these Lords is not above 25. years old, yet they were
most of them married; for they take care in Spain to make themselves acquainted
with his Godship Hymen, as soon as is possible.

And now as for the Ladies, I shall only say in general, that there is no place
in the world where they have a greater share of vivacity and wit, and a better
talent to please, than they have in Spain; amongst these, without reckoning the
Maids of Honor that belonged to the two Queens, the most remarkable for wit
were the Dutchesses Dalbuquerque, de Terra Nova, d' Ossone, de Frias, de Medina
Celi, d' Hijar, de Pastrane, and the Countesses de Monterey and de Villambrosa;
for beauty the Marchioness de Liche, the Princess de Montelion the Marchioness
de la Roche, the Countess de Penaranda, the Princess Stillano, the Duchess d'
Osseda, the Wife of Don Pedro of Arragon, that of Don Henrique Henriques, and
the Marchioness de la Puebla. The constraint wherein they live, the climate of
the Country and their own natural temper carry them to gallantry on course.
They are for the most part little, lean and slender, their skin is swarthy,
soft, and painted, their features regular, their eyes full of fire, their hair
black and in great abundance, and their feet small to admiration. Their habit
sits so ill upon them, that unless one has been long accustomed to it, she can
scarce know how to endure it. The men are no less disadvantageously apparalled;
they always come to Court in their Golilia and a black Cloak and hanging
sleeves, and although they be never so well shaped and handsome, with fine heads of
hair and good features, yet their awkward way of dressing and parting their
hair on one side of their face, and throwing it behind their ears, does
abominably disfigure them.

This digression has caused me to interrupt the series of these Memoirs, but
now to reassume my discourse, I must inform my Reader, that the good
understanding which passed between the King and the Queen Mother, occasioned
abundance of people to make their court to the latter. They looked upon her as
a Princess, who had assumed all her former Authority, for the King was still
young, and had need of good counsel, and his Mother being accustomed to Govern,
was for all sorts of reasons more capable to direct him than any one besides.
Nay it was commonly believed, that she would not be displeased to take the
Government again into her hands, and so some by inclination, and others out of
policy endeavored to get into her favor, in order to obtain some place or
other under the new Ministry, that was going to be formed, as well upon the
score of her return, as the arrival of the young Queen.

The world had reason to believe, that the face of affairs would be absolutely
changed, and therefore every one thought of himself in the present conjuncture.
It Is true abundance of persons that were very well read in politics, judged
that the Queen Mother would not perhaps manage the Reins of the Government,
they pretended that this would be always a weighty and troublesome Charge, that
she had been of late years accustomed to ease and quietness, and having
undergone all the varieties of an uncertain fortune, she was afraid of seeing
her self exposed to them the second time; that there was hopes she would
dissuade the King from taking a chief Minister, and that she would be forward
enough to make him conceive an aversion for one; that to effect this she only
needed to put him in mind of the sorry figure he made, when Don Iuan had such
an authority over him, and that in fine she would endeavor to form a Junta,
which should be composed of her own Creatures; that this would be the true way
to Reign, without making her self responsible for any events; that all her
Orders would be punctually executed, and yet she not appear to have any hand in
them. I ought to acquaint my Reader, that a Iunta is an extraordinary Council
of State, which the Kings of Spain erect to remedy the pressing necessities of
the State: For example, Philip IV. by his last Will created a Iunta to serve
and assist the Queens Council during the minority of the King his Son.

Thus people searched after, and as easily found out the Lords who were to
compose this Iunta; the hatred or the friendship of those persons that made
reflections upon the present affairs enriched or impoverished those they had a
mind to; they bestowed Offices and took them away, they made vows to no
purpose, and had effectual fears and apprehensions upon them: In a word, all
these busy Spirits were divided upon the point, and the most quiet among them
found themselves somewhat concerned for what was to come. But the Queen Mother
made no stir, she seemed in appearance to have no other thoughts than how to
establish her self in the favor of the King her Son, and serve her self in the
same condition.

This young Prince was passionately in love, and was sensible of all the
pleasure that accompanies those agreeable Ideas, that love uses to inspire, and
flattered himself to see all his expectations suddenly crowned; the possessing
a Princess, who was already become so dear to him, employed his heart to such a
degree, that he could think of nothing else. He pressed the time of his
departure that he might be the sooner with her.

The arrival of the Courier, who brought the news, that the Queen was advanced
toward the frontiers was expected with extreme impatience. The Marquess de los
Balbazez sent them word exactly on what day she was to arrive at Irun: while
she was in the territories of France the Kings Household waited upon her. The
Prince d' Harcourt accompanied her in quality of Ambassador Extraordinary and
the Princess his Wife likewise made the journey. The Mareshal de Clerambant's
Lady who was Governness to her, waited upon her as Lady of Honor, Mademoiselle
de Grance as Lady of the Wardrobe, and this place has left her the name of
Madam instead of that of Mademoiselle. Nothing was omitted in any of the Cities
through which her Majesty passed, to receive her with a respect suitable to her
high rank, and we may say she so much set off the grandeur of her Birth by her
natural beauty, and by her engaging and courteous deportment; that all France
was sensibly grieved to lose her.

One of the first persons that took the freedom to speak to the Queen and give
her advice was a Religious Theatin, called Father Vintimiglia. He was born in
Sicily of an Illustrious Family, and was Brother to the Count de Prade who
happened to be Governor of Palermo at the time when that City revolted in the
late troubles. He had been seized, and people thought it would have cost him
his head, but he got the favor to be sent to Madrid to justify himself; his
Brother the Theatin went along with him to assist him with his credit. He was a
bold hardy adventurous man, and devoted himself entirely to Don Iuan, and his
zeal for that Prince carried him so far, that in some of his Sermons he spoke
of the Queen Mother with very little respect. This Father departed from Madrid,
in company with the Duke d' Ossone, and tho he had not now any hopes of being
made the Queens Confessor, as he had before the death of Don Iuan, yet he could
not forbear to go as far as Bayonne to salute her; his deportment, his birth,
and his knowledge of the French tongue, which he spoke perfectly well, because
he had resided a long time at Paris, procured him access enough to the young
Queen to take his opportunity of prepossessing her with some suspicions and
jealousies against the Queen her Mother in Law, and the French Ambassador. By
this piece of conduct he did not only design to injure those persons who had
formerly been enemies to Don Iuan, but he had a particular aim, that personally
respected himself, and wherein his ambition had by much the upper hand of his
discretion: and that was to persuade the Queen to endeavor the erecting of a
Iunta, that was to depend solely upon her. He told her, that in order to bring
this design about, she was to choose the Duke d' Ossone to be a member of it,
because he was a person of consummate abilities, and besides had a great zeal
for her Majesty, he took care to reckon himself in the number of the Ministers,
and could not forbear to write a Scheme of the Government; the memoirs of which
he gave to the Duke d' Harcourt, to the end that he might present them to the
Queen, but it is very probable, he never showed them to her Majesty.

The Queen was now advanced as far as St. Iohn-de-Luz, and she departed from
thence about one a clock in the afternoon on the third of November, followed by
the Guards an Corpse of the King. She came to a wooden house that was purposely
prepared for her, it was gilded and painted within and without, there was a
great Hall in it, a Chamber, and a moveable Closet of Crimson-Damask with
Galloon and a rich Lace of Gold and Silver. This house was situate upon the
brink of the River de Bidassoa which parts France from Spain. As soon as the
Queen arrived there, she put on a most sumptuous Habit, then coming into the
Hall, she took part of a noble Collation: There she staid a little, and
afterward retired into her Chamber, after this she ascended a Scaffold, and
placed her self in a Chair of State under a noble Canopy; at this very moment
she was seized with an air of melancholy which showed what a regret she had to
be so near leaving France. The Prince d' Harcourt placed himself at her right
hand, the Princess d' Harcourt at her left, the Mareshal de Clerambaut's Lady
and Madam de Grance behind her Chair. Monsieur de Saintot went to inform the
Marquess d' Astorgas of it, who was Major D^no to the Queen. He was in a Boat
upon the River, near a little Island, which the Treaty of the Pyrantes has
rendered since so famous, and which was joined to the Queen's House by a Bridge
of Communication. The Guards de Corpse formed themselves into several Squadrons
in this place. The Marquess was waiting for his orders in this Boat, which was
very magnificent, and was prepared on purpose to carry her Majesty over to the
other side.

As soon as he was informed that the Queen expected him, he set foot upon the
ground, and fourscore persons, Gentlemen, Pages, or Valets marched on foot
before him, he threw himself immediately at the feet of the Queen, kissed her
hand, made her a Complement, got up again, and covered himself, without staying
for the Queen to say any thing to him. The Prince d' Harcourt covered himself
likewise at the same time. The Marquess spoke to her all the while in Spanish,
and presented her Majesty with two Letters from the King and Queen Mother; but
before he gave them, he touched them upon his Forehead, his Eyes, his Mouth,
and his Heart, as the fashion is. The Queen told him she was extremely glad
that the King her Husband had given him the charge of conducting her. After
this the old Marquess turned himself toward the Prince d' Harcourt, and made
him a Complement, who answered that he had orders from the King his Master to
deliver the Queen of Spain into his hands. Monsieur de Chateanneu^ Counselor
of the Parliament of Paris, read the Act of Deliverance in French; and Don
Alancon, Caruero, Secretary of State, read the Act of Reception in Spanish. The
Marquess presented several persons of Quality to her Majesty, who kissed her
hand kneeling down upon one Knee. The Bishop of Pampelune kissed her hand, but
did not kneel. The Queen did not press to depart, but the Marquess informed her
that it was high time to march; she immediately arose, placing him on her right
hand and a M^nin of Honor on her left, upon whose shoulder she leaned, for he
was a young Boy, and thus she advanced toward the Bridge. The Duchess de
Terra Nova met her just about the middle, and kissed her hand with the Ladies
of the Palace that followed her, who threw themselves all at her feet. After
the Duchess had made her Complement, she presented several Spanish Ladies to
the Queen. Monsieur de Repair, Lieutenant of the King'sGuards duCorps, who
carried the Queens Train, gave it to the Duchess. The Queen entered into the
Boat along with her, her Chamber was glazed all over; and thus being all alone
with this old Dame, she cast her eyes frequently toward that side of the
Kingdom which she had quitted, and her languishing air sufficiently testified
by what commotions she was agitated within. Twenty four Seamen placed in two
Barques drew the Boat along, and the Spanish Horse discharged their Musquetoons
and Pistols as soon as it began to move, the artillary of Fontarabia answered
them with a great firing. The Prince and Princess d' Harcourt, the other Ladies
and all the Queens Attendants passed over in Boats that were prepared on
purpose. The Queen setting foot upon the Ground toward the evening, found her
own Coach, her Litter, and a Chair with abundance of men in Liveries; she
placed her self in her Chair, and twenty Valets on foot lighted the way with
long Flambeaux of White Wax: when they came to Irun, Te Deum was sung, and this
was the first time her Supper was served after the Spanish fashion; the repast
was so little and so ill dressed, that she was extremely surprised at it, and
could scarce eat at all.

Alas! that a young Princess bred up in the most magnificent and refined Court
in the World should be forced to pass so many sorrowful melancholy moments. She
had always had the liberty hitherto to eat in public, and it had not been
denied to her upon the way; she danced, she rode on Horseback, she knew and
esteemed those that were her Companions, and they (if I may use the expression)
adored her. And now she found her self all on a sudden amongst persons whom
she knew not, and consequently could not appear amiable enough to divert her
grief, she understood so very little of their language, that she could not tell
what they meant, or return them any answer without trouble; then besides all
this, the manner wherein they served her appeared so strange, and carried so
small a resemblance to that of France, that she was not a little discomposed at
it. All was Ceremony, all was Restraint and Affection; from the very first day
she appeared amongst them, the Spaniards expected she should know and do every
thing as readily as themselves, who had been learning them the better part of
their lives. They never considered the difference between the two Nations, that
are opposite to one another in every punctilio, but believing that her Majesty
ought immediately to be made acquainted with their way of living, which she was
religiously to observe for the rest of her life, they dispensed with her in
nothing, so that from that time she suffered a kind of slavery, to which the
rigid humor of her Camarera Major contributed very much; but the natural
sweetness of the Queens temper, and her prudence made her receive all these
things, that naturally fatigued and displeased her, with a world of patience.

Nevertheless one would have been apt to conclude, that out of mere policy the
Duchess de Terra Nova ought to have managed the good disposition of the Queen
after another manner, especially since having no interest in her at present,
she ought by a courteous deportment to have gained her favor, because she had
so great a number of considerable enemies; and the greatest part of the Court
Ladies were desirous of her place. The Prince who advanced her to this Post,
was already dead, all appearances seemed to predict her fall, and she her self
was very apprehensive of it. However she took different measures from what any
body would have thought she ought to observe, for instead of showing any
complaisance to her young Mistress, she became a spy upon her actions, so that
by this means she might merit the King's favor. She studied all her
inclinations, and her humor, she frequently caused some French women, that
followed her to Madrid to be entertained, she drew strange consequences from
the slightest occasions, and every thing became poison in her hands. She
likewise drew for her self a Plan of the conduct she was to follow, and this
effectually hindered her from being turned out of her Post.

She was not only content with taking these remote measures to ingratiate her
self with the King, but likewise was of opinion, that to secure her own
interests, she was to hinder the young Queen from ever having any friendly
correspondence with the Queen Mother, or reposing any confidence in her:
because her party being absolutely opposite to that of Don Iuan, it was natural
to believe that the first sacrifice she would demand of her Daughter in Law,
would be the removal of the Camarera, who was the Creature of her Enemy.
Besides she could not flatter her self, that the young Queen would refuse to
give the Queen Mother this proof her complaisance, at a conjuncture that would
deliver her from a sort of a Governess, whom she had no great reason to love;
thus she could not think of a better expedient to support her self, than by
possessing the Queen, that the Queen Mother was her secret enemy; that she
would oppose her in every thing; that she could never forget that she was in
part the cause that the marriage of the Arch Duchess her Granddaughter was
not consummated with the King her Son; that she was always uneasy because she
had not that ascendant, as she desired, over the King's affections; that she
was resolved to keep her under a subjection that was more befitting a Daughter
in Law, than the Spouse of so great a Monarch.

To effect this more easily, she had instructed some persons that stood very
near the Queen, who acted their parts well enough. When they first took the
liberty to discourse her about this affair, she thought them to be altogether
devoted to her service, and their pretended tears seemed to engage for the
sincerity of their apparent zeal, What have you lost Madam, would they say to
her sometimes with a mournful air, What have you lost by the Death of Don Iuan?
What would not he have done to please you? If it had not been for him the King
had married the Arch Duchess, and his breaking off that Match drew abundance
of mortal enemies upon him. Now if you could promise your self, that the
Ambassador of France would prove faithful to you, you might find some
consolation in him, you might follow his advice, and profit your self by his
directions; but considering his present dispositions, Heaven preserve you,
Madam, from taking his Counsel: Alas, he quarrelled with Don Iuan only upon the
Queen Mothers account, he clearly declared himself for her in his first
Embassy, and she reposes an entire confidence in him. Thus your Majesty cannot
show your self too great a stranger to such a Minister, that will never go
cordially along with you, and who will penetrate into your private sentiments
for no other reason, than only to make an ill use of them. The Queen was
extremely alarmed at the things they told her, and knew not which way to
determine her self, being so young, and having no experience in this new world,
where she was acquainted with no body.

She departed from Irun, and lay that night at Hernani. The next day she
mounted on Horseback, followed by the Duchess de Terra Nova, who made but a
sorry figure upon her Mule; Madam de Grance accompanied her. The Marquess d'
Astorgas, and the Duke d' Ossone, with each a pair of Spectacles upon their
Nose, as is the fashion of the Grandees, bore their shares in the Cavalcade.
The Marquess placed himself next her Majesty, because she was to be his charge
till she saw the King; but the Duke pretended a right to the same place, as
being Master of the Horse, and so took it by force, menacing the Marquess very
haughtily. This dispute obliged the Queen to take Coach again. She lay that
night at Tolosette, where as soon as she was arrived, the Duke d' Ossone
arrested the Guard, who had abused his Coachman, because he would not suffer
the Coach of the Marquess d' Astorgas to go before his. This quarrel was
renewed upon the discharging of their Offices; the Marquess pretended, that all
the honors of the Queens Reception belonged to him; the Duke maintained that
he being Master of the Horse, ought therefore to have all the pre-eminences in
her House. To decide the matter, they were forced to write to the King about
it, who decided it in favor of the Marquess. The Duke not thinking himself
justly dealt with, continued his pretensions still, but this obstinacy drew an
Order upon him to return to Madrid, with a prohibition to pass through Burgos,
where the King was at that time.

In effect, the King left Madrid on the twenty second of October, being but
slenderly accompanied. The Duke de Medina Celi, Lord Chamberlain, the
Constable, and Don Joseph de Silva were all three in his Coach; as for the
Admiral of Castile he did not go along with them, for he pretended that for
want of money he was not in a capacity to fit out an answerable equipage: there
might indeed be something of truth in this pretense; but it is certain, that
his natural laziness was the real occasion, he loved his pleasure, he shunned
all trouble, and carefully avoided whatever might make him uneasy, and this
was the true reason why he did not meet the King and Queen till they were
within a days journey of Madrid. The King continued fifteen days at Burgos,
because he was extremely troubled with a Cold, in the mean time the Queen
advanced forwards by small journeys. She wrote to him several times, and he
answered her again. Her Majesty was forced to send to him to demand leave to
dine in public, and sometime to ride on Horseback; for those two terrible
Creatures the Marquess d' Astorgas, and the Camarera Major would not consent to
it, till they had received positive Orders. He granted it very freely, and she
sent to him in this place a Watch beset with Diamonds, and a Cravat with a Knot
of a fire color. He immediately put on the Cravat, and ordered five hundred
Pistols to be given to the Gentleman who brought him the Present.

The Count d' Altamire, Grandee of Spain; came to Ognate to complement the
Queen from the King, and presented her with Bracelet of Diamonds and Rubies.
She arrived on the eleventh to Victoria, where a lamentable Comedy was prepared
to Regale her. There it was that she dressed her self first a l' Espagnolle, and
she appeared no less beautiful and charming in that, than in her French Habit.
She went likewise to the Great Church, where the Bishop of Calahorra received
her at the Gate, and held the Canopy over her, she afterward was pleased to go
and see a Bull-feast in the Marketplace, but there was little or no
magnificence in the sight, because it was only performed by Citizens. She
received in this place a pair of Pendants for the Ears, with Pearls to them of
a Pear fashion, this present was sent to her from the Queen Mother, and was
valued at four hundred thousand Livers.

Monsieur the Ambassador of France came to wait upon her at Bribiesca, and tho
he tarried but a little time with her, and their Conversation was but short,
yet he could very easily observe that she expressed a great uneasiness, and a
particular distrust of him; he could not penetrate into the reason of it,
however he presently judged that these dispositions were not natural to her, he
told her several things that might be serviceable to her, he advised her not to
amuse her self with the different impressions that any persons might endeavor
to make upon her, that she ought to consider that the greatest part of those
that waited on her only minded their own proper interests, that her surest way
would be to love the King cordially, and so by that means engage him to love
her; to unite her self to the Queen Mother, and concert all affairs with her;
that she ought to rest satisfied, that that Princess had a great kindness for
her, and that if she took care to make suitable returns, she would find the
affections of a true Mother in her. The young Queen was already prepared for
this discourse, and particularly for what concerned the Queen Mother. She had
been tampered with upon that point before, but if she had seriously examined
what he spoke to her, she had soon been made sensible, as she was a person of
extraordinary wit, that the Ambassador dealt plainly with her, and that whoever
persuaded her to the contrary, endeavored to disunite her from her real
interests. He took his leave of her, and went back to the King at Burgos, and
during this short time he had the honor to discourse with her, she still
entertained him with great coldness and indifferency.

The Prince d' Harcourt was advanced as far as Burgos to salute the King; and
since the Queen was to come to Quintanapalla, which is within three leagues of
it, it was generally supposed that she would come to lie there on the
nineteenth of November, and that the Ceremony of the Marriage would be there
solemnized: But the Marquess de Villars, having met, as he was coming back, the
Patriarch of the Indies who was going to meet the Queen, it came immediately
into his head, that the Marriage might perhaps be consummated, without his
being informed of it; this thought made him inquire the news of Don Geronimo d'
Eguya, Secretary of State, who only told him, that the Queen was expected the
next day at Burgos. This doubtful answer, which had nothing positive in it,
obliged our Ambassador to inform himself still more particularly, and he
understood at last that the King was to go the next day to Quintanapalla to
celebrate the Marriage. Being assured of this, he took care to send advice of
it to the Prince d' Harcourt, and they departed together soon enough to be with
the Queen before the King arrived thither.

When they came there, they found it no difficult matter to discover, that the
Spaniards desired to have the Marriage solemnized without them. The Camarera
Major, who was altogether of that opinion, and to whom they spoke with
abundance of honest freedom, told them coldly that they were not to assist at
the Ceremony, and that the King would have no body be there, except only those
whose presence was indispensably necessary, such as the chief Officers, and
some Gentlemen of the Bedchamber. The Prince d' Harcourt and the Marquess de
Villars answered, that the King their Master had given them Orders to be
present at it. She fiercely replied, that the King their Master had nothing to
do to command in Spain. Monsieur de Villars told her that the King his Master
was used to command his Ambassadors, and that they would obey him in every
thing; that if the King was not willing to have them assist at his Marriage, he
ought to signify to them by an order in writing that they were not to be
there. The Camarera ravished with joy that she had an opportunity to show her
zeal for the King of Spain, although this was a very improper time for it, was so
far transported with the matter, and spoke several things so incoherent and so
fierce, that the Ambassadors left her and addressed themselves to the Marquess
d' Astorgas; he patiently listened to them, and told them ingenuously that he
would immediately dispatch a Gentleman to the King to know his pleasure herein.
This Gentleman found him on the way, and he consented that the Messieurs d'
Harcourt and Villars should assist at the Ceremony. In short it was occasioned
by the industrious diligence of some persons who had no inclination to the
French, that this thought was insinuated into the King: They were of opinion,
that so August a Marriage ought not to be Celebrated in a poor Village, where
there were not above a dozen Houses, and their Spanish vanity was so extremely
offended at it, as to desire that the Ambassadors of so great a King might not
be witnesses of so great a negligence, not to say misery. And now, to excuse
the matter, they gave out that the King was young and amorous, that every thing
that hastened the pleasure of seeing his Spouse touched him so sensibly, that he
even forgot the magnificence and grandeur of his Rank; that love alone made up
the Honors of his Feast, and that the King thought this alone sufficient. The
Queen having passed the night at Quintanapalla, about ten a clock in the
morning was told that the King was arrived; this news caused a small emotion in
her, and spread a color upon her Cheeks that made her still appear more
beautiful and lovely. She went to receive him in her Spanish dress, and having
met him as he was just going to enter her Antichamber, she would have thrown
her self several times at his feet, and kissed his hand, but he hindered her
still and saluted her after the Spanish fashion, that is, without kissing her,
but pressing her arms close with his two hands, and calling her often Mireina,
Mireina, my Queen, my Queen. They discoursed together a long time, without
being able to understand one another, and this was certainly no little pain to
them. Monsieur Villars, who perceived it, advanced forward to serve as an
Interpreter; if he did not say every thing they said, it is at least very
certain that he spoiled nothing of their conversation, and that he mingled a
great deal of tenderness, and passion with it. The King was dressed a la
Scombergue, which is properly after the French mode, and all his attendants
were clad after the same manner: For the campaign habits of the Spaniards
somewhat resemble ours.

The Marquess de Villars having observed that the Grandees of Spain took the
right hand, spoke to the King about it, and represented to him, the rank the
Marquess de los Balbazez had given to him at Fountainbleau, when the Queen was
espoused there. This reason prevailed, so the King ordered the Ambassadors of
France to be treated after the same manner. The Constable of Castile could not
be brought to quit his place without some trouble; he had still a small dispute
upon the point, which continued a little time between the Ambassador and him,
however civility was still preserved on both sides, and the rest of the
Grandees placed themselves behind the King. Don Antonio de Benavidez y Bazan,
Patriarch of the Indies and Grand Almoner gave them a second benediction; the
Ceremony was performed incognito in the Queens Antichamber: If the Archbishop
of Burgos had not been indisposed, he had performed this Office. Whilst Mass
was saying, they put a Ribbond of black Taffaty about the King and Queen, tied
up in a true Lovers knot, and a white Gauze with a Silver Fringe upon the
King's Shoulders, and over the Queens Head. The Duchess de Terra Nova held up
her Train. When the Ceremony was over, the King and Queen withdrew into a
Chamber by themselves, where they continued two hours alone: they dined
afterward in public, and parted from thence to go and lie at Burgos. There
was no body with them in the Coach, and since they did understand one another
but very little, one can scarce imagine what they said, however the King
appeared very amorous and affectionate; several Grandees of Spain went before
their Majesty's with very stately Liveries, and accompanied them to the Palace,
where a Comedy was acted, and artificial Fireworks were to be seen.

The next day the King came to a rich Abbey of Nuns, that are called Las
Huelgas, which is not much beyond the Suburbs of Burgos: She dined there, and
about three a Clock made her entry on Horseback, being dressed after the Spanish
mode, but appeared so beautiful and charming, that she ravished the hearts of
all the spectators. Three Grandees marched before her, the Marquess d' Astorgas
followed her; a Canopy was carried over her head; the Old Duchess de Terra
Nova rode upon a Mule, and the Maids of Honor accompanied her on Horseback. On
the twenty second of November Prince d' Harcourt made his entry, and had
Audience of the King and Queen; after Dinner there was a Bull-feast, which
pleased the Queen exceedingly, because the Cavaliers showed extraordinary
dexterity and courage in the performance. The day following she saw the
Parejas, that is to say, an Horserace, in which nothing is observeable, but
that two men who start together, ride even without going a step one before the
other, although they ride full speed: Sixty Gentlemen clad in Silver Brocard ran
after this manner.

After they had thus spent three days in different pleasures and diversions, it
was high time to think of going to Madrid; most of the French Gentlemen and
Ladies that followed the Queen took leave of her in this place, so that the
greatest part of the Household went back to France; but this was not done
without shedding abundance of Tears. The Queen had the liberty still to keep
with her her two Nurses, two Women of the Chamber, some Valets de Chamber, a
Gentleman to look after five or six English Horses she had ordered to be
brought with her, and some other Officers for her Table. She presented the
Prince and Princess d' Harcourt, the Mareshal de Clerembaut's Lady, and Madam
de Grance with her Picture enriched with Diamonds of different prices,
according to the Quality of the persons to whom she gave them: and the obliging
manner wherewith she knew how to accompany her liberalities augmented the price
of them exceedingly. They pretend that the present the King made the Prince d'
Harcourt was worth twenty hundred thousand Crowns, but it fell much short of
it; the Queen got a Pension of two thousand Crowns for Madam de Grance, which
was to be paid her wherever she lived.

The Princess d' Harcourt, and the other Ladies that followed the Queen went
back to France, while she and the King took the way to Madrid, being both by
themselves, and sat in the back part of the Coach. Several Officers of the
Household went before, and marched by different Roads to avoid an embarras; the
Counts d' Arcos, and de Talara, Don Joseph de Silva, and the Duke d' Hijar,
Gentlemen of the Chamber, were named by the King to accompany him in his
journey; he came back the very same way as he went to Burgos; he lay at Lerma,
at Aranda, at St. Stephen de Gormas, and at Guadalajara: The Nuncio and the
Venetian Ambassador came thither to make their Complements to the Queen: The
next day their Majesty's arrived at Torrejon, which is within three leagues of
Madrid.

All the while that the Court was on the way from Burgos to this place, the
Camarera Major frequently discoursed the King in private: She found it no
difficult matter to insinuate those sentiments into him, that are so natural to
the Spaniards, and he had for his share been educated in a Country where they
make no reckoning of a Ladies virtue, unless they take away from her all
opportunities of trangressing. She represented to him the ill consequences of
that liberty which the women are allowed in France; that it was absolutely
necessary for the Queen to live after the retired manner that those of her sex
observe at Madrid; that she was young, lively, and of a brillant spirit,
accustomed to the French fashions; that what is innocent in one place may
become criminal in another; but if he would be pleased to confide in her, she
would by her great diligence prevent every thing. The King commended her zeal,
and gave her sufficient assurances of his confidence.

The Queen Mother was arrived at Torrejon before the King; she quitted her
Apartment to go and meet their Majesty's; when the King saw her, he ran to her
and embraced her very tenderly; the young Queen advanced forward at the same
time to kiss he^ hand, but the Queen Mother would not suffer it: She took her
between her Arms, and embraced her several times with great testimonies of
friendship, treating her still by the name of Her Majesty; but the young Queen
told her, that she requested her to call her Daughter, and love her as one, and
to be persuaded that she had all those dutiful sentiments for her, that might
make her worthy of this Honor. The King gave her his hand on one side, and the
Queen Mother on the other; and thus going between them she entered the Palace,
that had been prepared to receive them. The Queen Mother perceiving that the
Queen had never a Muff, presented her with her own, about which was a great
knot of Diamonds: afterward she took from her a Ribbond that tied some of her
Tresses, and in exchange put upon her Arm a Bracelet that was computed to be
worth three thousand Pistols. In a word, she showed the Queen all marks of her
good inclinations to her, from which she might promise her self all happy
consequences. She staid with their Majesty's as long as she could, but went
home that evening, because this place had not conveniences enough to receive
her. The next day which was the second of December, the King and Queen arrived
at Madrid, in a Coach with the Curtains open, that they might be seen by the
people. They went down to our Ladies Datocha, where Te Deum was sung, and at
night lay at Buen-Retiro; the next day a Comedy was acted, and some French
Musicians, that followed the Queen, prepared some Opera's.

The Duchess de Terra Nova being resolved to take entirely from the Queen that
little liberty that remained to her, and desiring to continue sole Mistress of
her Majesty's Will, declared when she was arrived at Buen-Retiro, that no body,
of what quality or condition soever, should see the Queen till after she had
made her public entry. This was a sorrowful state, and a heavy restraint to
the young Queen to find her self thus all on a sudden shut up from those
persons, that either might have afforded her some consolation, or diversion, or
useful advice. She kept her in this solitary condition at Retiro, without
permitting her so much as to go out of her Apartment. All the entertainment
they regaled her with, was to see long fulsom tedious Comedies, little of which
she understood; and the terrible Camarera was incessantly before her eyes, with
a severe affected air, and never laughed, but was perpetually finding fault with
something or other. She was a professed enemy to all manner of pleasure, and
she treated her Mistress with as much Authority, as a Governess would use
toward a little Girl.

The Marquess de Villars knew all that passed, and was mightily concerned at
it, but it was not time as yet to speak of it. He sent to the Duchess de Terra
Nova to know whether he might have leave to salute the Queen, she answered him
just as she did all the rest of the world, that she was not to be seen till
after the Entry was over. This answer he looked upon to be so positive, that
not desirous to run the risque of meeting a second refusal, he was forced to
acquiesce: but the Queen being informed of what had happened by some of the
French women that still continued with her, could not forbear to acquaint the
King with it, and obtained leave to see our Ambassador de secreto, that is to
say, as a private person. She immediately took care to inform him of it; and
the Marchioness de Villars imagining that she might likewise have the favor of
the same privilege, sent to the Camarera Major to know whether she might be
admitted to wait upon the Queen, but she received the same answer that Monsieur
the Ambassador had received from her before, saying in a few words, she had no
order to let her in. The Gentleman that discoursed the matter with her, still
insisted that she had something of moment to say to her; it is all one, says the
Camarera, I Will never suffer any new customs to be introduced within these Walls.

Her Majesty not knowing what had passed between the Camarera and the
Ambassador's Lady, charged her Confessor to tell her, that she desired to see
her, and that she would extremely oblige her by making her a visit. But she was
not in a capacity to obey the Orders she had received, and the Confessor being
informed what obstacles stood in the way, very fairly gave the Queen an account
of all. She was not a little troubled at the ill services the Duchess had done
her; and one may be able to judge by these few instances what an absolute power
that old Lady assumed in the Queens House, and over the Queens person. The
Queen Mother, who came every day to Retiro, observed an air of melancholy in
the looks of the young Princess, which sufficiently testified her disquietude
within: She easily apprehended, that a person of her age could not choose but be
disgusted at the severity of the Camarera; so she thought her self obliged to
acquaint the King with it, and desired him that he would be pleased to treat
her after a more gentle method: She succeeded in her Petition, and procured
leave for the Marchioness de Villars to go and wait upon the Queen, who was
introduced into her Apartment through that of the Duchess de Terra Nova, who
appeared less savage and somewhat more respectful to her than she used to be.
The King according to the custom of Spain, sat in a Chair of State, the two
Queens upon two low Stools, and presently another was brought for the
Ambassador's Lady. Soon after the Queen Mother going out along with the King,
she found her self alone with the Queen, who seeing she was now at liberty to
talk, could not ^orbear to shed some Tears, as she acquainted her with the
sorrowful life she led. After she somewhat eased her self by recounting to her
the several ill usages that so much disturbed her, the Ambassador's Lady did
not fail to apply those consolations she judged expedient for one in her
condition. She made her sensible, that this life, so full of constraint as it
was, and for which she expressed so great a reluctance, was yet the very same
that all the Queens and Infanta's of Spain had ever been accustomed to; that
there was nothing particular in what she suffered* and consequently was not
designed to disoblige her; that she ought to hope, that when the King was
better acquainted with her, and saw he had an entire possession of her heart,
he might out of complasance allow her some relaxations which hitherto her
Predecessors had never enjoyed; That since the Queen Mother loved her, and
cherished her interests as her own, she could not do too much to cultivate that
friendship, which would be so advantageous and necessary to her; that in the
distribution of humane things, the greatest happiness is always attended with
some inconveniences; that she was now elevated to the supreamest Grandeur upon
Earth, which Heaven would have her purchase at the expense of a few
mortifications, but that her complaisance to the King and Queen Mother would
soon deliver her out of them. She likewise told her several things, which in
the conduct she was to observe toward the rest of the Court, might assist her
to support the beginnings, and render what followed more agreeable to her.

Madam de Villars spoke with a great deal of zeal of the Queen Mother; but the
young Queen being not as yet disingaged from those sentiments with which she
had been lately possessed, looked upon all this discourse as designed to
mislead her, and tho she ought to have considered that the Ambassadress could
have no other views in what she told her, than only to make her sensible of her
own true interests, yet these advices did not at that time make those
impressions upon her, as one could have wished they had for her good. Her
prejudices to the Queen Mother, which were perpetually inspired into her,
balanced the confidence she had in Madam de Villars, and her mind, that was
only accustomed to be entertained with those agreeable things, that use to
employ persons of her youth, her temper that was naturally free and lively,
dissipated the application she ought to have made, in order to distinguish good
counsels from bad. She knew just enough to embarrass her and give her occasions
of being uneasy, but could not tell how to disintangle herself, and for want of
a steady resolution to free herself from these melancholy Ideas, thought it too
great a fatigue to solve these apparent contradictions. So she continued under
this uncertainty without being able to rescue her self from it, and perhaps by
this means lost a favorable juncture that then offered it self to deliver her
from the Subjection, under which the Duchess kept her afterward. The
Ambassador of France saw her sometimes whilst she continued at Retiro, but this
was before Company, and besides the time they allotted him to be with her, was
so short, that in those general visits they could discourse of no particular
affairs.

The Queen Mother continued to visit the Queen often, she desired her to dress
herself after the French fashion, because she never beheld her in that dress;
she did so, and the Queen Mother liked it extremely well. When she was returned
to her Palace, which is the House of the Duke d' Vzeda, and is one of the
finest in Madrid, the Young Queen sent her two little Cabinets full of pretty
curiosities; she on the other hand procured her by way of exchange the
diversion of going a hunting at Pardo. She had not been on Horseback since she
came to Retiro. The King killed a wild Boar before her, and after that day they
went frequently to the Chase together.

The Councils of the Inquisition, of Castile, of Italy, of Flanders, of
Arragon, of the Indies, of War, of the Finances, of the Crusade, and of the
Orders, went on New years day to wish a happy year to their Majesty's; for this
is the Custom in Spain.

The Marquess Sera a Genoese, offered to make the Naples Squadron consist of
fourteen Galleys, which was never more than seven, and not put the King to any
expense, provided he would allow him the same conditions that the Duke de
Tursis had at Genoa. He had made this proposal to Don Iuan, some time before
his death, who found it to be very advantageous. However their resolutions are
so long a taking in Spain, and they have so small a consideration for
Novelties, of whatsoever use they may prove, that it is almost impossible to
introduce one; and this affair it seems met with the same fortune.

The Marquess de los Balbazez took the Oath of fidelity for his place of
Counselor of State, and Don Manuel de Lira did the same, for that of Secretary
of State in Italy. The Duke d' Ossone still expected that they would
accommodate the dispute between him and the Marquess d' Astorgas, but seeing
that they said nothing to him about it, he took up a resolution to go no more
to Court, and appeared every day in the City with a great equipage. This is
often enough practiced in Spain.

There are some people in the world that are never to be discountenanced by a
repulse, and Father Vintimiglia was of this number: Although he had received no
manner of answer to the memorial he gave the Pr. d' Harcourt at Bayonna to
present to the Queen, yet he could not forbear to draw up a second, wherein he
regulated all the Monarchy; he entrusted a French Gentleman with it, who
promised to find out some means or other to give the Queen a sight of it: But
whether he showed it her, or not, it is certain that Vintimiglia by an express
order of the King was banished out of all his Dominions. He betook himself to
the Ambassador of France, and nothing more became of the matter.

'Twas expected that immediately after the King's return some sort of
Government would be established to settle affairs in their old course, which
had been entirely suspended ever since the Death of Don Iuan. Just as his Death
happened, every thing was making ready for the Journey, which employed all the
Court, and the King in particular; his Marriage might well enough detain him
some time from making those applications he ought to use in the choice of an
able Minister: And the world was not at all surprised, to find him forget the
concerns of the kingdom in general, at a time when he was wholly possessed with
a Passion for his Queen; and had his head full of those agreeable Ideas, which
all Lovers amuse themselves with. But now when that business was over, they
impatiently expected to see him take up some fixed Resolutions. The Queen
Mother who was newly returned from her Exile thought of nothing else than how
to preserve her self in the favorable Situation she was in at present, and no
body in a manner was so interested with the King as to be able to pretend to
the Ministry. Thus the whole government was lodged in the hands of a Monarch,
who was but 17 years old, and who was never so well versed in things of lesser
consequence as to have any just knowledge in greater Affairs.

The only man that shared the Monarchy with him, was Don Ieronimo d' Eguya, who
had been Secretary of State 4 years, to which post he arrived from that of a
simple Co^missary. His address together with his good fortune rendered him
agreeable to the King, who had followed no other Counsel than his, unless d'
Eguya who was fearful of giving it sometimes, had not advised him to consult
the Constable of Castile, and the Duke de Medina-Celi in certain affairs,
because he had no mind to answer for every thing himself. It is indeed true,
that during the Journey nothing of importance was debated upon, for they only
busied themselves about that in particular, and the orders that are necessary
to be given upon such occasions.

The Court became now very full; the Kings marriage and the return of the Q.
Mother had brought together the most considerable persons of the Kingdom. Every
Family was consulting about the measures that were to advance some particular
man amongst them to the Chief Ministry: Some wished their Relations had it,
others desired it for their Friends, and abundance of people wished to enjoy it
themselves: Among those that had the justest pretensions were reckoned the
Constable of Castile, and the Duke de Medina Celi: They were both of them
furnished with great personal qualities, were both of an illustrious birth, and
considerable fortune; they possessed the chief Offices of the Crown, were
Counselors of State, and their merits equally distinguished them: But nothing
was more opposite than these two Lords were to one another: an old Spirit of
hatred, which they were not able to suppress, and which they had testified in a
thousand Rencounters, increased their common emulation; their humors and
inclinations were as contrary as night is to day. Several of their common
Friends had endeavored to reconcile them, but their pains were to no purpose:
They were all sensible that if they concerted matters together, they would
reciprocally render good Offices to one another, which might serve to advance
their Fortune. This was one of the reasons they used to accomodate the matter
between them; but sometimes we meet with aversions that are never to be
surmounted, and this I have mentioned was of that number.

The Duke de Medina-Celi was 45 years old, his Humor sweet and good natured,
but too slow and careless in matters of moment, of an insinuating agreeable
Spirit. He was descended of the illustrious Houses of Castile and de Foix: he
is seven times a Grandee of Spain. His Wife was Heiress of the House of Arragon
de Cardonne, she is very rich on her side, as well as he is on his. He was
President of the Council of the Indies, Sommellor du Corpse, that is to say,
High Chamberlain, he made his Court regularly, and always testified a
particular zeal for the person of the King; and his Majesty as he never fails
upon that point, expressed a certain affection for him, which he never showed
to any one besides. This made the world believe, that he stood fairer for the
Ministry than all his Competitors.

The Constable of Castile, descended of the House de Ve^^sco, was 57 years old,
and was Master of a considerable estate, nevertheless he did not live easy
amidst all his wealth; he is the tenth Hereditary Constable of Castile, Dean of
the Council of State, and Grand Master of the King's Household. His Genius is
vast, his Abilities and Knowledge are surprising, and he was always concerned
in employments, where he acquired experience. The last of his Governments was
that of Flanders, and although these posts ought to have made him sociable and
familiar, yet he always preserved so severe and rigid a character, that it
rendered him terrible: access to him is very difficult, and his humor is
naturally so imperious, that he can never submit. And this is the reason why he
was embroiled so deeply with Don Iuan, and hindered him from receiving several
favors, which that Prince would otherwise have willingly bestowed upon him, to
have brought him over to his own Party. It Is true he declared himself very
violently for the Queen Mother, and this might be one of the principal causes,
that kept him from being of Don Iuan's Faction. No body doubted but that the
King respected him very much, for what the Queen Mother might say in favor of
him, and the world was persuaded, that among those persons, whose merits she
would recommend to the King, the Constable would be the first, who besides this
would unquestionably find himself supported by all the party that had been ill
treated by Don Iuan, and by all those that continued still in the Interests of
the Queen Mother: She was obliged for her own proper Interests to procure the
King's favor, and the Favourite's place for the Constable. But amidst all
these flattering appearances, he seemed to be very indifferent in the matter,
whether it were because the ill posture of affairs, and the tender Age of the
King, made him apprehend some danger to be in the chief post, or because he was
sensible that he had not a prospect of obtaining it at one step, and so was
willing to ascend it by degrees. He seemed to desire that a Junto were
established for the Government, wherein he would bear his share with the
Inquisitor General and the Marquess de Mansera. He sometimes told his Friends
that the weight of great affairs astonished him, and that he found it a harder
matter to adjust them, than those persons who behold them only at a distance,
can well imagine; and that all his ambition was to contribute what in him lay
to the erecting a Junto.

The Queen Mother was not unwilling to have this project take effect; because
this was the way to keep the entire Authority in her own hands; for the Council
being composed of her creatures, they would in all probability act according to
her directions. The Constable for his part secretly promised, that by his
conduct and management he would always keep the upper hand over the other two,
and that thus his Companions would only enable him to bear the public hatred,
in case any thing should meet with ill success.

But this Junto, that would lodge all the authority in the hands of three
persons only, destroyed at the same time the expectations of all those that
would have it be divided amongst more, out of a consideration of their own
interest: This party desired to have it full as numerous as it was during the
Regency, and would have it composed of the Cardinal Portocarero Archbishop of
Toledo, of Don Melchior Navarra, who had been formerly Vice Chancellor of
Arragon, of the Duke de Medina Celi, and the other three whom I have mentioned.

After so many different projects, People were so well satisfied that the
Council at last would be only composed of the Queen Mothers Creatures, that the
alarm became general to those persons who had been devoted to Do^ Iuan, and
were very apprehensive of the credit of the Queen Mother and the advancement of
the Constable: Several of them assembled hereupon, they beheld their ruin in
the elevation of the contrary party, and united themselves to the D. de Medina
Celi, to find protection from him, out of hopes of beholding him made Chief
Minister: They considered that it would be more advantageous to them to see one
man made happy, who was sure to befriend them, than to see three happy persons
depending upon one alone, who had just reasons to wish them ill.

The Duke de Mediea Celi was of an equal and peaceable temper, which rendered
him agreeable to the King. This good fortune, which seemed particular to
himself, made him be looked upon by the greater part of the Courtiers as the
only man that ought to pretend to this favor, in a C^urt where the greatness
of rank and birth is one of the most essential qualities to recommend a Chief
Minister. Those that penetrated into the true disposition of the King, saw very
well that in the midst of these different parties, the Duke could not fail to
get the better; but whether it was an effect of his Prudence and Moderation, or
whether it was occasioned by the Intrigues of those persons that were on the
contrary side, he advanced but slowly. It appears probable, that the greatest
part of his Ambition came from his Friends, and that he rather followed the
advices they inspired into him, than his own proper inclinations. I desire the
same thing that you do, would he say to them, but in truth the tranquillity a
man abandons to expose himself to all the murmurs of the people, and to all
public inquietudes, very much moderates the pleasure that is inseparable from
so great a Post: and unless it were for the service we hereby render to our
Master, I cannot imagine how any man could find any satisfaction in a thing that
draws so many hazards along with it.

Thus people busied themselves about the two different factions, that were
formed by the Constable, supported by the Queen Mother, and by the Duke de
Medina-Celi, who was seconded by all the Creatures of Don Iuan: But while these
Rivals were openly disputing the prize, and all the Court seemed divided
between them, every one embracing a party according to his own inclinations,
Don Ieronimo d' Eguya formed a third almost alone. He saw himself all on the
sudden made Secretary of State, when the Marquis de Valenzuela, after the
removal of F. Nitard, became the Queen Mother's Favorite and took away that
Office from Don Pedro Fernandez del Campo, who did not behave himself supple
and submissive enough to him, so that we may say his Haughtiness was the
occasion of his Fall, Valenzuela having no reason to be content with him,
obliged him to quit his Office, and bestowed it upon d' Eguya.

He had too fresh an example before his eyes to fall into the same fault, and
being very adroit, complaisant, and well enough versed in dissimulation,
neglected nothing to please Valenzuela as long as he stood upon his Feet: but
when he saw his Fortune declining, and that the Court declared in favor of Don
Iuan, he presently copied after them, and preserved himself, during that
Ministry, by his exemplary Submission. He was one of the first that espoused
his party, and was likewise one of the first that abandoned the Prince, when he
saw his credit began to sink in the world. Nay some time before the end of Don
Iuan, he managed himself as he had done before Valenzuela's fall, he entered
into a correspondence with the Queen Mother, assuring her that he would only
depend upon her, so whether she was really persuaded of his sincerity, or had
not as yet a fit occasion to remove him from his Post, she suffered him to
continue in it without the least molestation.

In all these Changes he only held his place by a Commission, but as this
furnished him with an occasion to see the King perpetually, and to discourse
him in private about all affairs, so he made use of this opportunity to possess
him with a distrust of all those, that might with justice make pretensions to
his favor, nay even of the most considerable persons: So that being only a
simple Secretary of State by a Commi^^ion, and in all appearance of a narrow
unexperienced Genius, he beheld himself in a capacity to balance at one time
two powerful parties, so that neither one nor the other could succeed in their
affairs, so long as he opposed them.

Whatsoever Inclinations the King had for the Duke de Medina Celi, Don Ieronimo
frustrated them, by awakening him with an Idea of Don Iuan's Ministry, The
Slavery he then suffered, the Persecution of the Queen Mother, so many Persons
of quality ill used without any occasion, the Misery of the People, and many
other disorders that inevitably happen, when the Government is abandoned to the
Caprice of one man: On the other hand he represented a Junto to him, as a
Company of Ministers that would command every body, and everlastingly embarras
their own affairs by their Jealousies and mutual Discords; that it would be a
burden to himself, as well as unprofitable to the State; that Junto's might do
some good under a Minority, but that his Majesty was too far advanced in Age,
to want any Governors; that suppose he were pleased to compose one, yet the
obligation he had to make the Constable one of the number, would involve him in
new difficulties; that his temper was haughty and imperious in Authority, and
that he was wholly devoted to the Queen Mother; that she had been accustomed to
govern, and would easily come to be Mistress again, by the help of a Junto
composed of her own Creatures; that since he was married, and had Prudence and
Wit sufficient, he ought to manage himself, and that if ever he was prevailed
upon to do otherwise, he would find himself by little and little reduced to
those sufferings, from which he desired to free him.

It is natural for a Young King to desire to be at large, and independent; so
whilst he continued thus in suspense, Eguya was Master of all affairs: The
Confessor possessed the King with the same sentiments to choose no Chief
Minister, upon whom he must depend: And the Duchess de Terra nova found
herself equally concerned to keep off the Queen Mother, a Junto, and a
Favorite. During this Interregnum, she had opportunity enough to fix and
settle herself in the King's good opinion, she did not question but if the Q.
Mother happened to be once more Mistress, she would endeavor either by herself
or by her Creatures to turn her out of the Court; this consideration obliged
her to discourse frequently with the King, and her only care was to persuade
him, that he ought to be apprehensive of the Queen Mothers designs. She
likewise inspired him with the same distrust of the Queen, whose Youth and
Easiness of Temper made her incapable of taking strict measures: She constantly
whispered some disagreeable things or other into his Ear, that only tended to
disquiet him; but he preserved so great a Love for his Queen, that
notwithstanding he believed all the Stories this old Beldam told him, he never
had the less affection and tenderness for her.

The Court continued still at Buen-Retiro, that is to say without Madrid,
expecting the Queen to make her Entry, after which they were to go and lodge in
the Palace; the preparations for her Entry were very long, it was commonly
believed for some time that the Queen was with Child, but all these hopes
vanishing about the beginning of January 1680, She made her Entry on the 13th.
of the same Month; The Queen Mother went in the morning to Buen-Retiro, from
whence she parted some time after along with the King, they went together to
see all the streets through which the Queen was to pass, and stayed at the
Countess Dognates in a Balcony made on purpose, and having a Lattice-Window
gilt all over, the Avenues that led to Retiro were all shut up, and a
prohibition was issued out for any Coach to go that way. About eleven the Queen
mounted on Horseback, those that were to go before began to march, and passed
through a marble Gate, which was but lately built: The Kettle Drums and the
Trumpets of the City, in their Habits used in these Ceremonies, marched at the
head of all; after them the Alcaldes of the Court, the Nobility, the Knights of
the three Military Orders, the Gentlemen of the King's house, the Mayor domo's
to the Queen, and the Grandees of Spain, followed by a great number of
Lacquays, whose different Liveries of Brocard, and Gallon of Gold and Silver of
a mixed color, made an agreeable diversity; the Querries of the Queen marched
on foot immediately before her: the Count de Villa Mayana was on her Right
hand, who was her Chief Gentleman Usher: She was surrounded with her Menins and
Pages of Honor (when she walks on foot she always leans upon one of them) the
Duchess de Terra nova followed her, and Donna Laura de Alargon Governante of
the Maids of Honor, both of them mounted upon their Mules, and in their
Widows habit; which somewhat resembles that of Religious Women, except that
when they are on Horseback, they wear great Hats on their Heads, which made no
less terrible a figure than the rest of their garb. But People saw after this
with a great deal of pleasure Donna Teresa de Toledo, Donna Francisca
Henriquez, Donna Maria de Gusman, Iosepha de Figueroa, and Donna Manuela de
Velasco, Maids of Honor to the Queen, all very beautiful and richly dressed;
they were on Horseback, each of them was accompanied by their Relations, in the
midst of whom they marched: There were several led Horses admirably fine, led
by Grooms clad in rich Liveries, and the passage was shut up by the Guards de
la Lancilla. At the Prado, which is one of the most agreeeble walks in Madrid,
by reason of the several Fountains that water it continually, was to be seen a
Gallery open on every side with one and twenty Arches, there were several
jettings out in it, on which the Arms of the several Kingdoms under the
Dominion of Spain were affixed to Pillars that supported some gilt Statues,
which carried Devices in honor of the Queen, with Crowns and Inscriptions that
had a relation to the several Kingdoms; The Queen found at the end of the
Gallery a Triumphal Arch, very magnificent and well designed, through which she
entered into the City. The Corrigidor and the Rigidors apparelled in Brocard of
Gold, of a red Crimson color, with Bonnets and Breeches, such as the ancient
Castilians wore, presented her with the Keys of the City, and with a Canopy
which they carried over her head, during the procession: The Streets were
adorned with the richest Tapestries, and the precious Stones that were to be
seen in the Goldsmiths Row were valued at Eleven Millions. It would take up too
much time to describe all the magnificences of that day, I shall only content
my self to say, that the Queen was mounted upon a fine Andaluzian Horse, which
in this noble march seemed proud to carry so beautiful and great a Princess.
Her Habit was so covered with Embroidery that the Stuff was not to be seen; she
wore on her Hat white Plumes mixed with red; and a Pearl called there the
Peregrina, which is as big as a small Catherine Pear, and is of an inestimable
value, hung below a Clasp of Diamonds with which her Hat was beset. She wore on
her finger the great Diamond of the King, which, as they pretend, surpasses in
beauty any thing of that nature that was ever set in a Ring. But the graceful
deportment of the Queen in all her actions, and particularly in the management
of her Horse, and the charms of her person made a greater luster than all the
precious Stones she wore, although it is certain that people could scarce behold
the glittering of them. She made an halt before the Balcony of the Countess
Dognate to salute the King, and Queen Mother; they opened the Lattice about 4
broad fingers to see her, and the K. taking hisHanderchief in his hand, carried
it several times to his Mouth, his Eyes and his Heart, which is the greatest
piece of Gallantry in Spain. She went on in her Procession, and the King with
the Queen Mother received her in the Court of the Palace, he helped her to
light off her Horse, and the other taking her by the hand conducted her to her
Apartment, where she embraced her often, telling her that she was over happy to
have so amiable a Daughter in Law. That Evening there were curious Fireworks,
and Illuminations for three nights together; the King next day went to the
Royal Chapel, where the Queen was likewise in her Chair of State, the
Ambassadors and Grandees were there according to the Custom, and Te Deum was
sung. After dinner the King and Queen went out together, which was the first
time of their appearing in public: They were in a Chariot made like a
Triumphal Coach without a Crown upon it, and open on all sides to show
themselves to the People, they traversed the great Square before the Palace,
and passed through several Streets, where the Balconies were full of Ladies,
who mingled their Acclamations with those of the people; the Grandees followed
their Majesty's in very rich Coaches, with a great number of Livery men. There
were abundance of these Lords who for nine days together had nine different
Liveries, and each finer than the other; after this manner they went to our
Ladies Datocha, and it being already night before they returned to the Palace,
white wax Tapers were lighted at all the Windows, and the Streets were so
prettily illuminated, by them, that a man might almost see from one end of the
City to the other. The finest show of these Lights was at the Placa Mayor,
which is a very large noble Square, the Houses are built with five Rows of
Balconies one over another, and could reckon above three Thousand Tapers in
all. As soon as the King and Queen were arrived there, the Fireworks began.
Many other diversions lasted for several days; sometimes their Majesty's went a
hunting, at other times to a Comedy, or took a Walk: Sometimes they went to Sup
with the Queen Mother, or the Queen Mother came to eat with them at the Palace.
All the Ladies had the Honor to kiss the Queen's Hand, the Councils and the
Grandees complemented her also.

Some days after her Entry a Bull-feast was kept at Madrid, which was the most
magnificent of the kind that had been seen for a long time. The King and the
Queen came to the Great Square about one a Clock in the Afternoon: aftewards
entered the Duke de Medina Sidonia, the Marquess Camaraza Grandees of Spain, Don
Felix de Cordova, Second Son of the Duke de Sessa, Don Francisco Moscoso, and
Don Fernando de Lea, a Gentleman of Cordova, each of them followed by an
hundred Lacqueys, some dressed after the Turkish, others after the Grecian
fashion; and after this manner they represented several Nations. They combated
the Bulls with extraordinary dexterity and courage; the Son of the Duke de
Sessa had two Horses killed under him. This sport is an old remainder of the
Moors, whose Genius and Customs are not entirely extinguished in Spain, although
they themselves have been long turned out of it. The Spaniards still seem to
preserve something of the barbarity of these people, since they do so freely
expose themselves the rage of Mad Bulls to divert the Public. But to say the
truth, this representation is one of the finest things in the world, and
nothing can afford so agreeable a prospect, as the place of the Combat, which
is prodigiously spacious, encompassed with five ranks of Balconies all equal
and regular, and curiously set out with rich hangings and Furniture, as well as
filled with almost an infinite number of Spectators.

The King on the eighteenth of January named the Marquess d' Ossera to go
Viceroy per interi^ of Sardinia, because the Count d' Egmon was not as yet in
a condition to go thither: He named the same day the Marquess de Fuentes, Son
to him who had been Ambassador in France, to go thither in that quality in the
room of the Duke de Giovenazzo, who from an Envoy to the Court of Savoy, was
nominated to that of France, but it seems was at last destined to return to
Turin.

In the mean time the Marquess de Villa Mayna, Chief Gentleman Usher to the
Queen discharged the Office of Master of the Horse, in the place of the Duke d'
Ossone, who for his ill conduct was prohibited to come to the Palace. The
Marquess d' Astorgas took the advantage of his absence to make his own Court,
and although he had been indisposed, and continued to be so still, yet he went
every day with five Coaches of extraordinary fineness, and a numerous retinue
of Livery-men to wait upon the King. The Duke d' Ossone being informed of it
resolved to meet him, and give him some affront, so he took abundance of people
with him, and knowing which way the Marquess was to pass, he ordered his
Coachman to drive thither full speed, and to overturn the Marquess's Coach, in
case he was within: It happened he went that day in a Chair, and his Coaches
followed him, but the Duke d' Ossone's Coachman for all that met with him so
conveniently, that he threw him along in the River: This rencounter made a
great noise, and did not at all accommodate the affairs of the Duke, which
before this were in no good condition.

Madam, the Constable Colonna's Lady, who went out of the Convent, where she
sojourned, to behold the Queens Entry, staid with the Marchioness de los
Balbazez till the fifth of February, when she was carried away by the King's
Order to a Convent some leagues off Madrid.

It Is the Custom of Spain, that upon all solemn occasions, whether of Joy or
Grief, all the Kingdoms and all the Principalities that depend upon the King,
send their Deputies to complement him. Thus Don Pedro de Salinas y Vnda came in
the name of the Principality of d' Avila, accompanied with the Duke de
Pastrane, and Don Joseph de Silva his Brother, to kiss the King's hand, and
complement him upon the score of his marriage. The Kingdoms of Naples, Navar,
Arragon, Granada, and diverse other places sent likewise. After the King had
given them Audience, he took the Queen along with him to a great hunting of the
Wild Boar, where they killed abundance of them. The Duke de Pastrane, who
exercised the Office of Chief Ranger in the absence of the Marquess de Liche,
conducted the Queen to a place in the Forest, that was extremely pleasant.
Several streams of water ran by the place, and under some of the highest Trees
a Pavilion of Gold Brocard adorned with a Fringe of the same, was set up. All
the Trees were covered with little Apes, Squirrels and Parrots, and a thousand
other Birds that were fastened to them; young Boys that were dressed like Fauns
and Silvanes, and Girls apparelled like Nymphs and Driades, and Shepherdesses
served up a nobleCollation to her Majesty, who seemed to be at first extremely
pleased with the entertainment. But although no body knew what it was that
disquieted her afterward, she appear to be very sad all the remainder of the
day.

On Candlemas day there was a procession in the Galleries of the Palace; the
Religious of the Mendicant Orders, and all the Ecclesiastics belonging to the
Chapel walked before the Pages of the King, and those of the Queen followed
after. The Grandees of Spain marched before their Majesty's, the Duchess de
Terra Nova held up the Queens Train, the Maids of Honor came next, and there
did not seem to be above eighteen or twenty of them: It Is not here as in other
Holidays where they all wait upon their Sovereign.

Tho the young Queen changed her place of abode, yet she did not change that
solitary and disagreeable life she led at Buen Retiro, under the guard of the
Duchess de Terra Nova. She governed her like a Child, and continued still to
treat her after a worse manner, unless it were that she was permitted to
receive the visits of some Ladies, which oftentimes appeared more tedious to
her than even solitude it self; not that they wanted wit, for no body can
reproach them with want of that: But the Queen understood but a little of what
they said, and besides could not repose that confidence in them, which gives
liberty, and life, and spirit to Conversation; all was Grandeur, and Ceremony,
and Reverence, and State. Much about this time I had the honor to kiss her
hand, but she could not forbear smiling, to see me so much altered for the
worse by my Spanish Garb, for unless her self alone, I never saw a Stranger
look well in that Habit. After I had passed through her Apartments, which to
say the truth, were exceeding pretty, I found her in her Closet, which was
painted and gilded, and set out with great Looking Glasses fastened to the
ceiling; she sat upon a little square Stool near the Window, making Gold Net
Work, mingled with Blew Silk; her Hair was parted in the middle of her Head,
which was bare, only one knot of her Hair was curled and plaited with great
Pearls, and reached down to her Waste; she had a Velvet Robe on, of a Rose
Color, Embroidered with Silver, and had Pendants in her Ears that touched her
very Breast, and so heavy that she gave her self the trouble to take out one of
them that I might pass my judgment on it, and I was exceedingly surprised at
it. She spoke very little French to me, affecting to talk Spanish before the
Camarera Major. She ordered me to send her all the Letters I received from
France which had any news in them, to which I replied, that the news which was
sent to me did not deserve the consideration of so great a Queen. Ah good God,
cried she, lifting up her Eyes with a charming air, I shall never think meanly
of any thing that comes out of a Country, which is so dear to me. This
affection, said I to her, which your Majesty preserves for your own Native
Country, makes me hope every thing, Madam, since as I have the happiness to be
one, so I have all the inclinations of a good French Woman. She answered this
with her usual goodness, and whispered me in French, that she would rather see
me apparalled after the French fashion than that of Spain: But, Madam, said I
to her, it is a sacrifice which I have made to the respect I have for your
Majesty. Say rather, continued she with a smiling air, that the rigid temper of
the Duchess has frightened you. She appeared to me so very charming that day,
that I could not forbear to admire her, for in spite of her melancholy she was
plump and and in good liking, and that contributed to make her still more
beautiful and agreeable.

When I came back to my lodgings, I found my Letters from France were arrived;
there was one amongst the rest, which I supposed would please the Queen, so I
made all the haste I could the next morning to carry it to her, but the
Camarera would not suffer me to have the honor of seeing the Queen two days
together, therefore I was contented to write to the Duchess, desiring her to
present that Letter to the Queen. Behold the Contents of it.

I Am of opinion, Madam, that I cannot send you better news to day, than that
of the marriage of Mademoiselle de Blois with Monsieur the Prince de Conty. The
Contract of the Marriage was signed on the fifteenth of this month in the
King's Chamber, who went about seven a Clock at Night to the Queens Apartment,
and afterward returned to his own with all the Royal Family: The Prince de
Conty led Mademoiselle de Blois; she was set out with the finest Jewels in the
world, all which together did not glitter so brightly as her Eyes, and whose
luster was inferior to the Lillies and Roses of her Complexion. All the Court
was in a transport as soon as she appeared, and the majesty of her stature was
not a little increased by a Train five Else long, which Mademoiselle de Nante
carried. The King drew near to a Table that stood against the Wall; the Queen
was on his left hand, and next after Monseigneur, Monsieur, Madam, Mademoiselle
d' Orleans, Madam the Duchess of Tuscany, Madam de Guise, Monsieur the Prince,
and Monsieur the Duke, and Madam the Duchess, the Prince de la Roche sur yon,
Mademoiselle de Bourbon, the Princess de Carignan, the Count de Vermandois, the
Count du Maine, Mademoiselle de Nante, and Mademoiselle de Tours, all placed in
a Demicircle about the Table. The Prince de Conty, and Mademoiselle de Blois
came one after the other within the Demicircle over against the Table. The
Marquess de Seignelay drew near to the King, and read the beginning of the
Contract with a loud voice, but he had scarce read the qualifications, when the
King told him 'twas enough, and so signed the Contract. After all the Royal
Family had signed it the Cardinal de Bouillon entered, and advanced forward to
the middle of the Chamber; then the Prince de Conty and Mademoiselle de Blois
approached up to him, and performed the Ceremony of the Betrothing. The
Princess's Name, as you know, is Anna Maria, and the Prince's Louis Armand:
This Ceremony being over, the King and all the Court went to see an Opera. Next
day the Cardinal de Bouillon married this young Prince and beautiful Princess
in the Chapel of the Old Castle in the presence of the King, the Queen, and
all the Court: the King dined with all the Royal Family: at night a Comedy was
acted, and after that there was a great Supper, where, without reckoning the
Princes and Princesses of the Blood, there were fifty Ladies that sat at one
Table* which was served with three services of two hundred dishes each. The
Cardinal Bouillon blessed the Bed, the King gave the Shift to the Prince of
Conty, and the Queen to the Princess. Next morning their Majesty's went to see
her at her Apartment in the New Castle. The King has given her the Duchy de
Vaujour, a Million of money in hand, a Pension of a hundred thousand Livers, and
abundance of Jewels; to the Prince de Conty fifty thousand Crowns in hand, and
a Pension of twenty thousand to the Prince de la Roche Sur-Yon.

From St. Germains the 18th of Ian. 1680.

The Queen Mother had given all imaginable assistance to the Queen of Spain, to
deliver her from part of her troubles, if she could have cured her self of
those suspicions with which some people had possessed her against her; but she
unhappily imagining, that the other still regretted the Arch-Dutchess, and
would have been glad to see her in her place, that opinion made her extremely
distrustful: and the Queen Mother who found nothing of that openness of heart
and freedom as she desired, was likewise troubled for her part: for in effect,
she loved her tenderly, and was ready to give her all possible testimonies of
her affection.

The Ambassador of France, his Lady, and the Confessor often reminded the Queen
of that conduct she was to observe, if she intended to be happy. They told her,
that she ought to give her self entirely up to the Queen her Mother in Law out
of a principle of Duty, and Gratitude for the friendship she showed her, as out
of a consideration of her own proper interests: they represented to her, that
the Queen Mother ought not to be suspected by her, and that although the Arch
Duchess was her Grand Daughter, yet she had received such few tokens and
assurances of friendship from the Emperor during her disgrace, that she was
too sensible ever to forget it: that the Conduct of France toward her was
directly opposite to this, that there she had been pitied and obliged, that her
Most Christian Majesty had ever preserved a strict correspondence and
friendship with her, and that the Queen Mother knew well enough that she could
not by any returns oblige the Queen of France more, than by showing back all
that kindness to the young Queen of Spain; that she had all the agreements in
her, which could engage her heart; that besides this she hoped to see her give
an Heir to the Crown; that this was necessary for the good of Spain; that the
melancholy humor, to which she abandoned her self, might hinder her from
having one; that they ought to concert all their affairs together, in order to
possess the good graces and inclinations of the King; that it was natural to
believe, he would divide his power between his Mother and his Queen, rather
than bestow it upon a Favorite, who would think of serving him no longer, than
his Family reaped advantage by it; whereas the Souls of Sovereigns, having
something in them that was more noble and great, than those of private persons,
the motives of interest would never be supposed to influence two Queens, so
much as they would a Chief Minister; that in fine there ought to be no
separation between them, but that they must begin with the union of their
hearts.

The Queen relished these reasons, and found them plausible enough, but for all
that she relapsed all on a sudden into her old distrust, into which the
different things that had been said to her, did cast her anew: Besides the
extreme trouble she suffered from the rigid conduct of the Duchess de Terra
Nova; she found her so absolute and inflexible that she began to fear her, to
which the tenderness of her youth, her want of experience, and her natural
sweetness contributed not a little, so that she could not open her self to the
Queen Mother, when she considered, that if she did not really love her, but
would make invidious reflections upon what she said, this would be the way to
throw her into new inconveniences; so that notwithstanding the desire she had
to speak to her, she was always silent in her company. The Queen Mother
perceived it well enough, yet for all that she continued to visit her almost
every day, and sent her presents from time to time.

At last the young Queen being entirely vanquished by all these demonstrations
of amity, resolved to submit her self wholly to her directions. They had a long
conference together, where they took those measures which they judged were
necessary to promote their common satisfaction. After this the Queen Mother
spoke to the King, but found him in a cold reserved humor, so she made him no
discoveries of any thing, but took her opportunity to withdraw, imagining with
her self that her Son would be obliged to come after her; and that the world
might take less notice of this alteration, she gave out that she only desired
to live easy, and that she preferred her own repose to all other
considerations whatsoever: She talked after this rate before several persons,
in whom she reposed no ordinary confidence, although at the bottom she was clearly
of a different opinion.

The Constable was the first man that was aware of this alteration, and was one
of those who were mightily troubled at it. He easily saw that the Queen Mother
was leaving all thoughts of advancing him, and as he had his own particular
views, so he used all the means in the world to effect his designs. In fine, he
joined interests with the Camarera Major, Don Ieronimo d' Eguya, and the King's
Confessor, who brought the Duke of Alva into the same confederacy: the design
of these three last was to set up the Constable against the Duke de Medina
Celi, whose favor with the King increased, as they thought, very fast, and
this gave them violent jealousies of him. The Constable for his part
endeavored to gain by them what they designed to make the Duke de Medina Celi
lose; his Emissaries began to promote the affair with very favorable
appearances, but after they had seriously reflected upon the imperious humor
of the Constable. He is so arrogant and haughty, said they, that he would
rather ruin every man of us, than ever be brought to own that he was obliged to
us for his elevation, and whatever Minister has his place, will certainly be
less dangerous than he.

Don Ieronimo d' Eguya, who thought of nothing else but how to balance the
credit of these two Lords one with the other, did not neglect their
reflections. He mentioned them almost every day, and endeavored to make them
more strong if it were possible, he found it would be a great deal more
advantageous to him to continue in the same condition, than to see himself
subjected to a new dependence, and this reason obliged him to inspire the King
with an aversion and jealousy for the Constable; so that instead of doing him
any service as he promised, he did him underhand all the ill offices imaginable.

When our own particular interest lies at stake, and we are pursuing the
dictates of our ambition, we are so clear-sighted, that it is a difficult
matter for any one to deceive us long. We penetrate even into the most secret
thoughts of him that calls himself our friend, and easily find out whether he
does us good or ill. Pursuant to this maxim, the Constable soon perceived how
well he was served by his friends, and what designs each of them drove in
particular. It is no difficult matter to imagine how a person of his Temper, as
I have already described, resented this usage, and his uneasiness to be sure
was so much the more violent because he smothered it for some time before he
let it break out.

Don Ieronimo de Eguya was the first person whom he attacqued. Having
represented to them one day in a full Council, and that with the greatest
fierceness in the world, how all affairs went from bad to worse, he added, that
no body ought to be surprised to find it so, since d' Eguya who pretended, to
manage every thing, had neither Judgment, nor Experience, nor Capacity, and
that he ought to be confined to the Duties of his Post, without meddling with
those things that had no relation at all to it. When he had ended his
discourse, Don Manuel de Lira Secretary of State of the Council of Italy, who
was of the Constables Faction, presented to them at the same time a large
memorial, in which he laid open the vast prejudice which the State of Affairs
received from the ill conduct of de Eguya, and most of them there had been well
enough satisfied, if these complaints had obliged the King to remove him.

Don Manuel de Lira did not act only out of Complaisance to the Constable but
had his own private ends. He imagined that if d' Eguya were once turned out of
his Post, he might perhaps succeed him in it. Now nothing animates a man's zeal
in any affair, more than the prospect of some advantage or other to be gained
by it. However this same business did not meet with that success which he and
the Constable proposed to themselves, so after long consideration the Constable
was obliged to come back to the Queen Mother, and importune her to appear in
favor of him. He represented to her, That if the Chief Minister was not one of
her party, her repose would not be of long continuance; that the Duke de Medina
Celi stood very fair for it, and although he advanced insensibly, yet it was
probable he would soon find himself possessed of a place where he would make
his Enemies severely feel the weight of his Indignation; that in spite of
Politics, to which he pretended, he would not fail to set up the President of
Castile against her, who was a Creature of Don Iuan, and always ready to
execute those resentments that had lodged in his breast so long; that this Duke
was the very person who formerly had the hardiness to carry her the Order for
her Exile; that he seemed at that time to rejoice at her misfortunes and
perplexities; that if ever he came to be Favorite, she would find him to be a
constant rub in her way, and that this conjecture perhaps was not ill grounded,
since the Duke still possessed all the passions of Don Iuan.

The Queen Mother was alarmed at what the Constable represented to her, and
gave him her word to act vigorously in his behalf; but the Duke de Medina Celi
being advertised of it, was resolved to prevent the blow, and judged it the
best expedient to soften the Spirit of the Queen Mother, by making a profound
Submission to her. In fine he went to her, and told her, That he was resolved
to be obliged to her for all the King's favors, and desired to depend upon her
out of an obligation of Gratitude, as he had done a long time ago out of Duty
and Inclination; that he humbly begged of her to do him the justice as to
believe, that his Heart, his Birth, and his Fortune, were too great ever to
suffer him to be one of Don Iuan's Creatures; that he would never receive that
title but from his own Master, and that the Party must wear a Crown who
commanded the Duke de Medina Celi; that although he had declared himself for the
President of Castile, yet it was not out of a Consideration of Don Iuan, but
the King's Service, and he was ready to abandon his Interest at any time,
having no particular engagements of Friendship to him; and that if he appeared
in this affair, it was only done with a design to defend the Authority of the
King, which the Nuncio had a mind to invade in the conduct which he used
toward the President. The Queen Mother answered him, that she did not without
a great satisfaction, believe what he said to be true, that she had a great
esteem for him, and would not fail to give him convincing proofs of it in a
short time.

The Constable being informed on his side, that Queen Mother had very
favorably received the Submission of the Duke, whether out of a Spirit of
kindness, or indifference to the choice the King might make of a Chief
Minister, dispaired at last of seeing himself succeed in any of his projects,
either of the Junto whereof he pretended to be a Member if one were erected, or
in the place of Favorite which he could have desired rather to fill alone. He
resolved to merit something at least of the Duke de Medina Celi, by yielding up
that Post with a good grace, when he was in a capacity to dispute it with him
still.

In short, he laid hold of the first opportunity he could find, to tell the
King that no Person was fitter to serve his Majesty, and preserve the
Government in good order, than the Duke de Medina Celi. He bestowed wonderful
commendations upon him for the good conduct he had ever used; The free
unconstrained manner wherein he spoke all this, was exceeding remarkable,
especially in a man of the Constables haughty Temper, who, as the world
imagined, would dye a thousand times, rather than offer this violence inwardly
to himself: But people at last believed that he designed to render himself
agreeable to the King, by commending a man, for whom his Majesty testified so
great an Inclination. After all, it must be confessed that he showed a
generosity, which is not common, in treating his declared Enemy after this
manner.

It cannot be easily imagined, what a great detriment the Republic received by
these Factions of the Courtiers, and the King's Irresolution to take or not
take a Chief Minister. Nothing was concluded, nothing was done; a Spirit of
Lethargy seemed to be predominant at Court, which helped to increase those
perplexities, under which the Kingdom labored before. Every body languished to
see what would be the success of the smallest matters; and business that had
been carried into the Council, tarried there whole years, nay things that went
directly into the King's hands were dispatched never the sooner. Thus no one
knew what Party to take, or where to address himself.

Our Ambassador who promised himself to find a better treatment than he had met
with a long while, and which he dexterously dissembled in expectation of the
Queen's arrival, perceived at last that they designed to satisfy him no
better, than the other Ministers. who made their Complaints. About five Months
were passed since he demanded Justice for some violations of the Peace that
were lately committed as well by the Governors of the Provinces, as by the
taking of several Vessels, and the burning of others. But at the time when he
was urgent to have a positive answer, he received a new injury by the insolence
of an Who is a kind of a Provost or Judge.
Alcalde, and several These are Sergeants and Bailiffs.
Alguazils who passed before his House, which was never done at Madrid, in the
quarter belonging to an Ambassador. He was extremely surprised at it, but was
so far from receiving the satisfaction that was due to him for this affront,
that they told him His Majesty had given Order that his quarter should be no
longer exempt. This Resolution so much the more disgusted him, because it
affected only himself, and all the other Ambassadors enjoyed their Privileges
as formerly. Not but that they had several other complaints upon their Hands,
as for example, the Envoy from the Elector of Brandenburgh made a great noise
because they had amused him a long time with specious promises that had no
effect at all; they owed his Master a great Sum of money, he demanded the
payment of it, but they shifted him off from time to time, so that at last he
perceived that they neither had the power nor inclination to satisfy him. The
Nuncio did not seem to be less disgusted for his part, because he saw the
President of Castile keep his Place and continue still in Favor, although the
Pope had declared him suspended, and he himself omitted no application to have
justice done upon him.

In the mean time they wanted money to raise four Spanish Regiments that were
designed to be sent to Milain, because they apprehended some motion from the
Court of France, but it was almost impossible to find any funds, and besides
this the Silver that came from the Indies in the Flota was so suddenly gone and
with so little order, that no body knew what was become of it, so that it was a
difficult matter to send any returns into Flanders, or other places, where
there was occasion. Those that used to advance money upon these sorts of
occasions, would now do nothing at all, they were all of them drained, and the
necessities were generally so great, that they knew not where to take up money
to defray the ordinary expenses of the King and Queens House. This proceeded in
part from the disorder of the money; a Pistole which ought to go for no more
than forty eight Reals de Vellon, was raised up to a hundred and ten; and the
Patacoons that are only worth twelve Reals went at the rate of thirty. The
occasion of it was this, a great part of the Reals de Vellon, that are of
Copper, were bad, and the common custom made them pass as well in commerce, as
if they had been good. But at last they were called in all on the sudden, by
reason of the excessive price a Pistole was raised to, and it is impossible to
recount the disorders and inconveniences that attended this new Regulation.
The Court was of opinion in the month of February 1680. that there was a
necessity to find out some remedy or other suddenly for it; so a Pistole from a
hundred and ten Reals was levelled to forty eight, the Patacoons to twelve,
and the other money was so confounded one with the other, that it was reduced to
the eighth part of the ordinary value. There was no body almost but lost more
or less upon the account of this new Regulation, and accordingly felt it; that
which before the sinking the value of the money was worth forty Reals, which
make four Livers of French money, since the reducing of it, was worth a hundred
and ten Reals, which is ten Livers of our money; so that what Commodities a man
could buy on Monday for fifty Sons, went on the Tuesday for above a third part
more; and the Debtor, who, it may be, on Saturday owed twenty thousand Reals de
Vellon, which made but two hundred Pistoles, found to his sorrow the next day
after that he owed near five hundred Pistoles. This ruined a great number of
Families, and caused a mighty dejection in the spirits of the people; for every
thing a man has occasion to buy, is dearer by much in Madrid than any where
else, because they are brought a great way off, and there are few or no
Manufactures at all in that part of the Country. A kind of a mutiny happened at
Toledo, because after this sinking the value of money, no care was taken to
regulate the price of Provisions, for which they paid excessive rates. It is
still to be noted, that the Civil Government in Spain is managed but after a
very sorry manner, and that the slow lazy humor of those persons, who might,
if they pleased, correct the ill conduct of others, contributes exceedingly to
the public loss.

All these disorders and continual complaints, which made a noise from all
quarters, began at last to shake and undermine Don Ieronimo d' Eguya. He knew
very well, that the Post wherein he stood, was ticklish and dangerous, and that
after all his endeavors to disgust the world, in case he remedied nothing, the
oblige maledictions and hatred would fall upon the Favorite. The present ill
state of affairs was attributed to his ill conduct, so he thought within
himself, that he could not too soon deliver himself from the torrent of the
popular fury, and therefore resolved to omit nothing, whereby he might incline
the King to choose a Chief Minister. The consideration of his own interest soon
determined him to act vigorously in favor of the Duke de Medina Celi, he knew
the King had a particular affection for him, and besides he persuaded himself,
that when the Duke was informed what good offices he had done him, he would
maintain him still in his Post, as well out of a principle of acknowledgment,
as for the great services he might do him in these affairs, since he had
managed them for so long a time, and consequently was in a capaci^y to furnish
him with some necessary lights, which all those persons that newly enter into
the Government are altoge^her unacquainted with. And then he knew the natural
sweetness of the Duke's temper would never permit him to turn him out of his
place, and he was certain that as long as he continued in it, he could manage
the King's favor, the functions of his place giving him opportunity to
approach near the King's person very often.

The Camarera Major, and his Majesty's Confessor had each of them particular
designs in their head, however they were both agreed as to the Duke's
advancement, so that all the world concurring with the favorable dispositions
which the King had for him, he signed a Decree (that is the usual term with
them in Spain) wherein he declared the Duke de Medina Celi to be Chief
Minister. He immediately commanded Father Relux to carry it to him, who came to
his House about ten a Clock at night on the twenty first of February 1680. and
acquainted him with the good news.

No body had any reason to be surprised at the Duke's elevation. It seems he
had promised himself the place some time before, whether it were because the
King gave him his promise, or that some outward appearances assured him of it.

However it was, it was agreed upon by all hands at Court that the King could
not have made a better choice. He was a person in whom all good qualities were
to be found; his agreeable Conversation, his obliging Character, his noble and
generous. Deportment, his free easy Temper, made him beloved by all the^
world: People only wundered, that being so great a Lord as he was, he would
sacrifice his repose to the administration of Affairs, that were then in a
miserable condition. They could scarce imagine (and perhaps he was of the same
opinion himself) how he could ever be able to remedy evils of so inveterate a
malignity. Before he could effect this, he must in all appearance make an
entire Change in the ordering of the Monarchy, but this was an impracticable
design, and impossible to be executed.

As soon as the choice His Majesty had made in favor of the Duke, came to be
publicly known; all Persons that were of any Quality went to complement him,
as well the Ministers of foreign Princes, as the Grandees of Spain. The next
day being accompanied by all his Friends and Relations, he repaired to Court to
kiss his Majesty's hand, and thank him most humbly for all his great favors.
On the following days he received visits in his Bed, pretending a slight
indisposition to exempt himself from the fatigue of Ceremonies, His Apartment
and Furniture were extremely magnificent, but it is an odd sight to see a
Spaniard in his Bed of State, because they wear no Morning Gowns here, but only
their Golilia and black Cloaks, and have their Hats on, or else are
bare-headed, for the Men as well as the Women wear no Caps; He had enjoyed the
place of Sumiller de Corpse, i. e. Lord Chamberlain for a long time, and in this
Quality he was the only person that commanded in the King's Chamber, and lay
there.

He did not delay to give public Audience in the Hall, which they call the
Rubis, and is the place where the Council of State uses to assemble. It Is under
the King's Apartment. Here it was that the Duke received the visit of the
Nuncio and the Venetian Ambassador, they did not seem to be pleased at the
manner wherein the Chairs were disposed, because it could not absolutely be
determined whether either of them or he had the Chief Place of Honor. Besides
this, he only reconducted them to the middle of the Hall of Audience. They
acquainted the Marquess de Villars with it, who told them that he had designed
to make that visit along with them, because the Ambassadors of the Chapel
generally acquit themselves of these sorts of devoirs together, but that he was
not displeased with himself for not being there, since he was resolved to take
direction by the fault they had committed; and that he would not neglect, as
they did, to use all necessary precautions about the Step, Place and Rank, and
would be assured both of the one and the other before he performed that
Ceremony. In short, he sent to the Duke to know whether he would not receive
him, as Don Louis de Haro used to receive the Ambassadors of France; he
immediately agreed to it, and that there might be no mistakes committed, the
places were marked out, and every thing was adjusted before the day of
Audience. The other Ambassadors were concerned at the oversight they had
committed, and by this visit of our Ambassador, regulated those they continued
to make to the Chief Minister.

The Count de Monterey kissed the Kings hand and the Queens, he complemented
them from the part of the City of St. Iago de Compostella, the Marquess d'
Astorgas did the same from the City of Avila.

About this time Don Francisco d' Agourto was nominated by the King to be
Master of the Camp General of the Cavalry. The Envoy extraordinary from England
surprised all the Court by the strict prohibition he gave his Domestics not to
suffer any Ecclesiastics or Religious to come within his Doors.

The young Queen was so taken up with the diversions of the Carnaval, that she
had scarce opportunity to perceive that this was a set time of mirth and
jollity: Her best days were spent in hunting with the King, and the three last
days of the Carnaval there was a Comedy represented upon the Theater at
Buen-Retiro, which is a well-contrived Building. The King and the Queen saw it
on the Sunday, the next day it was acted before the several Councils, and on
Tuesday before the Officers of the City. The Queen being informed that the
Duchess de Bejar, and the Marchioness de Castle Rodrigo, who had never bore
any Children before, were each of them delivered of a Son, begged leave of the
King to send them word that she wished them joy, I agree to it, says the King
smiling, on condition that within nine months they will come in their turn to
perform the same complement to you.

All Spain impatiently expected to see what remedies the New Ministers would
apply to those disorders, that seemed for a long time to be radicated in the
Monarchy; but whatever good intentions he had to rectify them, he found it a
difficult matter to put them in execution. The King's Treasury was exhausted,
several private Families ruined, the price of all Commodities excessive high;
and these perplexities were heightened by the connivance of the Magistrates, and
the length of time. During the Ministry of Don Iuan nothing had been set in
order, and since his death one would have thought they had affected to abandon
all manner of business.

To this we may add, that the Duke de Medina Celi had never been in any employ,
where he might learn that experience which is so necessary for Government. He
was born and bred in the Genius of Madrid, which is so supine and careless,
that nothing almost is determined there. Nay what is more, he suffered the
Master of the Council to deliberate about the Public Affairs, after the same
manner, as he did, before his Ministry, and submitted to take his Counsel; he
likewise erected Iunta's to debate of those things, which he supposed to carry
any great difficulty with them.

He erected one amongst the rest, to which he nominated the Constable, the
Admiral, and the Marquess d' Astorgas, all which three were Counselors of
State; he also admitted three Divines, whereof the King's Confessor was one,
and three Counselors of the King's Council to examine along with him the
Affair of the President of Castile, about which the Nuncio made so great a
noise. The occasion of this Dispute was this, Monsieur Mellini, the Nuncio, had
a mind to preside over a Chapter of Religious, whom they call Clericos Minores,
who were going to choose a Provincial. The President desired that one of his
friends might be named; now he knew that the Nuncio had a kindness for another,
so he went the shortest way to work, and obtained a Decree of the King, which
forbad him to preside in that Assembly, and because he did not exactly obey it,
he was fined a thousand Crowns.

The Nuncio suffered this strange treatment with indignation enough, and
complained of it to the Pope. His Holiness writ to the King about it, and Don
Iuan promised him to get the Fine revoked; but the many disorders that happened
after his death, hindered the execution of it. The King thought the business was
laid asleep, because he writ a very submissive Letter to the Pope about it, but
for all that, the Nuncio, who was not to be appeased by a Letter, renewed the
quarrel after the Prince's death. He saw that the King had not as yet pitched
upon a Chief Minister, and judged that the President of Castile was not well
supported; he knew he had abundance of enemies, and that amongst the rest the
Queen Mother was the most inveterate against him. All these considerations
served to persuade him, that he should obtain an entire satisfaction without
any trouble:

He pretended therefore that he ought to lose his Place, and to go to Rome to
have the suspension taken off, which he had incurred in the year 1679. The
Court absolutely refused to grant him what he demanded; upon this he complained
very highly to the King, telling him that he ill performed what he had promised
the Pope in his Letter.

The Duke de Medina Celi being advanced to the Ministry, was willing to examine
the reasons of the Nuncio, and those of the President by a Iunta. 'Twas
alleged in favor of the last, that being a native of Spain, the King could
not abandon him to the Pope's resentments if at the bottom he did not deserve
it; that it was true indeed he had done irregular things upon several
occasions, but then his Place was of that nature, that he could not forfeit it
unless it were for reasons of the greatest importance: The Chief Minister
declared, that he should keep his Place of being President of the Council of
the Indies, and that Don Vicente Gonzaga should perform all his Functions. He
received with extraordinary satisfaction the offer which the Admiral of Castile
made, to resign the Office of Master of the Horse to him, which is generally
possessed by the Favorite, but would not accept of it.

He gave order to Don Gabriel Quinones, Secretary of the Council of War, to
bring in his accounts, out of hopes of drawing some money from thence; and
indeed the State was never in such extremity of want as now; for since the
publishing of the King's Declaration for sinking the value of money, all
Commerce was entirely stopped, the Shops continued shut up, and the people
groaned under the greatest necessities imaginable. The Duke used all his power
to remedy these pressing Grievances, he designed to coin new money, and to
lessen the price of all Commodities, but the effect of his good intentions was
long delayed, and the public misery increased more and more every day.

Hereupon a man of great business, whose name was Marcos Dias presented a
Memorial to the Duke, wherein he proposed a method to raise the King's Revenue,
and yet ease the people; he offered to prove that the Magistrates of the City
of Madrid, under pretense of reimbursing themselves of the money they had lent
the late King, had raised considerable sums, and had never given any account
of them. He proposed a way to force them to refund the overplus, as well to
supply the present want, as to prevent the like exactions for the time to come.
The Duke hearkened to him, and told him his advice was good. Immediately after
this Marcos Dias presented another Memorial to him, wherein he showed, that his
Majesty's Dues were considerably diminished, that he offered to pay the full
worth of them, and yet to make an advance of two hundred thousand Crowns, a
present of a hundred thousand Crowns to the King* and lessen the imposition of
the Dues one half of what it amounted to the year 1664. when they were less by
one third part, than they were this present year. For this he demanded that the
Rents of the Guild Hall of the City of Madrid, the payments whereof were
assigned for these funds, should be reduced to five in the hundred, whereas
they were risen to eight; and what is more, he still offered to reimburse those
persons who were not willing to suffer this diminution.

It is natural to believe, that he knew his own accounts well enough, not to
lose any thing by his project, and to say the truth he had been no loser: for
the disorders and rapines were at that time so great, that not a ninth part of
the King's rights came into his Coffers. The Duke foreseeing the event of this
affair, advised Marcos Dias not to stir out of the Palace, but he had a mind to
go to Alcala, and he returned with vomiting of blood and Convulsions, which
occasioned the belief that he was poisoned: for this overture of accommodating
the public affaris, disgusted some particular persons of great estates, who
got prodigious sums at the expense of the King and People. These persons, to
avert this blow, had written to Dias, and threatened to have him infallibly
stabbed if he continued his proposals. He was very apprehensive of the danger
he incurred, and besides this, these very Magistrates offered the same terms to
his Majesty: But the Duke saw there was all the reason in the world to prefer
Dias, and so he refused the others. Upon a consideration of what these
differences might produce, the Duke advised him to have a care of himself, till
the Treaty was concluded. The advice was good, if he had had the good fortune
to have followed it, but as he came back from Alcala to Madrid, he met some men
in Masks, who gave him several blows with little bags full of Sand, so that
he spit abundance of blood at his mouth, and being seized with a violent Feavor
died on the first day of April. The Corrigidor, and some other Officers of the
City were the men that were principally exasperated against him, because he had
discovered their Villainies a little before: nevertheless they were willing to
submit to some beneficial alterations in matters, and so they reduced the Rents
of the Guild Hall of the City, from eight to five in the hundred. There was
also some small regulation made in the Civil Government, but the Duke could not
forbear to be sensibly touched for losing, by the death of Dias, an opportunity
to serve the King and ease the People.

In the mean time the people who had fully flattered themselves that if the
Proposals made by Dias had taken effect, they should have met with plenty
instead of want; being informed of his indisposition, flocked about his House,
and cried out aloud, that he was poisoned, and that this business ought to be
examined to the bottom, because he suffered for the good will he had expressed
toward them. They added menaces against those persons who had opposed such
profitable advice, and as the King accidentally passed by them in his Coach, a
great body of them* got about the Coach, and followed it crying,

Vive el Roi y muera el mal Goviorno, that is to say, Let the King live, and
the ill Government dye.

There were great endeavors used to moderate the first motions of the popular
fury, which exceedingly increased on the day that Dias died. Above six thousand
were got together, who ran up and down the Streets complaining and weeping
bitterly, every one of them said, that they had murdered the only man that
wished them well. They accompanied his body to the place of burial, and the
Streets were so full of people, that the King durst not stir out of his Palace,
although he was to go to a great Festival that was celebrated by the Jesuits, and
he had a great desire to be there. There was little probability that they would
ever be appeased, but as good fortune would have it, the multitude was only
made up of poor irresolute people, whose spirits were broken by the miseries of
which they complained. All this Tempest past over in vain menaces, and some
injuries against some considerable persons, but however it did not alter the
State of Affairs.

At this same time word was sent to the Nuncio, by an express Order from Court,
that he should enjoy no other privileges than what the Ambassador of Spain did
at Rome. This was a new occasion of discontent to him; but the Action was
general, and they took care to inform the other Foreign Ministers, that for
the future the would allow them only the same privileges as their Princes
allowed to the Ambassadors of his Catholic Majesty; so that he had no reason
to complain since he was treated but like the rest. This resolution was taken
upon this account. Six Alguazils de Corte passing before the H^use of the
Venetian Ambassador, it seems three of his Footmen knew them, and dem^nded of
them how they durst have the impudence to go through their Quarter. The
Alguazels returned them a saucy answer, whereupon the servants drew their
Swords, but the Alguazels fired immediately upon them, and killed them upon the
place. The Ambassador made great complaints about it, they promised to give him
full satisfaction, but to av^id the doing of it, they thought it more expedient
to revoke all the Franchises.

The King received a Letter from the Viceroy of Naples, and was extremely glad
to hear that he had found out a way to borrow three hundred thousand Crowns of
the Merchants of Genoa for the raising four thousand men that were to be sent
into the Milanese: But they were persuaded at Court that it would be a long
time before they could be in a condition to get there, because they demanded a
further supply of money from Madrid, and here they wanted it, without exception,
for every thing. However this did not hinder them from using all imaginable
efforts to contribute toward the raising of these four thousand men, because
they were exceedingly alarmed at the Treaty of Casal, which they pretended our
King had bought of the Duke of Mantua. They apprehended, this was an open pass
to render himself Master of Italy when he pleased, and they were fully
persuaded that he had sent an Army thither upon this score.

The Genoese first whispered and spread about these jealousies, which at last
reached the Venetians, so that they drew their Soldiers out of their Garrisons
in Dalmatia, and bestowed them in their own Towns in Lumbardy, where they made
some new Fortifications. The Emperor for his part was as much alarmed as the
rest of his Neighbors, for he sent his Troops to the Milanese to guard them,
and several Princes of Italy put themselves to a great deal of trouble, out of
an apprehension of a rupture. But if there was any reason to fear one, it was
from the side of Bisca, where the people of that Province, who are under the
dominion of Spain, have almost every day some disputes with those that live
under the dominion of France, sometimes about the fishing, at other times about
other differences, each of them appropriating the River de Bid^ssoa to
themselves, so that they seldom live in peace. Matters came to that upshot at
l^st, that they burnt several Barques, and took several of the French
prisoners. Our Ambassador was ordered to demand justice for these injuries, and
frequently spoke to the Ministers about it, who continued deaf in these cases
because they had no mind to redress them. They persisted to be so stiff and
obstinate upon this occasion, that the Ambassador declared at last to Don
Vincente Gonzaga, that his Master would order his Troops to march toward the
Frontiers, by which mea^s it would be more easy to get satisfaction for the
insolence of the Biscayneers, than by sending to the Council at Madrid, that
His Majesty was concerned for the tranquillity of his Subjects, and that he
^ould take a due course to procure it. Gonz^ga heard Monsie^^ de Villars very
patiently, and t^l^ him at la^^ that he was surprised to find him add^ess
himself to him because he was no longer Commissary, and that the Marquess de
los Ba^bazez, had been nominated to his Place above a month before. The
A^bassador acquainted him, that generally these sorts of Changes are not made
without in^o^ming those persons who are interested in them* and that as for
himself he had never heard the least mention of it. Don Vincente replied, that
Don Pedro Colonna had been ordered to inform him of it, but that in truth he
was a negligent person, and had showed h^mself so not only on this occasion.
Upon this he made some particular reflections that were not very obliging to
the new Secretary of State.

Don Pedro Fernandez del Campo, Marquess de Majorada, who had been formerly
Secretary of State, and to whom the Marquess de Valenzuela, when he became sole
Favorite had an aversion, because he would not blindly obey him, died of grief
for the loss of his Place, and to see it still possessed by Don Ieronimo d'
Eguya.

The number of the Maids of Honor belonging to the Queen, was about this time
augmented. The King added to them the Daughter of the Princess Pio, those of
the Countess de Villambrosa, the Marquess do Pouar; the Duke d' Hijar, Donna
Eleonora of the House de Zapara, the Niece of the Duchess de Terra Nova, and
Mademoiselle de Lalain, who was a Flemish woman. But although this was a Testimony
of the particular consideration which the King had for his Young Queen, because
ordinarily the Queens of Spain have not so many, yet he could not ^orbear to be
sensibly tormented at the Stories which the Camarera continually buzzed into
his ear. Don Melchior Navarra, who had formerly been Vice Chancellor of
Arragon, and whom Don Iuan banished to Cienpuzu^los, was called home at the
entreaties of the Queen Mother. Nay it was even believed that the King would
give him the Place of President of Castile, in case the President, who was then
embroyled with the Nuncio, were turned out of his Place.

The King and Queen had the pleasure of hearing Mass celebrated at the Jesuits
College in the Chaldean language, by a Priest of the City of Muzal, which was
heretofore called Ninive. After it was over, the Queen, who was always desirous
of informing herself in matters of Curiosity, sent for him to come to her, and
by the means of an Interpreter, she asked him several questions, and amongst
the rest, whether the women were as severely locked up at Muzal, as they were
at Madrid. This question, although there was nothing criminal in it, was so
maliciously explained by the Duchess de Terra nova, that the King was observed
to look upon her with a great deal of Coldness for some days after. This did
not hinder the Queen Mother from going to visit her, who assured her with all
the Tenderness imaginable how sensibly she was concerned at these ill Offices
that were done her. They went together to St. Marie la Royalle, where was
celebrated the Beatification of Torribio Alphonso Mogrobejo, Second Archbishop
of Lima: The Music of the Chapel was there; their Majesty's were informed at
their return that the Great Arch Deacon of Madrid was dead. The Queen Mother
seemed to be desirous of seeing this Dignity filled by one of her own
Creatures, and the Young Queen proposed to send to Cardinal Portocarero to
demand it of him: But now it was too late, for the Cardinal to prevent all
Solicitations upon this point, made haste to gratify his Nephew Don Pedro
Portocarero with it.

In the mean time, whilst these small things happened, News was brought that a
Squadron of French men of War, commanded by the Marquess de Valbelle, was
arrived before the Isle of Majorca, to demand of the Viceroy some Merchantmen
that had been taken by the Corsairs, since the peace, and Monsieur Valbelle had
in his hands an Order of the King of Spain for their Restitution. The Viceroy
would not restore these prizes, alleging That the Persons who had taken them
had already shared and divided them, and that they were not all of them
Majorcans; that theEffects were all consumed and gone, and for his part he
demanded Damages for certain hostilities which these Corsairs had suffered.
Valbelle continued his instances, but seeing they had no Effect; he declared
that he would not forget to make use of the Right of Reprisals; That the
Subjects of the King of Spain, whenever he met them on the Sea, should find it
to their cost; that the King his Master had reason to complain of the usage he
found at their hands; That several Governors and Viceroys dependant upon the
King of Spain had taken liberty to commit all injustices against the French;
that it was almost to no purpose to demand satisfaction from those at Madrid,
where the Councils were filled with persons who had played the same Tricks,
when they were in the like posts, and consequently durst not condemn and punish
others for the very same crimes they had committed themselves; that he was
assured this was the reason that occasioned this impunity and all their
frivolous pretenses: In a word, that he was going to take another course with
them, and do himself Justice.

These Menaces, one would have thought, were sufficient to alarm those persons
that were concerned in them; but they have this Maxim in Spain, that provided
the danger is a little remote, they never fear it, whether this happens through
insolence or temerity, and they rather choose to suffer the disorders, that
always fall out in military executions, than give themselves the trouble to do
justice upon the complaints that are made.

But before I finish the first part of my Memoirs; I think it will not be
altogether amiss to say something of the Councils of Spain, according to the
best information I have received concerning them.

The Council of State.
The number of these Counselors is not ^ixed, they don't observe the right of
Seniority amongst themselves, but take their Places as they happen to come into
the Chamber. The King administers the Oath to them, and they sit, as the
Secretaries of State do upon benches, with backs to them, every man has his
Cushion, the Counselors are in the middle near the Table, the Secretaries of
State at both ends.

When the King assists there, he has a Table above that of the Counselors, who
for that time have only places, and the Secretaries of State stand.

This Council is held twice every Saturday, and but once on Mondays and
Tuesdays, all of them are called his Counselors, and they deliberate here upon
affairs of the greatest importance, such as Peace and War, Leagues and Truces.
Here they likewise treat of the Marriage of the Kings and Princes of the Royal
Family, and distribute the Viceroyships, and all the Governments of the
Provinces that are under the Obedience of the King of Spain, and although other
affairs are examined in other Councils, yet the Counselors of State don't for
all that omit to give the King their advice about them.

Behold a List of those that compose this Council at present.

The Constable of Castile, who is the Dean of it.

The Duke of Alva. Don Pedro d' Arragon. The Admiral of Castile. The Marquess
d' Astorgas. The Duke D' Ossone The Prince de Stillano. Don Vincente Gonzaga,
Prince de Guastallo. Don Lovis Portocarero Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo.
The Marquess de Liche. TheMarquess de loz Balbazez. Don Diego Sarmiento. The
Prince de Ligne. The Duke de Villa Hermosa. Don Melchior Navarra. The Marquess
de los Velez. The Count d' Oropesa. The Marquess de Mansera, And the Duke d'
Albuquerque.
The Council Royal of Castile.
This Council is the chief of all, and to distinguish it from the rest by a
Title of Honor, the King calls it Our Council. It was established by St.
Ferdinand the third of that name, in the year 1246. There are in this Council a
President, Sixteen Counselors, a Fiscal, Six Reporters, Six Secretaries, a
Register, and a Keeper of the Registers, a Receiver of the Fines due to the
Council, another of the Fines adjudged to particular persons, a Treasurer, a
Deputy, and a dozen Porters. The Council assembles every Friday in the Palace,
toward Evening the King comes there. The Kings, Don Ferdinand the Fourth, and
Don Alonzo the last of that name, established this Custom. This Council is
divided into four Chambers, where they distribute those Affairs that are under
their Jurisdiction in Castile.

One of them goes by the name of the Chamber of the fifteen hundred Pistoles,
because such a Sum is to be consigned before any man can get a review of a
process which is pretended to be unjustly judged by the Parliaments of
Vailladolid and Granada, which are the two Parliaments of Castile.

When the President of Castile, goes out of the Council, the Counselors follow
him to his Chair; he never makes any Visits, never gives the Right hand to any
at his House; he is to give the King an account of the most important affairs,
that pass in Council, where they name a Council every Week to report them.

When the King comes there, they all uncover themselves and kneel down.
Afterward they cover themselves and sit.

When Audience is over, the King retires into his Cabinet with the President,
who discourses him about business of the greatest moment for which the King
gives his Orders, and this does not return any more to the Chamber for the
Counselors to deliberate upon it.

In the Year 1609. all Castile was divided into five Districts, and every
District is under a Counselor of the Council Royal, who takes cognizance of
the conduct of the Judges, the Lords, Ecclesiastics, and other secular
Persons. Besides this, there is a particular Council that is called the Council
of the Chamber of Castile; the President is the Chief, and the King names a
certain number of Counselors of the Council Royal whether they be three, or
four that compose it. Here it is that they dispatch all Benefices in the King's
Nomination, Titles, and Patents for the most considerable Places, Letters of
Naturalization, and the Ratification of Orders to arrest the Grandees of Spain,
and the Graces and Favors, to which his Majesty is pleased to give his Consent.

The King receives prodigious Sums of Money for the Places that are sold by the
means of these Counselors. He gives likewise the Patents and Commissions of
several places of Justice, and it is commonly pretended that in the two
Castiles, the Kingdom of Leon, Guypuscoa, Biscay, the Province de Hana, and in
Navarr there are above 72 thousand places of Judicature.

Secretary of State, and of the Universal Dispatch.
This Secretary is in a condition to serve or injure people, according as he
stands affected to them, for all the Requests and Petitions, which they call
Memorials here, and are presented to the King or Chief Minister, pass through
his hands. It Is he who sends them to his Counselors, who are to give their
advice concerning them: After the consult is made (for this is their Phrase in
Spain) these Petitions are sent back again to the Secretary of State, and when
he reports them to the King, His Majesty orders what pleases him, and this is
called a Decree.

This Decree is expedited by persons proposed for that Office; so that when
these Requests are carried to the King they say the Memorial is mounted; and
when they are answered, they say the Memorial falls down; or else the Consult
ascended and the Decree descended.

Without counting the Secretary of State, whom I have been speaking of, there
are two more that enter the Council, one of them dispatches the Affairs of
Arragon, of Italy and Sicily, the other those of Castile and the North.

One of these is named Don Manuel de Lira, who was formerly Master of the
Ceremonies, and Envoy Extraordinary in Holland; he was made at his return
Secretary of State. The other is called Don Pedro Colonna, he is descended of a
good Family, and those of his House have always possessed great places. They may
give their advice in writing in matters of consequence.

The King sends the Decrees to them, and through their hands Affairs go to the
Council of State: They make a Report of them there, and gather the voices; and
give an account of all to his Majesty, who at last orders it as he thinks fit.
They have power to assemble the Council out of the appointed days, when they
judge it convenient, and when the King has a mind that they should have any
extraordinary meeting, they send the Order immediately to all the Counselors.

Every Secretary of State has a Chief Commissary, who is called the Official
Mayor, and exercises his Masters Office, when he happens to be absent. The
Secretary of State for Italy has eight Commissaries reckoning him that is the
principal, the King pays them: And the Secretary of State for the North has
seven under him; They choose them themselves and the King gives his consent:
These dispatch all Patents, and generally those persons that get into these
Employments, advance their fortunes in the world.

The Council of War.
This began as soon as the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon were erected, under
King Pelagius, in the year 720.

It assembles on Mundays, Wednesdays, and Fridays: As for what concerns the
Government of it, the King is always President of it, and the Counselors are
men of the Sword. They must be men of experience and service, the number of
them is not fixed, and it depends upon the King's pleasure to augment or to
diminish them. Their places are not regulated in the Council, but they sit as
they they come. It is indeed true, that when the Counselors of State are
called thither, they have the upper end, but then they never come but at a time
when a full Council of War is held. They have two Secretaries, who have each of
them two Commissaries under them, one of these is for the Sea-affairs, and the
others for those at Land.

When they debate about matters of justice, an Assessor of the Council Royal,
makes a report of them, who has likewise the privilege to give his opinion
before the Dean of the Council: The King comes there almost most every day.
There are besides some other Chambers that depend upon this Council, such as
those of the Flota's, the Galleys, and the Garrisons. The King nominates the
Officers for these Chambers. The Councils are the same with those of the
Council of War, and it is the Chief Minister or the President of Castile that
presides there.

Alcaldes of the Court.
The word Alcalde signifies a Judge of any place. This Tribunal is full as
ancient as the Council Royal, whoever is judged to be a criminal by it can make
no appeals but is executed immediately. For this reason it is named the Quinta
Sala, that is to say, the fifth Hall. Here they determine both Civil and
Criminal Affairs, but when these Councils were established in Castile, the
Judges thereof were reduced to four Alcaldes. They have been augmented since,
and are nine at present, two Reporters and four Registers: Their Jurisdiction
is divided into two parts, one, as I said before, relates only to Criminal
Matters, the other is like that of ordinary Judges, and is to direct the
management of Civil Affairs.

The Supreme Council of the Inquisition.
This Council was erected in the year 1483. by Don Ferdinand, and Donna
Isabella, King and Queen of Castile, to defend and preserve the Catholic
Religion, although it is certain that this Tribunal of the Inquisition was
established ever since the year 1478. The President of this Council is called
the Inquisitor General, and the Counselors, the Apostolic Inquisitors. They
are named by the Pope, and there are in Spain above twenty thousand Officers
belonging to the Holy Inquisition, whose business it is to seize the persons of
Criminals. Every Council consists of six Inquisitors (the word signifies
Enquirers,) the Fiscal who is the Accuser, two Secretaries, and Alguazil
Principal, two Reporters, a Receiver of the Fines, four Porters, and a
Solicitor. The Inquisition keeps its Tribunals at Madrid, at Toledo, at
Granada, at Sevil, at Cordova, at Murcia, at Guenza, at Logrono, at Lierena, in
Gallicia, and at Vailladolid.

The Council of Orders.
This was erected in the year 1489. The Duke de Sessa of the House de Cordonne
is now the President of it, he has two Counselors of the Order of St. Iago,
two of Calatrava, two of Alcantara, a Fiscal and a Secretary, who are all
Knights.

The King is Grand Master of these three Orders, and is called the Perpetual
Administrator of it.

This Council take Cognizance of the Temporal and Spiritual Government and of
the Civil and and Criminal Justice of these Orders.

There are also Religious Men and Religious Women of it, who bring their proofs
and carry the mark of the Order. It Is in concert with this Council that the
King examines those of his Subjects, who are capable of filling the places and
vacant governments that depend upon the Order.

The Sacred Royal and Supreme Council of Arragon.
The King Don Ferdinand established this Council at Madrid in the year 1590.
Charles the Fifth confirmed it in the year 1522. and appointed new Regulations
of it in 1543. when he passed through Catalonia to go into Italy.

The Chief of this Council is called the Vice Chancellor, who at present is Don
Pedro d' Arragon, and the Prince de Stillano is Treasurer General. This place
is hereditary to the Family of the Duke de Medina de las Torres, and this Duke
is the Head of it. Three of the Councellers are to be Natives of Valentia,
three of Arragon, three of Catalonia, a Protonotary, a Fiscal, four
Secretaries, four Scriveners, a Procurator General, nine Commissaries for the
great Registers, five for the little, one for Letters, four Porters, and an
Alguazil: The Isles of Majorca, Minorca, Sardinia, and Innica are under the
jurisdiction of this Council; they take cognizance of every thing that happens
within the extent of their Authority; and deliberate with the King about
Ecclesiastic and Military Affairs, Vice-Roy-ships, Bishoprics, the Finances,
and in short about whatsoever relates to the Civil Government.

The Council Royal of the Indies.
The Spaniards having had the good fortune to find out this part of the world
which was unknown before, and to reduce it under the Dominion of Spain, His
Catholic Majesty in the year 1511. established a Council of the Indies at
Madrid; Charles the Fifth in 1524. added a clause to it about the preserving of
Religion, and ordained that it should be composed of a Lord Chancellor, a
President, eight Councellers of the Long Robe, and four of the Sword, with a
Deputy to the Chancellor, a Fiscal, a Treasurer, four Contadores, an Alguazil
Mayor, two Secretaries who have each a dozen Commissaries under them, two
Agents to the Fiscal, five Reporters, one Historiographer, one Geographer, one
Chaplain, one Sacristan, one Advocate, and one Proctor for the Poor, ten
Porters, one Scrivener, and a Counceller of the Contratation at Sevil; this
last is commanded to preserve and keep together all the Ordinances and Laws for
the Indies. There is a Chief, and an Under Commissary, and four more under him.
This Council together with the King takes cognizance of every thing that has
relation to the several Kingdoms and Provinces in the Indies, of Navigation, of
War, of Peace, and of Civil and Criminal Affairs. Philip the Fourth created a
Chamber for the Indies in the year 1644. Before the Duke de Medina Celi was
made Chief Minister, he was President of the Council, he still retains the
Profits as well as the Title of it, but he has placed in his room Don Vincente
Gonzaga Councellor of State, by a Commission; He is called the Governor of the
Council of the Indies.

The Council of Italy.
Charles the Fifth first erected this Council in the year 1555. and afterward
Philip the Second did cast it into a new Form. It is composed of six
Counselors and a President, which Office at present is filled by the Duke of
Alva of the House of Toledo. They are called Counselors Regent, and there are
two for the affairs of Milan, two for those of Sicily, and two for those of
Naples. Of this number three are to be Spaniards, and three Italians.

The last of these reside upon the place where their District is, and have a
Fiscal, a Secretary, two Reporters and four Porters.

The President has no voice in the Affairs of Justice; His business is to
propose persons to the King for military Employments. This Council takes
cognizance of matters of State, of Grace, and of Justice that lie within the
reach of their jurisdiction, as also of the Affairs of the Treasury. They
consult with the King about the disposing of Bishoprics, and places of
Justice, as well as those of the Finances and the Civil List, and in short
about all Governments of places, except some few that belong to the Council of
State, as for example the Castle of Naples does. They deliberate about the
Government of the Mildnese, Naples and Sicily.

The Council of the Finances named de Hazienda.
Philip the Third in the year 1602. established this Council. It consists of
four Tribunals, Don Carlos Ramirez de Atellano is President of it; eight
Counselors of the Sword, and the President compose this Council. Their chief
business lies in the recovery and administration of the Finances, in the
raising and augmenting of the Rents, Graces, Privileges and Concessions of the
King. They make Treaties for defraying the expense of the Household and of the
Armies. When there is occasion for advance-mony, they are to find out people to
do it. The President signs all the expeditions alone by himself, after he he
has received the King's Order, and the consult of the Council, for all
Gratifications, Appointments, Assignments, Profits, Pensions, Ordinances and
advances of Uundertakers.

Their expeditions are made in two Offices, in each of which there is a Chief
Commissary, two Seconds, and two that are called Entretenus.

There are a dozen Contadores, that keep the Registers, and Accounts of this
Council.

The last Contador is called Ecrivain Major, which signifies the Register of
his Majesty's Rents: They all go the Council of the Finances, where they cover
themselves after they have stood bare for some time.

They give them a sign to go, when the Secretaries have a mind to come in. In
the regard of the Affairs, and Trials belonging to the Tribunal of the Oydores,
and the Council of the Finances, there is a great number of inferior Officers,
whose Places are sold, and four Reporters, that are named by the Council.

The Council of the Crusade.
Pope Julius the Second in the year 1509. granted the privilege of the Crusade
to the Kings of Spain, to make war against the Infidels; the Revenue of it is
so considerable, that it brings in several millions, and in the same year Queen
Joan and the King her Father, who Governed in her name, formed and erected the
Council of the Cruzada.

The President thereof carries the Title of Commissary General, and he is at
present Don Henriquez de Benavides y Bazan, Patriarch of the Indies. It is
composed of two Counselors of the Council of Castile, and two Regents, one of
the Council of Arragon, the other of that of the Indies, a Fiscal, two
Treasurers, a Reporter, two Registers, and three Sollicitors. This Council
gives permission or license to publish Jubiles, and to print Books; all the
States of his Catholic Majesty are under its jurisdiction, except those of
Flanders, Milan and Naples, who would never admit of its Authority. They Judge
without Appeal.

The Council of Flanders.
Philip the Fourth named the President and Counselors of it in the year 1628.
This Council is superior to all those that are established in Flanders: The
Prince de Stillano was President of it, but the Count de Monterey is now
preferred to this Post. It consists of no more than three Counselors.

The Council d' Aposento.
Since the first Floor that is raised in all the Houses in Madrid, belongs to
the King, this Council may Rent it, or Sell it until the Proprietors redeem it.
Don Alonzo, the Eleventh of that Name, erected in the year 1341. a Junto
consisting of a President, who is called the Aposentador Major, of six
Aposentadores of exercise, (because some others may be admited into it if they
are Veteranes,) of a Fiscal, a Secretary, a Receiver, an Alguazil, and a
Porter. This Junto preserves His Majesty's Rights, they take care likewise to
lodge the Officers of the King's Household.

The Council of the Chamber of Castile.
Queen Joan and Charles the Fifth her Son, erected this Council in the year
1518. The President of Castile is the Chief Man of it, with four Counselors of
the same Council, three Secretaries and a Reporter. They meet toward night on
Mundays and Wednesdays every week at the Presidents House, and give him an
account of all the Posts that are to be filled in the two Castiles.

They expedite all Remissions and deliver the Titles to Dukes, Marquesses,
Counts, and the names of the Villages. They likewise look after all the
Benefices, that are in the King's Presentation, by the Apostolic Commission.

The Iunto de Bosques Reale.
Charles the Fifth established it in the 1545: It consists of two Counselors,
an Alcalde, a Fiscal and a Secretary. Their business is to look after the
Palace, and the rest of the King's Houses as well in City as in Country, and
likewise to take care of His Majesty's Woods.

The Iunto of the Millions.
Philip the Fourth observing that the Council de Hazienda was overcharged with
business, in the year 1653. formed a Chamber composed of a President, four
Counselors of the Finances, four Commissaries Deputies of the States, a
Fiscal, and two Proctors of the Court. This Chamber is called the Tribunal of
the Millions, because here they receive the Revenue that arises from Imposts
upon Victuals, Oil, Wine and Vinegar, and amounts to a Prodigious Sum.

The End of the First Part.
MEMOIRS OF THE COURT OF SPAIN.
PART II.
ON the Fea^^ of the Annunciation, the Young Q. went to the Monastery of the
Incarnation. The French Ambassador's Lady accompanied her thither; but though she
never so earnestly desired to have an opportunity to entertain her in private,
she could not find one single moment to do it; for the vigilant Camarera would
not allow the Q. that Liberty. At her return, she served Nine Poor Women at
Dinner, and gave each of them a Suit of Apparel, and five Pistols in their
Purse: The Maids of Honor carried the Dishes; the Q. Mother performed the same
Ceremony on her side. But what infinitely surprised the Q. was to find a Billet
privately slipped into her Pocket, and thus Superscribed:

For the QUEEN Alone.

At first she was in doubt, whether she ought to open it or no; but presently
after she had a mind to carry it to the King: Nevertheless the uncertainty of
what was contained in it, and after what manner the K* might take it, prevailed
with her at last to open it. It seemed to be written in a disguised sort of an
Hand, and contained these Words in Spanish:

The Supreme Elevation of your Majesty, and the mighty difference that (...)
between us, has not been able to efface that Passion which your admirable
Qualities have infused into my Heart. I adore you, my Queen; I die in adoring
you; and I dare say, that I am not unworthy, to adore you: I see you, I sigh
after you; but you don't know my Sighs, you don't understand my secret
Languishings; nay, you don't turn your Charming Eyes upon me. Ab, Madam, how
unhappy am I to be born a Subject, who find my self possessed with the
Inclinations of the greatest K. in the Universe.

The Queen continued some time surprised and astonished: She could not imagine
who this Rash Person was, that had the hardiness to write to her in these
Terms; and did not question, but that the Billet was slipped into her Pocket by
one of the Poor Women whom she had served. But then it appeared very strange,
that a Man, who seemed to be of great Quality, would trust his Life (for
nothing less was hazarded) into the Hands of a poor needy Creature; for such
she must be that could approach the Q. that day. It was true indeed, that she
had been amongst the Religious Women of the Incarnation; but although some of
them might undertake this business, yet there was little probability to believe
it, by reason of the Consequences that would have proved fatal to the Party
concerned, if ever the matter came to be discovered. Sometimes she thought,
that perhaps it might be a Trick of the Camarera Mayor, to see what use she
made of this Billet, and then to acquaint the King with it, and turn the most
Innocent thing in the world into a wrong sense. After these different
Reflections, at last she judged it would be the safest way to discover the
Matter to the Q. Mother, and follow her Advice. She went the next day to dine
with her, and afterward showed her the Letter, beseeching her to keep it: That
if the K. came to know any thing of the matter, she would be so kind as to
testify the whole Truth. The Q. Mother seeing that she was discomposed at it,
assured her, that it was not worth the while to torment her self about it; and
from whatever Hands the Letter came, if the King was disquieted at it, she
would take care to acquaint him wi^^ ^ne Truth: So that the Queen le^t her more
at ease than she was before, by reason of this assurance. On this day the Q.
arrived to her Eighteenth Year: She received the Compliments of all the Lords,
and the Ladies made her Presents, particularly the Q. Mother, who sent her a
Set of Diamonds and Turquoises. At Night there was a Consort of French Music
at the Palace.

It was much about this time that the Envoy of Brandenburgh parted from Madrid,
complaining, and loudly th^eatning them with his Master's Resentments. He came
to receive several considerable Sums, which the Elector had sent to the K. of
Spain. They had amused him a long time with many tedious delays, but at last
gave him an Assignation to receive fifty thousand Crowns of the Silver that was
daily expected from the Indies. When the Flota was arrived, he went to Sevil,
but his Journey had no success, because they had ordered the President of the
The Contration is a Council where they order all Affairs relating to the Indice.
Contration at Sevil, to give him nothing. He came back to Madrid with all the
Fury imaginable, to find himself treated with so little Respect: He renewed his
Importunities; and they for their part renewed their Promises: At last he was
so wearied with these continual Delays, whereby they still put him off, that he
demanded a positive Answer, and yet tarried longer than he had resolved. But
his Master being informed of the whole Proceedings, ordered him to take his
Audience of Leave. The Duke de Medina Celi would fain have stopped him, promising
to pay down fifty thousand Crowns in four Months: And perhaps the Envoy had
stayed in expectation of them, if he had not been otherwise ordered, although
there was little probability, that he would have received satisfaction at the
time appointed; and so he refused this Proposal. Then they offered him thirty
thousand Crowns in hand. He was upon the point of accepting them, when he was
given to understand, that this would be paid him no better than the rest. This
put him into a great Passion, which made him speak so fiercely and freely to
the Ministers, that he did not spare them at all. He showed several Persons a
Letter from the Elector of Brandenburgh, which was full of Menaces, for the
rude Treatment of his Envoy. The Night before he parted, they sent him a Golden
Chain worth a hundred and fifty Pistols; but he returned it immediately back
again to the Person who brought it to him from the King: The next day the same
Chain was brought to him the second time; but he sent it back to the Chief
Minister, and told him, He would rather say, he had lost it upon the Road, than
accept of a Present that was so unworthy of the Elector his Master.

On the other side, the Count de Gubernatis, Envoy from Savoy, seeing that all
his Solicitations and Instances for four years last past, hadnot advanced his
Negotiation, in the least; and that all the hopes they gave him of granting the
same Honors to the Ministers of the Duke of Savoy, as they received in France,
were only dilatory Illusions to amuse him, without ever designing to perform
them; he departed from Madrid in a great Fury, which was so much the greater,
because they refused to satisfy his Demands, in the payment of those Subsidies
that were due to his Master. Some of the other Envoys departed also with no
less discontents; and as for those that stayed behind, they complained in their
turns, of the Ill Usage they had received. But Foreigners were not the only
Persons that were disgusted the Subjects of the K. of Spain were little better
used; and the Count de Balbo, with several Milanese Officers, returned to
Italy, without being able to obtain what was due to them, or get the Recompense
they demanded. It is indeed certain, that the King had no Funds, that the price
of Victuals was not in the least diminished, that many poor: Artisans and
Day-labourers died of Hunger, and that those men who were supposed to be rich,
had Billets often sent to them to send their Money to such and such places,
with great Menaces to Assassinate them, in case they failed.

Another Affair happened, upon which the Court had their Eyes fixed for a long
time, and several Persons of the highest Quality found themselves Interested in
it, by the means of the Prince d' Stillano, and the Count de Monterey. The
first of these possessed the place of President of the Council of Flanders at
Madrid; it was taken from him by Don Iuan of Austria, and conferred upon the
Count de Monterey, who had never taken possession of it. The pretense they used
to set by the Prince de Stillan^, was a quarrel raised for the purpose. He had
been banished, but was afterward informed under hand, that he might, if he
pleased, come back to Madrid: so he fell into the Snare, and returned. The K.
and Don Iuan seemed to be very angry with him, because he presumed to come
back, contrary to his Majesty's Order; and therefore to punish him, they
bestowed his place upon the Count de Monterey, who at that time commanded the
Army in Catalonia; and after this usage were so far from revoking his Sentence,
that they banished him to his old place. The first thing the Count did after he
had been summoned to the Court, was to demand the Oath of his Office, and the
K. promised to choose a convenient Opportuni^y to receive him: But the Q. Mother
being informed of it by Don Geronimo d' Eguya, hindered the King from receiving
the Oath of the Count de Monterey, because she had a kindness for the Prince d'
Stillano, who was altogether devoted to her Service. The Affair continued in
this condition, till the Duke de Medina Celi was advanced to the Ministry, who
assembled a Iuncto at Cardinal P^rt^carero's Palace, to examine the Reasons of
one side and the other: The Cardinal presided in it, and was assisted by the
King's and Queen Mother's Confessors, by Don Benedetto, and by Don Pedro Gil
del Faro: They gave the Prince de Stillano to understand, that since his
Majesty had disposed of his Place in favor of the Count de Monterey, he had
nothing left him to do, but only to submit. To this the Prince answered, That
by an ancient Law of Castile, the King could not take away his Place, without
commencing a Process against him. Upon this the Iuncto broke up, but at their
second Meeting concluded, That it was in the King's Power to dispose of this
Office, who having a great Inclination to the Count, had decided it in his
advantage. Whilst the Prince de Stillano continued thus outed, the Queen Mother
was sensibly concerned at the Injustice that was done to one of her principal
Servants; and she was persuaded, as well as the rest of her Family, that they
could reproach him with nothing but his faithful adhering to that Princess. He
still persisted in his Demands to have his Trial come on; That since they had
taken away his Place from him, as from a Criminal, they ought to treat him as
one, and punish him according to his Faults. All the Queen-Mother's Faction
joined in the same Complaints; but that did not hinder the Count de Monterey
from continuing still in his Place. It is true, that considering him
Personally, he was more deserving than the P^^nce de Stillano; that he had
faithfully served the King in Flanders, when he was Governor there, at a time
when Affairs were in a ticklish condition. He is a well made agreeable Person,
of great Abilities; and we ought to reckon amongst his other good Qualities,
his Alliance with the Duke de Medina Celi; and this was no small consideration,
at a time when the Duke did whatever he pleased at Court: For Example, he
nominated his Brother to be Vice Roy of Mexico, which is a Post where they get
a prodigious Wealth in a short time.

The President of the Council of Castile, received about this time a Breve from
the Pope, whereby he was enjoined to repair immediately to Rome, to give an
account of his Behavior toward the Nuncio; but they were of Opinion here,
that he was not obliged to obey it. It was known at Madrid, that the Visitor
General of the Kingdom of Naples had sent word to the Duke de Saint-Angelo,
Dean of the Collateral Council, to depart out of Naples within three days, and
to retire sixty Miles off. He obeyed this Injunction, after having taken his
Leave of the Viceroy, and the most considerable Persons of the City; and
afterward went to Gaette with his whole Family. The Viceroy, who appeared in
Favor of him, was very glad that the City of Naples had Writ to the King of
Spain about him, with a great deal of Zeal and Affection. The Visitor General
enraged at the Course they had taken, sent Orders immediately to the Duke de
Monte Sardo, his Son in Law, to the Duke della Regina, his Nephew, and to all
his other Relations, to be gone within an hour. The Duke Della Regina being a
Magistrate of the City* pretended, that he could not be hindered from staying
in it. He summoned his Friends together, and after he had represented to them
the Injury that was done to himself in particular, he declared to them, that
the Visitor had a design to attack them too in general, as appeared by his
severe examining the Conduct of the Princes and Barons of that Kingdom,
although by their Privileges they were exempted from it. 'Twas resolved in
this Assembly, to meet again the next day; and accordingly a great number of
people came there. In short, there came more than sixty, who elected out of
themselves the Prince Dotojano, of the House de Medici^, the Prince de la
Torella, of the House of Caraccioli, and the Duke de Matalone, of the House de
Caraffa: They went to find out the Viceroy, who voluntarily engaged to speak
to the Visitor General; but he coldly told him, That he executed the Orders he
had received from Spain. Hereupon the Neapolitan Lords were extremely
dissatisfied, and several of them wished, that they had some Chief or other to
head them, who was capable of a great Resolution.

For the better understanding of these Memoirs, I ought to acquaint the Reader,
That the Ambassadors, and even the Envoys, had a certain Right at Madrid, which
exempted them from paying any Toll at the City Gates, for those things that
were nece^sary for their Families. This Custom had been observed time out of
mind; but it being discovered, that some persons had extended this Privilege
farther than it ought to be, and that hereby the King suffered exceedingly in
his Dues; the Council judged it expedient to convert it into a Sum of Money,
which was in effect paid to the Foreign Ministers, and the Franquezas (for so
they call this Right) were abolished. There was likewise another Privilege,
which is called Immunidad del Barrio; that is to say, the Ambassadors have a
certain Precinct marked out about their Houses, in which compass Justice is not
to be performed without their permission, and the Alcaldes dare not pass in the
Ambassador's Quarter with their White Rods, which is the Badge of their
Authority. Every Ambassador is so jealous to preserve this Privilege, that
some Foreign Ministers have been so hardy as to hang the Alguazils at their
Gates, when they found them trespassing in this point. I must confess very few
of them have carried things to this extremity, but several have ordered them to
receive an hundred blows with a cudgel.

Notwithstanding the apparent Risque they ran, and the Consequences that such
Infractions might carry, the Corrigidor, accompanied with his Officers, passed
at midday through the Quarter belonging to our Ambassador: They carried with
them their White Rods; but he not being informed of it till they were quite
gone, could only send to the Corrigidor to tell him, that he was extremely
surprised at his procedure, and that for the time to come, he should remember
his Duty better. He answered, That he was ignorant, till he was now better
informed, that the Ambassador's Quarter extended so far as the place through*
which he had passed; and that it was sufficient he knew it now. But
notwithstanding this sort of satisfaction, the very same Corrigidor a few days
after came by that way again, and passed before the Ambassador's House at a
time ^hen he was abroad. The Marquess de Villars being informed of it,
complained loudly of this Insolence.

He expected with Impatience what would be the Result of the matter, when an
Order from the King came to him, wherein his Majesty revoked the Privileges of
his Quarter, pretending it was not just, that the Ambassador of France should
be more favorably treated at Madrid, than the Ambassador of Spain was at
Paris. It was said at Court, that in that great City the Officers of Justice
went when they pleased up to the very Gates of the Spanish Ambassador, to
perform the Functions of their respective Offices: That in the Year 1671. there
was issued out a Declaration of the same Nature with this; that the renewing of
it was no Novelty, and that since the first Declaration the Ambassadors had
only enjoyed this Privilege by Sufferance, but that for the future they were
resolved to connive at it no more.

Monsieur de Villars answered, That he owed too great a respect to the King,
ever to remove himself from it: That he was assured the King his Master would
approve of the Proposal to ^^eas their Ambassador, as they did his in Spain:
but th^^ they ought to consider, what Privileges that Minister has at the
Court of France: That it was not necessary there to demand Audience and
Permission, which always retard Affairs, in order to speak to the King and
Queen, to see them, and accompany them; that he went a hunting with the King;
that he assisted at Feasts, and other Ceremonies, as often as he pleased; that
he was allowed to have Six Horses to his Coach, and so to drive all about
Paris: That the Ambassador's Lady went in the Queen's Coach; that she sometimes
Dined with her, and that she received several Marks of Distinction, all which
served to make an Embassy pass very agreeable: That it ought to be considered,
that he did not enjoy all these Advantages at Madrid: And lastly, That he would
take care to acquaint his Master with the Declaration of his Christian Majesty:
That he could not have an Answer immediately, by reason of the great distance;
and that it was but reasonable and just, that things should continue in the Old
State, till it arrived. But the King of Spain issued out a Second Declaration,
wherein it was said, That his Majesty persisted in his first Resolution, and
that he thought fit to take away the Immunities of the French Ambassador's
Quarter, without assigning any Cause.

It Is indeed very surprising, that Monsieur de Villars, who had reason to
promise himself very advantageous. Distinctions upon the Queen's account,
should be the only man, who was singled out from the rest of the Ambassadors,
to have his Franchises taken away from him, whilst the others ^njoy'd theirs as
formerly. He did not fail to send Advice to the Court of France of what had
happened; the King was sensibly concerned at his Ill Usage, and promised to see
Justice done to him. But Monsieur desiring, that things might not be carried to
Extremities, neither on one side nor the other, writ a Letter to the Queen his
Daughter, wherein he signified to her his great Trouble and Inquietude about
this Affair. He conjured her to use all her Interest with the King her Husband,
to engage him to do his most Christian Majesty Justice. She was kept ignorant
till this very moment, of what had passed, and was no less surprised than
afflicted at it. She took occasion to discourse the King about it at a
favorable Juncture, as she imagined; but he answered her coldly enough, That
it was a long time a-go since this Affair had been regulated, and that he would
dispense with himself for telling her the Reasons. She earnestly importuned him
to acquaint her with them; and after infinite Sollcitations, he could only be
brought to reply as follows:

Esque me quiteram este Embaxador, y me embiaram otro Gavacho. Which signifies
in our Language; Let them take away this Ambassador from me, and send me
another in his room.

It is easy to judge, that the King speaking in those Terms, was not only
prejudiced against the Marquess de Villars, but also against any other that
might be sent to him. Whatsoever Entreaties the Queen made to oblige him to
settle matters in ^^e Estate they were formerly, yet he continued still
inflexible, and seemed indeed to act in this Affair rather by another Spirit
than his own, without making any Reflection, either he or his Council, that
France would resent the Injury. But they awaked out of their Lethargy, when
they saw an Extraordinary Courier arrive on the 8 th of April to the Marquess
de Villars's House. They had terrible apprehensions upon them, that he brought
a Declaration of War along with him; and the Suspicions they had entertained a
long time from the side of Italy, sensibly alarmed them. Our Ambassador had
Audience of the Duke de Medina Celi, to demand the Re establishment of his
Franchises, and the Jurisdiction of his Quarter. He represented to him the
hardship of his Usage, and the little reason they had to treat him after this
manner, and to chose him from amongst the rest to be affronted: That the King
his Master was never the Aggressor, but that he would not tamely suffer an
Injury, without revenging it: That particularly he was sensible of this, and
demanded public satisfaction for it.

The Duke alleged, as he had done before, That ever since the Year 1671. the
King of Spain was resolved not to grant the Franchises to the Ambassadors any
longer, but that the Relaxation which time causes in every thing, was the
reason that the Foreign Ministers by little and little recovered their former
Rights; That this was no good Consequence, why it should take place of the Law,
and for a Testimony that they had no intention to disgust him in this
particular, he might rest assured, that for the time to come, all the other
Ambassadors should be treated after the same manner.

To this the Marquess de Villars made Answer, That instead of finding any
particular Satisfaction for himself, he met with a new Subject of Complaint,
upon the score of this General Conduct; That since the new Alliance that was
contracted between the Two Crowns, the Natural Right warranted him to expect
that the Ambassadors of one would easily merit-Favours of the other, and even
procure them for their Friends; that he was so far from meeting that Usage,
that he could get nothing for them but affronts; but that this was not the
(...) he demanded: That as for the Declaration of 1671. he was not obliged to
take the least notice of it, since having been Ambassador at Madrid, near four
years a-go, he peaceably enjoyed all those Privileges, which now they designed
to retrench him of, under the pretense of that Declaration.

He was not content with discoursing the Chief Minister about this Affair, but
demanded Audience of the King, and immediately obtained it. So he presented to
him his Letters of Credence, to have this Affair regulated, and said every
thing that was necessary to engage him to make necessary Reflections upon a
thing that might draw after it such evil Consequences. He reminded him of the
Peace that was so lately sworn, and of the Marriage he had contracted with a
Princess of the Blood of France, and told him what little occasion he had to
disgust the most Christian King; That in truth, his Master believed he did not
act by his own Inclinations, and that upon this Consideration he was disposed
to receive the Satisfaction he had so much reason to promise himself on his
part.

The King of Spain only answered with We will see.
Veremos, according to his usual Custom.

After this, it was deliberated in Council, what was necessary to be done in
the business: The Council gave their Advice to the Chief Minister, and he to
the King, as is the way in Spain. At last a Resolution was taken up, that the
Marquess de Los Balbazez, who had been named to go Commissary to the Ambassador
in France, should give him Satisfaction. In pursuance to this Order, he went to
the Palace of the Marquess de Villars, and presented to him a Paper that was
signed, wherein was represented in terms full of Amity and Respect, That the
King of Spain had given necessary Orders to his Ambassador, to give that Answer
and Satisfaction to his most Christian Majesty, which he had demanded in his
Letter; and that he came to assure him, That the King his Master had so great a
regard to all the Motives of Friendship that united their Majesty's, that he
would still continue the Ambassador of France in all the Privileges and
Immunities of his Quarter; and that he should likewise have the Right of the
Franchises paid to him; That if he had them not till this present, it was only
occasioned by his own neglect to demand them; and that the King had never any
designs to take them away from him.

It is a thing seldom practiced in other Courts to begin Actions of this
Nature, unless they have had an important occasion to do it, and afterward to
abandon them with an Easiness, which may in some measure be attributed to their
great Weakness; but there are some places where this Conduct is more in Request
than others, and the Court of Spain is one of them. Some persons were even
persuaded, that this design of taking away the Ambassador's Privileges, was
executed by the Ministers, only out of a Principle of Revenge, because our King
had sent word to the Duke de Giovenazzo, that he was willing to give him at his
Court all the Advantages that belonged to the Character of the Ambassador of
Spain, wherewith he was invested; but that he had no Intention to leave him
those Liberties which he allowed to others. And he had a particular Reason to
observe this Conduct with him; for it is very well known, that when he was in
the Quality of Envoy at the Court of Savoy, he had busied himself, without any
provocation, to put them upon the Design of burning the Vessels of Toulon, and
the Magazines of Pignerol: So that the King having very just Reasons to look
upon him as a particular Enemy, it was Natural enough to deny him those Favors
that are allowed to those Persons for whom we have an Esteem. However it was,
if the Court of Spain was at the bottom mortified at this matter, they took
care not to make it appear; and to take away from our King an Ambassador who
was by no means agreeable to him, they immediately named the Marquess de la
Fuente to go and supply his Place. The Queen was extremely satisfied to see the
business of the Franchises terminate as she desired.

The King, who loved her tenderly, notwithstanding all those secret Enemies
that did her ill Services with him, knowing that one of her greatest Diversions
was to ride a hunting, ordered Three fine Horses to be brought to her from
Andalusia. She chose one of the most mettlesome, and mounted him; but she was
no sooner got upon his back, but he began to caper, and was very like to have
thrown himself backwards upon her, when she fell: One of her Feet unluckily
happened to hang in the Stirrup, and the Horse finding this Embarras, ran about
very furiously, and dragged the poor Queen after him, to the extreme peril of
her Life. This Accident happened in the Court of the Palace. The King beholding
her from a Balcony, was brought to the last Despair; And though the Court was
full of Persons of Quality, and the Guards, yet no one durst offer to go and
help the Queen, because it is not lawful for any body to touch her, and
especially by the Feet, unless it be the Chief of her Menins, or Pages, who
puts on her Chiopins: These are a sort of Sandals, into which the Ladies put
their Shoes, and make them appear very tall. The Queen always supports her
self upon one of her Menins, when she walks any where; but these were Children
too small to rescue her from the danger wherein she was. At last, Two Spanish
Knights, one of whom was named Don Louis de las Torres, and the other Don Iaime
de Soto-Mayor, resolved, whatever might happen, to deliver her: So one of them
caught hold of the Horse by the Bridle, and stopped him; the other took hold
immediately of the Queen's Foot, took it out of the Stirrup, and put one of his
fingers out of Joint in doing her this piece of Service: But without tarrying a
moment, away they went to their Houses, and presently ordered their Horses to
be sadled, to escape the King's Indignation. The Young Count de Pennaranda, who
was a Friend to both of them, approached the Queen, and told her very
respectfully, That those Gentlemen who had been so happy as to save her Life,
were yet in fear of losing their own. She had the Goodness to speak to the King
in their favor, because, as I mentioned before, no body was permitted to touch
her, and particularly by the Feet. The King, who came down immediately, to see
in what a condition she was, testified an extraordinary Joy to find she was not
hurt, and very kindly received the Request she made in behalf of these Generous
Criminals. Word was immediately sent to them, who by this time were got on
Horseback to save themselves: The Queen honored them with a Present, and ever
after had a particular Consideration for them.

A few days after this Accident had befallen the Young Queen, she received a
small disgust from the King upon this occasion: She had a very pretty Spaniel
with her, and the little Creature used to lie with her a Nights. The Queen
happening to miss her one Night, got out of her Bed, and groped up and down the
Room for her; the King too finding the Queen was not in Bed, got up likewise to
find her. Behold them now in the midst of a great Chamber, without any Light,
going on one side and the other, and rubbing their Shins against every thing they
met; At last, the King being impatient, asked the Queen, Why she got up? the
Queen answered him, To search for her Spaniel: And is it worth the while, said
he, for a King and Queen of Spain to rise out of their Beds, to find a little
pitiful Bitch? Being thus vexed, he spurned the poor creature with his Foot, as
she came against his Legs, and was like to kill it. At the Cries she made, the
Queen, who loved the Bitch, could not forbear to complain in a sweet manner,
and came to bed again very sorrowful; but neither the King nor she were able to
find it again; and they were forced to call up the Queen's Women to bring them
a Light. The next Morning the King went out very early a hunting all alone,
without saying a word to the Queen. This disquieted her all day long, and she
past the greatest part of it leaning upon the Windows of her Chamber, although
the Duchess de Terra Nova frequently disturbed her, and told her, That a Queen
of Spain ought not to look out at a Window. All that day she impatiently
expected the King's return, and as soon as ever he lighted from his Horse, met
him about half the Staircase, and threw her self about his Neck, with that
agreeable French Liberty, which she had not yet forgotten: He was perfectly
charmed at it, and could not forbear to embrace her often, although it is not the
Custom in that Country, where their way of saluting the Ladies, is to press
their Arms with their Hands. He was in so good a humor, that she obtained
leave for the Duke de Ossone, to come back to Court, and execute his Place of
Great Master of the Horse.

The Iuncta, that was erected to determine the Affair between the Nuncio, and
Don Iuan de la Puente y Guebarra, President of the Council of Castile, decided
it on the 12 th of April. He was sentenced to be banished, and turned out of
his Office. The Nuncio demanded of them, that they would oblige him to go to
Rome, to take off the Suspension he had incurred; but they thought they had
punished him sufficiently. Abundance of people said, That these great Names he
took upon him, did not belong to him; and that his true Name was Don Iuan de
Montesillo, and that he was barely a Gentleman of the Province of Castile. He
finished the Course of his Studies at Salamania, and afterward was made Canon
of Toledo. His Behavior mightily pleased the Archbishop of Toledo, who was at
that time Cardinal of Arragon, and taking a delight in his Conversation,
trusted him with the Management of all his Affairs. He acquitted himself so
well in this Station, that the Archbishop took care to recommend, and make him
known to Don Iuan of Austria, whom he extremely pleased by the Suppleness of
his Carriage, and the Vivacity of his Genius; And whether that Prince had any
particular Designs upon him, or only intended to prefer him, to acquit himself
of the Promise he had made to the Cardinal, he made him President of the
Chancery of Valladolid. Some time after the Count de Villambrosa, who was
President of Castile, happening to die, the Prince gave his Place to Don Iuan
de la Puente. To say the truth, he only executed that Office by a Commission;
but it was a very great Post, and could not fail to draw the Envy of several
Persons upon him: And so it really did; for few people were concerned at his
Misfortunes: They looked upon him as one of the Creatures of Don Iuan; and
those that were always looking out for an Object for their Hatred, when that
Prince was gone, vented all their Spleen and Indignation upon him. The people
accused him of all their Grievances, and pretended, that he was the Cause of
crying down the Money; That being in a Place which rendered Chief of Justice
and the Civil Government, he might, if he had been so minded, have found out
some way or other to relieve so many different Persons, that suffered according
to their Condition. But the Complaints of private Men, nay, even those of the
Public in general, could not have been able to hurt him, if there had not been
a necessity at that Juncture, to oblige the Pope, by reason of the
Apprehensions they had of the Designs of the most Christian King upon Italy.

Although the Office of the President of Castile is the next in Dignity to that
of the Chief Minister, yet all People have not an equal desire to possess it.
Don Iuan Ascensio, Bishop of Avila, whom the King nominated to it, refused it:
An Order was sent to him, to come immediately, but he desired the Duke de
Medina Celi to excuse him, and leave him in his Diocese. He had formerly been a
Religious of the Mercy, and General of his Order: However, as it is a hard
matter to resist the Will of one's Prince, especially when it happens to be so
advantageous as this was, he obeyed the Second Order that was sent him, and
came without any delay. He was a Person of great Discretion; and it is certain a
Man cannot have too much to qualify him for the Exercise of so considerable a
Place: for the Council of Castile regulates all the Affairs that respect the
Government of the States of Castile: it was first created in the Year 1245. by
St. Ferdinand, King of Castile; it is composed of a President and sixteen
Counselors; The President never makes any Visits, and at his House gives the
Right Hand to no body. They summon to this Council the Chanceries of Granada
and Vailladolid, and the Courts of Judicature of Sevil and Gallicia, which are
the Four Seats of Justice, where they determine, by way of Appeal, all the
Suits that are judged by the Corrigidors in the Cities, and by the Alcades in
the Villages: When the King speaks of the Council of Castile, he barely calls
it Our Council.

The Court was exceedingly troubled at the Advices they received, That the
Viceroy of Naples, having with no small pains, heaped together the Sum of two
hundred thousand Crowns, part of which he had borrowed to send to Piombino,
Portolongone, Orbitelle, and some other places which the King of Spain
possesses on the Coasts of Tuscany; the Money being embarked in a Felouque,
Eight Slaves found the opportunity to carry off the Vessel: Two small Vessels
and a Gally were sent after them to bring them back, but they were gone too far
to be recovered: So all the pains of the Marquess de Los-Velez, tended only to
set Eight Slaves at liberty, and enrich them for the remainder of their Lives.

The Ambassador of Venice seeing that he of France received Satisfaction upon
the occasion of the Franchises and Immunities, redoubled his Instances to have
Justice done him upon the Alguazils, who had killed two of his Attendants. He
received Satisfaction on the 17 th of April. The Alcalde who led them on was
banished, and the Alguazils were sent to Prison, and were not enlarged but by
his Entreaty.

If the Count de Monterey was sensibly affected with Joy, to be preferred to
the Prince de Astillano, as to the Presidentship of Flanders, he was not a
little disgusted to see several Persons made Counselors of State before him;
and notwithstanding he earnestly desired to be one of the number, he was
disappointed. The King named the Duke de Albuquerque General at Sea, the Count
Doropesa, who was very Young, and had no other Dignity as yet, the Marquess de
Los Velez Governor of Naples, the Duke de Villa Hermosa Governor of Flanders,
Don Melchior Navarra, who had been formerly Vice Chancellor of Arragon, the
Marquess de Mansera Mayor, Domo Major to the Q. Mother, and the Inquisitor
General, to be Members of this Council. It was commonly believed that the Q.
Mother had a great influence in naming most of these Lords. The Council of
State was instituted by Charles the Fifth in 1526. Here it is that they examine
the Merits and Services of those Persons that pretend to be made Viceroys, or
to possess any other great Employments: They regulate the most important
Affairs of the Monarchy; the King only is the President of it, and the number
of the Counselors is not fixed.

Most People were surprised, that Don Carlos Ramirez de Arrellano, was made
President of the Finances, on the 8 th of April, after he had been so long
chained and shut up for his Lunacy and Madness: He was chosen in the room of
Don Antonio de Monsalve. No body could imagine for what Reason the Duke de
Medina Celi thought fit to trust him with a Post of that Consequence; for he
had none of those Qualities that are necessary to make a Man capable of
discharging it well; nay, he had some that ought to have excluded him. Amongst
the rest, he was Son-in-Law to a Corrigidor, named Don Francisco de Herrera,
who was mortally hated by the People; and it is said, not without just Grounds,
since he contributed not a little to the extreme Miseries under which they
groaned. The Council of Finances, which is there called de Hazienda, was
established in the Year 1602. by Philip III. It is their business to inspect
the Tribunal, which is called the Contaduria Mayor, and was set up by Philip
the Second in 1574.

A certain Accident happened at Court, which I cannot forbear to relate,
although it is of little Consequence. The Queen had two of the prettiest
Parrots in the World, which she had brought along with her from France, and
loved mightily: The Duchess de Terra Nova thought to do a meritorious work in
killing them, because they could only talk French, One day when the Queen was
gone out to take a Walk, and the Duchess, to avoid going with her, and to put
this Design in Execution, had pretended a slight Indisposition; she demanded
the Parrots of the Woman that looked after them, and so without any more a-do,
as soon as ever she had got them into her Hands, wrung off their Necks, in
spite of all the Prayers and Entreaties that were used to prevent her from
killing them. This was a great Affliction to the poor French Women that waited
upon the Queen, who when she came back to her Apartment, commanded them to
bring her Parrots and Dogs, as her custom was always when the King was not
there: for he could not endure any of these little creatures, because they came
from France; and whenever he saw them, he cried, Fuera, fuera, Perros Frances;
that is to say, Out, out, you French Dogs. All the Queen's Women, instead of
going to fetch what she demanded, stared upon one another, and continued for
some time immovable, without daring to speak a word; but at last, after a long
silence, one of them gave her an account of the Execution which the Camarera
had made of them. She was extremely concerned, although she took care not to
discover it; but as soon as the Duchess entered the Room, and according to her
custom, came to kiss her Hand: The Queen, without speaking a Syllable to her,
gave her two Boxes on the Ear with her Hand. Never was any thing in the World
in such a Rage and Surprise as the Duchess was; for she was one of the most
haughty imperious Women living, and carried as much State and Grandeur: She
possessed, as I mentioned before, a Kingdom in Mexico, and now to be buffeted
by a young Queen, whom she had hitherto treated like a Child; this appeared
insupportable; she immediately flew out of the Room, saying all the impertinent
things that her Anger suggested to her, and assembled together her Relations
and Friends, and above four hundred Ladies: With this numerous Train of
Coaches, she came to the King's Apartment, to demand Justice of him for the
Affront she pretended she had received from the Queen: She made so great a
Clamor, and shed so many Tears, that he sent for the Queen to come to him: And
as he represented to her the high Rank which the Camarera Mayor held in the
World, the Queen interrupted him, and told him, without any hesitation, Senor,
esto es une antojo.

These few unexpected Words clearly changed the Face of Affairs; The King
embraced her with a thousand Testimonies of Joy, adding, That she had done very
well; and that if Two Blows were not enough to satisfy her, he consented she
should give the Duchess Two Dozen more. Now antojo signifies in the Spanish
Tongue, the Longing of a Woman with Child: And they are it seems convinced by
long Experience, That if Women with Child in that Country have not what they
desire, and don't do what they have a mind to do, they are delivered before
their time of a dead Infant. The King, who believed the Queen was with Child,
was ravished with Joy; and though he had a mighty kindness for the Duchess,
yet he exceedingly approved of the Queen's Action: So that all the Satisfaction
she received from him was this, Cailla os, est as bofetadas son bii as del
antojo; That is to say, Hold your peace^ these Bl^ws are the Fruits of a Woman
with Child. The Queen had so much Prudence and Address, as not to take the
least notice of the Death of her Parrots: So that she left the King no Room to
imagine, that the antojo of boxing the Old Duchess proceeded from her own
Resentments.

The Marquess de Villa Menrique obtained the Vice-Royship of Peru, which is one
of the most considerable Posts, by the means of a pretty Lady, of whom the Duke
de Medina Celi was extremely enamoured.

The King, the Queen, and the Queen Mother, went together to Buen-Retiro to
pass the Holy Week there. After Easter was over, the King expressed a great
desire to go to Aranjuez, as it had always been the custom: But the
Queen Mother, who had no Inclinations to be at any great distance from Madrid,
because all Affairs were managed there, and the Counselors never stir out of
it; and likewise because the Neighborhood of Toledo, where she had been
formerly confined against her Will, revived a sort of Horror in her, raised so
many Obstacles, that the King altered his Mind: So he stayed but a very
inconsiderable time at Buen-Retiro, and passed four days at the Escurial. He
would only suffer himself to be accompanied by the Duke de Medina Celi, the
Master of the Horse, one of the Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, and the Major
domo. The next day after he was arrived, the Queen wrote a very tender Letter
to him, and sent him a Diamond Ring. He sent her, by way of r^turn, a Chaplet
made of the Wood of Calambour, garnished with Diamonds, in a little Box of Gold
Filagreen, wherein he enclosed a Billet that had only these Words, Madam, there
has been a great Wind; I have killed six Wolves.

As soon as he returned to Madrid, the desire of going to Aranjuez, seized him
again. By a custom that had been established ever since the time of Philip II.
the Kings of Spain were used to go to this Noble House some time after Easter.
This is appointed in the Ceremonial of the Palace, which is a Rule they always
follow: In it are to be found all the Ceremonies that are to be observed, the
Habits which the Kings and Queens are to wear, the Time of their going to their
Royal Houses, how long they are to continue there; the Days of going to
Chapel, as also those for Bull Feasts, and running at the Ring, the Hour of
their Majesty's going to Bed, and Rising, and a thousand other things of the
same Nature. But, as it happened, there was so great a scarcity of Money, that
the King was obliged to stay at Madrid: However, to excuse and color so
extraordinary a thing, they gave out, that the Small Pox was at Aranjuez, which
being situated upon the Road to Malaga, where the Plague raged, and from
whence it might easily be spread thither, his Majesty was not willing to hazard
himself so far as to venture thither.

The Court was troubled at the Advices they received on the first of May, That
the Fishermen of Fontarabia and those of Andaye, had been lately engaged in a
Quarrel about the Fishery of the River Bidassoa, which separates the two
Kingdoms. They fought, and several Men were killed on both sides; but what
concerned them the most, was, that the Governor of Fontarabia, instead of
sending to part them, played the Cannon upon the French, and demolished some
Houses in Andaye: So that to prevent the Consequences, which might perhaps have
proved very dangerous, they commanded him to repair the Houses that were
battered, and give the French Fishermen all the Satisfaction they desired. Our
Ambassador assured them, that he would write to his Master, and acquaint him
with what readiness and complaisance this Affair was made up at Court.

The Duke de Medina Celi offered to make the Marquess de Villa Franca
Counselor of State, provided he would quit his Place of Lieutenant General of
the Mediterranean, which the King had a mind to bestow upon Prince Alexander
Farnese: but he returned him this Answer, That having Reason to flatter
himself, that he had discharged this Office well, he could never be prevailed
with to throw it up to another, as long as he was capable of doing the Duties
of it himself.

The King's Confessor was upon the point of being sent away about the beginning
of May. The Duke de Medina Celi designed that place for Father Bayona,
Confessor of the University of Alcala; for he imagined he might reckon upon
him, and beside, the King had given his consent. They had a mind to bestow the
Bishopric of Plazencia upon Father Francis de Relux, to have a favorable
pretense to remove him: But he used all the Interest and Credit he had in the
World to keep his old Post, declaring, That he would refuse the Bishopric; and
that if the King turned him off, he would every where complain of the Chief
Minister. Although the Duke de Medina Celi hated him heartily, because he was
difficult of Access, and having a great Ascendant over the King, possessed him
with several Scruples, in order to pursue his own particular Views; yet he was
forced to let him alone. Every one is of Opinion, that the Duke had done much
more discreetly, not to have discovered his Intentions against him, unless he
had been in a capacity to put them in Execution, because to show an ill Will,
and not be able to effect our Designs, only draws more Enemies upon our heads,
and exposes us to the contempt of all the World, which will be apt to conclude
we only are too weak. But this was not all; he left in the Person of the
Confessor a Man that was always with the King, and who was sure to oppose him
in every thing; but that was not the only thing he had Reason to apprehend. The
Camarera Mayor, and Don Ieronimo de Eguya, still continued to possess the
King's Favors; They had opportunity to discourse him a^ often as they pleased,
by virtue of their Places, and neglected ^o occasions to advance and secure
their own Interest. This was a sort of a Triumvirate, which might very well
check the Authority of the Chief Minister; he very well saw what he was to ^ear
from this quarter, and was extremely concerned at it; he had long a-go desired
to remove de Eguya, but he fixed himself every day more and more in the King's
good Graces; and the the Death of Don Pedro Fernandez del Campo, left him in
the entire possession of a Place, which before he had only exercised by a
Commission. He likewise obtained a Place of being a Counselor in the Chamber
of the Indies; and when the Duke used all his Endeavors to remove him from
business, he perceived, that the King's inclination prevailed above all his
Attempts to the contrary; for his Majesty was persuaded, that de Eguya was
faithful and necessary to him. The Duchess de Terra Novo, as well as the
Confessor, confirmed him in this Opinion: So that they rendered one another all
good Offices reciprocally; and this was a sure and easy way to support
themselves.

Ever since the Night that the Camarera Moyor had received that Chastisement
from the Queen, after a long consideration of the matter, she found, that if
she continued to observe the same rigorous Conduct toward that young Princess,
which she had hitherto used, she could never insinuate her self into her
Affections. Besides this, she knew that the Queen Mother utterly disapproved
this sort of Treatment, and that she had frequently spoke to the King her Son
about it; that she had represented to him, that there was so vast a difference
between the Customs of France and those of Spain, that there was a necessity to
make some Allowances, and not to perplex a Young Princess, whose Age, as well
as the Sweetness of her Temper, deserved another sort of Usage. The Camarera
looked upon her self as undone, if she did not lay aside all her former
Severity; and these considerations prevailed with her to assume a more engaging
Air, and to endeavor to relieve the Queen in all her pensive moments, by
discovering the King's Humor to her, and the means to please him. Whenever the
King was vexed, and out of Humor, she seemed to spare no pains to sweeten him;
and the Queen being of a frank, easy Disposition, was immediately persuaded,
that the Duchess had taken up a better Temper, and even believed, that she did
her all the Services she could. But the rest of the World were of a different
Opinion from her Majesty; they knew well enough that this Old Belldame was
rather inclined in her own Nature, to throw Oil into the fire, than endeavor
to quench it; and they alleged, as an indisputable Proof of this, all the ill
impressions she had made upon the King, in relation to the French; nay, even
the most inconsiderable things that came from France: For, as I signified
before, the Queen durst not play with the little Dogs she had brought along
with her, before the King; and the two Parrots were killed for no other reason
but because they talked French: The King was out of humor as often as any
Frenchman passed through the Court of the Palace, especially if the Queen
looked upon him, although it was through the Windows and Lattices of her
Chamber.

As she was going one day to Datocha, a poor fellow, who was a Frenchman, came
to her Coach, and begged an Alms of her; the King was in so horrible a Passion,
that they were afraid he would have caused this Unfortunate Wretch to be killed
immediately. The Camarera officiously counseled the Queen to order him to
leave Madrid without any delay; but if the Duchess had not prejudiced the King
after this manner, it is not to be imagined that the Queen had been exposed to
these Injuries, which happened so often to her.

This is so undeniable a truth, that one day when their Majesty's went into the
City, two Gentlemen belonging to the Ambassador of Holland, chancing to meet
them, they stopped their Coach, out of Respect, and saluted them as they ought:
They were on that side the Queen happened to be of, and were apparelled after
the French Fashion. This immediately raised the Camarera's Passion, who
commanded one of the Guards to go and demand of them who they were, from whence
they came, whither they were going, what business they had in Madrid? And when
to this they answered, That they were both Hollanders in the Ambassador's
Retinue, she believed it to be a Sham, or at least pretended to believe it,
that she might give the King a fresh occasion to commend her Care and Zeal for
him* So that she sent to the Ambassador himself to be better satisfied; and
when she was fully assured of the truth, she sent the two Gentlemen word, That
when they met their Majesty's, they should never be guilty of the Presumption
any more to go on the Queen's side, to salute her, or look upon her.
Nevertheless, observing the Queen to be concerned at this Conduct, as soon as
she was informed of it, she thought to efface all this out of her Mind, by
sending often to the French Ambassador, and giving him to understand, that she
was angry with him for coming so seldom to the Palace, She used the same
Expressions to the Ambassador's Lady, and told her, That it would be the
greatest Joy, in the World to her to see them visit the young Queen oftener, who
perhaps was too melancholy in private, and would certainly find no small
Diversion to enjoy the Company of Persons of their Merit, and who were of the
same Country with her. This did not make the Marquess de Villars alter his
Conduct in the least; for he understood well enough what was the meaning of
these fair Speeches; but as for his Lady, there seldom passed a day but she
went to wait upon the Queen, either in the Queen-Mother's company, or all alone
by her self; but notwithstanding the Assiduity of her Visits, she seldom found
an opportunity to entertain her in private: She was hindered from doing this,
by the presence of the Spanish Ladies, who came to make their Court; or else by
the King's coming, who went every other moment from his own Apartment to the
Queen's; for it is the Custom there, that as soon as he appears, all the Women
that are in the Chamber do immediately withdraw.

Without reckoning the Penance of this extraordinary Solitude, the Queen had
other things to afflict her, and one was to find her self clearly destitute of
Money; and this, considering the Generosity of her Heart, and her natural
Inclination to be liberal, was a very sensible Mortification. She had lived
there six Months entire, without having any Money to serve her for her lesser
pleasure and she was forced to ^orrow a little, to buy a few things, she had a
necessary occasion for, and to keep a few Horses she had brought with her out
of France, that were become altogether unserviceable to her, because she had no
permission to ride them out at any time. She wanted Money likewise to send back
some of her Women that could not comply with the Customs of Spain, and whom
they could not consequently endure there. The few Officers that she was allowed
to bring with her, were all dismissed, even to her Chyrurgeon, who had bought the
Place, and performed the Journey at his own Expenses. All of them departed; and
this consideration redoubled the young Queen's Afflictions, to see she was not
Mistress enough to keep them any longer, or to do them those kindnesses she
designed. On the 15 th of May 500 Pistols a Month were assigned her* but this
was in a manner less than nothing, because for six Months together she had been
forced to borrow Money, and even out of this small Sum she was obliged to lay
aside 200 Pistols monthly for some Alms and Charity, which the Queens of Spain
were accustomed to make. All this while no Orders were given out about the
Current Money of the Kingdom, nor was the Price of Victuals regulated; a great
Want and Scarcity reigned every where, and the Public Miseries daily
increased: it had not rained for six Months together, and this very much
contributed to inhance the Price of Corn: So that the People were reduced to
the last Extremities: Nay, what is infinitely more surprising, they were not in
a condition to pay the Queen the Money that was assigned to her, Gold and
Silver being so scarce, that none of it was to be seen.

The Bishop of Aquila being arrived at Madrid, took possession of his Place of
President of Castile; and the first of his Cares was to relieve and ease the
People of their Grievances To effect this, he made a strict Examination into
the most minute matters, and soon discovered, that the gross Monopolies, and
insatiable Avarice of the Magistrates, were partly the occasion of these horrid
Disorders. He came to be informed, That even the Counselors of the Council
Royal, by some of their Creatures, took their shares of the Imposts that were
laid upon Victuals; and that the same thing was done in the Oil, Chocolate,
Coals, and other Provisions necessary for Life: That the Regidors and
Corregidors belonging to the Town Hall, played most abominable Cheats in the
Corn, and consequently advanced the Price of Bread, at least one half above its
usual Price. But he was sensible that he was not able to rectify these Abuses
alone; so he discoursed the Duke de Medina Celi about the matter, whose
Encouragement and Assistance he promised himself. Nevertheless, whether the
Duke, were otherwise employed, or had no real intentions to change the Form of
the Government, he did not answer the President's Desires, who perceiving that
if he acted by himself, the hatred of all those Persons, whom he should cause
to be punished, would directly fall upon his own Head, he was not willing to
Sacrifice himself for the Public Good. He remembered that in the time of the
Regency, a certain Bishop, who was President as he was, having endeavored to
suppress these Abuses, had been poisoned by the Magistrates.

In the mean time every thing without exception continued to be as dear as
formerly, and Silver was so scarce a Commodity, that one would have imagined it
had been all melted down; I once saw at a Relation's House of mine the Sum of
almost three thousand Crowns received in Pieces of Bellon and in Ochavos These
are much of the same value with the French Doubles, and are scarce an English
Farthing.
, which are a wretched sort of Brass Money, and for the greatest part had, and
yet happy was the Man who in this Universal Scarcity could get this Money.
However I am obliged to say this in honor of Spain, that although the Finances
were in that sad condition as I represented them before, yet the King paid all
the Pensions that were due to Foreigners very exactly, because he looked upon
himself obliged in Honor to do it, and yet to confess a truth, some of these
Pensions were not inconsiderable. I knew a certain Lady, to whom he gave Eight
Thousand Crowns, and they were constantly paid her in the most difficult times.

The Families that were ready to die of Hunger, set themselves to Rob and
Murder, being in a manner Authorized in these Disorders, by the little care
that was taken to punish Murderers as they deserved, and by the extraordinary
Partiality which the Judges show to the Natives of the Country. These Families,
I say, that were very numerous at Madrid, assembled together in one of the
least frequented Quarters of the Town, and resolved by main force to break open
some of the Magistrates Houses, because they principally charged them with the
Disorders of the present Affairs, and afterward to Plunder them in the face of
the World, to serve for an Example to others. But as this Design was only
formed by a Mutinous Rabble, who had never a Head to lead them on, so it is not
to be wondered if they did not push their wicked Intentions any farther. In
short, every Man returned to his ordinary Occupation, and none of them were
called to an Account for Assembling after this Tumultuous manner. Behold now
the Effects which this sort of Connivance and Toleration always produces.

The Shoemakers being informed about the middle of May, that that the Price of
Shoes was orderd to be regulated, presented a Petition to the new President of
Castile, wherein with terms full of Respect they represented their Reasons
against this Regulation, making it appear, that they could not possibly lessen
the Price of Shoes, as long as Leather was sold so dear as it was. He sent them
to the President of the Chamber of the Alcaldes; so they formed themselves into
a sort of a Body, to meet him with the greater Ceremony: but he being a Man of
a sour sullen Humor, fell into a Passion to see so great a number of them; he
threatened to Imprison them, and told them, that if their Power were equal to
their ill Intentions, they were to be feared, because they were neither better
nor worse than downright Mutineers. They muttered a few words, and being at
that time none of the strongest, went in a Body to find out their Companions
and Friends, and then immediately repaired to the Court of the Palace. They ran
under the Windows of the King's Chamber, and, as it is the Custom there when
the People complain of the Government, they cried out as loud as they were
able, Let the King live, and let the ill Government die. As soon as the King
perceived it, he came near the Window, and was extremely surprised to see so
great a Rabble got together, for by this tim^ abundance of other People had
joined them. The King sent in great have to find out the President of Castile,
who came amongst them, and promised them all the satisfaction imaginable: He
moreover told them, they violated that Respect they owed His Majesty, in coming
to demand Justice of him with such Clamours and Tumults, and that if they would
follow him home, he would presently content them. They very readily went along
with him; so he gave them a permission to sell their Shoes at the same Price as
they did before the Order was published. This made them return the joyfullest
People in the World, but they happened to meet the President of the Alcaldes in
the way, who not knowing a Syllable of what had past, and not at all
considering that he had to do with an unruly Mob, stopped them to vent his
Reproaches and Menaces against them. But this procedure raised their
Indignation so high, that they drew out their Swords with a design to kill him,
and pursued him so fiercely, that never was any Man under more terrible
Apprehensions. He had never escaped their hands, had not their Fury so far
transported them, that they took no notice how he saved himself through a
little Gate, which he took care to shut after him, but his fear was so great,
that he fell dangerously ill upon it. After they had searched for him on all
sides, to no purpose, they were going homewards, when they saw the President of
Castile coming that way; they presently surrounded him, and swore they would
not let him pass any farther, till he had signed the Permission he had given
them to sell their Shoes at the ordinary Price. He immediately did every thing
they demanded of him; so without any delay they took Drums and Trumpets to
publish and affix this Permission to all the Public places of the City. They
suffered this first Heat to pass over without Opposition, but afterward they
arrested several of those whom they found the most Seditious; nevertheless they
tarried but a short time in Prison, and what deserved an Exemplary
Chastisement, was punished like an inconsiderable Trifle. It is indeed very
true, that in order to humble the People, it was proposed to forbid all manner
of Tradesmen to carry Swords about them, and to wear black Silk Clothes with
the Golilia. 'Twas likewise designed that that this Prohibition should extend
to all those Persons who had no Titles, and were not able to keep a Coach:
However they durst not put it in execution, because they thought this
Regulation would be too difficult and severe to be practiced.

The Viceroy of Naples was not a little afflicted at the loss of the Money
which the eight Slaves had carried away with them. He was obliged to get more,
but it was no easy matter to find it in a place, where they were burdened
every day with Imposts upon Imposts. He received Orders from Madrid to Let out
the Lands belonging to the King's Demain at forty thousand Crowns per Annum;
but no body could be found to take them, although those Persons, who had
formerly taken them, enjoyed them peaceably; and this Example one would have
thought ought to have encouraged others to imitate them. The Banditti of that
Country had ^or some time suspended all Acts of Hostility, out of hopes that
His Majesty would have given them a General Indemnity upon the score of his
Marriage; but when they perceived that their Expectations were like to be
frustrated, and that endeavors were used to Apprehend their Captain Mattheo
Tango, who was just come from Pirateering at Sea, they met to the number of
Three Thousand, pillaging and ravaging every thing they found in the Country,
and, what is strange, not a word was spoken of the horrible Disorders they
committed.

The Queen Mother who was every day at Buen Retiro, and searched all means to
gain the Affections of the People, gave three Comedies, with Music between the
Acts, that were represented on a Theater in the Placa Mayor, that abundance of
People might have the pleasure of seeing them without putting them to any
Expense. The Comedians played for three days together, and the crowd was so
great, that some People were killed. The City seemed to be very well pleased
with these Shows, for they love them more in Spain than in any other part of
the World; and what helped to sustain the public Joy, was the mighty
expectation they had of seeing a new face of Affairs, under the Ministry of the
Duke de Medina-Celi: they promised themselves to find an end of all their
present Grievances, without considering that although his intentions were never
so good, it would be a difficult matter to redress them. He had Don Vincente
Gonzaga for his Friend, who was very capable to advise him and furnish him with
all necessary Expedients to accomplish his Designs, but the execution of them
seemed to carry almost invincible difficulties along with it. There was a
necessity to be severe, to disgust some, and punish others; to remove several
things that had been long established, to give ones self up entirely to
Business, and constant Application, before these matters could ever be
accomplished: But this was not the Genius of the Duke, and his Natural
Sweetness and Bounty suited but very ill with that steadiness and resolution
that ought to be observed in these nice ran-counters. This gave him abundance
of uneasy thoughts, so that Don Vincente, who still pressed him to take up
steady Measures, and support them with vigor, had opportunity enough to
discover his Weakness. To deliver himself therefore from so rigid and severe a
Supervisor, the Duke gave him the Government (as it is called there) of the
Council of the Indies, upon Condition that he himself should always be the
President of it; but as for the Profits, one had as great a share as the other.
And now Don Vincente thought of nothing more than discharging the Duties of his
New Place, and it was not doubted but he would worthily exercise them; for his
Judgment, his Age, and his Experience made him to be considered as one of the
Chief Persons of the Council.

In the mean time several People of great Merit and Birth were displeased to
see the Duke confided in him no longer, they were in hopes that they would have
joined together to Regulate the Money. The good was diminished, as I said
before, and the bad continued to go as freely as formerly it did. It was
therefore resolved to suppress it for good and all in Commerce, and an Edict
was published on the 24 th. of May 1680. by which the King suppressed all the
Copper Money that had gone for several Years, and People were ordered to bring
it in within Ten Days to certain Offices that were set up in all parts of
Madrid, where they were to receive Bills of Exchange for it, that were payable
in Six Months. But they found a vast inconvenience in the Execution of this
Project; for in the two Castiles they had sixteen Millions of this Money, part
of which were mixed with good Silver, and the other was notoriously bad. So
that to draw these sixteen Millions out of the hands of private Persons, they
found in the King's Coffers a Fund of only sixscore thousand Crowns: however,
this did not hinder the crying down of the Money; and as for those Persons that
had store of it, they were utterly undone. It is an easy matter to imagine
what sad Effects these new Grievances drew upon the People, who were miserable
enough in all conscience before, and who were forced to buy every thing at
excessive Rates.

The Ministers of the Inquisition, with their Trumpets, Kettle-Drums and Banner
marching before them, went on the 30 th of May in a Cavalcade, from the Palace
to the Place Major, where they ordered it to be published, That on the 30 th of
June, they would publicly punish all those whom they had condemned to the fire
and other torments. It was forty years a-go, since a thing of this nature had
been seen; and the Sight was expected at Madrid with as great an impatience, as
if it had been the most agreeable Festival in the World.

Don Thomas de la Cerda, Brother to the Duke de Medina-Celi, parted for Cales,
with so magnificent an Equipage, that a Prince of the Blood could not have a
finer. Three Men of War waited to carry him over to New Spain, of which he was
made Viceroy.

They received Advices at Court, That the Count de Fuensalida, Viceroy of
Navar, had sent some Troops to Fontarabia, under the Command of the Duke de
Canzano. This Conduct did not seem to agree with the Orders they had sent him
from this place, to give Satisfaction to the French Fishermen of Andaye, who
had been abused and injured.

On the 16 th of June a Bull Feast was kept, at which the King and the Queen,
attended by all the Court, made their Appearance. This seemed an extraordinary
fine Show to the Spaniards, because two of the Combatants were killed upon the
Spot, and three Cavaliers more were dangerously wounded. The Queen was so
concerned at it, that she found her self somewhat discomposed; however, she
took care not to discover it, for fear of disquieting the King.

The Count de Gubernatis, Envoy Extraordinary of Savoy, waited for his Orders
to depart, but he received a command to attend the Marquess de Dronero, who
went Ambassador Extraordinary into Portugal. So he tarried at Court without any
Character.

We were here informed, that the Spanish Captains, who were at Naples, were not
a little mortified at the Prohibition that was issued out to forbid them to go
dressed after the French Fashion. There is never a Spaniard of 'em all that is
not ravished with Joy, as soon as he is out of his own Country, to quit the
Habit of it also, and to ablige them to wear it again, nothing less will serve
the Turn but re-iterated Edicts one upon the back of another.

The execrable Secret of preparing the most subtle Poison, that is so
frequently practiced in Italy, has been used from time to time in the Kingdom
of Naples. The Regent Galeota, who came back from Gaeta, made a sad Experiment
of it, in a Dose of Physic, which dispatched him in a few hours after: The
Viceroy of Naples, who loved him dearly, expressed a mighty sorrow at his Loss,
and promised, that if ever he was able to discover the Crime, he would make a
notorious Example of those that were concerned in it.

On the 30 th of June there was kept at Madrid an Auto de Inquisition; That is
to say, a general Execution of the Jews. The People ran thither in their best
Clothes, and with as great an earnestness as if it had been to the most solemn
show. A great Scaffold was erected in the Placa Mayor, where from Seven a Clock
in the Morning till Nine at Night, nothing was to be seen but Criminals of both
Sexes, that had been sent from all the Inquisitions to Madrid: Their Process
was read aloud, and Judgment was pronounced against them: Twenty Jews, as well
Men as Women, and a Renegado Mohammedan, were sentenced to be burnt: Five more
Jews of both Sexes, this being the first time they were apprehended, and now
repenting of their Errors, were condemned to a long Imprisonment, and to wear a
Yellow Scapulary, with a Red St. Andrew's Cross upon it, which they call a
Sanbenito, as those that carry this Habit are called Sanbenitados. Ten more
accused of Bigamy, Witchcraft and Sorcery, were sentenced to be whipped, and sent
to the Galleys: These wore Past-board Bonnets upon their Heads, with
Inscriptions upon them, having a Rope about their Necks, and Torches in their
Hands. All the Court was present, the King, the two Queens, the Ladies, the
Ambassadors, the Grandees, and a great multitude of People. The Inquisitor's
Chair was placed after the manner of a Tribunal, and was much above that of the
King, and a great deal higher. These Unfortunate People were persecuted so near
the King, that he heard all their Complaints and Groans; for the Scaffold where
they were ranged touched his Balcony. The Grandees of Spain did the same thing
here as our Provost-Marshal's Men do in France, they conducted the Criminals
that were to be burnt, and held them tied fast with thick Cords: The
Famillares; that is to ^ay, the Domestic Officers of the Holy Inquisition, at
the same time led the other Offenders, and several of the Religious, whether
Learned or Ignorant, disputed vehemently with them, to convince these miserable
Creatures of the Truth of our Religion. Some of the Jews were very knowing in
their own way of Worship, and returned very surprising Answers to their
Disputants. Amongst the rest, there was a young Woman, of admirable Beauty, who
seemed not to be above Seventeen Years of Age, and happening to be on the same
side where the Queen was, she addressed her self to her, to obtain Favor at
her Hands: Great Queen, says she, cannot your Royal Presence bring some Remedy
to my Misfortunes? Have pity on my Youth, and consider that I am persecuted for
a Religion which I have sucked in with my Mother's Milk. The Queen turned away
her Eyes, and appeared to pity her case, but durst not make any intercession to
have her saved.

Mass was now began, in the midst of which the Priest that officiated, quitted
the Altar, and sat down upon a Seat which was prepared for him; then the
Inquisitor General descended from the Amphitheater, dressed in his Cope, and
having a Mitre on his Head; and after he had bowed toward the Altar, he
advanced to the King's Balcony, which he ascended by some Steps that went round
the Scaffold, accompanied by some Officers of the Inquisition, who carried the
Cross, and the Evangelists, and a Book containing the Oath, by which the Kings
of Spain oblige themselves to protect the Catholic Faith, to extirpate
Heresies, and to support the Procedures of the Inquisition with their Royal
Authority.

The King stood up, with his Head uncovered, and having the Constable of
Castile on one side of him, who held the Royal Sword lifted up, swore to
observe the Oath, which a Counselor of the Council Royal read to him, and
continued in this posture till such time as the Inquisitor was returned to his
Place. Then a Secretary of the Inquisition got up in a Pulpit, and read the
same Oath, which he caused the Councils, and all the Assembly to take. It was
about Noon when Mass began, and it was not over till Nine a clock at Night, by
reason of the long Sentences of the condemned Persons, that were read aloud one
after another. The Constancy and Resolution with which they went to the place
of Punishment, had something in it which was very extraordinary; several of
them cast themselves into the fire, others burnt their Hands, and afterward
their Feet in the Flames, bearing their Torments with a Tranquillity which made
them be lamented, that such resolute Souls were not illuminated with the Light
of Faith. As for my self, I did not go to behold this sad Spectacle; for
besides that it was midnight, and the place of Execution was without the Gate
of Fuencaral, I was so concerned at what I had seen in the daytime, that I
found my self indisposed. The King could not avoid seeing this horrible sight,
both because it was a Religious Affair, and because he is obliged to authorize
by his Presence whatever the Inquisition does. We must not believe that these
rigorous Examples do in the least promote the Conversion of the Jews; they are
not at all concerned at it, and there are a considerable number of them in
Madrid, who are known to be such, and yet are quietly suffered to enjoy their
Employments in the Finances. Amongst these Don Aventura Dionis was reckoned:
His Father gave Seventy thousand Crowns to be made a Knight of St. Iago; and he
himself a few days after this Execution obtained of the King a Marquess's
Title, which stood him in Fifty thousand Crowns. His Uncle was one of the most
Famous Jews of Amsterdam: All this was known at Court, but there was not the
least notice taken of it; and indeed the General Receipts and Farms are full of
these People. When they are rich, the Spaniards content themselves with
affrighting them, that they may make them empty their Purses to redeem their
Lives. By this means they draw prodigious Sums of Money from them, and provided
they are in a condition to pay a good round Sum, they make a shift to escape
the Fire, which they deserve as well as the rest.

The Duke de Giovenazzo, who from being Envoy at the Court of Savoy, was
nominated to go Ambassador to that of France, was ordered to return to Turin.
But the Count de Gubernatis, who at that time was under no Character at Madrid,
and who was making Prepatations for his Journey to Portugal, went to find out
the Chief Minister, and represented to him, That the Duke his Master was so ill
satisfied, to see that his Ministers were not treated in Spain with the same
Respect as they were in France, and especially because they did not pay him
those great Sums that were due to him, that he desired to see an Envoy of Spain
no more at Turin. The Duke de Medina Celi answered him, That whatever Treatment
was paid his Master in France* ought not to be used as a Consequence for the
King of Spain to do the like, who wa^ so far above all other Kings, that he had
no Example to follow. The Count replied, That he had no mind at present to
enter into an Examination of their Greatness, or the difference that might be
between them; but that he had not forgotten, that about Twenty Years ago Philip
IV. had declared, by the Marquess de la Fuente, That his Ambassador should not
appear at the Ceremonies where those of France assisted; and that this
Declaration was very well known, and accordingly regulated in all the Court^ of
Europe. The Duke answered him, That he knew nothing of the matter, and that he
could hardly believe the business was as he represented it. In the mean time,
they made several Reflections at Court upon the Proposals of the Duke of Savoy;
and Don Antonio de la Cerda, who had been nominated to go to Turin, was
recalled home before he arrived there. Nevertheless, they dispensed with
themselves so far, as to send to compliment the Duke, upon the Alliance he was
going to make with the Infanta of Portugal.

This Princess, as it was commonly pretended, was supposed to be poisoned; and
what made the World judge so, was, because one of her Officers having carried
some of the Dishes from her Table to his own House, his Wife, and some others,
after they had eat of them, found themselves extremely ill, that they believed
they should die, and had all of them Marks of poison about them. This Accident
occasioned a great bustle at Lisbon; the People mutinied, and wanting a^ Object
for their Fury to work upon, they desig^ed to pick a quarrel with the Spanish
Envoy, a^though they had no Reason for it, and he was just upon the point of
suffering the greatest Outrag^s imaginable. The Portug^eses had afterward a
new occasion to grieve them, caused by the Death of Don Duarte Ribero, who was
sent Ambassador to Savoy. He happened to die in the Territories of Spain, after
so violent and sudden a manner, that all the World was astonished at it; and
this served to increase the Suspicions they formerly entertained of the evil
intentions of some persons, in relation to the Infanta.

A little time appeased all these Clamours, and the Count de Gubernatis
departed toward the end of June to go for Portugal.

On the 22 d of the same Month, the Marquess de Grana, Ambassador from the
Emperor, made his Entry. All his Retinue were ba^ely clothed in Gray, and his
Coaches had no Gilding about them. Most People were surprised at the sight; and
to say the truth, this was not the right way to please in Madrid; for there
they show them more or less Respect, according to the Expenses they are at in
these sorts of occasions. To this we may add, that the People there love fine
Shows above any thing in the World, and it being known, that the Ambassador had
received twenty five thousand Crowns to defray the Charges of his Journey, and
that he drew every Year from the Emperor and the King forty thousand Crowns
more, they were ready to throw Stones at him, when they saw him make so
scandalous an Entry. Don Diego de Bracamonte, Ambassador of Malta, was the
Reason why he made his Entry no sooner. He was still of Opinion, that they had
not done him Justice, when as he Marquess de Villars made his Entry, but that
as soon as ever he renewed his Pretensions, he should have Satisfaction given
him. Being under these Expectations, he demanded that his Chariot might march
immediately after that of the last Ambassador of the Chapel; the Marquess de
Grana would by no means consent to it, alleging what had been formerly done by
the Ambassador of France, and so that Example was followed. This small
difference was scarce determined, when the Marquess de Grana had another
Contest with Don Geronimo d' Eguya; he would have had him make the first Visit,
as the other Secretaries of State had always done before him. D' Eguya excused
himself, by pretending, that all the other Ambassadors has come first to visit
him, and that he lay under no Obligations to make any particular Distinctions
for the sake of Monsieur de Grana. Upon this, the other Ambassadors taking
notice what ill Advantage he had made of the Civility that showed him,
unanimously declared, that they never pretended to make that Visit, as if it
had been a Duty incumbent upon them; so that d' Eguya was not a little
mortified at a Declaration so contrary to his Vanity and Pretensions, and found
himself now under an indispensable necessity to go first to the Ambassador of
Germany.

He carried till the Court was gone to the Escurial, and took his Opportunity
to go to his House on a certain day, when he knew he was not at home: But this
did not satisfy the Marquess, who said, he reckoned that Visit for nothing,
which he had not received: D' Eguya answered, That he had acquitted himself of
his Duty; and thus they did not see one another at all. The Ambassador
Extraordinary of Malta made his Entry, which though it made no Magnificent
Appearance, was handsomely ordered.

It was no small satisfaction to them at Court to hear, that the Flota for the
Indies, which they believed would scarce be in a condition to go this Year, by
reason that the great Disorder of the current Money had not a little hindered
all manner of Commerce, had set Sail out of the Port of Cales, and made a Happy
Voyage with the Brother of the Duke de Medina-Celi, who went Viceroy to New
Spain: But to allay their Joy, they were informed, that one of the greater
Vessels had struck against a Rock in the middle of the Bay, and received so
much damage, that springing a Leak on every side, they had not time enough to
bring her off to any place where they might unload and repair her, so that she
was lost with some of her Passengers, and all her Merchandise.

The Duke of Medina-Celi not being absolutely assured to continue Chief
Minister long, thought it the best way to make all Advantages of the present
Opportunity. He had nine Daughters, but had only married two of them, and had a
great mind to bestow the third upon the Son of the Constable Colonna, who was
newly returned to Madrid from his his Vice-Royship of Arragon, and had brought
his Children along with him. This appeared to be a very Advantageous Match for
the Duke's Daughter, and therefore having it still in his Eye, he showed a
particular Respect to the Marquess de los Balbazez, who was Brother-in-law to
the Constable. Few Persons penetrated at first into the true Motive of the
thing; they thought he did it only to have a fit Occasion to take his
Instructions, because he was capable of giving him the best: but the more
understanding People soon discovered that the great desire he had to conclude
this Alliance, was the principal Reason; for at the bottom the Marquess de los
Balbazes had more Reputation at the time when his Embassies and great
Negotiations kept him at a distance, than when he was at Madrid. Whether it
proceeded from the Envy the World bore him, or that his Presence made them
examine his Faults more narrowly, it is certain that People had a better
Opinion of him when he was absent, than when they saw him before them. The good
Graces of the Duke still contributed to draw more Hatred and Envy upon him, but
they did not last long enough to make him suffer any thing upon that Account.

One of the greatest things they usually reproached Balbazez with, was his
excessive Avarice which busied it self in the most inconsiderable matters,
although he was Master of a plentiful Fortune, and might have lived after another
manner, without incommoding his Estate in the least. He was a Genoese, of the
House of Spinola; his Grandfather had formerly commanded the Spanish Army, and
this was likewise a great Captain; but whether it were because he was a
Stranger, or for some other Reason, the Grandees of Spain looked upon him as
much inferior to them, although he was a Grandee as well as themselves, and
was of illustrious Birth. They despised him, because he made Advantage of his
Money, after the manner of a Banker, which is so seldom practiced in Spain by
Persons of Quality, that they, cannot endure those that do it. His Enemies
pretended, that he had committed notorious Oversights at the Treaty of
Nimeguen, and that they daily beheld new Inconveniences arise from his ill
Conduct there; That this was the Subject of perpetual quarrels between France
and Spain, because he had neglected to lay down in plain intelligible terms,
what things were yielded up, and their Dependances, and that every one made use
of this Obscurity to interpret it to their own Advantage.

It is certain, that what they alleged against the Marquess de Los Balbazez,
had foundation enough, but the Constable of Castile was the Man that took the
greatest pains to expose his Miscarriages to the World. He had no kindness for
him for Don Iuan's sake, whose Favorite he had always been, and for which
Reason the Marquess declared against the Queen. This was the true Cause of the
Aversion that was between the Constable and him, and it increased very much on
the side of the former, when he saw what a Respect and Esteem the Duke de
Medina Celi testified for the other. He needed no more than this to revive the
Old Grudge he had against the Chief Minister, and it proceeded so far, that he
incessantly heightened the Complaints that came from all parts, under the
Dominion of the King of Spain, against the Duke. It must be allowed, that the
Constable was one of the most dexterous prudent Men of his Age, and that his
Rank and great Abilities gave him vast Advantages over the rest; so that
whenever he gave his Advice, few People were found so hardy as to oppose him.
The Duke was sensible, that he directly thwarted him upon all occasions: This
together with his other Affairs, made him extremely uneasy, to find himself
perpetually engaged in a troublesome Combat, and to dispute against a Man, who,
as we may say, took a Pleasure in chasing himself, and who searched all
occasions to perplex and disgust him. Therefore in this Affair the Duke took
the mildest course; he courted the Constable's Friendship, and made all
Advances toward it: He knew that he was fallen ill, and that though he was not
in a condition to go to the Council, he was not so much indisposed, but that he
might his have Advice, in case it were demanded.

He sent constantly to the Constable's House to consult him upon all important
occasions, and this mark of distinction flattered his Vanity so agreeably, that
he found himself mightily obliged to the Duke. He wanted very little of
pretending to be always sick for the time to come, as long as the Duke
continued to give him so evident a Proof of Deference: However, it is very
certain, that although he was as well as ever, he would not stir abroad for a
long time, only to prolong a thing which filled him with so much Pleasure and
Satisfaction. He received another Obligation from the Duke, which made no less
an impression upon him; a considerable Benefice happening to be vacant, he
bestowed it immediately upon one of his Natural Sons, without the Constable's
ever demanding it. So many unexpected Favors perfectly overcame him, and made
him desirous to do something on his side; so he proposed to submit to a
Reference, in order to accommodate the business of the Duke de Cardonne's
Succession. The Constable had espoused his Widow, and the Duke his Daughter:
These Two Ladies had great Pretensions, and as great Differences; therefore
they thought it the best way to determine them by the mutual consent of both
Parties: The Duke was sensible, that the Constable, who naturally loved long
tedious Lawsuits, showed a great deal of Complaisance in this matter, and
indeed the Constable was of Opinion, that it would be better to put an end to
this Affair, than be engaged in an everlasting Contest with the Chief Minister.

This Chief Minister often assisted the King, and denied, Audience to no body;
but neither did his Endeavors or Audiences produce any advantageous Effects
for the public Interest, and the smallest Affairs were as difficult for him to
determine as the greatest. The Marquess de Grana knew so well before hand what
he was to expect upon this score, that he could not be brought to accept the
Embassy for Spain, till he received express Orders from the Emperor, although
for his farther Encouragement, he had several Relations and Friends at Madrid,
and that besides his having resided there formerly, the consideration of those
Favors he might reasonably expect for his Master's sake, ought to have
overcome the unwillingness he expressed to come to this Court. It is true, what
served to increase it very much, was the secret Advantage which he thought his
Enemies, and those that envied him, might have upon him, during his Absence
from Vienna? But for all this he found he had reason enough to be content with
the manner of his usage, the King allowed him a double Franchise, and paid all
the Charges of his House at his Arrival: The Two Queens honored the
Marchioness de Grana, and her Daughters, with several Presents; they favored
him in every thing, yet nevertheless he could not forbear to say proudly, that
he hoped he should not tarry there above a year, and that it should not be his
Fault, if he did not depart sooner. He was a fine Gentleman, had abundance of
Wit, Penetration and Conduct; but he was of a prodigious bigness, and found
himself mightily incommoded by it: He sometimes could not help changing his
Countenance, when he happened to be in Company with People whom he was not well
acquainted with, when they looked steadfastly upon him. The Court of Spain had
such favorable Inclinations for him, that they readily granted him whatever he
desired; but they could not forbear now and then to promise him some things
which they never performed, and he himself was sensible that they never would.
He was frequently vexed upon these Occasions, saying, That it was his
Misfortune not to know what he might depend upon: He was concerned at the
Misery to which all sorts of People were reduced at Madrid, and I have heard
him frequently say, That whatever Idea's a Man might form to himself of the
Public Grievances, yet they infinitely fell short of what they really were,
when he came to see them, and that for his part, he could not imagine what
Remedies they could apply to them. It is indeed true, that Funds were wanting
for the most necessary. Exigencies, and that they were forced to borrow five
thousand Pistols for the Subsistence of some Troops that they thought
convenient to send to Italy, and the Frontiers of Biscay, by reason of the
Apprehensions they had at Court of the Designs of our King. I have heard it
often said, That the Couriers could not go, for want of Money to defray the
Expenses of their Journey, although they had Affairs of great Consequence to
dispatch; and the Marquess de Los Balbazez, who knew this better than any body,
represented to the Duke de Medina Celi, that there was a perfect necessity to
take full Cognizance of the Funds, upon which they might depend for the time to
come. The Duke relishing this Proposal, ordered a true Scheme of the King's
Revenues to be brought before him: But the President of the Finances, and some
others, after they had deliberated, as their Fashion was, upon the matter, that
is, with a regard only to their own proper Interests, answered all with one
Consent, That what he demanded of them was the Work of several Years. This
Answer was sufficient to make him abandon the Undertaking; for the Duke never
cared to engage himself in any business that was of long continuance; nay, he
had scarce Resolution enough to go through those things which he was obliged
suddenly to begin, and as soon to finish. One of the best Examples I can
produce to justify this, is his leaving the Camarera Major, Don Geronimo de
Eguya, and the Confessor, quietly to enjoy their Places, without endeavoring
to remove them, whether it were because he despised them, or that he imagined
them to be too powerful to attempt any thing against them. The Weakness which
he showed in that Rancounter, served only to increase their Courage and
Haughtiness; and they went so far at last, as not to fear him at all: They
possessed the King with a strong Aversion to him, and insinuated several things
into him that were quite opposite to the Duke's Intentions. He was well enough
sensible of it, but his natural insensibility hindered him from resenting it:
His Gentleness rend'red him contemptible both to one and the other, but
particularly to the Duchess de Terra Nova, who spoke often to the King about
him, and explained her self upon her constant Chapter, the Duke, in such bitter
Language, that he being informed of it, as he certainly was, every body had
Reason to wonder how he was able to endure it.

This ill-natured old Beldame had only a seeming, and not a real Kindness for
the Young Queen, and it lasted so short a time, that her usage served only to
make the Queen sensible, that she knew how to moderate her self well enough,
when she saw it was necessary for her interest so to do. But as this was indeed
a true constraint upon her Nature, and she could not counterfeit the least
sweetness of Temper, without a great Reluctance, so she soon reassumed her
proper C^^racter, and her Persecutions became more frequent than ever. The
Queen, utterly impatient of this Rigorous Deportment, charmed the King one day,
by all manner of tender engaging Caresses, till she found him in a Humor to
deny her nothing. After some time had past, she told him, That if she was dear
to him, she conjured him to give her some testimony of it, that was as well
necessary for her Health, as the Satisfaction of her Mind. He promised to
consent to whatever she desired. Why then, says she, deliver me from the
Tyranny of the Duchess de Terra Nova. This Demand surprised him, and it was a
pretty while before he returned her any Answer; but knowing that this had
disquieted her a long time, he told her at last, That what she requested had
never any President, and that no Queen had ever changed her Camarera Major. Ah,
Sir, replied the Queen, your Majesty has shown me several Favors for which
none of your Predecessors have left any Example; and cannot you then condescend
to grant me this? I consent to it, says the King, taking her by the Hand, I
consent to it; but then, Madam, have a care upon whom you cast your Eyes; for
after this first choice it will be impossible for you to make another. The
Queen testified her Joy and Acknowledgment, by Thanks proportionable to the
Pleasure she received.

The first Journey she made, was to acquaint the Queen Mother with the News,
not at all questioning, but that she would almost show as much Joy upon this
occasion as her self.

But she was not a little surprised to find her so reserved and cold, as if the
matter were absolutely indifferent to her. This mightily perplexed her, and so
she discovered the whole Affair to the French Ambassador's Lady, who took pains
to put her in heart again, by making her sensible, that the Queen Mother was
only apprehensive of seeing this place filled by some other Lady, who might
perhaps be full as disagreeable to her as the Duchess de Terra Nova was, and
that she was of Opinion, that if she proposed some body to her, whom she liked,
she would open her self more clearly to her. The Young Queen replied, That she
would do nothing in this business, without the Advice of the Queen her Mother
in Law; That she was minded to have said as much to her, when she first
discoursed her about it, but that she seemed to be so indifferent in the
matter, that she had not Confidence enough to explain her self farther. The
Queen judged it would be expedient to acquaint the Duke de Medina Celi with
this Affair, for fear, least if she made a Mystery of it, and he should
afterward happen to discover it, he might look upon himself to be disobliged,
and resent it so much, as to endeavor to hinder the Accomplishment of it: But
she still lay under some Perplexities, because she fancied she did not
understand the Spanish Language well enough, to be able to hold any long
Conversation in it with the Duke, and this was a nice Case, wherein she ought
to explain her self clearly and intelligibly. She was yet more afraid, that the
Camarera, who was always a listening in all parts of her Apartment, and who
sometimes slipped into Corners, where, without being perceived, she understood
and saw everything that past, would go and discover what she said concerning
her. These Reasons prevailed with her to charge one of her Women, in whom she
reposed a great confidence, to go to Don Antonio de la Cerda, who was a near
Relation of the Duke de Medina Celi, and who besides expressed a great Zeal for
her Majesty, and desire him to acquaint the Chief Minister with what had
happened, and to tell him, That since the Queen was resolved to remove her
Camarera, she desired him to choose for her one of his Friends, of whose
Fidelity he was assured; and that it was necessary for him to assist her in
this Affair, to the end, that acting in Consort one with another, the business
might succeed to their common Satisfaction. The Duke received the Honor the
Queen did him, with a great deal of Respect and Acknowledgement, and sent his
Duchess that very Evening to return her his most humble Thanks. When she came
to the Queen's Apartment, she carried till the other Ladies were gone out of
the Room, that she might have a better opportunity of making her Compliment.

The Queen, who knew very well, that the Duchess was sensible enough of the
favorable Condescensions she had made on her side, was desirous to bestow the
Place upon her; but the Affair did not succeed as she imagined, because that
Lady had too much business upon her Hands to accept the Offer. I have designed
it for you, says the Queen, and I am of Opinion, that you will not be unwilling
to serve me. The Duchess thanked her, as in Duty obliged, and told her, She
could wish with all her heart that she was in a condition to accept this
Honor, and that no body in the World should serve her Majesty more faithfully
than she would; but her Health was so ill, that it would not permit her to
render her those Services in which that Place, as well as her own inclinations,
would engage her. But the Queen continuing to press her still, she told her,
That although this Consideration was laid aside, yet she had another of equal
importance, which she could never dispense with, That she had Seven Daughters,
upon whose Education and good Conduct all her Cares were bestowed; and
therefore she requested her Majesty to think of her no more: However, she durst
assure her, she believed the Marchioness de Los Velez, to be the most proper
Person to execute this Place; That she was a Lady of great Merit, and
illustrious Birth; that she had formerly been Governante to the Young King, and
consequently being so well known to his Majesty, could more dexterously humor
and please him than any one besides. The Queen very well approved of this
Advice, and the Duchess afterward withdrew. She gave her Husband an Account
of what Conversation had passed between her and the Queen; but he was
displeased to hear that she had recommended the Marchioness de Los Velez,
because he had already engaged himself in behalf of the Duchess de
Albuquerque, and earnestly desired to see her advanced to this Post.

The Confidence which the King reposed in de Eguya, would not permit him to
conceal from him the promise he made the Queen to remove the Camarera. He for
hi^ part omitted nothing that might turn off the intended blow; but he found
the King was so fully resolved to satisfy the Queen, that he perceived it
would be to no purpose to use any importunities with him upon this score: So
all he could do in the matter, was only to acquaint the Camarera with what was
designed against her, that so she might be the better provided to bear the
shock when it happened. She had some Suspicions of this before, it being her
principal Talent to penetrate into the most secret Affairs. This blow sensibly
afflicted her, and she could not forbear to speak to the Queen about it. Madam,
says she, I should reckon my self extremely unfortunate, if my Zeal for your
Majesty should ever 'happen to displease you: I have spoken to you with more
Zeal, and perhaps with more Freedom than any one has done; nevertheless, my
design was only to inspire you with a desire of learning all our Fashions, that
so you might absolutely possess the Heart and good Inclinations of the King:
The Liberty I took has appeared too assuming; I have drawn your displeasure
upon my self, by endeavoring to deserve your Affection; and I am informed at
last, that your Majesty desires to see my Place filled by another. The Queen;
surprised to see that the Affair she had communicated to so few Persons, had
taken Air, answered coldly, It is not worth the while, Madam, to trouble your
self about what People say; few Persons know my Thoughts; and it is a thing
usually practiced in Courts, to invent News, and then to relate it as if it
were true. The Camarera was not able to draw any Discoveries from this
Conversation; but whether her Conscience reproached her for the Conduct she had
used, or else she had been informed of the Queen's Designs before de Eguya
spoke to her about them; it was some time a-go since she suspected that she was
to be removed, and upon that Consideration, having examined all the Ladies of
the Court, who gave her the greatest Jealousy, she found Three, viz. the
Marchioness de Los Velez, the Duchess de Albuquerque, and the Duchess de l'
Infantado. This is the Cause that she took her measures a long time before, and
spoke of these Three Ladies in very disobliging Terms before the Queen,
whenever an occasion presented it self. She accused the Marchioness de Los
Velez for her Haughtiness in all her Actions, and for her insupportable
Severity. She pretended, that the Duchess de Albuquerque hated all the French
so mortally, that when she happened to meet any of that Nation, she turned her
Eyes aside, that she might not behold them; and that she valued her self so
mightily upon the score of her high Birth and Virtue, that she had always
something or other to say against all the World: And then as for the Duchess
de l' Infantado, she represented her as an old doting Woman, who at the best
had never any great share of Wit, and had now totally lost it, by reason of her
great Age. She was not content to speak of them after this manner, but engaged
all the French Women, who were near the Queen, to insinuate the same Opinion
into her, and they acquitted themselves in the matter as well as they could,
out of hopes, that if the Duchess continued in her Post still, she would take
care to consider them for their good Services.

What they said to the Queen upon this occasion, made but a small impression
upon her Mind; and the first time she could find an opportunity to discourse
the Queen Mother about it, she acquainted her with her Designs in favor of the
Marchioness de los Velez; but she expressed as great an indifference at this
Motion as she did at first. This gave the Queen no small Affliction; so she
imagined, that she ought to inform her of every thing that was laid to the
Duchess de Terra Nova's Charge, as well upon the Affair of Don Carlos of
Arragon, whom she caused to be Assassinated, as several other things that
rendered her odious. After this, she added the Particulars of the Deportment
she had used toward her. But the Queen Mother pretended, as if all this were
News to her, and still continued to speak very kindly of the Camarera; not that
she had the least kindness for her in reality; for she had not forgotten how
deeply she had been engaged in the Interests of Don Iuan; and she had not as
yet forgiven the Memory of that Prince for the Troubles he brought upon her.

The Reason of her using this Conduct with the Queen, was only to exclude the
Marchioness de Los Velez, and the Duchess de l' Infantado, whom she did not
greatly care for. She thought with her self, that if she desired to oblige the
Queen to take a Camarera from her Hands, it would he necessary for her to
testify no Aversion for her that was to fill that Place, and that the Queen
being desirous to be seconded by her, would demand of her whom she pitched
upon, and so take a Person of her own choosing. The Young Queen was aware of her
Mother-in-Law's Designs: However, she pretended to know nothing of them,
supposing that such a one would be always obliged to do as the Queen Mother
directed her; Having therefore a particular inclination for the Marchioness de
Los Velez, she was resolved to sound the King's Sentiments upon that Affair,
and proposed her to him; but he expressed an extraordinary Antipathy to her: If,
says he, you knew the Marchioness de Los Velez as well as I do, I am confident
you would never think of placing her so near you; She has been my Governante,
and is the only Person in the World whom I dread most. The Duke de Medina Celi
desired no more to see her in that Station than the King did, and showed as
great a dislike to the Duchess de l' Infantado; all their Votes concurred in
behalf of the Duchess de Albuquerque, and it was agreed upon at last, to
persuade the Queen that she ought to choose her.

This Choice had infallibly succeeded, if the Queen could have cured her self
of those disagreeable impressions which the Camarera had made upon her in
relation to that Duchess; She often thought of the imperious Humor that was
attributed to her, of the pretended Aversion she had to the French, but
especially of what the King had told her, That when once the Duchess de Terra
Nova was removed, and another put into her Place, she must never think of
turning her off. She was persuaded, that she should be no Gainer by the change,
if she pitched upon the Duchess de Albuquerque: Nay, that it might so happen
to her, as to be a considerable loser by it. This Imagination hindered her from
pushing this Affair any farther; and she thought it would be much better to
carry a little, till she could find out some other Lady, who might be
altogether agreeable to her. In effect, as she was searching after one, she was
told of the Marchioness de Eytona, who was a Woman of Solid Virtue, great
Merit, and had abundance of Wit and Gallantry. In fine, she was every way so
well Accomplished, that it was necessary for her Majesty to have her near her;
and by the Relations she had at the Queen-Mother's Court, and with the Chief
Minister, she could not choose but please both Parties alike. The King showed no
opposition to her, and the Queen who knew her, loved her already; so that she
was mighty joyful to meet with one whom she liked so well. But this Joy did not
continue long; for the Marchioness de Eytona fell sick, and died a few days
after. The Young Queen was sensibly Afflicted at this Loss, and not knowing
where to make a better choice, she came back again to the Marchioness de Los
Velez, because she comprehended no difference between the Duchess de Terra
Nova and the Duchess de Albuquerque; And as for the Duchess de l' Infantado,
^he perceived well enough that she was not fit for her.

But now to propose the Marchioness de Los Velez, was to attempt a thing that
could never succeed, for the Reasons I have already mentioned. The Marchioness,
who perceived them better than any body, could not endure to be so long exposed
to an Exclusion that was so very disobliging to her; So she went to find out
the Queen, and returned her Thanks for her great Favors; but she told her,
That her Age, and the Trouble she had had with the King, when she was
Governante to him, gave her so great a disrelish for the Court, that she could
by means reconcile her self to it, and therefore desired her to think of her no
more. All these Difficulties seemed to arise for the Satisfaction of the
Duchess de Terra Nova, or at least, they proved the occasion why she continued
still in her Place; and that the Queen, utterly wearied to find so many
disappointments in her way, was come to such a pass; that she was no longer
desirous to remove her. The Queen Mother all the while intrigued more than she,
because she earnestly desired to have that Lady turned out of the Palace.

What still contributed to make the Young Queen less concerned for the matter,
was, that her Mind was taken up with new Troubles, that were more pressing upon
her than those she received from the Camarera; I mean, the Apprehensions they
had at Court of a Rupture between the two Crowns. The Queen remained
inconsolable, when she considered, that the Peace of Nimeguen, of which she
was, as it were, the Seal, was going to be broken. The Love she had for France,
and the Obligations that fastened her to Spain, balanced all her Inclina^ions;
and she often shed Tears, out of a fear only of seeing the War renewed.

The most Christian King pretended, That the Spaniards had pillaged and abused
his Subjects in several places, and either burnt or taken many French Vessels;
That they returned him no Answer at Madrid, to the Complaints he had made; That
the Marquess de Borgomaine, who resided at London, in quality of Ambassador
Extraordinary from the King of Spain, observed no manner of measures; nay, not
even those that Decency prescribes; That he had made a League in the Name of
the King his Master, with the King of England against France; That he was well
informed, that as he was upon his departure to go Ambassador to Vienna, he had
received private Orders to stay some time in Holland, to try if he could
persuade the Hollanders to do the most prejudicial things they could to France.
The King, provoked at so clandestine a Conduct, and so extraordinary in the
midst of a Peace, which he had not infringed the least on his part, was
resolved to act according to his usual Justice and Equity; and finding himself
possessed with these Resentments, he had nothing to incline him to believe,
that he was obliged to part with any of his Rights.

He ordered his Galleys to put to Sea, with an express Command to make those of
Spain give them the first Gun whenever they met them. He knew that this Affair
had been regulated at the same time when Philip IV. had agreed, that his
Ambassadors should never appear in Public with those of France; and he made
the Duke de Medina Celi be acquainted, that the Conduct he used during the
Peace, was so opposite to Peace it self, that he saw himself obliged to seek
out all Advantages on his side, as he found it expedient.

The King of Spain, for his part, complained of the exact Severity that was
show'n him in the smallest matters, alleging, that when the Commissioners of
the most Christian King were to have adjusted with those that came from Spain,
the Limits of what had been yielded up by the Treaty of Nimeguen, the French
had refused to Treat with the Deputies ^f Spain, as long as the Catholic King
should take upon him the Quality of the Duke of Burgundy: They added a
Declaration to this Refusal, That if within a certain time assigned, they did
not Treat, by Virtue of another Commission, where this Title was not inserted,
they would immediately put the King of France in Possession of the Territories
and Rights which belonged to him. So that the King of Spain was content to cut
off the Titles he usually assumes, with an etc.

This League, about which the Marquess de Borgomaine made such a bustle and
stir in England, was at last concluded with Spain. It was a mutual Engagement
on both sides, whereby they obliged themselves to defend one another, in what
place soever they should happen to be attacked. For this end England was to
furnish Eight Thousand Foot, and Thirty Men of War; and Spain was obliged to
send an Hundred Thousand Crowns every Month into Flanders, to keep the Garrisons
there in a good condition, and have Twelve Thousand Men in pay in Champagne.
They were in good hopes, that the Emperor and the Hollander would likewise
enter into the League. Don Pedro Ronquillo, Ambassador Extraordinary of Spain,
in England, sent a Courier, with a Ratification of the Treaty, which was
received at Madrid on the 25 th of June, 1680.

Most People were very well satisfied, when they saw the several Motions on
both sides, that the War would infallibly be kindled somewhere or other in
Flanders. The Duke de Villa Hermosa had demanded to be recalled home, and that
another Governor might be sent to supply his Place. The unconcerned Temper, as
well as the Natural Slowness of the Spaniards, held the matter a considerable
time in suspense, without giving themselves the trouble to determine it. The
Marquess de Los Balbazez, was first pitched upon to be sent thither: but as
soon as he received Advice of it, he endeavored all he could to get himself
excused, out of an Apprehension that they would engage him at the same time to
contract vast Debts, to which his Thrifty Humor gave him an invincible
Aversion. Besides this, they found it a difficult matter to meet with any
Subject who was to their Mind: The Report ran, That the Duke of Lorrain would
go to command there in Chief; Afterward it was said, the Duke of Newburg would
be the Man, for whom the Marquess de Grana did several good Offices. After they
had deliberated a long time about the Merits of these two Competitors, at last
they cast their Eyes upon Prince Alexander Farnese; he obtained the Preference,
and was named a^out the beginning of July. He was Brother to the Duke of Parma,
and was about Threescore Year old; the Gou^ very much troubled him, and the
Tallness of his Stature was very Extraordinary: He had been a long time devoted
to Spain, and particularly to the Queen Mother, at the juncture when she had
those great Differences with Don Iuan: He had been General of the Cavalry in
Estramadura and Catalonia, and passed for a very great Soldier, although it is
certain he had but very little Experience, and the Management of his private
Affairs sufficiently demonstrated it; for he owed every body Money, paid
seldom, and had not a Farthing by him: his Profuseness and his Mistresses
ruined him; and although, after all, he had really a great Estate, yet it was
miserably encumbered. It was the General Opinion here, that if the War
commenced, Flanders would be the first Victim; and this made them believe, that
it would be less ignominious for Spain to suffer this Loss, when an Italian was
Governor of the Low Countries, than if a Spaniard were there. In short, it
could be nothing else but this Consideration only, that could possibly induce
them to believe they did well to fill this Post with a Man, who never had
managed as yet any Affair of that vast importance as these were. They bargained
with Don Francisco de Castile, for the Sum of Three Hundred Thousand Crowns,
which was to be remitted to Brussels, for the payment of the Troops: And after
Prince Alexander had received the Thirty Thousand Crowns which the King ordered
to be given him, to bear the Expense of his Voyage, he parted on the 17 th of
July, to go and take Shipping at the Groyne in Galicia. He took along with him
abundance of Volunteers, and a numerous Train of Domestics: He sent a Courier
into France, to get necessary Pasports, and left the Court in such haste, that
he forgot to carry with him the Patent for his Government. It was not very long
before he heartily repented for so doing, and he pressed earnestly to have it:
However, they promised him one, but d^ferr'd to expedite it; so that he could
only be said to be Governor for the Interim; and it was believed, with Reason
enough, that he would not be well pleased with this Usage. He had entrusted
some Persons at Madrid to solicit this Affair for him; but they refused the
Expeditions, when the Court would oblige them to take them in such a Form, and
after many Petitions on their side, and several Contests with the Ministers
about it, it was not at last inserted into the Patent after what manner he was
made Governor.

In the mean-time the Prince departed from Madrid with so little Money,
according to his usual Custom, that he was scarce arrived at the Groyne, but he
dispatched a Courier away to the Court with some Letters, wherein he demanded
Money to perform his Voyage. They answered him very coldly, That they would
advise him not to defer the day of his departure, and that they could by no
means believe, that he had already spent his Thirty Thousand Crowns. He
embarked immediately, accompanied by some Vessels belonging to Biscay, which
transported five hundred new raised Men, that had been levied in Galicia, and
were commanded to guard the Frontiers. The People in Flanders had not for many
Years seen any other Governor but Don Iuan; he possessed the Government as his
own till his Death; and although he was at so great a distance, yet Couriers
were still dispatched to him, to receive his Orders, even in the most important
Conjunctures. To say the truth, the Constable of Castile had been sent thither,
as I have already observed in the beginning of these Memoirs, in the Place of
that Prince; and he obtained a General Patent, without specifying in it, that
it was only by a Commission; but the Queen Mother would have it so, on purpose
to disgust Don Iuan.

The pressing Necessity there was for Money in Flanders, obliged the Duke de
Medina Celi to search with all imaginable Application some means or other to
furnish them with some; and he tried several without meeting any Success. Don
Francisco de Castile immediately promised to remit Thirty Thousand Crowns
thither, and afterward engaged to make a return of Eighteen Hundred Thousand
Florins more; upon which consideration they were to give him Two Hundred
Thousand Crowns in Hand, and to pay him the rest at different times upon
Assignations, which in all probability would never have been paid to him. He
questioning it very much, was not willing to be their Fool, and resolved to
send no Money to Brussels, but accordingly as he received it at Madrid. They
failed to perform the Promise they had made him, to pay him Two Hundred
Thousand Crowns down upon the Nail; (...) he^, for his part, failed them in the
(...).

Now how was it possible to draw such (...) Sum as this out of the King's
Treasury, ^hen it was totally exhausted? The inferi^ur Officers of his House
having tarried for their Wages longer than they could well do, except they
reduced themselves to down-right-Beggary, would have thrown up their Live ries,
being resolved to quit the Service, unless they had been partly detained by
Menaces, and partly by fair Promises to see them paid, if they continued in it
still. As for People of Quality, they could not tell what to do: After they had
pawned their Jewels, their Plate, nay, even their Canopies of State, and their
wearing Apparel, they found they had now no more Money or Credit left. The
Bankers were not in a better condition, and the Merchants had neither
Merchandise nor Money. The inconvenience of proclaiming Money, to go at a lower
Price, was sensibly perceived every day more and more, and the Public Misery
still increased. A Man cannot sufficiently wonder that things of so great a
consequence were managed with so little consideration: Nay, matters were come
to that pass, that in several Provinces they were forced to exchange Cattle for
Corn, and Cloth for Linen, because there was not Money enough to circulate in
the way of Trade. Heaven pitied the great Afflictions of those People, and
favored them with a Plentiful Year; but the Price of Bread was not in the
least diminished, either through the Negligence or Villainy of the Magistrates,
who were so far from encouraging the Corn to be brought into the great Cities,
that they underhand hindered it from being carried to those Places. The
Queen-Mother's Household began to find in their turn, the Effects of these
Disorders; she had been hitherto very well paid, and her Domestics received
their Racions, that is to say, their Allowances, either in Money or Provisions;
and now when they pressed the Treasurers to take care they might have them, they
were told, that they might go and visit the Chests of the Treasury, if they
pleased, which at present were all open, because they had no Money within.

So many particular, as well as private Calamities, were yet increased by the
Ravage and Desolation the Plague made in Andaluzia. It is not long ago since it
was altogether uninhabited along the Sea Coasts from Malaga to Alicant. The
Kingdom of Granada was not free from this Pestilence, which spread it self
about Sevil and Corduba, and in Estramadura. It was immediately perceived at
Port St. Mary, but they would not take any public notice of it, till after the
departure of the Flota for the Indies, for fear of spoiling Commerce. If it had
not been for this consideration, it had been visibly perceived much sooner. The
difficulties still increased, as to the business of Trade, and People were
apprehensive that their Letters, Commodities and Goods carried the infection
with them. It is natural enough for Men to use all necessary Precaution against
so dangerous a Distemper as this was.

I have already observed, that the Duke de Medina Celi would have fain engaged
the King to part with his Confessor, but that finding so many difficulties
appear in the way, he desisted from his design: But Father Francis de Relux had
not, for his part, forgotten the ill Offices that the Duke endeavored to do
him. He dissembled his Resentments, because he was not as yet so well settled
in the King's good inclinations, as to venture to cope with the Chief Minister.
But as soon as he found himself upon sure grounds, he spoke to de Eguya, and
the Duchess de Terra Nova, to interest them in his quarrel, out of a desire he
had to make the Duke sensible of the Effects of his Power. The old Duchess was
not ignorant, that the Duke hated her, and that he passionately desired to see
another in her Place: This inspired her with a mortal Aversion to him; and so
these Three Persons being always united, raised a considerable Faction against
him: But that of the Confessor was carried on more secretly, and consequently
was more dangerous. It often happens, that a Man pursues his Revenge freely,
when he may safely do it under the Pretense of Devotion; And this was the Case
of Father de Relux; for he incessantly attacked the King in his most tender
part, his Conscience. He represented to him the Misery of his People, the
Extremity of the State, the Disorder and Miscarriages, which were so far from
being remedied, that they were openly encouraged; that no Grievances were
redrest, that every thing came to ruin; that if his Majesty was sensible that
he had not Power and Experience enough to regulate Affairs of himself, and to
take the Reins of the Government into his own hands, he ought at least, to
entrust them with a Minister, who would give him an honest and faithful Account
of his Employment: That the debate was not now about a trivial matter, but that
his Everlasting Salvation lay at stake; that God, who makes and preserves Kings
in their Sovereign Authority, expects that Kings should perform their Duties;
that they are obliged to cherish their Subjects as their Children, and to make
them happy as far as it lies in their Power; that the Duke de Medina Celi only
regarded his own private Interests, and minded nothing but his Family, which
was very numerous, and the advancing of his Relations, whilst the rest of Spain
groaned under the heavy weight of Subsidies, Imposts, and a thousand other
Vexations, which were purposely raised to exhaust them; that he was obliged in
Conscience to inform him, that unless he vigorously endeavored to apply proper
Remedies to these Evils, it was his Duty to deny him Absolution. The King, who
continued for some time astonished at these Menaces, demanded of him, whether
he did not speak all these afflicting things only to try him, The other
answered, That he was so far from entertaining any such thoughts, that were so
little conformable to the Respect he owed him, that he would willingly have
sacrificed his own Life, to have been exempted from the cruel necessity of
speaking to him after so frank a manner. The King was very Pensive, and spent
several days in consulting himself, without knowing what to resolve upon: He
loved the Duke de Medina Celi exceedingly, and at last sent for him to come to
him. So having shut him up with himself in his Closet, he fairly acquainted him
with the occasion of his Uneasiness, and with his Apprehensions in relation to
his Salvation: He recounted to him every thing that past between his Confessor
and him, and how he refused to Absolve him, because of the general disorder of
Affairs; and at last told the Duke, He had now sent for him to comfort him with
good Reasons. The Chief Minister listened very respectfully to him all the
while, and would not suffer himself to be transported with any Passion against
the Confessor's Severity, for fear the King should suspect the true Motives of
that Heat. On the contrary he agreed, That he was indeed a Man of Sincerity,
and that his Advices seemed to proceed from a good intent: But then he added,
That he was a Monk, and had no manner of Experience in the World: That Don Iuan
had drawn him out of a Convent, where he lay buried; That he never had any
Conversation but with Monks, like himself; that he was dazzled with the Post, to
which, by the Favor of Don Iuan he had been elevated all on the sudden; that
his Head was giddy, and that he knew not how to make any difference between
things and times, although this was an Article absolutely necessary in the
Conduct of Souls; that he placed the King's Soul in a parallel with that of a
private Man; that he agreed indeed, that in the sight of God one were as
valuable as the other, and that all the difference that was to be found between
them, proceeded only from the diversity of their Works; but then every Man had
a particular way to save himself, that a Prince ought to live like a Prince,
and a private Man like a private Man, and so after the same manner, a Secular
like a Secular, and a Religious like a Religious; that Father Relux, whose
Capacity was very narrow, confounded all Estates, and even lost himself in this
Chaos; that his Majesty ought not to be disturbed at what he had told him, and
especially least of all in the present Affairs, because he assured him, for his
part, that he would not lose a moment to set them in the best Order imaginable;
that in truth, it was necessary to allow some time for the performance of this;
that let a Man's Zeal be never so earnest for the Public Good, yet he cannot
effect it immediately, since it is full as difficult a matter to remedy
Grievances, as it is easy to desire the removal of them; but that since the
Confessor had troubled himself with several things, which did not at all belong
to him, if the King would be pleased to take his Advice, he would provide him
with one, who was more capable of the Post than F. Relux, and would never
torment him with impertinent Scruples.

The Duke found it an easy matter to persuade his Majesty to embrace a t^^ng
that would set his Conscience at rest; and the King had consented that very
moment to the removal of the Confessor, if he had not judged it necessary to
take the Advice of Don Geronimo de Eguya, and so he told the Duke, that he
would make a few Reflections as was requisite, upon the matter. De Eguya coming
to wait upon the King, he communicated his Designs to him. After the strict
Union that was between this Favorite, the Duchess de Terra Nova, and Father
Relux, there was little probability that he would consent to his Removal, but
as he preferred his own Interests to those of other Persons, and only served
others out of a Respect to his own Advantage: So he found, that the Confessor
was so devoted to the Camarera Major, and that she so resolutely swore the
Downfall of the Duke, that if this Combination continued much longer, the Duke
would infallibly fall under the weight of it: That his Successor might perhaps
have less favorable Dispositions toward him, and that he had better sacrifice
the Confessor to the Minister, than the Minister to the Confessor. These
Reasons appeared so well-grounded, that instead of inspiring other Sentiments
into the King, he fortified those he had already, and this was enough to ruin
the Father Confessor to all intents and purposes. They offered him, as they did
before, the Bishopric of Avila, in order to observe some sort of Decency in
removing him; but he would not accept of it, and was content to contin^e a
Counselor in the Supreme Council of the Inquisition, where they are always
obliged to have a Dominican. The Duke de Medina Celi persuaded the King to take
in his Place Father Bayona, a Dominican, Professor of the University of Alcala:
He had expressed a great desire long before to see him placed in this Station,
and had spoke of him ever since the Ministry of Don Iuan. That Prince, who had
no kindness for him, would never admit him, saying, that he was a Frenchman. He
was indeed a Native of Navar, but that was the Spanish Navar: He entered into
this Function toward the end of July. It Is very observable, that in the space
of Five Years the King had Seven Confessors.

This Alteration gave a fatal Blow to the Duchess de Terra Nova, and the Chief
Minister flattered himself, that she would now leave the Palace in a short
time. Since People spoke no more of sending her away, and she was well informed
of every thing that past, she was of opinion, that they could not find any Lady
who was fit to succeed her in her Place, and that she should still continue in
it: But the Queen finding all her Stock of Patience spent and gone, by reason
of all those occasions of Complaint she still persisted to give her, consented
at last to receive the Duchess de Albuquerque near her Person: But this was
not till after she had endeavored to obtain the Marchioness de Los Velez, and
even the Duchess de l' Infantado. She saw very well, that the Queen Mother,
and the Chief Minister would never give their Consent to it, and that it was
indispensably necessary for her to take a Camar^ra Major from their hands, or
else to rest contented with whom she now had. Every one gave the Duchess de
Albuquerque a good Character, to efface those ill impressions she had received
against her. They took care to satisfy her, That she was ingenious, and
well-read in the World; that she was not ignorant of any of the Customs and
Ceremonies of the Court; that she would do her all good Offices imaginable,
both with the Queen Mother, and the Duke de Medina Celi; that she had better
make this Choice freely and voluntarily, than express any repugnance to a
thing, which would unavoidably happen. These Reasons had their Effect; the
Queen accepted her, and received her very kindly when she saw her. She had
concerted the matter with the Queen her Mother in Law, and the Duke de Medina
Celi: But this was not sufficient; the King's Consent remained still to be
gained; and he was no less averse to the Duchess de Albuquerque, than to the
Marchioness de Los Velez. The Prejudices he had received against this Duchess
were of the same Nature with those that had been insinuated into the Queen. The
Duchess de Terra Nova, and the Secretary de Eguya, were the Persons who had
thus maliciously pre possessed him against her; and nothing less than all the
Authority of the Queen Mother could make him resolve to admit her into the
Palace. She spoke to him of it at first very softly and gently, but afterward
in a stronger and higher Tone. She told him, That it was high time for him now
to know People of himself, and not to judge of their Merits by what was
whispered to him concerning them; that any Person might be so unhappy as to
have secret Enemies, and that he was in a miserable condition to depend always
upon those that possessed his Ear. When he perceived the Queen Mother to speak
to him after this manner, he opposed the business no longer, and so every thing
was adjusted. Don Pedro de Arragon received Orders on the Twentieth of August,
to acquaint the Duchess de Terra Nova with the Queen's Intentions, and with
the Reasons she pretended to Assign against her Conduct; that the best way she
could take, would be to obey without resistance, and to make it appear, as well
as she could, that she retired of her own Accord.

This Blow did not surprise her, since she was long ago prepared for it, by the
private Whisperings that were spread about the Court. She answered Don Pedro de
Arragon in a very few Words, and could not yet bring her self to believe, that
the King had given his Consent to her Removal: So she was resolved to be
satisfied of the truth of it from his own Mouth. She waited to speak with him,
as he was just going to sit down to Dinner, and entertained him for some time
in a low Tone; at last, raising her Voice to a higher pitch, she demanded leave
of him to retire. The King answered her aloud, I give you my Consent, Madam;
you may retire as soon as you please. These few Words were like to discompose
all the Constancy of the Duchess; she changed Color several times, and
advanced a few steps to speak in private with him again; but he turned his back
toward her, and asked something or other of the Duke de Uzeda. She went
hastily out of the Room, and retired to her Chamber to compose her self again;
but the disorder she was in, would not permit her to appear before the Queen
till Evening; and then she came to wait upon her at Supper, and at her going to
Bed, with as unconcerned an Air, as if nothing had passed, though to
counterfeit this, gave her a great deal of trouble, because she was thoroughly
netled. The Queen was informed by the King of what he had said to her; however,
she had the Goodness not to discover any thing of it, although she had no
Reason to be well pleased with her.

Next Morning, the Duchess, who had not gone to Bed, but had passed the whole
Night walking in her Chamber, with the Dutchesses de Monteleon and de Hijar her
two Daughters, only waited till the Queen was up, to go and take her leave of
her. Her Visage was more pale than ordinary, and her Eyes more red and fiery:
She then approached the Queen, and without weeping, or showing the least
Concern, told her, She was very sorry that she had not served her so well as
she wished. The Queen, who was a Person of wonderful Tenderness, could not
forbear to seem somewhat touched, and to relent a little; but as she was saying
some obliging things to comfort her, the Duchess interrupted her, and told her
with an imperious Air, That a Queen of Spain ought not to weep for so
inconsiderable a matter; That the Camarera who came to succeed her in her
Place, would acquit her self better of her Duty: And so, without saying a Word
more, she took hold of the Queen's Hand, and making a show of kissing it,
immediately retired. When every one about the Court knew that she was to go
away, they came to her Apartment, shedding Tears, either through Policy,
Inclination or Weakness. She did not seem to them to be in the least afflicted,
and casting her Eyes on all sides, she said: I thank Heaven, this is a Place
where I shall never set my Foot again; I am going to taste the Sweets of
Repose, and to find Tranquillity at my own House: I will go to Sicily, there I
shall meet with no such Disgusts as I have found at Madrid. In saying these
Words, she struck her Fist twice upon a little Table that stood near her, and
taking a very pretty China Fan, she broke it in two, threw it upon the ground,
and stamped it under her Feet.

Thus she was sent away a few days after the Father Confessor; she that never
thought of leaving the Court, as well by reason of the Ascendant she had got
over the King, as because it was a thing without a President, till now, to
remove the Queen's Camarera Major, unless it so happened, that she desired it
her self. It Is easy to imagine the Grief she felt upon this occasion; however,
to comfort her in some measure, it was resolved to bestow the Vice-Royship of
Gallicia upon the Duke de Hijar, her Son in Law, and the Order of the Fleece
upon the Duke de Monteleon, who had married her Grand Daughter. They were
likewise willing still to continue to her the Honors and the Appointments
belonging to her Place; but as soon as she was informed of the good intentions
of the Court toward her, she proudly said, That she would refuse every thing
they could offer her, and that this was to give her Incense, forsooth, and
break her Nose with the Censer.

As soon as she was departed from the Palace, the Duchess de Albuquerque went
thither to take possession of her Apartment; and though she had the Character
of a Proud Haughty Woman, yet she did not make it appear, that she intended to
Copy after the Duchess de Terra Nova's Conduct: On the other hand, she
entertained all People with a World of Respect and Civility, and expressed the
greatest Affection imaginable for the Young Queen. This Lady was Widow to the
Duke de Albuquerque, who was Chief of the Family de la Cueva, and was Fifty
Years old. I always saw her wear a little Bandore of Black Taffata, which
reached down as low as her Eyebrows, and bound her Forehead so hard, that her
Eyes were swelled with it. She was a Woman of great Wit and Reading, and on
certain days in the Week, held Assemblies at her House, where all the Learned
were well received. She had only one Daughter, whom she married to the Youngest
Brother of the late Duke de Albuquerque, to keep up the Name of the Family. She
was passionately devoted to the Queen-Mother's Party, and People did not doubt,
but that she would use the Young Queen very well. They were afterward
confirmed in this Opinion, when they heard the King, a little after her
admittance to Court, tell the Queen, That he would have her take her Pleasure
more than she had hitherto done; That she must walk abroad, and ride on
Horseback; and that he was willing she might go to Bed late, provided he might
go to Bed at Eight a Clock, as his Custom was. Nay, he was so very complaisant
a few days after, as to resolve not to go to Bed till Ten. This agreeable
Alteration in his Conduct, gave the World occasion to conjecture, that the
Dutchness de Albuquerque had engaged the Queen Mother to speak to the King in
favor of her; and that the Severity which the Queen had hitherto undergone,
had been inspired into the King only by the means of the Duchess de Terra Nova.

The Marquess de Caralvo, who was of the Council of State, died about this
time: He ^eft prodigious Sums of ready Money behind him; and the Crown gained
by his Death sixty seven thousand Crowns, which was yearly given him by way of
Pension. The Admiral of Castile's Lady died likewise, and as he had lived after
a very indifferent manner with her always, and was one of the greatest Admirers
of the Fair Sex in all the World; so he did not overmuch complain for his
Wive's Death, nor was over-sorrowful to become a Widower. He had accustomed her
to see near fifteen or sixteen of his Mistrisses live in his House with him, in
very fine Apartments, and all different; and he was sometimes so malicious,
when she walked out in the Garden, as to look out of a Window with one of these
Creatures standing by him, who let her Handkerchief, or a Ribban drop, and the
Admiral would call to his Wife to take it up, and bring it to the Person to
whom it belonged; which she submitted to do, with a Respect and Patience that
all the World admired.

It happened to be said at Court, That a certain Man was found digging in the
Ground very early in the Morning, over against the Imperial College. His
Design was to take up some Money and Jewels, which a Jew, who had been burnt,
and whose Domestic he was, had buried, in that place. The King ordered him to
bring what he had found there: It was all locked up in a little Iron Chest,
which was full of Pieces of Gold of several sorts; and amongst the rest, there
were Two Pictures, which I have seen, bigger than my Hand, and incircled round
with Diamonds of a considerable Value: about them were Two little Scrowls of
Parchment, with some Writing upon them; upon one, The Duchess de Chevreuse;
and on the other, The Duchess de Montbazon. It was judged, that the Jews, who
traffic much, and lend Money upon Pawns, came perhaps by these Pictures after
the same manner. They were perfectly finished, and the Ladies were both of
admirable Beauty. The King said, that they ought to be sent to the Escurial.

I often had the happiness to see the Marchioness de Liche, who was one of the
most beautiful and agreeable Persons at Court; her Husband was a Man of
infinite Wit: He was much against his Will Ambassador at Rome; and when he was
to go thither, endeavored all the ways in the World to break off his Voyage.
He tarried a long time upon the Coasts of Spain, and was unwilling to depart,
pretending that he was ill, and praying them to send another in his room, to
whom he offered to give all his Equipage, as a free Gift, or else to trust him
for it, at his choice: But the Court was afraid of the Vivacity of his Genius,
and he was known to be a Man of Enterprise: For this Reason it was thought
convenient to keep him at a distance and so they sent him fresh Orders to
depart, and go to Rome. He appeared there with a great Magnificence, and
supported the Honor of his Ministry very well. When the Duke de Medina Celi
was made Chief Minister, he writ several Letters to him, and employed the
Interest of all his Family to get himself re-called. It was positively denied
him, because he was feared now more than ever; And it was apprehended, in case
he returned home, that he would unite himself with his Brother the Count de
Monterei. To these Reasons of State the Duke de Medina Celi joined some private
ones, that purely respected his own proper Interest: for it was an easy matter
to take Advantage of the Absence of the Marquess de Liche, to have a certain
Lawsuit determined, which was depending between them.

The Marquess being informed of what had happened, and despairing ever to
surmount those Obstacles which the Duke laid in his way, thought the surest
Expedient to get himself re-called home, would be to disgust the Pope upon all
occasions; And herein he acquitted himself so dexterously, and did every thing
to displease the Pope after so disobliging a manner, that his Holiness sent the
King Word, That unless he would re-call the Marquess de Liche, he must resolve
to leave Rome; entreating him to send another Ambassador in his Place, since he
had never seen so disagreeable a one as this in all his Life: But they answered
him, That one of the Reasons which inclined them to continue him still at Rome,
was, because his Holiness had declared. That he would grant the Rights of the
Franchises, and the Immunities of their Quarter, only to those Ambassadors who
were then resident in Rome, and that those who were to be sent in their room
for the time to come, should no more enjoy them.

The Pope perceiving that he tormented himself in vain, and that if he, for his
part, had good Reasons to demand the re-calling of the Marquess de Liche, the
Court of Spain had also theirs to deny it, did not renew his Importunities any
more: but being resolved to do all the ill Offices he could to the Ambassador,
who had on purpose disobliged him, as far as lay in his power, he found an
opportunity to quit Scores with him; and he took his Advantage of it with
pleasure. It was about a Dispensation, which the Marquess de Liche demanded of
him, in favor of Don Pedro de Arragon, his Uncle, to marry Donna Catalina de
la Cerda, Daughter to the Duke de Medina Celi.

This young Lady was Niece to Don Pedro de Arragon, who was Brother to the Duke
de Cardonne, and to the Cardinal of Arragon; and the Duke de Cardonne was
Father to the Duchess de Medina Celi: so that there was an absolute necessity
for a Dispensation. The Marquess was entrusted with the procuring of it by his
Uncle, who writ him word, That he should die contentedly, if he could but leave
an Heir of his Name and Estate behind him; That after he had been twice
married, without getting any Children, he hoped his Third Match would prove
more Fortunate to him; and therefore he desired him, not to lose a moment to
obtain of the Pope what he desired. The Ambassador omitted nothing to compass
it, and gave himself a great deal of Trouble and Pains to no purpose; they
still put him off, and sent him sometimes to one, and sometimes to another
Cardinal. In fine, after having made him dance Attendance long enough, till he
had lost all manner of Patience, they bluntly told him, that they could by no
means grant what he demanded, and that the Pope made a Scruple of giving a
Dispensation to a Man, who was Seventy Years old, to marry his Niece, who was
not yet Sixteen. The Ambassador sensibly resented this Refusal, and sent speedy
notice of it to Don Pedro de Arragon: but what gave him a new occasion to be
more displeased, was to hear, That at the very moment, when Don Pedro was
reading his Letter at Madrid, the Nuncio brought him a Dispensation that was
expedited gratis, and told him, That he had received it much sooner, if the
Marquess de Liche had not appeared in the matter. Don Pedro sent his Nephew
word of all these Circumstances, who was exceedingly vexed at it. The Marriage
was concluded on the 15 th of July, without any Ceremony, at the House of the
Duke de Medina Celi, where Cardinal Portocarero married them.

All the Spanish Officers at Naples were enjoined to reassume the Spanish
Dress: 'Twas believed that the Neapolitans would soon imitate them; but seeing
they did it not in the least, an Ordinance was published, by Sound of Trumpet,
at the beginning of August, commanding all the Officers of Justice to Apparel
themselves after the Spanish Fashion. This Conduct had never been used toward
them, had it not been to let them see how great a Heart-burning it was to them,
to behold them dressed after the French way. The Troops continued still to make
Complaints, because it was a long time since they had been paid off: They spoke
several times to the Viceroy about it, who sent them to the Secretary of War,
and he to the Cash-Keeper, or Play Master to the Army. He answered them, That
the Military Funds were clearly exhausted, and that he was not in a Condition
to satisfy them. This makes it sufficiently appear, That the extreme Misery,
which indeed oppressed the whole Spanish Monarchy, was not only perceived at
Madrid.

The King being fully resolved to endeavor, as far as in him lay, the Ease and
Satisfaction of his People, and thinking himself obliged to the Performance of
it, by those things which Father Francis de Relux had said to him, at the time
when he was his Confessor, acquainted the Duke de Medina Celi with his Designs
to establish a particular Council, where all manner of Affairs should be
debated; and it should be composed of the Constable of Castile, the Marquess de
Los Balbazez, the Inquisitor General, and Don Melchior Navarra. The Chief
Minister was to be the Head of it, but the King reserved to himself the last
Resolutions of things, and all Favors, and Disposals of Places. The Duke
approved at first of the King's Project, but after he had maturely deliberated
upon it, he went to the King on purpose to dissuade him from it, out of an
Assurance, that the Council of State would be Jealous of it, which was composed
of some of the most considerable Persons in the Kingdom; that this would
occasion a vexatious difference between them, and rather hinder the Success and
Advancement of Affairs, than promote them. Don Melchior Navarra,
Vice Chancellor of Arragon, obtained all the Appointments and Profits, which
the Presidents of that Council were formerly used to enjoy.

It was not at all questioned, but that the Queen Mother advanced the Duchess
de Albuquerque to the Place where now she was to be seen; and People were as
fully persuaded, that it was she who got the Prince de Parma to be sent into
Flanders, to recompense the great Zeal he had always expressed in her Service.
But the Council of State began to be Alarmed at the great Power of this
Princess. What is the matter? would they usually say one to another, Are we
going to have a new Regency, and is the King resolved to be under Wardship
again? What gave them the greatest occasion to talk after this manner, was as
follows: The Council having, according to the Custom, named Three Subjects for
the Vice-Royship of Peru, out of which number the King generally chooses one;
his Majesty, without having any regard to it, named Don Melchior Navarra, w^o
had advanced his Fortune by the means of the Queen Mother, and was absolutely
devoted to her. He was born in Arragon, of an obscure Family, and at first was
an Advocate, and afterward a Counselor at Naples; Being come to Madrid, he
there became Fiscal to the Council of Arragon, and had the good Fortune to
please the Queen Mother, who was then Regent. She made him Vice Chancellor of
Arragon, which is one of the most considerable Places, out of pure Spite to
the Council of State, who opposed her, so that she could not bestow this Office
upon the Prince de Stillano. The Iuncto of the Government refusing to admit
him, she put the other in his Place, that she might always have one of her own
Creatures in that Iuncto; and besides this, might always be informed for the
time to come, of what was transacted there.

The Queen had no sooner given this Testimony of her Affection to Don Melchior,
but every body stood surprised to see a Man of so mean a Birth, advanced to so
high a Post; but when they knew him better, they found him to be a Person of
great Merit, Experience and Probity. Don Iuan of Austria, who was mightily
displeased at his Conduct, banished him, and he came not back to Court till
after the Death of that Prince.

The Queen Mother being desirous to make him completely happy, got the Vice
Royship of Peru for him, which is a very Advantageous Post; for in less than
five Years time a Man may very well heap up Three Millions by it, without
wronging either his own Conscience, or his Neighbor. Just at his departure,
they charged him with very rigorous Orders against the Governors of that
Kingdom, who had made an ill use of their Power. This Custom has been taken up
of a long time; the Poor and Unfortunate only are made Examples, but the rest
make a shift to escape well enough, by giving a good round Sum of Money, which
perhaps they have extorted from other People. But as it always happens, that
one Man's good Fortune proves an Obstacle to that of another, the Marquess de
Santa Crux died of Grief, because he mist this Place. He had been General of
the Spanish Galleys, and was a Man of Birth and Merit, but so extremely poor,
that he saw nothing else could set him up again, but the Vice-Royship of Peru.

He did not question but that they would consider him for the Services of his
Ancestors, and remember that the Count de Chinchon, his Father, who had been
Counselor of State, was always Faithful to the Crown, and that they would
examine his own Personal Merit. He flattered himself, that all these
Considerations would infallibly procure him the Vice-Royship of Peru. He came
on purpose to Madrid, to solicit for it; but when he saw Don Melchior Navarra
preferred before him, he could not master his Grief, and died within few days
after. His Death was attended by that of one of the dearest Persons in the
World to him, Donna Antonia de la Cerda, Daughter to the Duke de Medina Celi,
and Wife to the Son of the Marquess de Villa Manriquez. She was very young, and
yet extremely agreeable.

The Ambassador of the Estates of the United Provinces, had Audience of the
King, on the Twentieth of August: He demanded of him the Payment of several
Millions that were due from the Crown of Spain to the Admiralty of Holland,
ever since the Year 1675. The King was only pleased to say, Veremos, and that
Evening having sent for the Duke de Medina Celi to come to him, I have never,
says he, seen so many Debts, and so little Money to pay them; If this holds, I
will give no more Audience to those to whom I am indebted. The Duke told him,
He hoped that in a short time things would be in a better Condition, and that
the Hollanders were rich enough to stay a little longer for their Money.

People talked very strangely at Madrid, of the King's recalling the Duke de
Veraguas, who was Viceroy of Valentia. This little Kingdom is, as it were,
annexed to that of Arragon, and is a place where there never fail to be
abundance of Murderers, Robbers and Cutthroats. The malignant influence that
reigns here, makes the Men naturally so bad, that when there is any ill Action
to be done, they make use of the Bandoleros, who are a sort of Banditti,
divided into several Factions, and have each of them their Chief, who are
generally seditious Persons, capable of all the Villainies in the World. An
Apostatized Monk took shelter amongst them, and they found him to be so
resolute and hardened a Fellow, that they chose him for their Captain; but as
it happened, the very moment he came to commit an Assassinate, he was taken
with his Sword in his Hand. He could not deny so palpable a Crime, and the
Viceroy was advised to execute speedy Justice upon him. The Viceroy was well
enough satisfied that he ought to serve him so; but what gave him some trouble,
was this, that having to deal with a Religious, he thought, that he ought to
use more Formality with him. Another Reason likewise stopped him a little; for by
the Laws of Valentia, some days are allotted to Criminals after they are
condemned, before their Execution. He ordered Four Religious of different
Orders to meet, and consulted them upon these Two Heads: Two of them were of
opinion, that he might take Cognizance of this matter with the Archbishop's
Consent: The Two others maintained, That although the Laws of the Country
allow some time to a Guilty Person, and that this was a Monk belonging to the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; yet for all that, the King's Service demanded a
speedy and severe Example; and that the Actions of this Man were so abominably
odious, that he deserved to have no Respect show'n him. The Duke de Veraguas
was of their Opinion, and ordered him to be hanged immediately. The
Ecclesiastics demanded him before Execution; the Archbishop supported them by
his Authority, and when he knew it was to no purpose, his Official published an
Interdict. The People immediately made an Insurrection, and the Viceroy was
obliged to shut himself up in his Palace; but being besieged on every side, and
apprehending some danger from the Violence of the Rabble, he escaped out of the
City well Accompanied. The Archbishop lost no time to inform the Court of what
had happened; the Duke too sent thither as soon, and each of them alleged
their Reasons. Upon this the King ordered a Iuncto to sit, composed of his own
Confessor, a Jesuit, and a Dominican. It happened well for the Archbishop that
he was of the same Order with this last, and had been General of his Order; He
wanted no more to gain the Cause; the Duke de Veraguas was condemned with one
Consent, and a Sum of Money was remitted to him, with Orders to come within
Twenty Leagues of Madrid, and there to wait the King's farther Pleasure. On the
Twenty Sixth of August the Count de Aquilar was named to succeed him in his
Place, and within 24 Hours after he departed, to go and take possession of it.

If t^is Affair, the Judgment whereof appeared too rigorous, made so great a
Noise, the Connivance show'n to the Marquess de Las Navas, Vice Roy of Sicily,
surprised People no less. He merely, for a Humor, persecuted the Archbishop of
Palermo, so as to make him leave the City: The King being informed of the
Proceedings, was not only content to Reprimand the Viceroy for it, but
ordered, That the Archbishop should receive particular Satisfaction from him.
He wrote a very obliging Letter to this Prelate, wherein he acquainted him how
much he was concerned at the Affronts he had received, and sent it to the
Marquess de Navas, with Orders to deliver it to the Archbishop with his own
Hands. The Viceroy received it, and kept it by him; but they being informed of
it at Court, a fresh Injunction was sent him: He obeyed this no better than the
former. This Stiffness and Contumacy of his, perfectly wearied the Council,
without drawing the least inconvenience upon him; so that they no more
commanded him to deliver the Letter to the Archbishop. It is very certain, that
another Man would not have had this Indulgence show'n him; but the Viceroy
being, it seems, obliged to marry his Son to one of the Daughters of the Duke
de Medina Celi, this is one Reason why he was sure to meet with good Quarter,
as long as the Duke continued in Favor. Nevertheless, the Marquess de
Louvignies, who was made Governor of Messina, was no sooner arrived there, but
he was offended to see the Fortifications and Garrison in so ill a Condition.
He plainly told the Marquess de Las Navas, That he could not dispense with
himself from giving the Court an Account of these matters. He was as good as
his Word, and the Viceroy received a severe Check for his Negligence.

They had a new occasion to be displeased at Madrid, when they received Advices
of what happened at Naples, on the 7 th of September: The Viceroy passing
through the Toledo-Street, to go to Visit the Spanish Nuns, was stopped by an
Hundred Troopers, all armed, and on Horseback, who Audaciously demanded of
him, either to pay them off, or else to dismiss them.

So resolute an Action as this was, did not a little surprise him: He promised
to do every thing they desired of him, and returned back again to the Palace
very suddenly. As soon as he believed himself to be safe, he ordered Six
Soldiers to be sent to Prison, and their Trials to come on speedily. He
reformed all the Cavalry, together with the Captains, and the other Officers,
as well as the Lieutenant General. This Body of Horse consisted of Seven
Troops, and had been kept up above Fifty Years. He pretended, That he had
received Orders from Madrid to reform them after this manner; but the real
Truth is, he was not in a condition to pay them. The King of Spain hereupon was
exceedingly grieved, to behold the Misery to which all his Kingdoms were
reduced.

But all this evil News was balanced, when they knew that the Plague was
entirely ceased in Andaluzia, and that the Chief Magistrate of Cales finding
the Port of St. Mary free from the Infection, had taken off the Prohibition of
Commerce. After this, they immediately begun to load the Gallions. On the Fifth
of September there were great rejoicings at Court, because it was the Birthday
of his Most Christian Majesty: A Comedy was Acted there, and all the
Ambassadors and Grandees of Spain were present at it. The Queen appeared so
covered with Jewels, that her Diamonds cast a greater Light than six large
Flambeaux, as big as Torches did, that were lighted in the Great Hall. A few
days after this, the King and the Two Queens went solemnly to Chapel, where
the Anniversary of Philip IV. was celebrated with great Ceremonies. The Queen
being returned to the Palace, found a Sealed Letter in her Pocket, having the
same Superscription with that which she formerly received; and seeing written
on the outside, For the Queen alone, she would not open it, and almost
distracted her self in thinking what Person it was, that could find the means
to come so nigh her, as to slip this Letter into her Pocket. Toward Evening
she went along with the King to the Queen-Mother's Palace, to make her the
usual Complements of Condolance, upon the Death of the late King her Husband.
The Duchess de Medina Celi told the King, That she had received a Letter from
Ispaham, the Capital City of Persia, which had great Curiosities in it. The
King replied, That he was desirous to hear it.

All the Company being gone out of the Room, she placed her self near him to
read it. The Queen took her Advantage of this Opportunity, and told the
Queen Mother, That she had a great desire to see a Picture of Titian, which she
had lately bought. As she said these Words, she advanced toward the great
Closet of the Queen Mother, whither she followed her. When they had entered into
it, the Young Queen gave her the Letter, which she had found in her Pocket, and
desired her to keep it, or burn it, as she thought most convenient. I don't
know, says she, but it may come from the Duchess de Terra Nova; but she shall
be clearly mistaken in her Project. The Queen Mother told her, That she had
best open the Letter, to see what was contained in it. Ah, Madam, replied the
Queen, I would never, by my good Will, see any such Letters. The Queen Mother
admired the prudent Conduct of this Young Princess, and bid her not disquiet
her self about the matter; for she would take care to keep it sealed by her;
And some time after she recounted this Adventure to the Marchioness de M^rtare,
and showed her the first Letter, saying, she believed it proceeded from the
Malice of some Persons who designed to do the Queen a Mischief. It was through
this Lady's Means, that my Cousin and I came to know all that I have written
concerning this Affair.

The Queen, and the Queen Mother did not tarry long together, but came to find
the King, who told them, That the Duchess de Medina Celi had read a Letter to
him, wherein was contained a very Tragical surprising Accident, and that they
would by no means think their time lost to hear it. The Duchess immediately
read the Letter; it was dated from Ispahan, the 18 th of March, 1680. and gave
an Account, how, That on the 23 d of January, in the same Year, the City of
Masulipatan, which is the greatest Scale of Trade in the Kingdom of Golconda,
had been overflowed by the Sea, and by extraordinary Rains, accompanied with a
furious Hurricane; That above Twenty five thousand Persons were drowned there,
and that the Loss of the Goods and Merchandise amounted to Twenty Millions;
That it had Rained Blood for the space of Two Hours, in the Village of Sobou,
near Deli, where the Great Mogul keeps his Residence; and that part of the City
of Sougean, near Daera, had been overwhelmed by an Earthquake: That the
English having received Advice, That the Raja Sevagi, after he had pillaged the
City of Danga, threatened to besiege Bombay, (which is a Place that was yielded
up by the Portugueses to them, together with Tangier, upon occasion of the
Marriage of the Infanta Catharina, Queen of England,) had sent some Men of War
to Bombay to defend it; but that it was very much questioned whether they would
be able to hold it out against a Prince who continued to make his Conquests
with so prodigious a Swiftness, and who had already defeated Cercan Loudi, a
Prince dependant upon the King of Visiapour. He had possessed himself in less
than Two Years of all the Territory scicuate upon the Coasts of Coromand^l. The
King of Visiapour being concerned at the Misfortune of this Prince, who was
just upon the point of Marrying the Princess Famika, his Sister, designed to
assist him, and sent his Forces under the Command of Famika, who was as brave
as an Amazon, Beautiful and Haughty. The Prince Sevagi knowing that she marched
against him, advanced with his Army, and met her toward the Kingdom of
Golconda. She sent a Zagay to him, with a Sabre, and writ to him, That in case
he was so pleased, they would decide the Quarrel by a single Combat. He
accepted the Challenge, took the Arms she sent him, and returned her other. The
Two Armies were drawn out in Battle, with Orders, not to make the least
movement as long as the Combat continued. The Princess was vanquished, and
surrendered her self Prisoner. The Prince Cercan Londi, who was with her, was
driven into Despair, when he saw his Mistress taken away from him; he threw
himself, with his Forces upon those of S^vagi, and after a long Combat Cercan
was taken Prisoner, and the Prince remained Master of the Field. After this, he
still carried Famika along with him; and she appeared so charming to him, that
he told her, If she was willing to marry him, he would restore to Cercan Loudi
all that he had taken from him by way of Conquest. The Princess haughtily
replied, That she would never sacrifice her self to one that was a Subject to
the King her Brother. Sevagi, who was deeply in Love with her, dispatched an
Envoy to the King of Visiapour, to demand Famika of him, and promised, That if
he would bestow that Princess upon him, he would serve him as his Vastal. The
King scorned the Proposal, treating him as a Revolted Subject, whom he knew
well enough how to chastise. When the other saw that gentle Methods signified
nothing, he presently fell a Ravaging the Country of Visiapour, from Surat to
Goa, except six or seven Places upon the Coasts; so that his Conquests extended
as far as N^gapatan; And this, in all, made near 250 Leagues in length. He
always carried his Fair Prisoner along with him, hoping to gain her by his
Respect and Complaisance; but having had one day a very long Conversation with
her upon this Topic, wherein she declared, That all the Injuries either she,
or those of her Family, suffered at his Hands, only served to provoke her the
more, and that she would never love any one but Cercan Loudi: the Love of
Sevagi was in a moment turned into Fury, and he had the Cruelty to cause a
Scaffold to be erected for her, where with his own Hands he cut off the Head of
the young Princess Famika, and her Lover.

The Queen Mother having a great kindness for the Marchioness de Grana,
received two of her Daughters, who were very lovely and well shaped, into the
number of her Ladies.

A short time after, the King, the Two Queens, and all the Court, departed for
Aranjuez; but the House not being large enough to lodge half the Officers and
Ladies, they came back every Night, and lay near it. The Duke de Uzeda, the
Count de Altamire, and the Two Sons of the Duke of Alva, disguised themselves
like Muleteers, with Bonnets, after the English Fashion pulled over their Heads
to hide them; and being dressed after this Fashion, they went every day on Foot
by the Boot of the Coach of the Queen's Maids of Honor, to Court their
Mistresses, as the Custom is there.

Although the King had Prohibited all Persons in General, and Married People in
Particular, Los Galanteos de Palacio, as they call it, at Madrid; yet he was
not able to hinder it. It has been a thing established time out of mind amongst
them, to entertain the Ladies of the Court, with their Gallantry, although they
have not the least design to marry them: And they wait upon them with as much
Assiduity as if they were already betrothed to them. But what is the strangest,
as well as the least pardonable thing of all, is, that they ruin themselves by
it: I have seen married men, nay, even those that were Grandfathers, totally
taken up in an Amor with one of the Ladies of the Court. The Women, whose
Husbands are led away with these Extravagant Fancies, are extremely disgusted
at it; and this often occasions horrid Disorders in their Families; but all
that these Cavaliers pretend to reap by their Passion, is only, that their
Mistresses will suffer them to come and stop under their Windows. Here they sit
in the back part of their Coaches, and entertain them by their Fingers, and the
Ladies answer them after the same manner, without speaking to them, but only
upon days of Ceremony, for at that time they have the liberty to Accost them
before all the World. But what is very surprising, and was never yet practiced
any where else, the Ladies of Honor belonging to the Queen, receive Jewels,
Apparel, and considerable Sums of Money from their Gallants. The Dukes de
Montalte, and de Medina Sidonia, having no Office to oblige them to follow the
Court to Aranjuez, sent their Stewards, Cooks, and other Servants, with Gold
and Silver Plate, to carry Magnificent Repasts to their Mistresses, as long as
they staid at Aranjuez.

The Diversion there is but little, because the greatest pleasure one can take,
is to walk along the sides of the River Tagus, which wash the Banks of the
finest Walks in the World; but the Rains were so great, that no body could stir
out. When there was the least fair Weather, the Queen rode on Horseback with
all her Ladies, but one of them had the Mischance to be carried away by her
Horse, and received so much hurt by her Fall, that she died within three days
after. This ill Accident troubled the King exceedingly, so that by his good
Will, he would not suffer the Queen to ride; When he saw her not, he would
still be crying, Let some body go to see how my Queeen does, and bring me word,
whether she is fallen off her Horse. The King was informed at Aranjuez, that
Two Portugues^ Men of War, in their return to Lisbon, had met a French Vess^l,
commanded by the Chevalier de Leti: He demanded the Salute of them; and upon
their refusing to do it, gave them a Broadside, which they answered with all
their Guns; but after a long dispute, he obliged them to strike the Flag. After
this, the Vessel continued its course toward Villa Franca, where the
Ambassador of Savoy waited to be carried over to Portugal. Upon this the King
of Sp^in told the Duke de Medina Celi, that there was no question to be made
but his Galleys would be served after the same manner, if they were not better
provided.

The King had a mighty desire when he parted from Madrid, to go immediately to
the Escurial, but he could not fully resolve to carry the Queen along with him
thither, till he had staid some time at some of the other Houses belonging to
the Kings of Spain. He had been told, That it was looked upon to be an ill Omen
to go first to the place where the Royal Tombs are; and since the Queen had as
yet been only at Buen Retiro, a la Casa del Campo, at Pardo, and Zarzuela,
which are so near Madrid, that she just rested her self there a few hours after
she came from hunting, He was resolved to begin with Aranjuez, to avert and
frustrate those evil Presages: Therefore he ordered every thing to be in
readiness for his Journey, by the beginning of September, which is one of the
finest Months of the Year in Spain; but the Ministers not finding Money enough
in the Treasury to defray the Expenses of the Progress, dexterously endeavored
to put it by, though in all appearance they seemed to desire it as much as the
King did, and daily ordered Mules to be got ready to carry the Baggage. They
pretended the Ways were dangerous and bad, and at last, that the great Rains
had corrupted the Air. Nay, they sent for some Physicians, with whom they had
been practicing, to confirm all they said. Notwithstanding these Reasons, the
King still persisted in his Resolution to go to Aranjuez, and did not know till
the very Evening before he was to depart, that he could not go. He was the only
Person that was ignorant of it; for the Ministers had acquainted their Friends
with it above Twelve Days before, and all the City was informed, that the King
was to stay at Madrid still. The Queen was not a little displeased at these
Proceedings; she spoke to the King about it, and told him, that the Ministers
might now very well forbear to use them any longer like Children; that if there
had been any important Reasons why they should not go to Aranjuez, they ought
to have given them timely notice of it; but to put them off, and, speaking
properly, to fool them after this insufferable rate, was never to be endured.
The King was vexed, and told the Queen, That this should be the last time he
would suffer such things at their hands, and that they should direct themselves
for the future only by his Will and Pleasure. This Discourse was overheard by
some of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, who went presently to acquaint the
Duke de Medina Celi with it, to make their Court by this means. He was terribly
disheartened, and feared least the Queen, who was charming and witty, might come
to get a greater Ascendant over the King's Inclinations than he desired; and
therefore that he might not displease the King any more, used all imaginable
diligence to provide a Fund sufficient to bear the Expenses of going to
Aranjuez and the Escurial. Till this very moment he had resolved to break off
these Two Journeys; but he apprehended a great deal of danger from the Queen's
dissatisfaction; and so to get a Sum necessary for the occasion, he sold Two
Offices of the Contador Major for Twenty five thousand Crowns, and received
Forty more for a Government in the Indies. He took Fifty thousand Crowns out of
an Hundred thousand, that were to be laid out in Equipping of the Gallions. He
made use of the Money gathered for Custom, that was to have paid off the the
Rights of the Franchises, and the Revenues of the Town Hall: In a word, every
thing was got ready by that time the Court came back from Aranjuez, for them to
go to the Escurial. However, the King was not able to go as soon as he desired,
by reason that the ill Weather increased; ever since the beginning of September
never a day passed without violent Tempests, accompanied by dreadful Claps of
Thunder: The Lightning struck abundance of Persons in several Places, and the
Hail fell so thick, and in such prodigious quantities in the Forest of the
Pardo, which is an House of pleasure belonging to the King, that it broke the
Branches of the greatest Trees, and killed so many Birds and Wild Fowl, that
both the Fields and the River of Mancanarez, were covered with them, and it was
the most surprising sight in the World to behold; the Ancient Bridge de Aranda
de Ducro, was carried away by the Waters of that River, and the Tagus
over-flow'd its Banks with that Impetuosity, that it did an incredible Mischief
to the pleasant Walks at Aranjuez. So many Accidents, of which they received
fresh News daily, troubled the Court exceedingly; for there was scarce a place
in Spain exempt from these continual Tempests: One of them happened on the 26
th of September, in so out-ragious a manner, that the Gardens of the Countess
de Ognate, which are the finest in Madrid, were overflown in a moment; the
Water entered into the lower Apartments of her House, where she kept her Noblest
Italian Paintings, and her richest Movables, and all was entirely spoiled by
this Inundation. The Torrent, to work out its passage, threw down the
Garden-Walls, and broke into that belonging to our Ladies de Atocha. The next
Night we all thought that Madrid would be beaten down about our Ears by the
Thuder claps, the Lightning, the Wind, the Rain, and the Hail. I don't believe
any body went to Bed in the whole City; the Churches were full of People who
confessed, as if the hour of Death were approaching. The Water of the
Mancanarez swelled exceedingly, and spread it self on all sides. The King and
the Queen, who impatiently waited for day light, went in Devotion to our Ladies
de Atocha, but at their return they found the Prado overflown; And though a
Coach had been overturned a little before, by the Rapidity of the Torrent, the
King believed that his might pass it well enough, and commanded the Coachman to
advance speedily forward toward the Bridge of the bare-legged Augustines:
Within a few Paces of the Bridge the two fore Mules, which in Spain are at a
pretty distance from the hindmost, were overturned by the Impetuosity of the
Water: The Postillion that led them escaped very narrowly; the Mules recovered
themselves twice, and were thrown down as often. The King was all alone in the
Coach wi^h the Queen, very much concerned, and telling her, that he was in pain
only for her sake. In the mean time some People got hold by the Traces, and so
drew out the Coach by mere Strength. By this means the Mules got out of the
Water; but their Majesty's could not reach the Palace, and being affrighted at
the great danger they had just escaped, were obliged to go to Buen-Retiro,
where they tarried till midnight, and waited for the Waters to fall.

The Marquess de los Velez, Viceroy of ^^^ples, dispatched a Courier to Court,
to give them Advice, That the Pope had demanded of them to send the Marquess
Sera, a Geroes^, to him, who was Excommunicated for falling foul upon the
Apostolic Nuncio's Courier on Maunday Thursday. The Brief specified, That h^s
Holiness grounded his Pretensions upon the Right of Sovereignty the Holy See
had to the Kingdom of Naples. The Officers of all the Courts of Judicature
Assembled upon it, and resolved not to comply with the Popes Desires, by Reason
of the ill Consequences that might attend such an Affair. But the King, and the
Ministers here, could not forbear to wonder, that his Holiness spoke of
renewing his Pretensions, which seemed to be adjusted a long time ago.

The only Son of the Marquess de Castel-Rodrigo died about the beginning of
October, as did also Don Rui Gomez de Silva, Brother to the Duke de Hijar: We
may say, they were two of the most handsome and hopeful Lords at Court. This
last was mightily devoted to Donna Isabella de Mendoza, a Lady of great Beauty,
who was not completely Seventeen Years old. She took the Death of her Lover so
much to heart, that without acquainting her Mother with it, she got out of her
House, covered in a Mantle, and went to the A Monastery founded by Joanna,
Sister to Philip IV.
Descalsas Reales, there to take upon her the Religious Habit.

Their Majesty's parted from Madrid on the 7 th of October, to go to the
Escurial. The King only carried with him the Duke de Medina Celi, the Grand
Master of the Household, with two Masters of the House in Ordinary, the Great
Forrester; and the First Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and two other Lords in
the same Office, Don Geronimo de Eguya, Secretary of State, and the Marquess de
Grana, Ambassador from the Emperor. The Admiral of Castile, who was Master of
the Horse, did not arrive there till Fourteen Days after the King: he was
naturally so lazy, even when he was obliged to make his Court, that he could
not resolve in a less time to go to the Escurial.

All the Ladies of the Court, and Six Women of the Bedchamber, Accompanied the
Queen; The Marquess de Villa Maina, Chief Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and the
Marquess de Astorgas, Grand Master of the Household, went along with her. As for
the Duke de Ossone, who was Master of the Horse to her, he tarried at Madrid,
upon the Account of a New Disgust he had received at Court. The King was
willing that the Queen should ride on Horseback, to take a few turns in the
Walks of the Meadows, and to meet him as he came from hunting. She had Four
Fits of an Ague, but the following ones were so gentle, that she was able to
get up a few days after, and divert her self, as she had used to do ever since
her Arrival to the Escurial.

The King, who was altogether taken up with the Pleasures of hunting, pursued
the Sport from Sun rising till Night. One day he ordered a Chase to be prepared
after the German manner; they had Toils, which enclosed a great quantity of
Ground, and here with their Guns they killed above two hundred Bucks or Does.
The Queen was at first desirous to be there, but being informed after what
manner they used these poor Creatures, she imagined that such a sight would
rather give her occasion to employ her Pity, than afford her any Pleasure. The
King in all his Chases generally took no more with him than the first Gentleman
of the Bedchamber, and the Great Forrester; he loved to find himself alone in
vast Solitudes, and sometimes it was a long while before they could find him.
When he hunted after the German manner, he would be accompanied by the Duke de
Medina Celi, and the Marquess de Grana. At his return, the Chief Minister
following the King to the Queen's Apartment, found that her Majesty did not
cast her Eyes upon him, he immediately penetrated into the Reason of this
Alteration he found in the Queen's Behavior; for to say the truth, she was
displeased with him for dissuading his Majesty to expedite a Parent for a
Government in the Indies, which he had granted to her: But when the Duke knew
it, he told the King, That the Queen begged this Grace of him, at the entreaty
of one of the Women of her Bedchamber, who was a French Woman, who would get
considerably by it, when in the mean time twelve thousand Pistols were offered
for it. The King thought it was the best way to take this Sum, and after this
would not hear the least Word of dispatching the Patent, as he had promised.

But what provoked the Queen infinitely more, was the Conduct he had used in
her Absence toward the Constable Colonna's Lady. The Duchess de Medina Celi
had passed her Word to the Queen, as in her Husband's Name, That during the
stay her Majesty made at the Escurial, nothing should be done to the prejudice
of this Lady. Notwithstanding these Assurances, upon which she depended, she
was carried away from Madrid, and by an Order from the King, confined to the
Cas^le of Segovia. To begin this Story from its Original, the Reader is to
know, that this Lady was Niece to the late Cardinal Mazarine: She brought a
very considerable Fortune with her at her Marriage; and perhaps the Family of
the Colonna's had sunk very low without this seasonable Relief. After she had
passed the happiest and most pleasant part of her Life at Rome, where she
always appeared in great Pomp and Splendour, having the liberty to live after
the French Fashion, and according to all Appearances, seeming to be content
with her Fortune: She withdrew all on the sudden, without so much as knowing
the Reason of it her self, through the ill Counsels of some Persons, who
hazarded not a little upon her Account, in making her hazard every thing on her
side: So that she departed privately with the Duchess of Mazarine, her Sister.
They had disguised themselves so well, that none knew them when they took
Shipping: And thus they arrived safely in France. The Constable Colonna's Lady
hoped to find here a Sanctuary against her Husband, and some vain flattering
Idea's, that were not as yet perfectly extinguished in her Heart, served to
persuade her, that she should be well received at Court; but so far was she
from meeting any Encouragement to make her Appearance there, that she was
prohibited by the King to come there. I have heard her say, That she resented
this Treatment with so sensible a Grief, that she was like to have died of it.
After this she went to Turin, where she made a short stay, and the uneasiness
of her Mind led her at last to Flanders. There she happened to find the
Marquess de Borgomaine, of the House of Este, in whom she reposed an entire
Confidence, without remembering that he was rather a Friend to her Husband than
to her self. He flattered her in all her Projects, in order to amuse her, and
to gain time till he might receive Advice from the Constable, how to dispose of
her; for he had sent him a Letter by a Courier for that purpose, to inform him,
that his Wife was at Brussels; and in Answer to it, the Constable earnestly
desired him to Seize and Apprehend her. He acquitted himself immediately of his
Commission, and carried her to a Convent, from whence she was not to depart,
unless she would consent to be Shipped for Spain, as they desired her. When she
was at Madrid she delayed, upon several Pretenses, to take the Religious Habit
upon her; she loved her Liberty, and was desirous still to enjoy it: But The
Constable being informed of her Arrival, sent Don Fernand de Colonna, his
Natural Brother, with Letters to the King, and the Ministers, wherein he
beseech'd them, that either by fair means, or Violence they would oblige his
Lady to enter into a Convent. This Necessity seemed very hard to her;
nevertheless she submitted to it, and retired to the Monastery de Santo Domingo
el Real, upon Condition, That if she happened to come out of it, she would
consent that the King should restore her to her Husband. She continued there a
long time, and sometimes in an Evening she escaped out with one of her Women,
and often went to walk on Foot in a White Mantle in the Prado, where she met
with several pleasant Adventures, because most of the Women that come there are
Ladies-Adventurers; and some Ladies of the best Quality at Court, take a mighty
pleasure when they can go thither, and are not known.

The Constable Colonna being come to Madrid, in his way to Arragon, whereof he
was Viceroy, went every day to entertain her at this Grate, and I have seen
him show those Gallantries to her, which a Lover may show to his Mistress. He
departed in a very good understanding with her; but when the Queen made her
Entry, she having a great desire to behold her Majesty, did not imagine they
would hold her so strictly to the Word she had given the King, That in case she
ever quitted the place of her Confinement, he should deliver her into her
Husband's Hands: So without any more a-do, she went to the Marchioness de Los
Balbazez, her Sister in Law, who received her very kindly, and the Marquess
made her an Entertainment that might have deceived a Person of less Faith than
her self. Seeing these fair Appearances she thought no more of returning to
Santo Domingo, but staid with the Marchioness de Los Balbazez. All this while
he secretly endeavored to get an Order from the King, and as soon as he had
procured it, carried her to a Convent within Four Leagues of Madrid. So severe
a Procedure afflicted her as much as it is possible for a Woman to be
afflicted. She wrote to the Queen to demand her Protection; and being informed,
that the Constable was come back from Arragon, with his Sons, she obtained a
permission of the King to go into some Monastery or other at Madrid. But
whether it were, that she was not content to be there, or that she had some
other Views in her Head, she made her escape, and went strait to her Husband's
House: She lived in one half of it, made her Court very regularly to the Queen,
visited abundance of Ladies, and diverted her self very well.

The Constable left her an entire Liberty to do what she pleased; but when he
was desirous to return to Rome, he talked of carrying his Lady along with him
thither. She was mightily Alarmed at it, and declared, that she would not go.
The Reason was, because she had got her Nativity to be Calculated, and it was
told her, That if she had another Child, she should die. This Prediction was so
fresh in her imagination, that she would rather choose to return to her old
Place of Retreat. The King was urgent with her to explain her meaning; She sent
him Word back again, That she humbly requested him to grant her his Protection,
in the design she had to throw her self into a Convent.

The King judged it convenient, That the Inquisitor General, Don Melchior
Navarra, and his Confessor, should meet to determine this difference between
the Constable and his Lady. The Marquess de Los Balbazez solicited so
powerfully, that the Iuncto concluded to ^end her to the Castle of Segovia.
This he so passionately desired, that all the last Year he was perpetually
troubling his Brain, how to do her some ill Office. But the Constable of
Castile, and the Admiral, set themselves all they could to oppose it; and they
were not able to obtain an Order for it.

They had never obtained one, if the Duke de Medina Celi had not been an Enemy
to the Constable's Lady. She being informed of what had past against her, and
what Reasons she had to apprehend some Mischief from her Enemies, cast her self
at the Queen's Feet, and conjured her, with Tears in her Eyes, not to abandon
her in this distress, but to engage the Chief Minister to pass his Word, that
nothing should be attempted against her as long as the Court was at the
Escurial. The Queen interposed in this Affair, as I have already mentioned; but
notwithstanding all this Precaution, within Eight Days after her departure, a
Counselor of the Council Royal, with his Officers, Accompanied by the
Constable Colonna, and the Marquess de Los Balbazez, who performed the Office
of Bailiffs, being all Armed, as if they had been going to apprehend a
Ringleader of Robbers, rather than an unfortunate Lady, who was not capable of
making the least Resistance, went about Eleven a Clock at Night to break open
the Doors of her Apartment, although it was within her Husband's House. She was
in her Chamber, when immediately an Alcalde of the Court pretended to tie her
Arms with a Cord: Seeing her self used after so ignominious a manner, she took
up a little Knife, which lay accidentally upon the Table; and as she defended
her self, gave him a cut in the Hand. This Resistance made the rest of the
Company fall upon her with that barbarous Fury, that they dragged the poor
Lady, half naked, as she was, by the Hairs of her Head, and so they forced her
away, like one of the most miserable of her Sex. She was conducted after this
manner all Night long to the Castle of Segovia, without expressing the least
consideration either for her Birth or Reputation, although she had given them
no occasion to treat her thus; for in fine, she was actually at that time in
her Husband's House, and her only Crime was, her refusing to return to Rome
with the Constable, although she offered to go into a Convent, without having
the liberty ever to leave it. Most Persons pitied her sorrowful Condition, and
took it ill that they broke their Promise to the Queen, and that they durst
employ the King's Name, only to satisfy the Malice and Animosity of the
Marquess de Los Balbazez. It was for his sake principally that they used this
Persecution toward the Constable's Lady; for her Husband was one of the best
Conditioned Men in the World: He loved her, and as he had formerly given her
his consent to stay several Years in a Religious House; so without question he
had not now opposed the Conditions she desired, if it had not been for the
Marquess de Los Balbazez.

He alone managed this Affair, and solicited the Duke de Medina Celi in the
Constable's Name; and that Minister thinking by this means to oblige both of
them, gave his consent to what was demanded of him.

Nevertheless it was a surprising thing, that he used so rude a Conduct toward
the Constable's Lady; it had been a more Generous and Manly Part, to endeavor
to reconcile the present Differences, than to imprison a Lady who was to be
Mother in Law to his own Daughter. He ought to have considered, that a Husband
and Wife are easily brought to accommodate matters; and that if ever they came
to be Friends again, his Daughter would fall into the Hands of the Constable's
Lady, who would then be in a condition to revenge her self upon her for the
Injuries he had done her. He might reasonably imagine, that as she was rich,
and had a great number of near Relations, who made a considerable Figure in the
World: so they would never see her oppressed, without regretting her Misfortunes,
and interesting themselves in her Quarrel: That they would vigorously endeavor
to procure her her Liberty, and that at the bottom, when he came to cast up his
Accounts, he himself would get nothing but ill will by it.

This Affair made a great Noise in the World: I knew every particular
circumstance of the Story, because I was intimately acquainted with this
Unfortunate Lady, and knew her to be of a good Disposition, and not given to
speak ill of other People, and, as it was truly said of her, she was never an
Enemy to any one but her self. Indeed it were to be wished, she had been
Mistress of more Discretion, and had not been of so easy a Temper as to
believe those Persons who advised her ill. She was very lovely, although she
was not in the Prime of her Youth; her Eyes were lively, quick and piercing,
her Teeth admirable, her Hair blacker than Jet, and in a great quantity; her
Stature Noble, and her Leg well shaped. The Queen being informed of her
Misfortunes, was mightily concerned at them, and continued to be very angry
with the Duke de Medina C^li, for not keeping his Promise to her.

The Calamities occasioned by the Plague, were not the only Evils which the
People of Spain suffered. The public Poverty spread it self farther still, for
the scarcity of Provisions continued, and no Remedies were applied to rectify
these Disorders. No alteration was made in the Government, and the Chief
Minister seemed to be possessed with a Lethargy. Every body hung down his Head,
and Men were so enfeebled, that they had scarce strength enough to lift up
their Eyes and Hands to Heaven to implore its Assistance and Relief. The past
and present Miseries made them apprehend what was to follow; every one made
melancholy Reflections upon the sad condition of Affairs, which carried them
further than they desired: But to complete the general Calamity, after they had
for six Weeks together beheld terrible Inundations that did a world of Mischief
in several goodly Cities, these Accidents were followed by an Earthquake, which
happened two days after the King's departure to the Escurial. We perceived it
at Madrid on the 9 th. of October, between six and seven a Clock in the
Morning; it was so violent, that it made a general Concussion, and the most
Resolute Persons were possessed with fear. This extraordinary Motion was
perceived all the Kingdom over, and even at Lisbon, and the other parts of
Portugal; but the City of Malaga found the saddest Effects, and sustained the
greatest Loss by it.

This City is situated in the Kingdom of Granada upon the Coasts of the
Mediterranean Sea, within Twenty five Leagues of the Streights, at the foot of
a Mountain, upon the top of which stands a Castle that Commands the Town and
the Port. It is large, well peopled, and rich, by reason of the considerable
Trade they drive in Spanish Wine, Oil, Citrons, Fruits, and other Commodities,
which draw a vast number of Vessels to that Port. Its Fortifications, although
they are Old, are very good, and are adorned with several stately Buildings,
which are remainders of the Magnificence of the Moors, and the Cathedral Church
was formerly the Principal Mosque.

They perceived there a great Trembling of the Earth, which lasted but a few
moments, however the concussions were so violent, that they caused a general
fear and desolation in in the City by the strange disorders it occasioned. The
Harbor, and the Walls on the same side, with their Bulwarks, Towers, and
Ramparts were overthrown; the Sea was in so extraordinary an agitation, that
the Fishes every where leapt out of the Water; the Vessels that were in the
Port were lifted up above Twenty Foot high, and all their sides cracked as if
they had been in a real Tempest, so that the Mariners believed they were
unavoidably lost. Fifteen Convents of Men and Women were ruined after that
manner, that scarce one stone lay-upon another; and in that of the Observance
of St. Francis, there were fourteen persons buried in the Ruins.

This Magnificent Church, which had been enlarged and beautified in the Year
1521. leaned several times on its two sides ready to overturn, and yet received
no damage, which the Inhabitants took for a Miracle. 1300 Houses were sorely
battered, and more than 1200 ruined. It Is easy to judge what a vast number of
persons must have been killed, hurt, and buried in this Confusion. As soon as
the Earthquake had ceased, the Bishop, followed by his Clergy, and a great
multitude of people, went in Procession to the Church, to implore the Divine
Commiseration. Assuredly in these sorts of Occasions the most irreligious
hardened persons pray heartily and sincerely.

The Inhabitants being affrighted, retired into the Country, fearing to be
overwhelmed in the City by some new Concussion, but several Houses fell down
all about Malaga; a great Mountain was perfectly overthrown, the Earth opened
in abundance of places, and cast up the Water in such prodigious quantities,
that great Torrents were occasioned by it, which swelled the Rivers so as to
make them overflow their Banks. 'Twas observable that the Wall of the Church d'
Albavrin opened it self the breadth of four foot, and afterward closed again,
so that the place where this fissure happened, could not be discerned. The
Jasper Pillars in the same Church were removed from their Pedestals, but
afterward returned to their old place, and sustained no damage. At the City of
Velez Malaga the Earth opened and swallowed up a River which runs near it,
after this it closed again with so terrible a noise, and threw up the Water
with so great a violence, that it rose above ten Pikes higher than the Houses,
and had like to have overwhelmed every thing when it fell down.

Several Cities here were entirely overthrown, and the Earthquake did a great
deal of Mischief at Sevil, Corduba, and at Iaen, where Palaces and Churches,
and many Houses were ruined. It is impossible for any thing in Nature to be
more terrible than this was, for no body knew where to save themselves, and
Death seemed to pursue them wherever they fled.

A few days after this Earthquake, there happened at Night a Tempestuous Storm,
which overturned part of the Roof of the Escurial, broke the Crystal Windows of
the King's Apartment, and tore up abundance of Trees in the Garden by the
Roots. The King perceiving the Queen to be affrighted at it, was so complaisant
as to rise with her, and sent for some Company to come to her Chamber, and
comfort her a little.

It has been a Custom long ago established in Spain, that when any thing
happens, the truth of which they cannot immediately discover, for the Ministers
to suspect that France had a hand in it. Thus they had received certain Advice,
that the Count d'Estrees had sailed with several Men of War in his Company for
the West Indies, and therefore they presently concluded, that it was he who
burnt Porto-bello; but they were informed of the contrary by two Vessels, which
were arrived from the Honduras at the Port of Cales, laden with six thousand
Chests of Indigo, and two hundred thousand Piasters. These brought word, that
some Bucaniers, commanded by an Englishman, had landed at the Port de
Bastimentos, and after five days march in the Mountains, had attacqued
Porto-bello; that the Spanish Garrison threw away their Arms, and retired
without fighting a stroke into the Citadel; that a poor Negro, who was Seventy
Years old, had marched out of it, followed by twenty five Soldiers, and made a
brave Resistance, but was killed upon the place, being abandoned by his Men.
The Bucaniers carried away thirty six Thousand Crowns, and all the Booty they
were able to take with them. In fine, having passed the Gulf of Darien, and
being conducted by the Indians that were Enemies to the Spaniards, they arrived
through unknown ways in nine days to the South Sea, within a League of Panama:
They embarked in this place in some Canons, and passed by Port de Perico, where
they made themselves Masters of three Vessels, and several Ba^ks. They went
from thence to pillage the Suburbs of Panama, the Garrison of which place,
without making any Resistance, retired to a Bastion, with the President and the
Auditors of the Exchequer. The Bucaniers continued some days Masters of the
Sea, but at last departed, upon Information that a Relief of Four Hundred Men
was coming from Cartagena, and that two Vessels were setting Sail from Lima, to
oppose their Designs. The Council of the Indies, highly provoked against the
Spanish Soldiers, who had showed so little courage upon this Occasion, assembled
at Madrid, and resolved to send Three Hundred Veterane Soldiers to reinforce
the Garrisons. They gave full Authority to Don Melchior Navarra, who was named
to go Viceroy for Peru, to Condemn without Appeal the Officers and other
Soldiers that were found guilty, and to decimate them, in case he found them
all in fault, as it was believed here.

It was no small Mortification to them to hear of the taking of a Vessel
belonging to the King of Spain, the Lading whereof was computed to be worth
Four Hundred Thousand Crowns in Goods. Six Ships of the Elector of Brandenburgh
took her near Oftend. This Prince was highly enraged at the ill Treatment of
his Envoy, and it seems the Menaces he gave them just as he left Madrid, were
not without effect. 'Twas believed here, that he had done himself too much
Justice; but others, who considered this Action without prejudice, were agreed,
that it was but Natural for the Elector of Brandenburgh to make recourse to
violence, after the unfair measures they had kept with him, which he had so
much the less Reason to expect, because he was devoted to the Interests of the
House of Austria, and had chiefly supported it in the last War. But if these
Reasons served to excuse him, there were others that laid some blemish upon
him, to use such an Action of Hostility toward a King, with whom he was in
Peace, and who had never failed on his side to satifie him, unless he had been
utterly incapable of paying him: That at the very time when the Envoy from
Brandenburgh demanded the Money, the King of Spain had not enough to defray the
Expenses of his Household, and that if h^ ^ad been in other circumstances, he
had de^^t better by him.

The Court was not a ^^tle troubled at this infraction of the Peace, and now
they had a fresh Argument to grie^e them. They were informed that the
Portugu^ses pretended to keep the Island of St. Gabriel to themselves, and that
although Buenosaires lay so near it, yet they were in a condition to maintain
themselves there. The Coast of Brasil lying to near favored them, as well as
the River, whose Channel is so very narrow in that place, that it was an easy
matter to Command it, and to hinder all Commerce. The Portugueses it seems had
entered the River de Plata; and all these circumstances were the more
afflicting, because it was certainly known that a Squadron of Brandenburghers
was gone for the Indies. This Affair was much talked of, and the Council met
about it: But those that were well acquainted with the Genius of the Spanish
Nation, were satisfied that the Alarm would not last very long, because at
Court they look upon dangers, that are at any distance, but as so many things
that will never happen.

The King and Queen being come back to Madrid from the Escurial, every one was
very forward to make his Court to them; and on the Fourth of November, which
was the Festival of St. Charles, His Majesty went to the Chapel in the Palace,
where the Ambassadors of crowned Heads appeared to Complement him, and several
of the Grandees of Spain, who kissed his Hand according to the Custom. The King
was dressed in a Suit, the Ground-stuff whereof was black, with flowers of
Gold, Embroidered with Pearls, and a large Diamond in the midst of every
Flower. His Chain, to which the Order of the Fleece was fastened, glittered
with several Emeralds half a finger long. The Queen Mother writ to the Queen in
the Morning, desiring her to dress her self that day after the French Fashion.
The Queen carried this Billet to the King, and after she had read it to him,
asked him, if he would agree to it? He told her, she looked so pretty in her
Spanish dress, that he prayed her not to quit that Habit on a day of Rejoicing.

The King took away the Receipt and Administration of the Revenues of Madrid
from the Corregidors and Regidors, when he knew their Cheats and Villainies. He
entrusted the Management of them to a Council composed of four persons, Don
Lopez de los Rios, Don Andrea Villaran, Don Francisco Carillo, and Don Joseph
Benavidez; and empowred them to make the Regidors give them an Account of their
Administration. They were Accused to have gotten the Sum of Eight Hundred
Thousand Crowns by the Expenses of the Queen's Entry, and by the Building of
the New Bridge at Toledo, which was carried away by the Waters of the
Mancanares. At the same time the Collecting of the Imposts upon Wine, Victuals,
and Coals, was taken away from them. These Alterations diminished the Profits
of their Offices so mightily, that they could scarce get any people to bid Six
Thousand Ducats for them, whereas before this Reformation it was an usual thing
to give Ninety Thousand, although the Sallaries were not above Six Hundred
Ducats.

The Chief Minister had sent a Commissioner some Months before to the Frontiers
of Biscay, to adjust the Rights of both sides with the French, but he being
fond of his Commission, endeavored to prolong it, and so decided none of the
Differences. There were some Regiments at Bayonne posted all along the River of
Bidassoa, and some Brigandines blocked up the Mouth of it to hinder the
Inhabitants of Fontarabia from all manner of Traffic. They could not go out to
Fish, or commit any of those Acts of Hostility, to which they had been so long
accustomed: And now they were given to understand that they should be kept thus
imprisoned till the Court of Spain had consented to a Reasonable Accommodation.
Whilst matters continued in this posture, the Brigandines pretended to go away;
immediately the Biscayners began to Fish, but the French coming back upon them,
carried them away Prisoners, and made themselves Masters of their Barks. As
soon as this News was brought to Madrid, the Ministers began to exclaim that
this was an unheard of Violence, and such an infraction of the Peace, as was
never to be endured. But his Most Christian Majesty ordered his Ambassador to
acquaint them that they then ought to remove the difficulties, which occasioned
so many Disorders; or till they were regulated to consent to follow the
decisions which the Commissioners of France had made after the Treaty of Peace.

A Person of the first Quality who had followed the King to the Escurial, and
came back from thence before him, told us, that he had strong conjectures to
believe that the Duke de Medina Celi had fallen out with the Queen Mother.
However, few Persons suspected it at that time; but after the return of the
Court to Madrid, it was plain and visible. Some People pretend that the Duke
was wearied with the great number of Creatures, whom the Queen Mother daily
recommended to him, and to whom he was forced to distribute part of his
Favors; that now he did not look upon her as any longer necessary to support
his fortune, and therefore was not willing to grant the frequent demands she
made him; that in order to break off with her all at once, he found it
convenient to visit her no more, but express a great coldness toward her. On
the contrary, there were other Persons that said, that it was occasioned by the
Queen Mother her self, who was not able to constrain her self so far as to
suffer the presence of a Man who minded nothing but how to advance his Family
or Friends, and never showed any Civilities to her. There were others still
that were of Opinion, that the Duke's behavior toward the Queen Mother was
not the result of his own Inclinations, but proceeded from the Suggestions of
Don Geronimo d' Eguya, and indeed it might be so, if it were not for the two
following reasons: the first is because there was not the least appearance of
any particular motive to engage him to desire a rupture between the
Queen Mother and the Duke; the other is, that supposing he had such a Design,
yet d' Eguya did not at that time stand so firm in the King's good Graces, as
that the Chief Minister should think it worth his while to give him so great a
proof of his deference: Nay it is certain that they had a pique against one
another for some time, the subtle insinuating Humor of d' Eguya made him
always embrace the Interests of the most fortunate, and he found himself under
certain Circumstances, which advised him not to press too far, for fear of
disobliging the chief Minister. But notwithstanding the coldness which passed
between them, the King when he was at the Escurial, told d' Eguya one day very
angrily, that if he was not more punctual for the future, to come and help him
in the Dispatches, he would do all the business with Vibanco, who was Secretary
to the Chamber, and for whom the King showed Inclination enough.

The Duke immediately, whether out of Generosity or Politic, excused de Eguya
so handsomely, that he set him right in the King's Favor again; and this
Obligation, for which de Eguya was indebted to him, made them be in a good
Understanding with one another.

De Eguya finding himself so well with the Duke, confirmed him in all the
dispositions he already had, not only in regard to the Queen Mother, but also
to the Young Queen,

He represented to him, That these Two Princesses could do nothing for him;
That the King would take it well, to find him testify a Devotion only to his
own Person, and that he would answer him with his Affection better when he saw
it was not divided. His true Design in speaking to him after this manner, was
only to keep him to himself, that so the Chief Minister might repose an entire
confidence in him.

In fine, they were both agreed, that in order to render the Duke an absolute
Master, it would be necessary for him to resolve to refuse the Two Queens
whatever Offices or Employments they begged for their Creatures. The Duke
imagined that this Counsel proceeded from a true Motive of Zeal, which he
thought abounded in De Eguya, and believed him so heartily, that he would do
nothing but by his Advice. The Duke was generally complained of, for suffering
himself to be managed like a Child, by the only Man of Spain, who as he was a
Person of the greatest Courtship, so he was likewise of the least Sincerity.

To pursue his Project of disgusting the Queen Mother, the Chief Minister
ordered Pensions to be given to several Persons who were directly opposite to
her; the Duke de Villa Hermosa, who had got enough in Flanders, and the Duke of
Alva, were in this number. The Marquess de Astorgas was made Master of the
Ordonance, although he was Comptroller of the Queen's Household; and that single
Place, with the Wealth he had heaped up in the Kingdom of Naples, might very
well suffice a Man of his Age. The Chief Minister afterward assigned Pensions
to the Women of the Duchess de Medina Celi, out of the Bolsillo, which is a
sort of a Privy Purse for the King's House, and other Private Expenses. He
gratified several of his own Domestics after the same manner, whilst those
belonging to the King lay under such great Necessities, that they found
themselves obliged to quit his Service for mere Want and Poverty.

The Duke de Medina Celi gave one Proof of his Power, which succeeded a great
deal better than one could have believed. On the 13 th of N^vember, he married
one of his Relations, whose Name was Don Augustine Henriquez de Gusman, a Cadet
of the House of Gusman, very poor, and of little or no Merit, to Donna Laura,
only Daughter to the Duke de Montalte, who was but fifteen years old, and so
rich, that she was looked upon to be the best Match in all Spain, as well upon
the Account of her Fathers vast Estate, as those of the Marquess de Los Velez,
and the Count de Oropeza, whose Fortunes she was to inherit, in case they had
no Children. This Affair was the Work of the Duchess de Medina Celi: Don
Augustine de Gusman had waited upon her with so much Assiduity, that to
recompense his Services, she procured this Marriage for him. All the World was
extremely surprised at it; but no body could comprehend upon what
Considerations the Duke de Montalte consented to sacrifice his Daughter to
Policy. The Marquess de Los Velez, the Count de Oropeza, and all the rest of
their Family were hereupon mightily enraged at the Duke de Medina Celi; they
quitted his Interests, which they had hitherto embraced with Zeal, and they
openly declared, That they would resent so dishonorable an Alliance as long as
they lived. The Count de Oropeza made particular Complaints against the Duke,
because he had contributed more than any one to his Elevation, and that if he
had been minded to have taken Advantage of the Favorable Dispositions his
Majesty had to him, it is certain, that when Don Iuan was dead, he might have
been made Chief Minister, notwithstanding he was so young: But as he had a
great Respect for the Duke, he imagined, that if he vigorously assisted him
upon so important an occasion, he would always remember him for his Services;
and that if he did not govern by himself, he should at least govern by his
Friend. In this he found both Repose and Security together, he flattered
himself with disposing of Favors, and being defended from the Aversion of the
People. These Reflections engaged him to employ all his Wit, and all his Credit
with the King, to declare the Duke his Chief Minister. But for all this
Obligation, which was transcendent, and for which he was highly indebted to
him, he did not act fairly with relation to the Daughter of the Duke de
Montalte; for although the Count de Oropeza was her Uncle, yet he knew nothing of
her Marriage. The Marchioness de Los Velez, Grandmother to this young Lady,
was no better informed of it; they were married privately without any Ceremony,
for fear least any one should come to disturb the Feast.

The King and Queen, being willing to divert themselves, went to Prado, to hunt
there till St. Andrews Day; they came back from thence, by reason the
Queen Mother had a slight indisposition upon her, and they were desirous to
visit her every day.

About this time Don Philip Vinzani, an able Chemist, who came from Naples to
Madrid, with Don Pedro de Arragon, received Orders from the Chief Minister to
examine the Money, which had been cried down some Months before, in order to
separate the Silver from the Brass. It was pretended, that the King by this
means, would get Six Millions of Pieces of Eight, and that he would employ them
to send considerable Forces to Sea; for the Pope was willing, that the Money
which was to be collected by the Bulls of the Crusade, should be laid out to
equip a Fleet, to make War against the Corsairs of Barbary. At the same time
they were apprehensive that the Vessels sent to the Indies had suffered
Shipwreck, because they had received Advice, that one of them arrived very much
shattered at Barbados, and they could not hear any News of the rest. Although
it is the Custom of Spain for the King to dine with the Knights of the Golden
Fleece on St. Andrew's day, his Majesty dispensed with it, to take the
diversion of Hunting. As he came back from Prado, toward the Evening, the two
Queens went out to meet him, and conducted him to the Admiral of Castile's
House, where they had passed the time ever since Noon. This Nobleman, who was
always generous and magnificent, being informed that he was to receive this
Honor, ordered the Basins of several Fountains to be encompassed with large
silver Pots, filled with all manner of Victuals, Flowers and Fruits as the
Season produced, and the diversity joined to the Order had a very agreeable
effect upon the Eye. In all the Summer-houses which terminated the walks, there
were little Tables set out with pieces of Cristal, Agate, Cornelian, Tapistry
of Gold and Vermilion, having all sorts of things in Basins after the same
manner as the Tables had. He got all sorts of Fruit counterfeited, particularly
of Grapes which hung with their Leaves and Branches in the Grottas, they were
composed chiefly of little Carbuncles of a Pomgranet color, Topazes, and
Amethysts, and nothing could look finer or prettier. The two Queens received a
mighty satisfaction at this walk. As soon as the King was arrived, they went
into the House, where fifteen Ladies and as many Cavaliers immediately
appeared, dressed after the fashion of the Country. The Ladies came at first in
their Mantles Tabados, that is to say, all their Face was covered except one
Eye. The Cavaliers for their part wore their Cloaks up to their Noses, and
their Hats over their Eyes; this was a sort of Masquerade, and to divert their
Majesty's they talked with their Fingers, and by signs for some time, with all
the several turns and Jestures that are used in this kind of dumb Conversation:
Afterward the Ladies quitted their Mantles, and the Lords their Cloaks, and
began to dance a Saraband after the Moorish fashion, holding one another with
Taffata Skarfs of different colors, and quitting them sometimes to carry
Flambeaus in their hands. The Women wore little Caps on their Heads, covered
with Plumes that were raised up on the sides very high. When the Saraband was
finished, the Ladies kissed the Queens Hand, and the Cavaliers the King's;
their Majesty's were pleased to declare, that they were extremely satisfied
with this pretty Entertainment. The Duke de Medina Celi, and the Constable of
Castile, knowing what Honor the King had done the Admiral, desired him that he
would condescend to come and divert himself at their Houses, whither he went
along with the two Queens. There were Comedies there, and Artificial
Fireworks, and a noble Collation: they omitted nothing that might testify
their Joy upon this Occasion, and their acknowledgment of so great a Favor.

On the second of December the King demanded a supply of Money of all the
Councils, and a hundred thousand pieces of Eight of the Council of Italy. He
proposed to fell some Places to raise this Sum, because it was impossible to
be raised any other way.

The King being informed that abundance of People died of several Distempers at
Port St. Mary, which were chiefly occasioned by the great scarcity of
Provisions, told the Duke de Medina Celi, that some way or other must be found
out to remedy these Miseries, and that he could not endure to hear any more
talk of them; that they had been of a long standing, which made him inclined to
believe that all this proceeded from mere negligence. The Duke replied that he
would not lose one moment to redress them, and that if his Life would do the
People any good, he was free to sacrifice it. He went home very melancholy, and
having retired into his Closet with his Duchess, I have a great desire, says
he to her, to abandon every thing, I slave and kill my self here with business,
and after all meet with nothing but Reproaches for my Pains. When you have once
brought things into a good Condition, says she, you may quit them if you
please; but if you leave them at present, all the World will conclude that it
is through weakness. She added so many reasons to these, that she made him take
Courage again, although he was mightily dejected. The Marquess de Priego, his
Son-in-law being come to Madrid to see him, as he entered the Room hit himself a
little blow on the Temples against the Edge of a Cabinet, he was immediately
seized with a bleeding at the Nose, and died of it within a short time after.

Our Ambassador prevailed with the King to give his consent to appoint a Judge
Conservator, whose only business should be to look after all Affairs relating
to the French Nation.

The business was decided at last in Madrid, in favor of Constable Colonna,
upon the difference he had with the Roman Knights, Subjects to the King of
Spain, about the Priority they pretended to dispute with him in the Cavalcade,
which is every year performed to present the Pope with a white Mare, and a
common Scedule for the Kingdom of Naples, which the King of Spain holds in fief
of the Holy See. His Catholic Majesty's Council had delayed to regulate this
Affair ever since the year 1668. When the Roman Barons perceived that it was
not determined in favor of them, they searched new occasions to get the
sentence revoked; and to succeed in their designs, they united themselves with
the Heads of the Papal Families, to write all of them together to Madrid about
the Matter: When the King was told of it, he only answered, What is judged is
judged. The Marquis de Liche, Ambassador from Spain, at Rome fell sick; he sent
immediately for the Pope's Physician to come to him, and when his Friends
demanded of him why he chose him before his own, I am so weary of my Life, says
he, that I purposely send for one, who will soonest kill me, if it were only to
please his Master. The Pope being informed of this answer, sent one of the
Gentlemen of his Chamber to visit him, and ordered him to tell the Marquis,
that he desired his Health as much as he did his absence, and by that he might
judge whether he wished his recovery or no.

About the beginning of December there was a great Earthquake in the Province
of Salerne, as also at Naples, and the Places about it, nevertheless it did no
damage. It was commonly said at Madrid, that the Queen Mother had engaged the
King to nominate Cardinal Nitard to be Viceroy of Naples, and that she hoped
in a short time to see her two Favorites with her. The Cardinal was the first,
and the Marquess de Valenzuela the second. The Marquess de los Velez, who had
no desire to quit his place, sent the King (in order to six himself in his good
Graces) a stately Coach of admirable Sculpture, and Embroidered all over most
delicately. But although the King had so many fine Coaches by him, I never saw
him in any of them; he just cast his Eyes upon them, and then they were shut up
in a Coach-house, where time and the dust absolutely spoiled them; the King
rather loves to ride in great Coaches of green Linen waxed over, made after
the same fashion with ours, and which a simple Citizen of Paris would not
vouchsafe to go in. The Marquess de los Velez sent him likewise some Neapolitan
Horses, but so finely shaped, that nothing certainly ever came near them.

Few days passed wherein the King and Queen did not go a hunting, or else to
see a Play; they went to Buen Retiro to behold some Dutchmen skate upon the Ice
after the fashion of their Country. Some Ladies sent to acquaint the Queen that
if her Majesty would permit them to appear masked, because they had no mind to
be known, they would show her better sport than she had hitherto seen. They
were told that they might come if they pleased, and immediately they went upon
the Ice in short Petticoats, fine Shoes and Stockings, and Pattins after the
Dutch manner; they danced a Saraband with Castanets to admiration, moving as
nimbly as the dance would allow them; but the Ice not being equally thick in
all Places, broke under one of them, and let her fall into the water, where she
had certainly been drowned, if People had not come to her help immediately.
Having lost her Mask by this Mischance, they saw she was a very deformed old
Woman, who was near threescore years old. When the Queen was told of it, she
smiled and answered, That at that Age it was lawful for any one to go masked.

The two Queens on St. Nicholas's day made a Present of precious Stones to the
Duchess d' Albuquerque, because it was her Birthday. She offered them in way
of return, some Curiosities of great Value, and particularly a Prayer Book to
the young Queen which was incomparably well painted, with golden Clasps, and
adorned with Diamonds. It being now toward the end of the Year, I went
(according to the Custom) to wish her Majesty a happy New Year, she was dressed
in a slight Stuff of white Wool, and had a prodigious quantity of large Pearls
about her; she sat near a great Vessel full of Olive stones, and turning over
the Leaves of the Prayer Book which the Duchess d' Albuquerque had given her,
did me the honor to show it me. See, says she, here are Henry the Fourth, and
Mary de Medicis on their Knees, stretching out their Arms in their Oratory; it
is certain that this Book was made for one of them. I was desirous to know by
what accident it came into Spain, and told her that perhaps Queen Elizabeth
brought it thither. Upon this she called for the Duchess d' Albuquerque, and
asked her how she came by it. The Duchess told her she could not tell, but
only that she had received it of her Mother. The Queen said to me afterward,
Are you not surprised to find me dressed in white Woollen; It Is a small sort of
Devotion which the King and I perform, but no body shall know the reason of it.
Ab Madam, replied the Duchess de Pastrane, we all of us take the liberty to
divine. How says the Queen, without mistaking? No, I am not positive said the
Duchess. And for you, said she to me, have you guessed at the true cause? Yes
Madam, very easily, replied I, and all Spain joins its Vows with yours. Don't
you know, says the Queen smiling, that this is none of the best Places in the
World to play the Sorceress in, and that we have a horrible Inquisition here?
The King entered the Room at that moment, so the Queen rising up, told him with
a cheerful Air, that she had two Sorceresses to show him; and that the Duchess
de Pastrane and I had divined the Mystery of her white Habit. The King,
although in all appearance he seemed to be in a good Humor, looked so angrily
upon us, and particularly upon my self, whom he knew to be a French-Woman, that
I made a profound Reverence, and went immediately out of the Queen's Apartment.

An Order was here published to raise the price of Money, which was reduced to
a fourth part of its value.

Although the Duke de Medina Celi was indisposed, yet he did not neglect to
inform himself diligently of every thing that happened, and he was not a little
troubled to hear that the Plague began to rage again at Port St. Mary. The
Scarcity and Poverty of this Country was so extremely great, that several
Persons died daily for Want. And the Duke de Medina-Cidonia was obliged to send
Corn from Andaluzia thither. The Misery was not less at Naples. The Pope's
Nuncio, by his Holiness's Order, Summoned the Superiors of all the Regular
Houses hither, to oblige them to give the City some Relief in Corn.

They granted two in a hundred of their Revenue, and it was hoped that what
with this Money, and what with the Charities they drew from private Persons,
they would remedy these pressing Necessities: But after some time, Cardinal
Caracchioli, Archbishop of Naples, acquainted the Marquess de los Velez by his
Vicar General, that the Pope would not suffer the Tax of two in the hundred to
be raised any longer upon the Ecclesiastical Revenues. Thus the Viceroy found
himself disappointed in his designs of raising two hundred thousand Crowns,
which were to be laid out in Corn, and likewise a more considerable Sum that
was to be sent to Madrid. To augment the Disorder, which was already great
enough, the price of Gold Money diminished daily in the Duchy of Bari, which
totally hindered all Commerce in the greatest part of the Kingdom. On the 16 th.
of December they made a Procession at Naples, which is duly performed every
Year, to thank God for preserving this City from the Flames of the Mountain
Vesuvius. The Body and Blood of St. Ianuarius, one of the Protectors of Naples,
was carried about in this Procession.

The King was troubled with an Ague for a few days toward the beginning of
January 1681. It is impossible for any one to show the assiduity that the young
Queen made appear during the little time his Indisposition lasted. Two Comedies
were acted at Court to divert His Majesty after his Recovery. On one of these
days, the King having prohibited all Persons, without exception, to sit upon
the Theater; the Duke d'Ossone placed himself there upon a heap of Cushions,
and would not depart. The King took no notice of it during the Play, but as
soon as it was over, he sent an Order to him, to come no more to Council or to
Court. He was not in the least pitied, since he had voluntarily drawn this
Misfortune upon himself, and because it was necessary to mortify him a little.
But what principally occasioned the King's Severity, is, that he had observed
in his Journey to the Escurial, that the Duke, who was Master of the Horse to
the Queen, did not follow the Court thither. A little after his return, he sent
him word, that he expected him to wait more diligently for the future; the Duke
took no notice of this Advice, and as he was one of the haughtiest Men in the
World, affected a certain negligence in the discharge of his Office, which
obliged the King to acquaint him by a Note from the Secretary of State, that if
he did not behave himself better for the time to come, he would dispose of his
Place to some body else. He might easily have judged from this, that the King
had his Eye fixed upon him, and at least ought to have taken care of himself
for some time, but his Natural haughtiness would not suffer him to comply with
this constraint.

The Duke de Medina Celi did not pass all his moments with content; he was
envied for the high Post he enjoyed, and d'Eguya was mortally hated: both of
them had powerful Enemies, and amongst these were reckoned the Duke de
Veraguas, the Duke de Pastrane and his two Brothers, the Admiral of Castile,
the Prince de Stillano, the Count de Monterey, the Count d'Oropeza, and the
Marquess de Mansera. They frequently met together, and made severe Reflections
upon the unequal Conduct of the Duke de Medina-Celi; they observed that he was
too irresolute when there was an occasion for constancy; too lazy, when he
ought to be diligent; and too positive, when he was justly and reasonably
opposed. They examined the present state of the Kingdom, the Misery of the
People, and the little appearances there were that he would redress them. They
proposed Expedients to Remedy all these Grievances, and likewise to prevent
those that might happen; but as it was not the public Good alone that made
them thus inquisitive, but their private Interest animated them, they took all
of them different Measures to attain the particular Ends they proposed to
themselves. It is true indeed, they all concurred in the destruction of the
Chief Minister, but when he was removed out of the way, every one was desirous
to make the best Advantages of it for himself; and thus this narrow Spirit of
Self-Interest which was so predominant in their Cabals, hindered them from
uniting with that sincerity, that makes great Affairs succeed happily.

Amongst these Noblemen the Admiral was most forward to desire an Alteration:
He had not forgot the sweetness he had tasted in that short interval, when the
Marquess de Valenzuela was the Queen-Mother's Favorite: the remembrance of
that Golden time made him desirous of another like it; for though he was a
Person of a great Estate, yet his Expenses were so extraordinary, that if he
had been a great deal richer, he would have been always in Debt. He desired
therefore to contribute what in him lay to the setting up of another Minister,
in order to find his Accounts in it; not that he designed to heap up any Money,
but to throw it out of the Windows, and squander it away, if he could but get
enough to serve so. He carefully looked about him to find out a fit and capable
Person to be advanced to this Honor; and at last, the Count d' Oropeza seemed
to be the most proper to accomplish his Designs: for he did not doubt but that
those particular marks of Esteem His Majesty always showed him, would have
their effect, in case he were supported by a powerful Party.

On the other hand, the Count de Monterey, who wanted neither Youth, Wit, nor
Ambition, whose whole deportment was agreeable and Court-like, who had been
concerned in the management of several Affairs, who was laborious and vigilant,
took only resolute and secret Persons into his Party. He had the justest
occasions in the World to be displeased with the Duke de Medina Celi, and Don
Geronimo d' Eguya his Mortal Enemy had done him a great deal of wrong before
the King. He had painted the Action and Character of this Count in such black
colors, that the Young Queen designing to do him some good Offices, and
speaking very advantageously of him to His Majesty, he told her, That Monterey
might reckon himself happy enough, that he wore his Head upon his shoulders
still. The Count was sensibly disgusted to see the Duke de Villa Hermosa, who
had been Governor of Flanders after him, and who had even served under his
Orders, made Counselor of State at his arrival at Madrid, and himself
consequently excluded after so disobliging a manner. Besides this, he saw that
the Marquess de Liche, his Brother was detained at Rome against his will,
although he daily petitioned to be called home. This gave the Count a new
occasion to complain, and made him sensible of the ill dispositions they had at
Court to his Brother and himself. The Marchioness de Liche, who was Beautiful
and Young, threw her self frequently at the King's feet, to demand of him the
return of her Husband, who was continually indisposed at Rome, whether it were
because the Air did not agree with him, or that his uneasiness to be kept there
by force, contributed to destroy his Health. What makes the case harder, is,
that she did not request to have him come back to Madrid, but only that he
might have permission to live in any of His Majesty's Dominions. The greater
part of the Counselors of State were agreed in favor of the Marchioness, and
her Prayers had certainly met with success, if the Enemies of the Marquess de
Liche had not taken all Opportunities to confirm the King in the Opinion he had
already of him, that he was a Man of the most incurable ill Temper in the
World, and that it was not possible for him to permit him to come home, without
hazarding the Peace of all the Court. We may therefore easily apprehend, that
the Count de Monterey had reason enough to be angry with the Duke de
Medina-Celi and d' Eguya; and his Resentments as well as his Ambition made him
passionately wish to see another in the Place, that he might effectually
Revenge himself upon the Duke, whom he hated, and might have Access enough to
the New Favorite, to be able through his means to be introduced into the
Council of State, and push on his own Fortune. He imagined himself capable of
doing it by his Merits and good Management; but although he might with Justice
aspire to the most high and difficult Posts, he was obliged to conceal his
desires and intentions, because he found People's Eyes were still upon him, and
that several who made a Solemn Profession to be his Friends, served only as so
many Spies to watch him. This consideration prevailed with him to put that
restraint upon himself, as to live in a sort of Retirement, and that with so
much circumspection, as to discover his Designs almost to no body. Nay, he
affected to Visit the Duke de Medina Celi, and having found him one day more
easy of Access than was usual with him, he freely declared to him, that it was
not without the greatest impatience that he beheld the preference the Duke de
Villa Hermosa met with, to be made Privy-Counsellor, and himself excluded. The
Duke answered him, that he might expect his turn one day, and upon this showed
him some Civility, which persuaded the Count to believe, that he had now
perhaps a greater kindness for him than formerly. This Reason engaged him to
make his Court regularly to him, and to devote himself to him, at least in
appearance.

The Duke de Veraguas, sensible of the Affront he had received in losing the
Vice-Roy-ship of Valentia, had no other motive to induce him to think of the
removal of the Chief Minister, but only an expectation that he who succeeded
him in that Place, would do him more Justice, than the Duke de Medina Celi had
done: For although the Duke de Veraguas was descended of an Illustrious Family,
as being of the House of Portugal, and that besides his Youth, he had a great
deal of Merit and Capacity, yet whatever importunities he made at Court to be
restored to his Vice-Roy-ship again, he was not able to obtain it. He had
received Absolution privately from the Apostolic Nuncio for having ordered the
Monk to be executed, who had quitted his Habit, and was made Captain of the
Banditti. It was believed, that having now appeased the Pope, this would
facilitate his re-establishment; he daily presented his Petitions to the
Council, he demanded of them, that if he were a Criminal, they would treat him
as such, that his Trial might come on, and that his Head might answer for the
faults he had committed; but that if after a strict Examination of his Conduct,
they found he had served His Majesty well, they would not deny him the Justice
that is allowed to the meanest Soldier. His Trouble and his Requests were
always equally unsuccessful, he found them perverse and prejudiced against him;
and so by this ill usage they obliged him to join with the Malcontents.

As for the Duke de Pastrane, he had not in the least been ill used at Court,
however he thought it sufficient ill Treatment to be left without an Employ.
His Wife, who was Sister to the Marquess de Liche and the Count de Monterey,
being provoked at what Indignities those of her Family had suffered, persuaded
him to use all his Efforts to get a new Ministry established. The Duke de
Pastrane voluntarily espoused this Party, and his two Brothers, whom he had
made acquainted with the Design, were resolved not to separate their Interests
from his; one of them was named Don Gaspar, the other Don Joseph de Silva; the
last of these had a very great share in the King's Affections, and his Place of
Chief Gentleman Usher procured him a great Esteem and Approbation. He had
married the Daughter of the Marquess de Mansera: But these three Noblemen were
guilty of a great Solecism in this Affair; for they communicated the matter to
Don Sebastian Bibanco, Secretary of the Chamber, out of a presumption that he
was of the same Opinion with themselves, but herein they were mistaken; for he
was ^^finitely more devoted to the Chief Minister ^^an to them, and
consequently no sooner knew any thing of Importance, but he immediately
discovered it to him.

The Marquess de Mansera, Grand Master of the Queen-Mother's Household, and her
Creature, desired for her sake as well as his own, to see the Government molded
into another form. He was a Man well advanced in years, whose Merit and
Experience might with Justice prompt him to believe that he was fit to possess
whatever Place they would assign him in the Ministry. He desired a Iuncto to be
erected, that he might be chosen a Member of it: But knowing that his Zeal for
the Queen Mother rendered him strongly suspected, and that he ran an
extraordinary hazard if he appeared for himself, he judged it expedient to
employ the Marquess de Grana, who was his Brother-in-law and Confident. So he
discoursed him about the matter, and possessed him with a desire to take all
necessary measures to effect it. The other having nothing to fear by reason of
his Quality of being Ambassador, labored very diligently in the Affair, while
the Marquess de Mansera expressed but a small concern for whatever happened at
Court, unless it were for the Marquess de Grana's Endeavors to contribute to
his Advancement. He seemed to be of Opinion, that for the Interests of the
Emperor his Master, he was obliged to procure the Prosperity of Spain, which
languished under an extreme Misery that extended it self farther than the
Limits of that Kingdom: That it was impossible for the King to Second the
Emperor in any of his Designs, as long as the Members of that great body were
declining, and continued under the ill effects of a Consumption, that made them
utterly incapable of Action; that it was to no purpose to make any Proposals to
the Ministers, because whatever they promised him was never executed. All these
Motives joined together, excited him to make all possible advances to convince
the Duke of the Necessity he lay under to erect a Juncto.

Besides this he considered that the Marquess de Mansera would not fail of
making one of that number; that he would manage himself in the Council
according to the Directions he gave him, and that this would be the easiest way
for him to succeed in all his Enterprises. He imagined that the best Policy he
could use to accomplish these Designs, would be to use none at all, and so he
addressed himself immediately to the Duke de Medina Celi. He began with
commending his Zeal, his Industry and Pains, and afterward passing into a more
strict Examination of every thing, he was desirous to make him comprehend, That
the Affairs of this Monarchy were reduced to their last Period, unless he took
sure and ready Methods to remedy them; that he made a slave of himself in vain,
since it was not possible for one single Man to sustain (like another Atlas)
the weight of so many Kingdoms; that Don Louis de Haro at a conjuncture of less
difficulty, had composed a Iuncto for his own ease, and herein followed the
Example of several great Ministers who preceded him; that a Iuncto would serve
to determine Matters under the Authority of the Chief Minister, to whom they
would carry every thing almost digested in his hand, and that by this means
business would go on cheerfully and speedily; that at the present time,
whatever good Resolutions were taken, yet they continued without effect by
reason of the general Perplexity, which rendered those things difficult that
appeared to be very easy; that he ought to consider, that the most
accomplished Genius in the World, without great Presumption, could never
promise himself to move so ponderous a Machine all alone, and that he therefore
counseled him to take some seconds, of Experience and Ability sufficient, to
make him repose one part of his Affairs upon them.

The Chief Minister relished these Reasons of the Marquess de Grana, promising
to weigh the matter with Deliberation, and afterward if he saw good, to
determine himself by the Advice he had given him. This gave the Ambassador good
hopes, that his visit would meet with happy success; and as he was a Person of
a great deal of Wit, who knew how to set off any thing to the best advantage,
and show it by the best Lights, so he did not question but the Duke de Medina
Celi would lay hold of the Expedients he had discovered to him; but the Chief
Minister had the weakness to discourse d' Eguya about them; who did not lose
one moment to dissuade him from this Resolution. He represented to him, that if
he composed a Iuncto he went to give himself so many Tutors; that then he could
decide nothing but in concert with them; that he would find himself joined with
Noblemen who were led by their own Passions, blinded with their own Interests,
still pursuing their own ends, and turning every matter to their own private
advantage; that notwithstanding all this, he only must resolve to bear the
brunt of all, and that every body having their Eyes fixed upon him would pursue
all his Motions step by step; that if any difficult juncture, any misfortune,
or unexpected accident should happen, he alone must incur the Reproach of it;
that the Iuncto would never be called in question for ill Events, but that they
would all lie at the Chief Minister's door; that it was very just and natural
to think, that if he alone was responsible for all Miscarriages, that then he
alone deserved to enjoy the Grandeur and Advantages that are annexed to this
Place. He turned the Duke's Inclinations so happily by these Reasons, that he
resolved to follow them, notwithstanding the advice that was given him to the
contrary; so that when the Marquess came to him with Expectations to find him
continue still in the same Sentiments, and ready to put them in Execution, he
perceived that he was steadfast and inflexible in the other Opinion, and that
all the Avenues to him were shut up and hindered.

In the mean time the Lords who had associated together to make a League
against the Duke, continued to assemble in private, and to debate of the
Expedients that were to be taken to convince the King of the necessity there
was to chose another Minister, or at least to erect a Juncto; but the greatest
part of their time was generally spent in making long Political Discourses, and
these same Politics hindered them so, that none of them offered to put himself
at the head of the Party. When the Question was about setting up a Chief, every
one stood looking upon his Neighbor; they wanted that Amity and Confidence in
one another which is necessary to cement these Designs, and he that merited the
greatest esteem, was sure to find the least Friendship from the rest. Envy
reigned amongst them, Sincerity was not observed; and when their Society was
examined, there was nothing but vanity and weakness to be found at the bottom.

Amongst those who were most sensible of the ill management that was to be
found in this Cabal, the Admiral of Castile was one of the first. He easily
discovered all the defects of the Party, and found it was non sense to be
longer engaged in it, since the Bow was not drawn high enough to send the Arrow
to the Butt. He was assured that the design would be discovered, and that then
he should find himself very finely ruined; that supposing it succeeded, and a
Juncto was set up, the Marquess de Liche would in all probability be made a
Member of it, and for his part rather than that should happen, he would choose
to go to Hell, because he bore such an implacable hatred to him. This only
Idea, that now he contributed to procure an Advantage for the Marquess, turned
his Inclinations absolutely from the Society into which he was entered; in fine,
after abundance of Reflections he totally abandoned it, and several People were
strongly persuaded that he was not content to quit it, but that he went to the
King, and acquainted him with the least Particulars of what had passed there;
nay, that he gave the same Advice to the Duke de Medina Celi.

The first Victim the Duke sacrificed to his Resentments, was the Count de
Monterey whether it were because his Indignation was the more violent against
him by reason of the Friendship he always pretended to him, and now had
violated; or because he feared him more than any of the rest: So that
notwithstanding the great security he imagined himself to be in for his
circumspect Conduct, the President of Castile sent him word, that he had
something to say to him, and therefore must see him that Evening at Court, (for
it must be observed by the way, that the Presidents of Castile never go to make
any Visits.) The Count was very glad to have this Opportunity to discourse him,
having some Affairs to speak with him about, wherein he was concerned. But his
Joy lasted but a short time, for the President gave him an Order contained in a
Billet from the King, and signed by Don Geronimo d' Eguya, wherein it was
specified that he must instantly retire to one of his Country Houses. He
continued surprised for some time, and told the President that he was ready to
obey it; but that being a Grandee of Spain, he demanded an Order signed by the
King's own hand, since it was the Custom; and that while he tarried for it, he
would go to put his Affairs in Order. In short, he returned to his own House
extremely concerned, and got his Equipage made ready, not at all doubting but
that the Order would be sent suddenly to him. He received it next day, which
was the 15 th of January, accompanied with a Permission to tarry three days
longer in Madrid. He passed them there amongst some of his Friends, and
afterward parted for Salamanca. Few People pitied his case, because he was
generally envied; and when Fortune leaves a man, few of his Friends have
Generosity enough to declare themselves in favor of him, or to espouse his
Cause. He was the first Person whom the Duke de Medina Celi treated ill, and
it is believed he had not made him serve as an Example for the rest, if d' Eguya
by his violent Courses had not sowred that peaceable and sweet Disposition that
was so natural to the Chief Minister; for he advised him to punish the Count
immediately, to be a warning to others; and he was banished rather because he
was not agreeable to d' Eguya, and had too much Merit, than because he was an
Enemy to the Duke. The Queen Mother secretly rejoiced at it, but could not so
well conceal her satisfaction, but that it was evidently perceived. The Count
had quitted her Party in Don Iuan's time, and it is very well known that he had
several pressing Obligations upon him to have used her after another manner;
for if he had been willing to have made the best advantage of his Fortune, she
had preferred him to Valenzuela, and entrusted him with the management of her
Affairs. He had at least as many good Qualities as the other could pretend to,
and was of an illustrious Extraction, but being a young man he neglected the
advances the Queen Mother made toward him. A certain Person who knew the whole
Proceedings very well, told me that Father Nitard was scarce gone out of Spain
when she began to cast her Eyes upon him intending to honor him with her
Confidence. On the Festival of St. Isidore, who is the Patron of Madrid, and on
which day a Bull-feast was celebrated at the Expense of the City, the
Queen Mother asked the Count whether he designed to combat the Bulls, he told
her no, unless her Majesty would be pleased to order him. No, says she, I will
by no means command you to do it, but is there never a Lady here in Court, who
has laid any such Commands upon you? If any of them had, replied he, your
Majesty may well imagine that I would not fail to give her this mark of my
Obedience. The Queen cried out Jesus, Jesus, Count! Will you expose your Life
thus? A few days after this she let a Paper drop out of her hands as he was
giving her an Account of some Affairs she had entrusted him with, he took it
up, and kneeling upon one Knee, presented it to her. Perhaps, says the Queen,
you believe it is a Paper of Importance, come I Will leave you to judge of that
your self, open it. The Count found the following words there.

Estoy toda la noche despierta sola, triste, y deseando: mis penas son
Martirios, mis Martirios son gustos. That is to say, I pass all the Night
without sleeping, alone, pensive, and forming desires to my self: my Pain is a
Martyrdom, but my Martyrdom is a Pleasure. The Count read these words with so
careless an Air, that the Queen who observed it, snatched the Paper out of his
hand, and said to him, go you insensible, and say your Domine non sum dignus.
The Count was sensible of his fault, and endeavored to repair it, but it
succeeded a great deal worse with him. The Queen Mother did not doubt but that
he had some other Engagement which he preferred to his Fortune; she informed
her self of his Conduct, and at last knew that he was desperately in love with
the Duchess de Monteleon. This was a young Widow, beautiful and agreeable, but
the Queen prohibited her to come to Court. The Duchess de Terra Nova her
Mother, was extremely disgusted at it, and this was the occasion why she
disengaged her self from the Interests of the Queen Mother, and joined with Don
Iuan's Faction. In the mean time the Queen continued still enraged at the
Procedure of the Count de Monterey; so that passing from the extremity of Love
to that of hatred, she gave him, during the remainder of her Regency, all the
Mortifications she could think of.

Most People were displeased with the Admiral of Castile, and call him nothing
but false Brother, and false Friend. Nevertheless he would have it received for
a certain truth, that he never had any intention to make the least Discoveries,
but that the King having sent for him, told him, that upon condition he would
deal fairly and honestly by him, he would forgive him; whereas on the contrary,
if he went about to Excuse himself, he was certainly undone; that he knew every
thing that had passed, even to the least Circumstance, that the Declaration he
demanded of him was rather to know his Heart, than to draw any new lights from
him; that when he would have denied every thing, the King pressed him more
earnestly than before; so that upon that score he resolved to discover what
related personally to himself, but that he had avoided as much as was possible
to speak of his Friends. To say the truth, whether he really excused the Prince
de Stillano, or the Court looked upon him to have made but an inconsiderable
Figure amongst the Party, the Chief Minister did not make him feel the Effects
of his Indignation. It is indeed as certain, that his Punishment preceded his
Fault, and that having already lost his Place of being President of the Council
of Flanders, which was bestowed upon the Count de Monterey, he had some Justice
on his side to expect that they would suffer him to live in quiet.

The Banishment of the Count de Monterey so terribly affrighted the Duke de
Pastrane his Brother-in-law, that he thought of nothing else but how to get
handsomely out of the Intrigue: He followed the Admiral's steps, that is to say,
he readily discovered whatever he knew of this Affair, that he might better
persuade the King of his Sincerity and Repentance. Secretary Vibaneo, to whom
he opened himself, had already discovered the whole Contrivance; but in fine,
he came soon enough to be favorably received; his two Brothers, who were
concerned in the same Cabal, imitated his Example in reconciling themselves to
the Duke de Medina Celi, and they seemed in all appearance to embrace his
Interests with greater Zeal than any of his best and oldest Friends.
Nevertheless the Duke de Pastrane and his two Brothers could not forbear to be
a little troubled, for being looked upon by the World as timorous Persons, who
had only made these Discoveries out of Weakness and Irresolution: This Reason
obliged them to use all imaginable means to make it be believed that they had
told the King nothing; but that having had the misfortune to communicate their
Designs to Vibanco, he had sacrificed his Friendship to make his Court at their
Expense; that the King had him ready to produce as a Witness against them, that
he had severely threatened them, and affixed their Pardon only to their
sincerity; that they could not possibly avoid the doing of this at a Juncture
when they should otherwise have destroyed themselves without saving any body
else; and that if it had not been for these unhappy Circumstances, they had
never been capable of doing this Injury to their Friends. People hearkened to
them, but gave no Credit to their words; nay, several of their Friends
reproached them very frankly for showing so little courage and constancy upon
this Occasion.

Perhaps the Duke de Veraguas had escaped as well as the Prince de Stillano,
and the loss of his Vice-Roy-ship had prevented the Punishment they pretended
he deserved, for joining himself to a Party against the Chief Minister: But he
was impatient to be restored to his former Dignity, and continually demanded
Justice at their hands; he filled all his Petitions with Complaints, and loudly
vented them against the Duke de Medina Celi; besides this, he earnestly
importuned the King to assign him some Judges, before whom he might Justify
his Conduct in condemning the relapsed Monk, who had betaken himself to the
Banditti. So at last he was sent to the Council of Arragon, where he demanded
to be re-established, as a piece of Justice that could not be denied him, and
pursued this Affair with all possible vigor and heat: But on the third of
February he received an Order to withdraw presently to his Estate in Andaluzia.
He begged leave to go to any other place, because the Plague raged violently in
that Province; but it was refused him, and he had only eight hours to prepare
for his departure. One may say, it was only the ill Fortune of the Duke de
Veraguas that procured him all the ill usage he met upon the account of his
Vice-Roy-ship: for it is a certain truth, that if there were a Law to treat all
People after the same manner who fail in their Duty, abundance of Persons had
been severely punished, who were now gratified and encouraged for their pains:
But His Majesty was so exceedingly prejudiced against him, that one Evening
when the Queen was demanding of him, whether it were true, that the Duke de
Veraguas was banished: He answered, Yes, and that all those should be treated
in the same kind, who talked impertinently. This was sufficient to make the
Queen know how his inclinations stood, and as she was very prudent, she took
care to change the Discourse immediately.

It was now sensibly perceived at Court, that the Duke de Medina Celi, and Don
Geronimo d' Eguya opposed the Queen Mother in every thing, but the true
occasion was not positively known. One day when the Marchioness de Mortare came
to Visit us, we spoke to her concerning it; and as she was particularly
informed of the whole matter, and reposed a greater confidence in us than in
the Spaniards, because we had no Interests to take in this Affair; she
acquainted us, That some time before the King went to the Escurial, d' Eguya
going to find out the Queen Mother, to show her a certain Letter which the
Marquess de Liche, Ambassador at Rome, had sent to the King: when he was come
into her Closet, looked for it in his Letter-bag to no purpose. He then
remembered himself, that he had locked it up in his Scritore, where he had
several other Papers, which he had no mind any body should see; and sent a
little Page for it, who could not read. The poor Boy took the first Letter he
found there, and wrapped it up in a sheet of white Paper, as he had every day
seen his Master do the same, when he carried his Expeditions to the King.

Don Geronimo d' Eguya tarried all this while with the Queen Mother, and as
soon as the Boy brought him the Letter, without taking it out of the Paper,
delivered it to her. It was now toward Evening, and the Queen went to the
Window to read it more conveniently: She was immediately surprised to find it
was not the Marquess de Liche's Hand, but that of Donna Lucinda Bucados (who
was of the House de Barcelona) one of her Maids of Honor, who was a very
Beautiful Lady, and extremely loved by d' Eguya. The Letter was writ with a
great deal of freedom, and signified to him, that he had no reason to apprehend
that the Queen her Mistress would censure their Amors. She gave him several
Reasons for it, that highly reflected on the Queen's Reputation. After she had
read it over, she imposed that constraint upon her self, as to conceal her
Indignation for that time, and only told d' Eguya, that she must Discourse the
King about what the Ambassador had written to him. As soon as he was gone, she
sent for Donna Lucinda, and after she had reproached her for her Ingratitude
and Impudence, she caused her to be privately locked up in a little Chamber
well grated and barred up, and kept the Key of it her self. Here the
unfortunate Lucinda was forced to lie upon a sorry Matt, having nothing but
Bread and Water to sustain her, and the Queen Mother frequently ordered her to
undergo the Penance of a Discipline. They told those that enquired after her,
that she was sick of the Small Pox, that the Queen had ordered her to be
removed out of the Palace, and that she was dangerously ill.

Don Geronimo d' Eguya believed the News, and was almost desperate for two
days; but having opened his Scritore to take out something or other, he was
exceedingly surprised to find the Marquess de Liche's Letter there, which he
thought he had left in the hands of the Queen Mother: He searched immediately
for that of Donna Lucinda, and not finding it, he soon concluded where the
fatal Error was committed; so he ran in all have to the Queen-Mother's
Apartment, cast himself at her feet, conjured her to forgive Lucinda, to
consider her Youth, her Birth, and the humble tender Entreaties he made in her
behalf, but he found the Queen inflexible. Seeing at last that he was not able
to move her, he told her, he knew a way how to revenge himself upon her. She
asked him what it was? He replied, that he would hinder Valenzuela from ever
coming back again; and that she should behold him no more. The Queen very much
enraged at this Answer, told him, that she was sensible enough of the ill will
he bore her, but that she did not fear the Effects of it; that it was a long
time since she had lost Valenzuela, who was indeed one of the best Servants she
ever had, but that she was now accustomed to bear his absence. Afterward she
added these words, looking earnestly upon him, I would advise you for your own
sake to hinder his return, for if ever he comes to know that such a fellow as
you had the boldness to displease me, he would tear you in pieces, as a Lion
does a She-Goat.

D' Eguya possessed with Rage, took the first favorable Opportunity to speak
to the King in prejudice of Valenzuela; He represented to him, That he was a
bold intriguing Man; that if the Queen had him with her, they two would raise
Factions together, in which they would engage all the turbulent Spirits in the
Kingdom; that by this means they would disturb the Tranquillity he now enjoyed;
that the Queen still regretted the Time and Authority of the Regency; that it
was dangerous to show favors to any of those Persons who had been her
Creatures of old. In a word, he so well managed the King upon this occasion,
that he bid him issue out an Order, such as he judged convenient, to hinder the
coming back of the unfortunate Valenzuela; d'Eguya lost no time about it, and
the substance of the Order was, That if they met him upon the Sea in his return
to Spain, they should take him out of the Vessel where he was, and reembark him
in that which brought the Order, and so carry him to Cartagne in the
West Indies. The Queen Mother for her part sent away Donna Lucinda in private,
with Orders to Ship her at the Groyn, and to Transport her to Flanders, where
she had sent word to Prince Alexander of Parma, to get her shut up in a
Nunnery. But Don Geronimo d' Eguya having found means to acquaint himself of
what had happened, dispatched an Order of the Chief Minister to the Groyne, to
bring Donna Lucinda back to one of her Relations, who had agreed to take care
of her.

The Duke de Medina Celi espoused d'Eguya's side in this Dispute with a mighty
heat. The Affair blew over at Court without any noise or bustle; as for the
Queen Mother she spoke nothing at all of it, because it had then been necessary
to produce Lucinda's Letter, which was by no means convenient to be shown, for
the several fierce and disrespectful things contained in it. On the other hand,
d Eguya had no Temptation to speak of it, for being Secretary of State, and
under an Obligation to preserve his Spanish Gravity, he was not willing to
discover his Amorous weaknesses to the World.

D'Eguya, who was the sole cause of the ill understanding between the
Queen-Motherand the Duke de Medina Celi, used all his Endeavors to increase it
still, and in order to accomplish his designs, alarmed the Duke perpetually
with all that he had reason to apprehend from the Resentments and Indignation
of that Princess. What he whispered to him, served to exasperate the Chief
Minister more and more against her, and this made him keep a fair
Correspondence with her no longer. He considered with himself, that he stood
firm in the King's Affection, and that the Father Confessor and d' Eguya, who
had more frequent occasions to discourse his Majesty than he had, would take
care to confirm him in all the favorable Dispositions he had for the Duke.
This Triumvirate began at the same time to sow the Seeds of Discord between the
King and the Queen Mother. No body durst acquaint the King with the Reasons
that inclined them to act so violently, they had seen after what manner the
Chief Minister had treated those Persons who were not of his side, and they had
no mind to draw down his Anger upon themselves. The great Officers belonging to
the King's Household seemed to depend entirely upon him; the Gentlemen of the
Chamber, who waited every day in their turn, paid a no less abject Submission
to the Favorite, and those who had Sincerity enough to speak, considering the
Injury they might hereby do themselves, left the Province of better informing
the King to some body else who had more Zeal, and less Policy: so that the Duke
de Medina Celi, d'Eguya, and the Confessor, finding a clear field, gave his
Majesty what ill Impressions they pleased, in relation to the Queen Mother;
they assured him that nothing in the World could make her forget the Troubles
and ill usage she had found when Don Iuan governed all; that although she had
reason enough to believe that when that Minister treated her so rudely, he
acted only by himself; yet it was certainly true that all was done under the
Name and Authority of the King; that therefore she would always remember, it
was he that abetted the Persecution she had suffered; and that he ought to
consider, that it was by no means safe to repose any Confidence in a reconciled
Enemy. The natural goodness of the King, and the Respect he had for the Queen
his Mother, hindered him from being absolutely influenced by the pernicious
Counsels they gave him; however they prevailed so far upon him as to render him
jealous, and consequently cold and reserved to her; she easily perceived it,
and was well informed of all their Designs, but whether she judged it was by no
means a proper time to endeavor the Destruction of her Enemies, or whether she
had some other reasons to dissuade her from attempting it, she did not move at
all in that Affair, and a short time after she never went out of her Palace but
only to make Visits of common decency to the King and Queen.

The Chief Minister, the Father Confessor, and d'Eguya applauded one onother
for having removed the Queen Mother from all share in the Administration of
Affairs; but fearing lest the young Queen might become serviceable to her in
this conjuncture, they found it convenient to render the Queen Mother suspected
to her. They took a very odd way to effect it, but one that served their turn
as well as any; that is to say, they began to inspire the King with a dislike
of the Queen's Conduct, wherein they made him observe abundance of
inconsiderable slight things, which they interpreted to him with so much the
more Malignity, because the Queen acting without any reserve, as all persons of
Sincerity use to do, never restrained her own natural Temper.

Sometimes the King expressed to her some dissatisfaction at it, and this
afflicted her extremely, but while she looked about her to find out who those
Persons were that did her these ill Offices, some of the Duke's Confidents gave
her to understand that all this came from the Queen Mother, who seeing she had
no Children, endeavored to render the King indifferent to her, that so she
might arrive to what she so earnestly desired, which was to see the Arch
Duchess Queen of Spain. The young Queen found some appearances of truth in
what they told her, and this threw her into a dejection of Mind, that really
made her an object of Compassion. Another Affliction was joined to this, and
contributed to augment her Grief, and that was to see the little Credit she had
to obtain what ever she desired.

For although the Chief Minister had promised to be always devoted to her
Service, and she had accepted of the Duchess d' Albuquerque chiefly upon his
Recommendation, yet he seemed not at all to be sensible of it, and never
obliged her in any tolerable manner. It was to no purpose that she begged any
favor of the King, and it was to as little purpose that his Majesty granted
them; for he no sooner spoke to the Duke about them, but the Duke dissuaded him
from doing what the Queen desired; in such manner, that if she requested any
thing it was sufficient for her to rest assured that she should lose the fruit
of her Prayers. The Queen who had a great deal of Wit and Penetration, and who
knew what obstacles the Chief Minister always laid in her way, could not
forbear to speak to the King about him in a most pressing earnest manner, which
intimated to him his unaccountable fondness for the Chief Minister, and
sometimes she closed the discourse with a particular detail of the disorders
which were to be found in all Affairs by reason of the Duke's insufferable
negligence. The King gave d'Eguya an Account of what the Queen told him,
d'Eguya carried all to the Duke to make his Court by it, and this still
occasioned fresh Complaints on one side and the other. The young Queen by this
means completely lost that little Interest she had in the Chief Minister, and
sometimes could not tell what measures she ought to take to strengthen and
support her own Authority.

The Queen was considering with her self what the Occasion might be that made
the Duke de Medina Celi neglect to give her that deference he was obliged to
pay her for so many reasons; and the Duke being informed that the Queen's
Resentments against him daily increased, made use of the Marquess d' Astorgas's
Confessor to tell him who belonged to the Queen, that her Majesty made a wrong
judgment of his Inclinations; that he should always be ready to give her all
imaginable Testimonies of his Respect and Fidelity, but that it was an
ungrateful displeasing sight to him to see her Majesty show such particular
Favors to Persons directly opposite to him, amongst whom he reckoned the
Marchioness de Liche, the Countess de Monterey, the Princess de Stillano, the
Duchess d'Ossone, the Marchioness de los Velez, the Duchess de l'Infantado,
and some others: That if she would be pleased to remove those Ladies, or at
least not entertain them with such evident distinctions of kindness, he should
receive it with a most sensible acknowledgment, and omit no opportunity to give
her all the proofs of Gratitude he was capable of. He added, that without
consulting his particular Interests in this, he was obliged to acquaint her
Majesty, as being her Servant, that it was not the Custom of Spain for the
Ladies to have such free access into the Queens Apartment, and that generally
they were introduced by the Camerara Major only. The Queen listened to this
Advice the Chief Minister sent her, but had no Inclinations to follow it,
because she found he designed to subject her entirely to the Duchess d'
Albuquerque after the same manner as she had been to the Duchess de Terra Nova.

She knew that in all the differences he had with the Queen Mother the Camerara
Major always declared for him, that she embraced his Interests with more Zeal
than her own, and that she had clearly forgotten all that the Queen Mother had
done for her to advance her to this place. The Queen had no desire to throw her
self again into a Captivity, from which she had lately got her self delivered
with so much difficulty. Thus she was content to examine the Motives which made
them set so many Intreagues on foot, but had no mind to be the Victim.

The Duke had so pressing a desire to possess the sole Affections of his
Master, that he could never forgive those Persons who were in a Capacity to
become his Rivals; and he added a certain Air of Sincerity to his Words,
whenever he spoke ill of any one, that the King was really persuaded he had no
private by-ends in doing it: His Relations, nay, even his Friends had no more
Privileges than others, who were indifferent to him. The Duke was believed,
because he always passed for an honest Gentleman; but one ought to have a great
Fund of Virtue, not to be corrupted when he becomes a Favorite. He represented
to the King, all those that came near his Person, as so many secret Enemies and
Domestic Spies, who had neither Zeal nor Affection for him: And these
Impressions wrought so far upon the King's Spirit, that he was scarce ever able
to wear them off. The Duke not only did ill Offices to those that belonged to
the King's Household, but he extended his Malice to all those who were able to
maintain any Intelligence between the Queen and the Queen Mother. He was
persuaded, that the Ambassador of France and his Lady, contributed to it all
that lay in their Power; and this made him conceive an Aversion for them both:
He spoke of them daily to the King, after a very disobliging manner, and laid
several things to their charge wherein they were not concerned. This made the
King so mightily displeased with them, that he could not forbear to tell the
Queen one Day, as they accidentally talked of the Marquess de Villars, That he
had poisoned all the Court, and that he would rather choose to have an open War
with France, than such an Ambassador at Madrid. He after this let fall some
reflecting Words against the Ambassador's Lady, which sufficiently testified
what strange Thoughts he had of her, although we may safely say, that neither
she nor her Husband deserved it. But the Reason why the Chief Minister was so
provoked against them, was, because he was well informed, that the Prince de
Stillano, the Count de Monterey, the Duke de Veraguas, the Admiral of Castile,
and some others, had seen him in private, and communicated to him their Designs
against him, to which he was to contribute something on his side, by getting
the Queen to support the Project. But suppose the Ambassador really knew of
their Intentions, this is no good Consequence, that he was willing to second
them; and indeed there is little probability to believe it, because the
Ambassador had no Reason to desire the Removal of the Chief Minister; and the
Duke's Abilities were not so formidable, that the Court of France had any
occasion to be apprehensive of him.

While the Court at Madrid was thus divided about the little Intrigues I have
mentioned, the People continued to cry out and complain of their Grievances,
because no care was taken to redress them. It was now a full year since the
Duke de Medina Celi had been made Chief Minister, and it was hoped that he
would have taken all necessary measures in a matter so pressing and important,
as was the easing of the People; but he so far forgot his Duty, that every
thing went worse and worse still; and indeed the least Inconveniences sensibly
improve in their malignity, when they are neglected. The lessening the Value of
the Copper-Money had occasioned a great Disorder: It Is true indeed it might
have been managed to the Public Advantage, but they took such wrong measures
in the Regulation, that it became a most horrible Oppression; for the Species
of Gold and Silver being thus reduced to one half of its just Value,
Foreigners took such hold of this opportunity, that they exported prodigious
Sums out of the Kingdom. Besides this, the Price of Segovia Wool, which is an
excellent Commodity, and brings a mighty Profit to those that deal in it, rose
in proportion to the Abatement of the Money; so that no body would buy it,
unless they would sink the Price: And things being in this condition, then at
last came the crying down of the Money, and this totally completed and
ratified their Misery. There was computed to be of it to the Value of Six
Millions of Crowns. The King did not at all take them off, although he had
promised by his Edict, to pay the full Value of the Metal, to those who brought
them into the Offices appointed to receive them. So all this Money lay
absolutely dead: and it is no easie' matter to express the Loss which the
Bankers, the Merchants, the King's Farmers, and almost every private Man
suffered by this decrying of it down. Foreigners were the only Men that made
Advantage of this General Misfortune of Spain: They bought this Copper Money,
that was mixed with a good Allay of Silver, for very little, and sent it to
Genoa, to Portugal, and other Places. The Council very well knew the Prejudice
the Kingdom received by it, and Assembled several times to find out an
Expedient to put a stop to it: There were some Undertakers, that offered to
treat for all of it, and separate the Silver from the Copper; and, as I said
before, Don Philip Vinzani, was made choice of in this Affair; but he had not
been preferred before others, if it had not been for the Credit of Don Pedro de
Arragon. This Man owed him great Sums of Money, and had been twice Bankrupt,
and was just upon the Point of breaking the third time; so he was desirous to
introduce him into some great business, that he might by this means enrich
himself, and be in a capacity of paying his Debts: But this Project did not
succeed, because so great a quantity of this Money was already carried out of
the Kingdom, and the separating of the Allay was so difficult a matter.

These Losses were the cause that abundance of Persons of great Quality found
themselves under a necessity of selling their Plate and Jewels. It Is true,
there is so much both of the one and the other at Madrid, that it cannot well
fail in a long time. What made several private Men suffer the more, was, that
the Rents of the Town Hall, which were reduced from eight to five in the
hundred, were not now paid at all, because the Corregidors and Regidors, who
were concerned in the payment of it, were such great Villains, that although
the City was sufficiently harassed with Customs, Taxes, and heavy Duties,
before these People had drained it as long as they pleased, and that they had
put some small inconsiderable matter of it into the King's Coffers, there was
nothing left more out of so many Imposts, and yet they were not levied for the
greatest part, but under the pretense of satisfying the Rents of the Town Hall.

But how was it possible to put things, as they now stood, into a better Order?
It was resolved, that there should not be above four Regidors; there had been
more than fifty, and their Places were worth sixty thousand Crowns. It is
certain, that before they could reimburse themselves of such a Sum, they must
be guilty of great Extortion and Cheating.

An Order was sent from Madrid to all the Ports to publish Reprisals in favor
of the Subjects of the King of Spain, upon the Vessels belonging to the Elector
of Brandenburgh. I have already spoke of the Vessel which that Elector's
Subjects had taken away from his Catholic Majesty. The Elector had allowed
three Months to redeem her, but they were not in a condition to do it. The
Ambassadors of England and Holland labored to Accommodate the Businesss with
no Success, because the Elector declared he would be paid his Eight Hundred
Thousand Crowns that were due to him, and he would restore nothing but upon
that condition. And therefore the Court would rather suffer him to enjoy his
Prize: however, to save the Honor of Spain, the Ministers pretended that the
King would have his Vessel restored before he would do any thing, and that he
refused to hearken to any other Proposal, till that were executed.

The Queen Mother, who seldom stirred abroad, and who lived a very Melancholy
Life at her Palace, invited the Young Queen one day to Dinner, when the King
was gone out a Hunting: They afterward shut themselves up in the
Queen-Mother's great Closet, and (as she told the Marchioness de Mortare, from
whom I afterward had the Story) they began to weep, and embrace one another
very tenderly. The Queen Mother complained, That the Queen her Daughter-in-law,
had prejudiced the King against her, and that she suffered as great a
Confinement, as if Don Juan did still Govern; that she was not ignorant that
the Duke de Medina Celi, d' Eguya, and the Confessor did her all the ill
Offices they were able; that if she had only these to Combat, she would
endeavor to destroy them; that perhaps she might be able to accomplish it; but
that when she saw the Queen at the Head of the Party, she had no Courage left
to defend her self; that although she very well knew she had promised to do her
all the injury she could, yet she could not forbear to speak to her of it,
rather to ease her self, than out of any hopes to soften her dispositions.
Alas, Madam, Alas, cried the Young Queen all in Tears, why do you add such
stabbing Suspicions to the other ills you have done me? Could you not be
content to poison my Conduct before the King, and make him show me a thousand
sensible unkindnesses upon that score, but must you insult upon me too, and
accuse me of the only thing in the World I am incapable of doing? At these
words the Queen Mother stretched out her Arms to her, and they tarried a
considerable space of time without being able to speak a Syllable, so much were
both their minds prepossessed against each other: But at last, when they could
speak in cold Blood, and came to examine what had been said on both sides, they
were sensible that some ill Persons had endeavored to disunite them, in order
to Fortify their own Party, which was equally contrary to them both. They gave
one another an Account of the measures that had been taken, of the Persons that
were concerned in them, of those whom they ought to suspect for the ti^e to
come, and they resolved to employ all their Interest to destroy the opposite
Cabal. They staid together till it was Night, and on the next day, which was
the fifth of February, the Constable of Castile gave the King and the two
Queens a Magnificent Collation, accompanied with Music. The King's Dwarf, who
is one of the prettiest Creatures in the World, whom the Constable brought with
him from his Government of Flanders, where he succeeded Don Iuan, danced a A
Ground.
Passa Cailla along with a young Girl whom the Queen had taken to her Service,
and was newly redeemed out of Slavery. They were both of them dressed after the
Indian Fashion, covered with Feathers of Birds of different colors; they had
little Tabors, and played prettily upon them. This Feast was followed by
another at the House of Don Pedro d' Arragon, where the Queen danced before the
King, which she had never done before, although she acquitted her self that way
to admiration. She had purposely learned the Canaries and a Saraband, so that
the King was perfectly charmed to see her so expert in the Spanish Dances, and
told her several times as he pressed her Arms with his two Hands, Mi Reina, Mi
Reina, eres la mas perfeta de todo el Orb: That is to say, My Queen, My Queen,
you are the most accomplished Person in the whole World. The Queen Mother sent
her that Evening a Watch all adorned with Diamonds, and a Gold Chain of
exquisite Work; she writ a Letter to her, wherein she wished that this Watch
would only show her happy and pleasant Hours. The Queen returned her this
Answer, That they would be always so, if she would continue to love her. She
afterward desired the King to tell her some tender thing, that she might send
it to the Queen Mother. The King told her immediately, No tengo que desir. How,
Sir, says the Queen, have you nothing to say to the Queen your Mother? I
beseech you to give me a Complement that may please her. The King studied a
long time what to send her, and at last said, Ponga os mi Reina que jo tongo
busna salud. That is to say, Write, my Queen, that I am well.

The King dispatched an Order to Prince Alexander, Governor of the
Low Countries, to make a grand Reform amongst the Officers of War and Justice.
He gave at the same time the Vice-Roy-ship of Navar to the Great Prior of
Castile. The Count de Fuen Salida, who possessed that Post, went to Gallicia,
whereof he was made Viceroy. The Count de Palma, Nephew to Cardinal
Portocarero, had the Government of Malaga, and the Coasts of Granada, in the
room of the Count de Cifuentes; and the Duke de Hijar, Son-in-law to the
Duchess de Terra-Nova, obtained the Vice-Roy-ship of Arragon. This Duchess
had not appeared at Court ever since she had quitted it with so great a
Disgust: But her Son-in-law having now received this new Favor, she was
resolved to go and visit the Queen on the tenth of February. She had already
sent to her Majesty to demand her Permission, and the Queen sent her word, that
she should be glad to see her. The Duchess at her entrance into the Queen's
Chamber, seemed at first a little disordered: She excused her not coming to
Court upon the account of a long Fit of Sickness, and then added, I assure your
Majesty I did not think I should have been able to live, after my misfortune to
be separated from you. The Queen told her, that she had been informed of her
Indisposition, but that this was not a place for her to speak of what made her
uneasy, and in effect passed to some other Discourse. The Duchess de Terra
Nova fixed her Eyes continually on the Duchess d' Albuquerque, as if she had a
mind to devour her; and the Duchess d' Albuquerque, whose Eyes were neither
better nor sweeter than hers, looked askew upon her, and they let fall every
other moment some Expressions that were a little eager.

One of the Footmen belonging to the Venetian Ambassador had committed some
Insolence, and the Justices ordered him to be Apprehended for it: but this
Minister pretending that it was against the Privilege of Ambassadors,
complained of it to the Duke de Medina Celi, but did not receive so favorable
an Answer from him as he expected. This so much disgusted him, that he went to
acquaint the rest of the Ambassadors with it, who all agreed to represent the
Consequences of such an Action to the Duke de Medina Celi in a large Memorial
conceived in very harsh terms, which they sent to him all at the same time. The
Chief Minister carried it to the Council of State, who, after they had maturely
deliberated upon the Affair, were of Advice that they should set the Footman
immediately at liberty. The Ambassadors were resolved, in case they had refused
them this Satisfaction, to have forced the Prison to fetch him out.

Constable Colonna came back to Madrid in February. The most important Affair
that brought him thither, was his desire to Accommodate Matters with his Lady,
and to find out a way for both of them to live in peace. The Marriage of his
Son with the Daughter of the Duke de Medina Celi did also take him up very
much. The Queen was concerned at the Misfortunes of his Wife, and it was no
small trouble to her to understand what ill Usage a Person of her Quality
received in Prison: Nay, she was particularly obliged to protect her, by reason
of the Promise the Duke had made her, and the Confidence the Constable's Lady
reposed in it. These Reasons engaged her to charge her Confessor to do all he
could with the Constable, in order to Negotiate an Accommodation, and see
whether he would carry her into Italy, or suffer her to stay in some Religious
Convent at Madrid, as she had already been. But the Constable and his Wife were
strangely exasperated against one another: She resented to the Life the
unworthy Treatment she had received, and the mutual occasions they had to
complain, hindered them from consenting to what might contribute to their
common Satisfaction. At last, the Constable being earnestly importuned by the
Queen, and advised by the Marquess de Los Balbazez, proposed, that his Wife
should turn a Religious, and that he, for his part, should take the Habit of a
Knight of Malta. This at first appeared very surprising to all the World, but
indeed was more strange to the Constable's Lady than to any one; for it is
certain she had no great desire to that Life, and her Inclination did not very
well relish three mortifying Vows, an austere Cloystering, and a severe Rule.
Nevertheless, the Constable was so positive, that all his Wive's Friends were
satisfied there was no other Way to deliver the Unfortunate Lady out of the
Castle of Segovia, but by obliging her to give her Consent to what he proposed.
Thus at last they prevailed upon her to consent to it; so she was brought back
to Madrid on the 15 th of February, 1681. where she immediately was shut up
amongst the Nuns of the Conception of the Order of St. Jerome. She was so
afflicted at her Misfortunes, that she would see no body but her Children: She
told them, she looked upon her self to be the most Unfortunate Creature in the
World, and that she was going to do a thing which might cost her the Repose of
her Life; That she beheld the Consequences of it with Terror, but that
nevertheless she was resolved to undergo it, because she had given her Promise.
In effect, she went down into the Quire, where every thing was prepared for the
Ceremony, and she took upon her the Habit of a Novice, but with a formal design
to die rather than make Profession. She wore a Petticoat of Gold and Silver
Brocard, under her Woollen Robe, and when she was not in company with any of
the Nuns, she would throw her Veil aside, and put a Coif upon her Head, after
the Spanish Mode, dressed with Ribbons of all Colors. Sometimes it so happened,
that the Bell rung to Chapel, where she was obliged to make her Appearance by
the Rule of her Order; and the Mistress of the Novices coming to inform her of
it, she clapped on her Frock and Veil over her Ribans and her loose Hair; This
made a very odd and Comical Figure, and no body could have forborne laughing at
it, had not her Miseries on the other hand, drawn the Compassion of all Persons
that knew her; for indeed her Condition was very necessitous; she wanted Money,
had but mean Eating, and yet worse Lodging. One Day as I happened to be in the
Queen's Retinue, I entered into the Convent, and the Constable's Lady carried me
to her Chamber; I was like to have been starved with the Cold there; it was as
high as a Tennis-Court; and, not to flatter the Place it was no better than a
great Barn. The Constable got a Dispensation from Rome to hasten the time of
her Profession; and he himself was obliged, as I have already said, to take the
Vows of the Order of Malta, but he was told every day, that his Wife had an
unconquerable Aversion to become a Religious, and at last had no hopes of it:
The Marquess de Los Balbazez, as well as the Marchioness, were not a little
concerned to be laughed at by all the World. The Constable concluded the
Marriage of his Eldest Son with the Daughter of the Duke de Medina Celi, and
parted three days after to return to Rome: He carried his Sister in Law, and
his two Sons along with him. As for his Lady, she still carried in the Convent,
where she wore the Habit of a Religious long enough, and at last quitted it.

The King and Queen went to the Jesuits College, to see a Tragedy, where a
Young Scholar, who Personated a Fury, coming upon the Theater with a lighted
Torch in his Hand, perceived his Tutor in a corner, who Acted a Chemist; in all
appearance he bore him a Grudge; for he run after him, and burnt his Beard and
Hair, and pursued him like a real Fury indeed. He played his part so well, that
the King was mightily pleased with him, and would needs have them begin that
Scene again, because it was the prettiest in the Play. The Scholar desired it
with all his heart, but neither his Tutor, nor any of the College, had a mind
to be concerned in the other part. The Carnival approached, and a Comedy was
played the Three last Days of it at Court. On the 19 th of February, which was
Ash Wednesday, the King had a Solemn Service at the Chapel Royal, and ordered
the Ambassadors to be told, that he would continue to have one every Week,
except Holyday-Week.

In the mean time the Duke de Medina Celi applied himself seriously to find out
means to set a Fleet to Sea by the Spring, and treated with some of the
principal Bankers of Madrid, whose Names were Dominico Grillo, Francisco de
Monserato, and Ambrosio Dionis. The first engaged to send a Hundred Thousand
Piasters a Month to Flanders, the second to remit Fifty Thousand to Catalonia,
and the third Thirty Thousand to Navar. But what signified all these Treaties,
since they were not in a Condition to furnish necessary Funds? The Court
received Advice from Naples, from whence they expected some Supplies in Money,
That the Prince de Belvidere, and several of the principal Barons, were retired
to their respective Countrey-Houses, by Reason of the great Disorders and
Misery of that City. Besides this, they were informed, that the Inhabitants of
Trapan, and of Two other Cities in that Kingdom, had made an Insurrection,
killed their Governor and Judges, and at the same time had sent to demand
Assistance of the Turks. This News found but an Unwelcome Reception at Madrid.

There arrived also at Court a Deputy of the Commerce at Sevil, with whom I had
a long Conversation. He assured me, that that great and stately City was
reduced to a condition which amazed all the World; That there did not now
remain one Fourth Part of its Inhabitants; That the Imposts increased every
day, and that this City, which but about Fifty years ago, was one of the
Richest in the Universe, was now ready to sink for want of Relief, although the
Gallions arrived there, and it still enjoyed the most considerable Trade of any
Place in Spain. We may hence justly conclude, in what a sad condition the rest
of the Cities of Spain were reduced to, since the best of them was almost
ruined. This Reason obliged me to enquire of a certain Gentleman, who was well
acquainted in those Affairs, what the Revenues of the King of Spain might
amount to? He told me, That in ready Money only, which came from the Indies,
they amounted to Thirty Millions, and Eight Hundred Thousand Ducats, which in
French Money is worth somewhat more than Seventy five Millions of Livres: But
then it ought to be observed, that the King does not touch a third part of this
Sum, the greatest part of it being either otherwise engaged or purloined; And
yet out of this third part are to be defrayed the Expenses of the Palace, the
Pensions his Majesty bestows, and the Payment of his Armies. He is likewise
obliged to be still sending considerable Sums to Milan, to Naples, to Messina,
to Catalonia, and to Flanders: For the Viceroys and Governors take effectual
care that the King shall not draw a Farthing out of those Kingdoms and
Provinces; they keep all the Profits to themselves: And this is the Reason why
Money is so often wanting, even for the necessary occasions of the King's
House. But after all, I can by no means be persuaded, but that he is Richer
than he is generally supposed to be; for there is no probability that otherwise
he could be able to give, as he does, such considerable Pensions, and so much
in standing Wages, to so vast a number of People. It is true, these
Liberalities so mightily incommoded him, that about the beginning of the Year
1681. all the Livery-men of the Stables having waited Two Years together for
their Wages, left the King's Service on the same day, and looked abroad to get
a Livelihood; so that his Horses had no body to look after them, or give them
Corn. This appeared so much the less surprising, because the Table of the
Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, was absolutely laid aside, although it was the
only one the King kept in his Palace. The Women that waited upon the Queen had
no better luck, and the Court could not be supplied with Money enough to defray
the least Expenses. This Extremity lasted for a while, and then things were
established as formerly. But what is very remarkable, and deserves the last
Commendation, the Soldiers, notwithstanding this Misery, continued still in
the Service; although there were several Officers, nay, entire Regiments of
them that had not received two Months pay in three Years. However this was the
reason that abundance of Garrisons were ill provided with men, and in a very
bad Condition, and particularly on the side of Estra Madura, where nevertheless
it was their Interest to have been more careful, because the Portugueses had
very considerable Posts in that part of the Country.

We saw the Governors of St. Sebastian, Bilboa, and Fontarabia at Madrid, who
came on purpose to acquaint the Council of War, that their Soldiers died of
hunger, that the youngest of them had deserted, that none but the old and
infirm were left behind in the Garrisons; and that in a short time there would
be none of these left, unless they gave them a speedy Relief. They had fair
Promises made them, they returned back, but were forgotten as well as a great
number of others.

It is indeed surprising, and cannot easily be believed, that in this very
Spain, so excessively poor and exhausted, as it seems to be, the Flota from the
Indies only, in the year 1680. brought thirty Millions of Gold. But of these
prodigious Sums that arrive there every year, we must deduct near two thirds
which the Foreigners draw away for the several Goods they furnish them with;
and besides there is a way found to cheat the King of the fifth Penny, which is
due to him out of all the Silver that comes from the Indies. There is another
thing still behind that contributes exceedingly to make the Spaniards so
destitute of Money as they are, and that is the prodigious number of French and
Dutch who come to help them, whether in the tillage of the Ground, or in their
Buildings, or any other things of a more servile Nature, which the Don Diegos
and the Don Rodriguez think so much below them, either out of a Principle of
Vanity or Idleness, that they had rather choose to starve, than resolve to set
about them. But Foreigners are not so nice and delicate, they come hither, and
when they have scraped a little Money together, they return to their own
Country, in the mean time others come in their room; and are employed in the
same work. They are computed generally to be full forty thousand, who come in
and go out of the Kingdom after this manner, and there is not one of them who
does not carry away with him seven or eight Pistoles every year, and sometimes
more. It is easy to judge that this arises to a prodigious Sum.

The People still continued to cry out and exclaim, and at last the Duke
fatigued with the great business he had upon his hands, and with these
continual Complaints, resolved to erect a Juncto to set things in Order again,
and endeavor to relieve the present Necessities. He cast his Eyes upon a
Person of great Abilities, whose Name was Don Lopez de los Rios, and whose
Virtue and Experience were sufficiently known, for he had always bore some
Office either in the Civil Government, or the Finances. He at first showed a
great Zeal, and the heat of this Zeal did not at all abate in his Mind, but he
found himself not strong enough to cope with all the Enemies alone, whom he
must expect to create by a severe and steady Conduct. Several Persons, nay even
the Ministers interested in these Affairs, directly thwarted him, and by this
means destroyed all that he had established with so much Pains and Industry.

On the 23 d. of February a private Act of the Inquisition was performed in the
Church of the Dominicans, where twenty Persons were condemned for being guilty
of Superstition, Sorcery, and Judaism. The Duke de Villa Hermosa, who came back
from Flanders, arrived about this time at Madrid, and the Duke d' Hijar parted
from thence to go to Saragossa, and take Possession of the Viceroyship of
Arragon. Two days after this, which was the 26 th of February, the Marquess du
Mondejar was made a Grandee of Spain.

The Duke d' Ossone who now began to be weary of not supplying his Place
himself, desired some of his Friends to intercede with the King in his behalf
that he might come to Court; and the King consented to it, with this Proviso,
that he should perform his Duty better for the time to come. The Count de
Pouar, and the Count de Montiel were forbidden the Court; both of them were
passionately in love with Donna Francisca d' Alcannicas, Lady of Honor to the
Queen, and Niece to the Constable of Castile. The Count de Pouar was under her
Chamber Window, and entertained her there with his Fingers as is the manner of
Spain, and told her a Story very much to the disadvantage of the Count de
Montiel, who lay hid in a corner where he saw and understood all, so that
coming toward the Count de Pouar all enraged, with his hand upon the guard of
the Sword, he told him he was a persidious Villain, and that he might thank his
good Fortune for being in the Palace. The Count de Pouar coldly answered, that
he would go out of it as soon as he had told Donna Francisca two or three
things he had still to say to her, and that he came seasonably enough to be a
Witness of them, because they concerned him. The Count de Montiel transported
with Choler, was upon the point of drawing his Sword upon his Rival. But the
Duke d' Usseda, Brother to Donna Francisca, passing by that way with the Count
d' Altamire, she made them a sign to draw near, and told them with her Fingers
what had happened. The two Lords labored all they could to make up the quarrel
between the two Rivals, and succeeded in it; however this Accident could not be
kept so secret but that the King being informed of it, forbid them the Court.

The Duke de Sejar parted from hence to go and serve in Flanders in quality of
a Volunteer. He was a Person of Illustrious Birth, very rich, and very young;
the reason he did this was only because he was jealous of his Lady. The Count
de Talara had the Place of Judge of the Forests conferred upon him, which was
vacant by the Death of the Marquess de la Guard; and Don Francisco de Manserato
obtained the Title of Marquess de Tamarit. The King ordered the Council to
discharge all the Receivers of the Impositions, that are laid upon the
Provinces: These Officers were above a thousand, and the suppressing of them
must needs be of great advantage to his Catholic Majesty, and to his Subjects.

A Vessel which came to Cales from the Honduras, brought News that the Flota
was happily arrived on the fifth of September, and that the Merchants of Lima
offered three hundred thousand Crowns to the King, on condition that for an
year and half he would not send the Gallions here. In the mean time ill Weather
hindered the Fleet, which had set sail from Cales a little before, from doubling
the Cape of St. Vincent; the bad effects of this Tempest were not only
perceived at Sea, for it was so violent in all parts of Castile, that several
Houses were beaten down, and the exceeding Rains so swelled the Rivers, that
the Roads were o'reflown, and almost all the Bridges carried away by the
rapidity of the Waters.

This ill News was followed immediately by three Couriers, one upon the neck of
another, and the first of them arrived on the 13 th. of March from Abbot
Masserati, Envoy of Spain in Portugal. He dispatched them to inform the
Council, that they had received Advice at Lisbon by a Vessel, that the
Governor of Buenosaires, having got together abundance of Indians, had joined
them to his Garrison; that on the 15 th. of August 1680. he had surprised the
Fort which the Portugueses had began to build in the Isle of St. Gabriel; that
he had taken the Governor Prisoner, and cut the Garrison in pieces; that the
Prince-Regent, being provoked at this Insult, had assembled the Council of
State, where the Queen of Portugal was present; that they had re^olved to raise
the Militia, and send 400 Horse, and four Regiments of Old Soldiers into
Estramadura; that it would be necessary to get Magazines ready on the
Frontiers, and to have a General Rendezvous at Eluas; that having demanded
Audience of the Prince-Regent, he had refused it him, and that in all
probability a War would ensue. 'Twas expected at Court that the Envoy of
Portugala would make his Complaints, but they were extremely surprised to see
him take no notic^ of it at all: so now it was not doubted, bu that this
silence certainly presaged a surprise of the Spanish Territories, like to that
which the Governor of Buenosaires had committed in the Indies upon the
Portugueses. The Ministers judged it convenient to prevent this blow, and spoke
to the English Ambassador about it, desiring him to represent to the Envoy of
Portugal, that the King of England would be obliged to take up Arms against him
who first broke the Peace, whereof he was Guarrantee; that he had also a more
particular Reason than this, forasmuch as by the League that was concluded
between the King his Master and his Catholic Majesty, they had mutually
engaged to Declare against the Enemy that fell upon either of them. This
Discourse was spoke with a great deal of heat; but the Envoy of Portugal
answered him, That he looked upon him to be a Partisan of the Court of Spain
rather than an Ambassador from the King of England; that he knew very well he
spoke without Order, and of his own Head: This Answer was followed by a
Protestation in Writing, wherein it was declared, that the King of England
could not upon any Reason whatever hinder the Prince of Portugal from using the
Right of Reprisals, and endeavoring to get Satisfaction from the Spaniards for
the Injuries received.

A little after this, the Envoy of Portugal received an Order from the
Prince-Regent to demand Public Audience upon this Occasion; and told his
Catholic Majesty, that he demanded an entire Satisfaction from him, and that
the Prince-Regent desired, that they would set the Soldiers and Governor at
Liberty; that they would punish those of Buenosaires; that they would restore
the Ammunition and Cannon; that if the Fort were razed, they would rebuild it*
or else surrender the place; that in case the Prisoners were sent into Spain,
they would set them at Liberty; that they would receive into the Fort of St.
Gabriel the Garrison which the Prince of Portugal should send thither; that the
Governor of Buenosaires should be chastised, and that an Answer be given in
within Twenty Days, or else they would begin Actions of Hostility. Upon this
the Council met, and spent three days to deliberate about it. They gave Orders
for their Forces to march toward the most exposed, defenseless places, and Don
Antonio Panyagua, Master-General of the Camp, was charged to stay there, till
he saw an end of this Affair.

Besides they set forth a great Memorial, wherein were contained the Arguments
which the Envoy of Spain had given in at Lisbon, to make it appear by
Authentic Papers, that according to the Limits appointed by Pope Alexander VI.
the Isle of St. Gabriel belongs to the Spaniards, and that they have had it a
hundred fourscore and six Years in their possession. After this they took
notice of the Declaration of the Envoy of Portugal, and ended all with a
Protestation, signifying, That they were desirous to preserve the Peace, and
that they would labor with all Application in this matter. This Manifesto was
sent to all the Foreign Ministers to communicate to their Masters; but they had
scarce given it to them, when they sent in all have back again for the Copies
to Correct something or other, and then they returned them again. At the same
time a Rumor was industriously dispersed, that the Nuncio by an express Order
from the Pope, had moved them to send an Ambassador to Lisbon to treat about an
Accommodation. But this was really a Temperament they had found out to conceal
the true motives which engaged them to make this Advance. The Nuncio upon this
said openly, that he had never interposed in the business, and that it was
impossible to receive any Orders from Rome about so fresh an Affair.

The Duke de Giovenazzo was chosen for this Embassy. As soon as he was arrived
at Lisbon, he saw the Prince-Regent, who nominated the Duke de Cadaval, and the
Marquess de Fronteyra for Commissioners. He would have made his Complaints at
first, and demanded Satisfaction: But he was told, that they were of a Humor
clearly opposite to what he pretended; and that matters were to be done
conformable to the Memorial which the Envoy of Portugal had presented at
Madrid, or else let the Affair go whither it would for them. After some slight
contestations, he gave his consent to it, and dispatched a Courier to Madrid to
inform the Court of what he had done. Immediately the Ministers bellowed out
against him as a Man of no Judgment, who had violated his Fidelity to the King,
pretending that he had infringed all the Rules of Prudence and good Sense by a
Conduct and an Accommodation so disadvantageous to Spain, and that his
Instructions furnished him with no such Power. All these Circumstances of
Indignation and Resentment were only offered to the Honor of the Nation: But
notwithstanding all this, they did not lose a moment to conclude the
Accommodation, and the Ratification of it was speedily sent to the Duke de
Giovenazzo.

Money still continued to be as scarce as ever at Madrid, and certain it is
that it was the greatest difficulty in the World for the Council to provide a
hundred and fifty thousand Crowns for the King to go to Aranjuez. The
Ceremonial of the Palace, whereof I have already made mention, orders this Sum
precisely to be spent in that small Journey, and here they are so exact to
follow it, that they would not for all the World lay out a hundred Pistoles
less. But after the Money was once in the King's Coffers, the Council thought
to send it to the Forces that were kept on the Borders of Portugal, by reason
of the late difference about the Isle of St. Gabriel. The Duke de Medina Celi
spoke to the King about it, and proposed that in this juncture they might take
Money where ever they could find it; but he roundly answered him, Do what you
will, provided you don't meddle with that which is designed for Aranjuez. He
was not able to go thither all the Autumn, because such a Sum of Money as is
necessary for that purpose could not be then gotten ready. He began his Journey
about the beginning of April 1681. being not willing to break any of the
Customs that are established in the Ceremonial of the Palace: Philip II.
observed it religiously, and after him the Kings of Spain have looked upon it
as Sacred as a Law. Every thing is there set down, the Processions, the Chases,
the Solemn days of Chapel, the changing of their Apartments, their Habits,
their Walks, their Journeys, the Presents the Kings make their Mistresses, and
what is to become of them when they cease to love them any longer: In a word,
there is to be found every thing from the most essential circumstance of State
down to the most insignificant Trifles. The King tarried five Weeks at
Aranjuez. This Royal House is within seven Leagues of Madrid. He goes no where
all the year round but there, and to the Escurial in October: These are his two
great Journeys.

I went thither along with a Relation of mine to take leave of the Queen, and
receive her Orders. She had the goodness to promise me her Protection for a
young Girl, whom I was to leave behind me in Spain, and was very dear to me.
She told me she would take her into the Number of her Menines, and that I might
assure my self she carried her own Recommendation along with her, since she
came from France. She honored me with her Picture in Enamel, incircled with
Diamonds, and I sensibly regret the loss of it to this very day. This is not a
fit place to tell how this Misfortune happened to me; perhaps I may still write
the Memoirs of another Court, where I resided some time, and which are no less
particular than these; and there I shall have a fit opportunity to speak
concerning the Portraiture of this lovely Queen.

FINIS.

