AN ACCOUNT Of the Whole Proceedings at the Sessions, Holden at the
Sessions House in the Old Bailey, for the City of London, County of Middlesex,
etc. Which began on the twelfth of this Instant July, and ended the 16th: of
the same. Giving a Particular Relation of the Trials of diverse High-way-men,
Clippers, Fellons, Traitors, and Conspirators, but more especially of the
Trials of WILLIAM, Lord RVSSEL. THOMAS WALCOT. JOHN ROVSE. WILLIAM HONE.
Who were Tried, and found Guilty, for Conspiring against the Life of the King,
and endeavoring the Subversion of the Government, with the Sentence pronounced
against hem, etc. Entered according to ORDER
AT this Sessions, beginning the day abovesaid, First in order, were Tried
Thomas Wilson, and James Johnson, upon three several Indictments; one for
Robbing Esquire Hide of Highgate on the Road, of diverse Rings, Money, and other
things, to the value of Eighty pound: Another for Robbing Robert Abel of a
Watch, Rings, Money, a Coat, and other Things: And the last for Murdering one
George Evans. The Evidence upon the Trial, Swore to both the Indictments upon
the Robbery, that the Prisoners were the Men that Robbed the Persons aforesaid,
and that upon Search, the Buttons of the Coat, taken at that time, was found in
Johnson's Lodging: As to the Murder, it appeared to be thus. The Townsmen of
Islington having notice of the Robberies committed that way, laid the Ways,
and in a short time met the Prisoners, whom they suspecting to be the Robbers,
commanded them to surrender themselves, which they refused, endeavoring to
escape, and Johnson finding himself hardly pursued, he with a Pistol shot
Evans, the Person that pursued him, of which Wound the next day he died: The
Prisoners Pleaded Innocence as to the Robbery, but not being able to give any
good Account of themselves they were upon full Evidence found Guilty.

John Muglestone, Roger Muglestone, and John Harris, were tried for Clipping
the Current Coin of this Kingdom, as Elizabeth, James, and Charles the First,
Halfe-Crowns, Shillings, etc. The Evidence was, that the former of the
Prisoners had at diverse times been seen to Clip and File Money, and that he
sent a Youth to sell diverse quantities of melted Silver, with one of which
Parcels being seized by the Goldsmith to whom he offered it, he confessed where
he had it, upon which the Prisoners House was searched, where diverse Shears,
Melting-Pots, Files, and other such like Instruments were found: As also, a
considerable quantity of Clipped Money: As to the Second Person he was Brother
to the former, and assisting to him in his Defrauding Occupation: And against
Harris it was Sworn, that he furnished the Prisoners with Money, and had
Sixpence in the Pound for Clipping, and that he had of a long time been of
Confederacy with them; upon which, and sundry other Circumstances, as the
Instruments being produced in Court, and the Bars of Melted Silver, and the
like, the Jury found them all three guilty of the High Treason, as in the
Indictment laid.

This Sessions William Lord Russel, was Tried upon an Indictment for
High Treason, for designing to Leavy War, and compass the Death of His Majesty.
The Evidence against him was the Lord Howard, Colonel Shepherd a Vintner in
Cornhill, etc. who Deposed, that he had been at diverse Consults in order to
raise Rebellion and Leavy War, and a General Rising throughout the Kingdom, and
that a Declaration had been drawn to that purpose, and a Survey taken of the
King's Guards at the Savoy and Muse, in order to Surprise them, etc. So that
after diverse Arguments the Jury found him Guilty of the High Treason.

Thomas Wallcot, John Rouse, William Hone, and William Blake, were Tried for
Conspiring against the Life of the King, and designing to Subvert the
Government, and make a miserable Slaughter amongst the King's Subjects as to
the three former it plainly appeared, that they had been in diverse Consults
about Killing the King and Duke in their Return from New Market, that it was
absolutely concluded, and Arms for that purpose prepared, but that the Fire
occasioning the King's sudden remove prevented it against the later. Evidence
was given that he was to raise a power of Seamen to seize on the Tower, and for
that purpose had prepared Shipping to batter it from off the Water, and that
diverse Discourses tending thereto had been by him uttered, but the main stress
as to Blake, rested upon one Evidence only, whereupon after Charge given, the
Jury found the three former Guilty of High Treason, and Acquitted the later.

William Lord Russel, Thomas Wallcot, John Rouse, and William Hone, being
Convicted as abovesaid, the King's Attorney General prayed Judgment against
them, whereupon they were brought to the Bar, and asked what they had to say
why Judgment should not be awarded against them, etc. whereupon the Lord Russel
desired to hear the Indictment read, which was allowed, and then made some
Objections, that there was no proof against him of his actual designing to kill
the King, only for Conspiring to Leavy War, etc. but he was told that the
Verdict was passed, and it now remained the Duty of the Court to pass Sentence.
Hone, Wallcot, and Rouse, being asked what they could say, desired that their
Friends might have liberty to see them, and time to prepare for another World.
Then Sentence was passed, as follows, viz. That they should return to the
place from whence they came, from thence be drawn to the Common place of
Execution upon Hurdles, and there to be Hanged by the Necks, then cut down
alive, their Privy-Members cut off, and Bowels taken out to be burnt before
their Faces, their Heads to be severed from their Bodies, and their Bodies
divided into four parts, to be disposed of as the King should think fit.

William Knowles was Tried, for that he the 20th of June broke open the house
of Phillip Stubb in Cornhill, and took thence in Plate and Money, to the value
of 50 pounds, which Robbery he before the Justice upon his being Apprehended,
confessed to have thus effected, viz. That going up and finding the Key in the
Chamber Door, he opened it, and broke open the Boxes with an Iron Skewer, and
took out the Plate, Money, etc. some of which Plate upon proffer to Sale was
stopped, and he Apprehended. This and other Evidence given against him he was
found Guilty of the Felony.

Francis Smith of St. Andrew's Holburn, was Tried upon an Indictment of
High Treason, for Clipping the Lawful Coin of this Kingdom, when by one
Evidence it appeared that he had often with Shears and other Instruments
Clipped, Filed, and Diminished Half-Crowns, Shillings, Sixpences, and the like;
but the other Witness not Swearing positive, but only by Circumstances, the
Prisoner was Acquitted.

Jane Dodson an Old-woman, was Tried for a Witch, it being Sworn against her,
that she used diverse Hellish Arts and Inchantations to destroy diverse Persons
especially that she lamed and distorted by her Cunning in Witchcraft and
Sorcery, one Mary Palmer, and killed another as the Evidence believed; but not
making it appear what means she used, or how the matter was brought about, and
diverse Persons appearing to Testify her Life and Conversation, she was
Acquitted.

William Barret, and Elizabeth Attwell were indicted for Robbing one Mr.
Cuttler of Hornzey of 100 pounds in money, which Robbery Barret confessed, and
declared that none but himself was concerned in the Robbery, whereupon the
other was Acquitted.

John Spittle and one Gratrick, took their Trials for Robbing one Mr. Pitts
near Mile-end on the 9th of May last of a Watch, four Pounds in Money, Rings, a
Silver-handled Knife and Fork, the which being positively sworn against them by
reason the Party Robbed knew them at the time of the Robbery, and therefore had
narrowly Escaped with Life, and they proved Notorious Offenders, the Jury found
them Guilty.

Elizabeth Mason of the Parish of St. Sepulchers, was Tried for stealing a Coat
valued at Twenty shillings, from Thomas Midwinter, but it appearing that she
had it of his Maid Servant she was Acquitted.

Joseph Brockly was Indicted for several Parcels of Goods from one Mr. Lowman,
to which upon his Arraignment he Pleaded the old Newgate Plea, viz. Guilty of
that and all other Felonies within the Benefit of his Clergy.

Richard Sinnel was Indicted for Marrying a second Wife during the Life of his
first Wife, to which Indictment he pleaded Guilty, owning the Fact, which by
Law is Felony.

John Plumpton was Tried for Conveying away on the 10th of June diverse pieces
of Plate from Edward Vile, who entrusted him therewith, but it appearing they
were delivered into his Custody, it was not Felony, whereupon he was Acquitted.

Francis English an In-keeper, was Tried for taking a Mare from one Mr. Long
upon the Road, which Mare was afterward found in his Stable, but he alleging
she was brought in by a stranger, who the next day promised to call for her,
and bringing diverse to Attest where he was at the time the Robbery was
Committed, the Jury Acquitted him.

Margaret Nicolson, was Tried for Clipping the Lawful Coin of this Kingdom, as
Shillings, Half-Crowns, etc. which was first suspected, as it was given in
Evidence against her, by changing diverse Clipped pieces of Money, and searching
her house they found Files, Shears, and Rubbing-stones, which the Prisoner
alleged were left there when she came to the house, and there being no actual
Clipping proved, she was Acquitted.

Margaret Chamberlain was Tried for stealing Knives, Canes, and Swords from one
Mr. Warradine a Cutler, in St. Martin's in the Fields, the proof against her
was, that part of the Goods were found about her, and that she had sold the
rest in diverse places, to which she Pleaded that they were delivered to her by
a Woman she met in Holborn by chance, but not being able to prove it, she was
found Guilty.

George Jones, was Arraigned for stealing 10 l. in Money numbered, from Thomas
Frind, upon plain proof of which he was Convicted of the Felony, as likewise
was Joseph Dumply for stealing goods to a considerable value from one John
Roman. Jonathan Ball was likewise Tried and found Guilty for Robbing John Cross
of five Pounds in Money.

John South Esquire took his Trial for killing William Atkinson in the Parish of
St. Andrew's Holborn, on the 26. of May last, the Manner thus. The Prisoner and
the Deceased in the Passage of a Yard in Grays-Inn-Lane drew upon each other,
and after a Pass, closed, and then falling off again departed to their
respective Habitations, but the Deceased had first received a Wound in his
Belly of which in a short time he died; but no former Quarrel being proved, nor
any Malicious Intent, the Prisoner was found Guilty of Manslaughter only, and
for stay of Burning in the hand, producing the King's Warrant, he was Dismissed
upon giving security to Appear the next Jail-delivery: Bail was likewise taken
for William Blake the Sea Captain, Tried for High Treason, and Acquitted as is
aforesaid.

Isabel Simms was Tried for Robbing John Brown of St. Martin's, of a Silver
Tankard, 3 Silver Spoons, a Silver Salt, a Cup, and diverse other pieces of
Plate, to the value of 24 pounds, which Robbery, as the Witnesses deposed, she
confessed some time after her being Apprehended, and that she was in the house
a little before the Robbery was Committed, to inquire for a Lodger, whereupon
she was found Guilty.

John Knot was Tried for stealing a Scarf, a Hood, a Cornet, and other things
from one Mr. Parsons on the third of May last, many of the things being
afterward found where he had disposed of them, upon which he was found Guilty.

Benjamin Cooper was Tried for stealing a Silver Cup, a Silver Thimble, and
other Plate to the value of 30 shillings from Samuel Wadcot of Holborn, on the
28 of May last, which Goods being proved to be taken upon him, he was found
Guilty.

Joseph Mills was Tried for stealing Sheets, Plate, Money, Rings, and diverse
sorts of wearing Linen, to the value of 30 l. from Jane Guttrell of the Parish
of St. Martin's in the Fields on the 26 of June last; the Evidence given
against him was, that upon search, a Purse with diverse Rings, owned by the
Prosecutors, was found between the Bed and Mat in his Lodging Chamber, but
there being no positive proof of the Felony, and he bringing diverse to give the
Court an account of his Life and Conversation, he was acquitted.

Mary Grifith was Tried for stealing a silver Tankard from Anne Ray on the 22d.
of May last, but the proof against her being weak, she was acquitted.

Anthony Sympson was Indicted and Tried for Killing one George Butler on the
26th. of May last; as likewise were John Scot and Samuel Godlygood, for killing
Mary Edwards on the 30th of June last, but the Evidence being but
Circumstantial, and not Positive, they were all 3 acquitted.

Elizabeth Hall was Tried for stealing a Scarf, an Apron, and diverse other
wearing Apparel from Henry Tailor of Aldersgate Parish, but the proof against
her being deficient, she was acquitted.

On Saturday the Grand Jury delivered an Adress in order to its being presented
to His Majesty, expressing therein the Joy they conceive for the Preservation
of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and their just detestation and abhorrence of
the detestable Conspiracy lately carried on to Depose and Murder him and to
Subvert the Government, etc.

This Sessions, William Lord Russel, Thomas Walcot, John Rouse and William
Hone, recived Sentence for High Treason as Conspirators, John Mugglestone, John
Harris, and Roger Muggleston, were likewise Sentenced for High Treason for
Clipping and Defacing the Current Coin of this Kingdom, Thomas Wilson, Miles
Johnson, John Spittle, William Gratrix, Mary Chamberlain, and Elizabeth
Simmes, were Sentenced for diverse Robberies and Fellonies, these for Treason to
be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, and the others to be hanged only,

George Jones, Richard, Simnel, Jonathan Ball, and Benjamin Cooper, were Burnt
in the hand, John Knot, Will. Knowles, Joseph Drumply, and Thomas Barret
ordered for Transportation, and so ended this Remarkable Sessions.

Advertisement.
THese are to give notice that notwithstanding a short Account of the Trials of
William Lord Russel, Thomas Walcot, William Hone, John Rouse, and William
Blake, that are given in this and other Papers, Published by the Publisher
hereof, that the Trial at large will be shortly Published by Richard Chiswel at
the Role and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.

LONDON. Printed for Lang. Curtis, 1683.


