Hidden Things brought to Light, FOR THE Increase of Knowledge In Reading the
Bible.

Being an Explanation of the Coyns, Money, Weights, Measures, mentioned in the
BIBLE; as Shekels, Talents, pieces of Silver, Silverlings, Pence, etc. And what
they are in Value in Gold and Silver, according to English current Money. Being
cast up from One Talent, to Three Hundred and Fifty Thousand Talents, in plain
words; for the Understanding of any that can Read the Bible.

Also, in what Chapters and Verse or Verses they are to be found.

Likewise, the Weights and Measures, how much they are of English.

And also, Hard Words of Office and Sects Explained.

Very Useful for all that can Read English. The like never done before.

Licenced according to Order.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-hart-court in Gracious-street; and at the Bi^le in Leadenhall-street,
near the Market, 1697.

TO THE READER.
FOr a General Good, and for the Increase of Knowledge and Understanding in
Reading the Bible, I have been at some pains and trouble in examining several
Dictionaries, for the finding out the true Value of the Coyns-Money mentioned
in the Bible; And also the Weights and Measures; And what the Shekels are, of
which there are three sorts; the Common, the Kings, and of the Sanctuary. So
likewise there are three sorts of Talents; the Common, the Kings, and of the
Sanctuary; which I have cast up both in Gold, Silver and Weight: And how much
each is a^cording to English current Money, from One to Three Hundred and Fifty
Thousand Talents, in plain words. And also of the Pieces of Silver,
Silverlings, Pence: And in what Chapter or Chapters, Verse or Verses, any of
them are to be sound. And also the Measures, how much any of them is of
English. Also the Hard Words explained, as of Office, Sects, Pharisees,
Herodians, Tetrach, Proselytes, Logion, Stoics, and diverse others; being very
useful and necessary for all People that can Read the Bible: Whereby they will
come to know the exceeding vast Riches of King David, Solomon, and the Queen of
Sueba; there being no Emperor, King, Prince or Potentate now in the World, or
ever were before, that has or had the like; and also other Kings in those
times. All which is fully mentioned in what follows. The ^ike never before done
in so plain a way for all Persons that can but Read English, whereby their
Knowledge may be increased, their Vnderst^nding bettered; and all to the Glory
of Almighty God, that being the desire of him who does Publish it for a General
Good.

John Axford.

The Money, Weights and Measures mentioned in the Old and New Testament; with
their Value, and how much it is in English current Money, either in Gold or
Silver.
THere are three sorts or kinds of Shekels, and also of Talents, often
mentioned in the Scriptures of Truth.

First, the Common Shekel, which was a quarter of an Ounce; worcester h fifteen Pence.

The King's Shekel weighed three Drachms or Drams, there being Eight in an
Ounce; three being worth One Shilling, ten Pence, half penny.

The Shekel of the Sanctuary or Temple, weighed four Drams, or half an Ounce;
worth two Shillings, six Pence.

Also there are Three sorts of Talents. The Common Talent, which weighed three
thousand quarters of Ounces or Common Shekels, which is six thousand Drams; and
is one hundred eighty seven Pounds, ten Shillings.

The King's Talent weighed three thousand of the Kings Shekels, which is nine
thousand Drams; and is two hundred eighty one Pounds, five Shillings.

The Talent of the Temple weighed three thousand Shekels of the Temple, which
is so many half Ounces; which comes to three hundred seventy five Pounds.

A Silverling, or piece of Silver often mentioned, is worth two Shillings, six
Pence.

The Common Shekel of Gold, is two Drams; worth fifteen Shillings.

The King's Shekel of Gold is three Drams, worth one Pound, two Shillings, six
Pence.

The Shekel of Gold of the Temple is four Drams, or half an Ounce; worth one
Pound, ten Shillings.

The Common Talent of Gold, is worth two thousand two hundred and fifty Pounds.

The Kings Talent of Gold, is worth three thousand three hundred seventy five
Pounds.

The Talent of the Sanctuary or Temple, is worth four thousand five hundred
Pounds.

The Gold being weighed by such Weight as Silver is, which is by Troy Weight.

Now follows what the Money through the whole Scripture is worth, with the Names
of the Chapters, and Verse or Verses where it is mentioned.
Genesis 20.16. And to Sarah, King Abimelech said, I have given to thy Brother
one thousand pieces of Silver; which were called Silverlings; is one hundred
twenty five Pounds, two Shillings, six Pence.

Genesis 23.16. And Abraham bought a Burying-place for four hundred Shekels of
Silver, current Money with the Merchant, which were common Sh^kels; is twenty
five Pounds.

Genesis 24.22. That the man took a Golden Ear-Ring of half a Shekel weight; is
seven Shillings, six Pence. And two Bracelets for her Hands, of ten Shekels
weight of Gold; is seven Pounds, ten Shillings.

Genesis 37.28. Joseph's Brethren sold him for twenty pieces of Silver; which is
two Pounds, ten Shillings.

Genesis 45.22. He gave to Be^jamin three hundred pieces of Silver; is thirty
seven Pounds, ten Shillings.

Exodus 25.39. Of a Talent of pure Gold shall he make with all these Vessels;
is four thousand five hundred Pounds.

Exodus 30.23. Every one that was numbered to give half a Shekel of the
Sanctuary; is one shilling, three pence.

Exodus 38.24. All the Gold that was occupied, even the Gold of the Offering,
was twenty nine Talents and seven hundred thirty Shekels, after the Shekel of
the Sanctuary; is one hundred thirty one thousand five hundred fifty five
Pounds.

Verse 25. And the Silver of them that was numbered of the Congregation, was one
hundred Talents and seven hundred seventy five Shekels, after the Shekel of the
Sanctuary; comes to thirty seven thousand seven hundred twenty one Pounds,
seventeen Shillings, six Pence.

Numbers 7.12, 13, 14. And he that offered his Offering, the first was Nashon
the Son of Aminadab; one Silver Charger weighed one hundred Shekels of the
Sanctuary; is twelve Pounds, ten Shillings. One Silver Bowl seven Shekels, is
eight Pounds, fifteen Shillings. One Golden Spoon ten Shekels, is fifteen
Pounds. So the worth of the Gold and Silver which one Prince offered, is thirty
six Pounds five Shillings. So the whole Offerings of the twelve Princes in Gold
and Silver, Chargers, Bowls and Spoons, amounts unto four hundred thirty five
Pounds.

Numb. 31.32. And all the Offerings that were Offered to the Lord of the
Captains of Thousands and Hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred fifty
Shekels of Gold of the Sanctuary; is twenty five thousand one hundred twenty
five Pounds. Read the 31 Chapter of Numbers, it is worth observation.

Joshua 6.20, 21. And Achan said, I have Sinned, when I saw among the spoils a
goodly Babylonish Garinen^, and two hundred Shekels of Silver, etc. which are
Common; is twelve Pounds, ten Shillings. And a Wedge of Gold of fifteen
Shekels, which were Common; is eleven Pounds, five Shillings.

Judges 8.26. And the weight of the Golden Earrings which he requested, was
one thousand seven hundred Shekels of Gold, which were Common; comes to one
thousand two hundred seventy five Pounds.

Judges 9.4. And they gave him seventy pieces of Silver; is eight Pounds,
fifteen Shillings.

Judges 16.5. And the Lords of the (...) pounds, twelve shillings, eleven pence.

Verse. 20. And there came up a Chariot from Egypt for six hundred Shekels; is
fifty six pounds, five shillings. And a Horse for one hundred and fifty Shekels
of Silver, is fourteen pounds, one shilling, three pence.

1 Kings 16.24. And he bought the Hill Samaria of Shemer for two Talents of
Silver; is five hundred sixty two pounds, ten shillings, the Kings Talent.

1 Kings 20. Then thy Life shall be for his Life, or else thou shall pay a
Talent of silver, etc. being a Common Talent, is one hundred eighty seven
pounds, ten shillings.

2 Kings 5.23. And Naman said, Be content, take two Talents of Silver etc.
which is the Kings Talent; is five hundred sixty two pounds ten shillings.

2 Kings 6.29 A great Famine in Samaria, and they besieged it until an Asses
Head was sold for fourscor^ pieces of Siver; which is ten pounds: And the
fourth part of a Cab of Doves-Dung, which is half a Pint, for five pieces of
Silver, which is twelve shilings, six pence. They used the Doves-Dung instead
of Salt.

2 Kings. 7.1. Then Elisha said, Hear the Word of the Lord, To morrow about
this time shall a Measure of fine Flower be sold for a Shekel, which is one
shilling three pence; and two Measures of Barley for a Shekel, etc. A Measure
being a Bushel: It came to pass as the Man of God had said.

2 Kings 15.19, 20. And Menahem gave Pull a thousand Talents of Silver; is two
hundred eighty one thousand two hundred and fifty pounds. He exacted of each
Man that was Wealthy, fifty Shekels; is three pounds two shillings six pence.

1 Chronicles. 21.25. David gave to Ornan for the place six hundred Shekels of Gold
by weight, the Shekel of the Sanctuary; is nine hundred Pounds.

1 Chronicles. 22.14. Now behold in my Troubles I have prepared for the House of the
Lord, one hundred thousand ^alents of Gold, which amounts unto, being of the
Sanctuary, forty five thousand Millions current English Money. And a thousand
thousand Talents of Silver; which is in English current Money, thirty seven
Millions five hundred thousand Pounds

1 Chronicles. 29.7. And gave for the service of the House, of Gold, five thousand
Talents, and ten thousand Drams, according to the Talent of the Sanctuary; is
two millions two hundred fifty three thousand seven hundred and fifty Pounds.
And of Silver, ten thousand Talents; which is three millions seven hundred and
fifty thousand Pounds, English current Money. And of Brass, eighteen thousand
Talents; which is in weight, two millions two hundred and fifty thousand
Pounds; which is one thousand four Tun, and nine hundred thirty two Pounds. And
of Iron, one hundred thousand Talents; which is in weight twelve Millions five
hundred thousand Pounds; which is five thousand five hundred seventy nine Tun,
eleven hundred seventy eight Pounds.

2 Chronicles. 3.8. And he over-laid it with fine Gold, amounting to six hundred
Talents of the Sanctuary; is two Millions seven hundred thousand Pounds.

Verse 9. And the weight of the Nails was fifty Shekels of Gold; is seventy
five Pounds.

2 Chronicles. 8.18. And they took from Ophir four hundred and fifty Talents of
Gold, and brought them to King Solomon; which is one Million five hundred and
eighteen thousand seven hundred and fifty Pounds.

2 Chronicles. 9.9. And she gave the King one hundred and twenty Talents of Gold;
according to the Kings Talent, is four hundred and five thousand Pounds.

Verse 13. Now the weight of Gold that came to King Solomon in one Year, was
six hundred sixty six Talents; amounts to, according to the Kings Talent, two
Millions two hundred forty seven thousand seven hundred and fifty Pounds,
English current Money.

Verse 15. And King Solomon made two hundred Targets of beaten Gold, six
hundred Shekels of Gold to one Target, which is nine hundred Pounds worth of
Gold to one Target. The worth of Gold to the three hundred Targets, amounts
unto one hundred and eighty thousand Pounds.

Verse 16. And three hundred Shields made he of beaten Gold, three hundred
Shekels went to one Shield, which is four hundred and fifty Pounds. The worth
of Gold to the three hundred Shields, is one hundred thirty five thousand
Pounds, according to the Shekel of the Sanctuary.

2 Chronicles. 2.56. And he hired one hundred thousand Mighty Men of Valor, out of
Israel, for one hundred Talents of Silver, the Kings Talent; is twenty eight
thousand one hundred twenty five Pounds English.

2 Chronicles. 27.5. And the Children of Ammon gave him, the same Year, one hundred
Talents of Silver, being Common; is eighteen thousand seven hundred and fifty
Pounds English.

2 Chronicles 36.4. And condemned the Land in an hundred Talents of Silver, being
Common; is eighteen thousand seven hundred and fifty Pounds.

Jeremiah 32.9. And I weighed him the Money, even seventeen Shekels of Silver,
etc. being Common, is twenty one Shillings, three Pence.

Hosea 3.2. So I Bought her unto me for fifteen pieces of Silver, etc. is one
Pound, seventeen Shillings and six Pence.

Thus far the Old Testament.
Matthew 18.24. One was brought to him which owed him ten thousand Talents,
which was forgiven him; being Common Talents, comes to one million eight
hun^red seventy five thousand Pounds. One of his Fellow Servants owed him one
hundred Pence, called Dram, seven Pence half penny; is three Pound two
Shillings six Pence, which he would not forgive his Fellow Servants.

Matthew. 17.27. And take up the Fish that first comes up, and when thou have
opened his Mouth, thou shall find a piece of Money, that take and give them for
me and thee, etc. Which piece of Money is called a S^ater; it is half an Ounce
of Silver, which is two Shillings.

Matthew. 22.19. And they showed him a Penny; which is seven Pence half penny.

Ma th. 25.15. To one he gave five Talents; supposed Common, is nine hundred
thirty seven Pounds, ten Shillings. To another two Talents, is three hundred
seventy five Pounds. To another one, which is one hundred eighty seven Pounds,
ten Shillings

Matthew. 20.5. He agreed with the Laborers for a Penny a Day; which is seven
Pence half penny, being the Roman-Penny.

Matthew. 26.15. And they covenanted with Judas for Thirty pieces of Silver,
called also Silverlings, being half an Ounce of Silver; is two Shillings, six
Pence; which comes to three Pounds fifteen Shillings.

The Measures Mentioned in the Scripture.
There are diverse kinds of Cubits.

1. The Common Cubit, was from the Elboe to the long fingers end, or a Foot and
half, or half a Yard,

2. The King's Cubit, one and twenty Inches, or a Hand's breadth more than the
Common.

3. The Cubit of the Sanctuary, contains two of the Common, being a full Yard.

4. A Geometrical Cubit, contains six Common Cubits, which is three Yards:
According to this Cubit it is thought Noah's Ark was built.

A Reed is six Common Cubits, and a Hand's breadth, which is three Inches.

A Pace is five Foot.

A Furlong is one hundred twenty five Paces, or forty Perch.

A Mile is one thousand Paces, or eight Furlongs: But in the Scripture or
Hebrew, as much as a Man can go in half a day, or between Meal and Meal.

Judges 20.16. Among all this People, there were seven hundred chosen Men left,
which could Sling at a Hairs breadth, and not miss.

Now a Hairs breadth is the forty eighth part of an Inch. Twelve Inches is a
Foot. Sixteen Foot and an half is a Perch. Forty Perch is a Furlong. Eight
Furlongs is a Mile.

A Sabbath Days Journey, according to Scripture, is six hundred ^aces.

The Measures Mentioned in the Scripture.
First of Dry,

A Cab is a Quart.

An Omer is a Quart and half.

A Seath is a Gallon and half.

An Ephath is half a Bushel and a Pottle.

Half an Homer is seven Bushels and a Quart.

An Homer or Cor is fourteen Bushels and a Pottle.

A Chenix, by some counted three Pints five Ounces and half, by others a Quart.

The Liquid or Wet Measures.
A Log is half a Pint.

A Hin is three Quarts.

A Bath is nine Gallons three Quarts.

A Poe or Sextary is a Pint and half.

A Firkin is four Gallons and half.

Of Legion.
We read in the Scripture of Legion, as Mark 5.9. He asked him, What is thy
Name. And he answered, saying, My Name is Legion, for we are many, etc.

Matthew. 26.53. Think thou that I cannot now Pray to my Father, and he shall
presently give me more than Twelve Legions of Angels, etc. Twelve Legions is
eighty thousand seven hundred and fifty.

So Luke 8.30. And Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy Name? And and he said,
Legion; because many Devils were entered into him. And if a Legion consisted of
so many, as is mentioned, as it follows, then they were possessed with some
Thousands of Devils: For a Legion at that time was six thousand Footmen, and
seven hundred and thirty Horsemen.

Romulus, who built Rome, his Legion consisted of three thousand Footmen, and
three hundred Horsemen.

Afterward a Legion was four thousand two hundred Footmen, and three hundred
Horsemen.

After, in Julius Caesar's time, which was about one hundred and fifty Years
before Christ, a Legion was five thousand Foot, and three hundred Horsemen.

Lisey and Isodor say, a Legion consisted of six thousand Armed Men. Hesych
says, a Legion was an Army of six thousand six hundred sixty and six.

Afterward a full and perfect Legion consisted of six thousand Footmen, and
seven hundred and thirty Horsemen, of the Common Soldiers.

Of Offices and Conditions of Men.
Patriarch, is a Father of the Family, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and his Sons.
Judges, Temporary, or for a time, supreme Governors appointed over the
Children of Israel, King over a Nation, or Kings after the falling of the ten
Tribes of Israel. Elders, or Senators, the seventy; or Sanhedrim, Officers,
Provists or Sheriffs. Judges or Rulers, such as determined Controversies in
particular Cities. Hebrews, from Abraham. An Israelite, from Jacob, who was
named Israel; called Children of Israel. A Proseiite of the Covenant, who
submitted to the Law, and was Circumcised. A Proselite of the Gate, or
Stranger, who Worshipped the true God, but was not Circumcised. The Officer or
Governor, appointed by the Kings of Assyria and Persia. Heads of the People in
Captivity, or chief of each Tribe, or many who exercised under others
Government, during the Captivity. Under the Grecian Monarchy the Maccabees, or
the Successors of Judas Maccabeas. High Priest, who presided in Kingly
Government or Power under the Roman Emperors. Presidents or Governors, sent
from Rome with Imperial Power. Tetrarches, who had Kingly Power over some
Provinces. Proconsuls or Deputies of Provinces, Inferior Officers. Publicans,
who were Tribute or Tax-gatherers, hated of the Jews. Centurion, Captain of an
hundred Men. Political Officers, or Sects of Men. High Priest, who only might
enter into the Holy of Holies. Priest, or Sagan, who supplied the High-Priest's
Office, in case he were disabled; some set apart for the War for expedition.
The Sons of Aaron, who had diverse Ranks, Degrees and Offices in the Temple.
Also the sons of Levi, who were of three Ranks and Orders, Gershomites,
Chohothites, M^rarites. Also N^thimins, Inferior Servants of the Priests and
Levites, not of their Tribe, to draw Water and cleave Wood. Prophets, who were
anciently called Seers, who foretold things to come; and denounced Gods
Judgments against Idolaters and Evildoers: And taught the People. Children of
the Prophets, their Disciples or Scholars. Wise Men, called so, in imitation of
the Wise Men of the East, or Gentile Philosophers. Scribes, Writers and
Expounders of the Law. Disputers, raised and determined Questions out of the
Law. Rabbis, Doctors or Teachers of Israel. Libertius, or freed Men of Rome,
who being Jews, or Proselites, had a Synagogue, or Oratory for themselves.
Gaulenits, or Galileans, who pretended it unlawful to obey a Heathen
Magistrate. Herodians, who shaped their Religion to the Times, and particularly
flattered Herod. Epicureans, who placed their Happiness in Pleasures. Stoics,
who den^ed the Liberty of the Will, and pretended all Events were determined by
fatal necessity. Simon Magus, Author of the Heresy of the Gnostics, who
taught, That Men, however Virtuous in their Practice, should be saved by their
Knowledge. Nicholaitans, the Disciples of Nicholas, one of the seven Deacons,
who taught the Community of Wifes, or Men to have more than one Wife.
Nazarites, who under a Vow abstained from Wine. Nazarens, professing
Christianity. Zelots, or Murmerers, who under the pretense of the Law, thought
themselves authorized to commit any outrage. Pharisees, Separatists, who upon
the Opinion of their Godliness despised others. Sadduces, who denied the
Resurection, Angel or Spirit. Samaritans, Mungrel Professors, partly Heathen,
and partly Jews; the offspring of the Assyrians, who were sent to Samaria.
Apostle, mission, or sent; our Savior had twelve, and after those seventy, and
sent them to Preach the Gospel, and heal all manner of Diseases. Bishops, or
Overseers: And their Successors, who had the Government of the Church, as they
are mentioned in the Epistles of Paul and Peter. Also Deacons, who were to
Preach the Gospel, and take care of the Poor.

In the Old Testament or Bible, are seven Hundred seventy seven Chapters.

In the New Testament, Two Hundred and sixty Chapters.

In the Apocrypha, One Hundred and seventy three Chapters.

In the Old Testament are Verses, twenty three Thousand two Hundred and three.

Several Books mentioned in the Scriptures of Truth, supposed to be lost.
The Book of Enoch. Of Iddo and Gad, Seers.

Samuel wrote a Book of the Office and Instruction of a King.

Solomon wrote a Book of Three Thousand Parables, and five thousand Songs. Also
of the Nature of Herbs, Trees, and Plants, from the Cedar to the Hysop.

A Book of the Cronicles of the Kings of Judah and Israel.

The Third to the Corinthians.

The Third Epistle of Peter.

The worth of Gold by Troy-weight.
One Pound of Gold is worth Forty Pound.

One Ounce is worth three Pound six Shillings eight Pence.

One Grain, worth three half Pence.

The worth of Silver by Troy-weight.
One Pound, is worth three Pounds.

One Ounce, worth five Shillings.

One Penny-Weight, worth three Pence.

One Grain, worth a half Penny. This being the Weight of current Money.

By Averdupoise-weight, One Pound of Gold is worth forty nine Pound thirteen
Shillings eight Pence half Penny.

One Pound of Silver by Averdupoise-weight, worth three Pound fifteen Shillings
eight Pence half Penny.

By this it appears, One Hundred Pound of Silver, weighs twenty six Pound five
Ounces Averdupoise.

And one Hundred Pound of Gold Money, weighs two Pound and about a quarter of
an Ounce.

Of Days and Hours.
Days are called either Natural or Artificial; a Day Natural is one entire
Revolution of the Sun, or Equinoctial about the Earth, which is performed in 24
hours, containing both day and night; now this day has several beginnings; as
we English and the Romans usual, begin at midnight, the Persians, Bohemians
and Babylonians, begin at Sunrising; the Jews, Egyptians, Athenians, Vmbrians,
etc. begin at Sunset, (which does appear to be the true beginning by the
Scriptures, where the Night is put first, as Genesis 1.5, 8, 13, 19, etc. Lev.
23.32. 2 Cor. 11.25.) The Astronomers begin at midday or noon.

An Artificial day is from Sunrising to Sunsetting, and differs in length of
equal hours, according to the Suns place in the Zodiac, and Latitude of the
Region; but in unequal hours (called Planetary hours) there is always 12, so
that one hour is the 12th part of a day, be it long or short, and these hours
we read of in Scriptures, John 11.9. Mat. 20 for at or about Jerusalem, where
great part of it was writ, the Latitude is about 33 degrees, which gives above
14 equal hours for the longest Artificial day, therefore we may easily perceive
that it was meant the unequal hours: Their day also was divided into 4 equal
parts, or large hours.

Scripture large hours I. III. VI. IX. small 1, 2, 3. 4, 5, 6. 7, 8, 9. 10, 11,
12.

And with us they are 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. So their 3d hour
was the midst of the Forenoon, and 6th hour full noon, and 9th hour mid
Afternoon, and 12th hour Sunset, Mark 15.25, 34. Luke 23.44. Acts 2.15. and
10.3, 30.

Of Night-watches.
They divided the Night also into 4 equal parts, called Watches, allowing 3
hours to every Watch, which makes the Night likewise to consist of 12 hours,
Mark. 13.35.

The first Watch began at Evening, and was till their third hour, (or our
ninth) at Night.

The second, or middle Watch, was from thence to Midnight, Judges 7.19. Luke
12.38.

The third Watch, or Cock-crowing was from Midnight till their 9th hour (or our
third hour) in the Morning, Luke 12.38.

The fourth Watch, was from that time until Morning, or Sun rising, Mark 6.48.

FINIS

