An Account of their Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of York, their
Arrival and Reception in Scotland, the 26. of October. 1680.
In a Letter from a Gentleman of their Highnesses Retinue, to a Friend in
LONDON.
SIR,
I Know it will be acceptable to You to know how it fares with us; and
therefore till the next, (the Post being now going,) pray accept this hasty
account: We have been in great Difficulties at Sea; Insomuch, that though we
serve the best of Masters, we begin to wish there were no such thing as Popery
in the world, or that all Mankind would come into it; for we you know have no
such Zeal for any thing as our own ease, and do complain more then ever to be
thus tossed about; And it is with admiration, that we behold the great Spirit
of our Master stooping to this course usage. On Monday the 25th. we arrived at
Fife, and were conducted to my Lord Chan^ellor^s House at Lesley by all the
well-affected Nobility and Gentry that could be drawn together from all parts;
But to deal truly with ^ou, They, together with His Majesty's Guards, made not
a Body of above 100 Horse, at which his Highness did something wonder, the
Country of Fife being the best and most populous part of Scotland Yesterday
their Highnesses and Train having been splendidly entertained by my Lord
Chancellor, went on Board their Yatches, and arrived at Leith in the dusk of
the evening, by which the Glory of our Entry here was much eclipsed: But we
found it was so ordered by the Politic Managers, because the Show was all of
our own making; for we had not a Reception to our expectation, being only
complemented by the Militia of Leith, and this City, which were drawn up
between Leith and the Abbey; Indeed our fast friends did their best to have a
better respect paid to their Highnesses, and cited the Gentry of 8 Southern
Shires to attend them, and at least forty Gentlemen came in to congratulate our
Arrival; And we are told at our entering Holy-rood-house, that many more had
Complemented his Highness with their Presence, but that it has been
malitiou^ly reported, that He intends to press on something about the Militia
of this Kingdom, to which many of the Gentry do manifest great aversion; But
that is not all, for we found an unlucky rumor here that his Highness is
accused of something of an high nature in your Parliament; And though we are no
way thoughtful about that, we do find, that even the Report (though false,)
does unspeakably diss-serve his Highness, and that he will meet with rudeness
from these false People if his treatment at London be contrary to our
expectation. We are not so well accommodated as at S. James's; and yet whatever
the matter is, we do rather dread then desire to return to you; So that
sometimes I fear things are worse than we are persuaded to believe, and that we
shall not see you whilst the Parliament sits. I was willing to tell you thus
much, because I believe you will not be told it in your Gazet: Let me know what
the terrible Men at Westminster are Acting, and what you think of our Case; an
pray believe, that wherever I am, I will be,

Dear Sir, Your BEADSMAN
Edenbrough, October. 30. 168^

