portrait of Anne Boleyn ANNE BOLLEN.


THE NOVELS OF ELIZABETH Queen of England; Containing the History of Queen ANN
OF BULLEN.

Faithfully Rendered into English by S. H.

LONDON Printed for Mark Pardoe, at the Black Raven over agianst Bedford-House
in the Strand, 1680.

portrait of Queen Elizabeth

The Novels of Elizabeth, Queen of England, etc.
NOtwithstanding the Duke of Allenoon had quitted the Court of England, Queen
Elizabeth continued her usual Divertisements with the principal Lords and
Ladies of Her Court. Balls, Comedies, and Music, were oftentimes their
Entertainments; but as Conversation did chiefly delight the heart of this
Princess, it was herein that this great Queen (who was always projecting high
Designs for the agrandizing her Government) was accustomed to recreate her
Spirits.

Being assembled one night at Westminster, their discourse insensibly changed
into a recital of the grand revolutions during the Reign of King Henry VIII.
Some persons thought to make their Court in condoling the destiny of the Queen
her Mother, of whom diverse had spoken so differently, and the Truth so little
known. The Queen who was naturally good, replied that Kings do usually guide
themselves in a different way from particular persons, and that what passes in
their Cabinet-Council, ought not to be divulged to all the World, therefore the
Death of the Queen her Mother had till that time, upon politic Considerations,
been kept secret, that nevertheless she ought to supersede all these
considerations to justify a Princess to whom she owed her Birth.

But as the too great credulity of the King her Father ought in some measure to
be blamed, she should be very glad that the Duke of Northumberland would relate
it, he having been a Witness to the greatest part of those things which did
conduce to that wicked Action, and he being exempt from Partiality, his
Relation would carry the greater Truth. Wherefore after his obeisance to the
Queen, he began thus:

The History of Queen ANN of BULLEN.
ENgland, for many years past, did not flourish with so great Peace and
Tranquillity as in the first years of the Reign of King Henry VIII. The
Inclinations of this Prince were good; He possessed many eminent Qualities; He
was at first purposed for the Church, and his youthful years having been
employed in continual Study, he acquired a profound Knowledge, whereof he gave a
signal Testimony in process of time.

He ascended the Throne so young, that in the beginning of his Reign he stood
in need of the Duchess of Richmond his Grand-mothers Counsels, a Woman of the
greatest Ingenuity and Virtue in her Age. The chief Offices in the Kingdom were
disposed of by her; by her William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury was made
Lord Chancellor, Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, was made Lord Keeper, Thomas
Howard Earl of Surrey Lord Treasurer, and George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury Lord
Steward of His Household.

Things did not long continue in so quiet a Condition as at the beginning. The
King Espoused Katherine of Arragon, Relict of his Brother Prince Arthur, not
without some repugnancy; the Duchess of Richmond dyed soon after this
Marriage: There happened a division amongst his Ministers; Wolsey is raised
from a low Condition to that of the Kings Favorite, and all the kindness this
Prince could have for the Queen was Traversed by the Enchantments of Elizabeth
Blunt. Never was any Person more ensnared by this Passion than he, and this one
vanity of his clouded the splendor of all his virtues.

Although the Birth of Wolsey was very obscure (being the Son of a Butcher,
born at Ipswich in Suffolk) he had a most pregnant Wit, capable of the highest
affairs, so that few Courtiers were comparable to him in their abilities; as he
had particular Tallents to make a happy usage of the Kings Favor, so did he
exquisitely insinuate himself into His Majesty's affections, by cherishing this
young Princes inclinations to Women.

The first advantages he acquired by his Policy were the Bishoprics of Tournay
and Lincoln, shortly after, the King made him Archbishop of York, and that he
might not be inferior to the Archbishop of Canterbury, he procured of the Pope
to be made a Cardinal.

But whilst he established himself thus gloriously, Blunt made no less
considerable Progress in His Majesty's Affections; this Illustrious Conquest
made her Ambitious without moderation, she pleased her self sufficiently in
making the King Act blindly whatever she desired. (excepting this weakness) he
was the best man in the World at the Age of two and twenty years.

Pleasures incessantly reigned in his Court, there Youth appeared Magnificent,
the King had a Liberal Soul, His Favorite was not covetous, Blunt loved
Splendour and vast expense, nothing was there seen but Balls, Comedies,
Tournaments, and stately Magnificence.

The Queen was a Princess infinitely wise and constant to her Husband; the
amorous commerce betwixt him and Blunt gave her much perplexity, but she hoped
that time and the advantage she should have in bringing forth a Legitimate Heir
to the Crown would winn her the Kings heart.

But things happened not according to her desire, for she was delivered of a
Son, whom she sent as a New-years-gift to the King the first day of January; he
received it with no small joy, but she was much afflicted by the Death of this
young Prince, who lived but one Month; but Blunt more fortunate then the Queen,
brought forth a Son who was immediately Created Knight of the Garter, Earl of
Nottingham, Duke of Richmond and Somerset, and afterward Admiral of England.

So much Grandeur might have satisfied Blunts Ambition, yet she raised her self
to something more considerable. There were certain Circumstances in the Kings
Marriage which made her conceive other hopes, and Woolsey's Friendship being
most necessary to her, she sought by all possible means to gain it; but he well
saw her Power was so great that he feared he had too much favored a Passion
which might diminish, or at least limit his Esteem.

At this juncture of time the affairs of England and France obliged Henry VIII.
and Francis I. of France to resolve upon that famous interview made betwixt
Guines and Ardres; The King of England arrived at Guines with all his Court,
and at the same time the King of France at Ardres with his Court; the two Kings
saw one another, and spoke together, and so splendid was the Magnificence on
both sides, that ever since the place is called The Camp of Cloth of Gold;
both Parties made Feasts, and both Nations often intermixed. Blunt, extremely
eager to possess the heart of Henry, brought with her an Equipage worthy of her
Ambition. The Duchess of Suffolk who had been the Wife to Lewis the Twelfth,
but now Wife to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, upon this occasion appeared as
the Kings Sister, and as one of the most Beautiful Ladies in the World. As for
the Queen who was naturally modest she did not affect the sparkling of Gems,
but was content with that of her dignity, and had with her many Maidens of the
best Houses of England, whose Parents had put them into an Equipage suitable to
her retinue, yet there was no sight there comparable to the fair Ann Bullen,
who went over into France with the Princess of England when she was Married to
Lewis XII. and continued there till now. She Eclipsed all the Beauties there,
and King Henry, who till then had never sighed for any Lady but Blunt, felt at
the sight of Ann Bullen that his Soul was too great to be Limited to one single
passion, he found something so sweet and Charming in her eyes, that in spite
of Blunts Jealousy he abandoned himself to the pleasure of beholding her.

Wolsey, who studied all his actions, soon perceived this Passion, and at the
same instant contrives a design to oppose her to Blunt, whose esteem began to
disquiet him. But as Ann of Bullen was of the Queen of France's Retinue, and as
there could be no pretense to withdraw her thence so suddenly, she returned to
Paris, and Henry was much troubled to part with her.

There were then many Persons of quality, who passed from England to France,
and from France to England, curiosity transporting some, and love enforcing
others. Henry Percy, Son to the Earl of Northumberland, followed the Court of
France, or rather Ann of Bullen, of whom he was most passionately amorous; he
was perfectly handsome, and of very great Merit, although he was young he had
already shown much Valor against the Britans, and had followed the Marquis of
Dorset with much Honor in the affair of Navarre, he now only reserved the
Honor to gain the heart of Ann Bullen, who had resisted the suits of the most
Illustrious persons of France.

And it was in this Voyage that Piercy first acquainted her with the Passion he
had conceived for her at the interview of Guines. He had submission and heat,
perseverance and a certain sweet and agreeable temper of Wit, easy to
insinuate. Ann Bullen was tender and courteous; her Eyes found him worthy of
her heart, and he found no difficulty in gaining her love, after he had assured
her of his.

But whilst they the passionately engaged each other, Fortune changed their
Scene. There happened some things in England which did precipitate the designs
of Wolsey. The Duke of Buckingham who had a Soul both great and generous) as
generally all those of his name ever had) supported the Pride of Wolsey with
much impatience, he explained himself hereupon a little too high, and his
Franckness was the cause of his Ruin. The Cardinal who knew the importance of
so great an Enemy, resolved to overthrow him speedily, and began by removing
his most particular friends. The Earl of Surrey his Son in Law was, upon some
slight pretense, imprisoned, and the Earl of Northumberland his Father in Law
was sent into Ireland. Wolsey's ill nature took the advantage of that Power his
favor had raised him to, and by his underhand laboring Buckingham was
Condemned to be Beheaded. The Crimes whereof he was accused were
inconsiderable, and he had assuredly obtained his Pardon, if he had asked it,
but he had so much Courage as to prefer death before a base submission.

Blunt made so strong an opposition in this Affair against Wolsey, that he
often feared he should not be able to compass his designs herein. She perceived
he had no good intentions for her, and therefore she took contrary Measures in
her conduct to what she did formerly in respect of him. As he was the most
penetrating of all men, he disintricated all the designs of Blunt, and waver'd
no longer to manage the return of Ann Bullen (whom he well knew the King
remembered with much tenderness) in hopes to have an entire power over a Person
whom he pretended to raise above Blunt.

The arrival of Ann Bullen was a most agreeable surprise to the King, who had
conserved a vigorous Passion for her, her absence had only produced in him
pressing desires to see her again, and now, found her more fair, and abandoned
himself entirely to her Charms, but whether he feared Blunt, or had some
respect for the Queen, he was a little cautious of showing his Change. Piercy
who went into France only for the love of Ann Bullen, stayed not there after her
return: at her arrival she was preferred to the Queen, where the King had
opportunity to see her and discourse with her without difficulty. Wolsey was
now wholly bent to put her in the place of Blunt, who in a short time perceived
the Kings inconstancy: She was ready to dye with grief, and doubted not but it
was the Cardinal's doings only, which made her conceive an irreconcilable
hatred against him.

Ann Bullen, although she perceived what effects her Beauty had produced upon
the Kings heart, became nothing proud thereof, and found nothing but subject of
perplexity in this advantage. Piercy had smitten her in such an effectual and
tender manner that nothing was capable to remove him from her, and as this was
not the first time she had sacrificed considerable Conquests to him; she easily
determined to hear the King no farther then her condition obliged her to, and
to answer him no otherwise then with respect and indifferency.

The Rank she held with the Queen was considerable, being descended from the
ancient Earls of Ormond by the Fathers side, and from the great House of
Norfolk by the Mothers; her wit which was Modeled in the most gallant Court of
Europe created her many Friends, and Blunt, whose jealousy increased against
her at the same measure that the Kings flames were declared in her favor, was
the only person who sought not her friendship, notwithstanding she durst not
permit her first Fury to act openly against her, but contented her self to
search into, and instruct her self in the affairs of Ann Bullen.

Fortune facilitated her way hereunto. This fair Ann had a Brother whose great
Merit made a considerable figure in King Henry's Court, but whose wicked
Destiny inspired him with a Passion for Blunt. The Kings Constancy to her had
hindered his discovery of it, but the levity which he now observed in him
emboldened him; He took Blunt in one of those moments of despite wherein she
passionately desired to be revenged on the King, and hoping for great
advantages from such a lover as young Bullen, who could not probably be
ignorant of his Sisters Secrets, she bound him in a commerce of Gallantry. She
learnt of him the Engagement betwixt Piercy and Ann Bullen; this knowledge was
joyful to her, hoping that a Marriage between these two persons would traverse
the pretentions of Wolsey, and would heal the heart of the King, whom ^he did
not renounce.

The Cardinal had Prospects quite opposite to Blunt; he pretended to govern
this Prince always by the means of Ann Bullen, whose Beauty engaged him more
and more, but he did not foresee the obstacle which Piercy's Merit had brought
to his Pretentions.

The King, naturally unconstant, neglected not only Blunt, who before had so
great power over him, but began also to have some sentiments of indifferency
for the Queen, which were soon changed into a version; upon this matter he
opens his very Soul to Wolsey alone: The Cardinal, who did not love this
Princess, was glad of it, and began immediately to insinuate into the Kings
mind a design of a Divorce, not that he intended to make Ann Bullen Queen, for
he proposed the Alliance of the Duchess of Allencon, Sister to the King of
France, for Henry, that so he might bring that Prince over to his Interests,
and that he might at the same time have a Queen absolutely for him, and a
Mistress for the King who was in some measure his Creature.

The King, who thought she could content her self with his love, consented to
the Alliance with France, and left the Rupture of his Marriage to Woolsey's
care. The Power which the Cardinal had in England, his Intrigues at Rome, and
his intelligence in France gave him great hopes for the Divorce and the second
Marriage. But Ann Bullen, who had both Virtue and Resolution, was not of the
humor to indulge the Kings Passion as he desired. She received his first
assurances of it with a respect more full of coldness, then he expectde. This
resistance augmented his love, and to render himself more agreeable, he sought
for succors in his Divertisements, he invented Plays and Feasts, and all this
was only advantageous to Piercy, who appeared there with so much grace and
activity, that Ann Bullen respected none but him, and was only sensible of his
sighs. The Queen, who foresaw part of her Misfortunes by the Kings coldness to
her, lived in a deplorable sadness. All the Passion of young Bullen could not
consolate Blunt, by reason of Henry's Inconstancy. She saw every day her own
credit to fade, and her Rivals to flourish, and the immoderate ambition which
possessed her, cast her Soul into an estate of perpetual fury and

In the mean time every one began to speak of the King's change, the Queen,
Blunt, and all the Court were convinced of it by the constant care he had for
Ann Bullen, but they also observed that she took no pains to manage this
Conquest.

Piercy had too powerful an interest in this Affair not to examine it carefully,
he was persuaded of the fidelity of Ann Bullen, but the concurrence of such a
Rival as Henry was notwithstanding an unhappy Cross, and what ever her
preference might be for him, he had reason to fear so puissant an Authority.

He saw Ann Bullen every day, and at all hours, he remarked ^ome melancholy in
her eyes, and as he loved in such measure that her least troubles were the
^hief Subject of his despair, be ^eared she had taken some secret displeasure,
and conjured her tenderly to make no Mystery of it to him. He found her one day
in so extraordinary a melancholy, that he sighed several times, and she
perceived it not, finding something of cruelty to his love in this Novelty, he
brake a silence which began to make him impatient. I know not Madam, said he,
what your heaviness presages to me, but it makes me fear it is something
unluckey: there is no appearance that you have not still the same bounty for me
as you had before, nor do I believe I have rendered my self unworthy of it,
nevertheless I see a surprising change in you: It may be said your eyes did not
know me, or that they would not give themselves the trouble to look upon me, I
see nothing in them but a cruel indifferency: It seems they never did know you
have loved me. Can it be possible that your Court is agreed with those -- No,
she replied, interrupting him with a sigh, do not expound a languish which you
have caused, to my disadvantage. I love you with too much Justice ever to cease
loving you, and this trouble which you have observed by my silence and by my
melancholy is only an effect of that tenderness I have for you. Do not hide my
good Fortune under such cruel appearances, replied Piercy. Tell me the true
cause of this condition wherein I now see you, if you love my repose.

I fear, said she, Fortune has no good will toward me, and I am jealous of her
favors. I know, says Piercy, she has created me a dangerous Rival, but I am
assured of your Constancy and I neither fear his merit nor his power. You do me
justice, said Ann Bullen, and I do again reiterate my Vows I have so often made
to you, That I will never love any but your self. But Piercy, if that
tenderness which the King declares for me be not capable to move me, his
Authority which obliges me to suffer it, will prove but a fatal Experiment; I
protest to you it is with great impatience that I am forced to spend those few
Moments with him, which I would most willingly bestow upon you, and that he can
see nothing in my eyes but discontent which ought to repulse him. Piercy loved
too well not to find a sensible delight in this obliging discourse of Ann
Bullen, he returned her his Thanks for it in most passionate terms, and
continued his discourse, saying, Make my interest with your Parents, Madam,
before the King explains himself, and I will secure my own, and you can, by
establishing my good fortune, hinder the King from thwarting us. An Bullin
loved Piercy sufficiently to consent to every thing that might secure her self
for him. Now it was openly discoursed that the King would divorce his Queen,
and Marry the Duchess of Alencon, and the opportunity was favorable enough to
Piercy's intentions, who declared them to old Bullen, and he accepted of this
Alliance without difficulty, as being very advantageous to his Family. Blunt
learnt this News of her lover with such joy, as for some time suspended her
jealousy. But old Bullen would not consent to this Marriage betwixt Piercy and
his Daughter, till the King and the Earl of Northumberland had approved it.
There was then a necessity to speak to them of it, and as Ann^ Bullen had great
reason to fear some obstacles, she would not employ ordinary persons in this
Negotiation. She prayed the Duchess of Suffolk (by whom she was tenderly
beloved, as being her Confident during her secret Intelligence with Brandon) to
make the King consent to Piercy's good Fortune, it wa^ not without some
confusion tha^ she explained her self to the Duchess, but the interest o^ her
heart overwhelmed her Modesty.

The King had much Friendship and very great Respect for the Duchess of
Suffolk, she suspected, as well as others, the designs that he had upon the
heart of Ann Bullen, but as he never had told her any thing of it, she feigned
ignorance and acquainted the King her Brother, That she having a Friendship
full of esteem for Ann Bullen, she ardently desired to see her Married to
Piercy, a Person of Merit, and humbly begged His Majesty to consent to it.

The King blushed at this discourse of his Sisters, and judged that Ann Bullen
had given the Princess this employ, and that from her only she had learnt to
Praise Piercy, his thoughts were mightily discomposed, and being sensible of
nothing but love and jealousy, he looked upon the loss of Ann Bullen as the
greatest of evils which could possibly befall him. He could not hide his
trouble from the Princess, whom he desired to speak no more of this affair, for
some important reasons, whereof he would one day give her an account. But he
enquired of her whether Piercy was beloved, and having learnt the truth, he
immediately quitted the Duchess of Suffolk, and sent to find Woolsey, whom he
commanded to think no more of the Duchess of Alencon for his Queen, but to
employ all his Art to preserve Ann Bullen for him.

The Cardinal wished heartily that the King's Passion had been a little more
moderated, but considering it was an epidimical distemper, and that in making
Ann Bullen Queen he should gain her absolutely, he did not believe that a
person of her Age and condition could have Constancy proof against a Crown. So
he assured the King of all that might flatter him, and took upon himself the
Charge to let Piercy know that he must heal himself till such time as the King
should declare his intentions for Ann Bullen.

In the mean time they began to labor for the Divorce, and the Queen, who had
secret advice thereof, expected those succors she stood in need of for the
justice of her cause. Blunt, who believed the Marriage of Piercy and Ann Bullen
was concluded, flattered by her ambitious prospects, conspired the Rupture of
the Kings Marriage with the Duchess of Alencon. She was big with great hopes
of her young Son, for whom the Infanta of Portugal, with the Duchy of Milan
for her Portion, were already designed, and she doubted not one day to raise
her self by this fortune to something more considerable.

As Woolsey was busied in the important Affairs of this Kingdom, and Piercy
gave himself up entirely to his love, the Cardinal could not acquit himself so
soon of his promise to the King. The Prince did not delay so long to explain
himself to Ann Bullen; It was not many days after the Duchess of Suffolk had
spoke to him that he stopped Ann Bullen as she was passing through the Gallery
into the Queens Lodgings, and taking her aside to a Window, I demand of you,
said he a moments Audience, I have something to tell you of importance enough
to oblige you to grant it me. Although my duty calls me to attend the Queen
(said she) I know the Obedience I owe to your Majesty, and am ready to hear
whatever your Majesty shall please to say to me. The King replied, Is it true
that you would render Piercy the most happy of all men? I thought I had
sufficiently made known to you that I loved you so well as never to consent to
it, you have an absolute power over my heart, give me some small part in yours,
and I will make you a present far more glorious than Piercy.

Although Ann Bullen hearkened well to what the King told her, she could not
refrain sighing, the happiness of her life was founded upon her Passion for
Piercy, she preferred him above all the Fortunes of the Universe. If your
Majesty, said she, had in the least intimated to me, that I should not love
Piercy, at the time when my heart was at liberty, I had done all that was in my
power to have prevented it, but it is now a long time since I declared my
inclinations in his favor. I will oppose it all my life time, said the King
extremely moved, you know he is my Subject, and I can remove him from you when
I list. She replied boldly, You can do something yet more unjust, but in
Banishing Piercy from your Kingdoms, or exposing him to any disgrace, you will
not find the way to chase him from my heart, and any misfortune that he suffers
for my sake will but render me the more sensible for him. Your Majesty obliges
me to speak with that freedom which perhaps you may condemn, but I had rather
commit that error then betray my just sentiments. A more passionate man than I,
the King replied, would punish Piercy for the Injustice you have done me, I
hope that a little reflection upon my proceedings will make you sensible you
are in the wrong: abuse not my moderation, I am not exempt from some transports
I would willingly avoid, I love you enough to Sacrifice all things to you, and
I would not give place to the highest Powers in the Universe for you; the life
of Piercy shall answer for what you make me suffer, therefore I leave it to you
to manage my hopes.

Ann Bullen entered the Quens Presence much tormented at the King's last words.
In the mean time Woolsey entertained Piercy, and put his patience upon the
Anvil. It is a long time, said he to him, that I have sought for an occasion to
let you know that I love you, I am persuaded of your exceeding great Merit, and
should be sensibly displeased if you should give the least occasion to Fortune
to declare her self against you; I must give that advice which I would not have
you neglect. You love Ann Bullen, the King has some designs which agree not
with your Passion, endeavor to free your self from it, and merit the Kings
esteem by this effort. What designs soever the King may have, answered Piercy,
I see nothing that can hinder me from loving the person you speak of, and it is
not my humor to renounce the least of my hopes. I know that you can love in
spite of all the World, replied Woolsey, but I know better that the King can
Command you not to look upon a person, for whom he has a particular esteem,
and that it were better for you to remove your self from her, then to expose
your self to the indignation of your Prince. I know not by what Motive you Act,
said Piercy, whether in zeal for him, or Pity for me, but I declare to you,
That neither all the Powers of Earth, nor a whole Age of Reflection, can ever
be able to make me change. Woolsey added, I thought you had not been so
strictly engaged, but since you resolve so blindly to destroy your self, I must
leave you to your Passion. And I will follow the Inclinations of it with
Pleasure, said Piercy, and I feel my self determined to a Constancy tha^ is
Proof against all things.

Woolsey left him enraged with a foolish Stability, and resolved to punish him
for it. His Ambition, which every body flattered, could not see himself
despised without Indignation, but he hid it from the King, and did not tell him
the truth of things, to spare him the trouble.

Piercy recounted to his Mistress the discourse he had had with Woolsey, and
she told him what had passed between the King and her; and as these Lovers were
Allarmed at the crosses preparing for them, so the pleasure of loving each
other with such Constancy did Comfort them.

Woolsey, who was Confident of the King's Passion, and knew all its violence,
harkening no longer to Reason, which at first hindered him from indulging it,
now only studies Piercy's Misfortune. Blunt, who looked upon the Cardinal as
the principal Athor of the King's infidelity, discovered to him her Resentments
of it upon all occasions. The Cardinal knew her fierceness, and was not
ignorant of her Artifices, and as he feared her credit, though much diminished,
he resolved to ruin her, to advance the Fortune of Ann Bullen. He a^seth the
King to recall the old Earl of Northumberland out of Ireland, and oblige him to
marry his Son Piercy: at the same time that these orders were given, Henry
declares openly the intention he had for the Divorce. The Queen in vain employs
the aid of her tears and tenderness, but nothing spoke in her favor, and Brian
and Vane were sent to Rom^ to proceed in it.

Blunt doubted not but this great design was Woolsey's Inspiration, and judged
that he labored to elevate her Rival* The Queen, who was upon the very point
to receive so sensible an injury, was not less enraged against him, and
although she had more Moderation them Blunt, her Hatred for the Cardinal
aspired (...) less to Vengeance.

Ann Bullen's Favor, which began to appear openly, and the care of the Queen
and Blunt to decry her, began to make the people murmur; The King was obliged
to explain himself to an Assembly of his Lords at his Palace of Bridewell,
where he Protested that it was purely out of Conscience, and the desire he had
to give them a Successor to the Crown, which moved him to this design of
divorcing the Queen. Some of them appeared satisfied herewith, but many of them
were not contented at it. The subtle Woolsey, who feared some dangerous
troubles might befall him upon ^it, persuaded the King, That whatsoever
Pleasure he took to see Ann Bullen, it was of vast importance for him to remove
her for some time, That reasons of State as well as those of love obliged him
to it, That it was to separate her from Piercy, and to facilitate the design he
had to recall his Father, That the Queen murmured, and that the discontent of
the People which was managed by the jealousy of Revengeful Blunt, was not less
to be feared, and that this retirement of Ann Bullen would infallibly calm all
things.

The King approved Woolsey's Reasons, but found it difficult to consent to
them; but the Cardinal left him not till he made him determine this Exile,
which he went immediately to denounce to Ann Bullen. Madam, said Woolsey to
her, I come to offer a Petition to you from the King, which will be surprising,
since the Contents thereof is to Banish your self from the Court, for no other
Crime then that you have appeared therein too Beautiful: It Is not without much
regret that he removes you, since all the happiness of his life depends upon
seeing and pleasing you. But the present state of Affairs have so Ordered it,
and it shall be for so short a time as would not be discernable, but that all
Eyes are upon you.

Ann Bullen was fierce, and sensible of the least thing that concerned her
Honor, she took some offense at her undeserved Exile, and their endeavor to
Banish ^er from the love of Piercy ex^iting her Passion, she told Woolsey she
should readily quit that place where she received so little satisfaction. I
pity His Majesty's weakness, said she, and and I shall joyfully depart from a
Court, where I am often forced to hear those things that displease me, to
retire into a solitude, where I may with liberty entertain my self with those
thoughts that please me. You may there make just reflections, replied Woolsey,
upon the grand Advantages which Fortune has decreed you. Her Favors, said she,
are so unsolid that I will wholly bend my self to despise them; tell the King I
will be gone to morrow, and that I am extremely obliged to him for ordering me
that thing which I desired with my whole heart.

She would have no longer Converse with him, but shut her self up in her
Chamber, and feigned an Indisposition. The Cardinal returned to the King, and
as he had made himself a necessary familiarity to flatter him, he concealed the
Rage of Ann Bullen from him, and settled his mind in a peaceable Condition.

Piercy received this News of Ann Bullens Banishment with unspeakable grief.
She exhorted him to support this beginning of their crosses with constancy, and
said a thousand tender things to him, which something allayed his torment, but
their parting extracted many tears from both; Piercy had a great Courage, but
could not refrain this weakness.

Ann Bullen retired some two days Journey from London, to one of her Fathers
Houses, where she was only accompanied by her Mother. The place was very
agreeable and proper to flatter her melancholy, her absence astonished every
body. Blunt, who knew not the true causes hereof, was joyful at it, and
believed it to be the beginning of her disgrace, and that she was withdrawn by
rigor. But the Queen, more penetrating, plainly perceived That her Banishment
was only to appease the peoples murmuring, and to facilitate the King's designs.

At this juncture, the old Earl of Northumberland returned from Ireland, and
was received with extraordinary Testimonies of Esteem and Friendship. The King
gave him new Offices, augmented his Revenues, and pleasantly surprised him by
the addition of Favors, even beyond his hopes. Woolsey, who had advised with
the King upon the Conduct which ought to be observed in this Affair, expressed
to him on his own part, how strong a desire he had to serve him, and gave him
Counsel how he might yet farther sustain and enlarge his Fortunes; he convinced
him at last that the Alliance of Ann Bullen would be ^o ways advantagions to
his ^on, and proposed by the By ^he only Daughter to the Earl ^f Shrewsbury for
him, and made ^im easily apprehend how great (...) Credit this Marriage would
^rocure to his Family. The on^y thing that made him pause, ^as to find a means
whereby (...) oblige his Son, who was a^orous, and passionately belo^ed, to
commit an Infidelity. Woolsey, more crafty and less ^arful, told him, That with
a ^tle Affront or foul play, it ^ight easily be brought to pass, ^d that it was
no hard matter (...) obstruct the most tender En^gements.

Although the Earl loved his ^n with a Fatherly Passion, ^d was persuaded of
his con^ncy, yet he followed the Car^nal's Counsel, and proposed the Earl of
Shrewsbury's Daughter to Piercy, who Answered his Father with great emotion,
and protested he would sooner seek his Death in the utmost parts of the World,
then renounce his love. The Earl passed by this his first rashness; but whilst
Piercy, by a happy intelligence, entertained a Commerce with Ann Bullen which
cherished him, there was a Treachery of cruel effects preparing for them both.

It was acknowledged that Ann Bullen was the only Ornament of the Court ever
since her first arrival. The King was insensible of all pleasures, but those of
love, and Woolsey was obliged to hasten those Affair^ which might recall Ann
Bullen.

Old Bullen, who was flattered with the hopes of seeing his Daughter a Queen,
did willingly assist to deceive her, and whilst his more indulgent Wife
suffered her to continue her correspondence with Piercy, he engages with
Woolsey and the Earls of Northumberland and Shrewsbury.

Ann Bullen lived contentedly in her Solitude, and showed a strong resolution
to continue in it, but her Father went himself to pull her out of it, and made
use of all his Authority to make her return to the Court. She obeyed, but would
not return to the Queen, and it was with great grief that she saw herself
constrained to suffer the King's Visits.

You fly from me (said the King to her the first time he saw her) will you
always in this manner answer a Passion which makes me undertak^ such
extraordinary things? Yo^ have explained it, she replied, i^ so extraordinary a
manner, tha^ I have great reason to doubt o^ it, and there are but few Lover^
who would signalize their passion in Banishing the Creature the^ love. The
Violence I acte^ on my self (the King returned in Banishing you hence, ough^ to
oblige you to pity me, an^ not to reserve so unjust resentments against me, I
would labor securely for my repos^ and your Fortune; For yo^ alone I have
engaged my sel^ in this Divorce which now so much surprizeth all Europe* In one
word I will make you Queen. It is a condition, she replied interrupting him,
too glorious for me, and I am no^ in a conditition to accept You owe your heart
to the Queen, who is a Princess deserving all your Affection, do not, in
abandoning her, draw upon your self those miseries which usually attend
Infidelity. How cruel is your Generosity, said the King, or rather how unjust
is your perseverance for Piercy? he is not so worthy as you esteem him, and
time shall show you who is most amorous, he, or I.

In this manner the King explained himself, and Ann Bullen continued steadfast
to the Passion she had for her Lover, who had left London to shun the
Persecution of his Father, and was absent at her Arrival, but soon came up at
the News of her return, and she soon perceived she had committed an irreparable
oversight in leaving the Queens House. Her Father forbid her to see Piercy, and
sent him word of it, that so he might avoid the refusal which would be given
him at the Gate. This Prohibition troubled her extremely, but she was
necessitated to make use of her Courage. She dissembled before her Father, and
told him with great indifferency that she would obey his Commands, but that she
hoped, in doing this Injustice to Piercy, it was not in his resolution to
employ the Authority he had over her in favor of any other Person. As those
whom I would serve in your behalf, said he, have more power then I, I shall
easily promise you to do nothing for them. At length he retired, and as she
doubted not but Piercy's impatience would soon bring him to her, she Writ to
him her Fathers Orders.

To PIERCY.
It is forbidden me to see you it is a cruel Necessity unto which I am forced
to obey, but my dear Piercy, they cannot hinder me from loving you, I Conjure
you to submit your self to those that have Authority over me, avoid those rash
carriages that may render us meritorious of our sufferings; I shall not see
you, but I shall Sacrifice to you what considerable thing soever Fortune can
offer me, attending the opportunity to give you more forceable demonstrations
of my tenderness.


He that delivered this Letter to Piercy was an Eyewitness of his transports
caused by it; he presently thought upon revenge, and to begin with Woolsey
first, whom he looked upon as the principal cause of his misfortune, but
considering he was forewarned not to follow the motions of his Wrath, he was
content to Afflict himself, and thus he answered the Letter of Ann Bullen.

To ANN BULLEN.
No Considerations could hinder my Resentment, if the Injustice of my Enemies
could have made me lose your heart, continue your bounty to me, which I prefer
above all things: it would be unnecessary for me to repeat here how well I love
you, and what I suffer for you: I will hope with you that the times may change;
pity me, and believe that my Passion shall never end but with my life.


The Messenger whom Ann Bullen entrusted with her Letter to Piercy, was
perfideous, and being corrupted by her Father, never delivered her the Answer
he had sent; she was surprised at Piercy's coldness, notwithstanding she did
not accuse him, but attributed this silence to his grief.

She feigned herself indisposed for a long time, as foreseeing that since she
was forbidden to see Piercy at home, she could not be permitted to see him
elsewhere. And to avoid all occasions of giving her Father cause to complain of
her disobedience, and the World to give her trouble, she appeared not in any
place, and Piercy sought after her in vain; in the mean time he was exposed to
all the bad effects that a violent Passion cruelly thwarted could possibly
cause. The King had other like Privileges, and saw Ann Bullen every day.
Piercy was not long ignorant thereof, he knew well enough that her
indisposition was feigned, and believing that she had received his Answer;
bewails himself that her first Bounties should have so short a continuance: In
this sort he passed away one Month, Ann Bullen being always retired, the King
saw her as he was wont, and Piercy could do nothing but figure a thousand cruel
things to himself: his Jealousy began to make him fear that the King was more
happy then he, and the event of things confirmed him in his first suspicions.

The Earl of Northumberland and old Bullen were equally agreed with Woolsey,
the one aspired to see his Daughter Crowned, and the other to see his Son
matched into the most considerable Family in England. Piercy had a Constancy
which amazed them, and to remove it, Wolsey contrives with them a Letter from
old Bullen to the Earl of Northumberland, which was in these Terms.

To the Earl of Northumberland.
THE Obstacle which your Son's Passion for my Daughter has hitherto put to the
Marriage you so much desire, is now wholly removed. I open my very heart, and
impart my joy to you. Our persuasions have shaken Ann Bullen, and the Kings
Perseverance has conquered her: the appearances of a Divorce have flattered
her Ambition, and she has now surrendered her self to the Interest of her
Fortune, after a long Fight she maintained for Piercy. If things succeed
according to our hopes, a short time shall assure you that no Person in the
World has a higher Value for you then my self.

Thomas Bullen.


The Earl of Northumberland laid this Letter upon the Table in his Closet,
where his Son usually came to speak with him, and left the door open. Fate
acted what he desired; Piercy having some business with the Earl, went into his
Closet, and there found this Artificial Letter, which caused the loss of his
Repose. He read it often and would have persuaded himself that it was not real:
but appearances joined with so powerful an evidence left him no place to doubt
of his misfortune. The faithless Creature has surrendered, cried he, and whilst
I despise real advantages, she hearkens to an unconstant man, who himself will
soon punish her for the injury she has done me. He paused a long time upon
this Letter, and confirmed himself in his thoughts, that he was betrayed. By
these reflections he concluded that Ann Bullens Letter to him was only an
Artifice to hinder him from seeing her, and that she agreeing with her Father
had consented to the writing of this to the Earl of Northumberland, who at this
moment came in, and judged by the great consternation he found his Son in, that
he had found Bullen's Letter. He asked him remisly if he had any thing to say
to him. Yes my Lord, replied Piercy, I come to beg your permission that I may
go for some time to suck in a more agreeable Air then this of London. Why will
you, said the Earl, leave it, when all things require your continuance here,
you are sensible of my designs, and of the complaisance I have hitherto showed
to your repugnancy of them; but in short Piercy, it is high time you should now
satisfy me, you bear an illustrious name, my years are far spent, and the
Interest of our House solicits me to establish you. I know, my Lord, said
Piercy sighing, that I ought indisputably to act what ever you please, but you
have known my weakness, and I still crave your Honors Pardon for it. Your
Perseverance is so little merited, the Earl interrupted him, that I blush to
see you sigh for a Woman who does abandon you, and pays those favors she only
hopes from the King with such shameful advances. I beseech you, my Lord,
replied Piercy dolefully, to spare Ann Bullen, she may have some levity, but
can never fail of being Virtuous, and I am persuaded she will never sacrifice
me but to the Crown of England. There is no likelihood of what you say,
continued the Earl; the Divorce cannot be made, Campeius is preparing to go for
Rome, and the Queen has more hopes then ever. Notwithstanding the King Visits
Ann Bullen every day, and at all hours, he is very well satisfied with her, and
has quite deserted Blunt.

Some persons that came to pay a Visit to the Earl interrupted this
conversation, which continued long enough to put Piercy upon cruel Trials; his
Father would not in policy speak to him of this Letter, as not doubting but he
had seen it, but gave him liberty to go and make doleful Reflections thereupon.

He passed one of those terrible nights, where sensible disquiets take up the
place of repose, and far from finding relief, he found on the morrow that the
King had Created Ann Bullen Marchioness of Pembrook, old Bullen Earl of Ormond
and Wilton, and his Son Viscount Rochfort. He doubted not then that these
favors from the King were recompenses for the favors he received from Ann
Bullen, and in spite of himself he fell into unjust suspicions of her.

The Earl of Northumberland quickly perceived the disorder of his mind, and the
impression that all these things had made upon it, he neglected not so
favorable a Conjuncture: Piercy's constancy was attacked in many different
places, they made him apprehend that he ought to engage himself before the
intrigue of the King and Ann Bullen was made public. The Earl of Shrewsbury's
Daughter was young and beautiful, he believed he might find some repose with a
person so amiable, and married her after he had so long resisted the Commands
of his Father, but time made him know his love was only hid under a resentment
of short continuance.

In the mean time the business of Divorce did not advance, the Cardinal
Campeius who was Mediator for Rome, had orders to proceed slowly, the King's
love made him impatient; Ann Bullen was not of the same Character with Blunt,
but stuck much faster to her honor.

But how great was her surprise when she heard of Piercy's Marriage, although
she had murmured at his silence, she did not fear his fidelity: she gave no
credit of a great while to this News, and thought it was only a Trial they had
put her upon, but at length she was forced to yield, and persuade her self of
that thing which all the World confirmed. Her own Conduct did nothing reproach
her, yet she believed his distrust of her constancy had been the cause of his
change. She employed all her care to hide her grief, but she succeeded not so
well therein but the King perceived it, and reproached her with the kindness
she conserved for so faithless a man: in fine all her spite was turned upon
Wolsey: she had not the power to wish Piercy any harm, to avenge her self.
Blunt was not less enraged against Wolsey then she, she understood by her
correspondence with Vis-Count Rochefort that Piercy had not been deceived but
by the Cardinal. These two redoubted Enemies undertook a thing that seemed
impossible, that is to say the utter overthrow of Wolsey's Fortune. The Queen,
who had a much more just subject to hate him, had the same intentions to ruin
him, labored on her part to destroy this audacious favorite.

Piercy found not that tranquillity in his Marriage which he expected, although
he believed the Marchioness of Pembrook was unconstant, and that all things
obliged him to withdraw his affections from her, he found a greater disposition
in himself to love her now then ever. The perplexity of finding himself every
day sensible of his first Passion, occasioned him a dangerous fit of sickness;
in the height of his Fever it was discoverable that he retained the same
passion, but his Youth and the great care that was taken of him surmounted that
Distemper, which every body judged to be Mortal. But he continued in a languish
which time could hardly wear out.

As angry as Ann Bullen was with him, she could not forbear to make some Vows
for him, his Crime appeared most detestable to her, but she thought upon his
Person with pleasure. They had not seen one the other from the time His Majesty
had commanded her to retire from London, till they accidentally met one day by
the side of the River Thames with equal emotion of Spirit, she could hardly
know him he was grown so pale and cast down, that he moved rather pity then
wrath. She gave a screek when she perceived it was he, who took her surprise to
be her aversion. Madam, said he to her, I did not design to give you any
trouble here, my grief conducted me hither, as a place proper for no other
Company but it self; at a more happy time perhaps you might have seen me with
less Horror.

In a more happy time, replied the Marchioness, with looks which expressed more
of sorrow then wrath, I should certainly have found the most sensible of all
Pleasures to have seen the faithful and genourous Piercy, but I ought to have
nothing but horror for a man who after his dearness to me, is become
unconstant, perfidious, and in one word the Son-in-Law to the Earl of
Shrewsbury. You have taught me to change, answered Piercy dolefully, but
unfortunately for me, my condition is only changed, my heart is altogether the
same it was. You are Married, she added, can you say that I have given you
Examples of levity, I whom neither King, Father, Favorite, nor Fortune herself
could be ever able to shake, nay even since you have betrayed me. And have not
you, said Piercy, repaid the King those Dignities he has shower'd on your
whole Family, with that same heart you stole from me? No, unjust Piercy, said
she, I have not done what you say, I have loved you with too wuch perseverance,
and if I ought to be reproached with any thing, it i^ that I have writ you a
Letter full of tenderness, which you would no^ vouchsafe to answer: Have not
you received my Answer, cried he? I am betrayed Madam, I am too courteous not
to acknowledge the Honor yo^ did me, I have watched a thousand times to see
you since, but you did not appear, the King has been continually in your
company, has overwhelmed you with his favors, and all the world spoke of his
good fortune your Father has confirmed it, and despair has precipitated me into
this state I am in at present. I see, said the Marchioness, we owe all our
miseries to the Artifices of Woolsey, and without reproaching your weakness, I
shall be content to comfort my self with that Liberty I have preserved I merit
much greater evils then those I have, and I well see that time has destined me
enough of them. But as for you, Madam said Piercy, put an end to those which
may menace you, forget an ungrateful man who ought not to give you a moments
trouble, and no longer refuse that glory the King offers you, Marry him if he
can make you Queen, you shall have in me a most unfortunate Subject, who will
retain for you Sentiments of Respect, and adoration to the last minute of his
life, and who shall find comfort in any condition, when he shall see you in a
state worthy of your self. I conjure you to this, continued he in prostrating
himself at her feet, if a truly sincere penitence can merit any thing of you.
She interupted him shedding some Tears, Go Piercy, and let it suffice you to
have caused me the chief of all evils, do not solicit me to render it yet
greater You have been more dear to me than fortune, and you are still too much:
let us put a period to this conversation which afflicts us, and can give us no
other Subject but that of repentance, conserve your self for those persons to
whom you stand obliged, and endeavor to forget me, for your own quiet sake. At
these words the Marchioness parted from him, and he had not force enough to
detain her, she never apear'd more beautiful to him, and he never found himself
more amorous. He continued some time after upon the place, he murmured against
his Father, detested Woolsey, accused the Earl of Ormond, made a thousand
reproaches to himself, and returned to his house full of grief and reluctance.

This discourse of Anne Bullen and Piercy gave them knowledge of their
misfortunes, and incensed them against the Cardinal. The Popes sickness which
happened at this time, made him neglect the divorce, and labor secretly to be
elected by all the powerful intrigues he had at Rome. The King perceived
something, and pressed the two Cardinals earnestly to determine this famous
affair, because they had full power to do it. But the Pope recovering this
sickness, recals Campejus, without giveing him leisure to satisfy the King.
The King notwithstanding resolves to appear in Court, with the Queen before the
Judges, nothing was more smart and touching then what the Queen pleaded in her
defense, she implored justice of the King, and went out of Court in despair,
and made her appeal from the Cardinals to the Pope.

The King accused Woolsey of his delay, and that he had betrayed him secretly,
but the Cardinal moderated his Indignation, by his Rhetoric who nevertheless
looked upon him as a man of little Sincerity.

Cardinal Campejus departed from London, and the King who knew the Pope and the
Emperor were reconciled feared his Designs, Queen Katherine being Aunt to the
Emperor, who interessed himself strongly in her Cause. Woolsey's slackness
whilst he was in prospect of being elected Pope, caused much disquiet to the
King, who ordered Campejus to be stopped at the Sea side under pretense of
searching his Goods, but in effect, it was to see if there could be found
amongst them any Writings concerning these Affairs.

His departure raised the Queens hopes, but gave fear to those that were
interessed for the Marchioness of Pembrook. Blunt was not dissatisfied with
these delays, knowing the Kings present Inclinations. And Anne Bullen was
joyful thereat, in hopes to be revenged of Woolsey, which followed soon after.

The King had murmured against him with high Displeasure, every one perceived
his favor was nip'd, and the Enemies his haughtiness had raised him now
observed no measures, the people cried out upon his Injustice, the Lords of his
pride, the Queen of the sorrows he had caused her, Blunt that he had made her
to lose the Kings heart, and the Marchioness of Pembroke that he had occasioned
the loss of her repose.

The Queen proved that he designed to betray the King, keeping secret
intelligences with the Pope and the Emperor, it was made clearly to appear
that he oppressed the Nation by his vanity which he supported by tyrannizing
over the people; Anne Bullen was too much incensed against him not to second
the multitude, and vindictive Blunt acted with no less resentments.

He was then accused, and arraigned according to the usual forms of Justice,
yet he continued to sit as Chancellor, hoping by his presence to disperse this
storm, but the King was acquainted that a person accused as a criminal ought
not to officiate the most important charge of the Kingdom. Who sent the Dukes
of Norfolk and Suffolk to him to demand the great Seal from him, which he
refused fiercely telling them his Majesty had honored him with the Office of
Chancellor for his life, but the King wrote to him on the morrow to send it him
and to quit London. He obeyed the order of his Prince, returned the Seal, and
immediately went to Asher, a very fair House that he built after he had given
Hampton Court to the King, commanding his Steward to deliver up to the King or
his Orders all his movables, which were the richest that ever any Subject
possessed.

Norris who had been brought up with the King, took VVoolseys place of
Favorite, and Confident. The quality of Agent in amorous Secrets was more
agreeable with his Character, than with the gravity of a Prelate, his own
experience had rendered him learned in these sort of intrigues, he had excess,
of complaisance, and found the true way to please the King.

VVoolseys process was made with sufficient precipitation, all his goods were
confiscated, being convicted of Treason against the King, and Violation of the
Laws of the Kingdom, but the disposal of his person was left to the pleasure of
his Prince; if he had been more submissive, or less powerful, he had
undoubtedly found more Friends, but his Fortune and his Pride had raised him up
irreconciliable Enemies, he was ordered to attend the sequel of his Destiny at
Asher. The King who could not all at once renounce the kindness he formerly had
for him, left him in possession of the Archbishopric of York, and bishopric
of Lincoln; sent Norris privately to him to assure him that he pitied his
misfortune, and to give him a Ring, which the Cardinal received upon his Knees.
He gave Norris a magnificent present, and after he acquainted him (with a great
deal of wit and resolution) that he was a most famous example of fortunes
inconstancy; he conjured him to assure the King of his respect, and
acknowledgment. He fell dangerously sick in hearing by the intelligence he kept
at the Court, that the Queens Friends, Blunts Industry, and the Credit of Anne
Bullen, did every day extinguish those sparks of bounty the King conserved for
him. The King in the mean time was concerned at his illness, he sent to visit
him, and obliged even the Marchioness of Pembroke to testify some candor to
him, he was permitted to go from Asher to Richmond, but was arrested on the
Road upon new accusations of Crimen Leze-Majeste, and carried to Cawood Castle.

Sometime after he was taken out of the Castle to be brought to London, but
Grief and a Fever ended his Life upon the Road, he died with a great deal of
Constancy, and signified no other Regret, but the loss of his Princes
friendship; he had a prodigious Wit, and was seen (as it were) to Govern all
Europe, and no Enemies but Women could have caused his fall.

The King had been more sensible of his death, had he been less taken up with
love, but he thought upon nothing but the means whereby he might possess Anne
Bullen, whom neither his Care, nor Piercy's apparent Infidelity, could render
any thing more flexible: He gave every day some fresh mark of his bounty to
those of her Family, her Father was put into the chiefest Employs, and her
Brother, Viscount Rochefort, appeared the most splendid man in the Court, he
was permitted to see Blunt every day, but she had nevertheless hatred and
jealousy for his Sister.

Piercy led a most deplorable life, his Passion for Anne Bullen had recollected
all its force, since their interview upon the Rivers side; she tasted more
sweetness in finding him less culpable, than she could imagine, but the greater
she found her tenderness for him, the more she avoided meeting him, not finding
in her self strength enough to hide her Inclinations from him. Norris soon made
himself considerable to all the world, by the credit he had acquired with the
King, he often visited the Marchioness of Pembroke, in delivering the King's
Amorous Messages to her, but he took a little too much pleasure in this
Commerce, and unhappily found his heart was too tender to serve as an Agent for
another, without some self Interest with the most beautiful person in the World.

The esteem which the Kings of England and France had reciprocally one for the
other, joined with some reasons of State, obliged them to make another
interview. Henry met Francis at Bulloigne, and Francis accompanied Henry
afterward to Callais, where the two Courts made up the most glorious Company
in Europe. They made many Feasts, and the Marchioness of Pembroke appeared so
beautiful in a Masquerade whereat the two Kings were, that she made new
Conquests. Norris was so charmed with her, that he could not forbear saying to
one of his most particular friends at their breaking off; How fair is the
Marchioness of Pembroke, and how unhappy is a man to have a heart so sensible
of it as mine? The King passed by him at that instant, but the place was dark,
and he not speaking it very loud, his voice could not be discerned.

Henry made the King of France his Confident in the passion he had for Anne
Bullen, and told him he was resolved to marry her as soon as ever the Divorce
should be determined. This Prince far from condemning his design, avows to him
bona fide, that he had passionately loved her, and that in the same Condition
he should have done the same thing, that he could assure him by experience, she
had virtue made her worthy of that honor he decreed for her, and he offered
him his assistance and force, if he stood in need of it upon this occasion, an
Authority of such importance that caused a sensible joy to Henry. The two
Princes mutually promised an inviolable friendship, and being willing to
demonstrate it even in their Subjects, Henry gave the Order of the Garter to
the Constable of Montmorency, and the Admiral Brion, and Francis gave the Order
(...) to the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk.

At the return from this Voyage, the King of France, whose counsel the
Marchioness respected, solicited her for the King of England, she could no
longer oppose so great difficulties, her Parents, her Acquaintance, and Piercy
himself who conjured her to it; at length shaked her stability, which till that
time she made appear. She consented to marry the King, and Rome having not yet
concluded, Rowland Lee, afterward Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, privately
Celebrated the Ceremony in presence of Archbishop Cranmer, a number of Persons
to whom the King imparted this secret, and some of the Family of Anne Bullen.
The Publication of the Divorce was made shortly after, Queen Anne was presently
Crowned, and Queen Catherine ever after called the Princess Dowager.

Never was any Person more satisfied with his own Fortune than Henry, nor more
worthy of hers than the beautiful Queen, she reserved so much sweetness and
modesty in this Exaltation, that she charmed all those that approached her
therewith. Piercy, who continually adored her, was consolated in some measure,
in the happiness of his Rival for his Mistresses glory; Queen Katherine
expected it too long to be surprised at it, but Blunts fury, who foresaw it as
well as the Queen, ceased not to give her terrible transports at the news: Her
hatred to the Sister extended to the Brother, and she detested both the one and
the other. It was somewhat terrible to her to see her Rival elevated to the
same degree of honor that she had fixed her hopes upon, and nothing appeared
difficult for her to enterprise, whereby she might pull her down.

In the Interim the young Queen was with Child, and was delivered of a Daughter
who was afterward that famous Princess Queen Elizabeth.

The Divorce was so far from being confirmed by the Pope, that it was declared
void at Rome, where King Henry was sentenced to retake his Queen, upon penalty
of Excommunication in case he refused. 'Twould be in vain here to repeat the
whole Series of a matter so well known: The grief of Queen Katherine was very
violent, for she had hoped, that after the King had satisfied his love, he
would be reduced by reason; but when she saw him persevere, she gave her self
up to discontent, and fell into a distemper, whereof she died.

She wrote such tender and smart things to the King, that he was touched with
some Remorse for his unjust dealing with her. She left him one Daughter, who
was afterward Queen Mary.

Norris sought by all means to keep in the King's favor, but he had an
Interest to manage: His heart was strongly fixed upon the Queen, but the King's
Constancy to her, robbed him ever of his hopes to discover his passion to her:
He knew the King was capable of new amors, and he took a great deal of care to
make him observe the beauty of a young Lady that waited upon the Queen;
insomuch that he perceived the King was insensibly smitten with her; a full and
quiet possession oftentimes pawls the Appetite of the most passionate Lover,
and the enjoyment most commonly is sufficient to obliterate the merit of the
Person. Thus whilst the Queen performed her duty, faithfully loving the King,
and forcing her self to forget unfortunate Piercy, Love revenged Blunt, and
prepared misfortunes for the Queen, from which nothing could secure her.

Although her Beauty was nothing diminished by Marriage, the King could not
forbear following his Inclinations for unconstancy, and became amorous of Jane
Seymour. The perfidious Norris, who was the occasion hereof, pretends to make
himself meritorious of the Queen's Favor hereby, and acquaints her with the
King's new Amors, in hopes to please her therewith: She told him that since
his Majesty had been pleased to honor her with his tenderness, and rendered her
Condition so glorious, he was not obliged to confine all his Affections to her
Person; and she should be so far from perplexing her self with an incommodious
Jealousy, that she should be joyful to see him search his satisfaction.

Norris expounded the Queens discourse to his particular sense, he believed
that she did not love the King, and that her indifference had caused her thus
to speak. Your Majesty has reason, said he, thus to despise his injustice, and
you will have no less reason to use him with the same unconstancy: Thus your
Majesty ought to revenge your Beauty, and you cannot do amiss herein, since he
has given you a President: If I had so great a share in your Majesty's esteem,
as I have passion for your Interests, I should take the liberty to tell your
Majesty -- If I had the least esteem for you, replied the Queen coldly, and you
should have a real zeal for me, it should be neither your Friends nor your
Counsels, that should regulate my Conduct: I know the King's Goodness, and
shall never recede from the acknowledgment and respect I ow him; I do not
penetrate the reasons that oblige you to speak this, be more discreet for the
future, and do not force me to Advertise the King that you betray his Secrets.

The Queen left Norris in despair, at the ill success of his Infidelity; the
King's new Inclination was not long kept secret, Blunt was immoderately
overjoyed at it, hoping that if she could chase Anne Bullen from the King's
Heart, she might also easily dethrone her, where she could not look upon her
without extreme Grief. The tenderness she had for the Viscount Rochefort was
utterly blotted out, by his keeping the Marriage of his Sister as a secret from
her, and never acquaint her with it; and she spared not to sacrifice him, so
that she might but destroy his Sister who was her Rival. She had so good
intelligence at Court, and had so Wedded her self to Fortune, that she had
power to act greater things than any other: She knew that it was now high time
to second the indifference that the King began to have for the Queen, and she
caused a hundred things to be published against the Virtue of this Princess,
who, though she kept not the least Correspondence with Piercy, they did not
stick to say that she saw him every day, and retained a great kindness for him:
The fury of this enemy proceeded yet farther, and she reported in several
places, that Viscount Rochefort was passionately in Love with the Queen his
Sister, and received favor enough from her. These noises were spread abroad
every where, and Tales which never lose any thing in carriage, were now
augmented according to the old Custom. These Reports reached the King, who the
rather gave ear to them to Authorize his Change, than that he thought there was
any truth in them.

Piercy had seen her sometimes after she was Queen, but had his Passion been
never so earnest to have entertained her with Discourse, it was impossible for
him to succeed in it. But Destiny once granted him this advantage at Greenwich:
The Queen was sitting there one Evening in a green Arbor, which gave a
prospect of the Thames, and Piercy's Melancholy conducted him to the same
place, not dreaming what he should meet there.

The Queen was meditating upon the unhappy state of her Condition, who though
she had no extraordinary passion for the King, she had yet so much, as to
create in her a most sensible subject of Grief for his Unconstancy. She was
looking toward the River side when Piercy came into the Arbor, and he knew not
who she was at present, till at the noise of his coming in she turned her self,
and then notwithstanding the obscurity, they perceived each other.

The Queen being alone would have gone away, but Piercy, with a little
earnestness stayed her: Ah! Madam, said he, casting himself at her feet, refuse
not one moment of your Presence to a man, whose grief for the loss of you, has
reduced to a condition that deserves your pity. If what you ask could be
capable to re-establish your Repose, replied the Queen, I should grant it with
pleasure; but Piercy, you can be never the happier for it, but will become the
more criminal; we live under those Laws that leave us not to our selves, why do
you solicit me to pursue a weakness, which can do you no service? Will you then
command me to renounce all manner of hopes, interrupted Piercy, and give me
leave to persuade my self, that your hatred makes you act thus: I know the
difference that there is now betwixt your rank and mine, and that perhaps I
commit a great error in saying I ever love you, but I can never forget that
equality of sentiments which heretofore united us: Can it be possible that so
much of that passion should continue in my heart, and that nothing of it should
remain in yours? I acknowledge that I have deserved my misfortune, but you have
formerly found me worthy of ^our tenderness, and the Remorse that my Crime has
cost me, ought ^n some measure to expiate it. If I hated you, replied the
Queen, I should take less care to avoid you, ^t is the inclination I have for
you, that obliges me to shun you: I know ^y self, Piercy, and that I am not
proof against your sighs, they have heretofore composed all the happiness of my
life, perhaps at this time ^ should be but too sensible of them; I have Enemies
that have a vigilant eye upon me, and the least failure may attract the
greatest miseries, which would make you despai^ to have caused me: Quit me the^
indispensably tied to what I owe the King. But he betrays you, interrupted
Piercy, and Seymour enjoys him entirely. His proceeding may afflict me, added
the Queen but ought not to make me incurr^ Guilt. So I ought not to hope, sai^
Piercy, that Love will do any thin^ for me. It Is a passion, replye^ the Queen,
which can procure ^ nothing but misfortunes: Retire Piercy, I conjure you, for
I have some presages of a direful Consequence, at this very moment that ^ speak
to you, I feel my heart and my whole body to tremble, without knowing the least
reason for it. I will obey you till death, replied Piercy most lamentably, and
I hope when I have sought her, she will cut off the intail of all my miseries.
At this the Queen could not forbear some tears. Piercy found great pleasure in
looking upon her, but could not long enjoy it, she commanding him to retire.

Fortune, who took Blunt's part, acted more for her than she could hope, and
placed her near the Arbor where Piercy entertained the Queen; she failed not
to empoyson this innocent interview, which mere chance had caused. The King
heard of this as well as others, the King, who aspiring at the liberty to
indulge his new passion, gave strict order to observe the Queen, that so she
might be convicted with any small matter: This hindered not, but as he loved his
Pleasures, he published a famous Tilting at Greenwich, with Orders to all the
Nobility to appear at it.

The Queen, though very melancholy, and taking no delight in these sort of
divertisements, was obliged to appear at them, but did with a great deal of
negligence. The King would only be a Spectator of these Justs; Viscount
Rochefort, the Queen's Brother, was Defiant, and Norris, the King's Favorite,
was Defendant. All the young Lords had magnificent Equipages and gallant
Devices; there came an innumerable crowd of English, and Strangers to
Greenwich, the Thames was covered with gilded Barges, wherein the Ladies were
to return to London, after the Solemnity was over. Blunt, who foresaw that this
day would end most agreeably to her, was bedecked after an extraordinary
manner, and filled one of the chief Balconies with her Attendants. Young
Seymour, proud to see her self adored by the King, and to be the Subject of his
Divertisements, took care to adjust what ever Art could contribute to her
natural Beauty, and both Sexes this day drained the industry of the most
dextrous Persons.

Piercy, who had renounced all sorts of pleasures, and whose last Conversation
with the Queen, had completed his despair, resolves (but with a direful design)
to be one of the Tilters. He sought death, and the Kingdom being in peace, he
resolved in this day of pleasure, to make no use of his own skill, but to
suffer his Adversary to practice his skill upon him. Having taken this design,
he gave Order for his Equipage to be all in black, only a little edged with
Gold: The day of solemn Justs being come, they were began with much vigor; the
Viscount Rochefort won much honor, and gained great advantages against the
first that presented themselves, but it was much doubted he could not keep it
when Piercy appeared, whose skilfulness they all knew. The Queen wept when she
saw him; he was so pre-occupied with his design, that he never regarded the
different Objects placed round about him: His first Encounter against the
Viscount Rochefort was very fine, they began the second, and Piercy, whose
despair carried him away, run himself upon the Viscount's Lance, which entered
him for want of his Armor, and made him fall with a deep wound. This
misfortune was followed with a general cry. The Viscount Rochefort who had done
it undesignedly and against his intention, run presently to Piercy, who lost a
great deal of blood, and was followed by many friends of the wounded; but
whilst thus so many people showed the affection they had for Piercy, the Queen
demonstrated hers by more evident persuasions. The sight of Piercy's blood had
chilled all hers, and a mortal grief robbed her of her Soul, and that Love which
was lodged in her heart, in spite of all her attacks to chase it thence, made
her feel his power at this time more than in the whole course of her life; she
had not strength to resist so cruel a blow, but fell down in a swound into the
arms of the Duchess of Suffolk who was near her.

This second accident concluded the trouble of the Solemnity. The King found
matter of perplexity and rage herein, which obliged him to retire into his
Palace at Greenwich, where the Queen was also brought, whilst on the other
side care was taken of Piercy's preservation, which appeared at present very
uncertain. The King was no sooner alone, but he made reflections upon this
adventure; the Rumors which the cruel Blunt had sowed of Viscount Rocheforts
love for the Queen, and of the continuance of her tenderness for Piercy, passed
for current in his opinion; he believed that Rochefort having heard of the
conversation the Queen had with Piercy one evening in the Garden at Greenwich,
was agitated with jealousy, and intended rather to kill Piercy, than to
conquer him, and the Queen's grief sufficiently demonstrated her love. The King
was making observations upon his first Resentments, whilst an Officer came in
to him, and presented him with a Letter he had taken up at the Lists which he
knew to be Norris his writing, wherein he read these words.

I am more enamoured with the Queen than ever any person was; when I acquainted
you the first time at Callais of my Inclination for her, I did not believe it
was able so far to transport me. Pity the Condition wherein I am, and make some
Vows in favor of a passion, which must certainly kill me, unless it find some
encouragement.

This knowledge of a third Lover of the Queens, made the King absolutely to
determine to shiver them, and it was no small surprise to see the Queens Barge
stopped in returning to London, from which she was taken out and sent to the
Tower, with Vis-Count Rochefort, and Norris.

But how great was the joy of Blunt, when she saw the disgrace of her Rival?
she promised her self that the Queens first going out of the Tower, should be
to the Scaffold, and she prepared her self to act a terrible part in this
Tragedy.

Immediately were published some of the Reasons, which the King said he had to
complain against the Queen, whereupon she was severely examined, but nothing
could be found capable to condemn her. She looked upon this as a return of the
same fortune that had raised her to that height, and saw that it was the King's
inconstancy alone that had caused it. The affection she had retained for Piercy
was innocent enough to hinder her from blushing, though all the World were
privy to it, and as for her Brother and Norris she could not comprehend the
meaning of it.

She submitted to the King's Orders without suffering the least murmur against
his injustice to escape out of her mouth, and protesting that she was innocent,
she was careful to spare him, only accusing her own misfortune of her ill
treatment.

But although she appeared so reserved to the public, she did not forbear to
give her grief a liberal current, when the Lords arrested and carried her to
the Tower. The remembrance of her first Engagements with Piercy, and the sweet
correspondence that created them so many happy days, now returned fresh into
her Imagination; she considered that the King had been the only interrupter of
that blessed Estate, and that his Love in pretending to raise her to a Throne,
had been the sole foundation of all her miseries; she detested the condition of
a Queen, and the memory of Woolsey, who had ruined her by his Artifices.

The Viscount Rochefort could not in the least imagine what should be the cause
of his imprisonment, he accused the Kings new passion of it, and judged that
his Sisters misfortune was only the effect of her Husbands levity, and that
fortune who had made him participate in her favor, would involve him in her
troubles. The Intricacies he had had with Blunt, and his knowledge of her
aversion to the Queen made him despair of her assistance, neither did she
employ her cruelty against him, for his own sake.

As for Norris, who some days before saw himself in that happy State, that
contracted the envy of all the Courtiers, and having himself carried on the
Intrigue betwixt Seymour and the King, much less apprehended such a return as
should wholly overwhelm him at one instant, not imagining that a Letter which
he had written to an old Confident of his, concerning his secret passion for
the Queen, should happen into the Kings hands; however that was not the only
cause of his disgrace, for the King in reading that, called to mind what he had
heard him speak in going from the Ball at Callais.

But whilst these three persons expected the event of this Affair, all the
Court interessed themselves herein differently. The King possessed with his new
amors, gave himself up entirely to those pleasures wherewith his inconstancy
flattered him, and the Queens imprisonment hindered him not from prostrating
himself at Seymours feet.

Blunt would have sacrifized all things to have recalled him to her, she
employed all her Charms, and Craft to succeed herein, but seeing all was labor
lost, and although she knew that in destroying the Queen, she did but labor to
advance Seymour, yet she chose rather to serve that Rival of hers that revenged
her, than she who stole the King's Heart from her, without this there had not
been the least appearance of justice in her cruelty, and her bloody
incompassionate Soul, furnished her with means for the most black and horrid
infidelities.

As the Viscount Rochefort had most passionately loved her, he often wrote to
her in the height of their Correspondence, but to hide that commerce which some
lost Letter might discover, he styled her Sister: She conveys two of the most
tender of these Letters into the Queen's Closet, in seducing by her interest
those who had opportunity to do it, and never hesitated to destroy a person
whom she had adored, to be revenged of her Rival. The King searched all the
Queen's papers, amongst which he found these two Letters of Blunt's which were
written in these terms.

LETTER I.
You know well, dearest Sister, that I love you in so passionate a manner, that
I should prefer the advantage of pleasing you above all the Fortunes of the
Universe; and I shall esteem my self the most happy of all men, if I could but
one day make you forget the King; I possess neither his rank nor his merit, but
I have more love and more fidelity than he; make trial thereof, and you shall
find my words are as sincere as my heart.


LETTER II.
The King beheld you yesterday with so great application, that I am alarmed
thereat; you promised that you would have no amorous aspects for any person but
my self, and yet I see you seek his with too much diligence: I avow to you,
dearest Sister, that I am jealous of you; have I deserved that you should break
your word with me, and will you renounce those bounties which I have had reason
to praise? Manage your self with the King, since Fortune will have it so, but
remember that all your tenderness is due to me, and that a few happy minutes
are not sufficient for the repose of my life, and that I expect a continuance
of your favors, to assure me of the possession of your heart.


All that was in these two Letters, might very well be supposed as written to
the Queen; and the King had no sooner read them but felt himself transported
with present revenge; but considering at length that he was obliged to keep
some measures herein, he gave order that the Queen's Process, Viscount
Rochefort's, and Norris's, should be drawn up according to the usual forms: His
passion for Seymour, and some little remorse for Queen Katherine, destroyed all
the small pity wherewith Anne Bullen could inspire him, and though she was much
more amiable than any thing that he could ever love, nothing interceded more
for her, but that destiny which caused her loss, created greater woes, and
suffered them to Reign.

As soon as the Queen had notice that her Process was forming, she wrote to the
King; not thinking to make him relent, but in some measure to justify her
self; she had much stability, and was little desirous of life, and considering
how much fortune had traversed her, and what a train of miseries were mixed
with her favors, she found that death was a slight pain, and an assured refuge
from all sorts of misfortunes, and in this meditation she wrote thus to the
King.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
I Write not to your Majesty in hopes of obtaining any favor for my self, but
I am obliged to assure you before I dye, that I am much more sensible at the
remembrance of your favors, than the injuries you do me at present; and though
you treat me as a Criminal, I do not forbear to acknowledge my obligations to
you, and to call to mind that I once had the advantage to enjoy your heart, and
participate your Throne; that from a condition much inferior to yours, you have
exalted me to a fortune worthy the highest persons in the world, and now at
last you are going to place me in that glorious state, from which all the
Furies of envy shall never be able to remove me: No, Sir, the utmost you can do
can never put it out of the memory of man, that I have been a woman most
passionately Loved by the greatest Prince of the Universe. It Is this advantage
that secures my Constancy, which has been proof against all my disgraces:
Complete then what you have resolved, I shall dye without complaining of you,
but upon the Trial you expose me to, suffer not my Adversaries to be my Judges.
I leave you a young Princess, who perhaps one day may be as unhappy as I am, if
you take not compassion on her: Remember that I was dear unto you when she came
into the world, and that she deserves not with so much innocence to inherit the
hatred you have at present for me. After this live happily: I do earnestly
desire, that the knowledge of my innocent Conduct may never interrupt or
disturb your tranquillity, and for a recompense of those felicities you are now
going to procure me, I heartily pray you may enjoy perpetual ones. Adieu Sir.
Once more I recommend to your Bounty, the Princess Elizabeth.

Anne Bullen.


This Letter which in all appearance ought to have made some impression upon
the King's heart, wrought no such effect; he was wholly occupied with the
desire of possessing Seymour, and the Queen was now forced to despair of his
Heart, he shut his eyes to every thing might favor her, and fixed them only on
what could ruin her; he was persuaded that Piercy was passionately loved by
her, and the Letters which the perfidious Blunt had produced, left him no place
to doubt of her guilt, he believed that jealousy was the only cause that made
Piercy engage with the Viscount Rochefort, and that their design in coming to
the solemn Justs, was to fight in earnest. Norris his Letter was yet a farther
subject of disquiet, and if the Queen was kind to Piercy, and received her own
Brother into the number of her Gallants, it might justly be believed that
Norris being young, handsome, and extreme amorous, was not ill treated by her.

These persons that were friends to Seymour, Confederates with Blunt, and some
ungrateful ones whom the Queen had favored, conspired together to destroy her:
She was accused before the Dukes of Norfolk, Suffolk, and some other Peers, and
constrained to plead for her self, all the world having thus abandoned her. She
defended her innocence in a most persuasive manner, and explained her self with
extraordinary moderation in respect of the King, and testified an entire
resignation to his pleasure.

But notwithstanding the force of her defenses, she was brought in guilty, and
condemned to lose her Head, together with the Viscount Rochefort and Norris,
who in a few days saw all his favor and the fairest hopes in the world to
expire in a shameful death.

The Queen heard her Sentence with a most surprising constancy, and no woman
did ever manifest a greater grandeur of Soul, insomuch that they who would have
comforted her, had greater need of consolation themselves. I receive this Death
to which my Judges (said she to them) by his Majesty's Will have condemned me,
as an addition to his former bounties, and I have lived long enough to learn to
die with Constancy: I do protest that I quit this life without regret, and that
it has been too grievous to me to make it desirable: Tell his Majesty if you
please, that he has no reason to blush for having loved me, that I have acted
nothing to render me unworthy that honor to which he was pleased to raise me:
Tell him, that I have honored him as my Prince, and loved him as my Husband;
and I call Heaven to witness before you, that I have never failed in my duty to
him, neither as his Subject, nor as his Wife. Add to this, I conjure you, that
I am so far from murmuring at his severity, that I believe him too just to have
hated me without cause, and condemned me without reason, and I only accuse
those enemies, which his former bounties have raised me, of my misfortunes. I
leave him a Daughter which is most dear to me, because she has the honor to be
of his blood. I hope he will take pity on her youth, that my misfortunes will
not disturb her Infancy, and that besides the tenderness he owes to her, she
may still find in him what she loses in me. I retain neither hatred nor
resentment against any of those who have betrayed me, and if any thing can
trouble the tranquillity of my soul, it is the grief I have for being the cause
of my Brother's death. After these words and some tokens of remembrance for
those that had served her, she disposed her self for Death with the same
courage. The Viscount Rochefort showed a little more weakness, and inveighed
against the King and the Judges, he had truly loved the Queen his Sister, but
no farther than the ties of blood and her virtue obliged him, he deplored the
misfortune of this Princess, and moved the hearts of people that heard him.

Nothing appeared in Norris, but passion and despair, but who can express, that
of Piercy, for from the time of the Tournaments at Greenwich he had heard
nothing of what passed, till one of his Servants indiscreetly told him of this
dismal adventure of the Queens, at which his Wounds opened again, and a torrent
of blood issued out at this emotion, which put him into a relapse of his first
weakness, to which a Fever joining made him lightheaded; and thinking he
always saw the Queen dying, he spoke many things which testified the condition
of his heart, and the disorder of his reason; he would fain have leaped out of
his bed and run to the succor of this Princess, but if they had not opposed
this design he had not strength to execute it.

In the mean time, the King was not without some opposition, the affair in
agitation caused him some troubles which he could in no wise avoid, but his
passion for Seymour soon dispersed them, and no sooner was he touched with some
remorse, but his fickle heart extinguished all its force.

The Queen was beheaded in the Tower, to avoid that murmur which pity often
excites amongst the multitude upon those sad occasions: But although this cruel
Action was executed in a private manner, there were many persons whom a
barbarous curiosity obliged to be Spectators: Blunt failed not to be present at
the place where she promised her self so great pleasure; she appeared there
with the same splendour as if it had been a gallant Festival, she was so
obdurate as to display the magnificence of her Apparel in the face of a
mourning Scaffold, and a doleful assembly wholly invested with tears and grief.

The Queen appeared with the same Grace that was constantly admired in her, her
Countenance was undisturbed, and nothing could be seen in her Visage but
Security and Majesty; she was Veiled all over with Mourning, and in the midst
of all these dismal objects, her Looks which were cast upon all her spectators,
infused grief and despair into all their hearts: Even Blunt her self, that
fierce and implacable Enemy of the Queen's, now felt that guilt has its
limits, and that fear and trembling are constantly its Attendants, the
constancy of the Princess made her to shiver, and she could not hinder her self
from considering that she was the cause of all those evils: These reflections
wrought a beseeming pensiveness upon her, and if her eyes had been examined,
they would have been found much more troubled than the Queen's. The Maids of
Honor to this Princess were extreme disconsolate, she exhorted them oftentimes
to be constant according to her example, and seeing the Executioner attended
only her order, she spoke in particular to her Divine, and afterward addressed
her self to all that could hear her.

As I die your Queen, said she, and the Artifices of Envy cannot bereave me of
that quality, although they have robbed me of the Kings tenderness which was
much more dear unto me; I am joyful that I can assure ye in the last moments of
my life, that I have never dishonored him either in my Actions or Thoughts,
but in protesting my own innocence to ye, I do not pretend to render his
Majesty criminal, I do declare that I have great cause to extol him, and his
great favors to me, do sufficiently persuade that without most powerful
reasons he had never abandoned me to so deplorable a Fortune: I die without
repining, imitate my stayedness, and pardon yours as I do mine Enemies, and let
that pity which my misfortunes can create in you, be declared in the favor of
a little Princess, whom I leave to the Kingdoms, and who is now going to be
left to the hatred of the King her Father, and to the cruelty of those who have
destroyed me: Her Birth is illustrious, and although my Blood is not so noble
as the Kings, yet at least it merits the esteem and protection of honest
people: Assist one day (if there be occasion) those legitimate Rights which her
Condition has given her. I recommend her in general to the People, to the
Nobility and Gentry, and in particular to all those who are concerned at my
misfortune: After this I die, praying for Prosperity to the King, and Peace and
Plenty to his Kingdoms. After these words she turned her last thoughts toward
Heaven, and received her Death like a true Heroine: Blunt beheld her Head
severed from her Body with horror, to which was joined a more sensible
amazement, when she saw the Viscount Rochefort appear.

She had loved him as far as her ambition was able to permit her, the
deplorable Condition wherein he was, his innocence which she so well knew, and
his sad and languishing Countenance gave her most mortal stabs to the very
heart. He fixed his eyes upon her, and reserving a large proportion of kindness
for her, (notwithstanding all her Intrigues) he sighed at the remembrance of
their former pleasures, and not being able to comprehend that a person whom he
had adored, should come to be an eyewitness of his death, and of a death of
this nature, he expressed to her by his dying looks, the astonishment that her
cruelty had caused him, he uttered many sighs which reached Blunt's ears, and
Pierced her heart, which till then had been impenetrable; in her seeing the
fatal blow given to the Viscount Rochefort, she felt all the injustice he
suffered; remorse bereaved her of her soul, a mortal paleness spread it self
over all her face, and not being able to continue longer upon this dismal
place, she was carried off before the Execution of Norris, which followed the
Queen's and Viscount Rochefort's.

The King heard the news of this Catastrophe not without some confusion, and
was inclinable to have been touched therewith, but flatterers, who always make
it their chief business to extol the weaknesses of Kings, soon stifled these
motions, and exhorted his Majesty to be resolute; wherein they so well
succeeded, that the Queen was scarcely expired, but he married Jane Seymour.
His Constancy for this Queen was of longer continuance than her life, she dyed
within a year after the marriage, in Childbed with Prince Edward.

The fury of Queen Anne's Enemies was extended even to her Daughter, and they
obliged the King to declare Queen Anne's Marriage null as he had that of Queen
Katherine's, and the two Princesses, Mary and Elizabeth, to be illegitimate.

After the Queens death, Piercy lived but a few languishing days, and wanted
incredible strength to hinder the effects of his resentment; he quitted the
Court, and sought for employments answerable to the sad state of his condition.
As for Blunt, she was punished for all her crimes by the Kings constant
inconstancy, and by the death of her Son, upon whom she had laid the foundation
of so great hopes, and to whom Fortune had decreed such glorious advantages:
She dyed suffering that misery her cruelties had justly deserved, being
despised by the King, and hated by all the world.

Queen Anne was generally bewailed, and notwithstanding all that her enemies
have been able to speak against her, many sage Persons who knew her virtue,
have conserved a just veneration for her memory, and have inspired the same
sentiments into succeeding Ages: She was not only Beautiful, Generous, and
Benificent, but was endowed with a true and real wisdom, and was altogether
worthy of that Grandeur to which she was raised. The Princess Elizabeth her
Daughter, who now Governs England with so great splendour and glory, inherits
her Virtue as well as the Crown, which is her undoubted right.

The Queen who had retired into her Apartment, to give the Earl of
Northumberland an entire liberty to relate the several interests which gave the
occasion to that cruel Spectacle, or rather perhaps to spare her self the grief
of hearing the recital of those things wherein she was obliged to take so great
a part; no sooner learnt that the History of Anne Bullen her Mother, was ended,
but she returned to the Company; where perceiving that every one to make their
Court, was preparing to condole the destiny of this Princess, whose Innocence,
Misfortunes, and the Cruelty of her Enemies appeared so worthy to be lamented:
She believed it was sufficient to have made them comprehend, that all the
Calumnies invented and spread abroad against the honor of the Queen her
Mother, were only mere invectives formed by her Enemies, or by those who acted
the greatest part in this Tragedy. Wherefore without dwelling longer upon a
subject which she was too sensible of, she promised them that at her return she
would relate a History to them, whose Subjects and grand Events which composed
it, should at least appear to them of as great curiosity as this they had
already heard; but as it was already late, she thought it convenient to defer
it till the morrow.

The Company being accordingly met by her Order, she told them the following
Story, which is, The History of Bassa Solomon and the Princess Eronima, being
the second and last Part of Queen Elizabeth's Novels, now in the Press, and
will be Printed next Term.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books, Printed and Sold at the Pope's Head in the New
Exchange in the Strand.
Folio.
AN Institution of general History, or the History of the World, by William
Howel, L. L. D. in two Vol. Historical Collections, or an exact Account of the
proceedings of the four last Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, of famous memory.
Pharamond Complete, English. Clelia, a Romance, English. Parthanissa, English.
Quarto.
An Historical Relation of the first discovery of the Isle of Madera. The
Protestant Religion is a sure Foundation, etc. by the Right Honorable,
Charles, Earl of Derby. The Jesuits Policy to suppress Monarchy, by a Person of
Honor. A Warning-piece for the Unruly, in two Visitation Sermons at Preston,
by Seth Bushel, D. D. The great efficacy and necessity of good Example,
especially in the Clergy, in a Visitation Sermon at Ga^lford, by Thomas
Duncomb, D. D. A Sermon Preached before the King, by Miles Barn, Chaplain in
Ordinary to the King. A Sermon Preached at the Assizes at Lancaster, by Henry
Pigot, B. D. Gods Revenge against Murder, demonstrated in the prosecution of
Henry Symbal and William Jones, Executed for the murdering Sir Rich. Samford.
Plays.
The Rivals, a Comedy. Cataline. Island Princes. Flora's Vagaries. Town Shifts.
Citizen turned Gentleman. Morning Ramble. Macbeth. Cambyses. Empress of
Morocco. Herod and Mariamne. Notes on the Empress of Morocco. Conquest of
China^ Ibrahim Pastor fido. Love and Revenge. Female pre-eminence, or the Life
and Death of Pope Joan. Fatal Love, or forced Inconstancy. Careless Lovers.
English Princes. Reformation. Spanish Rogue. Marcellia. The Mall. The
Rehearsal. Mock Tempest. Dumb Lady. Gentleman Dancing Master. Alcibiades. Dutch
Lovers. Pysa's Conspiracy. Siege of Memphis. Rival Kings. Constant Nymph.
Wrangling Lovers. Tom Essence. French Conjurer. Wits led by the Nose.
Counterfeit Bridegroom. Tunbridge Wells. Man of New Market. The Conspiracy, or
Change of Government. The Revenge, or the Match in New gate.
Octavo and Twelves.
Spanish History, or the differences that happened in the Court of Spain, between
Don John of Austria and Cardinal Nitard, with all the Letters and politic
Discourses relating to those Affairs. Reflections upon Ancient and Modern
Philosophy. The English Princess, or the Duchess Queen, a pleasant Novel.
Court Songs and Poems being an exact Collection. The Temple of Death, with
other Poems, by a Person of Honor. Hogan Moganides, or the Dutch Hudibras.
Liquor Achahest, or the immortal dissolvent of Paracelsus and Helmont, etc.
Philosophical Essay, ot the History of Petrification, by Dr. Sherley. Guilm,
Herrari de Bello Batavico. Westminster Quibles, very pleasant. The Amors of
Count Dunois, a witty Novel. Zayde, or the Spanish History, a pleasant Novel.
Mazarine's Memoires, a Novel. two witty Novels. Penitent Hermit Englis Monsieur.
Clark's Manual, a Book of Presidents. Sanders his Astrological Physic. Anima
Mundi, or an Historical Narration of the Opinion of the Ancients concerning
man's Soul after this Life, according to unenlightned Nature. History of the
Palace Royal, or the Amors of Mademoiselle de la Valliere. The Amors of Madam
and Count de Guiche. A Copy of two Journal Books of the House of Commons, in
which is the whole History of the late horrid Plot The Wits Paraphrased, or
Paraphrase upon Paraphrase, in a Burlesque, on the several Translations of
Ovid's Epistles.
Books Printed for Mark Pardoe, at the Raven over against Bedford House in the
Strand.
I I. Becoeri D. De nova temporis Dimetiendi Ratione, and Accurata Horologiorum
constructione Theoria and Experientia. Quarto. I. I. Becheri Minera Arenaria,
Perpetua sive Prodromus Historiae seu Propositionis prae D. D. statibus
Hollandiae ab Authore factae circa auri Extractionem mediante A^ena Littorali
per modum Minerae perpetuae seu Operationis magnae fusoriae cum emolumento
scriptum: hoc inservire poterit Lectori pro continuatione Irifolii Hollandici
and supplementi tertii in Authoris Physicam subterraneam. Quarto. Elements of
Speech, an Essay of Inquiry into the natural production of Letters with an
Appendix concerning Persons Deaf and Dumb^; by William Holder, D. D. Fellow of
the R. Society, Octavo. New Experiments upon Vipers, with exquisite Remedies
that may be drawn from them as well for the cure of their Bitings as for that
of other maladies: Also a Letter of Francisco Redi, concerning some objections
made upon his Observations about Vipers, written to Monsieur Bourdelot and Mr.
Alex. Morus, together with the sequel of new Experiments upon Vipers, in a
Reply to a Letter written by Sign F. Redi, by Mr. Charas, Octavo. The Intrigues
of the Court of Rome for these seven or eight years past, Octavo. Plain Man's
way of Worship and Practice, the fifth Edition with Additions, as well as
Emendations, Twelves.
FINIS.
The Novels of ELIZABETH, Queen of ENGLAND.

Containing the HISTORY OF BASSA SOLOMON, AND The Princess ERONIMA.

The Last Part.

Englished by Spencer Hickman.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for Mark Pardow, at the Black Raven over
against Bedford-House, in the Strand. 1681.

The Novels of ELIZABETH, Queen of ENGLAND, etc.
NO person is ignorant of that bondage whereunto Jealousy subjects all the
Women of the East, but particularly those who live in the Seraglio of the
Ottoman Emperors, the customs thereof are so severe, that they are all treated
like Slaves, though not all equally beloved. There the inhumane Eunuchs
tyrannize over their most innocent actions, and the old Governesses have a
continual eye upon them; and whereas they all have but the affections of one
single man to merit, this causes envy to reign with perpetual Intrigues; thus
oftentimes betwixt constraint and love are created strange Adventures.

Those of Mahomet the Second, surnamed the Great, are illustrious, Victory
attended all his Enterprises, he conquered the Empires of Greece and Trebizond,
subjected twelve Kingdoms, and gained thirty two Battles, notwithstanding he
had the Comnenes, the Scanderbegs, the Paleologues and the Huniades to his
Enemies: yet all his ambition for Glory, hindered him not from being more
inclinable to Women than any of his Predecessors.

His first inclinations were declared in savor of Racima, a Turk by Nation,
who as she was endowed with no less ambition and Subtlety than of Beauty (being
by the birth of Bajazet advanced to the chief Glory of the Empire) she managed
her credit in showring down her Favors at the Port, made her self many
creatures by establishing their fortunes, and conserved an absolute Sovereignty
over the heart of Mahomet, till the taking of Negropont.

A young Grecian Lady being made a Captive in this Island, inspired the Emperor
with new Flames, and Racima unfortunately lost that Empire she had so long time
enjoyed peaceably; but the beautiful Captive opposed the passion of Mahomet
with so obstinate a resistance, that he found in himself a necessity of loving
her without the least hopes of conquering.

Her arrival at the Seraglio alarmed all those that pretended to the Sultan's
Heart; her Beauty caused Racima particularly to tremble, and jealousy
immediately rendered Eronima odious unto her, who in having the misfortune to
please contrary to her inclination, had the ill luck to contract so dangerous
an Enemy.

Yet was it not the fear thereof that disturbed the tranquillity of her life,
an innocent tenderness was a greater cause of her Griefs, than the fear of a
Rival, whom the whole Seraglio dreaded.

Bassa Solomon by his extraordinary Merit and considerable Services had gained
her affections. The cruel Laws of the Seraglio sentenced them never to see each
other; and as it was dangerous for the fair Captive, or the amorous Bassa, to
give the least intimation of their thoughts, so the constraint of hiding their
very sighs cost them continual grievances.

Solomon was a man the most amiable, and of the most general esteem in the
world, his Birth was very illustrious amongst the Turks, he had signalized
himself in a most glorious manner in all the Affairs of the Empire, the Emperor
distinguished him from others by a most particular consideration: and there was
no person in Constantinople who had a greater number of real Friends than
himself.

All these advantages how considerable soever they might be, were of less
moment to him than the interest of his love; and although Eronima promised her
perseverance, he feared the ordinary returns of an age easy to be persuaded,
and that Mahomet might in a short time overcome a resistance supported without
hopes, which made him live in a most deplorable languish, which he withstood
almost a year, seeking some consolation in the confidence of a Friend; but
having a thousand times vainly endeavored to see Eronima, or at least to write
to her; he at last resolved to hazard the secret of his Love.

The access to the Seraglio of the Women was so difficult, that it was
impossible for him to approach it without exposing himself to terrible Events.
The prodigious number of Guards without, and the active observation of the
Eunuchs within, utterly destroyed all his Enterprises, these difficulties
appeared somewhat less dangerous on that side next the Gardens; and Solomon
being in a strict bond of Friendship with the Bostangi Bassa, or chief
Gardener, resolved to discover to him the whole mystery of his heart.

Morat possessed this Office, which is one of the most considerable in the
Empire, and that which gives a man, above all others, the greatest liberty with
the Emperor; and Solomon hoping for some succor by the privileges of the
grand Gardener, sought him out as soon as ever he had taken this resolution;
and living with him in that intimacy which made them neglect the regularity of
Visits, and the pleasantness of the Weather favoring his design, they took a
Walk together upon the Seaside.

Solomon delayed not long without entering into a conversation of amorous
interests, but not finding the grand Gardener to entertain the subject
according to his desire, My dear Morat, said he to him, (stopping him) I
conjure you to declare to me whether you have ever loved or not? this question
for which the Bostangi Bassa was not prepared, made him to blush, having an
Intrigue which he feared was now discovered, said he, why do you ask me this
question? To unfold my heart to you, said Solomon, I am in love, and if ever
you knew this passion by experience, you will have the greater indulgence for
me. If Examples may be any thing beneficial to you, replied Morat, I must
confess that I do love most tenderly. Pity me then, continued the Bassa, and
give me your assistance at the same time; I love in the Seraglio, and not a
Sultaness indifferent to the Emperor, but Eronima who entirely possesses his
heart. Ha! said Morat, do you love Eronima? and have you not foreseen the
misfortunes which the Sultan's concurrence may bring upon you? Had I not known
Eronima, replied Solomon, till after Mahomet had set his affections upon her, I
had not been perhaps more difficultly vanquished; but, Morat, my love preceded
his, we are now alone, and I can in few words recount you the Story.

The History of Bassa Solomon and the Princess Eronima.
IT was in this very City, and in this same Palace which from hence we behold,
that my passion commenced; but Morat, the time and state of Affairs were very
different; then War laid all things desolate, now Peace is established; 'twas
then the Capital City of the Paleologean Empire, as it is now of the Ottoman;
there nothing appeared but objects of horror, here nothing but pleasantness:
in short, it was at the Conquest of Constantinople, reserved for the happy
destiny of Mahomet, that I saw Eronima, and dedicated my self for ever to her.

The Employ I had in that Attack which gained us the City, separated me
oftentimes from the Emperor, and whilst the valor of Constantine withstood
him at one of the Gates, we forced another, and marched toward the Palace,
the Guards whereof being dismayed, rendered themselves at the sound of our
Victory; I moderated the fury of the Turks to the utmost of my power, but was
obliged to give way to its first Torrent.

So soon as we were Masters of the entrance into the Palace, our victorious
Troops pillaged all its Appartments: this commodious occupation was favorable
to many of the Grecians, for those were suffered to fly who made no
resistance, but the obstinate were cut to pieces; there the expiring Victims
Groans were mixed with Shouts of the joyful Conquerors, and in this Confusion I
failed not to succor the Women, and prevent that violence which might be
committed upon them, and in the midst of many Grecian Carcases I found Eronima
covered with the Blood of those that died in her defense: this Rampart was too
weak to secure her from the Soldiers Insolence, whereof she had found a direful
proof, had not I just then arrived; I found her abandoned to all the rigor of
a dismal Adventure; she was beautiful, though she endeavored to hide it, and
more prevailing against me than all the force of the Paleologues; her charms
instantly made their utmost progress, and love (which destined me most cruel
Sufferings) found not the least Obstacle in rendering her the sole Mistress of
my Heart, and a presaging interest made me thoughtful of removing her from the
sight of the Sultan. I made use of my authority over the Troops to dismiss
them, and I contemplated Eronima a long time without power to break silence,
though the Grecian Language was as familiar to me as our own; she looked upon
me as an Enemy whose power ought to give her fresh Allarms, and trembled at my
approach; although I had thrown down my Cymeter, and returned my Poniard, and
my eyes far from threatening any new misfortune, pronounced nothing to her but
an assured Victory. She told me afterward that grief having bereft her of her
senses, she took me for a Barbarian who came to complete her disgrace; and in
these thoughts retiring some few paces, Come not near Eronima, cried she,
unless thou come to give me death; thou art not the first of thy Nation who
would not spare my Sex, and this entertainment shall be more sweet to me, than
any pity which can prolong my misfortune. These words full of resolution,
augmented my love. Although I am born a Subject to Mahomet, said I, I am
nothing the less disposed to render you all the Services you can demand; and in
bearing Arms for my Prince, I shall never dishonor my self by committing
cruelties. I am mortally grieved to have contributed toward your misfortune,
and I would die in despair if I should not in some measure expiate the injury I
have done you: I am a Bassa to Mahomet, and I have some favor in his sight,
which I shall wholly employ for you; the reallity of my words were confirmed to
Eronima by my sighs, which are not usual to Barbarous Souls. She considered me
with a little more earnestness, and not finding me of that cruel aspect her
fear had persuaded her to. If I have done you any injustice, said she, the
condition you find me in has sufficiently chastised me. I stand in need of a
generous protection, and if my misery is capable to touch you with the least
compassion, you have an opportunity to demonstrate it, in removing me from the
sight of the Emperor, whom I dread more than death.

I was over-joyed to see her disposed to shun Mahomet; the time was short, and
as the Soldiers had left me at liberty with her, I charged Ibrahim, whose
fidelity was well known to me to conduct her with some Women of her Retinue to
a House adjoining to the Palace, which he had made himself Master of and
having not opportunity to stay longer, I went to find the Emperor, who was
entered the City after he had seen the last of the Paleologues expire.

All possible order was taken this first night in Constantinople, the
Janissaries had the Guard of the Gates, the rest of our Army guarded the Walls,
and the Emperor took his Quarters in the Palace.

But I found my self little sensible of the success of our Arms, it was Eronima
alone that wholly occupied my thoughts, and having contributed to her
misfortunes, my love reproached me of those glorious Actions, for which I
applauded my self before I saw her.

So soon as I could part with the Emperor, I hasted to the House whereunto
Ibrahim had conducted Eronima; she welcomed me with much civility, and an
admirable constancy, although she had heard the news of the Emperor of Greece
his death, and the rest of the Princes of her Blood.

If at the first sight she appeared beautiful to me, she appeared much more so
at this time, her eyes were now less troubled, her countenance more serene, and
her Habits put into greater order, added new charms unto her. I was now too
amorous to conceal it, and in spite of all my reservedness, Eronima perceived
what Mahomets Conquests had cost me; my eyes were so tender and submissive,
that what passion soever she observed in them could not hinder her from
granting me the pleasure to behold the splendour of hers.

She informed me then that she was Daughter to Demetrius Paleologus, Brother to
the Emperor Constantine, that a dangerous sickness had detained him from going
forth of Constantinople with his Imperial Family, where he was constrained to
attend the success of this War; and after having spoken many obliging things to
me, she conjured me to facilitate her escape to some Sanctuary where she might
be secure.

Imagine then how great my grief was to see her in this resolution of leaving
me, I had enjoyed no further pleasure in her sight, than what made me sensible
how contrary her desires were to the welfare of my life, and now that I must
be forced to deprive my self of her sight for ever, or contract her hatred in
opposing her retreat; here Love and Honor made a long engagement, till my
particular interest yielded to the Princesses pleasure, and I resolved to
suffer her departure, though at the price of my life, which I thought would
expire with grief.

The hours that I passed in her company served only to render me the more
amorous of her, and she received my cares with great acknowledgment, but I
observed that she suffered my visits not without some pain in a place where her
conduct was not known, which consideration made me the rather determine to
separate my self from her.

As soon as Mahomet had secured his Authority from all manner of Insurrections
in Constantinople, he caused all his treasure at Adrianople to be brought
thither; and after orders being given to establish his Household, and beautify
the Seraglio, he thought upon nothing more than seeking new Conquests.

Though he communicated this design unto me, I wavered not to procure the
departure of the Princess Eronima, this effort was not made without causing a
great alteration in my person, which Eronima perceiving, asked me obligingly
what was the occasion thereof; I was overjoyed that she observed me so much as
to take notice of it; and as nothing that can in the least flatter a Lover,
escapes his imagination, I believed that at least in losing her, I might hope
to be pityed by her.

Madam, said I, the despair to which you see me reduced, is but the beginning
of a condition yet more unhappy, since I am at the very point of losing you,
and in all appearance for ever. What passion soever I may have, replied the
Princess, for my liberty, if it costs you so dear, I shall renounce it with my
whole heart. If you only wish for it, I continued, it is sufficient
indispensably to engage me to procure it; but, Madam, if this Action can merit
any thing from you, give me leave not to see you part without discovering the
Secret of my Soul. I should have been less indiscreet, if it had been possible
for me to die in your presence; you are going, Madam, to leave me, destined to
all the rigours of absence, my fortune is not considerable enough to offer you,
and you esteem me not worthy of fixing my self to yours. I discourse to you of
my love for the first and last time of my life; and in spite of all the ardent
sentiments I have for you, I will be the person who shall conduct you to the
Vessel which is to convey you from Constantinople; and I will make sincere Vows
and Prayers for the prosperity of your Voyage, which will possibly cause my
death: not to exaggerate my unhappiness to you, thereby to draw acknowledgments
from you which are not my due; I know too well that I have justly merited my
misfortune, in contributing toward yours, but it is in some measure to oblige
you to remember me with some pity. Although my Discourse was irregular, it had
continued, had not the Princess interrupted me. The Sentiments whereof you
speak, said she, have been too advantageous to me to find an ill reception, and
I have no less reason, Sir, to complain than you, since there can be nothing
more cruel to a generous Soul, than a necessity of appearing ungrateful; I know
the value of my obligations to you, your merit is not less known to me; and can
you believe I shall be able to enjoy any repose, so long as I must reproach my
self with the loss of yours? I wish to Heavens! most generous Solomon, that you
could penetrate the very bottom of a heart which never found any thing but your
self worthy its esteem, you would there discover that it is truly sensible, and
incapable of forgetting what is due unto you; it is not just, that in removing
my self from you, I should deprive you the advantages of your Victory, which I
can assure you, without blushing, has extended beyond the Empire of
Constantinople: believe then, that if that moment which seperates us, prove
bitter to you, I shall not find it more sweet; and that if I should hearken
only to my inclination, I should follow the fortune which fastens you to the
Ottoman Empire, or I should consent to see you allied with my own: but, Sir,
what would the world say, to see the Daughter of Demetrius, a Princess who to
be miserable, neither loses her name, nor family, follow a Bassa of Mahomet, or
suffer him to wander with her from Sanctuary to Sanctuary? Ah! cruel point of
Honor, said I, which I must purchase with so many woes: you shall depart, I
will not follow you, Heaven shall decide the rest, and you may appoint what
place you will be conducted to.

Eronima replied many obliging things to me, which served only to augment my
grief: she acquainted me she had a design to retire her self toward the
Western Emperor; and conjured me withal to hasten her departure, which I
performed with as much diligence, as if it had been for my good fortune: at
length she embarked one night under the conduct of two Grecians, whose liberty
I had obtained, and some Women of hers who had not forsaken her.

I have not force enough to tell you what I then did, nor what revolutions I
had in my heart; my despair triumphed at Eronima's constancy, her looks
appeared tender to me, she could not hide some sighs from me, I saw her weep:
but, my dear Morat, she left me at the same instant, and all these favorable
appearances served only to render her loss the more cruel unto me.

I instantly resolved not to inform my self of her, hoping that her absence
would assist my recovery; but when a person loves, it is impossible to judge of
the time to come; my disquiet obliged me to send Ibrahim into the West, who
made his Voyage in vain, and returned without the least intelligence of
Eronima; and I was divided betwixt despair, that some accident might arrive to
him, and fancy that she had not contracted a real confidence in me.

Other Conquests (whither I always carried my affection) succeeding that of
Constantinople, Mahomet fixed his resolution upon that of Negropont; we found
there an obstinate resistance, which cost the Emperor much time, and many men;
the Venetians had sent thither very considerable Forces, which were prepared to
receive us; but all this served only to make the Ottoman Triumph more glorious;
and after the general Conquest of the whole Island, the ancient City of Calchis
surrendered like the others, and the Emperor forced all that could oppose him.

Before I had loved Eronima I fought like a man who husbanded both his Honor
and Fortune, but now I only sought occasions with a design to die; I
precipitated my self with pleasure, where I saw any danger. And I protest to
you, that my carelessness of life gave me no small share in this Victory; which
having secured the Emperors pretensions, and all things being quiet, he retired
to the Palace, to enjoy a little repose after this Expedition. A continual
succession of prosperities placed him in that happy state where pleasant Ideas
make so deep an impression, when Orcam Bassa presented him with a fair Captive,
whom he had taken at the Siege of Calchis. They who first saw her beheld her
with admiration, and deplored her fortune, which destined her to the slavery of
the Seraglio. But, Morat, do but conceive my astonishment, imagine my grief
when I knew this Captive to be the same Eronima whose absence had caused me so
great Sufferings; I found her more beautiful than ever, but subjected to a
misfortune, from which all the violence I had committed upon my self could not
defend her; and I was the second time covered with the gore of her Defendants.
Straight our eyes embraced each other with a mutual acknowledgment of love, in
spite of all the troubles that oppressed us; but if mine expressed their
tenderness by their glances upon the Princess, hers declared an absolute order,
to do nothing that might betray us; the danger was great, which I feared not
for my own part, neither perhaps did Eronima for hers, nevertheless it behoved
us to restrain our selves, since the least discovery could produce nothing to
us but most dismal effects.

As Eronima at first sight cancelled all that had hitherto taken possession of
Mahomet's Heart, he became no sooner amorous, than jealous, and suffered us no
long time to partake the pleasure of seeing her in his presence. The Princess
was shut up in a place, by his order, whereunto none but Women and Eunuchs had
access, yet finding her too much exposed at Calchis, he sent her to
Constantinople with all the precaution his love required, without any
possibility of my seeing her.

I understood at Calchis that she suffered Shipwreck upon the Coasts of that
Island, and that the Governor thereof was smitten with her; and had used all
his endeavors to make her sensible of his passion, and had detained her there
contrary to her inclinations.

But she had parted for Constantinople without leaving me the least subject of
consolation, had not Ibrahim assured me he could deliver a Letter to her, which
notwithstanding the great danger, I did run the risque, and it succeeded better
than I durst hope for. Eronima answered my Letter: the Contents whereof were
these: To Eronima.
IF the fear of displeasing you did not exercise a greater power over me, than
that of irritating the Emperor, I would either die at Calchis, or you should
not enter into the Seraglio. But, Madam, I heard all that your eyes spoke to
me, and the obedience I yield to them, is a new proof of my passion, which you
ought to remember with some pity; lament the unfortunate man, who in losing
you, loses all the tranquillity of his life; believe that my affection shall
follow you to those places where the Sultan shall often make you an offering of
his; and doubt not that I will search you in despite of all perils, were I but
assured of your consent.




Solomon then pulled out Eronima's Answer; and read it in these words.

To Solomon.
YOu had cast me into utter despair, had you not understood all that I would
have spoken to you in the presence of Mahomet; your life was at stake, and it
was too much f^ me to wish you should obey me. I have placed your moderation to
account, and demand of you the continuance of those sentiments you have
declared to me, they shall be my chief consolation in distress; but if therein
you desire I should find pleasure without interruption, do not expose your self
to those hazards which may prove equally dreadful to us both, preserve your
self, if you have any kindness for my repose; I shall respect the Sultan and
all his grandeur with so great indifference, that I shall wholly fix my self
upon the remembrance of you.


This, my dear Morat, continued the Bassa, was all that love has yet granted me
by the management of Ibrahim. This mark of Eronima's bounty does something
alleviate my grief; the pleasure of believing my self beloved by her, does
sometimes hinder me from falling into despair; but this is not sufficient to
render me happy, Eronima is in the Seraglio, Mahomet is powerful, and who can
be assured that she will always resist?

Thus Solomon concluded his Discourse, and seeing the grand Gardener to be as
it were in a dream, without speaking; Do thou say nothing to me, Morat?
continued me, And can all the power thou have in the Gardens do nothing for me?
If the Enterprise you would take in hand, replied the Bostangi-Bassa, did only
expose my fortune, or my person, I should not hesitate to give you this
counsel, since your satisfaction seems to be fastened to it: but Solomon,
consider well into what perils it will engage Eronima; the Emperor is generous,
but he is also cruel without moderation when he is offended. The like
Adventures have cost dear to some of our Office. The violencies of Amurat were
not so long since, but you may remember them: if examples in this nature cannot
terrify you, nor the Ideas of punishment restrain you, represent to your self
Eronima, expiring by poison, strangled by Mutes, or some more cruel ways of
death. Cruel Friend, cried the Bassa, why do thou depict so terrible a piece
to me? no, no, I will put no confidence in my love, and I will rather die than
expose Eronima to the least of dangers.

Solomon pronounced these words with so much grief, and in a manner so
piercing, that Morat could not avoid pitying him; he was in love himself, and
knowing all the force of this passion by experience, he resolved in spite of
all that could possibly arrive, to engage himself in a commerce, the least
knowledge whereof, must necessarily destroy all those that were concerned in it.

I have not alleged these difficulties, to excuse my self from serving you,
said he to his friend, embracing him, but I thought my self obliged to
represent them to your view, that so you might undertake nothing without
precaution; dispose then of all the interest my Office gives me; and perhaps
too, said he, smiling upon him, the favor of some one Sultaness; be not
sparing of my life or fortune, and believe that I am ready to undertake all
things for you; I do not despair of giving you even your desired satisfaction,
and I have a certain means to succeed in it.

Solomon expressed his joy and thankfulness to Morat, by an infinite number of
tender words. I would not propose your writing to Eronima, said the grand
Gardener, although I am sure I can deliver the Letter to her own hands, it
would prove but an imperfect pleasure; and if it should happen to be lost, the
events may be of fatal importance: but I will labor to let you see her, she
comes not into the Gardens, whether it be, that she is more strictly observed
than the rest, or that she loves not that walking, I know not: but I know a
person who can make it agreeable to her. I can hide nothing from you, since you
have thus opened your thoughts to me. I am in love with the Sultaness Bassima,
Sister to the Emperor; she has a great intimacy with Eronima: another time I
shall tell you more, but now it is time to go to the Seraglio; and it is
sufficient that I tell you by what means I will serve you.

Morat, by this discourse, restored Solyman's Spirits into a more tranquil
condition than they had known of a long time; and the amorous Bassa relied
wholly upon his promises.

But whilst he flattered himself with the pleasures which the grand Gardener
would give him, Love, who reigns in the Seraglio with greater Empire than in
any part of the world, prepared new Adventures for him.

Although the passionate cares of Mahomet could not shake Eronima's stability,
the jealousy and hatred of Racima were not the less violent; she did not amuse
her self with complaints and murmurings, but sought ways of revenge; by a
powerful intrigue she drew in the Janisaries to her interest, and spread abroad
reports amongst them, not sparing the Emperor's Glory, whatever might engage
them to a dangerous revolt.

This was not difficult for her to do. The Aga, or General of the Janisaries,
was her Creature; 'twas Racima that advanced him from the Emperor's Chamber to
this important charge; he had a natural inclination to infidelity, and every
way proper to execute the fury of Racima. He then spoke aloud amongst the
Janisaries, that it was a great shame for them to live in a detestable
idleness, when they were capable of pretending to the conquest of the whole
world: and in the end condemning the Amors of Mahomet, which buried the chief
Glory of their Arms within the compass of the Seraglio. Thus he with ease
excited those Spirits prone to mutiny.

The Janissaries are the Sultan's Guards, who by their valor are distinguished
far above his other Forces, and the good or ill fortune of the Ottoman Emperors
always depends upon their Caprichio. Amurat the first instituted them, they are
always about the number of twenty thousand of them at the Port of
Constantinople, and sometimes fifty thousand; there is extraordinary care taken
of those who are to fill up these vacancies; they are such persons who are
always passionate for war, and they despise those Princes that do not lead them
out to it.

The happy fortune which joined Victory to all Mahomets Enterprises, had too
much accustomed them to overcome, to reside in peace at the Port of his
Palace; the dangerous Aga adding his subtlety to their natural inclination,
made them look upon the Sultan's love as a weakness that extended even to
themselves; the most cowardly of them highly blamed his Conduct, and made them
cry, To Arms! as often as they saw him appear.

The Prince knew too well the importance of their Insurrections, not to be in
apprehension thereof: he then published, to appease them, that he had great
designs for them, and appeared daily at their Assemblies: but Racima, who spoke
by the mouth of the Aga, let them know how far any such designs were from them;
and destroyed what ever Mahomet's Candor could infuse to them.

Notwithstanding all this could not unbind him from Eronima, and the storm he
saw ready to fall upon him, could not move him. Solomon was the person whom he
esteemed the most in his Empire; and seeing himself in that state which
required prudent Counsels, it was from him alone that he required them: I am
persuaded that my interests are dear to you, Solomon, said he to him, the same
day that he discovered his passion to Morat: You know the fury which begins to
spread it self amongst the Janisaries; and you are not ignorant perhaps, that
it is also the effects of Racima 's Jealousy, I ought to fear the mischievous
consequences: in the mean time, the interest of my heart will not suffer me to
part with Eronima; they would absolutely destroy her, and I am resolved to
defend her, although it should prove to be even at the expense of my whole
Empire; give me, if it be possible, such counsels as may be agreeable with my
love; and tell me what I may do to calm these troubles, and preserve the thing
that I love; I am to be pityed every way, the inflexible Eronima will not so
much as hear my sighs, though they are likely to cost me so dear. I could make
use of my authority to constrain her; but tyranny is not the way to gain a
heart.

Solomon was truly generous, and how great interest soever he had in the
Emperor's Discourse, he could not choose but pity him; he assured the Prince of
his zeal and discretion; but at the same time he could not avoid tasting some
joy, in learning from the mouth of a redoubted Rival, that Eronima was still
the same: he answered the confidence that Mahomet reposed in him, by the most
useful counsels that he was able to give him, as that he should always flatter
the Janisaries, and affect some pleasant aspects toward the Sultaness Queen,
till such time as he could work upon some of the best beloved Officers of the
Empire, to put the Forces and People of Constantinople into a condition of
withstanding the rage of the Janisaries. I will render your fortune so little
different from my own, said the Emperor to Solomon, that you shall know how
great my acknowledgments are for your fidelity, and in espousing you to the
Sultaness Bassima, my Sister, I will link you so close to my person, that
nothing shall ever remove you from me. The Bassa's countenance changed at this
Discourse; and Mahomet imagining it was with joy, accompanied his promises with
many embraces; Solomon not imagining any thing that could authorize a refusal,
which must necessarily banish him from the Emperor's favor, was constrained to
feign an acceptance, and make secret reparations to Eronima and Morat.

As soon as he awaked on the morrow, he failed not to seek for the Bostangi
Bassa, but could not speak with him in two days after. The Emperors promise to
Solomon, in respect of the Princess Bassima did not allarm the grand Gardener,
who knew the generosity of his Friend, and his pre-engagement to another; he
told him that he had seen the young Sultaness who was very much inclined to
serve him with the Princess Eronima; 'twas now a great honor to Solomon to have
engaged a person of that importance in his intrigue, and his hopes thereof were
augmented.

The Sultaness Bassima loved Morat too tenderly, not to endeavor with all
expedition to serve his friend; there was no time limited for her to see
Eronima, but she went to her Appartments at her own pleasure; and the Sultan
who loved his Sister, was over-joyed to see her contract a friendship with a
person that was the most dear in the world to him.

The lovely Sultaness soon found an occasion to speak of Solomon, whereat
Eronima blushed; but Bassima cast a look upon her, that answered for her
sincerity; I am interessed for the Bassa, said she to her, and although I am
Sister to the Emperor, you need not have the least scruple in speaking to me; I
knew some time since that he loves you; I am not ignorant of your Adventures at
Constantinople, of those since at Negropont; and I know better since that he
has suffered for you all that love can make a man suffer: and begs your sight
but for one moment, as a recompense for all the misfortunes you have created
him; This Discourse made Eronima's color to increase; but seeing the Ottoman
Princess so well instructed in what had passed betwixt her and the Bassa, she
was obliged to acknowledge it. It Is true, that Solomon, said she, has done
those things for me which merit my utmost thankfulness; and had I believed this
passion which you assure me he reserves for me, I could still enjoy that
liberty which I ought not to hope for; you can know only from himself what you
have now related to me; and in what place, Madam, she went on sighing, have you
seen him? Does he come exposing himself to the cruel Adventures of the
Seraglio? He has not yet done it, answered Bassima, but I hope that you and I
shall give him an opportunity; the entry into the Gardens is free to us. Ah,
Madam, cried Eronima, I have not resolution enough to engage him in so manifest
a peril. These obstacles which allarm you, interrupted the young Sultaness,
have hitherto caused more fear than mischief; I was born in the Seraglio, and I
know all the Avenues thereof; the Eunuchs have some deference for me, and you
are Mistress of your own walks; I have some power over the grand Gardener,
follow my advice, and do not refuse Solomon that satisfaction which will cost
you so little. Bassima then acquainted Eronima of her intelligence with Morat;
and at last surmounted the repugnancy she had testified.

There are occasions when love fights only to be overcome: Eronima consented to
what the Sultaness desired, so that all things contributed to favor the Bassa;
an Indisposition fortunately kept the Emperor in his Bed. Morat neglected not
so favorable an opportunity; and after he had given the Princesses a
Rendezvous in a place called the Sultaness Grotto, at the appointed hour he
took care to conduct his Friend thither.

The Season was fair, the Emperor sick, the Sultanesses retired, the Gardiners
gone to rest, and the Gardens, by the diligence of Morat, more solitary than
they were ever wont to be: Solomon trod those Walks with that agreeable emotion
which precedes the greatest pleasures; and the grand Gardener having conducted
him into the Sultanesses Grotto, left him there, whilst he went out to spy lest
any one should come to trouble them.

Love, and the hopes of Happiness, whereof he believed himself secure, banished
all his griefs: he had not long attended, but some body came in, and an amorous
transport immediately laid him prostrate at the feet of a Princess, where he
lay fighing for some minutes without being able to speak: but at length, It is
then permitted me to see you, Madam, said he in the most tender manner in the
world, and in despite of all the difficulties which had taken from me all
hopes, I can speak to you of my Love. Solomon had fixed his eyes upon the face
of a person who heard him; and the Moon lent him so much light, as to let him
see, that fortune had most cruelly deceived him, and that all which he thought
he had spoken to Eronima, was addressed to the Queen Sultaness.

If his Surprise at this Adventure was great, that of Racima's was not less;
she saw a man at her feet who appeared very amorous. The Customs of the
Seraglio made her Mistress of his life; she then deeply resented Mahomets
inconstancy, the vengeance she hoped for from the Janisaries seemed too flow;
and beholding Solomon, whom she instantly knew, as an instrument wherewith she
might the more readily succor her self, she resolved not to neglect this
occasion.

Do you certainly know that I am Racima? said she, angerly to him, and the
place where I see you, with the discourse which you use to me give me the power
over your life, since you are Bassa to the Emperor, and that nothing can secure
you from his wrath, if I acquaint him with your undertaking. Solomon was less
sensible of the danger that threatened him, than of the joy that he had spoke
nothing which could discover Eronima, choosing rather to feign a thing quite
opposite to his sentiments to conceal the truth of them: Yes, Madam, he
replied, I know you are the Queen Sultaness, and that I have not less offended
the Emperor in approaching this place, than in discovering to you the state of
my heart; we cannot guide love as we list, it is a passion which observes no
rule; and since it does absolutely possess me, I shall find more sweetness in
dying after I have declared it to you, than in living with a secret that has
made me languish so long a time.

The Sultaness knew her Beauty sufficiently to persuade her that the Bassa's
vows were real and sincere; he had seen her often enough upon public occasions
to become amorous of her; and she being desirous to gain a man absolutely,
whose ambition to please her might render him capable of all things, since he
had already exposed himself to such imminent dangers; you may possibly find
greater difficulties to encounter another time, said she, but the present
temper of my Soul is favorable to you, as well as the season of retiring in
the Seraglio; and if you truly think what you speak, it shall be your fault if
you are not very fortunate; but be sure you narrowly respect what it is you
engage in; I do not only require love in you, but submission, zeal and
perseverance; you must assure me of a perfect obedience to what soever I shall
demand of you; I give you two days to consider of it, at the end whereof you
shall return to me in the same place, and at the same hour, to receive from me
the measures of your Conduct.

To what constraint soever this accident might engage the Bassa, he chose
rather to submit to it, than to give the least suspicion of the truth; he told
Racima all that he possibly could, to persuade her that he was amorous of her,
he promised her to return to her the same person that she could desire him.

She left him in this manner, and he expected Eronima a long time; being in a
great Consternation by this Adventure, he pretended to make her a thousand
reparations for this fault to which his misfortune had enforced him, but it was
in vain; and he went out of the Sultanesses Grotto to seek the grand Gardener,
and finding him in the first Ally, I am, said he to him, the most unfortunate
of all men. You would be so, replied Morat, and your impatience in going out of
the Grotto has deprived you of Eronima's sight: What would you tell me?
replied Solomon. That she sought for you, said the Bostangi Bassa, and that not
finding you in the Grotto, she is returned into the Seraglio, and has robbed
me of the conversation of Bassima. I am undone, Morat, cried Solomon. He then
recounted to him what had passed, and they were both of opinion, that Eronima
at her entrance into the Grotto had heard what Solomon said to Racima, and
moved with anger and jealousy had retired.

Morat comforted his Friend, and promised him that he would disabuse the
Princess by Bassima, and procure him some more happy rendezvous. He advised him
at last to pursue his feigned passion, which would render him Master of
Racima's confidence, and of all the Mysteries of the Seraglio, and made him
absolutely remember not to fail the Queen Sultaness of the Meeting, which might
do him a vast prejudice; they went out of the Gardens together, and did not
part that night.

Morat heard in the morning that Bassima was sick, at which Solomon despaired,
because this would retard his justification. The two days that Racima gave him,
ran away too swift against his inclination; and at the appointed hour, the
grand Gardener conducted him to the Sultanesses Grotto; no sooner had he entered
therein, but the Queen Sultaness arrived, attended by a Slave, who immediately
retired.

You see, said she, with how great confidence I render my self to the first
marks of your love; my facility ought to surprise you: but in short, are you
prepared to act implicitly all that can persuade me to think that you seek only
to please me, and have you no remorse that you have already engaged so far?

The Bassa was so confused, that Racima might easily have discovered it, had
not the place been so dark; but he concealed his disorder as much as possibly
he could, and did so well persuade the Sultaness, that she no longer doubted of
his sincerity; and taking the habit of a Woman Slave, which she had hid in the
Grotto, she put it upon the Bassa, and covering his face with a Veil, made him
follow her to the Seraglio, which he did, but with an agitation difficult to be
expressed.

As soon as Racima was entered into her Chamber; she commanded all persons to
withdraw, except the Slave who followed her to the Grotto; and for the greater
security, she made Solomon go into a Closet; and observing some emotion in his
countenance, Is it, said she to him, Love, or Fear, to see your self in a place
you believe to be dangerous, that makes you unmovable? do but love, and never
trouble your self, there is nothing wanting to the precautions that I take; and
if the possession of my heart be dear to you, you have now the power to gain it
for ever; you did not tremble at introducing your self into the Gardens, where
you might have been surprised by persons who would not have spared you, do not
deceive the good opinion I have of you: it is not sufficient for me to hear that
I am beloved, I must have the effect of all that I have required from you, and
you shall be happy since fortune puts me into a capacity to make use of you.

Solomon began to feel that he was not capable to continue this counterfeit for
long time, repented himself that he had believed the counsel of Morat,
necessity forced him to answer; and he did all that he could possibly to
content Racima by his words. You know, said she, the injury that the Emperor
has done me, in giving up himself to a Slave; a brave Soul can ill suffer
these sort of inconstancies; I have put in practice all things to revenge my
self, the Janisaries have murmured, they may yet make an Insurrection by my
means: but their Commotions perhaps may not reach my Rival, I must have a more
sure and expedite revenge; and it is from you, Solomon, that I demand it. I
pretend to punish Mahomet in giving you a heart which you deserve better than
he; but you must repay this Boon, by a service that may establish my Repose.
Your hand must commit an illustrious Crime, and must carry Mahomets own Arms,
and this Poniard, said she, pulling out one of the Emperor's, which she had
hidden, must punish his Infidelities, and deliver the Seraglio from a Captive,
who makes it groan under her Lovers troubles. In a word, I command you
forthwith to go even to Eronima's Bed, and take away her life; after such an
Expedition, expect the utmost of my Acknowledgment: the Janisaries are for me,
my Son's Party is potent, and some thing may happen to make you the Head of the
Empire. But, Solomon, said she, seeing his Color change, you are disturbed, do
not abuse me, she continued, casting a furious look upon him, and merit that
confidence I repose in you.

Solomon was in so great a consternation at these words, that he could not look
upon the Sultaness without horror, but endeavoring to sweeten her eyes, which
by so wicked a design, gave a threatening aspect. If I were to fight the entire
body of the Janisaries, said he to her, or force the Gates of the Seraglio, you
should not see me pause to do it, at the least of your orders; but, Madam,
would you have me stab a Maid, that has no weapon to oppose me with, but an
innocent sleep; can a Lover so barbarous be pleasing to you, and is there no
other way to revenge your Beauty? stay a little, till time disgusts the
Emperor, and scorn that change which is only ignominious to him.

If you truly loved me, replied the cruel Racima, you would only have in
prospect the glory of obeying this my proposition, a little Blood which I too
justly condemn, would not affright you; alas, you refuse me a trembling hand,
which perhaps would serve me ill, my own shall find a readier path to the heart
of my Enemy, and in a few moments she shall be no longer in a condition to
disquiet me.

This Transport redoubled the fears of Solomon; never was any Lover seen in so
deplorable an extremity; the most violent Woman in the World extorting from him
the worst of ills against a person he adored; he must either destroy Eronima,
or himself if it should take the least breath, and after a hundred different
resolutions, he fixes upon this, to manage Racima's inclinations, and to
deceive her, at least, till such time as he could advertise Eronima thereof,
and to put things in that posture, to be wholly sacrificed to the Emperor's
wrath.

I believed, Madam, you only sought to try me, said he to her, with a more free
air; but since you resolve to have Eronima 's life effectually, I promise it
with pleasure. In the mean time, said he, the better to persuade Racima, I
shall plead for Mahomet; that you shall no sooner be without a Rival, but you
shall restore him your heart. This doubt entirely pacified the Sultaness, whom
Solyman's resistance had irritated. She assured him, that he ought to fear
nothing, and that he should have no reason to repent his serving her. At length
she told him, that she had taken all her measures, that he ought not to delay,
but a few minutes before he went to Eronima's Chamber, that as soon as he had
revenged her, she would conduct him her self out of the Gardens; and that on
the morrow he should receive her Orders for all things that he was to do.

Whilst she was thus speaking, he thought upon nothing but Eronima's safety;
one while he designed to declare this Adventure even to Mahomet; but as this
could not be done without discovering his passion for the Princess, he was
constrained to bethink himself not to tell it to any but she, when Racima had
introduced him into her Chamber.

All these vexations hindered him not from promising himself some pleasure in
hopes to see her one moment. At last, the hour that he was to go, arrived, and
he marched under the conduct of a Woman slave, confident to Racima, after he
had received the barbarous instructions of the Queen Sultaness.

A profound silence now reigned over the whole Seraglio, the Eunuchs were
retired, the Sultanesses at repose, and all the Lights extinguished. The Slave
left the Bassa at the first Door of Eronima's Apartment, which was left open by
a treacherous Eunuch, whom Racima had corrupted; and after he had passed
through many Chambers, he entered into the Princesses Lodgings, which were still
light.

A mortal grief oppressed her ever since she heard his amorous conversation in
the Grotto, she had not stirred out of her Chamber, and Bassima being sick, had
not undeceived her, and believing every thing that might make her despair, she
spent her time in complaints.

When Solomon entered, she was laid down on a Couch with her Clothes on,
lamenting her Captivity less than the pretended Infidelity of her Lover, she
lay sometime without espying him at her Chamber door, where he stopped: but at
length perceiving him, and believing it was some Slave more careful of her than
the rest, who came to see if she wanted any thing: Retire, said she to him,
with a great deal of candor, if I cannot take my own repose, it is unjust I
should deprive others of theirs: the forlorn Slave durst not advance. She
continued, Your diligence does me no kindness now; retire, I command you.

Solomon stood thus no longer, but cast himself at Eronima's Feet. She thought
still the Slave would have asked some favor of her; but fixing her eyes upon
his face, she soon discovered, notwithstanding her tears, and his disguise,
some Lines which grief had not struck out of her memory, she had neither power
to rise, nor to express her surprise; her love that was irritated, and his that
was not, found themselves equally without motion, and a reciprocal trouble
hindered these two persons, who loved the best of any in the world, from saying
any thing of it. Yet nothing could hinder Solyman's sense of the pleasure in
beholding the Princess, which made him at this moment forget even the imminent
danger that threatened him, and notwithstanding Eronima's Resentments of his
infidelity, her eyes cast a tender aspect upon him, and found him always too
amiable.

The Bassa was just going to force his silence, and to spare a long recital of
his woes, to justify himself, when a sudden noise causing him to turn his
head, he espied the Emperor coming into the Chamber, and the Queen Sultaness
conducted by many Eunuchs.

Racima could not introduce Solomon to the Seraglio with that secrecy, but
Altagis, a Black Eunuch, faithful to the Emperor, perceived it, who knew all
the Slaves, and finding something extraordinary in the Visage of the Bassa,
partly suspected him, and immediately went to advertise the Emperor thereof,
whose discourse disquieted him, he knew by experience the Capaciousness of the
Sultan Queens spirit, and not being able to pass over the night without better
informing himself, he repaired to the Women's Appartment, and afterward to
Racima's Chamber.

Her impatience to know what Solomon had done, obliged her to follow him in a
short time; Mahomet not finding her in her Chamber, was confirmed in the
Eunuch's suspicions, and went directly to Eronima's Lodgings: now all was dark,
for the Emperor would suffer no Lights with him; and Racima hearing a noise,
thought it had been Solomon, imagining no other persons were awake in the
Seraglio: Is it you, Solomon? said she, coming toward him, have you sacrificed
Eronima to me, and have you merited that I shall make you happy? The Emperor no
longer doubting, at these words seized the Sultaness by the Arm, and
accompanied this action with menacing words, she knew the Prince's voice, and
despair, seeing her self discovered, taking away part of her reason, she
replied only by injurious Language.

Mahomet stopped not to hear them, the interest of Eronima called him to her,
entering then into her Chamber (and causing Racima also to be conducted thither
by the Eunuchs which Altagis had called) at the sight of the Bassa there, and
the remembrance of the Queen Sultanesses words, he trembled; but fury
succeeding his fear, there was no point of cruelty, to which desire of revenge
did not transport his imagination. Traitor, said he to Solomon, what come
thou to seek in these sacred places? and what base commerce can thou have
with this guilty Sultaness? Take my life, Sir, if that be capable of giving you
satisfaction, replied the Bassa, but take care for the preservation of
Eronima's. Do thou, perfidious wretch, said the Sultan, do thou exhort me
to be careful of that life which even now thou would have sacrificed? Let him
be loaded with Irons, Altagis, take him from my sight, and let him be close
Prisoner, till I determine the time and manner of his punishment.

The unhappy Solomon was several times tempted to discover the secret of his
heart; but the fear of displeasing Eronima, or contracting any misfortune upon
her, prevented him, so that he only cast upon her some glances full of love and
despair, but full of horror upon Racima; and following the Eunuchs that led him
away, malicious fortune would make him appear yet more criminal in dropping the
Poniard which the Queen Sultaness had given him.

She found the Bassa appear too amiable and too obedient, to see him led to the
place where he must lose his life, she was not troubled that she was the cause
of her own misfortune, and this thought rendered Mahomet and the very day odious
to her. It Is I, said she, that conducted him hither; and it is me alone thou
ought to punish, I had armed him with thine own Poniard to destroy my Rival,
and our enterprise unfortunately failing, revenge thy self on me if thou
dare, she shall not long enjoy the pleasure of my loss, and the loss of her
shall not be the least of thy misfortunes.

Thus whilst Racima's fury expressed it self in this manner, Eronima was just
expiring in the Arms of her Women, it was not enough for her to believe Solomon
was unfaithful, but she saw him ready to sheath a Poniard in her Heart; this
reflection made Racima silent, dried her tears, shut her eyes, and put her into
that condition which persuaded the Emperor she was now contented.

Whilst her rage thus pleased it self at so dolesome a Spectacle, the Princess
recovered a little strength, by the care of her Slaves, and casting her eyes
upon her implacable Enemy: You have acted more, said she to her, (with a
languishing voice) than you designed to do; the death which you prepared had
been agreeable to me, but the life which now is left me, is going to be exposed
to a thousand times more sensible evils. The Sultan would have spoke to the
Princess, but she conjured him to give her some moments repose; and as he only
sought to please her, he retired, having first given orders to many Eunuchs to
watch round her Apartments.

If I hearkened only to my just indignation, said he to Racima, thou should
not survive so many crimes, but I must punish them with greater terror, and
Bajazet's Partisans shall see, of what a Mother he has the misfortune to be
born. At length he caused her to be secured in her Chamber, and after having
set a Guard upon her, he retired with Altagis, who prudently counseled him,
not to publish an Adventure which so much dishonored him, and which might
cause Racima's Creatures to make an Insurrection: Mahomet knew the zeal of this
Eunuch, and following his advice which appeared so reasonable to him, he
concealed his wrath, and left the people to divine at the cause of the Bassa's
and Racima's disgrace.

Solomon was in a condition the most deplorable of all men, he was much less
concerned at the fear of death, than at the horror of an accident which made
him appear as Eronima's Assassin; he continually thought upon this, and
preferred the good fortune of justifying himself, beyond his own life; the
Princess had incessantly before her eyes the Image of her pretended Assassin,
if the Blackness of his Attempt did inspire her with any resentment, it was
soon obliterated by the Idea of that vengeance the Emperor was going to take.
She was now in the same Palace where she first saw Solomon, and where she
received those Services which engaged her to so tender an acknowledgment, Why,
said she oftentimes, did he spare my life at such a time, when I looked upon
him with horror, to take it after I had given him my whole esteem? the
sentiments I have for him, have rendered all things else indifferent to me, how
many woes has he cost me when I was constrained to shun him, what griefs has
he not caused me since I arrived at the Seraglio? yet the barbarous man, after
he had taken his heart from me, whose possession sweetened all my Sufferings,
comes to sacrifice me to the least favors of my Rival, yet in spite of all
the infidelities he is guilty of, my tenderness still interesses it self for
him, I have the weakness to lament him, and I would save his at the expense of
my own life: Ah! cruel destiny of the Paleologeans, she added, (in pouring
forth a torrent of tears) why do thou so severely prosecute the Survivers?

The Princess continued in the like agitations all the succeeding days to this
Adventure; the Emperor redoubled his cares for her, and his spite for Racima;
who, notwithstanding her captivity, and moreover that she was convicted of
several grand crimes; still hoped for succor from her subtle spirit.

Although the truth was not known of what had passed in the Seraglio, none
could be ignorant of the Queen Sultanesses disgrace, and of Solyman's
imprisonment, it was diversely discoursed of; but Morat alone penetrated the
reasons thereof, the indisposition of Bassima hindered him from learning the
particulars; the Emperor appeared so troubled and so reserved that he durst not
speak the least syllable of it to him; and Altagis, who was his acquaintance,
stirred not from the Women's Appartments, so that he was obliged to content
himself with what he knew, and to seek, with some others of the Bassa's
Friends, the means which they thought most proper to appease the Emperor's
wrath.

But whilst they hereunto applied themselves vigorously, the Queen Sultaness
was not idle on her part, her disgrace had not diminished her credit; and
seeing that all Mahomet's resentment was limited by her imprisonment; She took
advantage at his indulgence, and entertaining a pernicious commerce with the
Aga of the Janisaries, she caused her Captivity to be published as nothing but
the Sultan's injustice.

How great a shame is it for us, says this Agent of Racima's loudly, to see the
Mother to the Heir of the Empire, a Princess who loves glory, and the repose of
her Subjects, sacrificed to the ambition of a Slave, who renders Mahomet the
weakest of all men? The generous Solomon is at present chained with Irons, for
being ready to serve the Queen Sultaness, and the Empire, let us not doubt but
the same misfortune will shortly befall us; it is in your power, brave
Janisaries, to put an obstacle hereunto: you, I say, who are the only honor
and support of the Empire, elevate Bajazet upon the Throne, give him early
lessons of valor and generosity, he will without doubt make good use thereof,
and you will assuredly signalize your selves hereby.

This Discourse was approved by a general shout, the Janisaries spoke now of
nothing but forcing the Seraglio, to snatch the feeble Mahomet from thence, to
set up the young Prince in his place, and to strangle Eronima at Racima's feet.
They loved Solomon whose valor was approved and murmured highly at his
imprisonment.

Constantinople was divided in a moment, the Janisaries, the Port, and even the
Seraglio, but the Queens Party was always the most potent; the Janisaries were
now in so great a number in the City, that they alone were able to defend it.

The Queen Sultaness soon learned in what manner Fortune acted for her
interest, and promised her self, by these favorable beginnings, the liberty of
Solomon, the destruction of Eronima, and the Coronation of Bajazet.

This Consternation less disquieted the Emperor for his own sake than for
Eronima's; his wrath excited him highly against Solomon, whom he looked upon as
the chief motive of this Rebellion, he several times pronounced the sentence of
his death, but he could find none to execute it; and as he was confined in the
Seraglio, the fear of Racima hindered the obedience due to his Orders: You will
lose your self, Sir, in taking off Solomon, said the Chief of the Eunuchs to
him, you may from hence hear the Janisaries mention his name, it appears
sufficiently that his life is dear to them, calm this Tempest which grows loud,
before you think upon vengeance, and give not the Mutineers a new subject to
rebel. Mahomet was constrained to have some deference to these reasons, he knew
the necessity he had to show himself to the Soldiers, but he would not do it
till he had seen Eronima again, that at least he might have this satisfaction,
in case any accident should befall him, to hinder it for the future.

He found her in her usual melancholy, but accompanied with those Charms that
made him forget the preservation of his life and grandeur; I am just at the
point of perishing, fair Eronima, said he to her, is it possible you can refuse
me at a time of misfortune and despair, what you would not accord me in my
prosperity? I have lived without being able to make your heart flexible; and
must I die in the same misfortune; can pity do nothing for me, and shall the
Janisaries in bereaving me of my Crown and Life, have the pleasure to see me
hated by you to the last minute? The Princess who knew nothing of the troubles
which menaced the Sultan's Grandeur, was surprised at this Discourse. I am not
injust enough to make vows against the happiness of your life, Sir, said she,
and if it depended only upon me to establish it, I should not forbear to wish
it you earnestly.

Your Sentiments, Madam, are very generous, said the Sultan, but I wish they
were more tender; should you have a little bounty for me, it were a weakness
whereof you would not be obliged to blush; and if you did but love unfortunate
Mahomet, he had perhaps acquired sufficient glory to justify your heart. You
would enjoy but little by this advantage, she replied. It Is true, the Prince
interrupting her, said sighing, that fortune has declared her self against me,
and that she attacks my power, and perhaps my life amidst all the Forces of my
Empire: but could I be assured of being beloved by you but one moment, I should
die with an entire satisfaction. If you will not give me this Boon, at least
promise to bewail me. The Janisaries would not trouble me, if my passion for
you were less violent; it is the fair Eronima that makes all things revolt
against me. Ha! Sir, replied the Princess, give them the blood of a miserable
woman who creates so many troubles, my death will restore your quiet, and make
them more submissive. You shall live in despite of them, said the Emperor in a
most tender manner, and though it cannot be for me, it shall be at least to
conserve some remembrance of me. The treacherous Solomon alone shall die, he
has but too long survived his crime, it is now time to punish him, and revenge
our selves.

You may put him to death when you please, Sir, replied the Princess (who was
far from wishing the Bassa's death) but I do not solicit you to lose a person
whole valor has been so successful to you; is he so criminal as to have
prevented the Janisaries hatred; and if he does really love Racima, is he not
sufficiently punished for it? -- Eronima was interrupted by an extraordinary
shout, and Altagis came in mightily affrighted to give the Emperor notice, that
the Janisaries had already passed the first Gates of the Seraglio, and were
forcing their way further: Guard this Chamber, said he to the Eunuch, I will go
and expose my self to their fury; but first of all the perfidious Solomon shall
lose his life. The Princess remained astonished at these words, and the Emperor
marched to the places where he was called.

He there presently espied a Crowd of Janisaries, with their Weapons in their
hands, and lifting up his voice that he might be heard, What come you here to
seek, said he to them, have you any right to authorize this your violence? They
answered, We demand Eronima, and the liberty of Solomon; and we pretend in
forcing this slave from you, to restore your valor to its first force, and to
re-establish you in the paths of Glory. Villains, replied the Sultan, this
valor which you know so little to respect, may yet conduct you into those
parts where you may repent the povoking of it. How! do ye pretend to come, and
regulate both my designs and my actions, even into my very Palace? would you
have me abandon the dearest interests of my heart to you? No, Eronima shall
never go out of the Seraglio, till you have spilt all my blood; and for the
Traitor whom ye demand, I Will deliver him to you in such a manner as befits his
Crime, and my Resentment.

These words excited a new murmuring amongst the Janisaries. They cried, that
they must be obliged to pull out Eronima and Solomon by force: Come Traitors,
said the Emperor to them, putting his hand upon his Cymeter, attack your
Prince, whom a far greater number of Enemies is not capable to affright, and
who knows well how to punish those that offend him, to make them consider more
than once how they revolt from him. The Sultan's Guards were ranged round about
him: but the Janisaries were in so terrible a rage, that they overthrew without
respect all things that would oppose their passage.

Racima on her part excited the like Commotions within the Seraglio: she had
been advertised that the Emperor was going to strangle Solomon; all the Eunuchs
feared her, and whilst Altagis guarded Eronima's Chamber, she found an
opportunity to escape from her own, and told the Janisaries so loud of it, that
they were going to put all to the edge of the Sword, if the Bassa should be put
to death, who was prisoner in the Seraglio, so that fear opened the Gates where
he was kept, just as the Emperor's Orders were going to be executed.

His liberty made him not more fierce; but he learned the revolt of the
Janisaries with much grief, and far from joining with them, he went to seek the
Emperor with a resolution to die for his Interests. He found him in a Gallery
whither he was forced to retire, whilst the Janisaries continued their
Insolence.

The sight of Solomon astonished Mahomet, who imagined that he who would not
abhor the stabbing of Eronima, now led on the Rebels to attack him, but his
submissive Deportment soon changed his opinion. Sir, said Solomon, upon his
knees, and throwing his Cymerer down at his feet, I come endeavoring to merit
that pardon which I beg of you; I am ready to die, to see that displeasure in
you which I have occasioned, and to revenge you upon the very Authors of my
Liberty; I have no sentiments for the Queen Sultaness which can offend you; and
I was so far from being willing to destroy Eronima, that I would have died a
thousand times to preserve her.

This Discourse had so little appearance of truth to the Emperor that he gave
no credit to it, My eyes are convinced of what thou would disavow, said he, I
am not so easily abused; I am persuaded of the correspondence thou have with
Racima, and not less of the enormous Enterprise which thou have made against
the life of Eronima, pursue thy treachery, Villain, and affect not an
artificial excuse, since I ought not to put any confidence in an Enemy who
would assault my Glory and my Repose.

Solomon was not repulsed, but obliged all people to withdraw, and recited to
the Emperor the intrigue of his Amors, avowing to him that he entered into the
Gardens of the Seraglio, only with the hopes to see Eronima, and afterward
what had happened betwixt him and Racima.

The Emperor's surprise hereat was extraordinary; the importance of the Bassa's
protestations persuaded him of the truth hereof; and as Mahomet had a Soul
truly generous, he thought the Bassa was unhappy enough, since Eronima was
persuaded he would have taken away her life. The Emperor's jealousy,
notwithstanding, and interest for his glory were declared against his Rival,
who to all appearances was tenderly beloved, and who against all Laws came even
into the Women's Seraglio to demand new favors of Eronima; this crime touched
the Emperor to the quick, but it was not now time to hearken to his
Resentments, since all things made insurrection against him; You are more happy
than I, said he to Solomon, the heart of Eronima has declared in your favor;
and it is to you alone that I owe all these rigours; two words may justify you
to her, and my own indignation is not powerful enough to oblige me to take
vengeance on you, triumph over my misfortune, and my weakness; but at least
stay till the Janisaries have completed their Enterprise, and let me not see
those things which will prove much more cruel to me than the loss of my whole
Empire. Solomon, who knew the violent humor of the Sultan, and was not ignorant
that it had oftentimes transported him even to cruelty, was astonished at his
moderation. Believe not that I abuse your bounty, Sir, said he to him, I have
not pretended to justify my self to you in avowing that I loved Eronima, but
only to let you know that I am sincere and unfortunate, that I loved before
you, and that I have used all my industry and care to surmount my love, which
if it be absolute over me, Sir, the zeal and respect I have for you are not
less, and I have as much ardor and fidelity for my Master as for my Mistress,
let us then endeavor to subject the Mutineers, and secure an authority equal
to the merit of your glory: and after this, Sir, said he, sighing, you shall
peaceably enjoy the presence of Eronima.

Whilst these two illustrious Rivals did thus explain themselves, news was
brought to the Emperor, that the tumult and disorder continually increased,
that the Seraglio began to mutiny, and every one declared for Racima. If you
have any fidelity remaining for me, said the Emperor to Solomon, you see how
necessary it is to make it appear, go show your self to the Janisaries, and
endeavor to appease their fury, whilst I labor to calm the Seraglio. The
Sultan delayed no longer, but pressed himself where necessity called him,
whilst Solomon marched to the Mutineers; his presence made them give great
Shouts for joy; Morat was one of those who took the greatest share in the good
fortune of his Liberty, but they were not in a place to take that satisfaction
their Amity required.

Solomon made a long discourse to the Janisaries exhorting them to their
obedience due to the Emperor, but he found them not in any such disposition;
they all cried out, To war, to war; and the Bassa persisting in his
persuasions; was threatened with a more rude entertainment from them, than in
the prison of the Seraglio.

The people of Constantinople looked on quietly, during these Divisions,
flattering themselves with a more mild Government in the minority of Bajazet,
they took not the Emperor's part, the Aga of the Janisaries made what progress
he could, and Mahomet, who before was the terror of the world, was now at the
very point of being sacrificed to the jealousy of a Woman.

In all the different Allarms, Eronima had particular ones, the uproar of the
Janisaries reached her Appartment, which she could not distinguish, and the
fear of hearing some dreadful news of Solomon, made her not dare to enquire.
Altagis never quitted her, neither did he understand the state of Affairs: at
length they arrived to that pitch of disorder, that the Seraglio of the Women
was attacked, Racima's party endeavored to facilitate the Janisaries entrance,
or at least they would deliver Eronima to them; Mahomet had contracted their
odium by certain severities which had animated even the very lowest of their
Officers against him, and he had the displeasure to see them all come over to
the interest of the Queen Sultaness.

He fought furiously against all that approached him; but what valor could be
able to resist so great Forces? he encountered singly against a formidable
Party, whose Efforts redoubled each moment; and whatever Solomon, Morat, and
their Friends could do to moderate the Janisaries; all obstacles were nigh
surmounted, when the Emperor was seen to appear upon a Balcony, but in such a
manner that made the stoutest Courages to tremble with horror; his countenance
was affrighting, and all his action terrible, he held in one hand his Cymeter
covered over with blood, the other held the head of a Woman, just separated
from her Body, the face thereof was so mangled, none could discern the
features, and many believed it was Racima's; Solomon himself imagined so, and
though the Sultan's Action appeared barbarous to him, he did not condole a
woman who had too well merited the like Treatment. The Janisaries immediately
prepared themselves to revenge her death upon the Sultan, when he undeceived
them in this manner.

Behold the object of your hatred, said he to them with a loud voice, that he
might be heard by the farthest off, Behold the head of Eronima, which I deliver
to you, and which with my own hand I have sacrificed to your fury, judge by
this so unexpected an action, of what great things Mahomet is capable, and
tremble at the mighty works he is preparing for you; it is now that he will
conduct you to such Enemies, whose valor shall revenge the amiable Eronima; do
not think he will spare you, after this days surprising proof of his
resolution, you shall see if you dare follow him, the most dreadful appearances
the horrors of War can show; but if this blood I have now spilt cannot satisfy
you, come, cruel men, come quench your thirst with mine, and to complete this
bloody Scene, crown Racima's ambition in elevating Bajazet to the Throne.

This Speech of the Sultan's, the sight of this head which had been so dear to
him, and which he had cut off with his own hand, struck all the Spectators with
astonishment; they approved this barbarous action, and had not broke silence,
but to reiterate their Acclamations, crying, Long live our great Emperor,
Sultan Mahomet.

But the despairing Solomon mixed most doleful Cries with those of the
Janisaries. What a dismal sight was this to him? In what a condition was the
adorable Eronima presented to him? and what did he not find himself capable to
do in his first transport? He alone had acted more than all the Janisaries, had
his strength been answerable to his courage: But a most just grief made her
self entirely Mistress of his Soul, he fell dow^ in a swoon amidst those that
surrounded him from whence Morat (who was neither less surprised, nor less
afflicted) caused him to be carried, whilst the Janisaries, being satisfied
with Mahomet's Cruelty, took a new Oath of Fidelity to him, and retired from
the Seraglio, whither the Emperor returned, after he had calmed all things.

Solomon recovered not his weakness, but only to give some marks of his
despair, whereof Morat found it a hard task to moderate his Transports, he
endeavored by all sorts of Reasons and Arguments, to oblige the Bassa to make
use of his constancy, but he heard him with trouble and full of just
resentment, he meditated the destruction of all the Janisaries, the death of
the barbarous Mahomet, and of pityless Racima: at length, the sacking of
Constantinople, the entire ruin of the Empire, and the destruction of the
whole Ottoman Race, were things too sweet for his Revenge.

Whilst he was thus occupied by all these sad Meditations, a Message came to
him that the Emperor enquired for him: How! said he, He that found no horror in
spilling Eronima's blood, does he pretend that I shall see him peaceably, I
shall undoubtedly go even to the Seraglio: but it shall only be to take away
his life. Be not so transported, replied Morat, he may perhaps say something to
you may make you alter your opinion. Alas, what can he say to me, replied
Solomon, that can strike out of my memory the terrifying spectacle, he but now
presented to my eyes? Have I not seen Eronima's Head separate from her body?
The Cymeter of this Barbarian, was it not stained with that blood which was so
dear to me? And would you still have me moderate? The grand Gardener at last
persuaded Solomon to return to the Seraglio, without offering any violence.

The night was far advanced when they arrived at the Seraglio; Morat conducted
his Friend to the Emperor's Appartment, and there left him to go in alone; for
the order was not given for him. Solomon thus walkked to the Sultan's Chamber,
with all the emotion that a man can have, when he is going to see the
Executioner of that person whom he loved the best in the world.

Mahomet was then without Guards, without Eunuchs, and in that dejected
condition, which gave great facility to attempt his life: but Solomon, though
enraged to the utmost, had a certain natural respect for his Prince, which
opposed it self to all things wherewith his desire of vengeance could inspire
him: Come hither, Solomon, said he to the Bassa, come and enjoy the good
fortune which the Janisaries have procured you. Do not excite that despair,
Sir, replied Solomon, which with all my industry I have found so difficult to
moderate; content your self in that you have rendered me the most miserable of
all men, without adding thereunto a rallery, which perhaps may force me to
break through the bounds of my duty to you. Is it possible, replied the Emperor,
that you could believe me capable of taking away Eronima's life, and that you
should know me so ill, you whom I have ever distinguished from the rest of my
subjects by a sincere esteem and confidence? Alas, Sir, cried Solomon, have I
not seen Eronima's head in your hands, and have you not appeased the Janisaries
by this barbarous sacrifice? It Is true, said the Sultan, that I have quieted
their rage; but the head that you saw was not Eronima' s, one of Racima' s
Slaves served us to secure the life of Eronima, and to restore peace and
tranquillity in the Seraglio, and in the extremity whereto I saw my self
reduced, I chose rather to send her from me, and lose all my repose, than to
see her fall into the hands of the Janisaries, who would have had no respect,
either to her beauty, or my love: you shall learn the rest from Altagis (seeing
that Eunuch come in) said he, and shall judge by his discourse whether you have
any occasion to complain.

Solomon was amazed, the Emperor went into his Closet; and Altagis spoke to the
Bassa in this manner.

You know how obstinately the Janisaries persued their Insolences, after you
were at liberty; all the Seraglio revolted against Mahamet, and Racima alone
commanded all there, whilst they without endeavored to break down the Gates,
which the Emperor courageously defended, taking less thought for the
conservation of his own life and dignity, than for Eronima's safety, whom he
saw so nearly threatened, considering at last that all his efforts were but in
vain, and were now going to be surmounted, he generously resolved to have her
conveyed out of the Seraglio, aad leaving a small number of his Friends to
amuse the Enemy, he ran to Eronima's Chamber, which I, by his order had not
quitted.

All our Galleries were deserted, fear had obliged all the Sultanesses and the
Slaves to retire, the Eunuchs were otherwise employed; and the Emperor finding
no obstacle, Fly, Madam, quickly, said he to the Princess, go seek in places
more fortunate that repose which my passion has robbed you of, delay not one
moment, the Janisaries are making themselves Masters of this place, and I
tremble lest they should surprise you, the faithful Altagis shall conduct you,
and I shall die with content, when you have nothing to fear; save her, my dear
Altagis, and, if it be possible, secure her from all perils which can threaten
her. The Princess would have replied, but the Emperor would not give her time;
we were just beginning our march, when I espied a Favorite Slave of Racima's,
posted by her Mistresses Order, near Eronima's Appartment, to observe what
passed; she would have cried out to interrupt our escape, without respecting
the Emperor. I avow to you, Solomon, the zeal I have for my Master, made me
cruel, I took off the head of this Woman Slave with one blow of my Cymeter; and
considering at the same time, it was a means to secure our secret, I disfigured
the face, and presenting it to the Emperor: Hold, Sir, said I, appease the
Janisaries in telling them this is the Head of Eronima, whilst I conduct her
from these places to some securer Refuge.

The Sultan followed my advice, besmeared his Cymeter in blood, and showed
himself to the Janisaries in the manner you saw him, after he had given an
adieu to the Princess full of tenderness.

You may well be astonished, that in the Women's Seraglio, which is ordinarily
so frequented, we could be able to do what I have told you without being
discovered, but I have already observed to you that every one was retired, some
for fear, and others upon the necessity of their Employs.

I had then time enough to oblige the Princess to take the Slave's Garments,
and to cloth her with her own; she could not resolve upon this without
difficulty, but I assisted her to make this Exchange, and afterward conducted
her to the most remote Corner of the Gardens, and put her into the hands of
some Women who usually live there, to be serviceable to the Slaves of the
Sultaness, making them believe she was one of Racima's, who having
unfortunately displeased her, was forced to abscond for some time. There she
now continues in great safety: I returned to the Seraglio, where no body doubts
of her death; and Racima not finding her Slave, thought she had fled to save
her self, during those Commotions, preferring her liberty before the
Sultanesses Favor.

This Discourse of Altagis created an inexpressible joy in Solomon, he
presently banished from his heart all the horrors that had occupied it, and
seeing the door of the Emperors Closet open, he went to throw himself at his
feet, and to speak to him all that his acknowledgment and his love could
inspire. I did not deceive you, said the Prince to him, with a sigh, you are
now going to enjoy all Eronima's tenderness, and the pleasure of making your
own to appear; as for me, I fight, and perhaps may conquer: but if Love shall
always tie me to her, I will go seek in Wars the end or the cure of all my
Woes: she is still within the Bounds of the Seraglio, take her out of this
place, which in time may prove fatal to her; I have already sacrificed my
repose to her, and I will yet sacrifice to her the resentment which I may
justly have for your enterprise against our Laws, and against my Love; it is to
you that I bequeath her, since I am destined to lose her; I could deprive you
of her as well as my self, by banishing her my Empire, but my jealousy is not
of so blind an interest. Most just reflections have made me decide in your
favor; and since I have judged you worthy of my esteem, and my friendship, I
cannot remit a Princess whom I have adored, and who still is more dear to me
than my Life, into better Hands than yours; I do love her, and it is by this
reason that I find some consolation in giving her to a person of whom she is
beloved. It Is thus that Mahomet, who has hitherto passed for a cruel Soul, and
who has sufficiently confirmed it by the pretended death of Eronima, does
revenge himself of a pityless Mistress, and of a Rival who has so highly
offended him.

The Bassa was so charmed at what he heard, that hardly could he give the
Emperor any part of the praises due to his Generosity; he condoled the unlucky
chance of so great a man, and was convinced that he alone was the person worthy
of Eronima; and having returned thanks a thousand times for his life, and his
good fortune, he went to seek Morat, who was to receive the Princess from the
Hands of Altagis at one of the Garden Gates.

This News was not less surprising to the Gardener, than it was to Solomon.
Although the Night was far advanced, Morat ran to the place where Altagis
expected him; and Solomon ravished with joy attended the Princess at his
Friends House, who advised him not to accompany her thither, for fear of giving
the least suspicion by the number of persons.

Eronima had seen all that passed with a warmness which much resembled an
indifferency, Solyman's infidelity had so touched her, that she found not her
self sensible at any thing else: she heard he was alive, but knew nothing of
his innocence: Morat having received her from the hands of Altagis, spoke
several times to her, but she had not the force to answer him: at length they
entered into the Bostangi Bassa's House, and by the light of several Flamboes
she saw Solomon; he immediately prostrated himself at her Feet, and there lay
without being able to express himself; his presence and his action equally
astonished the Princess; she had not seen him since he attempted her life, and
sighing for grief that she should still find in her self a tender inclination
toward a person who deserved it so little: Is it, said she, the regret that
you could not sacrifice me to Racima's Fury, that casts you into these
transports, or is it the displeasure you had to see the Emperor's Fiction
succeed? It was not long of me that you did not execute your Design, neither
was it the care I took of my own safety that secured it; fortune would preserve
me for a continuation of misfortunes which she has destined for me: Ah!
Solomon, that you had not spared me, that you had taken less pity on me at the
taking of Constantinople. Eronima's tears interrupted her discourse; Solomon
had leisure to answer, and the Princesses eyes were full of languish, which
required his justification. I should appear a thousand times more criminal than
you can reproach me, Madam, said he, and fortune was resolved to show in my
Adventure all her most fantastical and surprising tricks. But my Princess in
spite of all her appearances has not your heart taken my part? Have you
believed me capable of assassinating you? I who have always adored you, and who
never sought any thing but you at the peril of my life; and who respired no
other pleasure than that of seeing you persuaded of my passion. Ah, Madam! how
happy had I been, if you had a little sought for me. Was I not a witness to
your passionate discourse with Racima, said Eronima, in the Grotto? And did you
not come even to my Bed to sacrifice me to her jealousy? It Is true, replied
the Bassa, that I was in your Appartment, and that she conducted me thither;
but if I might merit any thing from you it should be only by this Adventure
that I might appear so criminal to you. He then recounted to the Princess after
what manner he was engaged into this Counter-plot, which rendered him Master of
all Racima's Secrets: Morat seconded his Friend, and wholly convinced the
Princess that he was innocent; she desired it too much not to be persuaded
thereof; and Solomon had yet a much more puissant Mediator than the grand
Gardener, the lovely Eronima yielded, tasted the pleasure to see her self out
of the Seraglio, and to find Solomon constant, who in a few moments saw himself
the happiest of all men, after so many Traverses.

In the mean time Altagis gave the Emperor an account how he had disposed of
Eronima. This Prince who passed for the greatest of his age, now found himself
in a most deplorable estate; his subjecting the Janisaries in putting an end to
the troubles of the Seraglio, had not quieted those of his heart. At some hours
he was resolved to abandon the Empire, and renounce all the glory of his life,
to spend the rest of his days with Eronima; but considering he could never make
himself beloved of her, that all the ardor of his passion, the merit of his
person, and the splendour of the greatest fortune in the world were not capable
of moving her; he concluded that would not be the means to make him the more
happy; sometimes his jealousy inflamed him against Solomon, for he alone
possessed Eronima's affections, he had merited death in violating the Laws of
the Seraglio, but resolving not to conquer himself by the halves, he
considered, that in losing Solomon he should contract new Enemies against
himself, he generously triumphed over his passion, abandoned the interest of
his heart to his Glory, and resolved not to thwart two persons whom fortune had
united, and love had favourised.

Racima on the other side endeavored to banish Solomon from her heart, the
death of Eronima gave her hopes of the Emperors return to her; but her Crime
was none of those which are easily forgotten; the Emperor always remembered it,
but he was too sensible of her power, and durst not declare his just
resentments; he contented himself to see her seldom, and to draw off what ever
esteem or amity he ever had for her.

He found himself indisposed for some days, and could not go out of the
Seraglio; it was imagined, that Eronima was the cause thereof: Solomon was
taken up in telling her all that he had suffered for her, she would not quit
Morat's House, and the Emperor came thither to visit her as soon as his health
could permit; this Honor which the Sultans give to few persons, gave the
Princess new Allarms; Morat and Solomon were with her when the Sultan arrived,
the Princess and the Bassa changed their Countenances when he came in: Be not
disturbed, said Mahomet to them, it is the design of securing your repose that
brings me hither, and afterward to bid you an eternal Adieu. As for you,
Madam, he continued, addressing himself to the Princess, though you could not
love me, I hope you will not refuse me some esteem; perhaps I have deserved it,
by the victory I have obtained over my passion, nothing can for the future
justify me of the barbarous Action which I was obliged to feign, and all those
who shall read the History of my Life, will look upon me as a Monster; but I
shall consolate my self in it, for as much as it has been serviceable to you.

Sir, the Princess answered, I have nothing to reproach my self of, in respect
of that esteem which you demand of me; and if I have had any Sentiments
opposite to yours, they have not detracted from those which all the earth ought
to have for your merit, and now that I am overwhelmed with your Bounties, that
all your Generosity is declared in my favor, what acknowledgments thereof
ought I not to conserve.

If I have done any thing for you, replied the Emperor, hitherto it can only be
attributed to the interest of my Glory; but I must yet go farther, fortune
which has rendered me too happy against your Family, has not left you in an
estate worthy of your self: suffer me, fair Eronima, to repair part of those
outrages she has committed against you, and receive some succor, without
repugnancy from the hand of a Prince who still loves you in spite of all
things that ought to hinder it; the Present I shall make you is agreeable to
your inclination, it is Solomon, whom perhaps I should less have favored at a
time when reason had a less Empire over me: he is of a blood respected amongst
us, there are no Kings whose alliance he may not hope for, and I had designed
my Sister for him: you are persuaded that he loves you, and I am not less
certain that he is beloved by you, accept him then, with all that I possess in
Asia, the stately City of Trebizond, wherewith I have enriched our Empice,
shall be your secure Sanctuary: there pass all your days more happy than mine,
and there retain some remembrance of Mahomet.

Eronima and Solomon were so satisfied, that for a long time their silence
spoke for them: at length they testified their Acknowledgments to the Emperor,
who told the grand Gardener, that since Solomon could not have Bassima: he gave
her to him as soon as the Princess could recover her Indisposition. The Joy was
equal amongst these three persons; and Mahomet having continued with them some
few moments, after he bid them adieu, which cost Eronima some tears, returned
to the Seraglio.

On the morrow the Emperor sent Solomon the Commissions for the Government of
those places he had promised him, the Princess worse dependence now was only
upon her self, gave her self for ever to him; they made their voyage to
Trebizond, and there established themselves gloriously: Morat espoused the
Sultaness Bassima; and the Emperor performed his promise to the Janisaries in
conducting them to new Conquests.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books, Printed for, and sold by W. Cademan, at the Pope's
Head in the New Exchange in the Strand.
Folio.
AN Institution of General History, or the History of the World, by William
Howel, L. L. D. in two Vol. Historical Collections, or an exact Account of the
Proceedings of the four last Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, of famous memory.
Pharamond Complete, English. Clelia, a Romance, English. Parthanissa, English.
An Heroic Poem on Thomas, Earl of Ossery, with his Picture, neatly cut in
Copper.
Quarto.
An Historical Relation of the first Discovery of the Isle of Madera. The
Protestant Religion is a sure Foundation, etc. by the Right Honorable,
Charles, Earl of Derby. The Jesuits Policy to suppress Monarchy, by a person
of Honor. The great efficacy and necessity of good Example, especially in the
Clergy, in a Visitation Sermon at Guilford, by Thomas Duncomb, D. D. A Sermon
Preached before the King, by Miles Barn, Chaplain in Ordinary to the King. A
Sermon Preached at the Assizes at Lancaster, by Henry Pigot, B. D. God's
Revenge against Murder, demonstrated in the prosecution of Henry Symbal and
William Jones, Executed for the murdering Sir Rich. Samford.
Octavo and Twelves.
Spanish History, or the differences that happened in the Court of Spain,
between Don John of Austria and Cardinal Nitard, with all the Letters and
politic Discourses relating to those Affairs. Reflections upon Ancient and
Modern Philosophy. The English Princess, or the Duchess Queen, a pleasant
Novel. Court Songs and Poems, being an exact Collection. The Temple of Death,
with other Poems, by a Person of Honor. Hogan Moganides, or the Dutch
Hudibras. Liquor Achahest, or the immortal dissolvent of Paracelsus and
Helmont, etc. Philotrification, by Dr. Sherley.
FINIS.

