DIGITUS DEI OR God appearing in his wonderful Works.

For the Conviction of Nullifidians.

Quare miramur? Quare non credimus? Deus est qui fecit. St. Aug. sermon. 147. de
Tempore. THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
YOU have here in the first place a faithful Translation of the eighth Chapt.
of the 22. Book of the City of God, written by St. Augustine in his latter
days, upon occasion, as himself tells us in his Book of Retractations, of the
insolency of the Pagans, who attributed the loss and saeking of the City of
Rome by the Goths under Flavius to the just judgment of their false Gods upon
Christianity and the Professors thereof. This insolence of theirs, moved this
zealous man to take greater pains then ordinary in 22. Books to vindicate the
cause of Christ and his Church. 'Twere a happy thing if we had another St.
Augustine who could and would oppose himself as a wall for the house of God
against so many insolences as are practiced now adays in defiance of it: but
by none more freely than by those who are so far from alleging any thing of a
hand of true or false God in what passes in the world, that they too too
shamefully presume publicly to own those blasphemies, which in good King
David's time, some, who perchance had so little wit and grace as to be of
their opinion in their hearts, yet were so wise and civil as to keep their
thoughts to themselves. Against such Poison this whole Tract of St. Augustine
is a most excellent Antidote, But because the Dose possibly might seem too
large, I have elected this one Chapter, which, for the brevity and variety of
accidents therein contained, cannot choose but be very easy and pleasant to
take. And, in the second place, I have added some of the Virtues of it, chiefly
against that desperate Epidemicall disease, which reigns, I fear, too
frequently, and is the cause of many other dangerous and fearful distempers.
If what was intended for a private friend, prove any way beneficial to the
public, so far at least, as to work kindly with some one good person or
other, and cause him to mind the great business for which we are come into this
world, which is to believe in, and serve and obey our great and good God, I
have my end, and to God be the Glory.

The 8th. Chap. of the 22th. Book of St. Augustine of the City of God.
Of miracles which have been wrought for introducing the Faith of Christ into
the world, and do not vet cease to be wrought, in confirmation of the same
faith already introduced.
WHy say our adversaries, do not such miracles appear in these our days, as you
pretend have been done in former times? I might answer: that such miracles were
necessary in these days, that the faith of Christ might be established in the
world. Whosoever now requires miracles for his faith seems himself a Prodigy,
refusing to believe by the worlds general example. But the truth is, they who
allege such things, have a design to introduce a dis belief even of such
wonders as have formerly been done. How comes it then to pass, that Christ is
so generally held and believed to have been taken in body into Heaven? How
happned it, that in thase critical times, when men made such scruples of
admitting any thing which seemed to carry impossibility with it, they believed
things notwithstanding, even without the vouching of miracles, which were
extremely incredible in themselves? Will they, perchance, say, that they
therefore believed them, because they were credible? why then do they
themselves refuse to believe them.

Thus therefore I argue in brief: Either some things in themselves incredible
and not seen, came to be believed upon the evidence and attestation of other
things seemingly also incredible, which things, notwithstanding, were both done
and seen to be done: or else those things were credible in themselves, and
stood in no need of miracles by way of further proof, and as such, are a
convincing evidence against the incredulity of such Nullifidians. Thus much in
order to the confuting of such vain senseless men. For it cannot be denied, but
that many miracles have been wrought for the attesting that one great
health-giving Miracle of the bodily Resurrection and Ascension of Christ into
Heaven. For in the same most infallible writings are delivered both the wonders
themselves, and the faith intended to be established by them. These things were
made known for the gaining belief, and, by that belief which they have gained,
are come to be better and more clearly known. For they are read to the people
that they may be believed, and yet they would not be read to the people, were
they not believed. For even in our days miracles are wought in his name, some
by his most holy Sacramenes, some by the prayers and relics of his saints,
but they are not set forth with so much fame, as to be spread about the world
with the same glory which those others are. For it is the Books of Holy writ
which were to be every where divulged, which makes them to be read and Fixed in
the memories of all men. But these things are only known, where they happen to
be done, and that scarce of a whole City, or the inhabitants of the plaee. Many
hear nothing of them, especially if they happen in some great Town: And now
when things are carried from one to another, they bear not so great an
authority as to be believed without doubt or difficulty, even although they be
told by one Christian to another.

The miracle which happned at Millan, when I my self was upon the place, by
which a blind man was restored to his sight, may indeed have been known by
many, because both the City is great, and the Emperor himself was then there,
and an infinity of People were witnesses of it, who were come thither to the
bodies of the Martyrs Gervasius and Protasius. which bodies being wholly
concealed and unknown to any one, were revealed to Ambrose the Bishop in his
sleep, and were found by him; at which time and place the foresaid blind man
recovered his sight.

But now (unless it be some very few) who ever heard of the Cure done upon one
Innocentius? (who had born Office in those parts) at which my self was present,
and beheld it with mine own eyes. For he being a very pious and religious
person, was pleased to entertain me and my brother Alipius coming from beyond
Seas, who although we were not yet in Orders, had already dedicated our selves
to Gods holy service, and happened to be in his house when the thing fell out,
of which I shall now give you the relation.

He was then under the Physicians hands for more then one very dangerous
Fistula, which he had in the lower and hinder-part of his body. They had
already made incision and were now perfecting the cure by other applications.
In the incision he had suffered very great and tedious pains; But among the
rest, one hollow turning there was which the Physicians had mist, and it was so
hidden, that they never touched it, which ought also to have been laid open. In
conclusion having now healed up the other wound, that only place remained
without remedy. He suspecting their delay, and very much fearing to be cut
again (which indeed another Physician, who was of his household and could not be
admitted by the others so much as to be present at his first cutting, that he
might see how they went about their work, had foretold him, and for which he
had turned him out of his house, and was hardly brought to receive him in
again) burst out into passion and cried out: what will you cut me again? I see
I must come to what he told me, whom you would not permit to be present at your
doings. They mocked at the poor man's want of skill; and comforted the Patient
with all the good words and promises that might be. But many more days past,
and nothing was done by all their endeavors; yet still the Physicians
persisted in their promise that they would not cut him any more, but would cure
that place with other applications. To satisfy him, they called another grave
and very famous man in the Art, one Ammonius then living, who viewing the
place, promised him the Effect which the others with their art and diligence had
assured him off. Upon whose word, as if all went well, he now taking heart,
began cheerfully to make sport with his domestique friend, who had told him so
confidently of another incision. But at length, after many days spent to no
purpose or effect, being now tired out, with much confusion they were forct to
confess, that with no incision no cure could be wrought. At this (unexpected
news) being extremely frighted, be started and grew pale. But being come again
to himself, so soon as he was able to speak, he bad them all begone, and never
more come near him: And now there remained nothing for the poor man, tired
quite out with grief, to resolve upon in this sad condition, but to make use of
a certain rare surgeon one of Alexandria, that he might do that, which anger
had made him resolve never to permit the others to do. But when he was come,
and had behold their work with the eyes of an Artist, like an honest civil man,
he persuaded the Patient to leave the finishing of the work, to those who had
already taken such pains about him, to his great admiration: adding withal,
that without incision there could be little or no hope at all of a perfect
cure. For his part it was much against his custom and inclination, to deprive
them of the honor they had deserved, by some small addition which was still to
be made to that great Art and Industry which they had showed in those other
wounds, which he professed himself a great admirer of. By this he was something
reconciled to them again, and was contented (so he of Alexandria would be
present and assisting) that the same men should lance the place, which they all
agreed was incurable without it. The business was deferred until the next day,
but when they were gone, the whole family fell into such a passion of grief for
the sadness of their Master, that it seemed a mourning at a funeral, and
admitted very little comfort from our endeavors. In the mean time he was daily
visited by certain Godly men; by Saturninus of blessed memory, then Bishop of
Valence, and Gelosus a Priest, and some of the Deacons of the Church of
Carthage. Amongst whom and who of all the rest is now only living, was Aurelius
Bishop, whom I cannot mention but with much reverence and respect, with whom I
have since often spoken of this subject, calling to mind the great wonders of
God; and I found that he did very well remember what we are now relating. These
men then, visiting him in the Evening, according to their custom, he begged of
them with tears in his eyes, that they would Vouchsafe to be present the next
morning as spectators, more likely, of his last passage, then of the torment he
was to endure, For he was struck with such a horror from the pains he had
formerly endured, that he made no question but he should die under the
Physicians hands. They, on the other side, endeavored to comfort him, and
exhorted him to have a confidence in God, and to undergo courageously what the
will of God did inflict upon him. From thence we went in to prayers, where we
Kneeling, according to custom, upon the ground, he cast himself down, as if he
had been forct by some violent impulse, and began to pray* But in what manner,
with what feeling, and motion of Spirit, with what abundance of tears, with
what sighs and groans, even to the trembling of every joint of his body, so as,
almost, to take his very breath from him, is not for any man to express in
words. Whether others did pray, and did not suffer the same distraction by so
sad an object as my self did, I know not. For my own part I confess I was not
able to pray at all. This only I remember I said in my heart. O Lord what
prayers of thy poor servants will thou vouchsase to hearken unto, if thou do
not hear these. For it seemed to me that nothing could be added to the
earnestness he made use of, unless he should even have expired with the force
of praying. We stood up, and having received the Bishops blessing we departed
from him, he begging again that they would not fail to be present with him the
next morning, and they exhorting him to courage and conformity. The day came he
stood so much in fear of, and the servants of God failed not to come according
to their word. The Physicians also came: all things were prepared which the
time and occasion required: the instruments also were laid in a readiness,
every one being in fear and expectation: those who were of greater power and
authority stand nearest at hand to encourage him. He was now laid in his bed,
the bands were loosened, and the place laid open: The Physician, with with his
lancet in his hand looks carefully to find the place affected. He makes use
both of his sight and feeling to discover it. In fine tryes all experiments,
but finds nothing but the skar of a soar now perfectly healed. Upon this
discovery, the joy which possessed every ones heart, and burst forth with tears
into thankes-giving to, and praise of so merciful and omnipotent a God, I
shall leave to every ones thoughts to imagine, rather then presume to express
in words.

In the same City of Carthage one Innocentia a most virtuous woman* and one of
the chief of the Town had a Cancer in her breast, a disease for which Physicians
allow no remedy. The ordinary practice therefore is, that either the part
affected be cut off, or, that a man may live a little the longer (for sooner or
later nothing but death is to be expected from it) according to Hippocrates all
means of cure are to be wholly laid aside. Thus much she had understood from a
skillful Physician of her very familiar acquaintance: And therefore had now
wholly betaken her self to beg assistance of Almighty God, when behold, Easter
now drawing near, she is admonisht in her sleep, that she should stand on that
side of the Font appointed for the women, and should cause the first that came
from Holy Baptism to sign the place with the sign of the Cross of Christ, she
did so and was immediately cured. Now the Physician who had advised her to
forbear all padling with it, if she intended to prolong her life, looking
afterward upon her breast, and finding her perfectly cured of the infirmity,
of which his own eyes had been witnesses, was extreme earnest with her to know
what means she had made use of, being very desirous, as near as we can guess,
to know that Receipt, which might prove Hyppocrates his assertion false. But
when he had heard what had past, with a slighting kind of voice and countenance
(so that the good woman began to fear least he should utter some unhandsome
words in contempt of Christ) he is said to have replied, by way of a religious
kind of raillery; I thought said he, you would have told me some great mattter.
And she being now in a great fear and apprehension, be presently added what
great matter was it for Christ to cure a Cancer, who raised to life one who had
been four days dead? When I heard of this, I was very much troubled that so
great a miracle wrought in such a City, and upon a person of such note, should
be concealed, and thought fit both to admonish and almost to chide her for it.
And she making answer that she had not concealed it, I asked those Matrous her
very familiar friends who happned then to be in her company, whether they knew
any thing of it before. They assured me they never had heard word of it. You
may see then, said I, whether you have not been too silent in the business,
since even these your familiars never had notice of it; And then having desired
her to make a short relation of the whole passage, she did so in their hearing,
adding every material circumstance, they much admiring and glorifying God
therefore.

And who perchance has heard of a certain Physician in the same City, who was
troubled with the Gout, who when he had given his name in order to Baptism;
the day before he was Christened, was forbidd by certain black hairy boys or
negroes, who appeared to him in his sleep, and whom he perceived to be devils,
to be baptized that year: and when he would not obey, was kicked by them upon
his feet, so as to cause him a more grievous pain, then ever he had felt before
in his life. But he persisting the more resolutely to overcome them by those
regenerating waters, and being baptized according to the vow he had made; in
the very receiving that Holy Sacrament, was not only freed from that more then
ordinary torment, which he then endured, but was also quite freed from his
Gout, nor did ever, during his whole life, which continued many years after,
feel the least pain in his feet more* We indeed knew this, and some of our
brethren, who lived not far from the place where it happened.

A certain man of the City called Curubis was freed by Baptism not only from a
palsy, but also from an extreme swelling in his genetories; and he was so
freed, that immediately be appeared as if he had had no such infirmities
before. And who, I pray, had notice of this, but only those of that Town, and
some few others who by accident heard of it? But we having intelligence
thereof, by the command of the Holy Bishop Aurelius, procured his coming to
Carthage, although we had our informations before, from such, whose credit was
out of all question.

Hesperius one of this place (a person of good quality) has a farm called
Zubed, in the territory of Fusselen; he having notice that his house there was
haunted with evil spirits, to the great disturbance of his cattle and
servants, my self happening to be absent, earnestly desired of our Priests,
that some of them would be pleased to go thither, and drive the malignant
spirits away by the force of their prayers. On of them went accordingly, [
Obtulit ibi Sacrificium Corporis Christi.] offered there the Sacrifice of the
Body of Christ, praving most earnestly for the cessation of that great
affliction, by the mercy of God it presently ceased. Now Hesperius had received
a present from a friend, a parcel of Holy-earth brought from Jerusalem, from
the very place where Christ, having been buried, rose again the third day. This
holy Earth he had hung up in his own chamber, as a preservatiue for his own
person. But now when his house was freed from the foresaid molestation, he
bethought himself how, with decency, to dispose of the holy earth, which, out
of reverence, he thought not fit to keep any longer in his chamber. It
happened accidentally, that my self, and my then-companion Maximus Bishop of
Synes were in a place not far off. He entreated us to come unto him: which we
refused not, and having made us the whole relation, he made it also his
petition, that the holy earth should be laid in some decent place, which should
be turned into a place of prayer, where Christians might meet for performance
of their devotions. We could not refuse him; but did accordingly. And it fell
out that a poor countryyouth, who was struck with a palsy, hearing of it, begged
of his parents that they would carry him to the holy place, where having done
his devotions, he returned upon his own feet safe and sound.

There is a village called Victoriana some thirty miles distant from Hippo the
Royal. There are Relickes of the Saints, Gervasius and Protasius who were of
Millan. Thither was carried a certain young man, who washing his horse, in
the midst of Summer, in the River, the devil entered into him. In this place
the poor creature lying near dead, or at least, as if he had been dead, the
Lady of the manor, as usually, came with her maids and some Religious women
to say their evening prayers. At their beginning to sing their hymns, the
miserable creature, as one suddenly struck, started up, and with a hideous
outcry, daring not, or having not power to stir the altar he had laid hold
on, he stood there as one fastened or bound to it, and with a most horrid noise
begging that they would spare him, confessed, where and when and in what
manner he had entered into the body of the miserable young man. At length
promising to go out, he named distinctly every part of his body, which he
threatened to cut off in his departure. And uttering these words he went out
indeed. But one of his eyes fell out, and hung upon his cheek fixed by a little
string which was fastened to the inner part of his eye, and all the black of
the eye was covered with a white film. Those who were present and savv it,
(and now many were come in, upon the fearful voice he had made) fell all to
their prayers for him? although they savv that he was now perfectly come to
himself: Yet being in great trouble about his eye, were of opinion that a
Physician was to be sent for. Upon this; his brother in-lavv, who had married
his sister, and had conveyed him thither, said, Certainly the same God, who,
through the prayers of his blessed Saints, has been pleased to chase away the
Devil, is able also to restore his eye unto him. And with that, putt the eye,
which was fallen out, into its place again, as well as his skill would serve
him, [Orario, used for a stole by St* Hierome and others.] and bound it up
with a stole, and so thought fit to leave it for seven days space. At the
end of which days opening his eye, he found it perfectly recovered. Other
cures were wrought in the same place, which brevity makes me not to mention.

I my self knevv a young maid of Hippo who was immediately dispossessed of the
Devil by only anointing her self with the oil, into which some of the
tears of a good Priest had fallen, whilst he was praying for her. I know
also a Bishop who by his prayers for a young man, whom he never savv,
delivered him from the power of the Devil.

There was an ancient man of Hippo called Florentius* a very devout creature,
but very poor, who was by trade a tailour. This poor wretch happened to lose
his coat, and had not in the world vvherevvith all to buy him another. He
makes his prayers to the twenty martyrs, whose memory is very famous in these
parts, and beggs of them, with something a loud and earnest voice, that they
would help him to a coat. Certain gybing young fellows who by chance were
present, and overheard him, followed him as he went away, scoffing at him for
having begged fifty halfpence of the martyrs to buy him a garment. But he
walking silently on, espied a great fish lying paunting upon the shore, which
by the help of the young man he took and sold to one Carchoso an honest
Christian Cook, for thirty pence, telling him vvithall what had happened; and
with this little money intending to buy wool, for his wife to make him a coat
with, as well as she could, But the cook opening the fish, found of gold ring
in the belly of it, and out of mere commiseration, and upon scruple of
conscience restored it to the poor man, Saying: behold how the twenty martyrs
have furnished thee with a garment.

When Projectus Bishop brought the Relics of the most glorious martyr St.
Stephen to the Tibilitan waters, there was a great meeting and flocking of
people to the place in honor and memory of the Saint. There it happened that a
blind woman begged that she might be led to the Bishop as he was carrying the
holy relics: she gave him certain flowers which she carried a long with her:
they were again returned to her; she applied them to her eyes, and immediately
she saw. All the company being in a mazement, she led the way alone, and now
had no need of any body to lead her.

Lucillus Bishop of Synes happened to carry in procession a Relic of the same
glorious Saint which is kept in a Castle of the same place, not far from
Hippo, the people, some going before, others following; when, by the carrying
of so holy a thing, he was suddenly cured of a fistula, which had caused him
much trouble for a long time, and was now in expectation of the coming of a
Physician his particular friend, for the lancing of the place, Certain it is
that from that very time he could never discover any thing of it.

Eucharius a Priest, a Spaniard by nation, dwelling at Calama, by the Relickes
of the foresaid Saint, which the Bishop Possidius had brought thither, was
cured of an habitual infirmity of the stone. The same Person afterward
falling into another violent fit of sickness, was so far given for dead, that
they began to tie his thumbs together, when his own gown which had been carried
to touch the Relics of the forenamed Saint, being brought back again, and
laid over his body, by the help of the glorious Saint he was restored to life
and health.

There was a certain man, called Martialis, who was of prime note amongst those
of his quality; he was now well in years, and had a great aversion from
Christian Religion; he had indeed a daughter who had embraced the faith, and a
son-in-law, who had been baptized that very year. These, when they found him
struck with a dangerous sickness, begged of him most earnestly, with many tears
that he would become a Christian. But he would by no means hear of it, and putt
them off with great indignation. His good son-in-law took upon him, to get to
the place where the Reliks of Blessed St. Stephen were decently kept, there to
pray for him, with all the earnestness he could, that God would be pleased to
inspire him with his holy grace, that he might believe in Christ. He performed
this with many sighs and tears, and with great fervor of devotion. Then
returning he took with him some of the flowers which lay upon the Altar, and,
at night, laid them under his pillow. He went to sleep: but before day he cried
out (with much earnestness) that they should make have to the Bishop, who was
then accidently with me at Hippo. But having understood that the Bishop was
absent, he desired the Priests might come unto him. They came, and he presently
declared that he did believe; and to the great joy and astonishment of all, was
immediately baptized. And (which was strange* so long as he lived after, had
these words perpetually in his mouth: Christ receive my soul: although he was
wholly ignorant that these were the very last words which were uttered by the
most blessed Martyr St. Stephen, when he was stoned to death. These were also
the last words of this happy man, who lived not long after.

There were also cured, by the intercession of the same Martyrs, two who where
sick of the Gout, the one a citizen, the other a stranger. But the citizen was
absolutely cured without any more ado: the stranger, as I understood, had by
revelation what he was to apply when the fit took him; So that upon
application, his pain immediately ceased.

At a place called Audituras, where there is a Church, and in it a Relic of
St. Stephen, a certain little boy being at play in the courtyard, some resty
oxen coming with a cart, run the wheel over the child, who presently gasping,
dyed. His Mother immediately took him, carried him to the holy Relics, and he
did not only recover, but seemed to have received no hurt at all.

A certain Nunn at a house called Castiniana not far from the same place
falling very sick, so as to be given over by all, They carried her gown to the
same Relics, but before it was brought back again, she dyed. Notwithstanding
her parents would needs lay the same gown over the dead corpse, upon which she,
recovering life, became a sound woman.

At Hippo one Bassus a Syrian made his earnest prayers at the shrine of the
aforesaid Martyr for a daughter of his who lay very weak and in great danger,
and he had brought with him one of her garments; when, behold, some of his
servants came in great have to tell him that his daughter was dead; but some
of his friends meeting them, whilst he was at his devotions, forbad them to
deliver their sad tidings, lest he should not have been able to conceal his
grief from the notice of the world. But coming home, and finding all in
lamention, he cast his child's garment upon her, and she was immediately restored
to life.

Again in the same city of ours there dyed, of sickness, the son of one Ireneus
a Collectour. And now when the dead Corpse was laid out, and some were mourning
and lamenting, whilst they were preparing for the funeral, a friend of his
amongst others who endeavored to comfort the afflicted father, suggested this
advise; that they should anoint the body with the oil of the holy martyr (I
suppose which was burning in the Lamp before his holy Relics.) They did so,
and the young man came again to Life.

With us also, one Eleusinus, who had born the office of Tribune, laid his dead
child upon the Relics of the same Martyr, which are kept in his house near
the City, and there offering up his most earnest prayers, accompanied with many
tears, he received him again a live.

What should I say, or do? The desire I have of drawing to an end of this my
intended, Treatise, gives me not leave to mention all I Know of this Kind: and
without doubt, most of my friends, who shall happen to read what I have here
set down, will resent my omitting so many other particulars which themselves
are very well accquainted with as well as I. whose pardon I must beg; and
desire them to reflect what pains and labor it would require to do that,
which the work I have here undertaken, will by no means allow me. For to omit
others, if I should now only set down the miraculous healths restored to the
sick by this Holy Martyr, (I mean the most glorious St. Stephen) as well in the
Town of Calama, as also in our own, many books were to be written, neither
could we possibly make a perfect collection of them all, but only of such as
Memorials have been written of, to the end they might be read to the people.
For it was our desire to have it done so, that since it pleased Almighty God to
honor this our age with miracles not inferior to those of former times, the
Knowledge and memory of them might not be lost. It is not yet full two years
since that Holy Relic was first placed at Hippo the Royal; and although it
be most certain, that many miraculous things have happened, of which there have
been no Memorials given in, yet the number of such as have been in that manner
attested, amounted to about threescore and ten, at at such time as I was
writing this. But at Calama, where a Relic of the St. had been longer kept,
and where the good custom of giving in Memorialls* was more used, there is an
incomparably greater number. At Uzali also, which is not far from Utica, we
are assured of many strange things wrought by the same Holy martyr, there
having been placed a Relic of the said Saint by the Bishop Evodius, a long
time before we had any. But it is not the custom there to give in Memorials,
or, as I may rather say, it has not been formerly, though now, happily they
have also brought in that good practice. For, we being lately there, a certain
noble woman, called Petronia having been miraculously cured of a great and
tedious sickness, for remedy whereof all the art of Physic had come short, we
persuaded her, with the consent of the Bishop of the said place, to give up a
Memorial which might be read to the people, and she most readily complied with
our desires. In which Relation she inserted also this particular, which I must
not omit, although I am obliged to make what have I can toward a conclusion
of this work. She tells us there how she was induced by a certain Jew to put a
Ring upon a hair girdle, and to wear it next her body, under all her clothes,
which Ring was to have, under the other precious stone, a stone found in the
Reins of an ox. Being thus girt, by way of natural remedy, she came toward
the Church of the Holy Martyr. But being come past Carthage, and having lodged
at a farm of hers near the river Bagrada, rising up to go on her Journey, she
saw the Ring lying before her feet, and wondering, she viewed the hair girdle,
which the Ring had been fastened upon, and finding it as fast and firm as ever,
without any one knot being loosed, she imagined the Ring it self might be
cracked or broken; but finding that also perfectly whole and entire, she
presumed to take that strange accident for a happy presage and pledge of her
future miraculous recovery, and untying the girdle, threw it with the said
Ring, into the river. Those, happily, who do not believe our Lord Jesus to have
been born without the least violation of the pure virginity of his B. Mother,
or to have come into the room where his disciples were, the doors being
shutt, will have much difficulty to believe what here is related. But let them,
in the name of God, make farther inquiry into the matter, and if they find it
to be true, let them hereby be induced to believe those other things. She is a
Lady of great quality, nobly born, and nobly married, she is now dwelling at
Carthage; So famous a City, so noted a Person, must needs afford their
curiosity full Satisfaction. Most undoubtedly the Holy Martyr himself, by whose
intercession she received health, did did believe in the son of an ever-pure
Virgin; he did believe in him, who came in to his disciples, the doors
remaining shut; And finally (the truth whereof is the scope and aim of whatever
we have here rehearsed) he believed in him who ascended into Heaven with the
same flesh, with which he rose again from the dead. And therefore it is, that
he works such great wonders, because for that faith it was, that he was so
happy as to lay down his life. Many miracles then are wrought even in these our
days; the same God working them by whom he pleases, and by what means he
pleases, the same God who has wrought all these which we have read: But yet
even these are not Known a like to all, neither is there that care taken that
by often reading of them, the memory of them may not be forgotten. For even in
those places, in which (according to the custom now used by us) authentic
Relations are given up, by those who have received special favors, to the end
they may be read and notified to the people, those, indeed, who happen to be
then present, hear the same read; but many more prove to be absent. So that
even those who were present, do hardly remember, after some short time, what
they heard, and scarcely is there one to be found, who takes the pains to give
notice, of what they had heard, to others whom they know to be absent.

One thing there is which happened in our City, which though it be not greater
in it self then some of those things which I have already related: yet it is so
clear and so noted a miracle, that, I believe, there is no one person in all
Hippo, who did not either see it with his own eyes, or has not been
sufficiently informed of it, so as never to be forgotten by any. There were ten
children, seven brothers and three Sisters, of good rank amongst the citizens
of Cesarea in Cappadocia, who, by the curse of their mother, who had extremely
resented an injury done her by her children, upon the death of their father her
husband, had so heavy a punishment inflicted upon them by God, that they went
about miserably trembling and shaking every joint of their bodies. In which
wretched condition being not able to endure the sight of their fellow Citizens,
they went wandering over all the Roman dominions, as each one thought best. Of
this number two of them came into our City, a brother and a Sister, Paul and
Palladia, being now too much taken notice of in many other places by their own
remarkable misery.

They arrived here about a fort-night before Easter; they were every day at the
Church, and particularly at the Shrine of the most glorious St. Stephen, they
offered up their most fervent devotions, begging pardon and mercy of Almighty
God, and humbly praying that they might, at length, be restored to their former
condition. And now even there, and wheresoever they appeared, the eyes of the
whole Town were upon them, Some, who had seen them in other parts, and had been
informed of the cause of their trembling, gave notice thereof to others, as
they were able. Easter was now come, and upon Sunday in the morning, when the
people were in great number present, the young man who was holding by the
railes of the chapel where the Relics of the H. Martyr were kept, and
praying most earnestly, upon a sudden fell down, and lay as if he had been
asleep. At which sight some who were present were struck with admiration, Some
were frighted, others compassionated the poor creature's condition. And now
some would have lifted him up; others were against it, and thought it best to
see what the event of the business would be, when, behold, he rose of himself,
and trembled no more, being now cured, and stood a sound man, looking upon them
who gazed upon him. Who, think you, of all the company, could then contain
himself from praising our great and good God? The whole Church was filled with
the cries and acclamations of the people. From thence they ran up to me, where
I was sitting ready to go in procession. They crowd in upon me, one after
another, every one as he came, telling the same thing as new, though we had
heard it again and again from others before. And now when I was full of joy and
rendering thanks unto Almighty God within my self, the young man himself came
to me, accompanied with many others, and fell down at my knees, whom I raised
again with a kiss of peace. I went forward to the people, the Church was full,
nothing to be heard but loud expressions of joy, of praise and thanksgiving to
God, no man being able to contain himself, but every one crying out on all
sides. I spoke to the people, and they fell again to their acclamations louder
and louder. At length having obtained silence amongst them, the lessons were
read out of the Holy Scripture according to the Feast. But when the time was
come for me to preach, I said but little, indeed, as the present solemnity, and
the excess of joy in every one seemed to require; for I thought it better to
leave them to ponder the great power of God in his works, then to trouble them
with eloquence of words. The young man dined with us that day, related unto us
exactly the whole passage of his mothers and his Brethrens calamities. The next
day, after Sermon, he promised a narration of the whole matter to be read the
day following unto the people, which being done accordingly on the Tuesday
after Easter day, I caused them both, brother and sister, to stand upon the
stepps of the pulpit, in which I was to preach, whilst the narration was
reading. All the people saw them, one of each sex; him, indeed, they beheld now
free from that sad passion of trembling: which they saw as yet his poor sister
tormented with in every joint of her body. And they who had not happened to see
him before, saw in the sister what the great goodness of God had miraculously
wrought in the Brother. They saw in him matter of joy and congratulation; in
her they beheld a subject of commiseration, and what their fervent prayers were
to be offered up for. In the mean time, their Relation having been read, I bad
them retire from the throng, and began to frame a serious discourse concerning
the whole business. when behold, whilst I was speaking, new exclamations of joy
were heard from the chapel of the Martyr. Those who were harkening to me,
turned themselves immediately, and began to run altogether toward the place.
For the sister going from the stepps of the pulpit where she had stood, went
immediately to make her prayers to the H. Martyr; who, so soon as she arrived at
the railes, fell down, in like manner, as in a sleep, and rose perfectly cured,
Whilst then we were inquiring what the matter was, and the cause of so great
joy, they came with her into the body of the Church where we were, bringing her
from the Chapel of the Martyr whole and sound But then there began such an out
cry of admiration in all the people of both Sexes, that it seemed the noise and
their tears would never have an end, She was brought to the very place where
she had stood shaking a little before. The people rejoiced to see her now
become like unto her Brother, whom they lamented before for remaining so unlike
unto him. And they found the goodness of God had accepted already of their good
intentions, though they had not yet actually offered up their intended
devotions for her. The noise of joy, without any articulate expression of
words, was so great, that we were scarce able to endure it: And now, what do
you imagine was in the hearts of those who in this manner did rejoice, but
only the faith of Christ, for which the Blessed St. Stephen had spent the last
drop of his blood?

SOME FEW Reflections upon the foregoing Relation, presented to a Friend.
Sir.
TO give you some testimony of my readiness to serve you in some weightier
matter, I here send you what I have done in compliance with your late commands.
You have here therefore a faithful and almost verbal Translation of the 8th.
Chapt. of the 22th. Book of St. Augustine of the City of God, into that
language which the education of those you seem chiefly to desire it for, has
made them best acquainted with. Had that Gentleman who many years ago undertook
the whole work (which is long since extant in print) been as true to his task,
as he was willing (according to the mode) to be favorable to his preresolv'd
Principles, I might have spared this little pain, at least of translating,
though not of setting down in paper those few reflections, which you have
formerly, upon occasion, heard me make upon this subject, which because they
were pleasing to you (at least you were pleased to own them so) your farther
request of having them read at your command, for memories sake, has obliged me
not to spare my labor, which can never be unpleasant to me, when any
satisfaction of yours can be hoped for. If sometimes you find me, as it were
personally arguing the case with him or them whom I pretend to oppose, I hope
you will not be offended at the method, which is not unusual, in discourses of
this nature.

First then I hope I shall not need to mind you that this whole Treatise of St.
Aug. of the City of God is so universally, both by ancient and modern Authors,
owned to be the genuine offspring of that great wit, that I cannot find any one
so impudent (though it contain many points, which some perchance would be
willing enough to deny or conceal to have been this great Doctors opinions)
who ever yet called this verity in question. Sure I am that St. Augustine
himself in his 2. Book of Retractations owns it as such, alleging also the
reason of his undertaking the work, and making bold to call it Grande opus, as
most certainly it is, in what acception soever you take it, either of laborious
or learned.

Nay even those who seem to have taken a resolution upon them to deny all
things of this nature, and to have made it their business to pick up and cull
out whatsoever may afford any possible matter of exceptions; or be fitted, with
their pleasant glosses, to make sport for a profane Reader (such as possibly
some one who would adventure to go a step or two farther, might make with some
passages of H. Writ it self) and who, with great boldness have dared to lay
Fanaticisme and fondness at the doors of the great St. Gregory, venerable Bede
etc, whom the world hitherto had looked upon as worthy and creditable Persons:
yet even these, I say, these daring men have thought fit to keep themselves
within some bounds of modesty in relation to this account of miracles made by
St. Austin: nor have they (so far as hitherto they have made the world
acquainted with their thoughts) presumed to blast him in this, or any other
Relation of his of this kind, with fond credulity, or proclaimed him a father
of Legends etc.

Now that which I remember raised admiration in us both, upon the perusal of
this whole Chapter, was, how any man can think the invocating of Saints, the
honoring their Relics, the use of the sign of the Cross, the sacrifice of the
Body of Christ etc. to be novelties, since they are here mentioned by this
ancient Doctor of the Church as having been of use in his days; and that
without the least contradiction of any Orthodox person then in being; but
rather with the attestation of, and approbation by so many miraculous events
from Heaven. The question is not here about doctrinall points, in which I know
some are very ready, when it is to their purpose, to allot even to the Ancient
Fathers themselves their errors and human failings, but about matter of fact,
whither such things as are here related by this Holy and learned Saint, did
really happen so or no. If they pretend misinformations, which this great
Person might be subject to, as well as other men; let me first entreat them to
have so much respect, at least for this great Doctor, as to suppose him no
fool. And secondly let me desire them to remember, that he writ in a time when
the eyes of many friends and enemies, Pelagians, Manicheans, Hathens etc. were
upon him; which consideration certainly would not permit him to stuff his
writings with old wives tales; but oblige him to make strict inquiry into the
verity and certainty of such passages, as he was to make use of for the proof
of such Points of Christianity as were then in contest amongst them. But
thirdly, whatever his care was in the examination of the extrinsick
attestations of the things related by him, which in such a Person, and in such
circumstances we cannot well (without forfeiting both our charity and
discretion) suspect to have been inferior to the weight and importance of the
matter; yet cannot I see how we can, with credit, refuse him our belief of such
particulars, at least (and they are not a few) as his own eyes gave him evident
information of; unless we can find in our hearts to give so great a man the
downright lie. And yet, if all this, to some wilful pre-occupied person should
prove uneffectuall, at least this cannot be denied, but St. Aug. without
control of any in those days, which were above a thousand years ago, speaks
here very positively and confidently of many practices, now styled, by some,
novelties and superstitions, with approbation, and miraculous attestation. So
that I cannot but think it a very pregnant proof, or indeed, demonstration,
that they were esteemed no novelties nor superstitions, but lawful and
laudable practices, by him and all others in his days, so many years ago, as
may well serve to vindicate them from the imputation of Novellisme. This, only
in passing, for the Satisfaction of those who pretend a Zeal for purity of
Religion, and are offended at such passages as are found in St. Augustine, and
such illations as most connaturally flow from them, not so much because they
have any thing against the saint himself (whom at other times they would
willingly persuade the world to suppose to be of their Party) as because
Prejudice and Education have gotten possession of their understandings, and are
resolved to keep it in spite of Reason and most powerful Authority.

But there is another sort of men whom I think equally, if not more nearly
concerned in this Relation; I mean your pretended great Masters of wit, who, I
fear, many times make not that use of so precious a treasure, as it is truly
capable of, relying so much upon that which they call Reason, that they wholly
lose their way to Religion; and whilst they please their fancies with some
pretty nice speculatious, become themselves mere scepticks, and, too too often,
downright Atheists. They are not altogether behind hand with that great
ambitious Spirit, who not being able to reduce to known natural principles, or
comprehend the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the; sea, is said to have
cast himself as a very rash Sacrifice into it. For these men finding the nature
of God (as it must needs be supposed, if we suppose him to be) above the reach
of their capacity; to make short work, think it their readiest course to cast
him quite off; or, at least, make him so pitiful an one, according to the
model of things which their slender sense and experience has made them
acquainted with, that he must have no care or providence of things of this
world which are extrinsecall to his own being, lest he put himself into a
condition of perpetual trouble and disquiet. Others, whom I think all their
kind ought to be highly offended at, do so degrade, and even un-man themselves,
and all their race, that they make them, as to their beginning and ending,
little (if at all) superior to the meanest of those creatures which enjoy a
sensible Being, and have a feeling of those pleasures they are naturally
capable of, placing in them all their present, and renouncing all expectation
of any other future felicity. And so are not at all to be wondered at, if
having taken up such Principles, either upon trust or design, they first look
upon themselves as the chief, if not the only thing they are to observe and
gratify, and then, as is too frequently seen, become in their lives and
pursuit's like unto those brutes, whom they are by a very wise man rightly
compared unto ( sicut equus et mulus, quibus non est intellectus) without
understanding or reason, wholly drowned in sensuality, and absorp't in
bestiality. And yet, which is not only strange, but monstrous also, whilst
they thus become mere brutes in conversation, pretend still to be the only
masters of refined reason, and speculation; making it one great part of their
witty and agreeable divertisements to devide, and laugh at all those, who
having espoused better and nobler principles, endeavor to divest themselves
indeed of the Man, not by degenerating into the Nature of beasts, but by
raising themselves to the condition of Angels, with whom they one day hope and
expect to enjoy those pure delights which they know very well are not to be
comprehended by poor mortals here in banishment, but believe they are prepared
for those faithful servants of the great God, in whose power and will it is to
provide for them never-fading, yet always satiating delights, when those their
mortal bodies shall have put on Immortality.

And now to come close to what I would be at upon this account, I would fain
know of any indifferent person who has not quite abandoned his reason, whether
those great pretenders to, and Monopolizers of wit be not at a great loss, in
case these things prove true, which you have here seen related by the great St.
Augustine? whether here does not manifestly appear (so far as effects can
manifest a cause) first that there is some thing in the world above, or beyond
nature: secondly that this some thing has a providence and kindness for
mankiud: and thirdly, that there is some thing remaining after death in those
blessed Saints, whose prayers and intercessions obtain of the living God such
miraculous favors for those, who humbly address themselves unto them? Against
the Verity, or certainty of these things thus circumstanced by the person
relating, the witnesses attesting, all succeeding Ages unquestionably
accepting, it will be worth the seeing what the dissenting party, with some
pretense of reason do usually object.

For I take them for men of greater parts, and knowledge of the constitution of
the world in these days, then, by their peremtory denying the whole story, to
pretend to oblige mankind to a tame subscription and Acquiescence to their
Ipse-Dixit's: themselves having already banished out of the world all Implicit
faith of this nature at least: for in an other kind, I presume, when the health
of their dear bodies is concerned, they will still think it necessary to advise
with, and rely upon their Physician in his art, though themselves dive not into
the reasons, nor can give any just account of his proceedings. I presume also
they will not apprehend that they have forfeited any share of their reason,
when they give credit to, and rely upon their Council in point of law, though
themselves, perchance, never read so much as Littleton, or understand not the
full import of all those great hard words those learned men insert into
Conveyances etc. In these and the like cases the Great St. Augustine Confesses
l. 6. Confess c. 5. that after many doubts and perplexities, which himself, as
well as some others in his days had been subject to, he found it absolutely
necessary to have recourse to Faith even in human, proceedings, much more was
he convinced of the necessity of it in things supernatural, which, as such,
are ex terminis concluded to be above the reach and capacity of our
weak-sighted Understandings. In things therefore of this high nature we may
confide (though we penetrate not into the intrinsic Principles of the things
proposed) that we proceed rationally, and as becomes prudent men, if, having
discovered sufficient motives of the credibility of the things offered to be
believed, we submit, and yield assent, regulating our judgments and behaviors
accordingly. Thus much a good Christian knows to be his duty when ever things
appear vested with Gods revelation. But that only, which in our present case
(concerning things in themselves immediately of an inferior degree) I think
reasonable to demand, and necessary for the persons we are arguing with to
grant, is, not to deny human or historical faith, at least to matters of fact
proposed with so many circumstances of Unquestionable credibility, that
peremptorily to deny them, without positive and clear evidence against them,
would make the world believe their whole souls were turned fancy, or will, and
that they had renounced all right to the noblest part of man, Reason and
Understanding. Their only course then, if they purpose to maintain their
pretentions to Rationality, must be to argue closely with convincing proofs,
both in matter and form, with undeniable Premises, and fairly deduced
Conclusions. One thing let me beg of them by the way, that they will please to
be mindful, that it is highly against Reason, and the Rules of reasoning,
first to resolve upon and fix the Conclusion, and then come lamely in with the
Premises. Thus may you have heard many a good woman prove her child to be the
fairest, because he is. Thus may you see many a cause menaged with great
earnestness at the Bar, though the Council be not half so confident of his
cause, as he is pleased at the liberality of his Client. Affection,
Willfullness, and Interest, are the true Premises and Proofs in such Causes and
conclusions. Many an odd argument is alleged, not so much proving the thing in
question, as evidencing our good will for it. But I expect better things from
rational men, and pretended lovers of truth.

First then, they may perchance say, St. Augustine was a man, and might
consequently both deceive, and be deceived. That he was a man, and no Angel, is
without question: but withal you may take notice that he is held by the whole
world to have been an honest, and a holy man, therefore he did not go about to
deceive: he was ever esteemed a learned and a discreet man; he had the
testimonies of unsuspected, disinteressed persons, of whole Communities, of
whole Cities; nay of his own eyes in many remarkable particulars: Ergo he was
not deceived. If this be not a better consequence then any your Might be can
afford to your purpose, I must needs confess we are to seek for new Principles
of arguing. For to affirm positively upon so remote a possibility, that he was
either deceived, or designed to deceive, would be a ready way indeed, but it
must needs be a very rash one

For never was a mere Possibility yet admitted amongst rational men for a
positive proof of either side of a contradiction, which does admit of a
contingency: Much less can it have place indifferently, where one side is
fortifyed with such proofs, as greater cannot be required by any unbiassed
judgment, to a determination in the subject matter of inquiry. And if this be
not allowed as exactly rational, then cannot I imagine upon what Principles we
can be induced to apositive crediting any thing of this nature, in any age of
the world before us.

For they all being Contingencies, and the positive and negative not being
possible to coexist, no Might be, or May be can determine the judgment any
further then to a mere suspension: which is not only prudent, but necessary,
where proofs come equal on both sides. And as this is necessary, upon equality,
so certainly is it most rational to incline to some one side upon the
prevalency of motives, or even absolutely to assent, where they arrive to that
degree, that no wise man can find, or hope to find greater in matters of this
nature. Demonstratiuely, no May be, or Might be can be thought to be upon
equal terms with it.

But that which I suspect may make you so backward in giving assent to this
Relation of St. Augustine, may be the general prejudice you have against all
things of this nature. And this, happily, has been bred, and nourish't in you by
your aversion from those many Legends stuff't up, as you imagine, with such kind
of old-wives tales, which to you appear not only improbable by their number,
but also very liable to exceptions, by reason of Circumstances. what if I
should freely grant (as I shall not make much difficulty to do) what you seem
here resolved to suppose: that there have been mistakes, and perchance abuses
in this kind? what if I frankly own, that some ignorant person has taken that
for a miracle, which some more understanding man knows very well to be within
the compass of nature; or some strong-fancied creature has taken her devout
dream for a Vision? Will your inference hold, Ergo all are such; Ergo these
related by St. Augustine are such? Is there no true gold, because some, upon
the touch, has been found false? Are there no true Diamonds, because the
skillfull eye of a Lapidary, or the wheel has discovered some to be
counterfeit? Then I pray call to mind whom you deal with, whose reputation you
so severely call in question. It is that of St. Agustine, out of whom I did
purposely select these passages, not that I doubt but there are a thousand as
unquestionable things of this nature, in other grave Authors; but because I did
suppose (and I imagined I had reason for it) that the great esteem and respect
the world generally has for this great man, would gain him some credit with you
also. It Is He that tells you here of many cures (such as whole Consults of
Physicians esteemed incurable) wrought suddenly and permanently. It Is He that
tells you of Devils cast out by the force of Prayer and Exorcismes. It Is He
that tells you of many dead persons raised suddenly to life and health. It Is he
that tells you he saw many of these things when they happened with his own eyes.

It Is he, that tells you of the Testimonies of whole Communities, whole Towns
and Cities, in proof of many particulars. It Is he that tells you of Memorialls
given in, and read publicly, and kept carefully, that they might be
confirmed, or contradicted, if any thing occurr to any one of those thousands,
who saw, or heard them. It Is he, that tells you that there were so many other
Miracles wrought in the places he mentions, and known by his brethren then
living, to have been wrought, that he thought himself obliged to put down his
excuse, for not specifying them also, as well as others, which he happens to
mention. It Is he, who writ these Things in a time, when he could not but know,
that there were enemies enough, both at home and abroad, (Heathens and
Heretics, Manicheans and Pelagians, etc.) who would have been very glad of
the opportunity of diminishing his credit, and authority, by disproving what he
had writ with so much advantage to his own cause, and so much prejudice of
theirs. This certainly must needs have obliged so discreet, and sober a person,
to have used more care then ordinary, in the examination of those Things, which
he intended for public view, in proof of those great mysteries of our faith,
The Resurrection, and glorious Ascension of Christ, our Savior, in Body into
heaven. And here by the way give me leave to tell you, that this ever has been,
and to this hour is, the constant endeavor of Prelates in the Church, (and it
is their high obligation) that nothing of this kind be taken, or divulged, as
miraculous, but upon very strict examination, authentic proofs, and
depositions of sworn witnesses, etc. So that, it cannot in reason be thought
other, then wilful rashness in any man, positively to deny them all, upon no
better ground, then mere prejudice, or suspicion. I pray taken notice of what
I said last, to deny them all. For, to come a little home to you, I must take
the liberty to tell you, that if any one of these hundred Miracles, related
here by Saint Augustine, or any one of those thousands related, examined, and
attested by others, proves true, your business is done, You will be compelled
to own something beyond the reach of your eyes, or perchance, understandings
which has a being, and a power, above the force of nature, manifesting it self
abundantly in such admirable, and Supernatural operations.

But, I pray, Sir, do you not find it smart? Have I not touched the Apple of
your eye? For, whatsoever is pretended (as becomes a man indeed) of reason, and
rationallity, is not sense ( id est, Sensation;) your Chiefest engine; by which
you would overthrow what the believing world submits unto. Some, I confess, I
have heard own it; and I fear there are too many, who have it in their hearts,
that it is great folly to believe any thing, of which their eyes, or some other
of their material senses does not inform them. This indeed is plain English;
and such as makes them understood. It has enough of the ingenuity, though
little enough of the pretended Rationality. Yet such as it is, it is the very
language, (as there is reason enough to imagine) which most of that Cabal would
speak, if they durst permit their tongues to be true to their thoughts; and
their reputation were not at Stake upon another pretended score. But let the
whole Rational world judge, whether this be not the most desperate, and the
most abject spirit of levelling that ever was; to leave man, the noblest
creature of this our sublunary world, upon equal terms, with the meanest of
those others which enjoy the benefit of Sense: nay amongst which many (some in
one, some in another) so far surpass man, that unless he were enabled to
challenge a superiority upon the score of his Reason, and Understanding, he
would be forced, in other respects, to yield precedence.

But I pray, had not Saint Augustine eyes, as well as you? were all the
Inhabitant's of Hippo, Carthage, Millan, and other Towns, and Cities, blind? To
Suppose that, would he very strange indeed, and beyond the spirit of an
only-illuminated Fanatique. To say they all conspired to cheat you, and that no
body of those, whose concern was so deeply engaged, should discover the cheat,
is a thing beyond wonder. And yet one of these you are necessarily reduced to;
unless you have stubbornly resolved, that this alone must be your rule, to
believe nothing, but what your own eyes are witnesses of. And if so, then I
pray, First, Suppose that yon are subject to be dealt with in your own kind,
and to be trusted, or relied upon, no further, then men can measure you, and
your actions by their eyes. Secondly, you are obliged never to mention Rome, or
Constantinople, etc. unless you have taken the pains to travel to see them.
Thirdly, never talk to us of your Aristotle's, Epicurus's etc. for we take them
from you as mere Chimaeras. And fourthly, let us entreat you, to do the rest of
mankind so much right, as to renounce hereafter your unjust pretensions to both
use, and substance of Reason. This I apprehend ought to be done in good
consequence; and I think you may be obliged to it by deduction, in as good
form, as any Logic is capable of. But that I may not appear too rigorous, and
may have some hopes to enter again into your favor, I will deal plainly with
you, and tell you my apprehension; which is, that you are not all so black, as
you are painted, whatever the world may be apt to think of you, grounding
themselves* upon the extravagant sallies of some desperado's of your Party.
For, I make no question, but if some of you were men of Trading, and had a
design of improving your estates, you would either send, or go, up on
likelihood of advantage, to Aleppo, Scanderoon, or Mexico, etc. though you had
never seen those hopeful places, but by other men's eyes. You would be ready to
do your King, or Country, service, as Ambassadors, or Agents, either at
Venice, or Constantinople, though you had hitherto never set foot out of little
England, to assure your selves of the existence of such places, or of the
Princes, or States resident therein.

Be but consequent to your selves, and I hope we may be good friends again. You
will send to Aleppo, etc. by way of Trading: you will go to Constantinople,
etc. in Embassy: But where is your assurance all this while, that there are any
such places in the world, as men here talk to you of? And here I might allege
all those seeming possiblities of being mistaken, or deceived, which are wont
to be made use of, (and is imagined with great applause) in matters now
indispute, much, or altogether, of the same nature. For, how do you know, but
your factour, (far enough out of your sight) has a mind to dispose of your
goods, for his own advantage, in some other place, better known to him, then
Aleppo is to you? what certain ground have you for your confidence, that your
Prince has not a mind to be rid of you, and so sends you to some Utopia, or
other? Is this possible, or not?

You will, perchance, tell me, you are so morally certain in these your
undertakings, as to the existence of place etc. all the world affirming it, no
sober man questioning it, that it were a spice of madness, to entertain the
least doubt concerning it. Morally certain! I pray, Sir, what mean you by that?
I suppose, you never saw the places with your own eyes. If you had, that would
have produced something more, then Moral Certainty, and would cut off all
manner of doubt, and apprehension of doubt indeed. But I do not find, that your
Moral Certainty, is always (if ever) of that efficacy. For, though I am
morally certain, I saw such a man in the marketplace, whom I discovered by his
stature, complexion, clothes, etc. and am emboldened thereby to affirm, that I
saw him, though, perchance, but in passing, and afarr off; yet I will not
venture my credit upon it. For one man may in stature, complexion, clothes, be
like another, and I may at a distance be mistaken. I hold such a man to be my
friend, and an honest man, and am morally certain he will not break his word
with me upon loan of a hundred pounds; but will pay it again exactly at the
day appointed: but yet for all that I will not venture my money, without some
better security, then his bare word. This, I fear, is not the Moral Certainty
you would be at.

But now, suppose a question started, (in which your inheritance were
concerned) whether such an one were your Father, or (to put it on the surer
side) such an one (so ever reputed by your self, and all others generally) were
your Mother? Here, I think, you would make out such a Moral certainty, (for I
suppose, Physical certainty you could have none, either from self-evident
principles, or perceptibility of sensation) that you would venture your life,
and fortunes upon it. Here would be a certainty, which might send you to
Scanderoon or Mexico, to the Emperor, or grand Signior, rather then lose an
inheritance descended to you by so sure a title. And you could not fail of the
applause of all wise men for so doing. No man would censure you for it, unless
as full of malice and peevishness, as he must needs be of rashness, and
ignorance.

By this time then, I suppose, you may have discovered several sizes, or
degrees of Assurance, in that you call Moral Certainty: of which though some
is so weak, as to admit, both in speculation and practice, some fear and
dubitancy; yet others come to such a height, that albeit some detain them still
within the limits of Moral Certainty, (others allowing them something at least
of a reductively Physical certainty) yet such an one, most assuredly, it is, as
leaves the subject of its inhesion, in no more doubt, or perplexity, concerning
the verity, or certainty, of its objects Existency, and consequently, as
prudently determined to act accordingly, as if Cognizance thereof had been
taken by the very eyes, or senses.

This I apprehend to be the very case, in respect of this relation of the great
Saint Augustine; who affirms many of the things are here related, upon the
testimony of his own eyes, (which to him was a Physical Certainty) and that of
others, whole Cities and towns, no man of that age, or many Subsequent ones,
contradicting, or raising any doubt thereof: which to us is a most prudential
ground, of as much, and as great Moral Certainty, as things acted in former
times are capable to derive unto following ages. And now I hope no man will
undertake such a folly, as to go about to make any material disparity between
Time and Place. For certainly both are subject to the same exceptions, where
sense has not actually its operation; and both equally to be assented unto,
when they come attended with the same strength, and weight of probation.
Unquestionably all Negative arguments, of not seeing, etc. must be cast out of
doors, as of no force, or consideration imaginable; unless you can think it
reasonable, upon the same kind of proof, or motive, to deny the being of a
Caesar, or a Pompey, or of a William the Conqueror, or even of a Henry the
Seventh, or Eighth, etc.

But now, to deal heartily, and not slubber over any thing, which may seem to
have the least shadow of a probable disparity, I imagine this may be one thing,
which by some may be reflected upon; that though some former ages, descending
from St. Augustines days, did not at all question these things, but allowed
them as current, yet have there not been wanting some in these latter times,
(and those, in profession at least, not at all of the party in this present
discourse looked upon) who refuse to give credit to the things here related;
which by consequence become failing in a very material circumstance, which
those other mentioned instances are invested with; that they are by some
questioned, and opposed. I know very well, there are some whose concern is so
to do: But upon what grounds, besides what have already been mentioned, and I
hope, to the satisfaction of any rational man, disproved, I cannot imagine,
(supposing this to be the genuine work of Saint Agustin; which I have not yet
found any, even of these dissenters to disallow) unless it be this one; that
this relation contains several things, and practices, contrary to their
supposed Orthodox faith, or Reformation: wherefore there must be, and is,
deceit, and mistakes in it. But I pray give me leave to mind such objectors of
the caution I gave about the beginning of this discourse, concerning settling
the Inference or conclusion, before the Premises or proofs came under
consideration; which is an exact kind of (...) which, me thinks, is worth the
reflecting upon, and is here punctually put in practice. whereas I apprehend,
the argument may, and ought to be inverted, and retorted thus.

The great Saint Augustine writes these things, relates these practices
confirmed by miracles done in his own sight, attested by thousands of eye
witnesses; no man, in those days, disproving the matters of fact: Therefore
these things are not contrary to Orthodox faith, or true Reformation. If this
be not a more rational deduction, then the former grounded upon mere
conjectures, or a supposall of the Question, let any impartial man judge.

There is yet one Reserve; and that seems to have divided it self into two
wings. The one is, that these things my possibly have been effected by the
occult power of nature: the other, that he, who knows the art of applying
Actives to Passives, (the devil, God bless us) had a hand in them. The one
savours strong of the Physician; the other smells rank of the Pharisee. But we
must make as good a stand against them, as we are able. And first, me thinks,
this is just the proceeding of that peevish, or ignorant boy; who being bidd by
his master to spell Hugh (a proper name of a man, in Latin Hugo) first, fell
upon that which was most obvious, H. V. Hu; then Hew: But being told that he
was quite out, and that there was a G. in it, presently it was Hug; then Huge:
any thing, but the right Hugh; though this would have cost him as little breath
as any, or some at least, of the rest. But, for the love of God, Gentlemen,
('It Is that I wish you, as the noblest exercise of your wills, and which will
much facilitate your understandings) if we must needs fly to occult means, or
qualities, (of which we can give but a very slender account, and can by such
means only pretend to cloak our ignorance under certain pretty insignificant
words; Such occult means or qualities, being things, we only guess at, and
which are as remote from our sense, and understanding, as any thing we are
pressed to) why should we not rather betake our selves to him, whose
Omnipotency once owned, makes all things clear? where as now we grope only in
the dark, and are apt to stumble at a thousand blocks, before we are aware of
them. Is not this one great one, I pray, that a body once dead, that is, which
had lost the principle of life, should live again, contrary to the experience,
which we our selves have noted in thousands? nay, as contrary to the
inclination, and necessary tendency of nature to corruption, as it would be for
fire to cool, or ice to warm? But, which is more remarkable in our case, that
this should be effected, by only laying a gown, or garment, upon the Shrine, or
Relics, of a deceased Saint, (with invocation of God by his intercession) and
then applying the said garment unto the party deceased, that he, or she should
immediately recover not only life, but perfect health, is so unheard of an
effect, by way of any power, or virtue, which can be appropriated to pure
nature, that I think, they must be desperately resolved, who dare allow it so
much. as a probability, or indeed possibility. Add to this the strange cures of
those other diseases, the Gout, Palsy, Canker, Fistula, etc. whereof some were
held absolutely incurable by the means of any natural applications, according
to the Aphorisms of the great masters in the art of Physic: to others, all
remedies, though applied by very skillful hands, proved very unsuccessfull: yet
these were cured setledly, and permanently, and which was most to be wondered
at, suddenly: And that by such means, as could not possibly be imagined, to
carry any natural proportion with such unexpected effects; viz. by earnest
prayer, by the water of Baptism, by flowers, which had only touched the Bodies
of holy men, by the sign of the Cross, etc.

You will say, perchance, that fancy can do much. Surely, we need not go far
to prove it, if you can fancy, that such things as these were done by fancy.
I confess, I have hitherto taken fancy rather for a disease itself, then a cure
for any. I have heard of some indeed, who have fancied themselves Kings, and
Queens, etc. but I never yet heard of any real Crowns they got by that their
fancy; unless it were cracked ones in Bedlam. I have been told of others, who
have brought upon themselves very malignant diseases, as the small pox, etc. by
apprehension, or fancy: which I imagine very feasible, by an oppression of the
spirits, weakening the resistance, which otherwise might have been made against
the infectious Atoms; or through consent of parts, disordering the humors of
the body, so as to prepare it for any distemper, which the air was apt to
infuse. But I never yet read, or heard, of a Gout, Canker, or fistula, etc.
which was either got, or lost, by the force of fancy; especially in an instant:
much less can it enter into any sober man's fancy, how a dead man should rise
from death to life, and perfect health, by that, which he was immediately
before, as incapable off, as a stone is of smelling, or understanding.
Certainly, if such Philosophy, or Divinity rather, (for there must needs be
something more then human in it) be once held forth as current, our new sect of
Fanatics need not doubt of a large increase of proselytes. Great-bellyed women
will fancy strongly for cherries in December, and not lose their longing. No
man will want wealth, health, or content, if fancy can prove so omnipotent. But
I am apt to take this, (for I cannot believe it is intended for any other,
though some of the party make great flourishes upon it) for a mere shift, or
subterfuge or as a dark corner, wherein they would feign hide their nakedness,
that they may not be discovered; or rather that they may not be forced to
discover him, who has put boundaries to Nature universally, as well as to the
Sea, and who has reserved unto himself the power of working such wonders.

Now, as for the Pharisees daemonium habet, I beseech those, who pretend to
Christianity, and the use of prayer, and some Sacraments at least, to reflect,
that these were not fit means, or instruments, for the sworn enemy of them,
and the implacable hater of mankind to make use of, in order to so much good,
as the restoring health to the sick, and confirming them, and all the
spectators, in the faith of him, who took flesh upon him, for the destruction
of him and all his works. This carries high improbability with it, if not
impossibility. 'Twas never yet heard, he intended so much, even temperall good,
to any of our kind, whatever his knowledge may possibly be of Actives and
Passives. Besides, that in some of these passages, he must have acted directly
against himself, putting himself out of possession: And we know who tells us,
upon the like occasion, Luke. 11. 18. that his kingdom, so divided, could not
stand long: which certainly his intention, and most malicious endeavors ever
were, and are, to increase, not destroy. Again, the restoring the dead to life
must needs be a thing, as remote from his sphere of Activity, as it is improper
for his malice. For thou, O Lord, art he, in whom does reside the power of
life, and death. Sap. 16. 13. Thou art true, and sole Author of life. Acts. 3.
15. who were pleased to offer up thine own precious life upon the Cross, to
free us from the tyranny of this Prince of darkness, and purchase for us a life
free from all danger of ever dying.

But this little has been but too much concerning this point, in relation to
those, who own Christianity, and have any respect for the great servant of God,
Saint Augustine: who certainly never intended to set forth to the world any
thing, which either did belong, or could* with the least shadow of just
suspicion, be ascribed to, or esteemed the work, of that inveterate enemy of
God, and his whole Party.

But now as to those others, who are yet to seek Religion, and perchance a God
too, I could heartily wish to hear an objection of, this nature made by them. I
should then hope, they were something on their way toward the discovering
something else about him, if their eyes, or fancies, could once permit them to
suppose a being of him, whom this objection necessarily involves. But though an
hundred public Exorcismes, a thousand convictions of witchcrafts at public
Assizes, and other trials, have long since made this evident enough, yet I
fear, they will try an hundred Experiments more, before they will own his
person, what ever kindness they may have for his works. Men of these very
principles I imagine they were, who came, not many years since, unto a worthy,
learned Gentleman, (from whom I had the relation) and told him plainly, that
they were now satisfied, that there was no such thing, as a devil, either on
earth, or in hell. For certainly if there had been, they should have heard some
news of him. For they had tried all the tricks, charms, conjurations, etc.
that ever they could hear, or read of, in all the books, that ever they could
light upon, (and they were not a few) which had treated of that black art. But
the devil of devil could they either see, or hear of. O Gentlemen (replied this
discreet person) I thought you had had more wit, then to imagine the devil such
a fool, as to make his appearance at your Summons; (which no power of yours
could oblige him to obey) that you might be induced thereby, (for it seems they
had expressed themselves so far, concerning their intentions) to believe, or
be confirmed in your belief of a God. I hope, you have already found, or may (I
am sure) find better motives to ground your belief upon, then any that father
of lies can, or will, afford you. His discourse certainly was very congruous;
and such as I presume, gave those gentlemen a much more pleasing satisfaction,
then if their bold curiosity had been complied with in some false assumed
shape; which was all could possibly be expected from him; who is a pure spirit,
and who, by consequence, is (of himself, and in his own nature) no more the
object of our corporal eyes, then color is of our ears, or sound of our taste.
But indeed, in those circumstances, they had little reason, (whatever Pact, or
Compact they might pretend) to expect even so much from that false seducer,
when something was to be feared, or suspected, which might be in any way,
beneficial, or advantageous to those, whom he hates so mortally. Far then be
it from us to imagine, that Fiends could have any hand, or finger, in such
health and life-giving wonders, as are here related by the holy Saint
Augustine, in confirmation of Christianity.

One exception more I find made, and much insisted upon by some, by which (upon
a supposition of the present) they would fain make the world believe, they have
some reason to deny, or, at least, question things so long ago passed. For why
(say they) if the same power be still in being, are not the same, or the like
miraculous events, heard of, or seen in these our days, as did appear in the
time of St. Augustine, and other former ages? This must needs be confess't a
bold undertaking, thus to demand an account of him, whose will is his Essence,
and whose actions ad ertra (that is, in relation to creatures) are all as free,
as his great Intrinsecall Attributes of Wisdom, Goodness, Omnipotency, etc.
are necessary, and essential to his independent being. But it is noe improper
result of that liberty these men assume unto themselves, or of the libertinisme
they profess, and are such adorers of, to oblige even God himself, under pain
of being denied, or disavowed by them, to show himself to their eyes, their
corporal eyes I mean; (for to their intellectual he does sufficiently manifest
himself, if they did not wilfully shut them) when, and where their humor
thinks fit to demand it of him.

You may remember, that this was the very Heathenish question, which was put to
St. Augustine himself, as he mentions it in the beginning of this his eighth
Chapter; and which he answers, First with putting the prodigy upon them, who
now demand miracles for their belief, having had sufficient testimonies of
former miracles; which have already settled the world (for the most, and wisest
part) in a state of credulity. You know also, that the several relation of
miracles, wrought in those very times, when this question was put to him, and
are in this chapter summed up together, were ex abundante alleged by this
great Doctor, to show, that the hand of the same omnipotent God was not
abbreviated. And all men, that have heard any thing of the passages of these
our days, and are not preresolved to believe nothing but their own eyes, may,
if they please to take notice of them, or the design I have in hand, (which was
only to set down my reflections upon this one chapter of St. Agustine) would
permit me to mention them, be abundantly satisfied, that such supernatural
works have been in all ages, and are still wrought by the same hand, and by the
same means, as may serve to convince any impartial sober man of the truth we
are pleading for.

And that I may not seem to say this merely gratis; as also, that I may, in
some measure, comply with that method, which the great St. Augustine made use
of, though with some small increase of unexpected pains, (which may also
engage you to an additionall of Patience) I will make bold to touch upon some
few remarqueable passages, (amongst many) in which either the undoubted
authority, or unquestionable impartiality of the writers, or the things
themselves so fresh in memory, as even to admit of living witnesses, (some of
them at least) may justify me.

But here, I suppose, I shall not be allowed to mention the miracles recorded
by St. Gregory the great, in his Dialogues, and other works, nor those of his
Zealous, missionaries, sent for the Conversion of, or establishing Religion in
our Country, although Mr. Fox himself, in his Acts and Monuments, printed in
the year 1576. page 117. says of St. Austin, and those who accompanied him in
that great enterprise, that the King was moved with the miracles, wrought
through Gods hand by them etc. and although the same are attested by many of
the same age, and particularly by our venerable Countryman, Bid, in the age
following, who adds many more, of his own knowledge some, others of
unquestionable authority. Those recorded by St. Hierom, St Ambrose, St.
Chrysostom, St. Athanasius, Palladius, Theodoret, Lactantius, Epiphanius, St.
Cyprian, Eusebius, Evagrius, etc. all men of great prudence, and integrity;
although many of the particulars written by them, are owned by Osiander and the
Centurists, etc. (no friends of such wonders, which both in substance, and
manner, make highly against them, and their up-start tenets) would, I fear, be
subject to the same exception, as being of too stale a date. And those of St.
Malachy, written by his samiliar friend, St. Bernard; as also those of St.
Bernard himself, written by his contemporary, and scholar, Godefridus: as also
those wrought by the two great founders of Religious life, and Orders, St.
Francis, and St. Dominick, and many others, though not many ages since, yet
because something at least out of ours, and our fathers memories, will hardly
be admitted as current. But why those miracles wrought almost in our own days,
at the conversion of Congo, a region of Afrique, which are recorded by Mr.
Abraham Hartwell, in his book dedicated to the Archbishop, Anno 1597. and done
by Gods omnipotency in the presence of a whole Army; (lib. 2. cap. 3.) and the
same mentioned, and acknowledged by Mr. John Porey, not long since of Gonvil
and Cajus College in Cambridge, in his Geographicall description of Africa,
published in the year 1610. page 410. 413. where he approves of, and commends
Mr. Hartwell for publishing his foresaid Treatise; why these, I say, and the
like, should now be disputed, I see no ground, or reason, if there be any thing
of credit, or belief, left in the world. Again, those many miraculous passages,
which have happened at Lorett^, at our Ladies of Sichem etc. are so witnessed,
and owned, by the whole Christian world, as evident supernatural works of the
omnipotent hand of God, that of him, who should now go about to contradict
them, we might with all the reason in the world say, what the great Justus
Lipsius has, in the preface of his Diva Sichemensis, or Aspricollis, printed at
Antwerp, in the year 1605. Quid enim de hominibus dicam, etc. For what shall I
say of such men who should go about to deny, or so much as doubt of these so
evident things, but that they are not men? or, that they wilfully shut their
eyes, that they may not see so clear a sunshine of truth? For, most of these
things have been evident to our very senses. And again, in the beginning of his
fifth chapter; Behold, these things were done in our very sight, and hearing.
They were celebrated with the concourse, applause, and spiritual profit of
nations. what credit can be given to human things, if it be here denied? I
cannot omit to put you in mind of that one particular passage, which you may
have met with in this Author, chap. 45. concerning one John Clement, native of
Bruxelles, who was of so deformed a shape, his thighs and his feet being
contracted and turned upwards toward the forepart of his breast, so as his
knees did grow, and stick thereto, his body round, or sphericall, unfit to
stand, lie, or go; and had been so, and known to be so, by the whole town of
Bruxelles, for twenty years; that was, from his nativity, or rather from the
time of his being cut out of his mothers womb, after she was dead in labor of
so monstrous a creature. This poor man then, as Justus Lipsius relates in his
foresaid book, and forty fifth chapter, in the year of our Lord 1603. and
month of July, being moved in his mind to go to our Ladies Chapel at Sichem
in Brabant, where he had heard of many miraculous cures reported to have been
done, was carried thither in a wagon, and having done his devotions with much
fervor, and confidence, in conclusion he felt his contracted, and bound up
thighs and feet to be loosed, and stretched forth, so as presently he stood on
his feet, to the great amazement both of himself and the beholders, who had
seen in what a sad condition he had entered into the holy place that very day.
Lipsius professes, that he himself examined the ablest physicians he could
meet with, about this accident, and they all confessed, (though some of them,
says he, not at all credulous of things of this nature) that this was
certainly an effect of the powerful hand of God. And the thing was made so
public by the discourse of all, that sundry gentlemen, attendants of the
Earl of Hartford, then Ambassador in those parts made it their business to be
satisfied of the truth of things, as well by seeing, and interrogating the
party himself, as by other public, and authentic testimonies of the fact,
and could not discover any thing with reason to except against. This is fresh,
as I may say; having happened in the very age we live in.

I might also think it very reasonable, to exact some credit to be given to
those strange things done in the other world, I mean in the Indies, by the
means, and intercession of the great Apostle of those parts, St. Francis
Xaverius, in the times neighboring close to our age also: The particulars
whereof were examined with very great strictness, by the express command of the
king of Portugal, and attested by the oaths of so many persons of worth, and
reputation, that the Author of the book called Rerum in Orient gestarum
Commentarius, may well be allowed to say, as he does page 8. and be believed,
that upon execution of the said King of Portugalls commission to his Viceroy,
for examining the said miracles etc. and Certificate thereupon being made, it
did appear, that Xaverius, in testimony and proof of the Christian faith, by
him then preached, and taught, cured miraculously the dumb, the lame, the deaf,
and with his word healed the sick: and (fol. 9.) raised sundry dead persons to
life; and that after his death; ( as is there related, fol. 14) Anno 1552. the
grave being opened wherein his dead body for a time had lain buried in lime to
the end his naked bones might be carried from thence to Goa ( fol. 15.) they
found his body not only unconsum'd, but also yiedling forth fragrant smells;
although in the severe trial, and search, made by command of some great-ones,
it was found, that he was neither embalmed, nor bowelled. His body is still
kept at Goa; Where to this day (says the Commentary) it remains free from
corruption: witness whereof (says the said Treatise) are all the Inhabitants
of that City, and travelers, that repair thither.

It is not many years since that Commentary was written; which speaks in this
manner of that holy Saints body, remaining incorrupt to that very day. And to
our comfort the same wonder still continues even in our days, as very late
information assures us, especially from the mouth of a worthy grave person,
whose care it was, for five years together, to see it decently kept; and who
was a daily Eyewitness, during that time, of the miracle.

Neither has Almighty God been backward in his favors to Europe also, by the
means of the same great Apostle; as might be evidenced by most authentic
proofs, had I not transgressed too far in this point already. And yet in this
(I hope no very unpleasant) subject, I must beg your leave to insist a little
longer; at least till I have minded you of that famous miracle, wrought upon
the person of Marcello Mastrilli in Naples, in the year 1584. on the third of
Jan. in some of our memories, I am sure of it. You may see it more at large in
Bartoli, or in the late learned Treatise of Reason and Religion, written by E.
W. with the proofs, and unquestionable testimonies thereof. There are those yet
living, (as you may easily guess) who were witnesses of the wonder, and saw
with their eyes a man despaired of by all the Physicians, and surgeons; who
having layn most dangerously sick of a violent feavour, caused by a terrible
wound received in his head, twenty-four-dayes together, withal the symptoms
imaginable of death upon him, insomuch that all things necessary for his
burial were put in a readiness, upon a sudden, and almost in a moment as I may
say, by a visible apparition of that great Apostle, St. Francis Xaverius, and
by the application only of certain holy relics, according to the direction of
the said Saint, so perfectly restored to health, that he, who for many days
before had not been able to turn, or stir himself in his bed, immediately rose
nimbly out of it, threw off the linen, with which the wound of his head was
bound up, cast himself down upon his knees, to give God thanks for his
miraculous restoration, by the intercession of his holy patron; and then
refreshed himself with eating some thing, whereas he had not been able for many
days before, to swallow so much as a drop of water. That very night he writ
the whole relation, of what had passed with him and the blessed Saint, with his
own hand, said mass in the Church the next morning, and that very day, for many
hours together, was obliged to be present at the juridicall examination of the
fact, before the Cardinal, Archbishop of the place: And all this after such
extremity of weakness, both from his long sickness, and almost continual fits
of Convulsion, without the least difficulty, or decay of spirits. Not long
after, having first assisted the Lady, his mother, in her last sickness, he
prepared himself for the performance of the vow he had made, during the time of
his danger, (and which the blessed Saint, who appeared to him, caused him to
renew in his presence) of dedicating himself to the assistance of poor souls
in the Indies, where (as now at the time of his cure foretold him by the H.
Saint) he, some few years after, suffered martyrdom for the faith of Christ:
which also was not without miracle. for, having by the power of God, escaped
the ordinary cruel torture of water, used by those Barbarians, and which none
use to pass without certain death, he was at length beheaded, after the
executioner had several times endeavored to do his office, but without effect;
his strength failing him, till the holy man himself gave him leave, or
commission, for it. And of this prophecy concerning his dying for Christ,
(which could not be, but from the all-seeing providence of God) there are many
yet living, and among others my unworthy self, who can declare upon oath, that
they had notice of it, some years before it came to pass. In so much, that as I
have been informed from a very good hand, the late Lord of Caernarvan, that
valiant and worthy person, who afterward testified his loyalty to his prince
by the loss of his life, happening to be in the court of Spain, when Mastrilli
passed by Madrid in his way to take shipping for the Indies, and in the
presence, and by the command of the king of Spain, was obliged to make relation
of the whole passage of his miraculous cure, the said Lord of Caernarvan was
heard to say, that if the man did go into the Indies, and there lose his life,
as he had said was foretold him, he would believe all he said for scripture. I
would to God some of our Nullifidians could be persuaded to believe it, at
least as far, as human faith seems to oblige them. I should hope, it would be
a step, or disposition toward their believing something, in which they are more
nearly concerned.

But against much of this I hear there is a certain English Doctor, (who
notwithstanding would gladly see some of these things with his own eyes; and
then he would tell us more of his mind) who for once is contented to enter into
league with a Roman Doctor; though otherwise he seems to hate (as bad as Hell
does Holy Water) any thing, that has relation to that superstitious place; and
he tells us from his Roman Dr. Dr. Stillingfleet, in his 2. discourse, in
vindication of the Protestant grounds of faith: page 685. and page 617.
that it is so ordinary an effect of nature to preserve bodies a long time from
corruption, by the use of lime, etc. that it is mere ignorance to take the
late mentioned incorruption of the body of St. Francis Xavier, (which the rest
of the world so much admires, as an effect of the divine goodness to that
Apostolical man) for any thing extraordinary, and praeternatural. But with this
Doctors good leave, the general persuasion of the world, (amongst whom we find
some Doctors also) grounded upon experience, and the corroding, or rather
Caustic, quality, and force of unsleck't lime, (not so properly, perchance,
expressed by the Roman Doctors single word Calx) with which the body of St.
Xaverius was twice covered, is contrary. But then we would gladly know, from
this learned empirick, how this dead body of the Saint came to be preserved
entire, fresh, moist, and sweet, (more then ordinary living bodies) many
months, nay years, after that natural preserver of his was taken from it: or
whether he has any thing in his own, or his Roman Doctors experience, which
tells him, that bodies once covered with lime, do afterward preserve
themselves, or are preserved by some relict quality, from the lime for months
and years. This, I am sure, would be new, and worth so great an English
Doctors invention. For his Roman Doctor does here absolutely desert him; who
in the same place, and number cited by our English Doctor, concludes it to be
miraculous, where there are found such circumstances, as were discovered by
many curious Inspectours into the incorrupt body of St. Francis Xavier. But any
thing must pass, rather then God should seem to have any regard to the honor
of his Saints, or any miraculous thing be done by them, or at their
intercession.

And yet I am half of opinion, that this good Gentleman, (whether before he was
well awars or no, I cannot well tell) had some more respect then ordinary, for
this great Apostle of the Indies; seeing he is pleased to own, Dr.
Stillingfleet, ibid. page 615.
that if it were at any time reasonable to expect a power of miracles, it would
be for the conversion of Infidels; and Xaverius, and his companions (poor
Romish Priests and Jesuits) going upon so generous a design, might be favored
in it by some extraordinary effects of divine power. Only he (the good Doctor)
would willingly have appointed God, what miracles he should have empowered them
to work, in this, and the like occasions. Vtinam saperet, and intelligeret, etc.

But now the scene is altered again. For as to all those miracles, whose
relation we have from the Jesuits, Dr. Stillingfleet, ibid. page 617.
we are (says he) to consider, what credit their testimony deserves with us.
For, if they are men, who think it lawful to lie for a good cause, (as no doubt
the honor of their society is such with them) how can we with any tolerable
discretion rely upon their words? Thus this severe Doctor is pleased to
preingage his Reader. What credit they may have with such pre-resolv'd
Gentlemen, as himself, and his like, I know not: But we have a very ill account
of things abroad, if very many (who think themselves no fools neither, and who
have had some reason to be better acquainted with these men's principles, and
proceedings, then he, who (for all that we know) never saw, or conversed with
any of them in his life,) have not another opinion of them, then the character
here bestowed upon them seems to allow. And yet I perceive the man is
something wary too, and ushers in this pretty piece of Civility of his with an
If. If they are men, who think it lawful to lie for a good cause, etc. It
would be something satisfactory, to see in what Author of theirs (and it is
ten to one, he has seen more then one of them, in the libraries of the
universities, or perchance in his own closet) he finds this supposed doctrine of
theirs, that it is lawful to lie for a good cause. Thus much I promise him,
that if he can prove this to be their doctrine, I will join with him, and
proclaim them not only knaves, but very fools also: (and that is not the
Character the world generally gives them:) For though a lie may take for once,
when it is handsomely told, and may bring some advantage with it; yet to make a
trade, and open profession of it, (which they must needs be supposed to do, who
hold it lawful etc.) and hope to thrive by it, were to take the rest of the
world to be of very weak capacities, and to go about to impose upon all
mankind, which were in effect to declare themselves, utterly void of all wit,
and unfit for human conversation. It is true, Omnis homo mendax. Every man, one
time or other, by the common corruption of nature, is subject to be false to
his principles; and to offend against some known verity: neither do I find,
that Black coats are excepted in the general clause. But to do it, and hold it
lawful to lie, for a good, or bad cause, is a thing, for which I am pretty
sure, none of their Authors can be quoted, whom the Doctor is so civilly
pleased to father it upon. I confess, it is a pretty odd passage (especially
with those pleasant Comments upon it) which the Doctor, upon the back of this
his unexpected Caution, fetches as far as Persia. But, I find the Doctor
himself is pleased to furnish Hierom Xavier with several Authors, (good or bad,
I am not now in humor to dispute; for so much as his talent of inventing
untruths is concerned) for part of which this one (very possibly indiscreet)
Jesuit did utter; the Doctor himself making up the rest of the story with
several interpolations from others, whom we take to be none of Xavier's tribe.
But yet we do not find, that he was either so impious as to promulge this by
way of a new Gospel, or so insolent, as to insert many things, taking them even
from the Doctors own relation, (which notwithstanding I beg his leave, with
time and opportunity to examine a little further, before I enter it into my
Creed) so maliciously false, as to ground so general a supposal, that those of
his calling think it lawful to lie for a good cause. But it is remarkably the
fortune of this great Doctor, to be always undertaking, and endeavoring at
great and extraordinary things: such as indeed many have soberly questioned,
whether himself did in reality hold to be such Truths, as he seems to set them
out for.

Sure we are, most, or many of his own pretended Party do not think themselves
obliged to maintain or believe them as such. Qui nimium probat, nihil probat,
is an Axiom, which every fresh man is soon acquainted with, and knows, by the
very light of nature, what such Proofs amount to.

But now, as to this particular, of the Jesuits holding it lawful to lie for a
good cause, the thing appearing to me to be matter of Fact, to be made good
either out of their Books, Lessons, Sermons, etc. or notorious general
practice, me thinks I have reason to expect something more home, and positive,
then has hitherto been alleged, or brought to light. Till this be effectually
done, I must believe, I am obliged to confirm my judgment to that of the
generality of knowing men; who have heard them so often teach much better
things in their Schools and Pulpits; and who have found them more civil in
their conversation, then either to practice any such thing themselves, or brand
a large community with it: in which there be many, who by their quality in the
world, as Gentlemen, deserve more civil treatment, from those, who know, what
Breeding is.

Amongst others of them I find the forementioned Marcello Mastrilli; upon whom
was wrought that remarkable cure, described so lately, and which happened so
few years ago. This good man was, and is, owned by the chief nobility of
Naples, to have been a near relation of theirs; and one, who by his actions
brought no stain upon his family: And yet he also must fall under the general
censure of our kind Doctor, and be reckoned among those, who make no scruple
to lie for a good cause, etc. But could the Doctor make this action good, of
his being a lier, I should not stick to enter that other, of his being a fool.
For, that a man should stretch a little too far, in hopes of some profit, or
preferment, is that, which perchance may pass for wit, as the world goes now a
days. But that a man should invent a story, which should oblige him to leave
his native country, where he was in good esteem, both for his birth, and parts;
which in probability had been attended with a fortune answerable, before he
abandoned it, (as many more are known to have done) upon better motives, as may
well be imagined, then to take up a trade of lying. That he should (I say) in
this manner oblige himself to quit all these advantages, and expose his person
to a long and dangerous Journey, and to the cruelty of a savage people, from
whom he could expect nothing, but what he found, barbarous usage, and a cruel
death, is beyond any maxims of modern wit, or discretion. But the piercing
Doctor will (perhaps) tell us, that the honor of his society was the good
cause, which put him upon the contrivance, and obliged him to the execution
accordingly. If this could be made out, I should confess, it were something to
be admired indeed, that a man in this age, for such mere human respects, should
become so great a self denier: But I doubt, would hardly be imitated by any,
but some of his own party; who by his example have been moved to abandon
likewise their native countries, and comforts, and venture their lives through
sea and land, upon the only score of relieving the spiritual necessities of
those poor desolate Nations. Could we once see an example of this kind in some
of those, who pretend so much Zeal for the Gospel, we might, perchance, be
moved to think better of their Principles. But though their merchants, and
factours, venture indeeed yearly into those Eastern, and Western parts, to
fetch us home gold and silver, and silks, and spices, and Jewels, etc. Yet I
never heard of any of the good Doctors Partisans, who ventured (without, or
with a Viaticum) to go to those remote parts upon the bare hopes of increasing
the flock of Christ, and improving their stock no otherwise, then by suffering
all manner of evil usages, dangers, wants, and many times death it self.

But not to wrong the good Doctor, nor put more incivility upon him, then
some, perchance may apprehend he deserves, I must own, that I find him
sometimes inclined (as page 684. of his Second discourse) to suppose this
passage of Mastrilli's miraculous cure to have something of truth in it: and I
am apt to think he has some reason for it; there being such irrefragable
testimonies of many, who were not Jesuits, for the positive verity of it; and
so little to be said for the negative. For which notwithstanding, could it have
been done, I believe, he might have found some curious wel-willers of the
Jesuits, who would have been industrious and ready enough to have furnished
materials.

But then he comes off again with E. W. And asks him, what this, or the like,
would make to the proof of Pope Pius the fourth's Creed? As to that I shall
leave him to E. W. and others; who, I make no question, will do him reason. But
I must entreat him in the mean time, that out of his animosity against E. W. he
will not deprive us of such grounds, as make against Atheism for Christianity;
the supporting of which was my only design, whilst I mention this, and some
few other late passages: some of which I hope, the kind Doctor will not be two
earnest against, but think well of, and allow; at least of those mentioned by
Saint Augustine: And then I have my end in substance: though these others,
alleged (as I said) ex abundante, should fall under stronger exceptions, then
I find as yet brought by any body against them.

Having made so good a return, as I hope, out of these foreign parts, I must
needs engage your patience once more, whilst I touch upon that, which happened
so lately in Spain, in the year 1640. to one Michael Pellicer, who had his leg
restored by the intercession of our blessed Lady, after it had been cut off,
some four fingers below the knee, and buried in the ground, above two whole
years before. The particulars you may find also more at large, in the forecited
Reason and Religion, page 328. Certain it is, that there were many grave
persons, as you may there read, who had the Examination of the business, many,
who knew the young man, whilst he was lame by the loss of his leg. (the
Surgeon also well known, who cut it off) as also when he went perfectly, and
sound afterward, upon both his legs; the one being suddenly restored to him,
by the intercession of the Blessed Virgin. Certainly if this was so, it does
demonstrate a power more then human, and above nature. That it was so, after
the testimonies of so many eyewitnesses, and the strict examination made, and
subscribed by so many grave persons, I cannot imagine, how any man in reason, or
prudence, can call in question. I know, there have been those, who being very
loath, (God knows, upon what motives; they must one day give him a very severe
account of them) to own any thing of this nature; and having nothing, either of
authority, or reason, but only their own fancy, and prejudice, to object
against it, have (according to their custom in things of difficulty, or
evidence brought against them) endeavored to avoid the force of it by a pretty
piece of drollery, saying, That it is an easy thing for a stump to grow a leg,
in its passage from Spain hither. Such Raillery, I confess, might have been
expected from a man of mirth upon the stage, or in a tavern, where it is not
unusual for such slipperytong'd blades to make bold with the most serious, and
the most sacred things, if they chance to come in their way, and afford them
any subject of divertisement, or exercise of wit. But, that a grave Doctor, in
so serious a matter should have no other shift, and should dare to make use of
so slight an one, or imagine any sober understanding man should be satisfied
with it, is very strange, and indeed something prodigious. But I leave him to
make his best of it: Though I cannot but heartily wish, that both he and others
would make that use of these, and many other events of the same, or like kind,
(which might have been alleged) for which they were intended by the Omnipotent
worker of them; which certainly was, to raise in us a lively faith of the
greatness and power of God above nature; and consequently a resolution to
observe the will, and commands of this our great, and good God, though it were
necessary for this end, to renounce those inclinations of flesh, and blood, and
sense, which are (as is to be feared) the real grounds, and motives of our
denying, or waving such other principles, as do much more become the dignity,
and worth of those Rational souls, with which he has endowed us.

But here I must make a discovery, and speak plainly my sense, which is, That,
that which ought to be our cure, is the ground of our disease. The
consideration of these extraordinary, Supernatural works of God ought in reason
to move us to reverence, and adore his greatness; as also to check our unruly
natures, in obedience to him, and his commands, who is the Author of nature.
But on the contrary it falls out too too often, that discovering him, by these
great works of his, to stand in our way, though our understandings (at first at
least) cannot choose but think it reasonable, to comply with the duty we owe to
so great a God, his positive laws, and that of nature, obliging us to it; yet
the love we have of our own wills, and the extraordinary kindness we have for
the sensual inclinations of flesh and blood, work so powerfully, by little and
little, upon us, that we begin to be willing to deny him, not only a due
subjection, but even a common being amongst, and providence over his creatures.
For I take it to be as great a truth, as any in morality, that Atheism seldom,
or never, begins in the understanding; but that it is bred, and born in the
will; and that when men are once resolved to abandon themselves to liberty, and
sense, then they cast about, how to rid themselves of any thing, which may
check them in this their pleasant course. And then away with reason, away with
honor, away with conscience, away with God himself. And when they are once
come thus far, and feel something of that, which they call sweet Liberty, what
wonder, if they please themselves with it, as far as it will go, and as long
as it is capable of pleasing them; and laugh at, and make sport with those, who
take a more sober, and serious course.

I shall never forget that pleasant passage between Sir Thomas Moor's Cavilier,
and his honest Friar. I pray pardon me for troubling you with a story, (or
tale, if you please to call it so) which is so well known; I wish only, the
import of it were as commonly reflected upon. The good Friar, going one day
abroad into the country, either to beg relief for his Convent, or about some
Charitable employment, for the spiritual assistance of his neighbor, was met
accidentally by a Gentleman, well mounted, and well and warmly clad, as the
season of the year required. The poor Friar was fain to make use of his own
legs, and had but his single garment; which, though course enough, yet was too
thin to guard him sufficiently from the cold weather: his legs and feet bare,
only saved harmless from the stones by a pair of wooden clogs etc.

The frolic Gentleman thought this a fit subject for his drollery, and so
accosted him with the usual salute, of well met, Father: how do you do? The
good Friar had nothing to complain of; and thanking God, and his worship, told
him he was very well. Ay, but father, replied the Gentleman, are you not a
little cold, and something wet too? Me thinks that garment were fitter for
warmer weather. And besides, your stockings (I doubt) do not bear out the wet
and dirt, no more then the upper part of your shoes; ( his feet were bare, the
clogs being only made fast with a strap, which came over his foot) which seems
to be made of Calves leather. I can but thank you, kind Sir, for the calfe you
so charitably bestow upon me, replied the Friar: But as for the wet and cold I
meet with, it is no more, then may very well be endured for Gods sake. Heaven,
Sir, is worth this, and a great deal more. Ay, marry, replies the Gentleman;
now you say something indeed. But what if there be neither God, nor Heaven;
where are you then? The good, zealous Friar was quick to this, saying, Ay but,
my dear Sir, If there be a God, and a Heaven, and a Hell, where is your worship
then? My good Gentleman had no more to reply, but marched fairly off, rubbing
his hands, as if he had met with a nettle.

Will you give me leave to insist a little upon this Zealous Reparty of the
good Friar? You are, perchance, a pleasant-humour'd Gentleman, of a plentiful
Fortune, of a handsome feature, and healthy constitution, in the heat of your
youth, in the prime of your age: You are unwilling to let any field, or place,
or opportunity pass, without tasting, or taking your fill of all the pleasures
they afford you right or wrong, with the allowance, or against the express
command, and order of the living God. And for your greater encouragement in
this, which you use to call enjoying your self, you say (perchance) in your
heart, why not? whom am I to please, but my self? It may be, there is no such
thing, as simple, or fearful men talk of a Heaven, for those, who live
otherwise then I do; or a Hell for those, who think well of, and follow my
pleasant practice: nay, perchance not so much as a God, who takes notice of
these my ways, and intends to dispose of me hereafter accordingly. But now, I
pray, Sir, what if there be? what if there be an eternity of restraint, and
torment, reserved for those, who take the liberty you do? what if there be
endless joys and delights, prepared for those, who voluntarily abandon these
fleeting, momentary pleasures, you so earnestly, (not to say childishly)
pursue? what (...) there be an all-seeing eye over you which takes cognizance
of each thoug^ word, and deed? and whose Just^^^ essentially obliges him to
deal with y^^ accordingly? and you know not, (...) all your wealth, and your
health, a^^ your mirth, and your Jollity, h^^ soon you are to come to an
unavoidab^^ trial of it? Are you sure this is (...) true? Is there any friend
of you^^ who pretends a demonstration, or (...) much as a sober, solid,
argument against it? All your wilful sophist^^ and weaker Perhaps, will then
lit^^^ avail you. For the love of God th^^ or (if you will needs have it so)
(...) the love of your dear self, be a lit^^^ serious, and circumsp^ct. I shou^
willingly wish you a man of so mu^^ prudence, that if you were told by (...)
sober wel-wisher, that the Infecti^^ were in such a house, you should (...)
venture into it without better securi^^ then your Perhaps, it is not so: or you
were told from a good hand o^ Jewel of enestimable value, intend^^^ you for the
going for, I hope you would in prudence leave your game at Tennis, or what
other pastime you please, though you loved the sport never so well, rather then
forego the hopes of being made for ever. Again if you were told, you were the
son of a great King, and that that King, though never yet seen by you, had
always had a ^are of you, had given charge of you ^o his trusty servants, and
that by this ^eanes you came to be so well provided (...) present; and that he
also intended ^ou a considerable part in his kingdom ^^terwards: would you,
upon some ^^ght, groundless suspicion, of a cheat ^^tended to be put upon you
in some ^mall trifle, renounce your father, or (...) your inheritance for a
mess of pot^^ge? I cannot take you for one, who ^^ve your self so meanly, or
have so ^^^tle regard to your own interest. You should certainly, even in
ordinary pru^^nce, take better resolves in a matter (...) so great concern;
although you had (...) notice of your danger, or hopes, (...) from some one
ordinary person: (...) although you might possibly have (...) ground to
suspect, that he might have his little ends in it also. But now our case in all
things, both substance and circumstance, is infinitely different, infinitely
more considerable. Our danger, or hopes, are of no less, then eternal
consequence. The happiness or misfortune, excessive, and beyond all
imagination: and this depending upon his decree, or doom, by whom all things
have their being, and who is essentially, eternally, infinitely, his own
never-begun, and never-ending being.

Our intelligence of these great things is not from one Sceptick, or other, who
talks only of possibilities, or probabilities; but from the consent of all
Nations, from this great Fabric of the universe, which none, but an Omnipotent
hand could have framed, and designed with such order, and oeconomie, as even
our very Reason, well and closely managed, must needs convince us: whatsoever
Chance, or Atoms, (things ten thousand times harder to conceive) some silly
Philosophers may have dreamed of. And in conclusion, those several supernatural
wonders, attested by innumerable, sober, understanding persons, and
particularly (which was my chief design from the beginning) these miraculous
events here alleged by the great St. Augustine; which no sober man can, with
any show of reason, call in question, evidence, and demonstrate, that there is
a superior Power to all that nature is acquainted with, and that he has a
paternall care, and providence over his creatures; as also a special kindness,
and respect for his servants, now stated with him in eternal bliss: at whose
intercession, and by whose means, he has been pleased to bestow such
extraordinary favors upon some needful mortals.

To him be all Glory and Praise both now and ever-more. Amen.


