AN ACCOUNT Of a Remarkable SEA FIGHT, BETWEEN An English Ketch, and a French
Privateer.
From Aboard the Breda Fregate, at the Spit-Head.
April, 19. 1690. SIR,
I Send you this in return of several kind Letters which are acceptable to us
remote from the News of the Town. It Is true, it is an Account of a small loss
we have received; yet when you consider the Bravery of the Resistance and how
dear bought the Victory was to the Enemy, you will find it to be a Relation fit
for public view, to show the Gallantry of our English Courage.

Captain Robert Audley Commander of the King Fisher Ketch, carrying twenty four
Men, and four Guns, was sent by our Admiral from the Fleet here riding, to
fetch the pressed Men that lay at Plymouth. In his course, he was met by a French
Privateer, of eighteen Guns and six Petterero's, off of Weymouth. The Privateer
put out Dutch Colors at first, so that Captain Audley never suspected him to
be a French Man, till he came up just with him, at what time the Privateer put
up his French Colors; and then Captain Audley found his mistake. However
perceiving there was no way to avoid a Vessel that Sailed better then he did,
the Captain resolved to defend himself as well as he could. The French man
being as I said before an Excellent Sayler, put off the Ketch from the Shore to
make sure of her; and so the Fight began about four of the Clock in the
Afternoon, and continued till almost nine: During which time the Frenchman
Boarded the Ketch no less than four times, but was every time beat off with
much loss, till at length of twenty four Men and the Captain, there were no
more then seven Men left that were able to Maintain the Fight.

When the Ketch was thus disibl'd, the Privateer Boarded the Captain a fifth
time, and leaving twenty Men a Board, put off again. Now began another hot
Contest between the twenty and the seven; which continued till two of the seven
were cut in pieces, and Captain Audley himself wounded in four places, after he
had killed seven of the twenty with his own hand, and the rest of the twenty
all but two, were killed by the few left in the Ketch, and then it was, and not
before, that the French Privateer Boarding the Ketch the last time, and entering
all his Men, the wounded Captain and his poor five Men were forced to yield to
fresh a^^ailants and superior number. What loss the Privateer received, we
cannot understand, but considering the loss of the English, it is not to be
questioned, but that he paid dear for the purchase of a little Ketch.

When Captain Audley was taken, the Privateer impatient of the Mischief he had
received, asked him, how he had the Impudence to fight such a Ship as his was,
and in the height of his passion, was so ungenerous as to fall upon Captain
Audley with his Cane, and to bestow so many hard blows upon him, as to set his
VVounds a bleeding a fresh, and in other parts of his Body to beat him black
and blew. A piece of insulting Tyranny, which none but a French Privateer would
have been guilty of. Nevertheless we must say this for the Privateer, that when
the heat of his Fury was over, he came so far to himself, that before he sent
Captain Audley on shore at St. Malo's, he gave him his blew Suit back again to
keep him warm in the Goal, because he had fought so bravely; and was so kind to
his own Reputation, that to excuse the loss he had received, he reported to the
Honor of the English, that never Men fought better in the World; as by a
Letter from St. Malo's, is attested by several Merchants upon the place, who
offered six French Mates for his Ransom, but they would not be taken; twelve
Cowardly French Mates not being a true value for one Valiant English Captain.

He is at this present in the Castle of St. Malo's, and the four ^en that
brought the News, being since redeemed, are now in Portsm^^th, and the Rear
Admiral of the Red Squadron, is taking all the Care he can to obtain the
Liberty of the Captain Himself, with some other Friends.

This Account I could not forbear to give you, for the Honor of my Brother
Robert, since you know us both, Remaining your humble Servant,

John Audley.

IF any person desire to be further satisfied in the Truth of this Relation,
the Printer will direct where they may see the Original Letter, not to be
contradicted.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall. 1690


