SEVERAL THINGS Given forth by the Spirit of the Lord Through a Vessel prepared
to do the Fathers Will. Known by the Name of John Ansloe, I will send you the
Comforter, the Spirit of Truth: He will lead you into all Truth; He shall take
of mine, and show it unto you; the Spirit searches all things, yea, the Deep
things of God.
An EPISTLE to the Reader.
Friendly Reader,
THese following things are presented to thee, and are recommended to the Light
and Spirit of God in thee, from whence they came, that in the Light thou may
wait to have an Understanding of all thing belonging to thy Everlasting Peace,
for there be many False Prophets gone forth into the World, that if it were
possible, would deceive the very Elect. Wherefore try the Spirits whether they
be of God or no: the Light will discover of what sort they are, if thou sinkest
down into it, not having thy Mind above it, or puffed up with the Profession of
it; for if thou art, then thou will be apt to measure with the wrong Measure,
and it will be thy self, not the Angel with his Measuring Reed, but something
will be in thy Eye pertaining to the Outward Court, as thou art for or against,
that is not the equal Measure, but all are to bring their Deeds to the Light
that will make them manifest, none can be deceived or mistaken there; but being
busied with their own Conceits (as too many are) they make their own Ways
right, and all others wrong; this is Error and Deceivableness, for Christ is
the Light that lights every man that comes into the World. Why should any
man think his Way to be better than another, seeing all are enlightened, and
are to be turned to the Light, to be guided thereby; all here are in a Capacity
to believe, and the Fault is not in the Light, but in them that reject it, and
who is he that can force another to believe in the Light, or to believe as he
believes, or as the Church believes, but they must be left. (Christ could do no
mighty things because of their Unbelief) And no Force is to be used toward
them; nor no Fire to be called for from Heaven to destroy them. For the Son of
Man came not to dest^^^^m^ns Lives, but to save them.

A Testimony concerning the LIGHT.
I Am the Light of the World (said Christ) he that believes in me shall not
abide in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life. This is witnessed by some
who believe in his Name, and have denied themselves, and taken up his Cross and
followed him, through the Regeneration and through the Great Tribulation have
entered the Kingdom, and do sit down in Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, he
having made them meet to be Partaker with him of that Inheritance with the
Saints in Light, and this he has done freely for his Name sake, not for any
merit of ours, or Works of Righteousness that we have done, all our
Righteousness being but as Filthy Rags, and the Night Clothing we have put off,
and have put on the Lord Jesus Christ, making now no more Provision for the
Flesh, so that we are not our own, but he has Redeemed us up to God, and his
own Blood has paid the Ransom, and now we serve him in the Newness of the
Spirit, no more in the Oldness of the Letter; now we know, That the Letter
kills, but the Spirit gives Life. And, that it is not I (as the Apostle
said) but Christ that lives in me, and he walks in us, and moves and
works in us, both to will and to do according to the Pleasure of his own
Will, and his Will is our Sanctification, and we see the King in his Glory, and
behold his Face continually, and in his Presence is Fullness of Joy, and at his
Right Hand Pleasures for evermore. All this is enjoyed in the Light by
believing in him, and following him whithersoever he goes; so that we cannot
hut testify unto all, that he is both Lord and King, and invites all to come
unto him who are weary of their Sins, and laden with their Iniquities, and see
that their own Covering is too narrow, and their Bed of Ease too short, and
that by all their own Doings they cannot help themselves, help being laid upon
him only, he being given for Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, so that we
look not for another, he being as the Shadow of a Rock in a weary Land, and
leads us into green Pastures where our Souls delight to be, and the Lambs lie
down together, where no Destroyer can come, neither can any make them afraid,
though he has led us through the Vale and Shadow of Death, yet did we not
fear, for his Rod and Staff did comfort us, and his Glory is our Defense.

Concerning the WORD and the Ministers of the WORD.
IN the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. He is the Minister of the true Tabernacle, for the Son of Man came not to
be ministered unto, but to minister, he is the Minister as we have received him,
so he ministers in us and by us, and without him we can do nothing acceptable
to God; if any minister of himself or of his own Ability, he ministers to self
in another, and feeds that which is for Death, both in himself and others: all
that take upon them to be Ministers of the Word, must be sure the Minister be
in his Temple, else his Ministry will not profit, but will redound back again
upon him as unsavory, for that is not the Milk of the Word, it being bitter and
not sweet, so the Children cannot receive it; all are to know the Word abiding
in them, that it may minister at all times, none are to take the Words Place
upon them, to be called a Minister of the Word, or Minister of the Truth, but
as the Word of Truth ministers through us, we being but as the Trumpet, he
gives the sound. This Ministry is received in several Dispensations before the
Minister come into his Temple with a Fan in his hand, and those that receive
them there are liable to miscarry, being in the Servants State, not being
faithful as Servants (as Moses was) neither Good Stewards over the Lords Money,
but spend it upon their Lust or selfish Part, as it is written, They took my
Jewels and decked themselves, and played the Harlot. And such cannot agree
among themselveves, a Lordly Spirit bearing rule in them, they smite one
another, and would all be Lords, contrary to Christ's Saying, He that would be
greatest must be your Servant. But some of these are ready to say, We are Sons.
If they be, it is but of Hagar and Leah; they must not inherit with Isaac, the
Son of the Freewoman, but must be cast out with Bag and Bottle, that they may
know themselves, and their eyes may be opened to see the Well which is so near
them, but did not know it; the Son abides in the House for ever, being the
Fathers Heir, though he diffets nothing from a Servant in his Service while he
is in his Nonage, being under Tutors, he being brought forth under the Law,
fulfilleth the Law, and is the end of the Prophets, and is preferred before
John, for he was before him, so he ends the Baptism with Water, having
fulfilled all Righteousness; then he Baptizeth with the Holy Ghost and with
Fire, and finisheth that Work, which they could not do which went before him;
then the New Heaven and the New Earth is known, wherein dwells Righteousness.
Here Is no miscarrying Womb nor Dry Breast, but all are as the Sheep come up
from the washing, and there is not one Goat amongst them; he having made the
Separation, they lie down together where none can make them afraid.

Concerning the True CHURCH, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife.
THe Church is in God the Father. (as it is said) and there are none knows her
but those that are Members of her; and all such are Members of his Body, of his
Flesh and of his Bone, though not all of one Outward Profession or Society of
People, but is universal, and is known to God. Ye several sorts of People since
the Apostasy, have called themselves by her Name who are still in the Apostasy,
as may sufficiently be proved by their fruits, all of them having some Marks or
Fruits of the False Church, challenging a Power to themselves over their
Members to cut off, or set on as they please, and that by an Infallible Spirit,
as they say. The Effects of these things have been and are very sad, for all
Power in Heaven and Earth is given to the Son, and the Woman has not Power
over her own Body: Neither does the True Church challenge any such thing, nor
make any stir about it, but rests in the Bosme of her Beloved, and is in
subjection to Christ the Head of the Body the Church. She takes not upon her to
end Controversy pertaining to the Conscience, but leaves all to her Husband;
neither does She Judge her Fellow Members, all Judgment being Committed to her
Husband, knowing what measure she meets will be measured to her again; she acts
nothing but under his Government, she is not her own Head and Lawgiver, but
Christ Jesus is her Head and Lawgiver, and he moves in her as he pleases, she
is not without him, neither can she dispose of anything that she has, no, not
of her Dowry, it is reserved for her Husbands Heir.

Concerning the True FAITH, what it is, and the Work of it.
FAith is the Gift of God, the Mystery whereof is held in a pure Conscience, it
comes by hearing the Word of Faith, which is near in the Heart, and cannot be
removed into a Corner. Which Word is said to be the foundation of Faith, Faith
standing in it, as said the Apostle, Let your Faith stand in the Power of God,
and not in the Wisdom of Words. This Faith cannot be received by Tradition,
neither because another believes, or because the Church believes, though the
Churches Belief be true, but every one must have the evidence thereof in
himself, and substance of what is hoped for in himself, For what is not of
Faith is Sin. Every one is to have the Evidence in himself, and then they will
know the Work of it in themselves and for themselves, if it be but as a Grain
of Mustard Seed, it will remove Mountains. All are to know that Faith which
removes Mountains from off the Seed, and all are to come off those Mountains of
Imaginations, and be no more than they are in the true Faith, where the Saints
Unity stands, in the Spirit, not in Outward Observations of this, that, or the
other thing: none is to limit another Faith, nor force to do as they do, but
all are to be left free to the Exercise of that Faith they have received, and
not to stretch it to satisfy their Lusts, but in true Love to God and their
Neighbor keep to their own Measure and Gift of God.

Concerning CONFORMITY.
COnformity is an easy way, there is no Cross to be taken up in it, Self and
Flesh sets it up, and Self and Flesh Conforms to it, the Seed Christ cannot. He
is without Form, He has appeared in several Forms, but tied to none. If any
admire the Form that he has appeared in, he forsakes that Form and leaves it
desolate. Several Examples I have seen in my Age, and several I could produce
if required, the Form is but the Grave Clothes that the Crucified is wrapped in,
when the Life is slain; but when the Resurrection is known the Grave Clothes
are left behind. Blessed and happy are they who have part in the first
Resurrection, they contend not about Forms, but sit together in Heavenly Places
above Forms in Christ Jesus. The Pope and Prelates require Conformity, and
force to it, and so do others according to what power they have, but all is
from a wrong ground: none is to force another to do as he does, or they do, but
all are to wait in the Light to feel in themselves what to do, and as they act
in obedience thereto, acceptance with the Lord is witnessed and enjoyed.

Conformity is a broad way, it serves for a Covering to Hippocrites, and will
salve over (cover or excuse) any thing in its Members, but will represent
others as Monsters: the Contest has been between Form and Form, but now it is
among some between Form and Spirit, or Form and Freedom: now with some, no
Conformity to Form, no Unity, Form being its Weapon or Bond, and no more can it
use than it has: for God has taken its power from it. Hasten thy Work, O
Lord, Amen.


