A MEMORIAL Delivered to the States General, BY THE Marquess of CASTLE
MONCAYO, Envoy Extraordinary of Spain, at the HAGUE, May 9th. 1684.
THE Marquess of Castle Moncayo, Envoy Extraordinary of Spain, doubts not but
that your Lordships Deputies (which were present at the Conference held this
Day by the Ministers of the High Allies) have made a sincere and true Report of
that which was there debated: nevertheless, he has thought fit to put in
Writing that which was there represented by Discourse; viz. That the said Envoy
Extraordinary of Spain was extremely troubled and perplexed, by reason he knew
not whether or no he ought to concur in the same Sentiments with the Ministers
of the High Allies, or with those of this State; without due Reflection on his
Majesty's Pleasure and Resolutions. The Spanish Affairs being transacted
without regard to the Interest of Spain, or that which respects its Monarchy;
without Concern for its Honor, or that which is due to the King thereof;
Proposals of a Peace or a Truce, and the partaging of the Spanish Netherlands
being made in such a manner, as if they belonged to the States General, and not
to his Catholic Majesty. But having also considered that there were present at
the aforesaid Conferences, besides your Lordships Deputies, the Ministers of
many other Princes and States, who seem cordially to embrace the Interests of
his Catholic Majesty, and who have the same Esteem for the King his Master's
Friendship, as the King his Master has for theirs: the said subscribed Envoy
Extraordinary therefore is fully resolved to understand the Opinion and
Sentiments of the said Ministers, though perhaps he may meet with a
Mortification in desiring the same thing from your Lordships Deputies; which
Mortification will be the more intolerable to the said subscribed Envoy, by
reason of the Lecture your Lordships Deputies have made of the French
Ambassadors last Memorial: in which the Ministers of the High Allies have taken
notice that he says, Knowing that this State is more inclined to accept of a
Truce than a Peace; which if your Lordships think consists more with your
Interest, His Most Christian Majesty gives your Lordships the Choice, to
conclude either a Peace or Truce, according to the Conditions specified in his
Ambassadors Memorial, the 29th. of April. As if it belonged to this State, and
not to Spain, whom France makes War upon; or as if this State had received a
full and ample Power from Spain to treat of an Accommodation with France. The
said Envoy Extraordinary of Spain desires to know, That if France gives to your
Lordships the Choice of a Peace or a Truce, whither your Lordships be Masters
of Luxemburg, and of all the other Places and Towns which France demands, and
pretends to retain, or if they belong not to the King his Master, or if by this
Choice France may think that your Lordships will induce his Catholic Majesty
to agree to the unjust and impracticable Conditions of France. The said
subscribed Envoy Extraordinary has several times declared, and now does
declare unto your Lordships, That if your Lordships shall continue to promote
such a Design, it will be wholly in vain, and of no Effect, and the Reasons
which he has already alleged, which concern this State, and the Allies of his
Most Catholic Majesty, as may appear by their Minister disapproving the late
Measures your Lordships have taken. If then the Persuasions of your Lordships
will be wholly ineffectual to cause his Catholic Majesty to consent to the
Proposals of France, as the said Envoy Extraordinary has already declared, and
now does declare unto your Lordships, How can your Lordships then undertake to
dispose of that which is not your own, the so doing belonging to him to whom it
appertains, and who has declared he will never agree to such Conditions. If
France think that your Lordships may constrain his Catholic Majesty to comply
with Terms wholly inconsistent with his Interest, which if it be done directly,
it will leave this glorious Example to Posterity. That those Arms which were
first raised for the Defense of the Spanish Netherlands, were afterward
instrumental in its Oppression; and if indirectly by withdrawing your Troops,
then this State will be the first that will feel the Effects of such a
Resolution. And the said Envoy most instantly prays your Lordship to consider,
that his Catholic Majesty is their Friend, their Allie, and their Confederate,
but not their Pupil; And, That if your Lordships continue to treat your Allies
as they do, perhaps they will not have one left, when they stand in need of many.
His Majesty could not worse resent the Measures your Lordships have taken, than
by your granting France all that he pretends to; for undoubtedly, if such a
Grant should take place, this State would be utterly lost without the future
Hope of a Recovery. However, his Catholic Majesty taking to Heart the Liberty
and Welfare of this State, is content to hazard the rest of his Dominions, (he
having lost the best part thereof) and by his Constancy and Patience, will do
what in him lies to hinder this State from sinking, which turbulent Spirits
endeavor to compass. The Ministers of the High Allies have sufficiently
exposed to your Lordships, of what Importance Luxemburg is to this State, and
to the Empire, and what Consequences may follow to both if it be lost, with the
Disposition and Readiness that there is to succor it: therefore, since that we
are morally assured of its making a vigorous Defense, as Vienna has done, and
that those Troops which besiege it are not equal in Number to those which
besieged Vienna, and those which may raise the Siege are not at such a Distance
as those which relieved Vienna; I Am sure the Cause is as just, and we have the
same God to confide in. In the Name of God then, let us not delay to succor a
Place whose Conservation imports Christendom as much as Vienna.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Morris, at the Sign of St. Paul in Holborn. 1684.


