Two LETTERS, One from John Audland a QUAKER, TO William Prynne. THE OTHER,
William Prynnes ANSWER, By the AUTHOR of HUDIBRAS.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street. 1672.

JOHN AUDLAND'S LETTER TO William Prynne.
William Prynne,
THou perpetual Scribe, Pharise, and Hypocrite, born to the destruction of
Paper, and most unchristian effusion of Ink, thou Egyptian Task-master, of the
Press, and unmerciful destroyer of Goosequils, that do plunder and strip thy
poor kindred naked to the skin, to maintain thy self in a Tyrannycal and
Arbitrary way of Scribbling against thy Brethren, even the Independants and
Quakers, over whom thou set up thy self as an unrighteous Judge, for a
Righteous Judge has an Ear for both Parties, and thou have none for either.
Verily William thou do evil and against the light within thee, to accuse thy
Brethren of that, whereof thou art more guilty thy self; for though they break
an Act of Parliament, yet thou did worse, when thou would have made one thy
self, after thou had engaed thy Faith unto the House, that thou would never
lift up thy Heel against them more: Truly thou show thy self in this no
better then a Jew, in throwing the first stone at them, unless thou were
innocent thy Self, and all thy Fundamental, Municipal, Common, Natural Law,
will not serve to prove thee other, who have been judged by the Laws of the
Land, as a Pharise, to wear a Phylactery in public, and have had thine Ears
bored through according to the Mosaical Law: And I fear thy pretended
Conversion to Christianity, is but in order to something else, even as the
Mahometans (they say will not admit a Jew to turn Turk, unless he first become
a Christian. And that is the reason why thou art so cruel (like a Renegado) to
those of thine own Sect, yea even unto those in whose quarrel thou have lost
Leather, for as one of thy Ears was cut off for Presbytery, even so was the
other for Independancy. But now I speak of thine Ears, give me leave to ask
thee one question I have heard that those who have lost their Legs, do sometimes
nevertheless feel pains in their Toes; and I would fain know whether toward
change of weather thou do not feel a kind of itching and tingling in those
defunct Parings of thine, especially when Presbytery and Gover-nement are like
to peep out again. For what else does thy railing against the Bishops (as well
as us) hold forth? but that thou art the very same Will. Prynne Utter
Barrister, that did heretofore publish against them so many ridiculous
Hatcases, and Bandboxes, in which thy works are always bound up, and are to be
sold on the Southside of Pauls-Church-yard, where thy Stationers live. Among
those I have seen thy Title pages pasted like Mountebanks Bills, in which thou
do always write Reformation, Law, Religion, and Fundamental in Capital
Letters, even as those Quacks do Pox and Running of the Reins, and both to the
same purpose, namely to deceive the Reader, and vapor of more then thou art
able to perform. But o^ the verbosity of thy writings! Solomon says in many
words there is folly, and thou have proved it true: For thou writest
perpetually in the Language of a Conveyance, and do not indite but draw; and
when thou shall answer for every idle word, all the Bills and Answers in
Chancery will rise up in judgment against thee. For thou usest so many
impertinent Tautologies, that thy Reader can never understand what thou
meanest, unless he should take the pains to draw Breviates of thy senceless
repetitions which is unsufferable and not to be endured by a Freeborn English
man And this serves the^ to the same purpose, that Hems, and Hahs do thy
guifted Ghostly Fathers, that is to lose time, and put off thy Commodity,
namely Wast-Paper, whereof thou endeavourest to obtain the Monopoly, and
thereby undo hundreds of Families that live by writing lewd and profane Plays,
for when thou have ingrost the whole Commodity of Wast-paper into thine own
hands, their works will be left upon theirs; and in this thou take a more
wise and rational Course, then thou did heretofore in writting Indentures
against them. For thou know not how to write in any other strain, and
therefore to let thee see how easy it is to attain unto thy gifts, I will now
speak unto thee a few words in thine own way. Do thou not remember William
Prynne, when the long Parliament according to the ancient known fundamental,
established Custom, Practice, Usage, Example, of all Rebels, Traitors, Cades,
Tylers, Straws, set open the Prisons, Goales, Dungeons, Cages, and took the
Prisoners, Felons, Malefactors, Jayl-birds into their Protection, Patronage,
Safeguard, Tuition, and among others, thy self William Prynne aforesaid, with
thy Brethren Companions, Copemates, Associates, Burton, Bastwick, Lilborn, Poe,
etc. How the Sts. Brethren, godly, welaffected, rod out to meet thee, with the
Sisters, Helpers, Damsels, Handmaids, behind them, on the tail of the Beast,
struck with Antechristian Superstitions, Idolatrous, Rosemary and Bays to
celebrate, welcome and congratulate thy Remitter, how they daubed, dashed,
defiled and polluted thee the said William Prynne with Dirt, puddle, greetings,
Salutation, that thou did look more like unto a Pimp, Pander, Bawd newly
carted than an Utter-Barrister Triumphant, and with how durty and filtly a
grace, fashion and demeanure, thou did bow, stoop, and lowt to thine
Idolaters, the Rabble rout, crowd on both sides of the street, or streets, who
made an Idol of the Rings of thine Ears, even as the Jaws did of their
Earrings. This verily William is thy perfect Style, and right manner of
expression, in which thou art the f^eer of thy windy Stuff because thou come
easily by it, for thou do but turn over thy Concordances, and the Indexes of
thy Books, and wheresoever thou find any thing of Quake Tremble and Shake
from the motion of the Heavens to the wagging of a Dogs tail, thou applyest it
right or wrong unto Us, and that it may seem to be to some purpose, thou do
always, print it in CAPITAL LETTERS, because such were heretofore, to very good
Purpose imprinted on thy cheeks by the Ministration of that Son of Be ial the
Excecutioner. But I cannot understand how thou or thy Rabble of Sts. could
answer the Churches for commiting the abominable Sin of Bays and Rosemaryness
which they had before and have since so often condemned, for if it be
Idolatrous and Superstitious (as they have determined) to stick those
Creatures in the windores of Ste^ple-houses, much more must it be on their own
Vessels. All that they have (in mine opinion) to say for themselves, is that
they served thee up (like a Westphalia Ham) with Bays, as thou art a Pagan
Poet, according to the profane Custom of thy fore Fathers the Heathen, though
he that has the patience to read thy vile untunable Dittys, will rather take
t^ee for an Irish Ratcatcher that is said to Rhim Vermen to Death, then the
English Prudentius or Robert Wisdom Junior, as some of thine own T^^be style
thee, according to the Flesh for thou do abuse Scripture most unconscionably
against it is own express command, in casting holy things into Doggerel, which
is worse and more abominable then unto Dogs, and this thou performest so dully
that some of the Vertuoso's have been puz^ed to find out the reason of it, till
they were informed that when thou writest, thou do use always to set a Deaths
head on thy Desk before thee as one Campanella a Popish Friar, is said to have
done the Pictures of those to whom he intended to address his writings, and
found it most certain upon several experiments, that the person to the
Resemblance of whose Countenance he could nearest force and screw, his own was
always most pleased with his writings; And this they are confident is the
natural reason why thy compositions are so flat and dull, that they will hardly
hold till the Ink is dry, and when they are printed, not one of an hundred will
endure the stiching, but turn to such homly uses as they are most fit and
proper for. Truly William, if I were your friend I should advise you to leave
this freak of the Deaths head, lest the young Gentleman of the House, surprise
you again, as you know) they once did at midnight, and make you drink
healths-Sickness in it again on your bare Marrow-bones. But I wonder in what
part of the world thy Readers live, if there are any such Creatures in nature;
verily they ought to have their shoulders grow about their heads, like John
Mandevile's People in Afrique, for there is more of labor and drudgery, than
understanding required, and they ought to have a large measure of Patience,
Long-suffering and Ignorance, that can endure to read one Page of thine: For as
in the North, the more durty and foul the High-waves are, the larger measure
they allow to their Miles; even so do thou to thy tedious dull
Impertinencyes, in so much that some are of opinion that thy Readers ought to
be Dieted (like Running-Nags, before they can be in breath to read thy
long-winded Periods, which none but, such as thy self will submit to, for if
few words do best with the Wise none of those will ever endure to have any
thing to do with thee. And yet I have heard that thou do not a little glory
that thy works have past through all sorts of times, (but only those wherein
they were refuted by the hand of this old Antagonist the Hangman) without
dispute or question. It is very true indeed, they are utterly incapable of
confutation, as some places are rendered impregnable by their barren Rockey
Seituations, or by being fortifi^d with Mudwals and Ditches, He that should
venture to Encounter thee at thv own Weapon, might be said to Revive the old
way of fighting with Sandbags, the true Types of thy dry disjoynted Stuff, and
beside must of necessity cite so many several sorts of Wares, from Plums and
Sugar, to ^undungus and Rats bane, with which thy works are always bound up,
that his writings will be charged with Quotations as full and dull as thine own;
But since so many Chandlers and Habberdashers of small wares, have undertaken to
confute thee, and proceeded so far therein already, it were an act of great
imprudence to take the task out of their hands who are best able to go through
with it. And therefore I shall leave it to them to determine, whether thou have
substantially and solidly proved the Quakers to be Iesuitical Romish Capouchin
Frogs, with maskes on their faces put on by the Jesuits and pulled off by chee,
as thou do confidently undertake to perform in thy Title Page. Truly William
I do confess those Jesuits are dangerous fellows, thou had best look about
thee and have a care, for it is verily believed by many knowing Persons, that
they have always set thee on work no less then the Independants: and have
received a better return from thy Horse-like drudgery, though thou have no more
wit to perceive then a Fool has to know by what hand it is set on work. And if
they bewitched the Quakers (as thou do confidently affirm) it is most certain
they have drawn thee into that feat too. For if it be true as some carnal
Learned men aver, that Witches fetch the materials of their Medicines, from
Gibbets and Pil^^^es the Parings of thine ears have been among their
Ingredients, and thou are guilty thereof.

But I fear I begin to be like thee, that is tedious to no purpose, for I do
not expect that any thing can do ^ood upon thee, who have been so often
incorrigible to ^e Laws, for as the strenght of two men in their wits is (...)
sufficient to hold down and quiet one Madman, even (...) art thou proof against
all reason and light, and there^^^e I will cast away no more upon thee, but
leaving (...) to thine own Darkness, with the old saying, bid thee twice
Goodnight.

John Audland.

THE ANSWER OF William Prynne.
John Audland,
THou Quaking Quack, Jesuitical Romish Franciscan Frog, See my Quaker unmasked,
page 1. 13. Thou that art the Devils dice-box which he SHAKES, Rattles, wags,
to gull, cheat, delude, and seduce the intoxicated giddy-headed, English
Nation. Thou that art sick of thy Church, and have caught thy Religion like a
Palsy, Epilepsy, Ague, and art taken with Tertian, Quartan, Quotidian cold
fits, at thy Superstious, Idolatrous Jesuitical Meetings, Assemblies,
Conventicles. See my Healths Sickness, p. 150. The Northern blast, pa. 90. The
Pope crossing the Cudgels, p. 297. Whereas thou say I have no Ears, etc.
therein thou show that thou have no Light, Reason, understanding, For as a
house is judged to be a house in Law as long as any part thereof is standing,
and a light piece of Gold is good and lawful English Coin, current with
allowance, although it be clipped, filed, washed or worn; even so are my Ears,
legal, warrantable, and sufficient Ears, and good in Law, however they have
been clipped; pared, crop'd circumcised, and I have a better Title to the
Remainders then thou have to thine, for they have been twice adjudged to me by
the Laws of the Land, which thine never were. For those parcels, scraps,
shreds, that I was deprived of, did but confirm my Right to those that are (see
my own Abridgement at large, page 29. Lisle upon Gerrard, pa. 26. The Legality
of Treason, in two parts, S. G. upon both, page 666) left, for exceptio firmat
legem in casibus non exceptis.

This shows that the light within thee, of which thou do vapor, brag, vaunt,
and extol thy self so much, is but a kind of dusky Owl-light, a trembling,
twinkling, stinking stuff, which thou carriest in thy Paunch, Guts, Bowel, as
an Ox, Bull or Cow does Tallow to make Candles of, or the Cattle of Lincoln
shire do the Fuel of the Country, and thou know who it was that looked
over Lincoln, and cried, All Is mine, as he will in time do over ye Quakers,
Frogs, Vipers, See my Hidden works of darkness, p. 400. A Looking glass for a
blind guide, p. 79. Friars a Fry of Frogs, p. 220 etc.

Whereas thou say, urgest, and objectest, that I would have made an Act of
Parliament, therein thou art mistaken, deceived and deluded, for I would rather
have marred, spoiled and perverted one according to the sense, judgment and
opinion of the House (and ejus est interpretari eujus est condere, see Bra^on)
by putting in, adding and incerting some thing or things of my own invention,
wit, contrivance, that had not passed their Votes, and putting out, eracing, and
expunging other things, which had, which cannot be said, held, or judged to be
a breach of Law, because it was before it was made one, and if it had been so,
yet it would have proved no great crime, fault, offense, for exchange (thou
know) is no robbery. See The foot out of the snare, page 53. Prynnes
Principles, p. 200. which is more then you can say, produce, or allege for
your selves, who are a generation, Spawn, Lit er of Vipers, Frogs, Serpents, so
obstinate, peremptory, incorrigib e, that you break the Act of Parliament, at
the same time that it is put in Execution against you, like unto a Cut purse
that picks a Pocket when he is going to be hanged, for you crowd, thrust and
intrude your selves into Prisons by shoales, that you may in defyance of Law,
Government, Authority, meet more then five together, although it be in the
Goal. See my Sword of Christian Magistracy suppressed, p. 550. The Sectary
dissected, p. 82.

Whereas thou say I write in the style, form, language of a Conveyance,
therein I do according to my Profession, Calling, Vocation, and if thou had
done so too, thou had been but a Mechanic still, and had not ordained thy
self a Hedge-Sir John of an Orderless Order and unruly rule, the Original,
Rise, or beginning, whereof is as uncertain as the Head or Heads of Nile, or
the hatching of Woodcocks, for no body can cell from whence it came, (See,
Truth Triumphing, page 79. The Jesuit a lebusite, p. 904.) a Church, or rather
Chapel indeed, that is built upon a Quaking Dog (mark that) or flat quick
sand, without supertor or inferior in it, like the Knights of King Arthurs (See
the Seven Champions of Christendom) Round Table, or the Serpent Amphisbaena
(of which, see Pliny (that has a head at both ends.

Mahomet the false Prophet of the Turks, was the first Prophet, Patriarch,
Founder of the Quakers. For he had trembling trances, and frantic fits of the
Falling sickness, in which he had Revelations, dreams, Visions whispered into
his ear by a Dove Pidgeon or Widgeon, that he had instructed and taught, used
to pick seeds out of his ear or ears; which seeds, are the seeds of your Church
as well as his, for they produce the very same fruits, effects, workings in
both, and both equally hope to be saved by him. And hence it is, that all your
wishes, longings, desires are in the Turks overrunning of Christendom; for as
both they and you account Fools, Idiots, Mad men, Saints; you do not doubt but
to pass easily for such with them, for your great abilities in those gifts. And
therefore as your Brethren the aforesaid Turkish Mohammedan Fanatics, devote,
destine, damn, themselves to destruction, merely to tire, weary, make work
for, and put a stop to the Christians in their Wars: and fill up Ditches,
grafts, trenches with their bodies, carcases, outward men for their fellow
Mussel men to march over; even so ye also think to weary out the Officers of
Justice, with your numberless numbers, and render your selves as hard to be
cast out as Legion the Devil incorporate did, of whom ye are a Type. See The
Stationers Beacon fired, p. 1000. The Sectary in Sippets, pa. 202.

By all which, it appears that ye have a Turk as well as a Pope in your
bellies, and that ye delight in Persecution, in affliction, Tribulation, as
some old extravagent fantastic fornicators, find a pleasure in being whipped,
and out of these sores engender one another, by aequivocal generation, as Flies
blows Maggots, which afterward become Flys and blow others. See my Romes
Masterpiece, p. 808. Settle brain for a Sectary, p. 9. A siringe for a sore
sinner, p. 78.

That you are Jesuitical, Romish Franciscan Frogs, Witches, Sorcerers, appears
in that ye meet to quake, tremble, quiver, and converse with your Spirits,
lmps, Familiars; and that ye came from Rome out of the North, from whence evil
and destruction comes, as I have proved, cleared, demonstrated, and evinced in
my Quaker unmasked, p. 84. Lights Darkness, p. 26. For as the Needle in the
Mariners Compass Trembles (mark that) and points to the North, even so do ye,
ye trembling Quivering, Shivering Quakers. And as Witches are most frequent in
me North, and the colder a Climate is, the apter are the Inhabitants thereof
(see my first answer to thyself) to quake, etc. It follows that Quakers and
Witches are of the growth of the same place, and both of the same Nature,
quality, and condition; For as Witches swim upon the water like light scum,
even so are Quakers, the scum of the earth, that shake themselves like
water-dogs when they come out of a Pond (see my Popish Royal Favorite, p. 800.
Sweet sips of Soul-Savingness, p. 53. Lastly, as witches liquor their staves,
and fly through the Air; even so do Quakers liquor their throats with enchanted
Potions, and gape to suck in the air that it may fly through them, and blow the
light within them; (see Emmot and Gilpin, pa. 7. Aldermanbury bottle opened, p.
20.) at their Exorcisms rather then Exercises of Devotion. Whereas thou say I
was branded, burnt or Stigmatized in the Cheeks, it is true, I was so, nor am I
at all ashamed of, sorry for, or abashed thereat, but rather set a greater
value on my self therefore, as I believe I have very good reason, cause,
consideration to do, for I was only used like a sealed measure, burnt, branded
for being true. See my Verses written on this occasion in the Tower of London,
in haec verba.

Of this Opinion William Prynn was the
Sixth day of March six hundred thirty three.
Nor was it improper, unfit, or unbecoming a man of my Profession, cloth,
vocation, that is, to measure equal Law right, Justice between man and man. See
Truth Triumphing, p. 10. The Pricking Provender of P^^lacy, p. 907.

As for the Jesuits, who thou faist made use of the scraps of my Ears, to
bewitch the Quakers, etc. If they did so, it was no fault of mine, nor am I
bound to answer for it; for when the aforesaid parings, scraps, shred, were
severed from my freehold, they were no longer mine, nor am I to be accountable
for the evil administration of them, when they were out of my power, charge,
cuition. But if they had been in my own possession, and the Jesuits had
stolen them to bewitch the Quakers to listen to their enchantments: It is not
Just that I should answer for their Ears and my own too. See Speculum Iesact.
p. 95. I be frantic Franciscan, p. 700. A hole picked in the Popes coat, p.
30. Whereas thou say the Brethren; Godly etc, rode out with the sisters
helpers etc. I do confess, thank, acknowledge their loving kindness therein;
And if they did evil in sticking Rosemary and Bays upon their Vessels, bodies,
outward Folks, as thou say against the doctrine and discipline of the
Presbyterian Church: It is no more then the Members, Tools, Limbs of the Devil
and thy Synagouge did to the Pa^^iarch Patron, and Founder of their Order James
Nayler, whom they exalted above his brethren upon an Ass, and ran bare before
both, against the Fundamental, known established Rule, Canon, Constitution of
their disorderly Order. See The Buckle of the Canonical Girdle, turned behind,
p. 63. The Quaker Quashed, p. 4.

Whereas thou say my works are bound up in Hatcases, etc. If thou would but
buy one of those, and put thy hat therein, it would operate upon, and instill
into thy Noddle, sconce Logger head more se se, reason, understanding; and
teach thee better manners then to keep iron before a Court of Justice: by which
thou do but show, declare, demonstrate, that thou have a Crack, Flaw, soft
place in thy Scull; and in that respect art very careful to keep it warm, least
thy sickly brains (if thou have any) should take cold. And as for those
Chandlers and Haberdashers of small wares etc. which thou say have undertaken
to oppose, answer, confute me.

Verily they will find it a harder task then they are aware of, for I have
already written, Printed, published, 160 odd Works, Books, Labors; and before
they have done with those, do not doubt to have as many more in a readiness,
and to find employment, work, business, enough for them all; as long a Church
and State can furnish, store, supply me with subject, matter. Provided I may
have process enough to carry on the work; and can but procure, induce, engage
our Presbyterian brethren the Nonconformists to help, aid, and assist me, which
(it being so much for their ow advantage, interest, concernment, and they
having at present nothing else to do) I do not doubt to obtain.

Will. Prynne.


