MEMOIRES OF THE COURT of FRANCE.

Relating to the Amors of the Duke of Maine, AND THE Marriages of the other
Illegitimate Children of the French King with the Princes and Princesses of the
Blood.

Written in French By Madam DAVNOIS, the Famous Author of the Letters of
Travels into Spain;

AND Done into English by Mr. A. B.

LONDON: Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1697.

THE Translator's PREFACE.
THE Lady who is the Author of these Memoires, has gained so universal a
Reputation, that there is little occasion to say any thing in her Favor: Yet to
recommend Her the more to the Esteem of the English World, I shall observe,
that she is not tainted with the common Vice of French Writers, Flattery; but
speaks now with as much liberty of the Court of France, as she has formerly
done of that of Spain. Her Style is sometimes Historical, sometimes fitted to a
free and loose Conversation, and now and then interwoven with a delightful
Variety of Verses and Love Letters. As for the Translation, if any Hypercritick
will take the trouble to compare it with the Original, let him take this
Declaration along with him, That I have not studied to make a verbal servile
Version, but have taken the freedom to add and retrench, as occasion required,
to make the Sense run clear in English, and at the same time to preserve the
Graces of the French.

If I have committed any Faults, let this additional Account of the Royal
Family of France (as far as it is necessary for the understanding of these
Memoirs) atone for them.

THE Royal Family of France.
THe King, Lewis XIV. The Dauphin, the King's Son. The Dauphiness, the
Dauphin's Wife, (now dead.) The Dauphin's Sons. The Duke of Burgundy, The Duke
of Anjou, The Duke of Berry,
Monsieur, or The Duke of Orleans, the King's Brother. Madam, or The Duchess
of Orleans; Monsieur's Wife. The Duke of Chartres, Monsieur's Son.
Mademoiselle, or Mademoiselle de Chartres, Monsieur's Daughter. The Old Prince
of Conde, the King's Cousin-German, (now dead.) The Duke of Anguien, (now
Prince of Conde,) the Old Prince of Conde's Son. The Duke of Bourbon his Son,
now Duke of Anguien. Mademoiselle de Conde, Daughter to the Duke of Aguien.
Mademoiselle de Bourbon, her Sister. The Prince of Conti, the Old Prince of
Conde's Nephew, (now dead.) The Prince of Roche-sur-yon, the Prince of Conti's
Brother, (now Prince of Conti,) who at this present time stands fair for the
Crown of Poland. The Duke of Vendosme, the King's base Cousin-German. Madam la
Valiere, one of the King's Mistresses. Mademoiselle de Vermandois, Daughter to
la Valiere and the King. The Duke of Vermandois her Brother, (now dead.) Madam
Montespan, one of the King's Mistresses. Sons to the King and Madam Montespan.
The Duke of Maine, Count Verin, (now dead) ^^^nt Toulouse,
Mademoiselle de Tours, Daughter to the King and Madam de Montespan. Madam de
Nantes, her Sister. Madam Maintenon, the present Favourite-Mistress to the
King.
ERRATA.
Page 1. and elsewhere, for Mademoiselle, read Mademoiselle. p. 4. l. 27. Would
you not tell, r. Would you tell. p. 10. l. 10. Laughing, r. Languishing. p. 15.
l. 1. pitying, r. pining.

MEMOIRES OF THE Court of France, etc.
HIS Highness the Duke of Maine, as all the World knows, is natural Son to
Lewis the XIV. It is no wonder then to see his Heart capable of the tenderest
and softest Impressions, being the Offspring of a Monarch, who has made and
makes still the Fair Sex his chiefest Delight. Madam Montespan, Mother to the
Duke being one Day with the King, told him, Sir, if your Majesty would be
pleased to match my Sons and Daughters with Princes and Princesses of the
Blood, I should eternally be thankful for the Kindness. Madam, answered the
King, I would willingly give you that satisfaction, but the Prince of Conde my
Cousin did not seem very well pleased when I proposed a Match between the Duke
of Maine and Mademoiselle de Conde his Granddaughter. No doubt, replied that
Lady, with a haughty Tone, he will rather choose to bestow her upon the Prince
of Roche-sur-yon, who is more able to make her Fortune. Madam, I can say
nothing to that, answered the King coldly: But if you desire it, I Will speak to
him again about it, and endeavor to marry the Duke of Anguien his Grandson to
Mademoiselle de Tours your eldest Daughter. As for Mademoiselle de Nantes her
younger Sister, I design her for my Nephew the Duke of Chartres. Lord! Sir,
cried Madam Montespan, your Majesty don't consider what a noise this will make;
for the Duke of Orleans will never suffer the Duke of Chartres to marry my
Daughter. Madam, said the King, raising a little his Voice, leave that to me:
It Is not for nothing that I wear a Crown; and would not you be surpised, if I
should tell you that the Duke of Maine is already in Love with Mademoiselle de
Chartres, and that this Princess likes him so far as to make the World think
that she would not be displeased to have him for a Husband? That were
surprising indeed, answered she: How! could Madamoiselle's high Spirit descend
so low as the Duke of Maine. No, I cannot believe it. Besides the Duchess of
Orleans cannot endure him. Madam, said the King, there have been greater
Miracles before now: Love by a secret and unknown Power unites all things. Sir,
replied Madam Montespan, I am well enough pleased with that flattering Fancy;
but what shall we do with Count Vexin? Your Majesty loves him; he is the
youngest of my Children, and, in my Opinion, the most deserving. That Is but
your Fancy, said that Monarch with a Smile: The Duke of Maine has a great deal
more Fire and Sprightliness than his younger Brother. But, Sir, replied Madam
Montespan, Count Vexin's pretty little Ways are so wonderfully pleasing and
endearing -- Yes, said the King, because you are more fond of him than all the
rest: But let me tell you, Matrimony is not fit for him, and therefore we must
consecrate him to the Church. I Will not be against it, replied she, if he likes
the Proposal: But he seems to have as great a Passion for Women as his Brother,
who is a downright little Vulcan. Why, truly, Madam, answered that Prince,
smiling, Do you think that because a Man marries the Church he must therefore
renounce Women? I thought you knew better things: A black Coat hides a great
many Mysteries of Love, that would make a strange noise in the World, without
such a Cloak. --

These Words were scarce out of the King's Mouth, when the old Prince of Conde
came in; and after he had entertained the King, according to his Desire, Madam
Montespan took an opportunity to expostulate with him the Contempt he had for
her Son. Never was Prince so surpised; but however he thought sit to dissemble
his Uneasiness. Madam, said he, I am so far from having any such Thoughts, that
I could wish the Duke of Auguien had Desert enough to merit one of your
Ladyship's Daughters, who, in my Opinion, are both perfect Beauties. Madam
Montespan held her peace, and looked upon the King, who said with a Smile, I
shall make it my business to keep the Royal Family quiet: Soon after, the
Conversation ended, and Company separated.

Whilst others were industrious in speaking in the Duke of Maine's Favor, he
was busy in improving all Opportunities to give Proofs of his Passion to
Mademoiselle de Chartres, who was inclined to receive them kindly when she
could do it without being observed. One day he had the good Fortune to find her
alone in her Closet; and as he entertained her with the Force and Extent of his
Love, Prince, replied Mademoiselle with a languishing Air, What would you have
me do for you? What I would have you do for me, answered the Duke with a
passionate Eagerness? I would have you love me illustrious Princess, if I can
ever be so fortunate as to please you. Alas! cried she with a blush, how unkind
and cruel you are! Why would you not tell me you had a Design upon my Heart?
The Prince perceiving she spoke with so much Sweetness and good Nature, cast
himself at her Feet, and told her, transported with Love, Divine Creature, if
my Fate could ever be so happy as to -- here he stopped, being interupted by
Mauritia, one of the Princess's Maids, She being a Person of an easy Temper,
and one that the Princess entrusted with all her Secrets, the Duke pursued his
passionate Conversation. The same Day the Duke of Orleans made a splendid Ball
in the Royal Palace, where the Duke of Maine appeared in a very agreeable
Disguise, that he might the better entertain Mademoiselle with all the sweet
endearing Expressions that his Love could suggest to him. He was taken notice
of by the Duke of Orleans, who told the King of it; but he made as if he did
not hear him. The Ball being over, the Duke of Maine withdrew to his Apartment,
more deeply in Love than ever, and abandoned himself to all the Torments and
Pleasures of his newborn Passion. His Mind was still floating and tossed
betwixt Hope and Fear, and distracted by two violent Passions. He debated
within himself what course he had best to take to compass his grand Design of
marrying Mademoiselle de Chartres, in which he met with many Obstacles and
Difficulties. He often consulted with his Mother, who assured him that she
never missed any Opportunity to speak to the King about it; adding with Sorrow,
that her Influence upon that Monarch was not so prevailing as before. Nothing,
Dear Son, cried she with a Sigh, nothing is constant in this World, and the
kindest Prince that is, cannot always love the same Object. But yet, Madam,
answered that young Prince, Constancy ought to be inseparable from a great
Mind, since there can be no true Felicity without it. That Is true, Dear Child,
replied Madam Montespan; but Kings have their real Failings as well as the rest
of Mortals; and our great Monarch, though in all other respects accomplished, has
still the Frailty of being changeable in Love. He is infinitely pleased with
variety; of which Madam la Valiere made me but too sensible before she turned
Nun. Besides, I am afraid my Enemies whisper in the King's Ear what some
Court-Flatterers told formerly one of the Kings of Persia, who was constant to
one of his Mistresses merely upon the score of good Manners and Conscience,
That it was below his Grandeur to mind whether what he did was decent or
undecent, just or unjust, since his Pleasure ought to be the only Rule and
Standard of Decency and Justice. This, Madam, replied the Duke of Maine, is the
common way of pleasing Princes: Every thing must yield to their Desires;
surrounded as they are by a Crowd of Flatterers, they can never know
themselves: Their Failings are artfully painted and varnished; their Actions
heightened and advanced by false Lights and Glitterings; and their smaller
Virtues canonized: I know a World of pernicious Courtiers, who never approach
the Throne, but they poison it with their intox^cating Tongues, most fatal to
the Mind of a well-born Monarch. Flattery, said Madam Montespan, does not stop
at the Throne, but diffuses and spreads it self through all the Branches of the
Court. You know the Duchess of -- She has daily a Crowd of Admirers at her
Feet, who do but play the Fool with her; and persuade her that she can contend
for Beauty with the Angels: That her Merit is infinite, and capable of
enchanting the whole World; and with such like Fooleries they fill her Mind
with pleasing chimerical Fancies: But let the good Lady have as many Admirers
as she pleases, all their fine Speeches and flattering Nonsense will never
conceal her Homeliness, and Vulgar Carriage. The Duke was a going to say some
pleasing thing or other upon the Picture his Mother had made of the Duchess;
but was interrupted by the Abbot Morcau, who came to visit Madam Montespan, and
to give her an Account of a Commission she had given him, that did not much
become the Gravity of his Character.

The Duke of Maine taking this opportunity to leave his Mother, went to the
Wood of Boulogne to entertain his enamored Fancy with the Charms and Graces of
his Mistress. Sitting on a little rising ground which he found very convenient,
he revolved in his Mind all that a great Mind can think of to carry on the
Scheme of his Design. Some time after he went into the thickest part of the
Wood, and wrote in his Table*Book the Copy of a Letter, which he afterward
sent to Mademoiselle; which contained these Words:

I Find at last, Incomparable Princess, that of all the Torments in Nature,
none is so quick and violent as that of Love. It Is a Pain that gnaws and preys
upon our very Souls. And if you do not compassionate my Condition, I must soon
die at your Feet the cruellest Death imaginable. My Sufferings are not to be
expressed: And generally great Beauties like your self do but laugh at the Pains
which themselves cause. But as this is a most inhumane and unnatural Cruelty,
so you must have a Care, most lovely and beautiful Person, not to provoke the
Wrath of the Sovereign of all Hearts, who sooner or later punishes those that
are insensible. I know you stick at some Considerations; but, alas, Love
excludes Consideration, as Consideration excludes Love. You are not
unacquainted with this Philosophy, since there never was a more diseerning and
penetrating Princess than your self.


Upon the reading of this Letter, Mademoiselle could not forbear Laughing at
the witty insinuating way of the Duke, to engage her to Love. He gives himself
a needless trouble, (cried she with a Sigh) to persuade me to Love him: Alas! I
find I Love him too much already: But I am afraid my Inclinations must be
contradicted, and that I am destined for some greater Person than the Duke of
Maine. Madame, (who overheard her pronounce that Name) came on a sudden into
Madamoiselle's Chamber, and said to her, Princess, What Is the meaning of this?
I perceive the Duke of Maine has made a strong Impression on your Heart, which
ought to be the Price of something above the Son of an Unfaithful Woman. In
Germany and several other Countries, they look upon such Persons with utmost
Contempt, and had rather Match with a common Gentleman, than with a Prince
basely Born. Mademoiselle made no answer to her Mothers Advices, but only
fetched some Sighs, which convinced Madame, that she had a great Tenderness for
the Duke. Nay, then it is plain you Love him, said she, with a severe Tone; but
who is it that has raised so injurious a Passion in your Breast? And how can a
Princess like your self, thus poorly stint her Desires, when she can have her
Choice of many Illustrious Princes. In short, assure your self, I Will never
consent to such Baseness, said the Duchess of Orleans, leaving Mademoiselle in
the deepest concern for the contempt she expressed for her Lover. This young
Princess was irresolute and perplexed, when Mauritia came in, to whom she
unbosom'd all her Sorrows. This Maid, though of a soft and easy Temper, as I
said before, had still a great deal of Judgment and Discretion, and was not
wanting in giving good Advice to Mademoiselle upon this Occasion. The Princess
having heard her out with great attention, told her, Alas! my Dear, if you knew
what strange Motions I have to struggle with, you would pity me! Madam, replied
Mauritia, how is it possible that a Person that has so much strength of Mind,
as your Royal Highness, should be thus hurried and transported by her Passions?
Do but resist their first Impressions, and be sure of Victory. You do not speak
as if you felt what you say, Dearest Mauritia, replied Mademoiselle with a
laughing Air, perhaps you never Loved in your Life, or if you did, 'twas so
faintly, that you can scarce distinguish betwixt Indifference and Love. I
confess Madam, said Mauritia, that when a Woman loves in good earnest, it is a
hard matter for her to command her self. But however we must be ruled by
Reason; and your Highness is sensible, that the Duke of Orleans your Father,
will never suffer you to Marry the Duke of Maine, were he the most perfect and
Accomplished Person in the World. Barbarous Duty, cried Mademoiselle, cruel
Reason! you do but rack and torture a Heart that calls for your Assistance.
Why, said she (looking upon a Nightingale she had in her Chamber) why cannot we
live like those innocent Creatures, who follow the inclinations of Nature,
without vexatious Fears.

Mademoiselle left her Confident, and went to walk alone in a Solitary Place.
The Duke of Maine, who burned with Impatience to know the Effects of his
Letter, and being informed where she was, met her there in some few Moments.
Mademoiselle was a little surpised at the sight of him, and changing Color,
told him, Duke, you come in very good time to divert me from a Thought which
was like to carry me very far. May a Man be so bold, (replied the Prince) as to
ask you the Subject of that Thought, which undoubtedly was a pleasing one.
Prince, (answered Mademoiselle, with a little Concern and Disorder) you had the
greatest share in it. Is it possible, Madam! cried the Duke, transported with
Love; is it possible, Divine Creature, that my good Fortune can be so great?
Perhaps, said Mademoiselle with a Smile, you did not expect to hear News that
flatters all Hearts; you men love to please -- No question, Madam, said the
Prince, especially so Illustrious a Princess, who is the Admiration of the
Universe, and the Delight of the Court. Do not rally your Friends, replied
Mademoiselle, giving him her Hand, which the Duke kept close to his Lips, for a
quarter of an Hour, without speaking one word. What means this Silence, said
Mademoiselle, Laughing, has some secret Charm robbed you of your Speech? Yes,
incomp^rable Princess, I am no more my self, cried the Duke, grasping
Madamoiselle's Knees, my Fortune is so great and uncommon, that I cannot but be
amazed at it. Your good Fortune is not yet complete, said she with Sorrow: If I
was at my own Disposal, I would soon resolve upon the Choice I am to take; But
you know I depend upon the tyrannizing Authority of a Father. Alas, Madam, said
the Prince, (making some steps backwards) why did not you leave me in this
pleasing Error? And why would you acquaint me with my Misfortune? My Heart did
already flatter me with the hopes that you only depended on your self, and that
I was to be one day the happiest Man alive. He could not make an end of these
Words, without falling at Madamoiselle's Feet, who had much ado to recover him
out of his Surprise. You grow Pale and Faint, Prince, said Mademoiselle,
(perceiving that he began to come to himself) You want Courage where there is
most occasion: Are Words able to shake your Constancy thus? It Is with a
bleeding Heart that I tell you this News, no less fatal to my quiet, than your
own: But assure your self, that what I do now, or shall be obliged to do
hereafter, will be much against my inclination.

The Duke of Maine stood Speechless all this while, and left Mademoiselle,
because he saw the Duke of Orleans making toward them, whom he knew would not
have been very well pleased to find him with his Daughter in so retired a
place. The Duke of Orleans, who is very suspicious and distrustful, got upon a
rising Ground, to see whether he could descry any Body going down from the
Castle; and having perceived the Coach of the Duke of Maine, he gave
Mademoiselle very sharp and biting touches upon that Subject, to which
Mademoiselle made no return, but expressed a great deal of Discretion and
Modesty. Afterward leaving his Royal Highness to his own Thoughts, she
withdrew to her Closet, to reflect on her present condition. Monsieur, who is
Jealous even to Fury, in whatever concerns him, finding that his Daughter was
gone from him, flew into such a Rage as cannot be expressed: He inquired of his
Men, where she was, and went presently to her, and affecting a composed
Countenance, told her, it is against my Will Daughter, that you entertain the
Duke of Maine; your Mother is extremely displeased with it; you must expect to
find her Resentments break out before it be long. But how can you Love a Person
who upon many accounts, can bring nothing but Dishonor to the Royal Family.
Alas Sir, cried Mademoiselle, I perceive a thousand violent thoughts in your
Mind to Ruin me. And I, replied Monsieur, see you will never be satisfied till
you are in the Duke's Embraces, but you will soon repent it. I do nothing that
I ought to be Ashamed of, answered Mademoiselle, if I have a small Esteem for
the Duke of Maine, I think he does deserve it, and your Highness cannot blame
me for it. It Is true, I have just now been with him in the Arbor, but 'twas
innocentiy done on my side, for I never thought he would have come to me there.
We always seek the Company of those that love us, replied Monsieur with a sharp
Tone; and if the Duke of Maine was not sure of the Conquest of your Heart, he
would not be so eager to find you out.

Mademoiselle perceived well enough what her Father meant by that; and being
endowed with a strange ready Wit, and admirable Address, where are those
malicious Tongues, replied she with assurance, that have informed your Highness
that I Loved the Duke of Maine, so far as to make him run after me? My own Eyes
have told me so, replied he going away, and I want no other Witnesses. Alas!
cried the Princess, when she found her self alone, I must loose you, dear Duke,
and with you I must loose my Repose for ever! Here her Tears and Sighs stopped
her Voice; and Mauritia, who by this time was come in, soon perceived by her
Paleness, and down-cast look, the trouble and anguish of her mind. Alas! said
she, moved with pity, in what a deplorable condition do I find your Highness!
You love, Madam, added she, and that is enough to make you Miserable. That Is the
cause of my Despair, my dear Mauritia, answered Mademoiselle, all the World
will talk of my Weaknesses, my Heart is grown rebellious and unruly, and
consults nothing but its Inclinations: It never was in my power to do otherwise
than I have done; therefore, my Dearest, pity my Misfortunes, and consider my
cruel Fate, which makes me lead a pitying languishing Life, and will shortly I
fear hurry me to my Grave.

Mauritia being gone according to her Mistriss's Command, Mademoiselle fell
into a deep amorous Melancholy, and gratified all those Griefs and
Uneasinesses, that can be conceived by none but those that have lost the
Persons they loved. The Duke of Chartres her Brother did somewhat alleviate her
Pain by a thousand little Stories he told her of several Court-Ladies that were
very busy and industrious in getting Admirers. But, said that Prince Smiling,
it signifies little to Conquer us, the difficulty is to keep us when Conquered.
Most Women fancy, that because they have Charmed a Man at first, he is
presently their Slave for ever; but truly they are mistaken, we do not sell our
Liberty at so cheap a rate. No doubt, Brother, said Mademoiselle, (disguising
her inward Troubles) No doubt, you are one of those uncertain Conquests. I
cannot tell, dear Sister, returned he Smiling: The Duke of Maine however is
more eagerly assaulted than I: Five or six of our First Rate Beauties have this
Morning Besieged his Heart with a numerous Army of gentle Leers, amorous
Glances, and passionate Ogles, which are like to carry it soon upon easy
Terms. The Duke of Maine's Heart Besieged, replied Mademoiselle, with an
uneasy Concern, and what will this poor Prince do, to get out of this Danger?
He must, replied the Duke of Chartres, send for all the Artillery we have in
Flanders, to his relief, or else he runs great hazard of loosing his Heart.
That Is an impregnable Fortress, Brother, said Mademoiselle, the Duke of Maine
has hitherto bid defiance to all the most conquering and dangerous Ladies, and
will he now surrender without resistance? No, I cannot believe it; and I know
something that persuades me to the contrary. It Is true, returned maliciously
the Duke of Chartres, that when a Man's Heart is once possessed by an
inclination, it is a hard matter to make any sensible Impressions upon it. He
loves you, Sister, and how could he then feel the Darts of others? The Duke of
Maine, answered Mademoiselle, is not so deeply in Love with me, as you are with
his Sister, every Body talks of the Passion you have for her; they say you
Love, nay, adore her, even to Madness. That Is a little too much, and I am not
so far gone, replied the Duke of Chartres, it is true, Sister added he,
Mademoiselle de Nantes is a most adorable Creature; for besides that she is a
perfect Beauty, has a thousand agreeable, charming and endearing Qualities; she
is Mistress of a great deal of Wit and good Nature, a thing rarely found in
your Sex, which generally is all made up of Malice. These Compliments, Brother,
said Mademoiselle, are not very Engaging; But however, I will acquaint you that
you have a Rival no way inferior to you in any thing than can please a handsome
Lady. And who is this dreadful Rival, said the Duke? Cannot one be acquainted
with his Name? It Is the Prince of Roche sur-yon, answered Mademoiselle, who has
a great Passion for her. For Mademoiselle of Tours, the Eldest Sister, you
mean, replied the Duke of Chartres, with a disdainful Air; for I am sure the
Younger will never love him. Who can answer for her Heart, Brother? returned
that Princess, smiling: A Lady's Faith is a small Assurance, when exposed to a
thousand Temptations: She may indeed swear an Esteem to her Lover; but Oaths
that pass between Lovers, are easily given, and as easily broken: And how can
any body build upon a Passion which is born one day, and dies the next, without
so much as knowing the Principle of its Rise, or the cause of its Fall. Aristes
and Eugenius, two Great Philosophers, discoursing one day by the Sea side,
about the original of that Passion, did define it in few words: Aristes said to
Eugenius, That Love is an agreeable Conformity that unites our Hearts, and a
secret Sympathy from which arises one of those je ne sc^y quois, not to be
expressed by words. Certainly, Sister, replied the Duke of Chartres, it is a
very difficult matter to know the secret Tie that sastens us to the Person
beloved: Our Love represents her more Beautiful than the Angels, and without
any Fault with relation to us, who would be sorry she should be otherwise.

Mademoiselle and the Duke of Chartres were thus pursuing this agreeable
Conversation, when Madam interrupted them, and told Mademoiselle she wanted her
Company to visit the Princess of Conti. Madamo^selle readily complied with her
Mother's desire, and went wherever the Duchess of Orleans was pleased to
carry her. The next day following was spent in Hunting: And the Prince
acquainted Madam with the Marriage of the Prince of Roche-sur-yon, with
Mademoiselle de Tours, Daughter to Madam Montespan. And what is the meaning of
this New Match, said Madam to the Prince of Conti? The King, you see, Madam,
returned he smiling, takes care of his Children. It seems he does, answered
Madam; but methinks his Majesty might very well spare to Marry Princes of the
Blood with such sort of Persons: Have not we Marquisses, Barons, and Gentlemen
enough in Francc to bestow them upon, without -- Madam, replied the Prince,
your Highness will see more than all this, if the King lives: He first began
with me, when he gave me the First Fruits of his Amors; Mademoiselle of
Vermandois, whom I have married, tells me that often enough. Prince, said
Madam, I make a great deal of difference betwixt the Children of Madam la
Valiere, and those of Madam Montespan: We cannot with Justic^ blame the first;
she was a single Person tha^ never loved any Man beside the King; whereas the
other is a perjured Woman, who ha^ left her Husband for a Prince who begins to
be weary of her. I Foretold her this just Judgment of Heaven, added Madam; but
she was then so great a Cocquet, that she made no other answer, but that we
were born to our selves, to enjoy the Pleasures of Life. A very worldly and
sensual Answer, replied the Prince of Conti, and which has but little of that
Piety which that Lady begins to profess. Truly, Prince, said the Duchess, she
has a great deal to answer for, if Adulteries be criminal. Pshaw, Madam,
replied the Princ^, smiling, Father Anet, her Confessor has a Secret to absolve
all Sins, and turn them into venial ones. Pray, what is that you call a venial
Sin, said Madam, interrupting him? Our Reverend Father the Jesuits, make
several Classes of Sins; some are Moral, others Philosophical, and others again
Theological: And of all those Sins, Father Racine says, none can damn a Man but
the Theological. Here the rest of the Company coming up to Madam, interrupted
their Conversation: But what put this Princess out of Humor, was, the sight of
the Duke of Maine, who ran with all speed after these Illustrious Hunters.

As soon as this Prince had saluted Mademoiselle, he came near Madam, who gave
him a very indifferent Reception: He was used to such Crosses of Fortune, and
so was little concerned at this; blesides, one of Madamoiselle's Smiles that he
got now and then, made him sufficient amends for her Mother's Frowns, and made
him look extremely well pleased. As they were riding along, Mademoiselle
desired him to hold a little Cane she had in her hand; this Cane, besides a
Knot of Carnation Ribbands, and several Diamonds, had a fine Emrald with the
Prince's Picture (both a Present of the Duke's) on which his Highness bestowed
a thousand Kisses, unperceived by all but Mademoiselle, who told him as she
alighted from her Horse, Prince, who did you think upon, when you so devoutly
kissed the Image you had in your hands about an hour ago? Who could I think
upon but your dear Self, most Beauti^ul Princess, answered the Duke, since it is
your Image I love and venerate more than those of all the Saints in Paradise,
who perhaps could not have so much Power over me as your Highness. How can that
be, replied Mademoiselle? You know I cure no Dis^a^es, but rather cause
Suff^rings, if I may believe you? I confess, Madam, r^ply'd the Duke, with an
Air that made Mademoiselle laugh, your Highness is more apt to make a wretched
Mortal languish, than -- He said no more; and Mademoiselle, who saw that Madam
observed them, took his Sil^nce as a sign of his Love and R^spect.

The Company being separated, and retired to their respective Houses, the Duke
of Maine reflected on his ill Fortune, with respect to Monsieur and Madam the
Duchess o^ Orleans, who looked upon him with Contempt. He resolved at last to
speak to the King about it; but his Majesty told him, That he was not like ever
to compass what he aimed at: That Monsi^ur designed his Daughter for a Monarch;
and that he had already spoke in his Favor, but could not prevail. But, Sir,
replied the Duke, I dare flatter my self that the Princess does not hate me. I
am apt to believe it, said the King; but it is not enough to have her Consent;
you must have Monsieur and Madam's Good will too; if you propose to be happy:
But, Duke, added his Majesty, be ruled by me; since you have a mind to marry,
disengage your self from Mademoiselle de Chartres, and bend your Thoughts on
Mademoiselle de Bourbon, who is a lovely and deserving Princess: For tho? the
Prince of Conde her Grandfather be not very well pleased with the Match, yet I
am sure the Duke of Angu^en will not be against it. Sir, replied the Duke of
Maine, methinks I should like Mademoiselle de Conde the Eldest Sister a great
deal better. Marriages are not governed by Choice; and do not you see, said the
King, that she is designed for the Prince of Roche-sur-yon? But, Sir, returned
the Duke, cannot one serve that Prince's turn? They say he has a Design upon
Madamo^selle de Tours my Sister, -- Yes, replied the King; but I believe the
other will carry it, and that Madamo^selle de Tours your Sister will marry the
Duke of Bourbon.

All the Reasons the King did use, were not able to divert the Duke's Thoughts
from Mademoiselle de Conde, in whom he found a thousand Accomplishments; and as
soon as he had left his Majesty, he went to pay her a Visit, overwhelmed with a
deep Melancholy, for being in a manner forced to quit Mademoiselle, whom he so
much esteemed and admired. After he had been some time in this languishing
Condition, the old Duke of Conde died, and his Death freed him from a potent
Enemy, because his Highness had always had a mortal Hatred for all the Children
of Madam Montespan. The Duke of Maine being thus at liberty, and pretty well
recovered of the amorous Torments he felt for Mademoiselle de Chartres, he made
for a long time his earnest and constant Addresses to Mademoiselle de Conde.
But when this lovely Princess began to be enamored with the Charms of the Duke
of Maine, she was as it were snatched away from his Arms, to be given io the
Prince of Roche-sur-yon. The Duke is mad at the Disappointment; he raves, he
weeps, pulls of his Hair, grows weary of Life, and swears he will revenge the
wrong done him, in his Rival's Blood. The Dauphin hearing of i^ acquaints the
King with these frantic Designs, who presently orders the Duke of Maine to be
under Arrest till the mad Fit be over. While he was thus confined, he could not
enjoy a minute's rest till he had disclosed his Passion to his Mistress, and
assured her how unfortunate he was in his absence from her. Here is a faithful
Copy of a Letter he sent to her to that purpose.

I Have had all along, most adorable Princess, a thousand secret Surmizes, that
I should be never so fortunate as to enjoy you: I now find my Fears are too
true, and that you are destined for another who does not deserve you so well as
my self, if Love can claim the first Title. I am jealous even to Madness; and
this Proof of my Love is inseparable from great Passions. Alas! I am still fond
of my own Error, which flatters me that you will still be the same. What would
not I have done, if I could have had the liberty to love you for ever! All the
World seems combined to inform me of my Misfortune; but, alas! I do resent it
enough my self; and I need no Informations to be convinced that you have
perhaps forgotten me, and are just ready to sacrifice me to the cruellest of my
Enemies, who will never take the pains to deserve your Heart. This is the only
Comfort I have left: And I do assure you, incomparable Princess, that if you
can retain some Esteem for the most passionate Lover that ever was, I shall
never cease loving you in a manner equal to your Merit. Be your self Judge how
far my Love is like to go.

Du Maine.


Mademoiselle de Conde having received this Letter, could not forbear to answer
it as follows:

PRINCE,
YOU express your Sentiments to me in so moving a manner, that I find it
impossible not to love. But perhaps you speak the same to a great many others:
Take care of that; for I can never be reconciled to a Heart that is divided: I
will have it all, or none; and if that which is now designed for me, has still
an Inclination for the Blew-ey'd Marchioness, I swear I will -- You may guess
at my meaning, and what a Woman can do to revenge her self upon a Husband that
allows her but a share in his Heart. I must needs confess, Dear Duke, that I am
Married against my Inclinations. The Prince of Roche-sur-yon would have done
well not to have Courted this Match; but since the Court will have it so, I
must at least look pleased with it. Adieu, Prince; you know what I have in
store for you.

Henrietta de Conde.


The Duke of Maine having bestowed a thousand Kisses upon this Letter, felt an
unexpressible Joy in the Hopes his Mistress gave him to love him for ever;
which were confirmed by the small Inclination Madnmoiselle de Conde had for the
Prince of Roche sur-yon: She will never love him, said he to himself; and I
shall be Master of her Heart, if no other Inclination robs me of it. Women are
inconstant, and pleased with Variety -- But what do I say! Perhaps my Princess
will be true for ever; at least I will believe her so, since I cannot live
easy, without that pleasing, though deceitful Fancy.

The Duke of Maine was thus entertaining his amorous Thoughts, when news was
brought him that the King released him from his Consinement, which was in one
of his Friend's House. This Friend was married to a Lady (whom I beg leave to
disguise under the Name of Countess Brigid) for which the Duke had a fancy; not
because she was handsome, but by reason of some secret Charms in her Wit and
Conversation, that drowned the Defects of her Person. Therefore when the Duke
of Maine received the news of his Freedom, he made answer, That he would not
stir out till he had a mind to it himself, since he had been consigned against
his Will, about a Business that would have ended without noise. The Duke of
Marsillac, who was charged with the King's Orders, returned his Answer to his
Majesty; who left the Duke to do as he thought fit. The Countess Brigid, whom
this Prince had entertained with his Passion, began to be desperately in Love
him; and before he went to his Command in Flanders, under the Duke of
Luxemburg, she granted him the last Favors: But in so engaging and endearing a
manner, that the Duke has since confessed that he never loved so entirely a Woman
without Beauty. The sweet Moments he spent in her Company, made him forget all
his past Misfortunes, except Mademoiselle de Conde, whose Image was always
present to his Mind.

One Day as he was at Chantilli, (a House of Pleasure that formerly belonged to
Madam Montespan his Mother) musing upon the Charms of that Princess, he
received a Letter handsomely sealed up, which came from his Countess with the
following Words.

WHen I first begun to love my Dearest, I thought my Passion was capable of no
Addition; but now I perceive it increases to a stupendous and dreadful degree.
I know but one thing that can make me happy, and that is, my charming Prince,
That you Love me as entirely as I do you. But how can I flatter my self with
those pleasing hopes, when I have nothing to entitle me to the possession a
Heart of so much Worth as yours is? Nevertheless I do not doubt but that you
Love me a little, since you still wear the Scarf I made for you with my own
Hands: My Heart two has had a share in it; that Heart that made me contrive all
that I did for you, when the God of Love wounded us both, with so sweet so
pleasing a Dart! Oh! What Charms! What Raptures! I cannot forget those happy
Moments which I cannot express unless I see you. Haste then, my Dear, haste to
renew them before you go to the Army, where my Heart will attend you as a
Volunteer, I expect with impatience to see you to Night at the bottom of the
Terrass: Do not make me Languish after a thing that costs you so little.


The Duke of Maine, who was then in Company, could not forbear Laughing at the
last Words of the Countess's Letter, which were a Riddle to every Body but him,
and her that wrote them. He admired the Witty Turns of that Lady, and the
tender Expressions of her Love to him; and therefore did not fail to meet her
at the appointed Hour. The fine Moonshine invited the impatient Countess to
get upon a rising ground to look for her dear Lover, who soon after agreeably
surpised her, and told her: Madam, I am so possessed with the Passion you have
raised in me, that had I not seen you this Night, I would certainly have
expired. Then you Love me much, (said the Countess, embracing him:) Now indeed
I am the most fortunate Woman under the Heavens; let us make the most of your
Presence, and my Husband's Absence. The Duke Regaled the Countess with his
agreeable Conversation, and a great deal of playing and toying no less
pleasing: After that he went his way, as all your Fortunate Lovers do; that is,
a little in haste, and as they say at Paris, a la Masarine.

Some few Weeks after, the Duke being in the Field, received the News of
Mademoiselle de Conde's Marriage, which threw him into so deep a Melancholy,
that none of his Friends could guess at the Cause of his Concern. He soon after
fell sick of a Tertian Ague, which he used to call an Amorous one. His
Physician perceiving that he was against all manner of Physic, administered to
him of a very handsome Girl for his Cure.

The Duke of Maine who knew the thing, was secret, made the best of this
Prescription during the Campaign, and rewarded well his Physician for his
Remedy, which had restored him to his perfect Health. This Physical Girl, who
was in Boys Clothes, having done considerable Services to the Lovesick Duke,
returned to the Doctor his lawful Master, who, as I am told, has since
performed wonderful Cures with his Recipe.

The Summer Expedition being over the Duke of Maine, came back to Paris with
the rest of the Generals, and every one continued in his Winter Quarters to
divert himself with the Ladies. The Duke resumed his former Visits to the
Princess of Roche-sar-you, who always received them kindly, and 'twas in those
Visits that he fell in Love with Mademo^selle de Bourbon the Princess's Sister.
All the Thoughts of the Court were presently bent upon this Match; but whether
the Duke had a mind to show his Resentment for being refused before, or whether
he was still fond of a single Life, and averse to so solemn an Engagement, his
Marriage was put off till another time.

In this interim he fell in Love with a Marchioness that made great noise at
Court, both by her Youthful Beauty and Sprightly Wit. The Difficulty the Duke
met with, was to find a way through a Multitude of Admirers, that Night and Day
laid close Siege to that Lady. However he slatter'd himself with some hopes,
(as most young Men ar^ apt to do) upon the account of his Birth, his good Mien,
his Wit, and all that can dazzle the Eyes of a young Person who enters the
World, and loves to be Courted.

The first time he saw the Marchioness, whose Name you must suppose to be
Cliodora, was at an Acquaintance of his; that Charming Person was employed
about picki^g and stringing fine Pearls for Bracelets when the Duke came into
the Room where she was; he approached her with a bashful and respectful Look,
and stood a little while gazing upon her, not daring to speak to her; but
growing a little more bold, he kneeled before her, and told her: Madam, your
incomparable Charms strike dumb the boldest of Men: I could not my self resist
their force, the first Moment I saw you, I have begun to adore you: My Passion
is violent, and if you can be so cruel as to deny me your Pity, give me leave
at least to expire at your Feet the most Unfortunate of Mortals.

The Marchioness considered a little before she answered the Duke; at last,
looking upon him with a Blush; Prince, (replied she) I am strangely surpised
at your Discourse, your Passion can be no better than Criminal; and my Duty
forbids me to love you, and betray my Husband. Madam, (said the Duke with a
sorrowful Look) you have pronounced the Sentence of my Death, and I care not to
live any longer, if you rob me of the Hopes of pleasing you.

Cliodora, whose Temper was apt to receive the first Impressions of Love; and
who begun to feel something more than an Esteem for this new Adorer, whom she
thought extremely Charming, went out of the Room upon some pretense, fearing
lest her Tenderness should triumph over her Reason, she begun to hug her self
for standing this Trial, without giving any hopes to her Lover: But, alas! Love
which subdues all by an irresistible force, soon instam'd the Marchioness with
a fire that she never felt before: She loved the Duke from that very Moment,
but with so strong a Passion, that never was a Woman so troubled and so
uneasy; and though she is now very careful to avoid the sight of her Conqueror,
the God of Love whispers in her Ear, that she must yield ere it be long.

The Duke who was still disappointed in his Endeavors to see the Marchioness
abroad, took one Day the Resolution to visit her at her House, and had the good
Fortune to meet her alone, more Charming than the very Angels. Cliodora was
then in a careless but magnificent Deshabillee, with Hair tied up with
Amaranth-colour Knots and large Diamonds, and her Breast half naked: What
Raptures did our Lover feel at the sight of so many Beauties? He forgot in that
moment all his other Mistresses; nay, he forgot his very self, since he lay
Speechless, and as it were, in a Swoon, at the Feet of this lovely Person, who
looking upon him with languishing Eyes, completed the Duke's Defeat.

This Prince having recovered his Amorous Enthusiasm, closed his Lips to one of
the Fair Marchioness's Hands, and bathing it with his Tears told her, Madam, if
I commit a Crime in loving you, your self are the cause of it; your bright Eyes
have enchanted me; forgive me, Divine Creature, and consent to my Desires. The
Marchioness, who by this time was in great Disorder, made no answer to the
Duke, and s^emed to approve his Design by her Silence. The Duke made use of so
fair an opportunity to snatch some amorous Kisses. Afterward he went away,
fearing the Discovery of so charming and desirable a Mystery.

Being returned home, he reflected on his Behavior with the Marchioness, and
was ashamed of his Bashfulness and Timidity. I have been blessed, said he to
himself, with the sight of those Beauties that have heightened my Passion, and
raptured my Soul to the highest pit^h: Those Eyes sparkling with Love, those
sl^ming rosy Lips seemed to bid me go farther than Respect, and yet instead of
improving the blessed Occasion, I have been at the Feet of that incomparable
Person, but a stupid faint hearted Lover. As the Duke was thus arguing the
Matter, walking and fetching great Steps about the Room, he spied upon his
Table, a Letter from the Countess Brigid, who upbraided him with his
Inconstancy and want of Faith: The Letter contained what follows.

THE small trouble your Highn^ss has been at to preserve my Heart, shows but
too plainly how little you care for it; but Heaven be praised, I am not so
blind but that I see all your Faults much better than you imagine. The
Wanton-ey'd malicious Marchioness, that you visit so often; and for whom, I am
told, you are Mad, will never be constant to you. Poor Creature! She Is in love
with every new Face, and compassionates the Sighs of all the World: In a Word,
your Highness burns his Incense upon a very common Altar. You will, perhaps,
take ill at me what I say about your new Mistress, and think that I am Jealous:
I own, I love you so far as to be so even to fury; but I will moderate my
Transports, and banish, if possible, your ingratitude from my Thoughts, since
it is not in my power to hate you.


The Duke having perused this Letter, flung it down again upon his Table with
disdain; and said, Do you think, Madam, that a Man can always love you at the
same rate? Faith, I have other things to mind; and my new born Passion finds me
more business than any I ever had. Besides, you can boast of nothing that can
come in Competition with my Charming Cliodora; her Rosy Lips, hr
Lilly-Complexion, her bright killing Eyes, her sweet delicate Breast; in short,
all her Lovely Person does Captivate my whole Heart; nay, I love whatever she
touches; and at these Words looking upon a Diamond-Ring he had on his Finger;
and which, he remembered, Cliodora had had on hers; he kissed it over and over a
thousand times. Amorous Extravagance! Not to be conceived by any but those who
have been so passionately in love as the Duke was.

The Count of Thoulouse his Brother, who came to him in that very Moment, could
not forbear laughing at his Folly, and asked what he did kiss with so much
Passion? My Hand, Brother, (returned the Duke) which has touched a most lovely
thing: Nay, then (replied the Count, I have nothing to say to it, since you
commit an agreeable Folly. But pray tell me, Brother, what part of your
Mistresses Person is that you have touched? Her Mouth (replied the Duke: That Is
the nearest place to the Heart, said the Count: That may be, returned the Duke:
But, alas! I find that Heart impenetrable, and 'twill cost me a great many
Sighs before I arrive at the height of Happiness. Your Mistress is very cruel,
I perceive, said the Count smiling. I thought a Cavalier like you, could not
languish above a Day; you must not stay till she surrenders of her own accord,
but take her at unawares, while she gives you an opportunity: For my part,
added he, I never told a Woman twice I loved her. You are happy, (replied the
Duke:) But how can a Man wrest Favors from a Person, who will not grant them,
and has Reasons not to grant them: I never was for using Violence, and had
rather die for Love than force any thing from a Woman, that she will or cannot
give: All for Love, will ever be my Motto: A Man ought to get a Woman's Heart,
and that point once gained, the rest follows of Course. That Is none of my
Temper, said the Count bluntly; if I was Born under the Planet of Venus, I
would pillage and rob in all the Dominions of Love. You have showed it to
Julia, answered the Duke of Maine: The poor Girl flies you like a Monster; and
swears, she never saw so bold a Man as your self. Pshaw, Brother, (said the
Count, she cries before she is hurt: The Duke of Vendome has done more to her
than ever I did; but because he went a soft way to Work, she has made no noise
about it. Well, that shows however, replied the Duke smiling, that Gentleness
and Patience go a great way with the Ladies. The Duke of Vendome, like a
cunning Sportsman catches the Hare, without putting her to the Squeak.

The Duke who came in to them interrupted their Conversation, and asked them,
whether they would give him their Company to the Opera. I had rather go to a
Play, (said the Count of Thoulouse. I hear, (replied the Duke of Bourbon,
interrupting him) you are in Love with Christina, she that Acts the most
passionate Parts: Who I? (answered the Count, in a Surprise;) Faith, Love is
none of my Business: I am too boisterous and inconstant, and would soon assault
a Woman's Honor, or turn Deserter. If you be of that Humor, (replied the
Duke) taking him by the Hand, you will find but few Women that will have any
Kindness for you: But I wonder you are not ashamed so to profane this Noble
Passion, than which none is more worthy of a great Mind; for my part I look
upon the Pleasure of Loving as the most refined and sweetest Enjoyment of Life.
I am of your Opinion, (said the Duke of Maine, and I take a Man without Love to
be like a dark dull melancholy Day: In short, Love makes Life pleasant, which
otherwise would be tedious and troublesome.

The Count of Thoulouse perceiving that the Conversation ran still upon Love,
gave the Duke of Maine a Pat over the Shoulder, and told him; Faith, Brother,
it is a little uncivil to take so much Delight in teazing a Man at this rate;
Come let us go to the Italian Playhouse. These three Princes took Coach
presently, and went first into the Pit, and afterward upon the Stage. Arlequin
Acted that Day the Emperor of the Moon; and the Count of Thoulouse, who still
had the late Conversation present in his Thoughts, asked him, Whether People
made Love in the Moon, just as they do here? An't please your Highness, replied
that famous Mimick, without any manner of Concern; which set the whole Audience
a laughing. Well, (said the Count) go on with your Business.

The Play being done, these Princes returned to their respective Apartments;
and the next Day the Duke of Maine went to Visit the Marchioness, who
distrusting her own Heart, thought it a piece of Prudence to avoid his sight.
Therefore she stole through a back Gate, and went to walk in the Garden, not
thinking she had been perceived by her Lover. Thus being at liberty and alone;
alas! (cried she) how incomparable is my Prince in means to Charm me: It Is in
vain I fly him, since my inclination to love him surmounts all opposition.
Troublesome Duty, do not tell me I owe my whole Heart to a Husband; Love wrests
it from me by force, and will -- She was a going to say more, when the Duke o^
Maine, who had got into the Garden, and hi^ himself behind a Tree, made some
noise, which gave her notice he was there! Ah! (cried she ^ is it you, Prince,
that thus come to surpriz^ my Freedom and Innocence? Alas! (adde^ she, with an
enchanting Air) if you knew how weak I am when I see you, you would not thus
break in upon my Solitude. For to tell you all, nothing is so tormenting to me,
as the Duty incumbent on my Honor, neither to see nor love you. I dare not
follow the tender Inclinations I have for you, for fear of splitting on a Rock,
and breaking the Sacred Ties of Matrimony. All this, Madam, (replied the Duke)
is not sufficient to oblige you to fly me; for the more you know me, the less
danger you will find in my Company. I know too well, (answered she somewhat
uneasy) what my Heart thinks of it: I do not blush to own that I find infinite
Charms in your Person, that I am pleased with every thing you do, and look upon
the necessity of your Absence as the greatest torment imaginable: But then what
secret Reproaches of violated Duty should I be exposed to, if I gave you an
opportunity to see me in private? No, that step is too slippery for a faltering
Heart: Therefore your Highness must be satisfied with these Reasons, and not
endeavor to involve me in endless Misfortunes.

As she made an end of these Words, she ran out of the Garden with such
swiftness, that the Duke of Maine had much ado to follow her: And having
entrenched her self in a dark Alley without the Garden, the Duke told her
smiling: Madam, I think I had best send for Canon to beat you out of your
Retrenchments: What do you mean to fly me thus? If I had been more bold in
discovering to you all the force of my Passion, perhaps, either out of Kindness
or Gratitude, you would have done for me, what you will undoubtedly do for
another, who will not deserve it so well, because none can ever love you so
sincerely as I do. This, Madam, (added he) is what drives me to Despair. The
Marchioness having heard him out; Prince, (cried she) with a most passionate
Voice; Alas! Your Presence does but tear open those Wounds which would heal up
of themselves if you were absent. I use all that the Art of Love dictates, to
avoid that fatal Rock on which I am afraid to split in the very Harbor. The
Duke perceiving her dying Resolution, fell at her Feet, and stopped her against
her Will. This small, but seasonable Violence wrought so much upon the Heart of
this Lovely Person, that she staid for a considerable while with him, and
seemed to give consent to all the moving and tender Expressions of his Passion.

Oh! sudden and unaccountable Change: But alas! What Is impossible to Love, when
he designs to Master a Heart? It seems as if all Nature were made for him,
since nothing can resist his Power. The Fair Cliodora, experienced it in that
occasion, having often summoned in vain to her assistance, both Duty, Chastity,
Faith, and all the Sacred Obligations of a discreet Wife to her Spouse. Now,
(cried she) am I surpised, conquered, and speechless at once: At this, she
yielded to the fond Caresses of her Lover, who embraced her most tenderly, and
looked passionately upon her, to find in her Eyes the Sentence either of his
Life or Death. The Marchioness casting a languishing Eye upon him, said, Alas!
I am ruined: All my fears are come upon me, and the cruelest Death would now be
a Blessing. Here she broke off, shedding a shower of Tears in the Duke's Arms.

The Shades of Night coming on, the Duke both out of Decency, Kindness and Love
conducted her to her House, entertaining her all the way with the most
endearing Expressions; and having taken his leave, left her in the cruelest
Agonies imaginable. This Night was to the Lovely Cliodora, a Night full of
Horror, Uneasiness, and all that can be most tormenting in this Life: And as
she was of a Tender and Amorous Temper, and had never before felt so violent
and engaging a Passion, she took an exact Review of all that the Duke had said
to her, which had made a deep impression in her Heart. Atonia one of her
intimate Acquaintance, who surpised her in Bed the next Morning, found her so
changed, that she asked all in a Fright the Reason of that sad Metamorphosis.
Alas! My Dearest, (said the Marchioness, with a doleful Voice) if I should tell
you the Cause of my Misfortunes, you would be so surpised and astonished at
the condition my Heart is now in, that you would certainly pity my Miserable
Fate. Madam, (replied Atonia) I compassionate your Trouble without knowing the
particulars of it. Can you believe, (said the Marchioness, resuming her
Discourse) that I Love the most perfect and accomplished Man alive? Fame,
indeed, has not done him Justice; but Heaven has bestowed on him those Charms
that are able to enslave the whole Creation. Atonia, who ought all this while
that the Marchioness spoke of her Husband, told her, Madam, I have long since
known the infinite Merit of your Illustrious Husband. Here she paused a while;
and the Marchioness resuming the Discourse; Alas! (cried she) how happy should
I be, were I only Charmed by my Husband's Merit? But another possesses my
Heart, and I cannot forbear loving him in spite of Duty, Honor, Faith, and all
that opposes the Torrent of my Inclinations. How! Madam, (replied Atonia in a
Surprise) you love another besides the Marquess your Husband? I do, (returned
Cliodora) I do, dear Atonia, love another against my Will; and my Heart has
yielded to the most perfect of all Mortals. But who is that happy Mortal,
(replied Atonia) with a serious Air, who has found the way to captivate your
Heart, which seemed to be an impregnable Fortress. How often has the Count of
-- made vain attempts upon the Citadel of that Fort, which, perhaps surrenders
now without resistance to a less formidable Conqueror. Alas! Cruel Atonia,
(answered the Marchioness with a dying Look) if thou knew how my Heart, my
Reason, and all the Powers of my Soul have strugled with this Passion, thou
would not speak as thou do. I have courageously encountered all that can
Charm a Heart; and it is no great wonder to see Victory side with the stronger:
The Duke of Maine triumphs over my Resolution, and it is that powerful, that
charming Conqueror that puts me to these Agonies.

It Is not to be imagined into what astonishment those Words cast Atonia, who
looking fixedly upon the Marchioness, told her, Madam, what is now become of
that great Virtue and Reserve, which made your Ladyship the Admiration of all
the World? I cannot tell, my Dearest, cried Cliodora, falling into a Swoon, in
which she continued for some time, without either Speech or Motion; but at last
recovering her Spirits, Faithful Spouse, (cried she) I have been treacherous to
thee, by breaking my Marriage-Vows: Then looking upon his Picture that hung by
her Bedside, she went on in these Words: Oh! why must I break thy Heart by
this intolerable Grief. Fatal unlawful Love! thou art ready to undo me, and
precipitate my Days into an endless Abyss of Sorrow and Misery. Guilt begins to
triumph over Virtue, and crushes me under the abominable Weight of Vice. O
Heaven! that see the trouble of my distracted Soul, calm this dreadful Storm
by some gentle Influence.

She had scarce done speaking, when the Marquess, who for some Days had been a
Hunting with his Friends, came into the Room, and sat down upon the Bed by her.
He expressed his usual Kindness to her; and finding her extremely changed, he
asked her the cause of it, with a great deal of Concern. Cliodora, as you may
imagine, was not such a Fool as to own her Frailty; but, on the contrary, she
concealed and dissembled it, and forced a seemed Satisfaction at the dull
Caresses of her Husband. Some time after, being left alone with her Confident,
she told her, Dear Atonia, a Husband is still the same thing, and Love is
pleased with Variety. But, Madam, replied Atonia smiling, how can you expect
always to find that pleasing Variety in a Galant? I cannot tell, replied
careless the Marchioness; however, it is requisite to pass from one amorous
Engagement to another, were it but to keep our Hearts in ure, which otherwise
would grow dull and insensible. You preach a fine Doctrine, said Atonia,
smiling; but I am afraid your Precepts are dangerous, and proceed from loose,
wanton Thoughts, which you ought rather to suppress. Alas! how can I, said she,
rising from her Bed? See! here comes the dear Charmer that has raised them,
whom I cannot shun. At these Words the Duke of Maine came in, and asked her how
she had spent the Night? Very uneasily, dear Prince, replied she. Atonia, who
perceived that her Company might be troublesome, went out of the Room
immediately, and left 'em to themselves.

The Duke thus alone with his Mistress, entertained her with his Passion,
which, said he, is arrived at its highest pitch; then, I fear, it will soon
decline, replied Cliodora, since Philosophers tell us, that things being come
to their perfection, begin to decrease and return to their center. My dear
Angel, answered the Duke passionately, I am above Philosophers, and I Will teach
them, by the duration of my Love, that they are but a Company of Fools: It Is
true, that by an unsearchable Decree of Heaven, all things are changeable in
this Life; but for my part, I will always be the same to you. These sweet
Hopes, my dear Life, said the Marchioness, clasping her Hands about his Neck,
do ravish my very Soul, and show me the utmost extent of my Felicity. Will you
then ever love me without alteration? I will, answered the Duke, who swore upon
the Faith and Honor of a passionate Lover (frail Security) that future Ages
should admire the Constancy of his Love. The Marchioness took his Word for it,
and was pleased to believe all he said.

Some time after, the Duke of Maine being at the Princess of Roche-sur-yon's
House, had a sight of the young Princess Illida, and was so taken with her
Conversation, that he fell passionately in love with her. 'Twill not be amiss
to draw the Picture of so accomplished a Person, both to entertain the Reader,
and that he may guess who she is. The Princess Illida was a tall, proper, black
Woman; her Shape free and easy; she had fine, large, sparkling, black Eyes,
level with the rest of her Face; a white and lively Complexion; the prettiest
little Mouth in the World; Ivory Teeth, set with regular symmetry; a charming
Smile; a look Noble and Great, and yet sweet and engaging; with the finest
Voice that ever I heard in my Life. All this were more than sufficient to raise
a great Passion in the Duke of Maine, who is naturally very susceptible of
Love; so that finding himself at liberty, he disclosed to her that very Day all
the Sentiments of his Heart; and the Princess, who was not insensible, returned
very obliging Answers to all the fine Speeches he made upon her Beauty. The
Prince of Conti, who died about the time, retarded for a while the amorous
Affairs of the Duke, because the Princess Illida was a Relation of his. The
Days of Ceremony being over, the Duke went to see her at the Princess Dowager
of Conti's: The Princess having a great Tenderness for her, advised her to have
a care how far she should embark with the Duke, who (said she) changes his
Mistress's oftener than his Clothes. Oh, Heavens! what is that you say, cried the
Princess Illida? Of all things in the World, I abhor Inconstancy most. Madam,
replied the Princess of Conti, this is a very nice point; Fhench-men are of a
fickle Temper, and generally false to our Sex, though never so true to their own;
and I heartily pity all the Women that engage with them in an amorous Commerce,
which of all others requires Honesty and Sincerity. Well, Madam, said the
Princess looking upon her, my Engagement is not so far gone, but that I may
break it: Yet I must needs own, that if any Person besides your Higghness did
tell me this, I would look upon it as a piece of malicious Jealousy to
undermine the Duke of Maine in my Esteem; but because no such thing can ever
enter into my Thoughts, I shall take my Measures according to your Advice. I
hope you will, replied the Princess of Conti; and if you don't, you must expect
to lose the good Opinion I have of your Discretion. This Caution, added she, is
the same I gave lately to a Lady of my Acquaintance, who answered me briskly,
Why, Madam, should we lose precious Time? It Is fit to Love as soon as possible;
Hearts born for that Passion, are spoiled when they are without it. The poor
Fool, added the Princess, has since found by Experience, that it is much better
to have no Lover at all, than to have one Inconstant: For my part, if I had a
mind to have a pleasant and lasting Amor, I would pitch upon a Foreigner, or
some Cavalier older than my self, that might take no advantage of his Youth.
What would your Highness do with a Foreigner, said the Princess Illida? They
are generally but a sort of Clownish, Ill-bred, Dull Persons, unless they
travel through France, Italy, and other Countries; and when so, they commonly
learn the Manners they see abroad, and are not a jot the better than the rest.
No Men can be more tender, more amorous, more changeable, or more jealous than
the Italians; they Love sometimes even to Madness, but their Passion is of no
duration. The Spaniards are much like the Italians, but that they have not so
much Spleen and Malice. The English have something very insipid; they are
presently for killing their Rivals, or hanging themselves. As for the Dutch,
their Love is so cold and so dull, that the hottest Lover of 'em all, shall not
speak five Words that can please his Mistress in a whole Year. Pray of what
Country would you then have your Lover, said the Princess of Conti, breaking
out in Laughter? I fancy you must get one among the Turks or Moors. Fie, Madam,
replied the Princess Illida, smiling: If I would have a Lover to my Fancy, I
would choose a German, or Switzer. A very fine Choice, I vow! returned the
Princess of Conti; why, the Germans and Switzers are so heavy, so dull, so
clownish and unpolished -- Madam, said the Princess Illida interrupting her,
they are downright, constant, honest Men. The Duke of Maine, who surpised
these two Princesses, soon made them change their Conversation. Alas! said the
Princess of Conti, perceiving the Duke made his Addresses to the Princess
Illida, Prince, I think you are neither German nor Switzer. Why that to me,
Madam, replied the Duke? Must a Man be German or Switzer to please this
incomparable Beauty? Yes, he must, returned the Princess: They are constant,
downright, and honest -- Faith, Madam, replied the Duke, smiling, it is because
they have not the Wit to be otherwise: But is Constancy such a mighty thing in
Love? Ah! cried the Princess Illida, how maliciously Cunning is the Princess of
Conti, to make People confess their own Faults! Nothing in the World is so fine
and charming as Constancy; and without that solid Quality, all Enjoyments would
be unpalatable, and breed disquieting Thoughts. The Duke of Maine perceived
presently what malicious Trick the Princess of Conti had put upon him, to make
her Relation have an ill Opinion of him, and without making any reply, took his
leave, and went away.

The Duke was no sooner come to his Apartment, but he bent all his Thoughts to
remove the ill Impressions the Princess of Conti had given the Princess Illida;
which were so deeply rooted, that whatever the Duke of Maine could say to her,
was not able to undeceive her of the Prejudice she had conceived against him.
The Prince was so desperately mad at it, that he expostulated the matter with
the Princess of Conti in very big, sharp, and contemptuous words; and ever
since that, these two Persons have had an irreconcilable Hatred for each
other. But to return to the Duke of Maine, here is a Letter he sent to the
Princess his Mistress, to endeavor to bring her back from her Estrangement.

The Duke of Maine, to the Princess Illida.
MADAM,
YOur Unjust Reproaches have hereft me of my Rest; and if you continue to have
so ill an Opinion of me, and banish me from your dear Presence, I must fall an
infallible Sacrifice to your uncharitable Judgment and Severity. You see what
Sin you are like to commit, and what Remorses of Conscience you must expect if
I die. I am grown so faint and weak, that I have hardly Strength enough to
write to you: This Weakness, most adorable Person, ought to give me a Title to
your Heart; and without the Possession of so inestimable a Treasure, I can
never hope to love happy. You may triumph over my Passion, and use at pleasure
the Power you have over me, since the Condition I am in will not suffer me to
do any thing in my own defense, save only to assure you, that what the Princess
of Conti told you of me, is nothing but Falsehood: She is a malicious Woman,
that cannot endure to see a Man sigh for any other than her self, as if she was
Mistress of all the Accomplishments in the World: And as she comes infinitely
short of those shining Qualities and Perfections that Nature has bestowed upon
your self; so she cannot but have a mortal Jealousy to you. Farewell,
Illustrious Princess, and do not deny the humblest and most passionate of your
Adorers, the Favor of believing him the most Faithful and sincere of all
Mortals.

Du Maine.


The Princess Illida received this Letter very kindly, and moreover told the
Gentleman that brought it, that she longed to see his Master. The Duke no
sooner received this News, but he immediately flew to his Mistress, and casting
himself at her Feet, begged of her to hear him but for a Moment: I will hear
you as long as you please, (replied the Princess.) The Prince perceiving an
amorous Tenderness in her Looks, told her, Madam, I am overjoyed to see the end
of your Indifference, which could have no other cause but the malicious
Insinuations of the Princess of Conti, whose true Character I have given you
already. It Is true, I have had several Mistresses which I never loved long,
because they had not the power to keep me. Their Charms were too faint to
please above a Month a Man of so nice a Palate as my self; you alone, most
charming Creature, are capable to fix my Love. Prince (replied the Princess
smiling) a Month, nay, a Week is a long time for inconstant Lovers; they seldom
like a Mistress at the second View: If all Ladies were like your self,
incomparable Princess, (said the Duke with a passionate Air) Men would never
change their Mistresses, but rather impose upon themselves the agreeable
necessity of loving them for ever. These are Compliments you make to all our
Sex, (replied the Princess) and Men of your Temper have always a full Stock of
fine Things to say to the Ladies. There Is no general Rule without an Exception,
(returned the Duke;) there are, indeed, a sort of Men that cannot live without
an Amor, and those we call General Lovers: Then they love out of Habit and
Custom, (replied the Princess;) and therefore their Passion is nothing but an
Amusement. Habit and Custom have undoubtedly a great share in it, (answered the
Duke) and a great many Men don't look upon Love as a serious business. The
reason they give to color their Fickleness, is, that it is impossible for a
Heart to be possessed by two Passions at once, and that the last impressions are
generally quicker and stronger than the first. And according to this Principle
they change their Mistresses as often as their Periwigs, being captivated by
the Fair and the Black by turns. The Princess could not forbear laughing at the
pleasant Way the Duke made his Court to her; and told him, it was a vain
attempt to resist his Address, and the Charms of his Wit, since 'twas but
losing one's Repose without getting the Victory, Would to God, Madam, (cried
the Duke of Maine, grasping her little Lily-white Hand, which he kissed most
amorously) I were Master of that Merit you are pleased to give me; but my small
Skill and Genius contradict the good Opinion you have of me. Not at all,
(replied the Princess;) and I am sure you deserve the Character I give of you.
Can I flatter my self that you are persuaded of what you say, (returned the
Duke:) I really am, (replied she with a Charming Look) and for all my
Disguises, my Heart tells me, that you are not indifferent to me. These
pleasing Words accompanied with the Charms of the Princess, so transported the
Duke with Joy, that had he not been supported by a Table, he had fallen, like
one in a Trance, at the Feet of his Dear Charmer. At last, having recovered his
Amorous Ecstasy; See, Madam, (cried he) what Raptures and Transports your
Divine Perfections cause in me; every thing speaks in my favor to persuade you
of the strength of my Passion; and nothing can alleviate the Torments I endure,
but the hopes that you do not doubt my Sincerity. The Princess, whose chief
delight was to see her Adorers languish, made as if she believed by halves, the
Protestations of his Passion. 'Twas her Humor to keep several Lovers at a Bay,
and lead them about into a Fool's Paradise, without caring ever to be at any
great Expense for them; while the deluded Fools were at a great deal of Pains
for Favors in Reversion. The Duke of Maine was one of these, though I cannot
tell whether his Address and incomparable Wit, have not raised him above the
Fortune of his Competitors.

The amorous Commerce betwixt the Duke of Maine and the Princess Illida, could
not be so secret, but that it came to the knowledge of the Marchioness
Cliodora, who loved him desperately. Love that never sleeps, but is continually
upon the Watch, discovered it in a very pleasant manner.

One Day as these two Lovers were together in an Arbor by the Side of a House
where the Marchioness happened to be, she heard through the Wall one that said,
Madam, I shall willingly give you my Picture, since you ask it in so engaging a
manner: But do not you think, most adorable Princess, that I shall envy its
happiness in being near you when I shall sigh after your dear Presence. He
paused here a while, and the Marchioness being curious, as all the rest of
Women are, went nearer the Wall, and knew the Duke of Maine's Voice, but could
not justly tell who was the Lady he spoke to. Now am I betrayed, (said she loud
enough to be heard) that false Man loves another; can any Misfortune be so
great as mine is? The Princess Illida, who is very fearful and timorous,
hearing a strange Voice and doleful Complaints, desired her Lover to take Coach
again and return Home. He presently obeyed, and having carried her Home, took
his leave till the next Day, when they appointed to meet near the Forest of
Vincennes, toward the Close of the Evening.

The Duke of Maine, who had a suspicion that the Marchioness was acquainted
with his new Intrigue, was at a loss how to manage a Woman so Jealous and so
Troublesome: At last, to rid himself of her in as civil a manner as possible,
he counterfeited being Sick, and acquainted her by a Letter, that his Physician
had ordered him to forbear conversing with Women upon pain of Death; and that
to cure his Melancholy, he had prescribed him the Waters of Bourbon, where he
would go in few Days. The cunning Marchioness smelled out the Plot presently,
and perceiving her Reign was at an end, she prevailed so far upon her own Love
and Jealousy, that she received the Duke's Letter with great Indifference, and
made as if she believed all he said, though she was sure of the contrary.

Here is the Answer she sent him upon his feigned Illness, and his going to the
Waters of Bourbon.

ALas! Fair Prince, what would I not do to restore your Health. A barbarous
Fever is like to blast your Lily Complexion, and you are going to the Waters
to put out its fire: But, I think, your new Passion that has kindled it, might
quench it as well, without going so far to deprive me of your dear Presence.
Alas! How fortunate were Lovers in the first Ages of the World! They were still
loving, still Constant and Faithful; they never parted one from another, and
Treachery never wrested the Lover from the Mistresses Arms. Oh! Happy Times
whether are you fled? Why does not Heaven grant us now so great a Blessing? I
would not feel the cruel smart of your Departure: Nor would you be delighted
with change, but rather place your Happiness in the Sweets of Constant Love.

Cliodora.


The Duke of Maine is so penetrating a Wit, that he saw presently his Feint was
discovered. How cunning (cried he) is that Woman, she seems contented to lose
what she cannot have; yet I am mad she shows no more Jealousy: Alas! She loved
me not, and I was a fond deluded Lover. But why do I repine? I ought to be glad
of the Indifference, since a nobler Passion possesses my Heart.

These Thoughts kept a long while the Duke of Maine seriously employed: He was
in suspense whether he should go to see the Marchioness, or no. And one
Evening, as he was walking irresolute upon that Subject, he found himself near
that Lady's House, who being then at her Window, drew in as soon as she saw him.
The Duke, for all her seeming Disdain, pulled a little Bell, which was the
Signal of their Secret Loves. One of the Marchioness's Women led him into a
dark Parlour, where having perceived under the Table, and in a corner some Arms
that used not to be there, and considering besides, that his Introducer had
locked him in, he begun to suspect something, and leaped presently out of the
Window, and made his Escape through the Garden.

The Marchioness, who, as I said before, was jealous of her Love and Reputation
even to Madness, had taken the Resolution to murder him privately, to revenge
his Infidelity; and for that purpose had sent for some Men, who were coming in
great haste Masked and Disguised. As soon as she entered the Room, where she
expected to see her false Lover, she was so surpised to miss him there, that
she fell into a Swoon, and was Speechless for a while. At last having recovered
her self, she thanked those Gentlemen who had taken this opportunity to be
revenged of an Assront the Duke of Maine had given 'em at Play. Cliodora who
seemed to be all Good Nature, was indeed a Snake hid under Flowers: She was now
enraged to see her self disappointed in her Revenge, and rushing with fury upon
the Woman that had conducted the Duke into the Parlour: Traitress, (cried she)
laying hold of her Neck, thou have betrayed me, by causing the most perfidious
of Men to escape my just Resentment: He will now make me infamous to the World,
by publishing what wicked Design I had upon his Life; but thou shall be the
Victim I Will offer to my Revenge -- As she pronounced these Words, in the
greatest Passion imaginable, the Marquess came in with Sword in his Hand,
thinking that there were Thieves in his House. But how surpised was he to see
his Wife with disheveled Hair, a Dagger in her Hand, Curses in her Mouth, and
wild Despair in her Looks, putting a string about her Woman's Neck, who, I am
told, had formerly been her Nurse? The Marquess prevented this fatal stroke,
cutting with his Sword, the String that was ready to strangle this innocent
Creature, who as soon as the Tragi-comedy was over, both out of Gratitude and
Revenge, put into his Hands all his Wife's Letters, which were the proofs of
her Infidelity. He being a Man of much Honor, and very touchy where his
Reputation was concerned, inquired so nicely into all his Wife's Intrigues,
that being fully convinced of her Treachery, he caused her to be put into so
severe a Nunnery, that she had the very Hair of her Eyebrows shaved off.

The Duke of Maine, who had underhand much contributed to the Marchioness's
Confinement during Life, was abundantly revenged without noise: The Archbishop
of Paris who was his Friend, as well as of the Abbess of that Convent, being
acquainted with all the Story, gave Orders to have the Marchioness now and then
severely Disciplined as well for her other Sins, as for this last Offense
against the Duke, which would have cost her her Life, had he delivered her up
into the Hands of Justice. What is it that a Jealous Woman is not capable to
do? (said the Duke one Day to his Friends, without telling them the cause of
this Complaint) The Devil himself is nothing to her; she is all Dissimulation,
and stops at nothing that is wicked to be revenged. The Princess Illida, who
had these Words reported to her, believed they were spoken upon her Account,
because some Days before she had shown a little Discontent at a Present which
the Duke of Maine made before her to Mademoiselle de Bourbon, whom he always
looked upon as his future Spouse.

All these little Quarrels being over, the Duke resolved to give a Diversion to
a thousand Troubles he felt in his Mind, and refresh his Heart, which was tired
with so many different Passions: In order to that he made a Campaign, in which
he bent all his Thoughts upon Honor and Glory, seldom or never remembering his
Mistresses. Being returned home, he paid his ordinary Visits to the Princess
Illida, who received him with Coldness and Indifference. This was enough to
disingage the Duke of Maine, who cannot endure to be slighted; and from that
very moment he resolved to make another Conquest. The Person he had a design
upon, was Madam Olida, Wife to a Baron of great Reputation, and intimate Friend
to the Demoiselles de Tours, and de Nantes, Sisters to the Duke. As soon as he
had made an Acquaintance with her, the King Married the Duke of Anguien,
otherwise the Duke of Bourbon to Mademoiselle de Tours, and 'twas during those
Rejoycings, that he declared his Passion to the Baroness, unknown to every Body
but the Duke of Bourbon, who told his Wife, Madam, I verily believe the Duke of
Maine is in Love with our Baroness: That may be (replied the Duchess) for he
is so inconstant and changeable in Love, that I believe in a little time no
Woman will give him the Hearing. Oh! How I hate Inconstancy! There Is no
Treachery like that of being Persidious in Love. Madam, (returned the Duke
smiling, that is the Fashion now adays; and therefore you ought to have better
Thoughts of the Duke your Brother; but however, I would advise him not to Marry
till he has sown his Wild Oats. Sir, (replied the Duchess) he will always be
the same: All your Cripples are exceedingly Amorous, because of the Choler
which is predominant in their Nature, and excites them to love. Pray, Madam,
where did you learn this Philosophy? (said the Duke.) Sir, (replied the
Duchess) I have it out of Plato's and Socrates's Works, which treat of
Philosophical Physiognomy, and of all the Signs whereby we come to the
knowledge of the Natural Inclinations of Men.

As soon as Dinner was over, the Duke of Bourbon, who is very curious, sent for
the Works of Socrates and Plato, and the Company being met in a fine Parlour,
every one looked for his own Temper and Inclinations in those Philosophers. The
Duke of Maine, whose Wit is full of Life and Sprightliness, begun the
Conversation and said, that it is the Remark of Galen and Aristotle in several
Places, That a Man's Genius and Manners are often shown by the Stature and
Habit of his Body; and that your little or middle-siz'd Men are generally
ingenious. Hippocrates, (said the Prince of Conti, interrupting him) was of
Opinion that all those who profess Physic, ought to be skilled in Physiognomy,
otherwise they are apt to commit gross Errors; and I do not wonder to see my
Physician often at a loss to know my Distemper, because he is no good
Physiognomist. Monsieur Pinac Archbishop of Lions, was so well acquainted with
Physiognomy and Metoposcopy, that having one Day looked fixedly upon the Duke
of Biron, he foretold him his satal End to a Hair. Passions (said the Duchess
of Bourbon) are infallible Indications of ones Temper; as for Example, Sadness
proceeds from Choler, and a brisk airy Humor from abundance of Blood. It Is no
wonder then, (replied the Prince of Conti, you are generally so Jovial and Gay:
As for Mademoiselle de Nantes, (said he looking upon her) she has a moderate
Melancholy which is a sign of good Sense. Right, (answered she smiling, for
Aristotle tells us, that the Virtuoso's of his Time, were for the most part of
a Melancholy Humor. True, Sister, (replied the Duke of Maine) but here is a
place where Galen, with the same Philosopher speaks of two sorts of Melancholy,
the one is tempered by the Blood and Choler, and the other by Phlegm; the first
produces Wit and good Sense, and the other Inconstancy, Fickleness, Deceit and
Ill Nature: if one durst accuse you of Inconstancy, Brother, (said the Duchess
of Bourbon with a malicious Coldness) I fancy he would not wrong you much, though
you be so full of Mirth and Gaye^y. Is it possible (said the Baroness Olida)
for the Duke of Maine to be Inconstant? That Is a Frailty too much below the
greatness of Mind of a Prince like him -- I, Madam, Inconstant! (replied the
Duke) Alas! when I Love, my love is solid, constant, and without bounds. That Is
true, (returned maliciously the Duchess of Bourbon) because it is a General
Love: Besides, you love like a Master that must and will be obeyed. I confess,
Madam, (replied the Duke smiling) my Passion is Masculine and greedy, and wants
something to feed upon: A kind Look, or a gentle Smile may inspire me with
Love, but that is too thin a Diet to satisfy me. To what excessive height, dear
Brother, you let your Passions go? (answered the Duchess:) Your Love is Rash,
Wanton and Undiscreet. Princess, (cried the Duke of Maine) you must pardon
those Excesses which slow from my very Nature. I cannot look upon a Handsome,
Well-shap'd Woman with a Complexion of Lilies and Roses, Cherry Lips and
Sparkling Eyes, without burning with a raging flame. But, (said the Duke of
Bourbon, taking him by the Hand) when you are in those amorous Raptures with
your Mistress, do you ever find the Happy Minute. Faith, you are very curious
(replied the Duke of Maine smiling) I never met with any but Unkind,
Ill-natured Mistresses, that have made me pine and languish. Do not dissemble,
(returned the Prince) I know a certain Lady that has a Passion for you, which
is not much for her Reputation. Pshaw, (said the Duke of Maine Laughing) a
Woman may have one or two Amors in her Life, without wronging her Reputation,
provided she have the Address to conceal them; the Sun is sometimes lost in an
Eclipse, but shines afterward as glorious as ever. Indeed (said the Baroness
Olida, affecting a great Modesty) these are new Morals to me; I cannot imagine
how a Woman can be accounted Virtuous and Innocent, when she parts with her
most valuable Treasure to a Man.

The Duke of Maine interrupted this Conversation, rising from his Seat and
singing these Words.

No Heart is proof against the Shafts of Love,
When darted from my Mariana's Eyes.
A very moving Style, I protest; (said the Duchess of Bourbon smiling) a Body
must be no less Amorous than the Duke of Maine to be inspired with those fine
Expressions. I fancy, he loves like the ancient Gods, especially like Vulcan,
the dear fond Husband of Venus. Faith, Madam, (replied the Duke) I should be
made to be one in the List of Vulean, who marches at the Head of Cuckolds.
Pshaw, (said the Duchess smiling) you would bear it patiently, since there are
thousands to keep you in Countenance.

The Duke of Maine fetched a Sigh, and looked sad at these Prophetical Words,
and to divert his Melancholy Thoughts, he went to walk alone in a solitary
Grove that was in the Garden. some few Moments after he returned to the
Company. The Ladies who saw him coming, went a little way to meet him, and
taking him by the Arm, every one asked him with a sort of impatient Eagerness,
Where have you been, Prince? Where have you been? The Duke made as if he did
not hear what they said, and having considered a while what he should answer,
he told them boldly, Ladies, we have, thank God, no Inquisition in France; and
I Will say no more -- This sharp Answer put the Ladies to the Blush, and netled
them so, that they went away mad and enraged.

Every one spent that Night pretty quietly except the Baroness Olida, who being
offended by a Prince that she could not hate; Alas! (said she) what Contempt
has been the Reward of my impertinent Curiosity? But, Oh! what a Passion do I
feel for him? Surely, he has Enchanted me, and his whole Person has a powerful
Ascendant over my Heart! This last Thought, as well as the Adventure of the Day
before, kept her awake all Night: Her Women who heard her speak, brought her a
Light, by which she wrote what follows:

A Letter from the Baroness Olida, to the Duke of Maine.
IT were but Justice, Ungrateful Prince, if you had as ill a Night as my self,
after your scornful Indifference Yesterday in the Afternoon. Your Highness
pretends an Esteem for my Person; and yet, perhaps, you never so much as think
of me. Alas! if you will take the Pains to merit my Heart, it will certainly be
yours; for I see my Capricious Stars will have it so. Yet do not mistake me: I
should be glad to join with you in a sound and agreeable Friendship, seasoned
with a thousand innocent and easy Pleasures; but as for Love, that is a
troublesome uneasy Passion, that I always have avoided; and therefore if your
Designs are bent that way, pray, withdraw your Forces, and look for a Heart
that can suffer more than mine. You and I are well at home, and so let us stay
where we are.


It was now pretty late, when one of the Baroness's Women came in to tell her,
that Madam Maintenon asked for her. Lord! (said the Baroness rising in haste,)
what Business can that old Bigot have here? Her Conversation sure will run upon
nothing else but Mortification and Meritorious Works. Ah, Madam! (cried Madam
Maintenon,) you are very sleepy; I must give you some Tea or Coffee to awaken
your Spirits, which is much better than the Poppies and Opium your Physician
prescribes you. Madam, (replied the Baroness,) there is no occasion for it; I
only slept to day later than ordinary. You look very pensive, (returned Madam
Maintenon) no doubt but somebody has entrusted you with a Business of
Consequence, that keeps your Thoughts thus employed. Not at all, Madam,
(answered the Baroness with a melancholy Air) when a body is in your Company,
one may very well be excused from troubling one's head with the State. These
Fatigues, Madam, (replied la Maintenon) ought to take up but little of our
time, whilst the Affairs of one's Heart are much more considerable. Your Lady
ship i^ very pressing (replied the Baroness, smiling) to require a sincere
Account of my most hidden Intentions. I own i^, Madam (answered la Maintenon)
but withal I know my self discreet, and believe I am capable of keeping a
Secret. Then, Madam, continued the Baroness) I have no Secret to disclose, and
consequently can have no occasion for a Confident* Therefore, pray Madam,
(continued she) let us discourse a little of your Affairs, and enquire how you
do to preserve your fair Camilla, whom I hear every body is catching at:
Certainly that wonderful Beauty must have more than one Admirer at Court. Most
certainly (replied la Maintenon, maliciously) that young Girl is every where
but too much beloved: Nay, it is said moreover, his Highness the Duke of Maine
is desperately smitten with her. At this the Baroness began to blush, and spoke
not a word after: Whereupon Madam Maintenon being curious, would needs know the
cause of her silence. To which the Baroness replied in a negligent manner, That
the matter was very indifferent to her; and therefore she should not give her
self the trouble to discourse farther about it. Madam Maintenon well knowing
the utmost secrets of her Heart, could not forbear smiling and teazing her
farther with her ill Nature, thus: Truly, Madam, our famous Camilla makes a
wondrous noise at Court. Cannot Mademoiselle de Nantes (cried the Baroness
interrupting her, being almost ready to burst with Jealousy) oppose this
aspiring Beauty? I know not that (replied Madam Maintenon,) but I believe she
has already got the Advantage to be pretty well assured of her Love^
beforehand. For my part (quoth the Baro^ess in a scornful Tone) I should take
but little pains to secure to my self such a ram^ling Spark as the Duke; he has
Mistresses i^ every corner: The Brown, Black, Fair, Bur^^, whatever they be,
all have Charms enough to engage him for a day or two; and longer you know he
never cares for loving any body. And what would you require more (replied la
Maintenon) from a Prince whose only Business is his Diversion? I would have him
(answered the Baroness) either resolve to be constant, or not pretend to love
at all. Where can you expect to find such Lovers nowadays? (answered la
Maintenon.) The Age we live in, Madam, is sickle throughout, and would you have
its Particulars more constant. If matters be as you say, Madam, (replied the
Baroness) for my part I shall wish to die a Maid: I am confident that is the
surest way to be easy. Very well, Madam, (continued la Maintenon) but pray of
what use is Reason, when one's Heart is once wounded? We grieve and groan, but
are never the better; for it often happens, that whatever is made use of to
oppose this Passion, does but augment, instead of diminishing our Torture.
Madam (replied the Baroness ready to laugh) when I was a Girl, I had an
extravagant Passion for a young Cousin of mine, who was too near of kin to
marry me: My Mother, observing our Familia^ity, forbid me to come near him; but
which had no better effect than to increase my Inclination to see or write to
him; insomuch that the poor Youth would often wish me a sharp Lecture, that he
forsooth might reap the Benefit of my Disobedience. It is a defect of human
Nature, Madam, (replied la Maintenon) to desire that most which we are
strictest kept from, as likewise to reject and slight what we enjoy and have in
our power. Whilst the Ladies were thus Moralizing each other, one of Madam
Maintenon's Pages came to acquaint her his Majesty required her Company
immediately, which occasioned her forthwith to withdraw.

The Baroness thus finding her self alone, reflected seriously upon all had
been said to her; and after having strictly examined into the Duke of Maine's
Conduct, she immediately broke out into immoderate Laughter, together with
these words: Such a Lover as this shall never put me to the expense of a Sigh;
where a Man can have a Passion in five or six places at once, we may well
suspect him of a Trick, and in whom for the most part a rambling Humor takes
place of common Constancy. Nevertheless, this faithless and unsettled Prince has
a thousand times sworn to me, that he was born to Love; and that wherever he
once six'd his Affection, he was but too strictly engaged ever to enjoy any
future Quiet. But (continued she) is there any likelihood of truth in his
Words, when we may observe him oftener change his Mistresses than his Clothes!
Nevertheless, if but a little Jealousy could any ways have an Influence over
his wandering Temper, or awake in him but the least remembrance of my Charms
which he formerly professed an Esteem for, I would then make use of such
occasion to obtain what I have always most ardently desired.

These amorous Thoughts employed the Baroness till Night, when knowing that the
Dauphin had prepared a magnificent Ball at Court, she hasted thither with all
imaginable Splendor, accompanied only with an old Aunt, who though she was above
sixty years of Age, yet nevertheless appeared that Night tricked up like a
young Girl. This Marchioness de Berge (for so was her Name) was one of those
Women that stretch out their Youth to the greatest extent: She was habited on
this occasion in Crimson Velvet, with an extravagant company of yellow
Top-knots flaunting upon her Head: Her Nose was exceeding large, Eyes little,
and Mouth wide even to her Ears; her Complexion generally sallow, tho'in many
places blear'd over with a better Color. This surprising old Coquette, who
retains still some taste of Gaiety, loves to be told that such an accomplished
Gallant languishes for her Deformity. But let us return to the Baroness Olida
her Companion, who fat next to her, to whom the Count de Tolouse made such hot
Love, that the Duke of Chartres thought himself immediately obliged to acquaint
the Duke of Maine therewith, telling him, his Fortress was assaulted; whereupon
the Duke observing with what inclination she endeavored to raise his
Jealousy, Replied, I Will leave 'em together, let my Brother make his advantage.
When turning hastily about; he instantly went and cast himself at the Feet of
Mademoiselle de Bou^bon, who that day glittered more like an Angel than Flesh
and Blood, and who by her becoming Negligence, ^clips'd all the laborious
Endeavors of the most exercised Ladies.

What a Torture must it needs be to the Baroness to see her self thus slighted!
Nevertheless all she could do at present was to go away, feigning her self
indisposed: But having once reached her Apartment, she fell into so profound an
Agony, that it was impossible for her speedily to determine what she intended
to do. Shall I go to bed (says she) when my Soul is so fired with an Affront
from a Prince I have always loved so dearly? -- But what do I mean to confide
in one whose Passion varies with the first Approaches of another of my Sex, and
whose Affection is as inconstant as his Indifference is cruel? No; could never
believe a Prince could be guilty o^ such vulgar Volubility. With these sad
Reflections the Baroness thought to repose; but we may rather imagine she had
the most cruel and persecuting Night that ever was undergone either by Despair
or Revenge. The next Morning she took a firm Resolution never to love for the
future but with Indifference. Ha! (cried she, raving both in Verse and Prose,)
be still my Sighs you have caused me but too much Grief already, and my Heart
is but too sensible of the Scorn and Contempt of its Conqueror.

To what end's this Impertinence,
Since my Ungrateful serves me thus?
Be dumb, my Sighs, no more commence
Your Reign both vain and tyrannous.
I believe, Madam, (observed one of her Cousins) you frequently exercise your
self with the Muses, and by the sprightlyness of your Genius, often augment the
Beauties of Parnassus. Apollo, that God of Light and Heat, must needs now and
then have presented you with a draught of his Helicon, or you could never have
been so harmoniously inspired. Alas! I know not what I do (Dear Cousin, replied
the afflicted Baroness) Happy must they needs be, that are out of this wicked
World, or who can avoid the Temptations of it. Why so (cried the Young Lady) is
there any thing more engaging than Human Society? You know not what you say,
Dearest, (replied the Baroness) but go fetch me my Headdress. How Charming you
are to day Madam (added the Young Lady, whilst she was dressing her) you must
needs make innumerable Conquests with such various Artillery. Alas (cried the
Baroness) thou art deceived; my Shafts have no force: My Heart is heavy, and
Mind afflicted, and therefore neither like to be Charms in my Eyes, nor Darts
in my Tongue. What pity it is (replied the Young Creature, sighing) that so fair
a Mouth should be without Action, and so bright Eyes without Fire. Mariana
(cried the Baroness) I think you will always continue a Buffoon. How can I help
it, Madam, (replied the other) when it is wholly the effect of my Nature? I
observe it, Dearest, (quoth the Baroness, having a mind to divert her self) But
prithee entertain me a little with a description of Love, though I am no
extraordinary Votary to his Divinity. Madam (replied Mariana, smiling) I
believe you are more than you will care to confess. However, my account is this:
Since Love was first created, he has all along made it his chief Business to
scatter his Shafts throughout the whole Universe; Scepters and Crowns have not
been free from his Power, nor are there any vital Creatures but what have felt
his Force. Nay, more, his Darts are chiefly levelled at the Innocent. Gods were
never insensible of his Fury, nor Angels of his Force. This is the most Noble
of all Passions. The Painters not being capable to express his Eyes lively
enough by Colors, have always been accustomed to paint him blind. But how then
could he perform such wonderful Conquests without Sight? Why that is easily
answered: For when Love has once a mind to seize upon any Heart, he always
makes use of some Fair Lady's Eyes to wound it; being (I suppose) persuaded,
that of all the Senses Seeing is the most charming. But to carry our Reasoning
farther, let us affirm that Blindness can never arrive at any great Knowledge,
the Eyes being but as Windows that let in the Light of Wisdom and Understanding
from thence. Moreover, it is commonly said, that Love is a Boy; yet all
nevertheless must allow him the greatest Conqueror and most Learned
Philosopher, since he not only triumphs over every Man, but also con^ounds the
most solid Reasoning and sublime Discourses. Besides all this, is there any
thing more charming and so conformable to Reason, as an innocent Passion? And
what Happiness could ever any Mortal enjoy, if Love were once banished from our
Globe? All other Pleasures are but his Attendants, and Life without him would
be no better than the extremest Torment.

How wonderful are thy Notions Mariana? (cried the Baroness,) Thou revivest
Flames in my Heart, that I once Thought extinguished. You abuse your self
Madam, (replied the Young Lady:) Love whilst you are Young; your Charms will
never last always. Thou say right Dearest, (answered the Baroness,) but I
would nevertheless Love like a Philosopher, that is, only what is present, and
that too but with Indifference. Ay, your Ladyship is a Wag, (replied Mariana;)
I thought before that your Tongue still dissembled the Sentiments of your
Heart. Away Fool, (cried the Baroness.) Adieu -- I must leave you. But why in
such haste Madam; (quoth the young Lady, stopping her,) whether are you going?
What makes you Sigh when you are so lovely? sure such an Accomplished Beauty
ought never to Languish. Yes Dearest, (replied the Baroness, looking back upon
her,) Love makes no distinctions 'twixt Fair and Ugly: A King may as well
Languish on his Throne, as a Shepherd in his Sheep-Cot, For --.

Whilst the Baroness was thus going on, the Abbot of Joli coeur entered and
interupted her; to whom, turning about, she thus Accosted her self. You come my
Lord Abbot (cried she,) in good time, Mariana was just entertaining me with
Trifles, that she says a Woman can never engage in without concern. How,
(replied the Abbot,) what says this lovely Charmer? Sure then she was
entertaining your Ladyship with Love. Yes the same, (quoth the Baroness) her
Tongue is Eternally running upon that Subject. She has Reason, (replied the
Abbot,) For it is the greatest comfort of our Lives. Hereupon the Baroness*
being sensibly affected with the Abbots Address, retired immediately into her
Closet, and threw her self upon an Angel*Bed* where the Abbot Sighing followed
her, and Approaching Trembling told her, with a Mournful Air, That he was but
too unhappy in being so Subject to a Woman's Eyes adding withal, that his
Misery was the greater, in that his Function permitted him to go no farther
than his Breviary. How (replied the Baroness smiling,) Your Breviary sure is no
Woman? That Is certain Madam, (answered the Abbot,) yet never theless, therein
Lent is strictly Commanded. But prithee my Lord, (cried the Lad^ interupting
and taking him by the Hand, Tell me if your Misfortune should procee^ so far as
to occasion a Woman of some Quality to Confess she Loved you; What would you do
I pray? Would you immediately hang your self in her Garters? Is it possibl^
Madam, (replied Joli-coeur,) that your Ladyship should be so unacquainted with
m^ sincerity? It is most certain I should Lo^^ her a Thousand times beyond my
fell Enough, (quoth the Baroness,) you shall be farther considered hereafter.

Joli coeur by this time being desperately smitten, instantly throws himself at
the Baronesses Feet, and after boldly Advanced to her Embraces, where what they
did I am not able to give any farther Account of. Let us now return to the Duke
of Maine, who troubled his Head but little with any Mistresses except the Fair
Camilla then under Tutelage of Madam Maintenon. This Prince saw his amiable
Object but seldom, which was the extremest occasion of his Grief, nevertheless
a Marriage being proposed for him with Mademoiselle de Bourbon, Daughter to the
Prince of Conde, the greater part of his amorous Ideas were soon effaced. This
Marriage being at length Consummated, his Highness for some time was
conformable to the Restrictions of Hymen. After which, the King perceiving that
one of his natural Daughters was still unmarryd, resolved to bestow her on the
Duke of Chartres his Nephew, and this by reason of a report made him by a
certain Lord, that the Duke was desperately in Love with Mademoiselle de Nantes
Sister to the Duke of Maine. Enough (quoth the King) I Will soon turn the Scales:
whereupon, one Day meeting this Prince with his Father the Duke of Orleans in
his Closet, he talked to him Roundly about the matter when his Father the Duke
briskly opposed his Complying, Persisting that for his part he would never
consent that his only Son should marry a Bastard. To whom then would you marry
him (replied the King) to some German Princess? I care not (quoth the Duke)
providing she be but Legitimate. Oh, you must pass by these trifling Obstacles
(quoth the King) and remember that she is the most Amiable as well as
Beautiful Princess in Europe. I do not pretend Sir (replied the Duke) to
dispute her Beauty with your Majesty, but her Birth only: Monsieur (continued
the King with some heat) oblige me to -- and let it Suffice, that He has no
ordinary kindness for my Daughter.

The Duke of Orleans, being one of the best Natured, and none of the Wisest
Princes in Europe, soon suffered himself to be ouer-perswaded by the King,
insomuch that that very Night the Contract was signed between 'em with out the
Dutchesse's Privity, who afterward coming to know it raved most Immoderately,
and expressed her Indignation in these Words. What (says she) have I prevented
my Daughter's Marrying the Duke of Maine, and must his Sister come in her
place? These are some of the Kings laudable Actions, who never yet had any
other consideration then his Will. Whilst the Duchess was thus To^menting her
self, the Marriage of her Son went on apace, and being atlength Finish*d, the
Duchess of Chartres would needs pay her Duty to her Mother-in-law the Duchess
of Orleans, Who received her but coldly, and told her moreover, with a great
deal of Contempt, that she could easily have dispenc with such a Visit; and
that so mean a Person as she must never think hereafter to nitrench upon her
Retirement. Very well might the Duchess be concerned at such a Compliment,
nevertheless, some Days after telling it to her Husband, he comforted her
extremely there upon and likewise endeavou'd to extenuate his Mothers Conduct.
But the Duke of Maine for his part, was to grievously affronted at the Duchess
's Haughty Carriage, as well in regard to himself as his Sister, that it was a
great while after, before he would be wrought upon to go to Court.

Although his Highness the Duke of Maine was now Married, he could yet never get
the Incomparable Camilla out of his Head. It was easy for him to have frequent
access to her, Madam Maintenon her Governess being the principal Confident of
his Amors. Moreover before, the King pich't upon her for his Mistress, this
Lady was likewise Governess to Mademoiselle de Tours and de Nantes, his
Highness's Sisters, as also to the Count of Tolouse his Brother; all which
reasons were more then sufficient to engage the Superior of St. Cir to his
side, who entertains in her Breast, even to this D^y, both his Pleasures and
Disgusts. It was necessary for a Prince, so Gallant and Misterious as his most
Serene Highness, to have a Consident, Discreet and Intriguing as the Sage
Maintenon. This Lady therefore perceiving how tenderly he Loved the Young
Camilla, and that it was impossible for her to disengage him, after having
endeavored by a great many Arguments to convince him of his Conjugal Tie, at
length resolved to afford him secretly the sight of this charming Creature.
Hereupon St. Cir was destined for the Rendevous where he afterward often
Surfeited upon inconceivable Delights. One Day, as he was at Dinner with his
Duchess, the Freak took him all of a sudden to go to St. Cir; whereupon this
Princess asked him seriously what Pleasure he could find in that place? Ah!
Madam (replied the Prince) the charms I there meet with are a ravishing
Innocence and a most intrancing Tranquillity, insomuch that I cannot forbear
approving the Situation of that House, which is much more fine and Singular
then those either of the Jnvalides, or Academies of Gentlemen; over and above
which, we may there like wise see a great number of fine young Ladies, whom the
King has placed under the conduct of a Person of eminent Virtue; so that this
noble Retreat may very well be termed an agreeable Amusement. But (replied the
Duchess having some reason to distrust from his Earnestness) Prince will you
Swear -- for I cannot but be a little Jealous to see you go so often to a place
where I know you have no business. Madam (answered the Duke) can you suspect me
of so base an Action? Loving you so tenderly as I do, (replied the Duchess) I
do not suspect, However cannot but -- Ah! Madam (cried out the Duke Embracing
her) can you then believe me capable of salsifying my Faith to you? Not
altogether, (replied the Duchess) but in part I must distrust you: and if you
should injure me, sure you would but imitate your Father Lewis the Great and
Illustrious, who never yet made any great Scruple of breaking his Marraige
Vows. I am not like my Father in that Madam, (answered the Prince coldly.) No
matter (cried the Duchess, leaving him) I must go and entertain a Lady just
come to Visit me: Prince you are at Liberty, you may act your Pleasure.

The Duke thus seeing his Duchess gone, made use of this Opportunity, and
immediately Posted away to St. Cir, where being arrived, he presently enquired
for the Lady Governess, and was soon conveyed to her Apartment, and from thence
by Madam Maintenon as speedily to Camilla's Chamber, who was then busy
Embroidering in Gold and Silver. He first Addressed himself to Madam Maintenon,
Observing her Conduct in Domestic Affairs, and telling her that if she had
lived in the time of the ancient Romans, she would certainly have had the
Education of all their Senators Daughters, and consequently received great
Honors and Advantages from that wise Commonwealth. Your Highness (replied the
Governess, with a Modest and Pious Air,) is always pleased to regale me with an
account of my Defects. Say rather your Virtues Madam, (answered the Duke
levelling at the same time a Passionate Ogle at his Mistress, who kept on
Working, without so much as once looking up,) My noble Prince, (replied the
sage Maintenon) to prevent ill is as great a Virtue as to Redress it, and in
that I shall endeavor to exercise my self, where I am not capable of greater
Archeivments; But I must beg you Highnesses Pardon for a Moment, the necessary
Affairs of the Family requiring my so doing.

The Duke of Maine finding himself thus alone with hi^ Loved Camilla, acosted
her after this manner. How happy, Dearest Creature, am I to meet so charming a
Person, in a place no less a Favorite of Nature. Afterward observing this
fair Ladies Cipher on the top of her Cabinet, (he cried out sighing) God! Is
there any thing more Engaging good and better Fancied? But (continued he) would
it not be much more agreeable if my Name were added to it. Sir, (replied
Camilla smiling) if your Highness's pleasure had been known before, we would
have seen what might have been done. Oh! Divinest Creature, (cried the Duke
throwing himself at her Feet,) you are but too good. Is it possible your Heart
should ever correspond with your Words? Upon this the fai^ Nymph blushed, and
Answered only with a Sigh. To what must I attribute this silence Madam,
(continued the Duke) Must I explain it in my Favor, or receive it for my Doom?
Do as you please Sir, (answered the bright Creature a little fearfully.) How
(replied the Duke all on Fire,) am I then so happy? Give me but thy dear Hand,
and I will confirm my Sincerity with my Lips. Then snatching it close to his
Mouth for about a quarter of an Hour; he afterward released it with this
Asseveration. When I neglect any thing to convince thee of my esteem, may I
never more de serve thy Encouragment, and therefore Dearest permit me but to
make use of this happy Opportunity, to inform thee of the Conquest thou have
gained over my Heart, and I shall then reach the very utmost heights of all
Happiness. Camilla being no great Talker, was easily silenced at this
Narration, and the Prince at the same time flattered himself with not being
altogether Repulsed. Do not wonder, Dearest of Cha^mers, (continued he striving
to Kiss her) if I ravish a blessing from those lovely Lips, for I am all on
Fire when I but see thee, and when I do not, the bare Memory of thee furnishes
me with but too severe Proofs of thy Absence. My Prince (replied the Nymph) All
Men in general have ever made it their business to deceive us poor Women; they
lead us into Snares and never care for coming near 'em themselves. Alas Madam
(replied the Duke sighing) In adoring so bright a Creature, I would willingly
run all hazards; it is what I have already begun, and which I will endeavor to
finish at the Expense of my Life. But Sir, (insinuated the Bright Camilla) all
this while your Highness forgets your Marriage Vow; I would fain know what
Advantage can any Woman expect from Doting on one who must reasonably be
supposed to be an others. Ah good God! (replied the Prince,) If I had had so
much Power over my destiny as to be altogether yours, I should have been truly
happy. But --. Quarrel not with your Lot Prince, (replied Camalla briskly,) You
might not have been so happy as you imagine. Why so lovely Charmer, (cried the
Duke with a Melancholy Air,) for pity's sake give me your Reason. My Lord,
(replied Camilla,) I am by no means endued with any of those Qualities you
expect; for I am Indifferent, Jealous, and often times in a very ill humor. No
matter Bright Angel, (answered the Duke) it may be some kind Planet may move in
my Favor, and one time or other make you more Reasonable. Your Highness is a
little too Vain in my Opinion, (cried the fair Camilla smiling) But which does
not altogether unbecome a Person of your Quality. Nevertheless, when you shall
be no longer locked up in Hymen's Fetters, (continued she pleasantly,) it may
be I may be better advised from my Heart. How endearing are these Expressions
Madam, (replied the Duke,) I can never be enough thankful for 'em. But Alas!
(added he with an Amorous Air,) these Blessings are but imaginary and I would
have 'em real. Camilla who read the Duke's Passion in his Eyes forbore speaking
for some time; at last said, my Prince, I must not wholly abandon you to your
tender Reflections; I observe you Uneasy, Melancholy, and as it were buried in
excess of Thought. What would you have me to say charming Creature (replied the
Duke, waking as it were out of a Trance,) you will not own you Love. Who told
you so, (replied Camilla ready to Laugh. Your self Fair Inhumane, (answered the
Duke looking languishing upon her) you take Pleasure in Murdering all that look
upon you, by which means you will shortly dispeople France, and expose us to
the insults of our Neighbors. This is to carry the Hyperbole too far my Lord,
(cried Camilla,) Are Men ever killed without Arms or Blows? Sure then they must
be like ^^ies that are caught Flying and Stifled with a squeeze. No lovely Fair
one, (replied the Duke,) the Wounds that Murder us proceed from your Eyes, and
it is impossible but that every Man that sees you should dye at your Feet. I
never knew a Gentleman yet die with Love, (answered Camilla pleasantly,) unless
it were in Paper where the Passions had been warmly represented by some Agony:
but for my part I am resolved never to favor any Languishing Flame; a little
Fire to relish Pleasure would be much more to my liking. That might well be
Madam, (replied the Duke,) if a Man were but Master of himself, when a true
Lover has no Spirit, Resolution, nor Gaiety, but is always Heavy, Timorous and
Drowzy, like an Owl at Noon day: moreover he is both a trouble to himself and
Friends, and a Plague to every body else; minding nothing but Woods and
Willows, to tell the Story of his Grief to. Then I find (cried Camilla a little
coldly,) Love-Martyrdom, now a days is more tolerable than heretofore, when
Pyramus and Thisbe willingly let out their Souls to enjoy each other in the
Shades. Thanks be to Heaven the World is mightily come off from those Frensies,
and we may now despair without danger either of a Dagger or a Halter. Times are
extremely mended indeed Madam, (answered the Duke,) the methods of Loving in
our Times (it must be Confessed) are much more agreeable; for now, if we cannot
soften an Heart by Sighs we endeavor only to do it by Tears and not by violent
Remedies. Camilla finding her self moved by the Dukes Conversation, which has
frequently approved it self dangerous to those he really Loved, could not
refuse him some little Liberties, which yet did not arrive at any great
Scandal. But alas! it was now time for Madam Maintenon to return; whereupon the
young Lady, being just ready to Shipwreck her Reputation, hearing her
Governesses Voice, hastily caught up her Fan to refresh her Countenance, which
you may imagine, had been sufficiently heatedin refusing what she most desired.
Madam Maintenon always being inclined to favor the Princes Amors, said not
one Word to her, nor seemed in the least to take notice of what had passed, but
as a kind Indulgent she-Friend, presently turned the Discourse another way. A
little while after she conducted his Highness to a Pleasant Grotto at the foot
of a small Hill, covered all over with Green Moss, and Planted with an infinite
number of sine Orange Trees; here she entertained him with the sight of a great
many pleasant Statutes, such as Jupiter and Venus, the Muses, Apollo, Diana in
her hunting Habit, and Love levelling a Dart at her: a little farther she
showed him several Heroes, amongst which was the Grand Louis, with Mars
supporting his Arm, and Victory presenting her Laurels. Here is the
Representation of a Man, (observed the Duke,) whose Memory will be as lasting
as his Actions are daring. It Is certain (replied the Governess) that his Noble
and Heroic Achievements shall out live Time, and future Ages will be
sufficiently employed, but to do Justice to his Merit: His Majesty has so
refined all the Pleasures of his Court by the Innocence of his own, and made
himself a most absolute Master of his Passions, even at a time when Vice is so
very difficult to Conquer. What Prince, what Hero (continued she) can be
equaled to our mighty Monarch! If he makes Laws he Obeys 'em, and Reforms
Libertines barely by his unblemished Piety: His Predecessors have busied
themselves only in building stately Structures, and raising vast Pyramids to
Vanity, when his chiefest Aim is to Model the World after his sublime example.
Cirus, Alexander, Caesar, and Augustus, have no body (I dare promise) here on
Earth will dispute the Succession to their Virtues, with Lewis the Great. All
the Kings Atchivement, Madam, (replied the Duke) are equally Illustrious and
Admirable, and which (I do not question) will fare better than those of
Antiquity, which are to be found only in History, when times to come shall not
only write but talk incessantly of his Glories.

The Duke of Maine perceiving the Night come on apace, immediately took leave
of the Superior of St. Cir, and hasted home to his Spouse, who all this while
attended him with great Impatience, and who at his first Entrance asked him
Sorrowfully where he had been so long from her? With my Mistress Child,
(replied the Duke merrily) I could not possibly get from her sooner. I have
known many a true Word spoke in Jest (answered the Duchess.) But pray what is
that Beauty which has so great an Influence over you? I know none charming
enough about Court, therefore sure it must needs be one of Madam Maintenon's
Serraglio. hereupon the Duke blushed and said nothing; which was sufficient
reason for the jealous Duchess to have but an ordinary opinion of his Conduct;
nevertheless, thinking it fruitless, she said no more to him at that time but
immediately went out. At Supper she had another Fling at him, but to as little
purpose as the former, for he had scarce heard three Words before he took a
Candle and went up to his Chamber, leaving his unhappy Consort, to drown her
griefs in Tears. Next Day his Highness went a Hunting with the Dauphin, and
after Dinner posted away afresh to his bright Camilla, who hearkened to 'him yet
more and more favorably. For a Week and above the Duke spoke not one Word to
his Duchess, his fullenness being upon this occasion without Parallel, where
upon she thought it but reasonable to complain to her Father the Prince of
Conde, who promised forthwith to acquaint the King; but she entreated him by
all means to forbear, giving him to understand that her Misfortunes then might
reach but too far, when they should rather bestifled and Suppressed, her
Husband being but Young, and therefore likely to see his Error in ashort time.
Madam, replied the Prince, you Reason like A she-Philosopher; but I would fain
know who is this Lady that presumes to entrench upon your Right. That Sir I
cannot satisty you in as yet (answered the Duchess) but I have reason to
suspect Madam Maintenon to be the Cause; she never yet wanted Fuel to feed a
Volatile Flame: She has under her Tuition where withal to occasion Jealousys
enough besides I could never fancy that foundation to be so very free from Vice
as is commonly imagined. O Heavens! (Exclaimed the Prince,) you certainly do
her a great deal of wrong: Can you think she would encourage Vice in a place
which is consecrated to Virtue! Ah Sir, (replied the Duchess) I am but too
well acquainted with her Genius; I know her to be a passionate Lover of
Intrigues, and that that Holy Habit she Wears, is but the better to disguise
her Hipocrisy; I dare assure your Highness he Women are not always busied about
the Litany. Moreover she is a great Confident of my Lords, having as it were
brought him up, and therefore though he was disposed to Intrigue elsewhere, it
might be reasonably Conjectured she would not give him leave. Madam, (answered
the Prince,) I can believe nothing of this kind, therefore endeavor to settle
your disturbances and resolve --. Ha! What Sir, will you not then believe it?
(replied the Duchess) a little time will clear all, and evince the Truth; and
grant Heaven I do not prove a Prophetess at my own costs.

The Prince of Conde thus having endeavored to calm his Daughters Afflictions,
left her no less indisposed; so that being willing to be farther satisfied, he
went to his Son's the Duke of Bourbon, of whom he demanded Smiling, if St. Cir
had any Beauties capable of charming a Prince? Yes in truth Sir, has it
(answered the Duke,) there are some even fit to engage a God, especially one
wonderfuly fair -- whom it is impossible to see without the most sensible
Regret, if not received, and for my own part, I never yet beheld any Woman so
worthy of a lasting Amor. How, (said the Prince rubbing his Forehead,) What do
you call her? What is her Name? Sir, (replied the Duke) it is Mademoiselle de
--. Oh! (quoth the Prince) I know her Family; is she then so handsome? Yes,
(replied the Duke) more Beautiful than an Angel, and no less charming than a
Cherubin. I have heard say, (answered the Prince cunningly,) that she is
engaged to a Young Duke about Court. True Sir, (replied the Duke of Bourbon
bluntly) it is to the Duke of Maine. How, (quoth the Prince dissembling,) you
amaze me; it cannot be he sure: the Duke of Maine who was so lately Married!
How can he think already of other Amors? I Will assure you I can give but little
Credit to this. It Is so reported Sir, (replied the Duke) I know no more;
Perhaps it may not be True. I believe it is not, (answered the Prince,)
nevertheless I Will go and make a visit to the Superior of St. Cir; Perhaps I
may see this Mademoiselle de -- whose Father I was so intimately acquainted
with, and who approved himself so true and Faithful a Friend to me upon many
Accounts.

The Prince of Conde, being arrived at St. Cir, enquired for Madam Maintenon,
who readily waited on him, and whom the Prince, after some discourse about
indifferent Matters, desired the Favor of to oblige him with the sight of a
young Lady he named to her, who was under her Tuition, and likewise Daughter to
one of his most intimate Friends. Madam Maintenon not being able to refuse his
Highnesses request, caused Camilla forthwith to appear before him; who soon
made good the Character the Duke of Bourbon had given of her, and which
Occasioned the Prince to Address himself to her after this manner; Madam,
(quoth he) Fame, the common Flatterer, has approved her self very much your
Enemy, for though she has published a surprising Account of your extraordinary
Qualities, yet by the sight of you, we find you a thousand times more
deserving. Camilla answered his Highnesses Compliments with so engaging an Air,
that even the Prince himself soon felt the force of her Charms; for some Days
afterward, he told the Duke of Bourbon that he could no longer admire at the
Duke of Maine's Passion for so beautiful a Creature. Alas! (added he with a
great deal of Concern,) if I my self were but to see her often, she would
infallibly force me under the like Miscarriage. I remember I have read somwhere
in the History of France, That one of our Kings fell so desperately in Love
with his Son's Mistress, that what he Condemned before in him, he afterward
approved of himself, and from his Father soon became his Rival. I should not
think it proper to let the Duchess know any thing of this, (quoth the Duke of
Bourbon) Alas! (replied the Prince,) she poor Woman knows but too much already;
her Husbands coldness easily convinces her of the Truth of it, and for my part,
I know not what Remedy to prescribe for her ease. Does your Highness believe
(quoth the D. of Bourbon) that Madam Maintenon will ever suffer matters to
exceed Modesty and good Manners? I cannot tell you that, (replied the Prince,)
but the Case is a little dangerous; however, be you sure for your part to keep
your Wife from the Knowledge of it, for fear she should out with all to the
Duchess of Maine, and in the mean time perhaps the Duke may weary himself out
with Sighing in vain at his Beauties Feet, who seemed to me not to be a little
Haughty; nevertheless so favorable a beginning of an Amor does not promise
any probable satisfaction to the Duchess my Daughter in a disappointment.
Notwithstanding it is her Resolution to dissemble her Sentiments to her
Husband, and perhaps that may work some good effect upon him; for we have often
known several Virtuous Women reform their Husbands Extravagancies barely by
their Patience and Ingenuity.

The Prince of Conde was Reasoning after this manner when the Duchess of Maine
came in, whereupon the Duchess of Bourbon was immediately sent for to
entertain her Highness at Play. Afterward several other great Persons coming
in, and a Magnificent Banquet being served up, they fell to Discourse at Table
of the several Passions that preside in the Heart of Man. Alas! (cried the
Duchess of Maine Mournfully) If Men did but follow the Morality of the Gospel,
there would not so many Vices reign among Christians; Wives would be faithful
to their Husbands, and Husbands to their Wives; Ingratitude would be banished
from the World, with all the other numerous Sins, that both Dishonor the
Church, and Injure ones Neighbor. Madam, (quoth the Prince of Conti smiling)
what your Highness has been pleased to urge is most true, but nevertheless,
oftentimes Custom and Conversation make us, what we should otherwise never have
been. This is very well, (answered the Duchess) let us then follow the
Morality of the Court, and Surfeit upon Politics and Pleasures: Is there not
likewise a kind of Morality in Gallantry, which provides that in Case we be not
faithless, we may be as wanton as we please? I agree with your Highness Madam,
(replied the Prince,) and if I were discoursing before Ladies of that
Character, I would take care of saying that their Affected Dresses, soft and
languishing Airs, fancied mien, and Coquettish Behavior were altogether
opposite to the Gospel likewise. Don't be so severe upon our Sex, my Lord,
(replied the Duchess) I humbly beseech you, for I could easily demonstrate Men
are more Conquettish and Inconstant in their Tempers than we, and this as they
are less capable of being otherwise: In a Word, They never oppose their
Inclinations, and it would be easier for them to live without Meat and Drink,
than to deny themselves the Rambling Pleasure of running after pretty Women.
This discourse of the Duchess made all the Company laugh, being Calculated on
purpose for her Husband, who was just then entering the Room, and which gave him
occasion to answer after this manner. Faith Madam, Love is but a slender Diet,
and there are but very few that can make a Meal upon their Mistress favors; it
regales our Minds and Bodies indeed, but nevertheless, it must be when we have
well Dined before.

This thought of the Dukes made every body Laugh likewise, and all thereupon
were of Opinion that there were false Moralls in the World, as also of
different kinds. don't ye know (continued the Duke) that those Thieves who do
not kill have one kind of Morality, and such Women as cannot Cuckold their
Husbands another: Both these pretend an Obligation to 'em, for not driving
things to Extremity, so that almost every body has a Morality according to his
own Fancy: I likewise am resolved to have one of my Choosing, and intend
Faithfully to obey the Dictates it Inspires. You have had one a good while, my
Lord (replied the Duchess) which has filled your Head top full of generous
Notions and -- Madam (quoth the Duke interrupting her being unwilling to enter
into particulars of his Conduct with his Wife) nothing confirms Friend*ship
more than a lasting Conversation, and it is therefore that when I was a Boy,
having an Extraordinary Kindness for the fair Cephisa, the amiable Object will
never be root'd out of my mind. What a malicious Creature art thou, Prince
(quoth the Duke of Bourbon clapping him on the Shoulder) to endeavor to make
my Sister believe thou could have a greater respect for any other than her,
who Loves thee so dearly. Prince (replied the Duke angrily) If I had but
thought I should ever have been a slave to a Woman I would never have been
Married; but, as it is, let my Wife Pursue her Inclinations, and I Will follow
mine-

He had no sooner spoke this but he instantly left the Company with out so much
as a Word more. Ah! (cried the Prince of Conde dissembling his Displeasure) see
here is a Prince rash and Violent, but who nevertheless, being Young, there is
some hopes of his reforming. All the company agreed with his Highness, and
afterward taking a Turn or two in the Garden, placed themselves in a green
Arbor, which might better be called a little Isle being surrounded by a small
Stream which fell thence into a green turfed Basin; causing an agreeable
Murmr, but which nevertheless did not interupt the Conversation a whit Every
body except the Duchess of Maine was affected with this pleasant Retirement,
but she Melancholy, and Heavy, soon returned to her Apartment. I must needs be
very unhappy (said she sighing to one of her Confidentes) to have a Person of
the Duke of Maine's humor to my Husband, who it is plain, will never fail to
follow the Footsteps of his Father Lewis the Great, and his Mother Madam
Montespan, who is the most Voluptuous and Libidinous Woman in the World; and if
I had but minded my Grandfather the deceased Prince of Conde, who had a most
distinguishing Head, and could foresee things at the greatest distance, I had
never consented to this Marriage, which is like to give me so much trouble and
Vexation. Madam (answered the Confident) a great deal of Care must be taken in
the Choice of what one Pitches upon, and likewise to know why we prefer one
thing to another, that we may be able to give an Account when required. If any
body blame your choice whose fault is it? Your illustrious Spouse perhaps
pleased you without knowing whether the esteem your professed for him, was well
grounded or not; we must know how to limit the bounds of our Passion, and
Admiration without suffering it to transport us beyond Reason. Thou say true
my dear Marchioness (replied the Duchess) I did not examine far enough into
the Duke's Temper before I suffered my self to be overcome by his Wit, Address,
and a certain foolish wanton Air, which we Women are not able to withstand: And
lastly into his false pretended Love, which nevertheless, he swore a Thousand
times to be sincere and without Ceasing. Ah Madam, (answered the Confident)
these are the ordinary means that render our well meaning bubbled by the
Treachery and Perjury of Men, who never fail to deceive us whenever it comes
into their Power. No doubt your Highness has showed but too much Fondness and
Kindness to my Lord Duke. There would have been less danger in giving some
Innocent Proofs of your Passion to a Lover, who for Family Reasons, could not
marry, than to show so much Love to a Husband: I have experienced what I assert
to my loss, and therefore I hope may be the better Credited.

I own Madam, (replied the Duchess,) that Marriage seems to me a Rock designed
to Ship wrack Humane Felicity; as likewise that it is my Opinion, Love ought
only to be a Sojourner with us during our Infancy, and that we would do well
only to marry Fools, or great Lords to keep up our Families; But to enter the
Matrimonial Noose with design either to meet with Happiness or Content, is an
extreme Folly. True Madam, (answered the Marchioness) All the Attendants of
Hymen are vain Hopes and tedious Disappointments; and that to be truly Happy in
this World, the best way were to turn Philosopher, that is to enjoy the
present, take no Care for the future, and to make Indifference and Quiet our
chief Favorites. These Lessons (replied the Duchess Mournfully) were
admirable, for those that could Practice 'em; but on the contrary, How many do
we Daily see in the World, who make a thousand Resolutions never to marry, Yet
by a fatal Lot, most opposite to their Intentions, Course the Bridal-God about
like Mad People, till by that Ignis fatuus they are led through Brakes and
Briers into the very Whirlpool of all Misery. Madam, (replied the Lady,) don't
your Highness know which is the best Path to follow in this Labyrinth; you
should never suffer your self to be Guided by Passion, but altogether by Reason
and Interest. But (answered the Duchess) What shall they then do that Love has
the greatest Power over? Constraint you know, is an inexpressible Torment. I
grant you that, (replied the Lady,) but where their Misfortune is so great as
to favor a Man before they have married him, he will not fail afterward to
believe that they can have the same kindness for any Body else: When we design
to take any Man to our Arms, we ought only to acquaint him with our esteem for
his Merit, and conceal the Love we have for his Person. Will a Man think you
Madam, (interposed the Count of Tolouse, walking up to 'em,) be content with
such Indifference? I have Overheard (continued he) part of your Conversation.
I cant tell that Sir, (replied the Lady Smiling) Men I grant you must be made
alittle much of, otherwise they will scon desert. Nevertheless (continued he) In
case of Husbands, it must needs be a grievous Misfortune to an honest Man, to
dote upon a Woman, whose slame is wholly Extinguished. But for my part, I
declare my self an utter Enemy to Marriage; and my reason is because the last
Mistress I had, played me false, when I afterward observing in her Eyes, that
she had a mind to come on again, I thanked her kindly for her Love, and sung
her the following Words.

Who er'e can calm his Passion was True:
An Heart that once could Love will always do.
This is to treat Love like a Soldier; (quoth the Duchess of Maine smiling)
and to let us know moreover, that your Passion never strays out of call of your
Reason; but yet there is some thing remaining in your Eyes, that persuades me
you still have more than ordinary kindness for your Mistress; And Im' of
opinion those verses the Duke of Chartres sent a Lady, who pretended she could
Love no longer; are very proper to be applied to your Case.

How easy is a Flame renewed,
Whose Snuff retains but too much Fire?
So is a Lovers Heart subdued
By the least Spark of a Desire.
I am of the same Opinion Madam, (replied the Count) and have some times
practiced accordingly; but as to this Lady, I have determined to persist in my
Resolutions, because she has often repeated the like Inconstancy. Love it must
be granted, Sir, (replied the Duchess,) whether True or False, is not very
easy to be withstood. Madam, (Interrupted her Friend, who had not yet offered
her Sentiments,) As I have said before, your Highness sees that it were best to
turn Philosopher, and Dote only upon the Arts and Sciences, for all other Love
is but a Torment. The Conversation run still upon this Subject, when the Duke
of Maine entered the Chamber, who after having taking due notice of the
Company, clapped himself down upon a Squab Couch, and fell to Reading a small
Novel, called The Jealous Wives. Certainly (quoth the Count of Tolouse, looking
over his Shoulder) this must be a very pretty Book: Nothing pleases me so much
as to see a Woman play her Part well that way. And on the contrary (replied the
Duke bluntly, striking his Hand upon the Table,) nothing to me is so a greater
Torment. The Duchess hereupon, cast down her Eyes and Answered not one Word;
and soon after entering her Chamber, fell to her former Agony, and shed
abundance of Tears, which the Duke yet took no care to wipe off. Good God!
(exclaimed the unhappy Princess,) How deaf is this Lord to my Griefs, and how
regardless of my Sighs! The Duke of Maine hearing her Lament, could no longer
forbear going to ask her with a great deal of Concern, what she ailed? Do you
then my Lord ask me that Question, (replied the Princess very sorrowfully) I
have but too too sufficient Reason; sure whilst I have learned that you Love me
no more, but have altogether bestowed your Heart on another. What a Fantastical
humor (quoth the Duke) have you Madam got in your head? your Sex are ever fond
of these sort of Fancies to disturb ye: I tell you Madam, if you will believe
me, I am still, and will always be yours, and though I may not continue the same
triffling Dalliance that attends Love in its Birth, I have nevertheless the
same kindness for you. Marriage and an entire Possession of what one Loves,
dispises this Foolish niceness. I am satisfied my dear Duke (cried the
Duchess, throwing her Arms about his Neck,) but notwithstanding you must give
me leave to fear you do not Love me only. It Is but your groundless Fancy Madam,
(quoth the Duke) as I told you before: Come rid your self of these unkind
Suspicions, which are little suiting with your Temper and Quality. Alas
(replied the Duchess sighing,) then I have been basely misinformed, for I have
been told Dearest, that you Love Mademoiselle de -- to Destruction, who it is
reported is the greatest Beauty of all Madam Maintenon's Serraglio. The World
then knows more than I my Dear, (answered the Duke) The Lady you speak of is
indeed wonderfully Handsome, but the Access to her Heart is no less difficult,
and besides if she were never so easy to Conquer a married Man as I am sure
would sigh at her Feet but with a very ill Grace. There are some Coquetts in
the World, (replied the Duchess) will give themselves the hearing of all a Man
can say to 'em for Diversions sake; but is it possible for any Woman to resist
you, who have the greatest Talent imaginable for such Addresses. The Duke
laughed heartily at his Dutchess's Compliment, and grasping her close to his
Bosom, told her, she was a little Impertinent Gipsy, and took Pleasure in
vexing him. But (continued he) be assured dearest, my Heart shall be altogether
thine, therefore if you would oblige me, let me hear no more of these
Distrusts, (adding moreover) Jealousy never becomes a Person of your Birth; I
know its cause is grounded on Love, but having no just Foundation, I hope
you will have regard for the future, both to my quiet and your own. But will you
then swear to be Constant Prince (quoth the Duchess) for -- must Persons only
be believed, on their Oaths in this Case, Madam, (replied the Duke) I thought
you had known me better than to distrust me. Ah Sir, (quoth the Duchess
sighing) but that part of a Man is always most Subject to vary, therefore --
whilst the Duchess was going on with her Reflections, a Servant of the Dukes
interupted her, bringing his Lord a Letter. The Duchess at this being a little
surpised, hastily caught it out of his Hand, but not being able to maintain
her Conquest, she was soon forced to let go her hold, and leave the Prince at
Liberty, who retiring into his Apartment, shut to the door; and read these
following Words, from an old Mistress of his, the Countess Bridget.

YOur Silence and Indifference (Prince) equally injure my Love, which is but
too much in extreme. How can you have the Heart to cause her so much Torment,
whom you have so often Sworn to Love all your Life long? The Hostages your
Highness sent as a Pledge of your Faith impatiently wait their Return. But
Alas! how long is your Promise in performing, which has so often Charmed me,
but with its Memory, and which at present, gives me the greatest Delight? Alas!
Why is so small a Favor refused me, after my frequent Protestations, that I
Love you more than ever, and in spite of your Inconstancy, that your Company
will be still dear to me. But Alas, to how little purpose is it to write to you
after this manner, since you have no more pity left for your poor unfortunate
Bridget. This is in the Mouth of every Body, which occasions me an
acknowledging Blush: Ah Cruel Remembrance of my Infamous Action to comply with
your Request Ages to come will Condemn my Ingratitude and Infidelity to my
Husband for your sake, whilst I am assured of no better recompense than the
Cruellest remorse of Conscience that ever was, though I must at the same time
own is is some times Alleviated by my Love; however, Ungrateful Prince, when I
think how you have rejected me as the very worst of Women, I cannot but
disdain the unworthy Usage, so unbecoming a Person of your Character;
nevertheles^ if you should ever think fit to be sorry for your past Omission;
It Is odds, but I could be so weak as to pardon you, and this to make good that
Maxim which says, That whoever but once Loved well, can never, by any means, be
brought to Hate.

The Countess Bridget.


The conclusion of this Letter pleased the Duke infinitely, insomuch that he
read it over several times before he could put it up. She Is in the right (quoth
he) they that have once bestowed their Hearts, can scarce ever afterward be
made to call 'em back. But your Misfortune (rejected Countess continued he) was
not to have charmed me to that Degree: Your Chains were easily broken, being
not over strong, and according to all Appearance you have abundantly more Love
for me, than ever it was possible for me to have for you. Thus his Highness
entertained himself some part of the Night, but as soon as Day peeped, he was
engaged to mount on Horseback, to go a Hunting with some Lords, to all whom he
showed the Countess 's Letter, after having torn off her Name. Are Ladies then
used to bestow their Favors so Prodigally (quoth the Duke of Bourbon laughing)
I know not who your Correspondent is, but nevertheless am sure her Style is
none of the least Passionate. Oh! It Is a Lovely Creature (replied the Duke of
Maine smi^ing) and any body else perhaps would be glad of what I refuse. Would
she think you my Lord -- (quoth the Duke of Bourbon) I have a Friend has
occasion for such a Female. There 's not a fitter for his purpose (replied the
Duke of Main) providing her Husband don't come to know it. Oh! (quoth the Duke
of Bourbon) I thought she had been some Virgin, who had had a mind to
Communicate her Maidenhead. ^oh, my F^iend will never care to have to do with a
Woman that has a Husband. I believe you may keep her to your self my Lord,
(continued he) it is plain she knows you or she would never have writ so kindly.
Yes (answered the Duke) I have some small knowledge of her, her Name, as I
remember, is Madam Freelove: I Will assure you she was no ordinary Charmer in her
first Husbands Days. It may be, (quoth the Count of Tolouse) she is now some
worn out Piece, who is weary with Traversing the Streets, and therefore would
get yo^ to put her off to my Brother for convenience. No, by my Faith (replied
the Duke of Maine) she is a very lovel^ Creature, Young, Blithe, Bonny, and --
one you would be glad of, with all you Heart. Having spoke these Words, he
immediately set Spurs to his Horse, and galop'd toward asolitary Wood, where
entering, he instantly leaped off his Saddl^ upon a green Bank, and sung these
Wor^

Whilst I am cutting and Slashing Abroad,
And courting deep Wounds from the fiery God
You cry your concerned for the Hazards I ru^
Yet when I return,
Oh, Oh, how! how little you Burn:
My Wounds you neglect, and my Love you do shu^
The rest of his companions did t^ like, every one complaining of the Cruel^ of
his Mistress, except the Duke of Chotres only, who affirmed that he never y^
found any Woman false; nor ever w^ in Love above sour and twenty Hours ^ all
his Life. How vain is this Spark? (r^ply'd the Duke of Maine, about to ral^
him) This does not at all my Lord, (quo^ he) suit with your Character; you
shou^ ever find fault with Women, nay though the were never so kind: It is Loves
Poli^ and who ever does not follow it; will never ^ucced well in his Amors.
Women Love Men that are discreet, and to whom, they ^an the safer confide their
Favors. also ^overs should not only be discreet, but like^ise Secret,
otherwise they might quickly Dethrone their little Emperor. O the ^rand
Love-Politician! (cried the Duke of ^hartres) He is a Prodigious Proficient in
^ese matters, and no doubt was never de^eiv'd but in Madam -- who could not
love him because --. Why these Aenigma's ^y Lord (replied the Duke of Maine)
you are very wanton methinks; and perhaps fancy you have some very easy body to
^ally with: But have a care Prince, you ^ay otherwise raise a sury that wont so
easily be laid. I care not a Fig, (quoth the Duke of Chartres) provided it be
from ^n Enemy, and particularly him I mean.

Whilst these two Young Princes were ^us Jarring the rest of the Company
pre^ail'd with them to return to Paris, where ^e Duke of Maine was no sooner
arrived, but ^e imediately posted away to St. Cir; and ^aving found out his
Charmer Camilla in ^e of the Grotts reading a Romance, he ^ccosted her after
this manner. What do ^on do here my Heavenly Hermit? (quoth ^e) can solitude
so well suit with thy ^vely Temper? I was reading Sir, (replied ^amilla rising
from her Place) of two of ^aesar's Wives, one whereof was Cornelia, whom he
valued so, as to make her funeral Oration himself, and the other one whom he
fancied a Coquette; and whom therefore he thought fit to banish, giving for
reason that were she so or not, when the rumor was once spread, aspot would
sooner appear upon his Cloth than an^ others, as also that a wife of Caesar's
must never be suspected though guiltless. What (quoth the Duke) could Caesar
part^ with his Wife without being well assured of her Crime? It may be she was
Inocent* It may be so too, (replied Camilla) but I find (continued she, with a
very engaging Air* that great Men of former Ages, have always had their
blindsides as well as ours o^ these. Do you doubt that, Madam, (replied the
Duke,) Men have ever been Me^ since their first Creation; would you have 'em
exceed their Model: Adam was no^ perfect you know after his Lapse. But sti^
(added he) these Illustrious Heroes of pa^ times, never loved so truly as I
do; the^ Passion was limited, when mine has n^ Bounds. Then yours in time will
be Giant Passion, (quoth the Lady smiling) you suffer it to proceed farther;
but have a care my Lord, it may else come to Scal^ the Skies, and receive the
like Fate wit^ its once Metamorphos'd Brethren; or el^ run wandering all over
the World, and wa^ it self to a Pigmy with its Fatigue. Yo^ Love after this
rate will be a Vagabon^ and Fugitive. Fie! my Lord, you must by ^ll means call
it Home, and confine it to a decent Standard. What do you rally after ^his
rate, Adorable Beauty, (quoth the Duke) the Person whose Torments you occasion?
fie! this is not Generous, (contin^'d he with one Knee upon the Ground) you may
well think one Day to answer for all these Homicides. Who I, (replied Camilla
briskly) I never yet was the occasion of any Man's Death. Ah! too Cruel, (added
the Duke,) you will infallibly soon be of mine; I feel your Eyes already sunk
^eep into my Heart. You abuse your self Prince, (replied Camilla merrily) I
have nothing wherewithal to Wound you. Ah good God! (continued he growing
Pale,) ^o not force me to explain my self farther: which Word he had sca^fe
uttered, before ^e fell flat in a Swoon at her Feet; who ^evertheless could no^
forbear smiling a^l the ^hile at his Amorous Enthusiasme. What, i^ it after
this rate Cruel and Pityless, (cried the Duke, coming a little to himself) that
you treat your sincerest Admirer! Can you s^e me dye thus Prostrate without
remorse? Ah! Cruelty without Parallel! Must I then e^pire without the least
hopes of Comfort? your coldness and indifference will not a ^hit abate my
Passion; that but increases ^o fiercely every Day, and I must, without your
Pity, infallibly Sacri^ice my Life, a ^iserable Spectacle, to your Incredulity.
O Heavens! (replied Camilla blushing and Sighing deeply) Embrace me Prince, and
do not reproach me of a Crime that perhaps, I am the farthest of any of my Sex,
from being guilty of; but you know Sir, a young Woman of my Condition must be
Cautious of --. She was going on with her high flown Cordial, to Cure her
Lovesick Duke, who all this while listened in most attentive manner to his kind
Physician, when Madam Maintenon came in all of a sudden and surpised 'em. Who
could have thought Camilla you had been here (quot^ the designing Governess)
the Company yo^ have had, is but too good for so Mean ^ place, though so
Ingenuous a Person as m^ Lord Duke perhaps may however find some Charms in it.
Madam, (answered the Duke, making her a very low Bow) yo^^ Ladyship is pleased
to Flatter me agreeably and the Praises which proceed from yo^^ Mouth are more
estimable then choiest J^wels. But those from our fair Camilla Mouth, (quoth
the Governess) I presum^ would be much mo^e acceptable to yo^^ Highness. The
Fair always add a grace (...) the Words they speak, especially in Love Eyes.
But I have not that good Fourt^^^ Madam, (replied the Duke) with this (...)
Lady: She looks upon me sure as one of (...) worst of Enemies, and treats me
with Indi^ference and Coldness accordingly. P^^haps that is but your Fancy my
Lo^^ (quoth Madam Maintenon, who had a great deal of good Will toward his
Highness,) Camilla sure is not so indifferent as you may imagine; for on the
contrary, I am well assured, she is more than ordinarily sensible of your
Highnesses Merit and good Qualities. Blessed Saints! (exclaimed the Duke) How
endearing are these Expressions! Is it then possible so Divine a Creature
should ever be capable of receiving Impressions of Love? Do you believe my
Lord, (replied this Lady) that the fair are any ways incapable of that Passion?
if you do, you are much deceived, for I can assure you they are oftentimes more
easily wrought upon than the Homely and Deformed Afford me but a Proof of this,
Dear Camilla: (replied the Duke in a wondrous Ecstasy,) your generous
Governess permits you to hearken to me, and I dare almost promise, Commands you
to do it. This I hope dearest will be some relief to your Fears and Modesty,
and for which I shall be eternally obliged to Madam Maintenon, who takes so
great notice of my Sufferings. Yes, (replied the Intriguing Governess,) I do
allow Camilla to Love your Highness, but that with a necessary restraint, for a
Young Lady may easily d^ive her Passion so far, that she can hardly return
without danger of Shipwreck. There is a certain Rock she may meet with in the
way, that has baffled many a good Pilot. And what is that Rock Madam, (quoth
the Duke) Perhaps striking there is the greatest Satisfaction, and sinking more
the Desire than unskilfulness of the Pilot. It may be so, (replied the
Governess) but --. Ah Madam, (continued the Prince) but how shall we do to cool
our selves of --. Your Passion, (quoth Madam Maintenon laughing) even Sigh
often, and Breath strong, and so refresh your selves. Ah but Madam, (replied
the Prince) would Sighing prevent -- your being blown up by your Passion? Yes
yes, I warrant, (replied the Lady, being unwilling to let his Highness explain
himse^^ any farther upon that Subject.) But Sir pray what News from Court? None
Madam that I know of, (replied the Duke) except that the Duchess of Portail
has lately fatted a Young Fellow to distill him in a Limbeck, to make yer young
again. Are you in earnest my Lord, (answer*d Madam Maintenon) Is that old
Dauber quite bereft of her Senses? Sure she well deserves the name of the fair
French Antiquity. 'Ti^ certain Madam, (replied the Duke) she works at it with
the extremest Diligence; she loses no time. Why this Action of her^ is
Abominable (quoth Madam Maintenon, she ought to be complained of to our
Reverend Fathers the Jesuits. Alas (continued she making a sign of the Cross,)
for so frail a thing as outward Appearance, that Women should be so Devilish
as to damn themselves! Well Madam, (added the Duke,) but she has a greater
folly than all this still, if you would give me leave to tell it, which is
this; A young Lady who lived formerly with her, but now with us, told me, that
in Summer time her Footmen were used to refresh her with a great Taffeta Fan as
large as a Mizzen Sail, and which she was wont to say, was the greatest Cooler
imaginable, no more for pities sake, (quoth the Governess, holding her sides
and ready to burst with laughing) I believe your Highness has invented these
two Stories on purpose to entertain your Mistress, but if they be true I am of
Opinion, many a Soberer Body goes every Day to Bedlam. Faith Madam, (replied
the Duke) the young Lady told 'em me very seriously for Truth, and I am apt to
believe they are so. This last whimsy (cried Camilla) is at this Day practiced
in the Indies, where perhaps this Lady has been in a Dream or a Frenzy. But no
more of this hideous Creature pray my Lord, (cried the Governess) I protest the
very thoughts of her makes me Sick. Why Madam, (quoth the Duke) your Ladyship
asked me News, and I thought none could be more Diverting. These are such
indeed (quoth the Governess) as ought to put either in the Gazette or the
Post-Boy. Pray let them then my Lord, (cried the fair Camilla Maliciously) such
Ridiculous Fancies ought to entertain the World at a cheap rate. Madam,
(replied the Duke,) her History would indeed furnish out an admirable Monthly
Account. I believe so too, (quoth Camilla) and I fancy moreover, that her
Company must needs be very diverting to her Friends if she has any, For --.

Camilla was proceeding in her Discourse, when News was brought, that her
little shock-dog was just dropped down dead of an Appoplexy. Impossible is it to
imagine, what stifling Grief this Fair young Lady imediately conceived upon
this relation; Nay, in the Dukes presence, who promised her one a thousand
times more beautiful. Alas! (exclaimed she Sighing deeply) Adonis, (so was her
Dog's name) was incomparable. Madam. (quoth the D.) I can easily Redress your
loss. Impossible, (cried Camilla sobbing) he was a Dog that excelled all of his
kind. But my Lord (added she) if your Highness has any thing like him, let me
beg him of you. I promise thee dearest of Charmers, (replied the Duke, catching
her Hand and Kissing it greedily) before Madam Maintenon, thou shall have one
as beautiful to the full. Hereupon the Duke immediately took leave of the
Ladies, designing to make a small Theft upon his Duchess without her Knowledge,
but which nevertheless was very difficult for him to do, she making frequent
Reviews of her little Dogs, many of which she loved equal with herself;
notwithstanding Polidor was in a short time obtained by a Stratagem; the
Duchess little fuspecting her Duke for a Shop-lifter. His Highness soon after
Dinner hasted away to his loved Camilla with his Prize, who, as ill Luck would
have it could not by any means fancy Polidor so charming as her Adonis.
Nevertheless, thinking her self Obliged to accept what his Highness had took so
much pains for, she began to dry up her Tears, and make some show of Comfort;
whereupon the Prince, believing he had absolutely restored her to her Gaiety,
took her up in his Arms and mounted her upon the Table, where he immediately
began to renew his Amorous Addresses. But Camilla, like other Beauties, being a
little incredulous, would give no great ear to his Courtship. Is it credible
(quoth she with a charming Air) that your Highness should have so great a
kindness for me as you profess? I am not ignorant that great Lords as well as
meaner Men, have very often been apt to disguise their Thoughts, the beter to
suceed in their Intentions. This you should not say Madam, (answered the Duke)
without being sure of it: But nevertheless you may be prudently confident that
I am none of that number. Granting it so my Lord, (replied Camilla,) you are
notwithstanding one of those who often die in Paper, without ever coming near
the Elysian Fields. Do you look upon us Men then Madam, (quoth the Duke) as
Robbers that seize whatever comes in our way. Yes Prince (answered Camilla
pleasantly) It is requisite only to be Man, and in Love, to commit any sort of
Robbery. I know a Friend of mine, (continued she) that whenever she is left
alone with her Lover, presently cries out Thieves! Thieves! being certain that
he comes to steal something. Alas! replied the Prince, it is only her Heart he has
a design upon, and that commonly is shut up too close to come easily at. I fancy
(quoth Camilla) the Mad Lover is a very uneasy part to Act; A Man methinks
looks but very Sheepish Dying at a Woman Feet, who oftentimes almost bursts her
self with Laughter at the comical Figure. Would you then most cruel! (replied
the Duke) ridicule a Person in such a condition? Of all Human miseries, none is
greater sure than that of rejected Love, which Inexpressible Torment, has only
its G^ief for its Comfort, and Despair for its Encouragement. Well, Heaven be
praised (quoth Camilla interrupting him) your Highness is not like to Die of
that distemper: What would be your Fate if --.My Fate Madam (replied the Duke
very disconsolately) would certainly be very Miserable if you could not Love
me. Me or another my Lord, (quoth Camilla rallying) I suppose 'twould be all
one where you Loved. No, Charming Innocence, (replied the Duke) I shall never
Love any like your self; and all Words are but too wanting to express my
sentiments of your Conquest: Yours I am entirely, you are my Sovereign; Sway my
Heart at pleasure, and Providing I can but find the Philosopher's Stone to
please you, I shall think my self more then ordinarily Happy. This
Philosopher's Stone, My Lord (quoth Camilla) is a Chimera, and in my Opinion,
the best way to find it were to cease looking after it. But this Precious
Stone, (quoth the Duke snatching her up in his Arms and Embracing her) this
precious Stone, every body Aims at, and would be Master of though at the greatest
Expense. For my part (added he) I would willingly give all I were worth in the
World, to have but a Right to call thee my own. My Lord (quoth she) you would
not think me worth your Charge, after you had had me a little while, for I am
but a Jilt, Whimsical, and of very ill Principles at best. The wors then for
you, fair Inconstancy: (replied the Duke) But if there be any means to Convert
you, Command Diamonds, Pearls, Gold, whatever you can fancy either in Dream or
Thought, and you shall have 'em incontinently and what would you more? Cannot
this Obtain me the favor to --.Stand off (replied Camilla with a haughty Tone,
repulsing him with some earnestness) can your Lordship think I will be guilty
of any such Baseness? No, all the Riches in the World, could never extort but
the least Compliance from me. To this the Duke replied very respectfully, and
was not a little disappointed, to meet with so surprising Qualities, and worthy
even of a Queen. After a little farther Trial he left her to her self,
retiring into a Neighboring Solitude where he intended to make a few
Reflections upon her Conduct.

Her Generosity (begins he) does not at all favor my design; these Women of
nice Honor are the worst in the World to deal with; Nevertheless (continued
his Highness) she was once kind to me, but Alas! How little did that happy
moment last; since her Virtue soon summoned her Modesty to her relief, and the
Passion she before professed for me, soon Vanished and Ceased.

Whilst the Duke was thus wandering through the Forest, he unexpectedly met his
old Friend the Marquess of Verrille, who likewise came thither upon the same
account. These two Lords were both in Love, but after a very different manner;
whereupon the Duke with Mournful Tone, began thus with the Marquess. I believe
my Lord (quoth he) one Wind blew us both hither to Expostulate with our
Discontents. O, (replied the Marquess) but I presume nevertheless, our case is
far different, for where Hymen forbids your Highness any strict Ingagment, Me
he baffles, though I am willing to list under his Standard. Ah! Dear
Fellow-Sufferer, (continued the Duke) whilst that I Love a certain Lady, who
makes me no reasonable Returns, be thou Judge of the Extremity of my Grief: my
Life is altogether Dependent upon her will, and her Absence moreover is my
Death. I must confess I am not able to guess at the Person you so Affect,
(replied the Marquess Smiling) but nevertheless I would advise your Highness
not to set your Heart too much upon her, since you are already so comfortably
disposed of. Ala's! it is not in my power to forbear; Dear Marquess, (answered
the Duke) my Passion is but too vehement to admit of any Opposition; and If you
knew this Lovely Creature as well as I do, you would willingly forego all other
Engagements to die at her Feet. The Marquess hereupon flung himself into the
Dukes Embraces, and begged of him to know who this Charming Beauty was: Which
secret, the good natured Prince, but too soon disclosed for ^is future quiet,
Being afterward sensible, how dangerous it is for a Man to commend his
Mistress, even before his Friend.

Camilla, by this time being vigorously attacked by the afforesaid Marquess,
who was the Wittiest and most Accomplished her utmost Wishes could expect, as
likewise of Noble Birth, soon yielded to his engaging Address. The Duke of
Maine therefore having some Reason to be Jealous, one day meeting him coming
from St. Cir, Accosted him (with a heavy Countenance) after this manner.
Marquess, you that so often have approved your self my Friend, are now no more
so, but a dangerous Rival, as likewise the most Cruel of all my Enemies. Ah my
Lord, (replied he catching him by the Hand) so far am I from being your
Highnesses Enemy, that I am unavoidably become my own, in not being able to
resist the Charms of that Beautiful Creature you Love: I have used all
endeavors to overcome my Weakness, but notwithstanding, find 'em all fruitless
and of none effect. Then you Love Camilla, (quoth the Duke angrily, and with
Contempt) But have a Care Marquess, otherwise you may be but too sensible of
your Treachery, For -- what will you then pretend to do Prince, (replied the
Marquess boldly) will you offer to oppose me? I Love this Beautiful Charmer
beyond any possibility of resistance. The same do I, (added the Duke with the
like furious Air) I Love her in spite of my Will to disingage my self, as
likewise without Hopes, as I wish you do; and this, give me leave to tell you,
Sir, -- (coming up to him.) Ah Cruel Friend, (continued he, putting his Hand to
his Sword) I fear this Casuist must at last be the Decider of our difference.
When you please my Lord, (replied the Marquess) I do not wear a Sword to any
better purpose than to Defend my self. Then I find (continued the Duke) from
the very best of Friends, we must become the greatest of Enemies, being Rivals;
But with all my Heart, since it is so determind. Here Marquess (quoth he) give
me your Sword, and take you mine; let us see in whose Favor Fortune will
declare herself. Which done, they began to fall to it Pell-mell, when having
exchanged several passes, by chance two Fathers, la Chaise and Bourdalou
happened to come by, who seeing two young Lords Attack each other so
vigorously, immediately interposed with their utmost diligence, to prevent any
farther mischief, and after Preached Peace to 'em, without knowing the least
occasion of their Quarrel. My Lord Duke of Maine soon Condescended to their
Mediation, being unwilling to make any farther Noise, for fear it might come to
his Dutchesses Ear; therefore suffered his Hand to be given to the Marquess, by
Father la Chaise, who all this while, knew nothing of the true Cause of their
Dispute. Thus being made seemingly Friends, the Reverend Fathers conducted 'em
to their Cloisters, with so much secrecy, that there was not the least Rumor
of it got Abroad.

Notwithstanding this Accommodation, the Duke could not but treasure up a great
deal of Malice for the Marquess, who likewise bore him no less Ill Will;
insomuch that when ever they were like to meet in the Streets, the one
endeavored to avoid the other with a great deal of earnestness. Camilla, you
may imagine, was very much puzzled to manage these two Lovers equally,
especially since she had so great a kindness for the Marquess. One Day as the
Marquess was pressing her to declare in his Favor, he said, Ah! fairest
Camilla, I can but too well perceive how much you prefer the Duke of Maine to
me; But -- He could not go on farther, because she suddenly interupted him,
asking seriously why he thought so? Why I think so? Madam, (answered he) why I
am convinced by the kind reception, I observe you always give him, even in my
Presence; No doubt you think him more deserving, for Reasons best known to your
self. It is my desire to make your Fortune, when I am confident the Duke
intends nothing but to ruin it. I understand you Sir, (replied Camilla
blushing) but however what would you have me to do; you see Madam Maintenon
forces me as it were to be Civil to him, he being her Favorite, and besides he
is assuredly a Person of that Merit, that must needs Command every Bodies
esteem. Ah! it is this your esteem Madam, (cried out the Marquess) that will
certainly be the cause of my Death. And moreover, how do I know but that you go
something farther? but however it is certain my Love will endure no Competitor.
Then you must needs have me to your self I find Sir, (replied Camilla laughing)
but nevertheless, this is a piece of Vanity, does not at all displease in a
true Lover to suffer no Partner. Then I find Dearest Camilla, (replied the
Marquess in a Love-Fit) you are pleased to agree with me in my Assertion; But
however, prithee tell me, thou Loveliest of thy Sex, can thou but have the
least kindness for me. Your Questions a little too rash in my Opinion Sir,
(quoth Camilla merrily) It is but a little while since I have first known you,
and would you have me Love already? No my Heart is not so easily wrought upon,
(continued she) and perhaps may never.

Whilst they were thus debating the Duke of Maine entered bluntly the Room;
where upon the Marquess immediately decamped, leaving the Field of Battle to
his Highness, who like an experienced General in Loves Wars, began instantly to
Muster all his Troops of Sighs, Complaints and Languishings, which he had
always about him, and which he immediately drew up at the Incomparable Camillas
Feet, where he began his Harangue thus. Will you never, cruellest of your Sex,
put and end to my Grief? I suffer more on your Account then the very damned in
Hell, (pardon the Simile for where a Person is Skrew'd up to my Pitch of
Jealousy, the very worst of terms suit his Condition best) and yet you will
have no Compassion. Yes (quoth Camilla) when my Heart can assure me, you have
gaind any considerable conquest, for these terms of Damned, Miserable, Wretched
and a Slave, savor more of a Romance than Reality. But Madam, (replied the
Duke) for the most part your Sex are not to be wrought upon unless a Man give
himself to the Devil for security. Good! you are pleased to rally I find My
Lord: (quoth Camilla,) But does your Highness seriouly believe that we Woman
don't know when we are truly beloved, when nothing is so easy to discover by a
Man's Actions? I cant tell that Incomparable Charmer, (replied the Duke, darting
her a favorable Look) But I know you have not yet been pleased to discover
mine. I am sure (continued he sighing) it is no small time since my Honor,
Liberty, and Heart have been in your Fetters, and yet you would never think fit
to take any notice of 'em. Have I had the possession of 'em so long then?
(answered Camilla Merrily) I thought they had a great while since been Banish'^
Paris, for Fugitives and Vagabonds. Pari^ has never had greater Possession of
m^ (replied the Duke) than now, and particularly St. Cir, were you now are, and
where you may likewise find my Grief, engraven in lasting Characters. Where
abouts pray my Lord? (quoth Camilla Laughing) for my part I can see no such
Hieroglyphics. Here on this very Spot, bright Angel, (replied the Duke) here
you may instantly see me buried, and this is what I would have carved on my
Tomb. Here Lies the most Unfortunate of Lovers, who expired at the Feet of the
Cruel, and -- sure my Lord there was never such an Epitaph as this before;
(added Camilla Interrupting him) and besides wrapped up in such Terms, and to
have these effects: Expired at the Feet of the Cruel, etc. Ha! Ha! (continued
she laughing) why, did your Lordship ever hear of any one that really died for
Love? Certainly if there were any such, he ought to be extremely prized, being
the only Phoenix of his kind that ever was: Why if this were so, another must
Consequently arise out of his Ashes; and to besure then e^^ry Woman would
immediately put in to be his Mistress. Faith Madam, (replied the Duke
pleasantly) he would then have enough to do to Content 'em. How did your
Ladyship say, All Women? Alas Poor Phoenix! he would be well employed sure to
hover his Wings over so many Beauties: For my part I should think one or two
sufficient to keep a Man considerably in play. Take then two for your share,
(replied Camilla smiling) and moreover choose her you like. How! may I take any
notice of your Words, Madam, (continued the Duke singing, as follows,)

Youthful Iris Swore to Love me;
But why did youthful Iris Swear?
Not that she meant e're to approve me,
But show how Fickle Women are.
And Men I dare assure your Highness, (replied Camilla) are yet more Fickle,
for they change with the Wind and Sail with the Tide. A Fever, Green sickness,
Smallpox, or some lesser Evil, makes them quit their Mist^esses Incontinently,
and if you but ask 'em the Reason of their so sudden alteration, they will tell
you, that if she could but have continued her Charms, they would never have
va^y'd their Love, so that we find Gentlemen, how extremely our Sex is ob^ig'd
to you, to forsake us at the very first Approach of a Misfortune: This m^kes me
of Opinion, that you are more in Love with your selves than us, and that we are
not a little unwise, when we have any thing to do with you. Why Madam, (^^ply'd
the Duke) i^ all Women were of your Mind, Love would be altogether idle, such a
cold and wild Const^tution would frighten him, and he would be forced to return
to Spain or Italy, from whence he came. Is Love then a Spaniard or Italian,
Sir, (quoth Camilla, feigning Ignorance.) Yes Madam, (replied the Prince) he
had his Birth, and is always best supplied in hot Countries.

But have a care (Exclaimed he) I am almost gone already. What a Dart have you
just now shot into my Heart! Your Imagination wounded you only, (replied
Camilla Laughing) And you may be termed Embevecido, that is, drunk with Love,
for your Highnesses Passion is wrought so very High, that I cannot fancy you any
ways in your Wits, and therefore, this Spanish Word may very properly be
applied to your Condition. Call me what you Please Madam, (replied the Duke)
and bestow upon me whatever Qualities you fancy; I shall never take it amiss,
providing you will have but the least kindness for me: Call me Jack, Tom, what
you think fit, or Snubbee, as our late Chancellor did his Mistress; it will be
all one, on the foregoing Conditions. These familiar Terms please infinitely in
Love. The King our August Monarch, would never permi^ his Mistress La Valiere,
to pay any distant Respect to him, nay he would have her always call him, my
Life, my Love, my Joy, and by other suchlike endearing Expressions: But
nevertheless, I cannot promise my self so great favor, and perhaps must
despair at last, of your ever Loving me as long as I live. Will you then
Despair so suddenly Prince? (replied she with a tender Air) Matters do not move
so much sure to your Disencouragement, and particularly -- what then (cried out
the Duke, transported) most Adorable Creature, will it thou then give me but the
least glimpse of farther Hopes? What welcome News to my Lovesick Soul! Permit me
a little to embrace thee, as an Acknowledgment of the Pleasure, I have
conceived upon this extraordinary Juncture. Camilla, who was naturally good
humored, could not refuse his Highness, some small favors, which yet did not
in the least entrench upon her Honor, but which, nevertheless a little grated
her Modesty, for though the Duke was extremely civil, yet she could not but
Blush often in his Arms, which might very well have enflamed his Highness to
some farther Attempt, had not the superior of St. Cir, sent one of her Ladies
to see what Camilla was doing.

This Sister Hyppolita reported to Madam Maintenon, that Camilla was engaged at
hawty tawty with the Duke of Maine, and moreover, that she observed her Clothes
were a little rumpled. How (quoth Madam Maintenon, in an angry Tone) will she
^hen suffer herself to be rumpled by that Prince? Does the Wind blow in that
Quarter! I Will soon teach her how to behave herself, and as speedily show His
Highness the way home. The Prince, believing Hyppolita would give no favorable
account of his Conduct, thought fit to endeavor to prevent her Malice, and
therefore met Madam Maintenon as she was coming toward 'em. Madam (quoth he) I
question not but you have been told wonderful Matters; but, I Will assure your
Ladyship, there is little or no Truth in 'em: I know very well Sister
Hyppolita's Malice, who loves to make more of a thing a Thousand times than it
is. She told me indeed Sir, answered the Governess smiling) that you had towz'd
Camilla about to some purpose: You must needs know of what Consequence, this
may be in my House, though at bottom, I don't think there can be any great harm in
such Waggerys, providing that -- you understand me. I do Madam, (replied the
Duke laughing) but I Will Assure you there has been no such thing intended here.
Your basely mistrusted however My Lord, (answered the Governess) for our good
Sister Hyppolita told me quite another story. It may be so, (quoth the Duke)
But can you think Madan (continued his Highness) that this good Sister would
not suffer herself to be rumpled sometimes as well as another? No certainly;
(replied Madam Maintenon) for the Nuns of St. Lewis renounce the Pleasures of
Love by their Vows. Good, (replied the Duke of Maine laughing) but don't your
Superiourship know the Flesh may sometimes contradict the Spirit? For my part I
cannot believe the Sisters of St. Lewis, are so very Insensible as you would
make 'em, and for example I have observed Sister Angel send her Eyes abroad a
Piqueering, through the Grates, more than once. That Is but your groundless fancy
my Lord, (quoth Madam Maintenon) she is the most devout of us all; that poor
Girl implores our Holy Patron Night and Day, to sortify her mind against Carnal
Thoughts, which might else interrupt her Devotion. The Duke of Maine was going
to reply, when the King came in, which made his Highness, soon think of an
Escape from his Majestys sight, who he knew, would presently ask him what he
did there, and if his Duchess at home was not sufficient company to entertain
him. Madam Maintenon being always a Friend to the Prince, immeditely caused
Camilla to Vanish likewise, and continued only with her Monarch herself. The
Duke returning home, was immediately asked coldly by his Wise, whence he came,
and where he had been. I have been walking Madam (replied he) in Vincennes
Grove where I met abundance of Company, this fair Day. Was your Mistress there
too Sir? (quoth the Duchess smiling) I have been to^d you were seen pretty
near her not long since. My Mistress! who is that I pray Madam, (replied the
Duke) for I find you know more of her than I do. Is it possible then you can
forget (contin'd the Duchess) her whom you are so often with, Mademoiselle de
--, of whose Charms you boast so inordinately; can she be so indifferent to you
as you pretend? No matter, (replied the Duke, with an angry tone, and
regardless mein) have I not told you I would have you trouble me no more upon
that Subject, and yet you presume? Pray meddle with your own Affairs and leave
me to mine; I don't pry into your duct, Do I? He had no sooner said these
Words, but he immediately flung out of the Room, leaving his most unhappy
Duchess in the greatest despair in the World.

This Princess passed her time, you may imagine, but very uneasily, and when
she was alone, she did nothing but weep and complain of her wretched Fate. Next
Day she went to wait on her Father the Prince of Conde, to whom she related
part of her Misfortune, but he advs'd her like a wise Prince, to make no great
noise about the Matter, and perhaps her Lord might be reclaimed. But
nevertheless, we see he is not like to be so, nor perhaps ever will for any
continuance.

At length the Duchess perceiving she could gain nothing upon her Husband by
Reproaching him for his Amors, gave him his full swing to do as he pleased,
whereupon his Highness became more and more indifferent for Camilla every Day;
which this fair Creature perceiving, immediately resolved to marry the Marquess
Verveille. My Lord Duke was so far from opposing it, that the Marquess being
his intimate Friend, he thought fit to join their Hands which was the Cause
even of Transport to his Duchess, who by these means thought her self
delivered from all future distrust. But alas! this Humor of the Dukes lasted
but very little; for seeing his Quondam Mistress about to be married to
another, he immediately found in her a Thousand times more Charms than before,
insomuch that his Love being but as it were suspended for a while, came on with
the greater force, and would certainly have overset his Brain, had not the
Marchioness granted what she so vigorously before refused. All this while his
Duchess was calm; nevertheless, some few Years after, she sufficiently
revenged her self by engaging in a strict league with the Count of -- with whom
she afterward spent many agreeable Moments, and at last became wholly
insensible of her Spouses Cruelty.

Thus have I revenged my wrongs, (said she one Day to her Consident.) The Duke
of Maine takes but little care of me, and at present I have as little regard to
him: Nevertheless, (added she moreover) he has merely forced me upon what I
would otherwise never have attempted. Do you Repent then Madam, (replied her
Friend?) No dearest, (answered the Duchess) for the Count is a thousand
degrees before him; and over and above that, he is more constant, his Tongue
likewise is better hung, and consequently more Charms to be found in his
Conversation. Ay, but Madam, (quoth the Confident) it is but a little while
since the Count has loved you; all Persons are agreeable at first, and perhaps
when he has worn your Chains longer, he may be as Rebellious as your Duke. Men
are disgusted by little and little, and we likewise often loose much of the
delight that Charmed us at first. Time will show that, (replied the Duchess)
but if ever any such thing should happen again sure I should Mortally hate that
Sex for ever after, nay, I believe should never care to come in their Company.
again, It is the fate of all Women Madam, (answered the Confident) that love in
a hot Country to --.You understand me. Very well (replied the Duchess
smiling.) And what was wanting in me (continued her Friend) to preserve the
Heart of that faithless Man your Highness knows of? Did not the treacherous
Villain soon forsake me after --?Ay, Villain indeed, (replied the Duchess) and
it may be my Spark will think to serve me the same trick; But if he does, I Will
Chain him so fast to the Oar, that perchance he may leave a Limb behind him
before he gets free. Oh Madam, (quoth the Confident) All Men in general are
Rebels, mere Ramblers, and it is most impossible to fix 'em. They continually
revolt and escape us often insensibly, and there is no way to make 'em constant,
but by a Power of varying our outsides continually, like a Camoelion, for one
face seldom long engages the same Heart. Well; (quoth the Duchess laughing)
But I have thought of a better way, without effecting Impossibilities, and
that, is by letting 'em feast upon our Eyes, without having any thing to do
with our Bodies. Nothing will Plague 'em more then this Abstinence, and we may
be beloved and adored as long as we please; we must allow 'em an easiy Access
to our Hearts, and that will make 'em go forward with the greater
Encouragement, and Shame to return without effecting their enterprise, will
undoubtedly keep 'em from going back.

These Ladies thus entertained each other, till a certain Visit interrupted
their Conversation. But let us return to the Duke of Maine, who by this time
perceived his Duchess with Child, and which occasioned him so much Joy, that
his Highness immediately quitted all his Amors, and kept altogether to his
own, who was overjoyed to perceive it, and with which, the King likewise was no
less satisfied, and it is hoped moreover that the Prince of Dombe now Born, may
be a means for the future, that they may live happily together. I could have
reckoned up many more Passages relating to this Princes Life and Conversation;
but for several Reasons, have thought sit to reserve 'em to another
Opportunity, when I promise to oblige the Public more at large: Till then,
Adieu.

FINIS.

