THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PASSIONS, According to the RULES OF Reason and Religion.
VIZ. Love, Hatred, Desire, Eschewing, Hope, Despair, Fear, Anger, Delight,
Sorrow, etc.


Sapiens uno minor est Jove. Horat. London, Printed for J. Knapton, at the
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

To the Right Honorable John Earl of Marleborough, Baron Churchill of Aymouth
and Sandridge, Governor to His Highness the Duke of Gloucester, and one of the
Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
A Soldier cannot lay the Endeavors of his Pen any where so properly, as at
your Lorships Feet. We have seen you in Flanders, as great as at Kensington:
You were the Delight of our own Troops, and the Terror of our Enemies, the
mighty Darling of Mars and Minerva. In Your Lordship alone, we found all those
fatal Contrarieties reconciled: The Captain was a Courtier, the Courtier a Man
of Honor, the Man of Honor preferred. But not to be tedious, where the most
that can be said will be too little; Your Lordship was all that Man could wish,
or Man could be.

The brightest Planet of the Creation has been Eclipsed; But Europe's Genius
alas could not long support your Retirement: For though his present Majesty, it is
true, could manage an Army without a Marlborough, yet there was another task
more difficult, and out of his Sphere too, I mean that glorious Employment Your
Lordship possesses at St. James's. The Education of so Great, so Young, so
Hopeful a Prince, adds not more to your Grandeur, than it subtracts from your
Tranquillity: For the Charge of so inestimable a Jewel, cannot but make Your
Lordship very solicitous. The Early dawning of his Infant Years, gave us all
assurances he would be something extraordinary: Every day shows us more and
more the collected Endowments of all his Royal Predecessors: And if the rest of
those who are about His Highness's Person, could come any thing near Your
Lordship in Care or Capacity, He cannot possibly be otherwise than as Wise as
Tiberius, as Victorious as Alexander, as Valiant as Julius, and as happy as
Augustus.

But I rob my Prince and the Public too by the length of this Dedication:
Wherefore my Lord, I humbly crave Pardon for the Liberty I have taken, so
publicly to profess my Self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient and most Entirely Devoted Servant, W.
AYLOFFE.

The Government of the Passions. The Introduction.
REason is that Emanation from the Divinity, which if it be not the sole end of
our being, yet is one difference between us and the rest of the Creation. Those
who first studied the improving it, were justly called Wise Men: for as they
excelled in knowledge and understanding, they seemed the better Copies of their
great Original. We may indeed form to our selves some Principles of Moral
Philosophy, because its Object is the Work of Man: But it was a bold attempt of
Reason, and somewhat more curious than cautious, more daring than advised, to
pry into the Eternal Wisdom of the Almighty. St. Austin's defining the World to
be a great Theater, where the Art of him that made it shone forth on all hands,
was more pious than exact. The greater effects of God's Wisdom and Power are
concealed from our Eyes, and utterly impossible for us to comprehend. Those
many wonderful Springs by which every part of this glorious Machine is moved,
are all behind the Scenes, and past our finding out, we see no more than the
Dial Plate of the Clock (as it were) and nothing at all of the movement. Matter
is we know not what; this Globe is suspended we know not how, and the whole
Universe is we know not where. Might not the World be rather thought a
wonderful Riddle of the Infinite Wisdom of God, to employ our admiration, but
punish, if not prevent our Curiosity. The causes of all things are so abstruse,
and our Capacities so shallow, that not only the Astronomers, but other Natural
Philosophers too may find all their Principles vain; and that Man is equally
ignorant of the Grass that grows in the Fields, and of the Sun that moves in
the Firmament, of a Fly, a Pismire, and his own Person. Every thing is so
uncertain in the Systems of Natural Philosophy, that our greatest prudence is
not to meddle with it at all, but humbly admire what whilst we are here below
we can never understand. Aristotle himself, that had the profoundest Capacity
of any Man, if he knows any thing at all now, sees a great many mistakes in his
Books of the Heavens, of Meteors, and the Soul, etc. For experience and the
benefit of new invented Instruments have taught us a great many absurdities in
his Works; and hereafter we may come to find that we are not far from being
altogether in the dark: For Man's Reason is not so universal, but that she is
limited in most Subjects. Pythagoras, though he learnt much Natural Philosophy
from the Egyptians, yet he was more curious of Morality; and found out a
method of improving that even whilst he investigated Nature. Socrates was a
great and good Man, and reduced it to Principles. Zeno affected a Gravity in
all the Air of his Philosophy; and that supercilious Sect, when they thought as
others did, could not be brought to omit the haughtiness of their style: In
other Points they sought by a captious Dialectick to conceal the defects in
their Doctrines to be Sophisters where they could not be solid, the better to
varnish the falsehoods of their Philosophy, they thought to out-vy the Modesty
and Patience of the Primitive Christians, but acting by a different Principle,
their Virtue was frequently overthrown, and in short, most of their Virtues
were but a Policy whereby they concealed their Ignorance and Vice, and imposed
upon the unthinking part of Mankind.

The whole Study of Philosophy is charming, and every part of that body has its
beauties as well as its benefits. Ethics I confess has the least luster, and
if its utility did not enhance its worth, Socrates had walked by himself, and
no body been in the Porch with Zeno. However. Epicurus would have been crowded,
for where Sensuality is the great Principle of a Sect of Philosophers, the
School will never be empty; if Paris be Judge, and fair Helen the Bribe, Venus
may be sure of the Cause. It Is true, our dispute is somewhat unequal, and the
Enemies we are to engage with in this Intestine Warfare, are not only powerful,
but dishonorable. St. Paul seemed to mention his Victory at Ephesus with
disdain, since he fought with Beasts, and what alas are all our Passions but
such? To triumph over Avarice is not a subject to boast of, since daily
experience informs us, it is its own punishment, and we are as anxious in
concerning, as we were in acquiring; nay, the horrors wherewith we apprehend a
loss, and the eager desires of gaining more, are two such tormentors, as make
the covetous Man suffer more than one Hell? What glory is it to be not
prodigal, since what is got by Rapines is squandred away by indiscretion? and
we foolishly lavish what we unjustly got. Is not the ambitious person a slave
to every one that can promote his Interest, and is he not advanced by so
unpardonable a servitude, that necessity it self can hardly render it
supportable to an ingenuous Temper. Morality has this signal advantage, that it
makes us good Men, good Masters, good Servants, and good Subjects: whereas
speculation spoils Men, it renders 'em morose in Conversation, and almost
useless to the Commonwealth. The Republic being a Man the poorer for every
such Philosopher.

Utterly to destroy our Passions were foolish to attempt, since impossible to
effect; alas, they are too fatally, and too firmly interwoven in our Nature,
and can have no other period but what is in common with our very Being. However
we must try to take from them the depravity they labor under by the Corruption
of Nature, and restore 'em to their Primitive condition in the state of
Innocence. In checking 'em alone we prevent most Vices, especially those whose
commencements being with delectation, we can hardly afterward resolve to
disengage our selves from. And indeed we are rarely, if ever, criminal, but
when our Passions rebel against Reason, and thereby make the flesh unhappily
triumph over the spirit, and the Man over the God.

The measures which the Philosophers took could never effect this great design,
they thought Nature and Reason were two sufficient guides, and without any
other assistance they could travel through this dangerous Veil of Misery, and bid
defiance to the infirmities of humanity. Their vanity gave 'em some courage,
and being not acquainted with the difficulty, they very readily attempted what
was infinitely out of their reach. It is more easy, alas, to know what is
good, than to do it. Universal Nature speaks through the mouth of Medea --
video meliora proboque deteriora sequor -- Neither the Philosophers Eloquence,
nor the merited Encomiums they give Virtue throughout their whole writings, can
put us in possession of it: our Malady is too inveterate to be awed by such
feeble Catharticks; and if Grace were not prescribed to help Nature, Virtue
would be impracticable. We have liberty enough to undo our selves by following
our own impulses; but are not able to advance one step toward our salvation;
that proceeding from Grace as the other does from Free will. If we may credit
St. Austin, the Best actions of the Heathens were criminal; being defective in
their principal motive. Not acting by Grace, they acted by Concupiscence, and
made their own selves the end of all their actions. Glory or pleasure being
what they ever aimed at. The Sages themselves, who knew a little more
Philosophy than the vulgar sort, yet were equally to seek with them in this
important affair; for though they give glorious Epithets to what they called
virtuous actions, yet all terminated in their own peace and tranquillity; some
Vices are painful, some are ignominious, and others there be which all Ages
have had in detestation: Now that any Man who had the least shadow of common
sense, should be guilty of all these, were a perfect Paralogism.

The Epicurians esteemed the summum bonum to consist in mere voluptuousness;
the rigid Stoic thought Virtue his happiness, but we Christians think Grace
our greatest, nay only felicity. The first made the Soul a Slave to sense, and
reduced their wise Man to the beatitude of a Beast. The second sort puffed up
the Mind with nothing but vain glory. Lucifer-like, the misery of their
condition did not make 'em modest, but they were as proud in their Chains, as
if they were still at the right hand of their Creator. The latter confess their
inabilities, and sensible of how little moment, Nature and Reason could be to
'em in this dangerous Conflict, they implore the assistance of Grace, and
pretend not to conquer but by the Powers of the Almighty. Reason, alas, is not
our only advantage; and if I may be allowed to say so much, it is not our most
essential distinction from the rest of the Creation. Adam was not made to be
only Rational, nor could he have been saved, if with his Reason he had not had
Justice. His advantage was our undoing, for he could save but himself, and
might damn us all. Nature and Grace being united in his Person, they could not
be separated but by sin. Thus our first Parent by disobedience lost Original
Justice, and revolted from the Empire of his lawful Sovereign, and in his Fall
threw his Posterity under the Tyranny and Power of the Devil.

The Government of the Passions. The First Part.
TO be subject to Passions is one of the indispensible Conditions of Humanity:
and no Man was ever so very moderate, as not sometimes to be shaken with their
fatal violence. That we are not all equally so, is more the blessing of our
Temper, than the result of our Judgment: so that our Moderation is not so much
a virtue as a felicity. No part of all Moral Philosophy has been so frequently
handled, as this: but in my humble opinion, they have most written with more
pomp than profit: showing their own Eloquence, without ever helping in the
least our misfortunes. Some of them have been extraordinary industrious in
declaring the Causes of all such irregular Motions; but have never subjoyned
the least Caution how we should govern them. These may justly be accused of
having informed us of our distemper, without prescribing any remedy. Others
more zealous, but less penetrating in the secrets of Nature, have confounded
the Passions with Vices, making no difference between the impulses of the
sensative Appetite, and the disorders of the Will: the necessary Consequences
of whose Argumentations, is, that we cannot be passionate unless we are
Criminal likewise. Some again would stifle the Passions; elevating Man to the
immediate condition of the Angels, without reflecting that he consists of
both Body and Soul, and that the Soul can never be here totally freed from the
malignant impressions of the matter in which she is so deeply engaged.

As the Stoics have always been remarked for the most haughty proud Sect of
all the Philosophers; so their Arrogance appears in nothing more palpable than
in the Wars they have so loudly proclaimed against the Passions. They think it
easier to destroy these Monsters, than to tame them: that at best they are but
so many diseases of the Soul. That the grand Miseries of Mankind consists in
this, that he owes his safety to his Ruins, and all his glory to his
wretchedness; in as much as he cannot be Courageous without being Choleric, or
prudent without fear. However, notwithstanding the florid gloss of all these
elaborate and adorned reasons, they could never produce a Philosopher according
to their definition, but in imagination alone. To elevate their Wise man they
degraded their Jupiter, yet the whole World has long since been sensible, that
whilst they endeavored to make a Divinity, they only consecrated an Idol.
'Twas indeed admirably well observed of St. Austin touching the insolence of
the Stoics, that they only differed from other Philosophers in an affected
Arrogance of terms; and that although their expressions were more haughty, yet
were their sentiments no sublimer than those of other Sects. In effect they
blame not so much the Passions, as their Excesses; and if they vainly boasted
some fond desire of smothering them, yet they never had any hopes of effecting
it.

It seems much less difficult to govern the Passions than the Senses: for Love
and Fear, are sooner brought to reason, than Hunger or Thirst: so that in as
much as we can command our Senses, we may by reason subject our Passions
likewise, and render our desires and fears, as virtuous as we make our fastings
and watchings religious acts.

Reason is the great propriety of Man; all other qualifications are but exotic
and adventitious; he loses them, without impoverishing himself, and provided
he be rational, he can always style himself Man. This must be the great source
of our felicity; and by managing the motions of the inferior part of the Soul,
we shall learn how all the Passions may serve to our advantage. Fear proves our
security, and Hope animates us to generous Enterprises, by so much the more
glorious as they seem to be environed with difficulties. In short, the Passions
are not so predominant, but that they may be subjugated by reason. Virtue would
want employ, if she had not Passions to vanquish, or at least to regulate.
Fortitude bridles in Fear; Modesty measures our Desires, Temperance represses
the violent instigations of Voluptuousness. Clemency moderates the efervescency
of Choler: and if it were not for this, Princes would neither be merciful nor
just.

If the Passions receive such great advantages from the assistance of Virtue,
after some training in her School, they repay her richly, and serve her as
faithfully. Fear is the greatest part of Prudence; and though some tax her with
anticipating Evils; yet she does not so much forestall dangers, to make them
more afflicting, but by considering them at a distance, she teaches us how we
may happily avoid them, or patiently undergo them. Boldness attends Valor, and
the most illustrious Conquerors owe their Laurels to the generosity of this
Passion. Choler supports Justice, animating Magistrates to the punishment of
Criminals: so that there is not any one Passion but what is subservient to
Virtue, when it is guided by reason, and those who have vented so much of their
malicious Eloquence in crying down the Passions, have only showed they were
ignorant both as to their use and merit.

We may define Passion then to be a motion of the sensitive Appetite,
occasioned by imagination of a real or an apparent good, or evil. In its birth
it has no other malignity than what it contracts from the Corruption of Humane
Nature. But when the understanding begins to be obfuscated with the fuliginous
Clouds of their Vapors, or else vanquished with the softer blandishments of
their solicitations, and so perverts the Will, then, and only then, their
motions turn rebellious, and who was but irregular before, is now become
entirely criminal: for as the impulses of the inferior part of the Soul are no
ways free of themselves, they cannot be vicious but when they are voluntary.

These Passions we shall endeavor to bring under the Government of Reason: and
by the assistance of Grace happily transmute them into so many Virtues. It Is
not enough here to know the Cause of our Malady, unless we are instructed in
the Cure too. For these are distempers which charm, and the Patient frequently
fears nothing more than recovery. We cannot destroy our Passions without making
a rupture in the Economy of our Nature; yet we may draw great Service from
them; more than barely as some fancied, by trying our Courage in repelling
their too rapid violence: or our constancy in supporting them patiently. I hope
to demonstrate that as Providence did work our Salvation out of our ruin, so
we may gather our tranquillity and happiness out of that very mighty disorder
which our Passions occasion in us.

Of the Number of our Passions.
SOme have made the Passions, as 'twere to flow from two different Springs,
which they term the Concupiscible and the Irascible Apetite: Supposing that
such contrary Motions could not be effected by one and the same Power, or part
of the Soul. Yet, with their leave, I should rather follow the Opinion of St.
Austin, not believing that a diversity of Sentiments presupposes a diversity of
Faculties too, since one Man frequently desires Things contrary in themselves;
yet he conserves the unity of his Person in the variety of his Desires. The
Holy Father had a severe Trial of this in his Conversion; his Soul was
distracted with differing Sentiments, and the good Saint wondered that having
but one Will, he should be capable of forming such very opposite Resolutions;
so that the Passions may possibly flow all from the same individual Source;
since the Soul is not either divided or multiplied by its various Faculties;
preserving the unity of its Essence, even in the multitude of its Operations.

The Philosophers themselves are divided in their Opinions concerning the
Number of the Passions; yet I cannot but side with St. Austin in this particular
likewise; and hold, that Love is the only Passion which agitates us: For as the
same vast Body of Water, generally termed the Sea, has distinct Names in every
respective Part of the World through which it passes; or as the Heaven's made a
different Divinity of each Attribute and Perfection of God; so the various
Effects of this one Passion has been the great occasion of Man's judging that
there were many of several Natures, supposing that it changed its Condition as
often as it changed its Conduct. Thus Reason confirms our Belief that there is
but one only Passion, and what others have thought to be such, were but only so
many Properties of this one. Desiring and Shunning, Hope and Fear are the
Motions of Love, by which it seeks what pleases, and flies what is disagreeable
to it. It Is but a very frivolous Objection to this Hyyothesis, That Love must
of Consequence transform it self into its Contrary, which is Hatred; for even
that very Motion of Love is reconcilable with Reason and Experience; since one
Cause produces contrary Effects; the Sun melts wax and hardens Clay; Justice
punishes Crimes and rewards Virtue; or if we may presume to fly a step higher,
God only hates sin, because he loves himself.

Whether there were any Passions in the State of Innocence.
IT IS so long a Tract of Time since Man lost his Innocence, that we at present
have but a faint Idea of what it was; nay, did not the Justice of God punish
the Crimes of the Father in the Person of the Son, peradventure we should
hardly regret the loss, as irreparable as it is. Every one discribes the State
of Innocence according to his own Imagination, yet doubtless as the Earth
brought forth no Thorns, so the Heavens had no malignant Influences; every
thing conspired to the Felicity of our first Parents, and the very Beast which
inhabited the Woods (for Deserts there were none) could not be called Savage,
the Viper was without Poison, and the Tiger without Treachery: Yet alas this is
all but Opinion too; and we are as far to seek concerning his Nature, as
concerning his Beatitude, it is but congruous to think that Adam, being created
Perfect, was subject to neither Malady in his Body, nor to any Disturbance in
his Mind: He was obliged to eat indeed to support Nature, but as Time would
have attenuated his Strength, so had the infinite Providence of God prescribed
him the Tree of Life to restore him to his pristine Vigor. Nothing could kill
him but Sin, so that he was not immortal by Nature, but yet by Grace he was so.
His Soul was questionless as happily stated as his Body, since he knew every
thing by the innate Faculties thereof. He had only good Inclinations, his
Affections were under Subjection, and though he was not insensible, yet nothing
could disturb him, his Passions were as natural to him, as ours are to us, but
with this happy Circumstance, that they were more obedient, and as the Economy
of his Natural System, made him capable of our Motions, so original Justice
prevented their Disorders.

Not but that we must grant some of the Passions to be inconsistent with the
State Adam was in; sadness and despair could not have Place in a Soul
completely happy, so that he was rather unmoved with them through want of a
Subject, than want of Capacity. In so great a Pitch of Beatitude as Adam
enjoyed, his Reason could not be thought to excite Passions, designed only for
the Wretched. Doubtless Adam was afraid of the Punishment annexed to his
Transgression, and hoped for the Reward in Case of Obedience. As he desired to
preserve the mighty Felicity of his Mate, 'twas but naturally Consequential to
apprehend an Alteration in it. As his Senses were a Part of his Body, so were
his Passions Part of his Soul, and they differed from ours, not in their
Nature, but in the absoluteness of their Subjection to his Will.

If there were any Passions in Jesus Christ, and wherein they differed from
ours.
IT would argue an extraordinary and unpardonable Ignorance in a Christian, not
to know that our Blessed Savior took upon him the Form of a Man, subject to
all the Infirmities thereof, Sin only excepted. He was constrained to support
his Life with Meat, and refreshed his wearied Body with sleep; he was punished
with the Winters cold, and was dropping with the Heat in Summer. The very
Elements which reverenced him as a God, had persecuted him as a Man, and he
felt the Pangs and Agonies of Death it self upon the Cross, which he had
delivered Lazarus from.

As Passions are the most natural Weaknesses of Humanity so he would not be
exempted from them that they might be a Testimony of his Love, and an
irrefragable Argument of the Verity of his Incarnation. He mingled his Tears,
with those of Mary Magdalen, and though he was going to remedy them by his
Power, yet he would first feel them by his Compassion, and by that Weakness
show he was a Man, before he would work a Miracle to show he was a God.

As he had a real Body, so he could not have Supposititious Passions, and as he
was actually a Man, so was his Affliction actual too. But whilst we would
magnify the Love of the Son of God to us, we must not substract from his
Grandeur; Passions he had, but not disorderly like ours; they were always
subject to his Will, and waited on his Reasons to accomplish his designs.

But alas! it is infinitely otherwise with frail Man; his Soul is in a continual
and violent agitation; one Passion gives way for another to create new
confusions, and amongst so many and so powerfully tyrannical Enemies, how is it
possible for him to enjoy any considerable rest? our desires are inordinate,
and most of our sorrows ridiculous: Our Anger transports us so far, that we are
as rigorous in punishing an ill word as a Murder. And if any one would
seriously compare our Passions with the Causes that excite them, they might
easily remark that it is scarce possible we should ever have any that were not
Criminal. Our Hatred exceeds the Injury which created it, our Hope is solid
where the thing hoped for is perishable. Our Savior his Anger was to revenge
the dishonor done to his Father, or else to chastise them, who by their
worldly negotiations profaned his Holy Temple. It Is a new obligation we have to
his Bounty, that he did not despise our Infirmities. What everlasting and
bitter reproaches may he justly make us, should we not have an ardent desire
for his Glory, who has showed so much for our Salvation: or should we not
combat against his Enemies, since he has utterly vanquished all ours. What,
shall we not shed a tear for his disgraces, who poured forth his Blood to
satisfy for our sins? Indeed he would have too great reason for to complain of
our Ingratitude. Should we not use all our Passions to specify our Love to
him, since he has employed all his to demonstrate his Love to us?

Of the disorderliness of Man's Passions.
THough there be many stupendous things in Man, worthy our consideration, and
which do loudly express the greatness of that Wisdom which created him, yet
there is nothing more extraordinary than his Constitution: both Heaven and
Earth are united in his Person, and he is at once both an Angel and a Beast. As
the Power of God was manifested in the union of these two Parts so highly
disagreeing in themselves; so his Wisdom was not less apparent in causing so
good a Correspondency between them; the Soul participated of all the
Contentment and Satisfaction of the Body, and the Body ministered to the
Purposes of the Soul without suffering a Violence toward its own Propensities.

This happy Intelligence between them lasted no longer than Adam's Obedience,
for he had no sooner fallen, but the Beasts did rebel against his Authority.
His Subjects became his most inveterate Enemies, to execute the Justice of his
offended Creator. The very Elements were at discord in his Body, and his Body
rose up against his Spirit; and this intestine War was by so much the more
easily kindled, as the preceding Peace was rather the Result of Grace than
Nature. Nor is there any prospect of any Enjoyment of Peace here on Earth;
since, as the Apostle tells us, the Flesh evermore is rebelling against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh.

From this mighty Disorder proceed all the Malignity of our Passions, and
though they are equally Daughters of the Soul and Body, yet these so unnatural
Children only serve to increase the Division between their Parents. Thus the
Spirit of Man can never be at rest; but is forced to nourish in his Bosom those
very Vipers, which he sees devouring him. This Disorder is the Penalty of our
Transgression; and the Frailty under which we groan, is not the Product of our
Nature, but the Chastisement of the Justice of God. For the Revolt of the Flesh
against the Spirit, is not a Condition of our Being, but a severe Punishment of
Sin.

Since Man then is Criminal, and his Reason which ought to regulate his now
disobedient Passions, is become obnubulated; he must of necessity have recourse
to Grace, and implore that from Mercy, which Justice has deprived him of. And
since he cannot hope for a Peace, so must at least labor to obtain a Victory.

Nature alone cannot regulate our Passions.
THere was some specious Pretext of Verity in the confounding all our Passions
with Vices; for in that State to which sin has reduced us, we have no Thoughts
but what are impure, and as our Nature is totally corrupted, so of Consequence
all our Inclinations are disorderly; for the Streams must necessarily be
troubled which flow from a foul Spring. 'Twas a generous Effort, I confess, of
the Philosophers, but vain withal, to attempt the making Man as moderate in the
State of Sin, as he was under original Justice. But we Christians have learned
other Documents from the sacred Scripture; we know that Grace must assist
Reason to repel the violent Emotions of our Passions; for of our selves we are
not capable of remedying their Irregularity, though we do not approve of it.

Nature in her self has not lost any thing of her original Excellency, though
examining her under the miserable servitude of sin, she has not the power of
exerting her self to so much good as formerly. She is not annihilated, though she
is become Criminal, and even under this Frailty there remains some Tincture of
her Ancient Condition. For, as St. Austin says, there is doubtless no question,
but we esteem the Being of Man, though we condemn his Sin: nor can we more
reasonably blame him, than in showing how he dishonours that by the fatal
Contagion of his Iniquity, which was so very honorable by its own Nature.

Even under sin Man has some good Inclinations, but wants the power to follow
them; he has good Purposes, but knows not how to effect them, and like Birds
caught in a Net, cannot use those very Wings they have, or recover that Liberty
they desire. Grace only can comfort us under our Misery, and give us strength
to resist Vice, practice Virtue, and regulate all the Inordinateness of our
Passions.

Of the necessity of Grace to govern the Passions.
THE Grace which Jesus Christ has purchased for us at the expense of his Blood,
is infinitely more precious than what we lost in Adam's Fall; its Advantages
are so gloriously great, that they exceed our very Desires. It not only
elevates us far above our Condition, and promises us a Felicity equal to that
of the Angels; but makes Christ our Head, and obliges God himself to
acknowledge us his Children, partakers of Glory with his own beloved Son: But
this only respects Futurity; for though we have already received the happy
Pledges of these most gracious Promises, and that this Grace lies in the bottom
of our Souls; yet alas! the Body is still wallowing in its Iniquity; and though
the Spirit be reinforced, yet the Flesh is still oppressed with its usual
Weaknesses, and groans under an intolerable Bondage, whilst its other Sister
tastes all the Sweets of Peace and Liberty.

Baptism does not totally take away Concupiscence; it only moderates it; and
though it strengthens the Soul, yet it leaves her still in a certain languid
Condition, which cannot be taken away perfectly till she comes into Glory. This
Weakness and Imbecility of her State is not a Sin; and though it prove the
exuberant Source of many, yet it does not render us culpable, but when we too
poorly submit to its Instigations. We consider not so much the Beginning as
the Cause of a Man's Anger: Nor do we weigh the deepness of his Sorrow, but the
Subject of it: Nor do we examine so much, if a Man be seized with any pannick
Apprehension or not, but wherefore he is so. If he be angry at a sinner, to
reclaim him; or if he is afflicted with the miserable, to comfort them; or if
by his fear he can prevent the ruin of one, who was precipitating himself into
danger. I cannot imagine any Judge would be so severe, as to condemn Passions
so useful; and he must forfeit his Pretensions to Rationality who would forbid
us such innocent Affections as those.

Of consequence then, the Excess only is blameable, and the Passions are no
longer Criminal, than they are immoderate. Concupiscence is born with us, and
grows in vigor and strength, as we do our selves; nor does it generally leave
us, but with the last gasp. However in an Affair so important to our Salvation,
it behooves us to be very circumspect, lest by our Negligence, we should add new
Forces to an Enemy, that is but too puissant of its self. Since we have entered
the List together, let us manfully attack it; and, if it be possible, by Art or
Industry, make that die before us, which came into the World with us. But the
Consummation of this great and happy Victory is not to be hoped for in our
Condition; and since Grace is not able to extinguish Concupiscence neither can
she utterly master our Passions.

Our Senses are chiefly the Causes of the Disorders of our Passions.
I Cannot but lament the sad Condition of the Soul, when I reflect what a
Prisoner she is to the Body; nor can I wonder, that she so very frequently
mistakes Errors for Truths, since her Intelligence is conveyed to her through
the Parts of the Senses. She can know nothing but by the Ears or the Eyes; and
their Information is generally so deceitful that Blindness were preferable to
their false Lights; and an utter Ignorance less insupportable than the fatal
dubious Knowledge they procure us.

Nature engaging the Soul in the Body renders her a Slave to all the Senses,
and thereby obliges her, in her most Noble and Considerable Operations, to take
Advice of those who are Stoneblind. From hence is it that the greatest Part of
our acquired Knowledge, is but a painful Composition of Errors; and even the
Truth it self is never unattended with some Lies. Our Opinions are uncertain,
and our Passions, which are generally guided by them, cannot but be irregular.

There is more Irregularity in the Passions of Man, than in those of Beasts.
MAn's Advantages are prejudicial to him; and Reason it self, when once she
becomes a Slave to the Senses, only serves to make our Affections so much the
more unreasonable, as they blindly believe themselves in the Right. The brute
Beasts only apprehend the Danger that is immediately falling down upon them.
And as they have no Knowledge of what is future, so do they hardly ever reflect
on what is past. But Man, born for his own Destruction, sollicitously looks out
for Danger, before it approaches, as though he was in haste to pluck down his
Misery; or to enlarge the vast Empire of Fortune he prevents her Malice, and
anticipates Evils, to which she had not as yet given birth. Our Fear is equally
busied with what is past, and what is still to come; and as we shiver at the
Remembrance of a Danger long since happened, so we tremble at a Disaster, not as
yet fallen upon us: Thus are we as wretched by what may happen to us as by what
does.

The Brutes are affected with but very few Objects; and abstracted from things
that are requisite to the mere support of their Lives, they look upon all other
things with an Indifferency that shames even the Philosophers. Neither
Necessity nor Reason can put Bounds to Man's Desire: Useful is not enough, he
must have Superfluity. And we may truly advance this short, but pathetick
Characteristick of Man, that he is as ingenious as assiduous in his own
Destruction; generally employing the Sagacity of his Wit, to make him either
more miserable, or more criminal. The Beasts are stupid, and their Complexion
being most of Earth, renders them insensible, thereby happily exempting them
from those numerous Evils which only wound us, because they first wounded our
Imagination.

The Life of Brutes is uniform in reference to its self; and Nature having
confined them to narrow Bounds, they have but a small Number of Passions; Fear
and Desire making all their Motions of the sensitive Soul.

But as Man is subject to Ten thousand Rencounters, all of differing Natures,
as of various Circumstances; his Passions rise up in Multitudes, and on what
side so ever he but turns, he meets with new Subjects of Fear or Anger, of
Pleasure or Pain. Which Consideration alone did give occasion to the Poets to
unite in the Person of every Man, the Malice of a Serpent, the Fury of the
Tiger, the Choler of the Lion, and the Lubricity of the Goat; demonstrating
from hence, that Man alone had as many Passions as all the Beasts together. And
indeed Man has not only more in Number, but they are much more impetuous in
their Irruptions. It Is not unworthy remarking, that the Brutes must be provoked
to Anger, the roaring Buffler is not furious till he is hard hunted; and it is
the Cry of the Hounds and Hollowing of the Huntsmen, that stirs up the dreadful
foaming Boar: Their Pain or Danger is no sooner over but they forget the
Injury; whereas Man, once the Glory of the Creation, cannot support a wrye Look;
and so far from pardoning Affronts, that he bequeaths 'em to his Posterity to
revenge after his Death, leaving them equally Heirs of his Indignation and
Malice, as of his Substance.

As there is nothing more difficult, so there is nothing more glorious than the
Government of the Passions.
LEst the glorious things of this World should be too common, Nature has wisely
made them to be difficult. The never fading Laurels of the happy Conquerors,
cost them a thousand and a thousand Toyls; they are purchased with their Blood,
and sometimes at the Expense of their Lives too. They must surmount Dangers,
and acquire this Felicity with innumerable Fatigues. But how glorious then must
the Victory be, which we gain over our selves? Capricious Fortune can be no
ways assistant to us here; and though she conducted Alexander through the whole
World, and brought him so triumphant Home; yet she could not prevent his
murdering Clytus, and by one rash Action tarnish all the Glory he had acquired
by so many and so incredible Victories. Our Passions are in a Sphere beyond the
reach of that fickle Goddess; and what enhances the Luster of our Conquest, is
that we fight against Part of our selves, and acting both as Commander and
Soldier, none can pretend a share in the Glory of our Victory. In most other
Combats we are egged on by a certain Point of Honor; nay, sometime Revenge
and Choler constitute the greatest part of our Bravery. Hope stimulates us on,
and the vainglorious Desire of vanquishing makes us exert our uttermost
Efforts to accomplish it. But alas! here our Forces are divided, and we engage
with but part of our Troops; and though Duty and Virtue may animate us to an
Attack, yet the tender Affection we bear our very Enemies makes us so much the
less resolute, apprehending an Advantage that must cost us all our Pleasures.
Though our Passions are irregular, yet are they part of us; and we cannot readily
resolve to tear out our Bowels, because they sometimes displease us. If Grace
does not assist us, our Self-Love will betray us, and we shall spare those
Rebels, because they are Relations.

The Nature of these Enemies makes the Conquest difficult, and an utter
Overthrow almost impossible; they may be worsted, but never so defeated, but
that upon the next occasion they are as insolent and as formidable as at first.
Their Being is so bound up with our own, that both must either die or live
together. Hydra-like these Monsters increase by their Ruin; or as Antheus,
gather new Vigor by being suppressed. They must be loaded with Irons, and used
like Gally-Slaves, to whom is left the Freedom of their Arms, only to row
withal; so since we cannot hope for a complete Victory over these stubborn
Enemies, or destroy them with our selves, we must bring them to Reason by
force, and make all their Motions subservient to Virtue and Prudence.

If the Greatness of the Difficulty frights us from undertaking the Conflict;
the Glory that accrues from it should push us forward, in as much as the Sun
shines on nothing more illustrious than a Man who commands his Passions. No
Diadem is sufficient for such a Hero's Brow, no Encomiums equal to his Merit,
and it must be Eternity alone, that can recompense so great a pitch of Virtue.
The Reality and Substance of such a Conquest must needs be inestimable, since
we adore even the very Appearances and Shadows of it. What makes us admire the
Sages of the World, but for having seemed, rather than in effect that they did
conquer their Passions? Cato surpasses Pompey, and Socrates the great
Alexander; their Victories caused no Bloodshed; made neither Widow nor
Fatherless: They swam not to their Laurels in a stream of Tears, nor did they
depopulate Cities to erect their Trophies. If they fought for their Liberty,
they made none miserable thereby, and without taking others Prisoners, they
freed themselves from an odious Tyrannical Bondage. How must it tarnish the
Luster of those Heroes Glory, who owing all their Grandeur to their Injustice,
have only been famous, in that they were extraordinary Criminal, and of whom
Histories would have made no mention, had they not burnt Towns, plundered
Cities, killed Men, and ruined whole Nations?

Those who only wage War with their Passions, enjoy a far more solid Pleasure
in the benefit of their Conquest, than the other Heroes do, whose satisfaction
is allayed; and the remorse of Blood and Death, Destruction and Misery abates
the Glorious Triumph. The Former we praise without Flattery, and admire them
without base Envy; we extol them above the Throne of the most Puisant Monarch
here, and when we have followed them through the Church, we ascribe them happy
Mansions in Heaven. Their Examples help us to complete the same great and
glorious Designs; we read their Lives with admiration; and learning from their
experience those innocent but sure Artifices, with which they prevented the
insurrection of so very troublesome Enemies, we facilitate the same happy
Victory to our selves.

Their chiefest Maxim upon which they depended, was never wholly to rely upon
their own strength; for Nature is depraved, our Resolution weak, and Temptation
strong as the Devil is subtle; so that nothing but Grace can secure us the
Conquest.

No Slavery is so miserable, as that of being overpowered by our Passions.
LIberty is so charming, and Servitude so insupportable; that without
exageration, we may say, if one is the greatest Bliss, the other is the
severest Misfortune Man can lie under. Nature seems to suggest to us the
sweetness of Freedom, when she prompts us to expose our very Lives, to secure
that, or prevent Slavery. Yet though this Evil be so anxious to bear,
notwithstanding the tyranny of our Passions is something beyond comparison with
it; and we must grant, that no Bondage upon Earth can be equal to that, where
these cruel Masters domineer. Others are but Slaves in the less worthy and
considerable part of Man, viz. his Body; their Soul is at liberty, though their
Limbs lie in Irons. But our unhappy deplorable Slave is fettered even in his
Soul, and has not the liberty of thinking as he pleases, but when he will be
Criminal. The violent impulses of his Passions dictate to him what he must
desire, and what he must dread; he loses that freedom, which the darkest
Dungeon, or the most ponderous Fetters cannot deprive the poorest meanest Slave
of, and which the most cruel blood-thirsty Tyrant cannot deny to his most
abominated Captive.

If our Masters are too austere, we can change them; and few Slaves but have
the benefit of a Ransom; yet wherever we go we drag our Shackles and Bolts with
us, and change not our condition, though we do our residence. The Fatal cause of
our Misery is within us, and we transport our Enemies, wherever we go our
selves: Nay, for a surcharge of our Wretchedness, we are so very strangely
bewitched with this Vassallage, that we have not only lost our Freedom, but we
have lost even the very desire too of regaining it. We are in love with our
Servitude, and kiss, nay hug the weighty Chain; and by an unheard of Blindness,
we are so fatally enchanted with our Captivity, that we dread and apprehend a
Deliverance. How miserable is that Man, and how deservedly is he so, who will
not be at the pains of one generous Resolution, one brisk vigorous Effort, to
free himself from so detestable a Prison, so ignominious a Thraldom as that of
his Passions?

He who is a Slave to any one Man, may in process of time, by submissive
comportment and faithful Service alleviate his Bondage: For he who has but one
only Master to please, cannot be extremely miserable, or long so. If it be
impossible to please two Masters, how is that Wretch stated, who has as many as
he has Passions, and is necessitated to obey them, even under their
contradictory Commands? No sooner one ceases, but another begins more despotick
than the precedent. For here every change is for the worse; new Passions being
always the most rapid and impetuous. Every Master is here a new Executioner,
and his Commands so many different Condemnations. See Alexander ruining Greece,
and then depopulating Asia; storming at Nature for the narrowness of her
Extent, and repining that he was necessitated to terminate his Victories, where
the Sun did its course: Reflect a little on Pompey, intoxicated with a vain
desire of Glory and Grandeur, and raising Civil Wars to satisfy his Ambition,
establishing his Authority at the expense of his own Countries Liberty. He runs
over the World to make an Enemy where he found none; and after all these
formidable Actions, he will not believe himself really great, though his
Countrymen call him so, unless Julius Caesar subscribes it too. These commanded
vast Armies, and were commanded by their Passions; being Martyrs to their
Ambition, and Slaves to all things that the World calls Great and Magnanimous.

If the servitude of Ambition be so very uneasy; what is that of Lubricity? He
that has once given up his thoughts to this flattering infamous Passion, has no
prospect of ever recovering his Liberty. No Man can be Master of himself, who
has once submitted his heart to the imperious Domination of Love. Cleopatra
governed Mark Anthony; and might boast indeed that she had revenged Egypt on
Italy; and subjugated the Roman Empire by enslaving him who commanded it. No
wretched Vassal ever labored more to insinuate himself in his Master's favor,
than this poor spirited Prince did to please his proud insulting Mistress. He
durst not Conquer at the Battle of Actium; but chose rather to desert the Army,
than renounce his Love. But what can we expect from one who has lost his Heart
with his Liberty, and was so far from fighting, that he could not live absent
from Cleopatra's Eyes? Histories will furnish us with Examples enough of these
Heroes, who have suffered greater and baser Slavery under their Passions, than
what their prosperous Arms had imposed upon the most barbarous Nations. Thus
Nature punished all their Homicides, making them suffer more in their own
proper Persons, than they were capable of inflicting on others.

To govern our Passions we must first moderate them.
THough the Passions are designed as Assistants or Servants to Virtue, and that
there is not one which may not be profitably employed; yet we must confess
there goes no small Skill and Artifice in effecting this. Indeed considering
our Condition through sin, they cannot be helpful to us, unless they are
moderated. That unfortunate Father who has made us Heirs of his Crime, did not
transmit to us our Being in that Purity, which he himself received it: Both
Soul and Body have their Punishment; and as they were both culpable, so they
both suffer. The Soul has its Errors and Blindnesses; our Inclinations are
inordinate, our Memory treacherous, our Senses deceitful, our Imagination but
frivolous, and our Understanding dark. The Body which was the fatal and
accursed Channel, through which Sin was conveyed to the Soul: That, I say, has
its appropriated Miseries; and though it was the least Guilty, yet it is the
most unfortunate. Every thing is there in Confusion and Disorder; the Senses
are all distracted by the Variety of Objects, and thus deluding our
Imagination, they occasion all the Disorders in the inferior Part of the Soul;
they excite our Passions, and like young Necromancers, raise more evil Spirits
than they are able to lay again. They are not now under that Command they were
in the blessed State of Original Justice; they are all turned Mutinous, and
their detested Rebellion is to be assuaged, rather by Art, than Force. They
rise with so much Rage and Impetuosity, that their very Natural Motions are
violent; like fine pampered Horses, full of Fire, but not of Force; or like the
horrid Ocean, generally tempestuous, and never very calm but precursorily to a
dreadful Storm.

To effect this great Work of Moderating our Passions, we must follow the
Methods of Nature and Art. Though she composes all Bodies of the four Elements,
yet she first tempers them according to their respective Qualities, so that
they may the better operate in the Production of that particular Body she
designs to form. Art has found out the secret of reconciling Black with White;
so that from these two Colors, Painters have composed all the rest. Lions have
been made to draw Triumphant Chariots; and as if they had forgot their Royalty
and Courage, have patiently suffered the lash from a Slave. Elephants have
carried Castles into Battle, and have been unconcerned, whilst ten Thousands of
Deaths flew momently about them: Thus Reason must imitate Nature, if she
designs to reap any Advantage from such furious Beasts as our Passions are.

Let us consider how many sad Troubles the rebelling of our Passions have
caused in us. It Is one act of Prudence to draw benefit from our Misfortunes,
and grow wise at our own expense; the most just Anger will fly out to an
excess, if we have not a great precaution; and what was innocent in its birth,
will grow criminal in its progress; and for want of mature deliberation,
thinking to punish a slight Injury, we commit a gross Enormity: Fear often
surprises us, and drives us into a real danger to avoid an imaginary one.

The second precaution is to oblige our Reason to keep a strict Guard over all
those Subjects, that may probably excite our Passions; watching their motions
will secure us from surprises. Dangers that are foreseen are not so astonishing
when they arrive. The cautious Pilot who sees a Storm gathering in the Sky, or
makes have into Harbor, or to avoid Ship-wreck puts out again to Sea, to be at
once out of danger of the Rocks or the Flats. It Is want of consideration only,
that makes us so very frequently prevented by the rising of our Passions; we
might avoid it if we would be at the pains to foresee it; so that in reality,
we owe all our great Overthrows to our neglect alone. For if our Reason foresaw
the dangers, as she easily may, 'twas no difficult matter so to prepare our
Senses, that our Passions should hardly disturb the tranquillity of our mind.

The third precaution is to study the nature of every respective Passion, which
will highly conduce to the moderating them; Some must be used with severity,
others must be flattered to be brought under reason, others again must be
deceived; and though Virtue is too generous in her self, yet she is obliged to
accommodate her self to our weaknesses, and employ cunning where force will
have no effect. Love is of this nature, and to bring it off from an unlawful
object, we must propose to it a legitimate one; and since we cannot banish it
from our Heart, we must by an innocent Cheat fix it upon a lawful object: Anger
is also of the same Constitution; to go to oppose it were to make it more
furious. Fear and Grief are of a contrary complexion; to yield to them, were to
increase their impetuosity; these must be forced down, and mal-treated to be
moderated.

Thus may we with care and industry, so find out the qualities of the Passions,
that we may daily oppose fit Remedies to them in their birth; and not let them
mount to such a prodigious height, as that they overtop our Reason and become
vicious; but keep them in such a subordination, as that they may be assistant
to Virtue in all her designs.

Reason alone is able to restrain the Passions.
THOUGH the notions of the sensitive Appetite seem so many Monsters and Tyrants,
yet we must be so just to confess, that as Art prepares Poisons, and makes them
so Medicinal, that some Maladies cannot be cured without: So Reason and Care may
bridle in our Passions, and of insolent Masters make serviceable and faithful
Slaves. And though Sin has made them irregular and disorderly, yet Reason can
always manage them, so as to draw both Benefit and Glory from their Service.
Considering them in their Infancy they are tractable, and may be easily curbed,
which made the Platonists call them Affections, as unwilling to give a Criminal
Appellation, to what as yet was not so. But if we stay too long, we shall find
their fatal strength increasing so fast, that we shall no longer be able to
restrain its impetuosity, and of simple Affections they turn guilty Passions.
Yet even under this Circumstance too, they may be managed; for their
irregularity proceeds from their abuse and error; and they could hardly be
impeached of a Crime, if they were not mistaken in their Object. Nature has not
lost so much by the Fall, but that she retains still, and ever must, that grand
Principle of loving what is good, and fearing what is prejudicial to her. Did
not our Senses make so many false reports to our Imagination, we should be
freed from many perils which we daily fall into. The Devil knowing we are not
as yet so depraved as to love Ill for its own sake, deludes our Senses with an
appearance of Good, under which he conceals the Evil he tempts us to; so that
we fatally love what we should abhor, and detest what we ought really to love:
This is the Artifice of the Devil alone; and our Passions are only criminal
because they are deceived; would we take away that unhappy Gloss which is put
upon things, and show them in genuine Colors, our Senses would not so blindly
incline to them, nor they give such powerful occasions to our Passions, of
raising such commotions in us. Open but their eyes and they will soon leave the
mere apparent good, to cleave to what is really so: For though our Passions have
lost considerably of their primitive Innocence, yet they have still good
Sentiments, and in most of their motions, there is much more of mistake than of
premeditated malice.

If we consider them in that effervency and extreme violence, when their fumes
begin to obfusque the understanding, there is no remedy but patience; we must
wait till the ebullition is over. Reason can do no good here; it is now too late
for any advice; waiting too long has brought all to a desperate State: We must
leave it to Time to assuage this Tempest; which when it shall happen, and by
the intermission of this raging Storm, Reason begins to have some force; then
must we by a severe Penance and unfeigned Sorrow, seek a redress of our so
turbulent Ills, from him alone who was offended thereby, and by humbling our
selves before God, grow rich by former Losses; thus learning Experience at our
own expense, we shall never permit our Passions to grow to that fatal height
again, as to offend God, or dethrone our Reason: Thus our very Misfortunes may
be made to tend to our Advantage; and Examples in other things show us, that a
Storm may drive us into the wished for Haven; and the same furious Billows that
cast away our Vessel may cast us afterward on shore. Not that a wise Man would
leap overboard, and trust his safety to the necessity of a Miracle: no more
should a prudent Christian permit his Passions to come this length, to reap the
benefit of Repentance for it, whereof he is not assured. We must not sin that
Grace may abound. In pursuit of these Truths, we may venture to advance on
more, which is this; that considering all things, our condition is not so
deplorable as some of us (peradventure) imagine, who impute the greatest share
of our Misdemeanors to the misery of our Nature. Our good Fortune is in our
own Hands; we sail upon an Ocean, whose Billows are absolutely at our disposal;
we can both avoid the danger of Rocks, and if there arise any Tempest, we can
immediately lay it; and what was instanced upon another Juncture, we may apply
here in honor to Reason, which is an Emanation from God himself; it is
something extraordinary since the Winds and the Seas of our Passions and
corrupt Nature obey it.

By what means we may moderate our Passions.
WE might here use the Policy of the Huntsman, who uses tame Beasts to catch
the Wild; and oppose Hope to Fear, that she might not despond; Joy to Sorrow
that it grow not excessive. However, there may seem some plausibleness in the
method, yet it is not safe: We may prove the reality of Ovid's Acteon, and
perish by those Hounds we used for our pleasure. We fortify one Passion to
repel the violence of another, which now having its force augmented, by our
indulgence, may rebel it self, and be more hard to repress than the other was.
It Is not safe to show them how to conquer. Though in common Policy the practice
may hold off making War toobta in a more advantageous Peace, or to use the
interest of reconciled Enemies to pacify those who still harass us with
Incursions and acts of Hostility; and to sow Discord between those Neighbors,
whose agreement and good intelligence might be prejudicial to us; yet in
Morality those Maxims have no Authority at all.

Reason, which is the grand Sovereign of all the Passions, must use her utmost
care and diligence, in watching over the first motions of our Passions, and by
taking away from them all those Objects, which serve only to promote their
Rebellion, keep them in order with so much the less difficulty. The Effects
must cease when the Cause does. The only great Remedy against these fatal
Intestine Commotions, is not to give them any occasion of revolting. It Is the
Pride of the World, the Grandeur of Court, the Glories of a Triumph, that
foment our Ambition; and by showing us these splendid Trophies of other Heroes,
make us uneasy till we have acquired the same empty Vanities for our selves
too. So Caesar wept at the reflection that he began to follow Arms at that Age
wherein Alexander had conquered the whole World. In the private retirement of a
Country Village, or a poor Farm, we see none of all these empty Toys, they are
utterly strangers to such things, and by not seeing any Image of them, their
Souls are never agitated with that raging Phrenzy that sacrifices every thing
to its own ends. Nor indeed can we expect it should spare any thing, since it
sacrifices its own tranquillity to the accomplishing its own desires. So is it
likewise with Sorrow; dim Lights, dark Chambers, every thing colored with
black, a profound slence through the whole Family, amazement and horror in
every Face, makes the impression so much the deeper. And indeed one would think
Man did not labor so much to bridle his Passion, as to indulge it. Take away
these lugubrious ornaments; let the person afflicted, but go abroad, and
converse with those who have no cause to weep, and the source of their Tears
will quickly dry up. Nature it self will be weary of always lamenting, and
peradventure no Sorrow would be so very intense as it is, did we not heighten it
by Circumstances. The same may be observed of all the other Passions which are
not so difficult to govern, but that we will not seriously set about it; but on
the contrary, by our fatal Artifices we render them more obstinate in their
Rebellion, and assist them in their Insurrections, as if we were desirous of
being miserable by them, or afraid of being victorious over them.

Our Passions are really in themselves so many Seeds of Virtue.
THE Knowledge of Man being generally but superficial only, we are taken with
the mere Appearances of things. And this was it which made the Dogma's of the
Stoics be received with so universal and so great an approbation: They
promised no less than to make Angels of their Sectators, and to place them in a
Condition beyond that of poor Mortality. Philosophy alone was to elevate them
above all the Storms and Thunders of our Passions, and by fixing them in a
higher Region of Serenity, free them from all those troublesome Disorders which
interrupt the happy Calm and Tranquillity of the Soul. But alas! these were
empty deluding promises, and all these proud Waves turned into mere Froth. Had
it been possible for them to have made good these haughty pretensions, they had
at once superseded all those Helps which Nature has given us to become
virtuous, and the inferior part of Man's Soul had been without any function:
For the Passions are but the mediate motions thereof, by whose means, without
being separated from its body, it is united to what it desires, or keeps at a
distance from those Objects it apprehends. Joy is the dilation of the Soul, and
Sorrow its contraction; Desires make us as it were advance, and Fear sollicits
us to retire. So that to abstract the Passions from the Soul, were to deprive
her of all her motions, and render her impuissant as well as useless, under the
notion of constituting her felicity. No reasonable Man would sure purchase his
Happiness at so exorbitant a price: For if Contentment consists in tasting
the good we possess, it must incontestably and naturally follow, that the
Passions are so many necessary motions of our Soul, and that Joy must
consummate the Bliss to which our Desires at first gave Life. The Passions
being so many Seeds of Virtue, that if we will be at the pains to cultivate and
improve them, they will produce extraordinary delicious and agreeable Fruit.

The Man is not born virtuous, and that the Art which renders him such, is as
difficult to acquire, as it is glorious to possess; yet it seems to be one power
of the Soul to have inherent in it the principles and fundaments of Truth; and
the Will also seems to be endowed with the Seeds of Virtue, which want more of
manuring than sowing. The Infancy of all our Passions represents them to us as
so many budding Virtues, and a little care will make them perfectly such. What
is Fear but a natural Prudence, prompting us to avoid a danger that threatens
us? Or what is Choler but a species of Justice, that arms us against our
Enemies, and by a legitimate fury repels force with force? What is Desire but a
separating us to unite us to what we think better, a sort of elevating us from
Earth to Heaven? Where is the mighty difference between Sorrow and Repentance,
but that one is the pure product of Nature, the other the effect of Grace? Both
of them be wail an evil; nay, sometimes they mingle their Tears to deplore the
same Iniquity. There is none of our Passions but may be made Virtues; for since
they incline to good, and abhor evil, there wants only Conduct and Management,
to make them change their Condition. A just Object of our Love will make all
the other Passions innocuous: And correspondent to the governing of that,
'twill produce Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, and Justice. Were it not then
barbarous even to endeavor the stifling those Passions which have so great an
affinity with Virtue? or were it not high Ingratitude, not to acknowledge those
mighty advantages we have received from Nature? or is it not Injustice to give
such infamous denominations to so innocent Subjects, who by our own prudent
Conduct, might be easily brought to merit a much less inglorious Character?

We will state it then as an indubitable Aphorism, That the Passions are seeds
of Virtue, and that their grand Employ is to fight under her Banners, and
revenge all her Quarrels. As the negligence of the Prince, is generally the
occasion of the Revolting of his Subjects; so it is the weakness of our Reason
only that gives birth to the disorders of our Passions; the Soul is more to
blame than the Body, and the Prince than the People. Does not our Fear hold an
advantageous intelligence with our Enemies? and by observing all their motions,
know how to give us such a faithful information, as may prevent our overthrow?
We owe indeed most of our Miseries to our having neglected her Advices. Does
not Hope embolden us, and give us Courage to undertake Enterprises as
difficult, as they are glorious? How weak and languid would our Virtues be,
(not to say imperfect) if they were abandoned by Passions? How often has the
fear of Ignominy
retained Soldiers from a shameful flight? and the bare apprehension of a
scandal alone has preserved Women in that Virtue and Pudicity, which
opportunity had almost triumphed over. Nature has made nothing in vain; and
since she has given us hopes and fears, let us employ them in propagating
Virtue, and expugnating Vice.

There is no Passion which may not be changed into a Virtue.
IN the preceding Discourse, having shown that the Passions are so many Seeds
of Virtue, from whence we may expect most happy, and advantageous productions;
we shall here go a step higher, and teach Christians the grand Secret of
changing them into absolute Virtues. This operation is difficult, but however
not impossible: And Nature will assist us with Instructions how to divest them
of all their savage and monstrous qualities.

This prudent Mother of all things does not use so much violence as industry,
when she sets about any notable Metamorphosis: She consults the respective
qualifications of each; she rarifies Air only into Fire, and consolidates the
Earth too from Minerals; and that Gold which we so much esteem, is the product
of a whole Age's industry.

Our Morals must imitate Nature, and consider and weigh the several Properties
of each Passion; that we may thereby the more easily change it into a Virtue,
which is no ways Heterogeneous. Prodigality draws nearer Liberality than
Avarice does; and a rash Man may sooner be brought to be Courageous, than one
who is a natural Coward. In like manner is it with our Passions; some have more
Reference to one particular Virtue than another, and the just Application
facilitates their Reduction. Take away that Panick Terror, which ordinarily
accompanies Fear, and it becomes Prudence. Hope, that by a happy Anticipation
enjoys that Bliss, which is as yet locked up in the Womb of Futurity, may be
converted into Assurance. Anger, which arms us to revenge Injuries, is not so
far from Justice, but they may be reconciled, since the Purport of both is to
punish Crimes. If we love only what is amiable, and hate what is really odious,
these are not so much Passions as Virtues; and merit rather to be applauded
than stigmatized.

Sorrow and Despair, Jealousy and Envy, I must confess have a terrible Aspect;
and seem rather so many Executioners of Divine Justice than Adjutants of
Virtue. But our Reason must pull off this frightful Masque, and make them
appear in less inglorious Forms. A moderated Envy becomes a virtuous Emulation;
and Jealousy, when not extreme, may assume the Character of Zeal; Sorrow has
so many Commendations in the very Holy Scriptures themselves, that plainly
show, that if she be not a Virtue, she is highly profitable to it. She it is
that raises us from Earth to Heaven, and by despising the deluding flattering
Blandishments of this Life, makes us long for those of Eternity. What can argue
more the Praise and Power of this Passion, than that it appeases even the Anger
and Indignation of the Almighty? and no sin was ever produced, before she
prepared the way. How can we conclude to the Disadvantage of a Passion, which
has more Instances to highten its Merit, than all the others put together? Even
our blessed Savior was seen to weep, but never known to smile. Despair has
nothing terrible, but its Name; for considering it Right, it is a prudent
Invention of Nature to cure some dangerous Maladies of the Mind. We make a
Virtue of Necessity, and out of our Misfortunes gather our Security. Despair
makes us easy, when Desire deceives us by its Promises; the one flatters us,
the other disabuses us: Despair, by giving a new Force to our Courage, has
sometimes gained Victories, for those who were vanquished just before; and the
utter Impossibility of retreating has occasioned an Overthrow to a conquering
Army. This Passion has such wonderful Efficacy, that the most brave and
circumspect Generals have always avoided the bringing their Enemies to this
fatal Necessity; and apprehended more the Ruins of an Army, with this Passion
alone, than when it was entire, and not as yet conquered. The Poet Lucan had
the same Sentiment of the wretched Remainders of the unfortunate proud Pompey's
Army.

-- Spes una salutis,
Haec fuit afflictis, nullam sperare salutem.
To conclude all with the Opinion of St. Austin: Christians make a good use of
their Passions, when they employ them to the Glory of Jesus Christ and the
Salvation of their own Souls. We have Reason to fear the just Judgments of God,
and the Miseries of Damnation: Our Desire is just when its Object is those
innumerable and infinite Pleasures which are at God's right hand for ever more.
That Grief is but innocent, which we feel for the Loss of our Liberty, by our
first Parent; and when we deplore those many Infirmities our Nature is at
present subject to, thereby eagerly panting after the Liberty of the Children
of Grace. It Is a holy Joy with which we expect the Felicities prepared for us,
and by a firm Hope, taste already the Promises of our great Master. Thus being
sorrowful for him, and rejoicing in good Works, we convert our Passions into so
many glorious and sanctified Virtues.

The Government of our Passions is the Business of Virtue.
THE Condition of Man is so very wretched by sin, that even his Advantages
themselves reproach him with his Misery: And his greatest Excellencies, show
him that he is Criminal. The nobler Habits, which embelish his Soul, have only
slavish Employs, being engaged in Combats not only difficult, but
dishonorable. For the most singular Virtues of Man have no other Occupation
than waging War with Vice. That very Prudence which is our Guide, shows us,
that we wander not only in Darkness, but in an Enemy's Country too. Temperance
points out to us the Disorder of our Constitution, and teaches us, that
Voluptuousness only flatters us to our own Ruin. Justice obliges us to
confess, that we are not absolute Masters of those Goods, we are actually in
Possession of; but that as they belong to another Proprietor, so we are but so
many Stewards.

Although the Virtues have many Employments here below, yet the most Necessary
is the governing the Passions. Nature seems to have given them a Being only to
tame these savage and terrible Monsters: Some by Cunning, others by Force; some
by Menaces, and others by Promises, using several Mediums to accomplish one and
the same Design. Prudence enters not into the List, but is rather Moderator or
Superintendant, giving all necessary Orders to suppress their Motion, even in
its Infancy, thereby to prevent Danger. Temperance indeed must struggle hard,
and that with Enemies, which are so much the more formidable as they are
agreeable; and is forced to maintain the Heat of the Action, against all those
Passions which flatter our Senses. Yet when she finds her Forces too few for
such powerful Adversaries, she calls in the Assistance of Penance and
Austerity, and by so severe Virtues, she triumphs at last over those dissolute
Enemies. Fortitude makes us bear up against all the Attacks of Sorrow. But as
the Number of Troops are never disadvantagious, provided they are well
disciplined; so the Aggregation of Virtues must needs facilitate our Victory,
if we dispose them right. If Temperance cannot regulate our immoderate Desires,
we must have recourse to Humility and Modesty; persuading us that the Glory of
the World is not due to us, if we are Criminal, nor worthy of us if we are
Innocent. When Sorrow proves too powerful and obstinate, we must call in the
Assistance of Hope, and take the sweetness of her Promises to animate us to a
Conquest. Thus Nature, fortified with the Succors of Grace makes Man Victorious
in all these so doubtful Combats: And Virtue regulating the Motions of his
Passions, he cannot but enjoy a Tranquillity of Mind, not much inferior to what
our wretched Father by his Transgression deprived us of.

The End of the First Part.
Of Passions in Particular. The Second Part.
Of LOVE.
LOve has this Property of the Divinity, that we all know that it is, but none
know what it is. The Philosophers gave it several Names, all Infamous, not
knowing how to grant a good One to a Passion so disorderly; and as the Poets
made him a God, so the Platonists thought him a Demon. Aristotle himself, who
defined the Soul, would not undertake to do the same by this Passion, leaving
Posterity to despair of ever arriving to the Knowledge of a thing whereof he
was Ignorant.

But in pursuit of our former Hypothesis, we shall still respect Love as the
only Passion; his different Motions being but so many Attributes, which have
occasioned some to think they were other Passions. In his Infancy indeed he
bears the most glorious Title; for the first inclination which is formed in the
Heart, when a charming Object sweetly imposes upon our Will, is termed Love;
when we sally as it were out of our selves, to be united to that Object, it is
called Desire; when he is grown more vigorous, and promises himself success,
it is Hope; when he is animated against those difficulties which oppose his
satisfaction, it is Choler; but in every one of these States it is Love too. His
first Condition is the Rule of all the rest; for as he is more or less violent
in his birth, or to speak more properly, under that circumstance, wherein he
still retains the softer appellation of Love, so are the other degrees of his
motion more or less rapid; like the Heart, he distributes life and heat to all
the depending Members; and he commands with so despotick an Authority, that
nothing on Earth can parallel it. He makes Monarchs neglect their States, and
Generals forget the nicety of Punctilio's of Honor. Emperors have been
disobeyed, but Love never; and as the Moon is the occasion of the ebbing and
flowing of Rivers, so this powerful tender Passion Love, causes all the
tranquillity and distraction in our Soul.

Of the good use of Love.
WE must not so much consider the natural perfections of things, as the good
use which may be made of them. Gold is but condensed Clay, though the covetous
Man's God: Yet when it is employed to relieve the Needy, to redeem the
Bond-Slave, to Cloth the Naked, and succor the Orphans; who could disapprove
of it? though when it serves only to corrupt Judgges, pervert Justice, debauch
Women, and oppress the Innocent, there is no Body but must.

Love is the most holy of all our Passions, and the greatest Favor Nature has
conferred upon us. It Is as much a Duty as it is a Delight; it is an abbreviation
of Humane Felicity; in a word, it is what the Divine Eloquence has thought fit
to term the Law and the Prophets. By this innocent Artifice, we change
Condition without changing of Nature, and transform our selves into the things
we love; it makes even toils and hardships agreeable; and finds a pleasure in
attempting Difficulties, which it cannot surmount: it is the most unallay'd and
real satisfaction Man enjoys here below, and a shadow of that supreme Felicity
which the happy Angels taste above. But Morality must prescribe us Rules by
which we must govern it: For an absolute freedom may not be indulged to a
Passion, which is by so much the more dangerous, as it is charming and agreeable.

There are three Objects of our Love; God, Man, and irrational Creatures: The
first we cannot love too much, he being infinitely worthy of our highest
Affection; yet 'twere our Happiness if we could dilate our Hearts and Souls
wider, to be more capable of this Passion, for the most incomparable deserving
Object of it. The love we bear the Creatures, is always restless, and never
perfect, because attended with so many uncertainties. Those whom we love most,
may, or hate us, or be treacherous to us; but admitting they were all that we
can desire they should be; yet alas! they are mortal, and that Fidelity which
they protested to us, cannot exempt them from the Law of Nature: As they were
born, so they must dye. By consequence then, where the Creature is the Object
of our Love, we cannot but be unhappy. Fixing then our Love upon God can only
secure our Felicity; We are certain he will love us, as long as we love him,
since he even loved us before; the infiniteness of his Goodness, and the
immutability of his Nature may arm us against all Apprehensions: He deserves
the most to be beloved, since his Love to us cannot change but with our Love to
him; and whenever we by transgression dissolve this union, he is ready and
willing to pardon us upon our Repentance, and take us into favor again.

Friendship is one of the principal effects of Love between Man and Man; even
Barbarians esteem it, and Nature could not subsist without it. To banish it the
World were to subvert Governments, overthrow Cities, and turn the Condition of
Man into that of Beasts, to live wild in the Deserts; it is the Band of humane
Society, and the greatest moral Contentment we find here on Earth. However, if
it have its Charms, it is not without its Cruelties too: For as Nature has made
nothing without some Blemish, so there is no Pleasure so entire but has some
Stings. Absence is a short Death, and Death an everlasting absence. We are
vulnerable in the Person of our Friend, and often more sensible of his Miseries
than of our own; what Misfortunes fall upon him, are by so much the more
insupportable to us, as the Person was esteemed. Who loses a Friend loses the
better half of himself, surviving that part only to be the more sensible of his
Misery.

Friendship between different Sexes, as it is not to be contracted but with
danger; so it is much better to avoid it. For though there is no distinction of
Sexes in the Soul, yet such an amity cannot be without Scandal, though it might
be peradventure without a Crime. The World is grown too corrupt; and a strict
familiarity between Man and Woman cannot be long entertained, without sensible
peril to both: Nature will be mixing certain motions with those of Friendship,
which cannot but have fatal consequences. When Man shall be an Angel, he shall
be permitted to converse with Woman: For till he is divested of his Body, he
will not be without a Criminal desire. Therefore we must resolve never to
approach too near these glittering Stars, whose malignant Influences ruin our
Innocence, and whose Rays do not so much enlighten as they burn.

We must not only love our Friends, but Neighbors: Every thing that is Man has
a right to our Affections: But the consummation of this Passion is, when
setting aside those base ignoble Considerations of Profit or Pleasure, we
arrive to that glorious pitch, as to love even our very Enemies. This is a real
proof of the verity and ardour of our Affection; and if it is not advanced so
far, it cannot but be imperfect, and so forfeit all its pretensions to the
reward of a Virtue.

It Is intolerable to see with what Idolatry the Miser beholds his Bags, and how
much Love he bestows upon a Metal, that can make as few returns to his
Affection as it is insensible of it. With what extravagancy some admire a
Flower, which fades even whilst they smell it, and which is irreparably lost if
they crop it. Others, more Brutes than the very Dogs they follow, postpone
every thing to a Kennel of Hounds! It Is a shame for a rational Creature to
place so much fondness on one that is insensible. There is I know a feeble
shadow of Fidelity in Dogs, and of Love in Horses; but as they are irrational,
they are not properly Objects of our Love; we may esteem them answerable to the
service we draw from them; but more is unpardonable. It Is highly absurd indeed
(if we reflect seriously on it) that that Noble Passion, which was given us to
constitute our Felicity, should be so misplaced, as only to argue the highest
Folly in us that can well be, and that one Heart should love God and a Beast at
the same time.

Of the Nature and Properties of Hatred.
ONE would think there were nothing in Nature more contrary to Man than Hatred
is; and since he derives his Name from Humanity, he should never be reconciled
to a Passion, that breaths forth nothing but Blood and Cruelty. However, this
is as much a part of his Essence, as Love it self is. And if he has occasion
for Love to unite him to those things he desires, he stands in no less need of
Hatred, to preserve him from those that might annoy him. The whole Universe
subsisteth but by the contrariety of the Elements: If the Waters coolness did
not allay the violence of the Fire, the whole World had been long since in
Cinders. So is it with the lesser World of Man's Body; did not the radical
Moisture, temper the natural Heat, he would perish immediately without redress,

Hatred is as necessary a Passion as Love; and we might justly accuse Nature of
Cruelty or Neglect, if having given us a propensity to Good, she had not also
taught us to hate and avoid what we thought not so.

Hatred is in its birth no more than an aversion to any thing that displeases
us; it is an Antipathy of the Appetite, or the impression that a disagreeable
Object makes on the inferior part of the Soul. It has this property in common
with Love, that it often prevents our Reason, and is established in our Will,
without asking advice of our Judgments. And it has likewise this property
different from Love, that we perceive it even in its conception, proceeding
from an Object that wounds us, she makes us suffer from her very birth: and is
not sooner established in our Breast, but she turns our Tormentor. One moment
only is enough to produce her, and if she be not curbed immediately, she casts
Fire and Flame through all the Faculties of the Soul, and like that active
Element, converts all it meets with to its Nourishment. Her greatest Evil is,
that she dies not so soon as Love does; when once it has taken root, it laughs
at all attempts of repressing it. Philosophy that boasts such mighty Victories
over the Passions, could never cure this Frenzy. I wonder not that Hatred when
inveterate, should make some Parents oblige their Children to a perpetual
enmity with their Enemies, and so expire cursing them if ever they should
hearken to a reconciliation; since it is so impetuous in its motions, that it
makes a Man despise his own life to prosecute his Revenge; nay, dye with Joy
and Consolation, if he can but crush his Enemy with his own Fall. From hence we
may learn the violence of Hatred, that there is no Torment but it despises; no
Crime so enormous, but it resolves on it presently to farther its furious
Instigations.

If the Properties of this Passion are so very strange, its Effects are fatal.
She is the occasion of all the Tragical Actions which swell up History; and
indeed he who follows her counsel, is capable of committing any thing. This
Hellish Passion taught us, that Man could dye in the Flower of his Age, without
any Distemper, and that a Brother was not always safe in the company of his
Brother: She gave us first the Cursed Instructions of mixing Poison with Drink,
and murdering People under the color of Hospitality. 'Twas she, and not
Avarice tore up the bowels of the Earth, to furnish Instruments for her
Cruelty. She teaches us to kill Man decently, and makes us approve of a
Parricide, if it be but according to Art. In a word, after she has pronounced
most bloody Sentences as a Judge, she will her self have the pleasure of
executing them as a Hangman.

The Good Use of Hatred.
ALL the Works of Nature are perfect, and cannot without Jnjustice become
Objects of our Hatred. Another likes what I do not; and what displeases my
sight, gratifies his smell: And what Nature has produced of most unacceptable
aspect, is a foil to the most charming, and illustrates the variety of the
Created Beings. All such things then must be exempted from the violence of this
Passion. Sin only can be its proper and legitimate Object; and that with this
reservation too, that our own Offenses be rather made so, than those of our
Neighbor. We know not so well the Circumstances of his Transgression as our
own. We are not Judges over him, therefore must not exercise our hatred with
his failings. Its greatest edge must be against our selves, and there it can
never prove excessive; when we justify God's Goodness by our implacable hatred
of iniquity. It Is an act of Justice to abominate sin. And David thought he
showed his Love to God, when he demonstrated his hatred to his Enemies, and
therefore ceased praising him to curse the wicked and ungodly.

To make our Hatred meritorious, as was that of the Royal Prophet, it must have
those two Conditions with it which his had: That is, we must hate Sin, but not
Nature: We must detest the work of the Creature, but cherish and admire that of
God. Thus by the assistance of Grace, Hatred becomes a Virtue, and assistant
both to Justice and Charity. But she is practiced much more securely against
our own Imperfections, than those of our Neighbors. Selflove here will tie up
our hands that we shall never exceed in it; what holy Fury soever our Love to
God might inspire us with, yet that natural inclination we have to our selves,
would hinder us from proceeding without any dangerous severity.

The hating our selves is one of the Foundations of Christ's Gospel. We must
deny our selves and follow him, if we will be his Disciples. Love and Hatred
are taught in his School after an extraordinary manner. For we are to give all
our Love to our Neighbor, and to reserve the same degree of Hatred for our
selves. This Command is more rigorous in appearance than effect: For under the
severity which it seems to carry along with it, there is concealed the
sweetness of Love; for by a happy destiny attending this prosecution of Hatred,
we love our selves so much the more really, by how much we hate our selves for
sin.

This Doctrine of our Savior extends to the Spirit as well as the Flesh, and
enjoins us not only Mortification, to repress the saucy motions of the Body,
but Self-denial, thereby submitting our very Will to that of God. Our Hatred
cannot be perfect if it reach no farthet than the Body alone; for it must
equally act against every disorder that is caused by sin: And as Nature has
lost her Original Purity, so both the parts, whereof she consists, are become
criminal. The inclinations of the Soul are not more innocent than those of the
Body; they have both their imperfections, and are both corrupted. What thick
Clouds of Error and Ignorance obfuscate our Understanding? With what labor do
we learn, and how easily is it all forgotten? our Memory which passes for a
Miracle in Nature, treasures up Idea's that are false, as well as what are not
so: She is treacherous, and leaves us at a pinch, furnishing us rather with
futilous unnecessary things, than what are of moment to us.

Perfectly to practice this great Doctrine of Jesus Christ, we must denounce
War against both Soul and Body; and Combat the Darkness of our Understanding,
the Weakness of our Memory, the Malice of our Will, the Error of our
Imagination, and the Perfidiousness of our Senses, together with the Rebellion
of every Member of our Body. These ill Qualities which deface the Image of the
Creator in the Creature, are the proper Objects of all our Hatred; we may abhor
them with Innocence, and punish them without Injustice. In a word, we must
detest and abominate every thing that Sin produces, and which Grace cannot
suffer.

Of the Nature and Properties of Desire.
DEsire is the Motion of the Soul toward a good which it loves, but is not
yet in possession of; from this Definition we may gather its first and chiefest
Property, which is Inequitude.

There can be no real Contentment where this Passion is conceived. Some have
voluntarily condemned themselves to horrors and miseries, thinking every
Remedy pleasant that cured so intolerable a Malady. Seneca tells us of a Woman
who followed her Son into Banishment, choosing rather the Torments of Exile,
than those of regretting her Son's Absence, and desiring his Return. But
Nature, who designed this Passion for a Plague, has given us Hope for to
mitigate the Horrors which its Motions create; for it is the wretchedness of
the damned to desire, without Hope of ever obtaining, and to languish after a
Felicity, which it is impossible for them to possess. This Torment alone is far
more insupportable to them, than the scorching of the inquenchable Flames or
the Company of Devils, nay, more sensible than the very Eternity of their
Damnation it self.

But it is not in Hell alone that this Passion exerts it self in the Rigours of
its Cruelty, she afflicts Man here upon Earth; and she is a Minister of Divine
Justice, she is also by a Holy Artifice, subservient to Mercy. The Innocent and
Godly desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. This Passion gives Life and
Motion to all the others in our Soul. Hatred only tortures us, because it
desires Revenge; Ambition, because it thirsts after Honors; Avarice, because
it longs after Gold; and all the Passions are only insupportable, because
they are attended with Desires, which, like a Contagious Malady, is spreading
its fatal Poison through all the Faculties of the Soul, to render Man so much
the more miserable.

If Desire be so cruel, she is as shameful, for it is as much an Argument of
our Indigence as our Affection; for we never desire but Things that we have
not. Alexander the Great, who could make Sovereigns of his Slaves, could not
accomplish his Desires in other Things: He saw his dear Friend Hephestion, at
the Point of Death, and could only specify his Love to him, in the Fervor of
his unfeigned Wishes for his Recovery. The Vows he made to Heaven for his
Health, were so many evident Proofs of his Weakness and Incapacity, as well as
of his Love and Sorrow.

Desires are so many Public Marks of some Private Necessity; for the Soul that
wishes shows its Indigency. This made Tertullian say, That Desire is the Glory
of Things desired, and the Shame of the Party desiring; the Honor of Riches,
and the Infamy of the Miser; the Reputation of Dignities, but the Scandal of
the Ambitious.

Of the good Use of Desire.
ALthough there is nothing more frequent, than Desires, yet there is nothing
more rare than their good Use. For of so many who make Wishes, how few know how
to moderate them? Nature has bestowed on us this Passion, in order to the
acquiring the Good we want and which is necessary for us. We must be cautious,
and have only faint Desires for Transitory Things; and be reserved in our
wishing for what may be taken away from us with Violence. The Fruition of no
sublunary Felicity, can be so fixed, but by a Reverse of Fate, it may be
interrupted; therefore we must love them, without Ardour, desire them with
Moderation, possess them with Indifference, and part with them without Sorrow.

But the great and principal Use we ought to make of this Noble Passion, is to
elevate us to God, and unite us inseparably to him; for as he is the only and
proper worthy Object of our Love so must he be of our Desires likewise. The
most glorious Things below, are but imperfect at best; and if they have some
Charms to attract our Affection, they have also many Faults, which merit our
Contempt. The Sun with the beautiful Luster of his splendid Rays, has found
People so Captivated with his Glory, that they raised Altars to him; and
Christianity which spread almost all over the Face of the known Earth, has not
been able to convince these of their Idolatry; yet he has his Imperfections
too, which argue him but a Creature; he cannot enlighten at once both the Parts
of the World; and though he goes round it every Day, yet but the one half of it
enjoys his Light. He cannot avoid Ecclipses, and see his Glories obfuscated by
a Planet much inferior to him, both in Magnitude and Beauty. His Influences are
not always propitious; he is the Parricide, as well as the Parent of Flowers.
If his Rays warm us here in Europe, they scorch those in Africa. But God has
nothing which is not amiable in the highest Degree: Millions of Angels sing
forth the Honor of his Perfections, which have had immortal Admirers, paying
Homage and Adoration to them, from the very Infancy of the Creation. This is
that supreme Good which we all long after; he alone is able to fill the vast
Immensity of our Desires, with the Infinity of his Glories, the Exuberancy of
his Perfections, and the unutterable Joys of his ravishing Beauties. Let us
then hug our Misery, and rejoice that Nature has given us this Passion, since
it may serve as Wings to elevate us to God, and as Chains for to fasten us
there too. Our Wishes after Salvation. can never be Fruitless, the Object being
Good, their Virtue consists in their Ardour. Our Converssion depends upon our
own Will. Desire animated with Grace, blots out all our Transgressions; and
though Heaven be so glorious and so happy a Place, yet it has cost little more
than Desires to them who now enjoy it.

The Power of this Passion is so great that it makes us heard in Heaven, even
without speaking; and nothing was ever refused there to the Importunity of its
Demands. It makes one of the glorious Appellations of Jesus Christ; for before
he was known by the Name of the Savior of the World, he was known by that of
the Desired of all Nations.

Of the Nature and Properties of Eschewing.
WE should have but too just Reasons of reprehending Nature in the dispensing
of her Favors, if after having given us an Impression whereby we covet Good,
she had not also given us one to avoid Evil; for since we hate it, 'twould be a
severe Affliction not to be able to fly it. This Passion seems to be the
Daughter of Hatred, or her Handmaid at least; she is as impetuous in running
from any Object, she apprehends, as Love is in pursuit of what it desires. Her
Motions are generally innocent, and rarely Criminal but by surprise. We must
then consider, whether the Evil she labors to shun, is really or apparently
so: and if Opinion has not persuaded her of an Error, instead of a Truth. There
is properly but two things that may be termed Evil, that is, Guilt and Pain;
yet as we are much more sensible of the one, than of the other, so are we more
diligent to avoid it; and there are but few Men, who had not rather be
criminal, than miserable. We fly the Plague more than Sin; and though we would
not live in an Air that were prejudicial to our Health, yet we run daily into
Company that robs us of our innocence. However, Pain has this great advantage,
that it contributes equally to the Salvation of Man and the Glory of God: For
he is as much glorified in the punishment of the wicked, as in the rewarding of
the Just. Therefore we must adore the Arm that strikes us; and love the stripes
for the dear Hand's sake which inflicts them, and teach the whole World, that
the Thunderbolts of the Almighty are just, since they who are struck with them
even adore them.

Sin is a real Evil, and there ought our aversion to be irreconcilable. There
is no motion of it but what is odious; the irregularity of the Will is its
Cause, and an infiniteness its Object; it violates all Laws, and dishonours
both Angels and Man. All the Miseries we suffer here are the punishments of its
Disorders. This is the great Evil we must eschew, which has Hell for its place
of residence, and Eternal Death for its Chastizement.

Of all the Sins, none seems more properly to stand in need of this Passion to
curb it, than that of Lasciviousness; other Passions may jointly be employed to
combat some Vices, but nothing can be so efficaciously applied here as
eschewing. No Charms will be so powerful, no Temptation so strong, no
Opportunity so favorable, but that if we retire from them, they cannot hurt us.
Here flying only can secure the Field;
Who stays to parley, will be sure to yield.
It Is by this Passion that Chastity is preserved in the World, and by this that
Men retiring from the Earth, become Angels in it, triumphing over the Wiles of
the Devil, even in the infirmities of the Flesh.

Since we have so great obligations to this Passion, owing our Salvation partly
to it; let us consider a few of its Properties: For we ought exactly to know a
Passion, to which we stand indebted for so considerable advantages. It Is the
reverse of Desire, as Hatred is of Love; and its effects are as powerful as
either of them all. It Is likewise an argument of our weakness, since by our
retreating, we confess we have no other Strength, to surmount an Evil which
attacks us.

Of Hope.
THat Art which raises it self from the Earth to contemplate the Heavens, and
neglects the Beauties here below, to gaze on those of the Stars: This Art tell
us, that the Sun changes not his Nature, though he changes his Houses; and that
the Planet which Eclipses him, does not diminish his Light. Moralists, who
acknowledge no other Sun than Love, confess that he assumes new Influences with
new Aspects; and that he alters not his Essence when he varies his Name. But
that he accommodates himself to the Sentiments of our Soul, according to the
sundry Effects he designs to produce. He is melancholy and dejected under
Affliction, violent in Anger, prompt in Desire, cast down in Despair, and easy
in Joy: yet he is never so agreeable as in Hope.

This seems to be his Throne, whereon he never sits, but in all his Pomp and
Splendour. This is the most generous motion of the Soul; an inciting the Hero to
every thing that is glorious. At her Solicitations, Alexander undertook the
Conquest of Asia, and distributed the Fruits of his Victories to his Captains;
and he who thought the whole Universe too narrow for his Sword, was contented
with Hope alone for his share of all things. All the Conquerors were her
Votaries, not to say her Slaves; and that Ambition which precipitated them into
so many Dangers, took all her Councels from this Passion.

Her Empire does not extend only over Princes, but the meanest Vassals live by
her Flatteries. The Husbandman Manures his Land, the Merchant tempts the
Constancy of the Seas for gain; and if Hope makes the former strive, by
Patience and Industry to overcome the barrenness of the Earth, so she makes the
latter trust all to the fury of a more treacherous Element. She is so happy in
her Subjects, that we believe her, though we have been deceived by her. She knows
so well how to give specious Glosses to her new Promises, that upon her word
alone, we throw our selves into new Dangers to compass our Designs, which were
frustrated more than once before. There is no condition of Life so very
wretched, but it is made less intolerable by this Passion; whence came that
true, though old Proverb; Were it not for Hope the Heart would break; she
comforts the Slave in the Galleys, and the Captive in his Bondage; and though she
deceives us never so often, yet we cannot be brought to renounce her.

Hope is the motion of the Irascible Appetite toward a good, that is absent,
difficult, but possible; and if she may be abused, whilst indiscreetly employed
about Futurity, relying too entirely on its incertainty, yet she is of great
use in Religion, when she is founded upon Eternity.

Of the Good Use of Hope.
CHristian Religion is wholly grounded upon Hope: And as she despises the
Felicities of the present, so she waits and longs for those which are to come:
We are not of this World; no wonder then if we are mal-traited in it: But as we
have nothing to possess here below, we ought to expect all above. It Is here we
wait to receive the fulfilling our Redeemer's Promises, and really taste those
Joys, whereof we have at present but the Pledge. With a bold impatience we long
for that happy day, wherein the Son of God will punish his Enemies, and crown
his Servants; and think our selves already saved, because in Hope we are so,
and in the midst of all the Crosses and Calamities that afflict us in this
Life. We build our consolation on this Passion, which promises not so much, but
that she performs more; since as the holy Father St. Austin says, the end of
Hope is Eter-nal Happiness.

This powerful Passion sustained the Martyrs in the midst of their Flames, and
through the Tortures of implacable Tyrants, showed them a Crown of Glory which
waited for them. The great Apostle of the Gentiles has poured out all his
sacred Eloquence, to show the miraculous Effects of this glorious Passion.
Sometimes he styles it the Anchor that keeps our Vessel firm and steady in the
midst of the boisterous Ocean, and procures us a Calm even in the most raging
Tempests. In another place he calls it a Shield to quench all the fiery Darts
of Satan.

From hence we may gather Hope is necessary to us in all conditions and states
whatsoever, and that we may very usefully and profitably employ her, in all the
several re-encounters of our Lives. She is our assurance in Storms, our Defense
in Combats, and our Glory under Affronts. We must beware that she takes not the
things of this Life for her Object; no, we must propose more noble ones to her,
and by quitting all pretensions to these sublunary Enjoyments, only look after
the Blessings which Christ has promised us, in the World which is to come.

Of Despair.
AMong all the Passions Despair has had the greatest Honor, and the greatest
Blame from Antiquity. She was esteemed the last effort of Courage; which
prompted those great Men, whom we still admire, to kill themselves rather than
lose their Freedom; and employ Fire, Sword, and Poison, to deliver them from
the insolency of a victorious Enemy. The Orators and Poets have used all their
Rhetoric and Eloquence, in describing the Death of Cato: and they have so
artificially disguised this furious Act, that if Faith did not tell us it was
execrable, we should still believe it to have been Heroic. Seneca was never so
florid upon Virtue as upon this Crime; and one would judge from his Encomium's,
that he would persuade all Mankind to Despair, and all that are unfortunate to
be their own Executioners. With what haughty Eloquence he makes the Gods
descend, to contemplate Cato's Carcass; and suspend the Felicities of their
Eternal Mansions, to see a Murderer wallowing in his Gore. But it is no wonder
he makes so infamous a Murder pass for a Sacrifice, since he makes Drunkenness
pass for a Virtue; choosing rather to maintain a Paradox, than that Cato's
Reputation should suffer any thing; since he was so severely charged with it.
Others too rigorous on the other extremity, considering that some following the
impetuous motions of this Passion, have fatally dipped their Hands in their own
Blood, would by no means admit of our harboring an Enemy, that gave us such
mortal Counsels.

Both these Opinions are equally unjust: For Nature has showed her Care and
Indulgence of Man, in nothing more than in giving him this Passion; since
thereby he delivers himself from many Evils which oppress him, and to which
Philosophy it self could prescribe no Remedy.

Love makes us desire, and that very Desire excites such anxious motions in our
Breast, whilst we do not compass what we so earnestly long for, that we become
miserable, because we cannot refrain loving a Good which we do not enjoy. But
Despair terminates this wretched uneasiness, which otherwise would not
terminate but with our Lives. By a natural Prudence she obliges us to leave off
the pursuit, of what she finds impossible to attain, and to kill those Desires
which serve only to heighten our Misery. We must accuse our Hope, that too
easily engages us in Perils, and commend Despair that delivers us from them:
She is indeed more prudent than courageous, and regards rather Safety than
Glory; yet when reduced to the last push, and that a retreat is impossible, she
grows honorably Courageous, resolving either to Dye or Conquer. She has often
snatched the Laurels out of the Hands of the Victorious, and by efforts, which
might almost pass for Miracles in surmounting Nature, she preserves Man's Life
by making him despise it, and obtains for him glorious Triumphs, whilst he
sought an honorable Death.

But to make this Passion subservient to our Design, we must keep it from those
two dangerous Extremes, Timidity and Timerity. And though this Passion is
sometimes innocent in Nature, yet it is always criminal in Grace. For our hope
being founded on the veracity of God's Holy Word, we cannot despair without
accusing him, either of insufficiency or untruth. In Religion, Despair is the
blackest Sin we can define, and he shows that he merits not to have his
Iniquity pardoned, who despairs that it will be. It Is a trampling the Blood of
Christ under our Feet: And what made Judas more criminal, then the very
betraying of his Master, and Cain, then in the murdering his Brother?

God has so equally mixed his Promises with his Menaces, his Blessings with his
Maledictions, throughout the sacred Scriptures, that Man should neither
Despair, nor yet Presume. To assure the former, he has proposed Repentance,
whose Door is open to all that will come in; and to intimidate the latter, who
by their delays impose upon his Mercy, he has made the hour of Death uncertain,
reducing them hereby to the necessity of apprehending that fatal Moment, which
being unknown to every living Creature, may easily surprise us all.

Of Boldness.
IF the difficulties which accompany Virtues, enhance their price, and those
are regarded as the most beautiful which are the most painful; Boldness ought
to be distinguished as the most glorious, since she undertakes to encounter
only with what the World produces of terrible and astonishing, proposing no
other benefit to it self, of all the many Conquests it gains, but the bare
glory of having achieved them. Like generous Princes, she leaves the Pillage
to the Soldiers, and is satisfied with Honor for her dividend. As this Passion
never takes any thing for its Object, but what is both dangerous and difficult,
she is rather severe than charming. It is easy to remark in the very
Countenances of those Hero's whom she animates, a certain austerity and
fierceness, which argues that her pleasure is in fatigues, and her chiefest
diversion consists in surmounting difficulties; she has no Consolation but in
glory, and no nourishment but in hope; with these feeble succors she attacks
all her Enemies, and gains almost as many signal Victories, as she gives
Battles; she promises nothing, but gives much, and tries sometimes even
Impossibilities to accomplish those Promises which Hope had made us; and
surmounts all mere difficulties that retard their execution: She is generous in
all her designs; and though they are ever attended with hazards, yet they are for
the most part crowned with a happy, but always with a glorious event. And if
the blind Piety of the Poets made them ascribe the softer impulses of Love to a
Divinity, which they styled Cupid; the miraculous effects of this Passion has
constrained them to raise Altars to her, and offer up Sacrifices to her under
the appellations of Pollas and Bellona.

To make the qualities of this Passion more evident, we will subjoyn some
Instances, to all our antecedent Reasons. Zerxes was the most puissant Monarch
that ever was; but gave the most palpable demonstration of his Power when he
undertook the Conquest of Greece: His Army consisted of no less than two
Millions of Men: The Rivers were too small, to make so many but quench their
thirst; the Clouds of his Arrows obumbrated the Sun, and this glorious Planet
suffered Eclipses which the Astrologers could not foresee in the countenances
of the Heavens. All these mighty preparations were to subjugate a Country that
was hardly sufficient to afford Quarters for such numerous Troops: However
Leonidas possessing himself of the Straits of Thermopile, and entertaining
himself between these Mountains, resolved to give him Battle, with only 300
Men. Without all dispute Hope and Fortitude elevated his Courage, and animated
this generous Warrior, to an Enterprise equally difficult and glorious. As
Hope represented to him the Honor of having made head against the common
Enemy, and secured his Country's Freedom, prevented their Altars from being
razed, and their Women from being ravished; yet Fortitude more sincere in her
Counsels, showed him the greatness of the peril; setting before Leonidas's
Eyes, that though his death was inviolable, yet he ought not to quit his Post;
there was no necessity of his overcoming, but there was of his dying; and that
he should do enough, if in sacrificing his own Life, he could but repel
somewhat of the Enemies haughty Fury. Following then the motions of this
generous Passion, he resolved to sustain the Charge of an Army, which extended
beyond the Horizon, and so bid his Soldiers prepare for Combat and Death. Thus
we see that Hope feeds upon Pleasures, which are imaginary, but Fortitude upon
pains which are real. The Hope of Success was as much against Reason, as the
being overthrown was inevitable. Yet we know, that this small Handful of Men
defended themselves so bravely and so long, that though they fell there
themselves, yet they might be said to have conquered Zerxes's Army: But at
least we must allow that this was the Foundation of his total Defeat; and the
so happy event of this resolution, so bravely executed, encouraged all Greece,
and showed them, that so powerful an Enemy was not invincible if they durst
dye. The Power of a Prince may make him undertake great things, yet nothing
inspires so much boldness as Innocence. For she thinks that Heaven it self is
obliged to appear in her Cause, in as much as she is without offense.

Of the good use of Boldness.
IT IS true, that our Passions are oftener criminal than virtuous, and the
disorder of our Nature since the Sin of our first Parent has occasioned their
greatest inclinations to be toward Vice, yet with some assistances we may
bring them from it. This glorious Passion made all the Martyrs despise their
Torments, and whilst their Bodies distilled drop by drop from the glowing Grid
Irons, their Tongues reproached their Persecutors, and praised their God. Grace
we must grant to be more strong than Nature; yet she does not refuse the
assistance of Nature. Virtue stands in need of the succors of our Passions,
and they on the other hand require Virtue to be their Guide.

To make then this Passion a Virtue, we must see she is accompanied with
Justice. He that takes Arms to ruin his Country, is rather Criminal than
Courageous; and though he dye with his Sword in his Hand, in the thickest of his
Enemies, yet the illegitimateness of his intentions will take from him the
Character of Glorious.

We must likewise try our Forces before we begin to attack our Enemy. Virtue is
not so rigid as to exact impossibilities of us: she requires but what is in our
power, and would have us in all undertakings weigh, whether the Medium we use
is proportionable to the end we propose.

But a Christian's boldness must have two other Conditions, which are Humility
and Hatred of our selves; for he who has not conquered his Inclination, cant
hope to triumph over Pleasuress and he who has not declared open Wa; against
his Body, is in no good condirtion of doing it against the sorrow of his Mind.
Let us then make use of our Forces against our selves, that we may the better
succeed, when we employ them against other Enemies; and let us surmount the
love of our selves, if we would surmount the fear of Death.

Of Fear.
THere are some Passions, whose Names belie their Nature, and which are nothing
less within, than what they appear without. Hope has an agreeable Aspect; yet
she procures us as many Miseries, as she promises us Advantages. Fear is looked
upon as the basest of all the Passions, and is thought to be the pure result of
an ignoble Spirit. But there is a great deal of Error and Injustice in this
Sentiment; for she is prudent in effect, only descrying. Evils to show us how
to avoid them; and as Man is exposed to many Multitudes of various Dangers,
that may overwhelm him, this passion is continually upon guard, prying even
into futurity it self, to discover a possible danger; which being cautiously
warded off, secures our Felicity at the same time it prevents any Disaster.

Fear then is a natural prudence, which delivers us from an Evil, by the very
Apprehension alone she gives us of it, and is not less useful in the Church
than in State. The fear of eternal Punishments, first made Man seek to appease
the irritated Gods, to build Temples, erect Altars, burn incense, and Immolate
Sacrifices. And though Religion bids us love God for his own worthiness sake, yet
it is highly to be presumed, that Fear has made the most of his Votaries; nay,
saved more guilty Souls than Hope it self. The fear of God (says the Divine
Text) is the beginning of Wisdom; that is, in other words, the supporter of
Virtue, and the foundation of Piety. Vice would grow insolent, and the Law of
no use, had not Nature placed this Passion in Man's Soul, and made the most
hardy Criminal apprehend Punishment: And the Judge can give Sentence but upon
what he knows; yet this faithful Minister of God's Vengeance, makes the Guilty
tremble in the midst of their Friends, and enjoy neither rest nor security
either in Cities or Deserts.

This may serve for one Instance, that our Nature is not entirely corrupted,
since she retains still in the midst of all those Imperfections which environ
her, an abhorrence and hatred of Sin, as well as a fear and dread of
Punishment. Wheresoe'er we hide our selves, the secret remorses of our
Consciences go with us; assuring us that there is a Divinity, which sees the
most secret transactions of our Lives, and punishes them after our Death. Of
those many thousands of Christians, who confess and acknowledge Christ, there
are but few that stand not more indebted to their Fear than their Love, and
endeavor to purchase Heaven, only to secure them from Hell; loving God's
Mercy, because they fear his Justice. And it is no small matter, that this
Passion (by its motions) should open a Door of Salvation to the ungodly, and
show Sinners the way to Virtue.

If she is thus beneficial in Affairs of Religion, she is no less in Affairs of
State. We live alas! no longer in that happy Age when Friendship united
Mankind, and superseded Laws; when Love banished Injustice from the face of the
Earth. No, now our Love to our selves is established in hating our Neighbor;
and we must restrain them by Fear, whom we cannot win by Affection: We erect
Gibbets to terrify the Criminal, and invent Tortures to render Death more
horrid; that so what was an indispensable Tribute of Nature, should by this
means become a Chastizement of Iniquity.

Nature has not given us this Passion to be a Torment to us, but a Security,
for she considers only those Dangers that are avoidable: If once she finds them
inevitable, she leaves off the intentions of struggling with them; vain efforts
are to be condemned in every thing; so we must support what we cannot shun. Who
would not judge Fear to be the Guardian of our Repose, who studies nothing but
our security, and only gives us an Alarm, that we may prepare to oppose an
Enemy who comes to invade it? But as there are some Accidents, which our
Prudence cannot foresee, nor our Courage vanquish, we must not be astonished if
some others surprise Fear, and get the better of a Passion, after having
triumphed over two glorious Virtues.

Of the good use of Fear.
FEar has this property of Prudence, that it is most especially busied about
things to come; and when she has discovered a Danger at a distance, calls in
all her Forces to combat it. Courage and Conduct is not every Man's Lot, and
hardly any Man's in perfection; for one is the property of fiery vigorous
Youth; and the other the tedious Lessons of a long Experience, acquired only in
an Age, wherein we are no longer fit for Action our selves, and therefore only
proper to give Advice. As Fear is more considerate than generous, so is she
more proper to deliberate than engage. She may be as successfully applied in
Virtue, as against Vice: What is Shame but the fear of Infamy? and this
innocent Passion protects all the Virtues. How many Men would be looked upon
under a less glorious Character, were it not for the Instigations of this
Passion, owing their Innocence to their apprehension of Scandal; acting not to
satisfy their Duty, but to save their Reputations? If we would encourage this
Passion in our Souls, we should keep our selves unhurt from a Thousand
Temptations which would otherwise triumph over our Innocence. Who is there
proof against the illecebrations of the Flesh? and what refrains us from
yielding to such powerful, such charming Solicitations, but the bare fear of
Discredit here and Damnation hereafter?

Of Anger.
ANger draws its strength from the other many Passions, whereof she is
composed; and seems courageous only because she is so well seconded. Sorrow
raises her, Desire stirs her up to Revenge, Hope sustains her there, and
Boldness carries her on to the accomplishing what she violently affects. For
when we find it impossible to get that Revenge we proposed to our selves, our
Anger sinks into Sadness, and loses both its Name and its Nature.

We may then define Anger to be a Motion of the Sensitive Appetite, seeking
after a Revenge for an Injury committed; she thinks that she is always
reasonable, because she has always Justice on her side. She has depopulated
Cities, and made Deserts of whole Provinces; she has dethroned a thousand
Monarchs; sacrificed some even in the very midst of their Guards; and that
august Glory which shines on a Sovereign's Brow, could not secure them from
feeling the terrible Effects of this Passion. Yet in all these Devastations,
she believes her self innocent, and that she has but exacted a just
Satisfaction for the Injuries she had received. Thus after having called in the
Assistance of Fortitude to perpetrate her Cruelties, she summons Reason to
justify such Proceedings. She sows Discord in private Families, Enmity between
Man and Wife, and Civil Wars in a Commonwealth. Envy, with all its Malignity
and Rancour, is contented with the Wishing Evil, and leaves the Event to
Destiny; but this savage Passion (more criminal than all the others together)
prevents the Rigours of Fate, and takes a pleasure in making others miserable;
nor does she think their Punishment severe enough, if she has not her self a
Hand in the inflicting it. The Poverty of some Nations secures them from
Ambition, Pride, Voluptuousness, and Avarice; but none were ever exempted from
the tyranny of this Passion; it reigns equally amongst the Barbarians and those
who are civilized, and employs Bows, and Arrows, and Slings to execute its
Fury, where it has not as yet introduced the use of Artillery and Swords.

The most troublesome Condition of this fatal Passion is that the smallest
occasion is enough to excite it; a wrye Look, a Mistake, a cross Word, a Jest
from a Friend or a smart Repartee from any one, sets all in a flame in a
Moment. In the very instant of its Birth, it is at full Growth, and if the
other Passions may be said to push us forward, this may as truly be said to
precipitate us. Since she is so very hasty, no wonder if she be inconsiderate
likewise, and makes us often commit an unpardonable Crime, in revenging a small
Affront, and expose our Lives to accomplish our Satisfaction for some imaginary
Injury.

The good Use of Anger.
AS the Motions of this Passion are too impetuous to give Place to Reason, so
we shall never reap any Advantage from it, but through the means of Grace; she
is too sudden to be prevented, and too violent to be suppressed.

To make her subservient to Virtue the surest Method is to prepossess our Minds
with the Frivolousness of those Things which ordinarily excite her, show her
how she is abused in the estimate she makes of Things; that we are only
offended because we are ignorant; that they are not so much Injuries as
Arguments of our great Weakness. Could we persuade our Selves, That Virtue only
is all our Riches, all our Glory, we should not be surprised by this Passion.
It Is not really ours what Fortune can deprive us of; and what is under her
Dominion is not absolutely good in it self; and therefore no ways worthy the
very inconsiderable Uneasiness of but one anxious Thought or Desire.

In respect of Injuries; if they are but slight, they ought to be despised; if
they seem great, we must mitigate and allay their Blackness by some
Considerations. They will not do us so much harm, as to their own Author; and
will be the more glorious for us to suffer, as they are unjustly done to us Had
there been no Tyrants, there had been no Martyrs, and the Cruelty of the one,
was as necessary as the Constancy of the other. What matters it if the Action
of this Man be unjust, provided I can reap a Benefit from it? Joseph owed his
Grandeur to his Brother's Malice: And if they had not sold him a Slave to
Egypt, he had never been Pharaoh's chief Minister. And if we think it a happy
Bondage that procures us a Kingdom here, why should we not forgive an Injury to
gain that of Heaven? A frequent Meditation on these and such like Reasons,
would make such an Impression on our Minds, as that this Passion would very
rarely be able to surprise us.

With these Precautions we may draw some Advantages from this Passion. Kings
and Judges may use her beneficially in supporting Justice, when either Fear or
Favor would try to hinder the Execution of the Laws. The Holy Scriptures
assure us that God is sometimes angry: And the Wiseman giving a Description of
that terrible Day, when the Almighty will take Vengeance of his Enemies, he
arms the Divinity Capa-pee: He shall put on his Armor in his Zeal (says he;)
Justice shall be his Breast Plate, Judgment his Helmet, Righteousness his
Shield, and Anger shall be his Lance. Though the Prophet accommodates this
Description to the weakness of Man's Capacity, yet it is certain that the Son of
God had Whips and Cords to revenge the Quarrel of his Father; and had that just
Resentment painted on his adorable Visage, which prudent Magistrates have when
they punish Crimes and defend Innocence. The greatest and wisest King thought
his People could not be well governed without this Passion. The Sword he wears
ought to be as much employed in punishing Violence at HOME, as that from
Abroad; and that he ought to have the same just Indignation, when the Laws are
infringed by his Subjects, as when his Frontiers are surpised by his
Neighbors. Anger and Mildness are the Bridles by which the People are kept in
awe, and Peace made to flourish throughout the Kingdom. The Wrath of a King is
as the roaring of a Lion, but his Smiles are as the Dew upon the Grass.

Our Blessed Savior said, Be angry, and sin not; so that this Passion may be
safely admitted into our Breast; but it must be with great circumspection. If
it take any other Object than our selves, we have reason to fear an overthow.
In this is it most fitly employed about the punishing our own selves, that the
instinct every Man naturally has to preserve himself, will so far moderate the
effects of this Passion, that we need not apprehend its outrages. Oh happy
Anger! that offending Man, appeases God; that by its Tears blots out its
Iniquities, and is absov'd by accusing it self, and which by small pain
delivers us from the Torments of the Damned, to enjoy the Felicities of the
Angels.

Of Pleasure.
IF Hope is thought to merit so many and so high Encomiums, as that she is the
most charming agreeable Passion that rises in Man's Soul, and that which
flatters our senses with the most sensible delectation; what shall we say of
Pleasure, which is the delicious fruitwhereof the other was but a bud, or
blossom at most? This is the effect, and the other was but a fair promise. This
is the motion of the Soul that terminates all the rest: As Love is the
commencement, this is the consummation, and in all the different forms which
Love assumes, he is the most agreeable in this; in all the others, he is mixed
with troubles, dangers, fatigues, hardships, and as many various miseries as he
is metamorphos'd into different shapes; yet in this of Pleasure he is
absolutely all the desires; he is at once victorious, triumphant, and happy.

Pleasure is the fruition of an agreeable good which renders the Soul
satisfied, interdicting any motion of desire, sorrow, or fear; this definition
excludes all those delights our Memory furnishes us with, in the recollection
of a past Felicity: Those shadows of Joy may serve to entertain our thoughts
with, but are not solid enough to constitute a real Tranquillity; It being as
natural to regret a Felicity which we have lost, as desire one that is absent
from us: As also all those infamous Pleasures which Voluptuousness creates; the
pain of desiring them exceeds by much the delectation of fruition: They are
such Mortal Enemies of our quiet, that they are never enjoyed without rendering
us miserable, as well as criminal, at one fatal stroke wounding both Soul and
Body.

True Pleasure is never so agreeable as when it is extreme; the greater it is,
the more it ravishes us. The solid satisfaction of a rational Creature
consists in the Mind, and Man cannot be contented if the more noble part of
his System is not happy. The knowledge of Truth, and the practice of Virtue
ought to be his great divertisement: He must follow the most pure of his
inclinations, and in the composition of his Body he must labor rather to
please the Angel, than gratify the Beast. He must remember that the Body is
but the Slave of the Soul, and in his choice of Pleasures, he ought to give the
Deference to the Sovereign. If any man is of a contrary sentiment, we cannot
but conclude that Sin, which deprived him of Grace, has robbed him likewise of
his Understanding and Reason too. The pleasures of the Senses are limited, but
those of the Soul are not so: That sweet Odor which gratifies the Smell,
pleases no other Sense. Music, which ravishing the Soul from the Body, puts us
in Heaven with the glorious Cherubims, has no effect but upon the Ear. Virtue
satisfies every faculty of the Soul, and indeed she is never contented by
halves; what charms her in one power is diffusive, and her Joy becomes
universal. The happiness of the Body is but a shadow, and its felicity but an
empty vain appearance: Whilst that of the Soul is real, solid, and substantial,
not to be taken away from them who possess it, even by death it self, but what
will accompany them into a happy Eternity.

Of the good use of Pleasure.
THose who condemn Pleasure, at the same time condemn Nature, accusing her of
over-sights in all her Works; for she has so mixed it in all the most minute
affairs of our lives, that we do nothing wherein she has not equally an
agreableness as a necessity. Hunger makes us eat, and our Nourishment pleases
the Palate whilst it concerns our Lives. As Pleasure is useful to the Body, so
it is necessary to the Soul. We would not combat against Vice, but for the Joy
and Glory which the Conquest yields us. Who would go through the many
difficulties that attend the acquiring of knowledge, but for the sweetness they
reap after their labors? But as Nature has diffused some pleasure in all these
things, it is to serve us, not as an impellent motive, but as an assistant only,
and to be rather our refreshment under our difficulties, than the reward of
them: A spur or encouragement to arrive at the end, but it must not be the end
it self. The pleasures or enjoyments of the Earth may divert us, but must not
take up too much of us; Nature designing them not so much for our felicity, as
our comfort.

Our blessed Savior has assured us, that all the pleasures and happiness of
this World, are not worth our looking after; and therefore he counsels us to
renounce forthwith the blandishments of the World, and establish our felicity
in Heaven. He has ordered us by the mouth of his Apostles, never to open the
door of our hearts, but to those pure unallayed consolations which have the
Holy Ghost for their source and spring; and consulting our Interests only, he
obliges us to look after a Joy, which being grounded upon himself, cannot be
ravished from us, either by the Malice of Man, or by the Iniquity of Fortune;
and which having an infinite goodness for their Cause and Object, have their
duration only circumscribed by Eternity.

Of Sorrow.
THis Passion seems to be natural to Man; the others but accidental: Few Parts
of our Body are Partakers of our Pleasures, or capable of receiving any one
Particular: But no Part of us, but alas! is sensible of Pain, Sorrow and Grief.
The Spirit is dejected, and the Eyes mourn; Sadness displays it self through
the whole Economy. The very deplorableness of our State does argue Pain to be
more essential to us than Pleasure. We are born in Tears, we live in Sorrow,
and dye in Sighs. For one vain, transient and imaginary Pleasure, we feel a
thousand real weighty Evils. And what is a farther Confirmation of the Misery
of our Condition, we are much more sensible of Pain than Pleasure. A small
Distemper destroys all our most solid Contentment; a Fit of the Gout or Stone,
is capable to make a Conqueror forget his Laurels, and the Pomp of all his
Triumphs.

Grief is a real Evil that attacks both Soul and Body at once, making a double
Wound at each Blow. When the Body is necessitated to undergo the sharpness of
Tortures, the rigours of the Seasons, and the violence of Distempers, the Soul
is obliged to sigh with her, and that Bond which unites them, makes their
Misery common; she apprehends Wounds, though she is invulnerable, and Death, though
she is immortal; and this only by reason of that strict Communication, which
she has with the Body. We all agree, that the Soul cannot be happy, whilst the
Body is miserable; and to confirm us in this Opinion, we know that the Soul of
our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, though it was happy in it self, yet it was
pierced with Grief, when he said to his Disciples, My Soul is sorrowful even
unto death: And the Felicity of his Divinity seemed to be suspended during his
Agony; for it was not without Cause that he cried, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me?

The Soul is much more happy than the Body by this Union; for by the very
Reflection on a past Misery she creates to her self new Pains whereof the Body
feels no part, and so of but one only Evil she makes a double Martyrdom.

The effect of this melancholy Passion are very strange; for when Sorrow is not
extreme, she is ingenious, and renders Man Eloquent without the benefit of
Rhetoric; to hear their pathetick Expressions, that multitude of Sighs, that
so easily second the energy of their lugubrous Discourses, one would think that
the greatest horrors and anguish of Nature, were infinitely less than what
they groan under. But when she is extreme, she stupifies, hardly leaving Man
the use of any Sense; and who was so florid in describing a small Evil,
confesses by his silence, that this is without comparison greater, since it is
unutterable. Curae leves loquuntur, magnae stupent. This mighty alteration gave
occasion to the Poets to feign, that it Converted some into Rocks, others into
Stones.

The good use of Sorrow.
WE must not wonder if the Stoics condemn a Passion, when they do not approve
even of the very Virtues she produces; placing their Wisemen in such a State of
Felicity, that no humane cause could ever interrupt: In the plundering of a
City, or the destruction of their Country, they were still as unmoved, as
Jupiter would be at the dissolution of the Universe; and if they granted a Sigh
to a deceased Parent, or shed a Tear with the reflection of their Countries
Ruin; yet this was without ever Affecting the Soul, whose Felicity consisting
in its self, it could not be moved by any external Cause. But sure the pomp of
these haughty Expressions, could be only to preserve the Soul in her
Sovereignty, and persuade us not to be so far overwhelmed with the pain of the
Body, as to dethrone the Mind; and of the Malady of the Slave, make the Misery
of the Sovereign; which the better to effect, she used the policy of the
Orators, who by their Hyperboles persuade us of Verities, and prove all things
possible, to animate us to some that are difficult. Therefore that the Soul
might not sink under the weakness of the Body, but be established in her
Empire, they have made use of Terms somewhat more Eloquent than true.

Sorrow is so reasonable a Passion, that there are some Junctures, wherein it
were Impiety not to be afflicted; and we must not only bewail our own Sins, but
our Neighbors Miseries. We stand indebted to this Passion for our Innocence;
because our conversion to Grace, is perfected in our sorrow for Sin; and the
Justice of God satisfied with the sincerity of our Tears.

In other Circumstances she works not so miraculously: If our Afflictions
comfort the Living, they do not raise the Dead, and if they assure the Wretched
of our Affection, they deliver them not from the anguish of their Torments. But
the sadness of Repentance is of another nature, those grievous Sighs which
oppress Sin save the Sinner; these Tears wash away the Crime, and sanctify the
Criminal. Sorrow alone for having offended, becomes here a complete
satisfaction: And as God knows that it lies not in our power, to alter any
thing which has already happened; so he graciously accepts of our Repentance, for
having transgressed. And as he sees the bottom of our Hearts, so when our Tears
are unfeigned, he never refuses them his Pardon. Were it not for this Passion
there could be no Salvation, since there can be no Repentance without Sorrow;
we will therefore be vehement in the defense of a Passion, from which we
receive such considerable Advantages: And though Princes thinking this too
austere a Passion to have admittance into their Courts, by Music, Balls,
Dancings, Plays, and many other Divertisements, seek to keep it from an
Entrance; yet before the Tribunal of God, this Passion has more Credit than all
the others united in one. She can boast that she works the strange
Metamorphosis in Grace; of making Saints of Sinners; and of the Children of
Disobedience, Darkness and Perdition, she makes Children of Light, Brothers
with the Son of God, and Heirs of everlasting Felicities, and of a Crown and
Kingdom which can know no end.

The Conclusion.
FRom all these Discourses it is easy to judge, that there is no Passion in our
Souls, which may not be advantageously managed by Reason as well as Grace. For
to sum up all what has been said in the whole Work; Love may be changed into a
holy Amity, and Hatred may be brought to a just Indignation. Desires moderated
are so many good Assistants, to acquire Virtue. Eschewing is the proper
security of Chastity: Hope animates us to brave and generous Undertakings, and
our Despair turns us from rash ones: Fear is serviceable to Prudence, and
Boldness to Valor: As brutish as Anger seems, she sides with Justice: Joy is
an innocent Antepast of Felicity: Grief a short pain, that frees us from
Eternal Torments: So that our Salvation depends only upon the good use of our
Passions, and Virtue it self, only subsisteth by the good employment of the
Motions of our Soul.

FINIS.
INDEX.
PART. I.
OF the Number of our Passions. 14 Whether there were any Passions in the State
of Innocence. 17 If there were any Passions in Jesus Christ, and wherein they
differed from ours. 19 Of the disorderliness of Man's Pass. 22 Nature alone
cannot regulate our Passions. 24 Of the necessity of Grace to govern the
Passions. 26 Our Senses are chiefly the Causes of the disorders of our
Passions. 28 There is more irregularity in the Passions of Man, than in those
of Beasts. 29 As there is nothing more difficult, so there is nothing more
glorious than the Government of the Passions. 32 No Slavery is so miserable, as
that of being overpowered by our Passions. 37 To govern our Passions we must
first moderate them. 41 Reason alone is able to restrain the Passions. 46 By
what means we may moderate our Passions. 50 Our Passions are really in
themselves so many Seeds of Virtue. 53 There is no Passion which may not be
changed into a Virtue. 58 The Government of our Passions, is the business of
Virtue. 62
PART. II.
OF Love. 66 Of the good use of Love. 68 Of the nature and properties of
Hatred. 73 The good use of Hatred. 76 Of the nature and properties of Desire.
80 Of the good use of Desire. 83 Of the nature and propert. of Eschewing. 86 Of
Hope. 88 Of the good use of Hope. 91 Of Despair. 93 Of Boldness. 96 Of the good
use of Boldness. 100 Of Fear. 102 Of the good use of Fear. 105 Of Anger. 106
The good use of Anger. 109 Of Pleasure. 112 Of the good use of Pleasure. 115 Of
Sorrow. 117 The good use of Sorrow. 119 The Conclusion. 122
BOOKS Printed for J. Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul 's Churchyard.
CApt. Will. Dampier's New Voyage round the World. Describing particularly the
Isthmus of America, several Coasts and Islands in the West Indies, the Isles of
Cape Verd, the Passage by Terra del Fuego, the South Sea Coasts of Chili, Peru,
etc. The Isle of Guam one of the Ladrones, Mindanao, and other Philippine and
East India Islands, near Cambodia, China, etc. New Holland, Sumatra, Nichobar
Isles; the Cape of Good Hope, and Santa Hellena. Their Soil, Rivers, Harbors,
Plants, Animals, etc. Their Customs, Religion, Government, Trade, etc. Vol. I.
Illustrated with particular Maps and Draughts. The 4th Edit. Cor.

-- His Voyages and Descriptions. Vol. II. describing the Countries of Tonquin,
Achin, Malacca, etc. their Product, Inhabitants, Trade, Policy, etc. 2. Two
Voyages to Campeachy; with a Description of the Coasts, Product, Inhabitants,
Logwood-cutting, Trade, etc. of Jucatan, Campeachy, New-Spain, etc. 3. A
Discourse of Trade-Winds, Breezes, Storms, Seasons of the Year, Tides and
Currents of the Torrid Zone throughout the World: with an Account of Natal in
Africa, its Product, Negroes, etc. Illustrated with particular Maps and
Draughts. To which is added, a General Index to both Vol.

Mr. Wafer's Voyages and Descript. of Darien.

Discourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of England. In two Parts.
viz. I. Of the use of Political Arithmetic, in all Considerations about the
Revenues and Trade. II. On Credit, and the Means and Methods by which it may be
restored. III. On the Management of the King's Revenues. IV. Whether to Farm
the Revenues, may not, in this Juncture be most for the Public Service? V. On
the Public Debts and Engagements. By the Author of the Essay on VVays and
Means. Part 1. To which is added A Discourse upon Improving the Revenue of the
State of Athens. Written Originally in Greek; and now made English from the
Original, with some Historical Notes. By another Hand.

Discourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of England; which more
immediately treat of the Foreign Traffic of this Kingdom. viz. I. That the
Foreign Trade is Beneficial to England. II. On the Protection and Care of
Trade. III. On the Plantation Trade. IV. On the East India Trade. By the
Author of the Essay on VVays and Means. Part. II. To which is added, the late
Essay on the East India Trade. By the same Hand.

An Essay upon the probable Methods of Making a People Gainers in the Balance
of Trade. Treating of these Heads; viz. Of the People of England. Or the Land
of England, and in what manner the Balance of Trade may be thereby affected.
That a Country cannot increase in Wealth and Power, by private Men doing their
Duty to the Public, but by a steady Course of Honesty and Wisdom, in such as
are trusted with the Administration of Affairs. By the Author of the Essay on
Ways and Means.

A Discourse upon Grants and Resumptions. Showing how our Ancestors have
Proceeded with such Ministers, as have Procured to themselves Grants of the
Crown Revenue: And that the Forfeited Estates ought to be Applied toward the
Payment of the Public Debts. By the Author of the Essays on Ways and Means.
The II. Edition.

Malbranch of Morality. 8vo.

VVingate's Arithmetic.

Jacobi Rohaulti Physici, per S. Clark. 8vo.

Three Practical Essays, viz. On Baptism, Confirmation and Repentance, by S.
Clark.

Some Reflections on Amintor, in a Letter to a Friend.

The Memoirs of Monsieur Pontis. Fol.

Dr. Sydenham's Practice of Physic, Translated into English by VV. Salmon.

Helvet on Fevers 2d Edit. 12o.

Hack's Collection of Voyages. 8vo.

The History of the Inquisition of Goa, done into English, by the ingenious Mr.
Wharton.

The Godfather's Advice to his Son. Showing the Necessity of performing the
Baptismal Vow, and the Danger of Neglecting it. With General Instructions to
young Persons to lead a Religious Life, and prepare them for their
Confirmation, and worthy Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament. Very necessary for
Parents, etc. to give their Children, or others committed to their Care. By J.
B. a Divine of the Church of England. The Second Edit. Price Three Pence.

Those that are Charitably Inclined, shall have One Hundred for 20 s.

Mr. Shadwels Plays, in one vol.

And most other Plays.

ERRATA.
PAge 4 line 24 read conserving p. 6 l. 26 r. to be cured by, p. 13 l. 18 r. by
the, p. 16 l. 3 r. the Heathens, p. 19 l. 3 r. his State, p. 19 l. 21 r. was
pierced, p. 24 l. 4 r. he must. p. 28. l. 26 r. Ports of, p. 34 l. 25 r. them
but with, p. 46 l. 12 r. the Motions, p. 54 l. 9 r. immediate, p. 44 l. 26 r.
Rock and the, p. 55 l. 5 r. though man, p. 58 l. 15 r. the prudent, p. 62 l. 14
r. for Sin, p. 76 l. 2 r. are as fatal, p. 80 l. 19 r. Inquietude, p. 81 l. 18
r. and if she, p. 87 l. 18 r. infinite Goodness, p. 98 l. 9 r. Pallas, p. 98 l.
29 r. intrenching, p. 101 l. 29 r. open War, p. 112. l. 17 r. it is most, p.
112 l. 18 r. for the, p. 115 l. 30 r. it preserves.


