An Account of the wicked Design of Poisoning the PRINCE of Orange before he
came out of Holland. ALSO A Relation from the City of Orange of a strange
Meteor, representing a Crown of Light, that was there seen in the Air, May 6th,
1688.
In a Letter from a Gentleman in Amsterdam, to his Friend in London. October. 1.
1688.
SIR,
THE two enclosed Relations are sent me from an Eminent Divine, now at the
Hague, you will do well to make them public: The poisoning Business I doubt
not but was contrived by a sort of Men that in all Ages stick at nothing to
carry on their Bloody Religion.

An Account of a Design of poisoning the PRINCE OF ORANGE.
THere is a Man of Lunenburg Wolfenbuttel, who being fallen in Debt in
Amsterdam, upon his Father's Death, his Brother taking no Care of him, was put
in Prison and brought extreme low; yet he was brought out by the means of a
Friend: And soon after a Man who pretended to know him, and to have seen him
before, (though the German believes he never saw him) seemed to take pity on
him, seeing him in a Coffee-House, and gave him a Ducatoon, and promised he
should never want; so he entered into a great familiarity with him, but would
never let him know where he lodged, only he gave him Appointments in
Coffee-Houses and Taverns, and fed him from time to time with Money: At last,
after some weeks, he drew him into a secret Walk in the Grounds that are not
yet built, and asked him if he had a Heart to do a bold Thing? The German said
he had, if it were not such a Thing as might bring him to a Scaffold. The other
said, There was no Danger, only it would require a little hardiness. Then he
asked an Oath of the German, That he would either do that which he was to
propose to him, or presently go out of the Country. The German said, He could
not go out of the Country, for he had no Money: And then he gave him eight
Ducats in Gold, and then he swore the Oath: So the other proposed to him the
poisoning the Prince of Orange: that startled him, but apprehending he should
be killed if he refused it, he undertook it. The other told him, That in the
last Age Men had tried Stabbing or Shooting, but these were dangerous Things,
Poisoning was a safe and sure way: He added, That he should have 3000 Pistols
in hand, and a Fortune besides. The German asked, From whom? The other, who
called himself Corn, and spoke French like a Stranger, but the German cannot
judge what Nation he was of; the other, I say, said to to him, That if he had
the Money, he was not concerned know from whence it came. In short, he made a
Proposition to the German, giving him a Quill with a Water in it, carefully
stopped, and told him, that he (the German) lodged in the House of an
inconsiderable Man, of whom no regard would be had; and if he would cut the
Quill, so that one drop of the Liquor fell into any thing that his Landlord was
to drink, he would be certainly dead before to Morrow; and if he would begin
with him, one should come to him to such a place to Morrow, having a white
Feather in his Hat, who should deliver him 1500 Pistols, and instruct him how
to manage the Poisoning the Prince, which he should find would be easy and
safe; then upon his going on he should have the rest of the Money. The German
went Home, but was struck with Horror, and so resolved to keep that part of his
Oath of going out of the Country; yet he showed another his Gold, and told him
of his going Home: But from Osnaburgh he writ to one about the Prince; this
happened in the beginning of March last. So he was desired to come back, which he
did, and the Matter being brought into the Court of Holland, upon an Oath of
Secresy, Mr. Halewyn Deputy of Dort, and another, were sent with him to
Amsterdam; they found many collateral Confirmations of part of his Story, but
no such Man could be seen in all the Places where he had met with him formerly;
the German came to the Hague, and being in the Fair, seeing one of the Shows,
and a Dane with him, as they came out in a huge Crowd, the German complained
that one struck him on the Breast with a Battoon: But this was not minded till
they were quite out, and he found one had struck at him, as it seems, with a
Stilletto under the left Pap, his Cloak and Coat were cut, and the Wound proved
but a slight Scratch; the Quill with the Poison in it sealed, is in the Court.
It seems, a German was thought a fit Tool, being of a Nation that would not be
easily suspected; and the putting it on a Lutheran would have been thought a
Masterpiece. I give you this Account, which I will Answer for, to satisfy some
of your Friends, both Here and in England, who will perhaps desire to know the
Certainty of this Matter.

A Relation from the City of Orange of a Crown of Light that was there seen in
the Air, the 6th of May, 1688.
ON the 6th of May, 1665, when his Royal Highness, the Prince of Orange, took
Possession of that Principality, and whilst his Deputy Mr. Ziulechem was taking
the Oath of Allegiance of all the People in the Prince's Name, which was done
in the Fields, in the Enclosure of the old Roman Cirque that yet remains; over
the Chair of State that was set there for the Prince, a Crown of Light appeared
in the Air, and hovered over the Chair above an hour: And now this Year, 1688,
the same day of the Month, in the same place, the like Crown appeared and
continued there three hours, all the People of Orange looking on; all the
difference between this Years Crown, and that of 1665, being, that this had an
Edg of Red about it. This is writ from Orange by an old Professor of Physic,
that is past sixty, and not apt to take things upon trust; he writes that he
himself, as well as all the Town, looked on it for above two hours with great
admiration of that strange Meteor. An account of that strange Meteor in 1665.
is related by Aitrema in his 5th Tome, fol. 595. well attested, and he is a
good Author.

FINIS.
Printed in the Year 1688.


