A LAMENTATION over CAMBRIDGE, AND ALSO A Visitation to the Inhabitants
thereof; Who have not yet sinned out the day of their Mercy, and worn out the
Patience of the Lord.
OH! thou Town of Cambridge! what sort of Lamentation and mourning shall I take
up for thee? how shall I lament thy sad Estate and condition, my tongue is not
able to utter the grief of my heart, for thy Inhabitants who have so long
grieved the Lords Spirit, and resisted his Appearance in thee by his Light and
Spirit, which is given to heal thee, and all people: But Oh, you Inhabitants of
Cambridge how have you slighted it, and rebelled against the Lord days without
number, and have still continued in your wickedness, and idolatrous practices,
and have highly provoked the Lord in acting that which you saw to be evil,
which his righteous witness in your Consciences did reprove you off, and which
many of you were and are convinced of in your Consciences to be evil; yet
notwithstanding, you have done that evil which you were convinced of, which is
a grievous provogation of the Lord; and the ground of it is because you were
not faithful unto the Lord in what he convinced you of, but for fear of man,
and also the reproach that might fall upon you, if you departed from iniquity,
ye have rather chosen to obey Man then the Lord, that ye might save your
selves from that which Man could do unto you; but alas, alas, who shall save
you from the stroke of the Lords hand, which is now ready to fall upon you, who
now will stand in the Gapp; will your Teachers whom you have followed, will
they save you, or are they able to save themselves? who is so wise among them
as to discern the cause? which of them can find out the ground of the matter?
has not fearfulness surprised the hearts of all? who can say, his heart is
clean, and he has no hand in procuring this which is come, and may yet further
come; do you not now see? In vain is the help of Man; have ye not been often
told it by the despised people of God called Quakers, that in vain was the help
of Man, whose Breath is in his nostrils; and has not the Lord raised up this
people, and sent early and late among you, exhorting you to cease from
following of Man, and to turn to the Lord, and be obedient to his Light and
Spirit, manifested in you: And have not they born a faithful Testimony among
you, in your Markets, in your Streets, in your Colleges, etc. and have they
not been evilly entreated by you? Oh ye Inhabitants of Cambridge! and was not
the first PERSECVTION begun among you in all these Parts, and was it not in
this Street, where the Lord has begun to stretch forth his hand; and has not
even all the Persecution that has been ever since begun in that Street: Oh
consider and lay to heart, ye Inhabitants of Cambridge, and repent and turn
unto the Lord, and love his Appearance in you, for yet a little while is given
you to return; take heed of slighting of it: And thus I was moved of the Lord
to write these few lines unto you, for the Seeds sake which is amongst you; and
that the honest hearted may know for what the Lord is offended with you, and be
separated in their hearts and conversations, least they also feel the stroke of
the Lords hand, for the Lord is certainly risen to plead the Cause of his
innocent and oppressed People, for he has heard their Cries and their Groans,
even as sure as he heard Israel in the days past, and will as certainly
deliver them from all their Oppressions; and well will it be for them that have
had no hand nor consent in Persecuting of them; for the Lord will certainly
take their parts more eminently then he has yet done, even to the Astonishment
of their Enemies, and to the opening of the eyes of many that they may see and
discern the cause of the Lords Controversy with England: But oh, thou Town of
Cambridge, there is yet something in my heart to write unto thee, and that is,
that every one may search their own hearts, with the Light of Christ, Gods
righteous and true witness which he has placed in your Consciences; and every
one depart from that which it lets you see to be evil, and let it search your
hearts, and be subject unto it; for that is it that must stand in the Gapp, and
cause the judgment to be removed, for it is your transgression against the
Lords witness, and appearance in you, which is the cause of his judgments
breaking forth amongst you. (and in this Nation) And thus I have cleared my
Conscience in the sight of God, (concerning you) and whether you hear or
forbear I am clear of your blood, who am subject to the motion of Gods Spirit;
and this is the message of the Lord unto you through his Servant.

J. A.
Written on the first day of the week being the 6. day of the 6. Month 1665.
An Epistle written in the movings of Gods holy Spirit unto the Elect People of
God every where.
DEar Friends, Brethren and Sisters of the birth of the morning of the day
which is sprung from on high, which has visited us; unto you all is the
breathing of my Fa^hers love through my vessel; and in the tenderness of my
heart, and moving of the spirit of life do I dearly salute every one of you,
having you all fresh in my mind before the Lord, wishing well unto you all, as
my own soul, and desiring of the Lo^d that ye may never want the enjoyment of
his life and love, which at this time I am filled withal toward you, and
which I feel is still in sto^e for you and all that are not yet brought home,
my soul travelleth for them and you, that all may be brought into the rest, and
also continue in it, for great shakings of heart may still be to come, to try
every birth, that that which is born of God may only stand and be approved in
his sight, and all false births will fail and fall before the Lord, and will
not stand in the day of trial, though it may make a great show for a time, and
boast it self in its many sufferings, and conquests, and glory over others,
with its many words and great show, yet it will come short of the blessing, and
the inheritance of God is not for it: therefore dear friends, I warn you all in
Gods fear and holy awe, that ye watch diligently over your own hearts, that
such a birth be not found amongst you, for that is it will betray the just for
something of this world, therefore beware of it, for it seeks it self and its
own honor, and not the good of all, nor Gods glory; by this ye shall know it,
it breathes downwards, and will say, save thy self; but the pure holy gentle
Seed and birth of the holy God, its cry is unto him, and its eye is toward
him, and it says, shall I not drink the cup which my heavenly Father gives
me? and shall I not follow the Lamb through the great tribulation, and lie down
in the will of the heavenly Father, and be content in all conditions, and it
murmures not at any trial, but cheerfully and joyfully passes through all,
rejoicing that it is found worthy to bear his testimony, and that it has a
cross to bear, though it meet with a Crown of thorns, from the world, and
spittings and mockings from the men thereof; yet the present enjoyment of its
God, in the midst of them makes up all, and constrains it to say (in the
strength of his love) all these things is but little; in comparison of what
thou art to me, how can I answer thy love, oh my God! so it wearies not in its
journey, nor faints not by the way, because the Lord is its portion, and the
place of of its rest; oh dear friends feel this birth in your hearts which
breathes upwards, and seeks those things which are above, and is not entangled
with the things of this world, with the cares of it, and fears of it, but casts
its cares upon God, and believes beyond all, and its faith removes the
mountains, and it has the evidence thereof in its self, and is of Abraham, For
it staggers not concerning the promise, though Sarahs womb be dry, this is the
birth that my life travelleth for, and that which my God will stand by, and
deliver out of all its afflictions, and will raise it up in the brightness of
his arisings and glory of his appearance, and blessed and happy are they that
has part in this first resurrection, for over them the second death shall have
no power, and they shall be reckoned in the number of Gods elect, which cannot
be deceived, and they are builded on that rock which the gates of hell cannot
prevail against, but all others shall beshatter'd and scattered, the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it, and it must shortly come to pass, therefore be
awakened, oh every one of ye who profess the name of the Lord, and put on your
beautiful garments (which is the covering of Gods holy pure spirit) and meet
the Bridegroom; prepare, prepare to meet him, for in power and great glory is
he come, and coming, and every eye shall see him, but the slumbering spirit
shall be shut out; but the bride that is prepared for her husband shall enter;
for now is the Kingdom of Heaven like unto ten Virgins, therefore it is in my
heart, from the mighty God, to warn all to watch and be diligent, that none
lose their Crown, and miss of their rest after so long a travel; for surely
my cry is, Lord save thy people, that none of them perish in the wilderness,
but that Iosuah's spirit may be found amongst them, that all may pass the
River Jordan; even So be it, Amen, says your Brother in the tribulation,
kingdom, and Patience of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Cambridge County Gaol, the 13. of the first Month, 1664. JOHN AYNSLOE.

For the FLOCK of God in the Town of Colchester.
DEar Friends and suffering Lambs, whom I dearly love and tenderly embrace in
the arms of my Fathers love, which flows in me toward you and all my suffering
Friends and Brethren every where, and also to the whole flock of my Fathers
fold, the breathing of my life is for you, and the salutation of my love is
unto you in the Town of Colchester, who is called to bear you testimony in this
day for the living God, and is found faithful in your trial, and shrinks not at
the sharpness thereof, though it has exceeded others. Surely it is because
the Lord is with you, and stands by you, and inables you to bear and suffer
what he suffers to be done unto you for the trial of your faith and patience,
that ye may be approved of in his sight, and manifested unto all your enemies
that ye are of God. Oh ye Valiants in Israel, my heart loves you, and my life
is refreshed in you: go on and prosper, and let it never repent you of what you
have suffered or may suffer for his Names sake, for surely your reward is from
God, and no man can take your crown from you; and happy are ye whom God has
counted worthy to bear such a testimony which is so much renowned in the hearts
of your Brethren, and so much in remembrance before the Lord; and strong are
the cries that are put up for you, that ye saint not, which surely prevail with
God on your behalf, for how can you suffer and we not partake with you, and
bear part of your burden, and contribute our assistance for your help by
supplicating to God for you, as the life does arise in our hearts, which is all
that we can do, having our own help from him, And now my dear friends and
fellow sufferers in the kingdom, and patience of our Lord Jesus Christ, what
have we to glory in in all this? wherein can we rejoice save that our names are
written in the book of life? what has the Lord done for us? how can we answer
his love? what can ^^^so dear to us as our God? what is so precious as his
life? what can we not part withal rather then it? what can we not suffer in
body and estate, rather then to be deprived of the light of his countenance? is
not this the cry of our hearts, Lord lift thou up thy countenance upon us, and
then we have enough, and be thou the portion of our cup, and which of us can
say but he has dealt bountifully with us, and does spread our table, and cause
our cup to overflow in the sight of our enemies, and many are the experiences
we have had of his love, day by day he has not ceased to do us good; how has
he engaged our hearts unto himself? O^ the remembrance of his love is fresh
upon my heart, and I cannot but communicate it unto you, that we may rejoice
together and praise the name of the Lord. And friends, be ye still valiant for
the truth upon the earth, keep your ground, and ye shall gain more. Weary not
in well doing, for surely you shall have your reward, if you faint no: fight
the good fight of faith, look over all the hardship unto the Lord, and he will
sweeten your cup, and make your trial easy. But woe to the enemies of Sion,
better they had never been born, then thus to vex and trouble Israel, who would
only pass through their country, and eat our own bre^d and drink our own
water, and not fowl their springs, but the heathen rage, and the people are
angry, because of what the Lord is about to do in the earth. But be ye still in
your tents, and quiet in your habitations which ye have in God: these things
will pass over, and the remembrance will be no more so. Think not the time
long, nor your trial hard, but ly down in the heavenly will of the heavenly
God, that his will may be done on earth as it is in heaven, which is the travel
of your suffering Brother.

Cambridge Castle the 7. of the 1. Month, 1664. J. A.

Printed in the first Month, 1664.


