An Exact COPY OF A LETTER FROM THE COUNT D'AVAVX His Most CHRISTIAN MAJESTY'S
Ambassador AT THE HAGUE. Dated the 9th of JANVARY 1684, And Directed to the
KING his MASTER, which was intercepted by the Marquess DE GRANA Governor of
the Spanish Netherlands. As also the Copies of other Three Letters relating to
the same Affair.
SIR*
I Had the Honor two days ago to make known to your Majesty that the Lords of
Amsterdam desired that I would by a Memorial to the States general, make known
those good Sentiments which your Majesty has taken up for the rest and quiet
of that republic, in case the Spaniards should let pass without effect, the
prefixed time of the Month of Jan. but that I had refused to present such a
Memorial. In the mean time, Sir, the Lords of Amsterdam are not able by their
Authority to bring the States General to deliberate upon some Affairs; to do
which it will be necessary that Pensionary Fagel and the Deputies of the States
General do consent before they look upon themselves obliged by the presentation
of a Memorial. But as it was 205, 33 for to Answer the designs of the Lords of
Amsterdam, that the States General should enter into a deliberation of what
measures they should take: in case an accommodation should not be concluded
betwixt your Majesty and Spain before the end of this Month.

We have sought after all expedients that might supply the defects of a
Memorial, and they laid before me that I should yield; that the Deputies of the
States General should ing^ge in a conference with me: In the which a Friend of
Amsterdam, one of the Holland Deputies should demand of me my Thoughts
concerning what should happen, in case the Spaniards should not accept some of
your Majesty's propositions before the end of Jan. from whence he might find
matter enough for the deliberation of the States General to me. I agreed, and
the Lords of Amsterdam went immediately to desire two of the Deputies of the
States General, that were most inclined to the interest of the P. of O. that
they would accept of a Deputation, and it was to be demanded from me. To give
an express Answer to the Complaints relating to the Ship called the Reagle;
these were presently ready and glad that they saw the Lords of Amsterdam,
willing to make Complaints against France, but others seeing further then they
saw, that the design of the Lords of Amsterdam was nothing else but to get a
Conference with me. This being their suspicion, was the cause that this
expedient took no effect; but the necessity in which the States General found
themselves to return me a Complement, upon my giving them notice of the birth
of the D. of Anjou did give us an opportunity of another expedient, which by
the vigilance of the Lords of Amsterdam was not ess serviceable to us than the
former.

For upon such Occasion, there being no more than three Deputies appointed, it
fell out luckily (all places having their turns) to fall upon the Deputies of
Holland, Freesland, and Groningham; to come to me; so that the Lords of
Amsterdam having thoroughly informed the Lords of Frisland and Groningham, and
desired the aforesaid two Lords to discourse with me in the same manner, that
the Deputies of Amsterdam should have discoursed with me, in case the
Deputation of the States General had been completed, the three aforesaid
Deputies came yesterday to me, and gave me to understand how much the States
General rejoiced in the happy Birth of the D of Anjou. After which the Deputies
of Freesland and Groningham began a Discourse of those Disturbances which might
arise, in case the Spaniards should pass by the Month of Jan. without effect:
The Deputy of Holland, that had the Precedence declared that the Discourse that
happened between us was of importance enough to be reported to the States
General; and in regard he could not do it except I gave it him in Writing, he
therefore desired that I would put it into the form of a Memorial: I answered
him that he was in the right, if I had any thing to propose, or was to request
any thing in the behalf of your Majesty, but that this was only as an Answer to
what was said to me by those Lords that were in the same Deputation, and that
it was not a request of your Majesty's, and that it was sufficient for them
that they knew it might be granted them, when the States General should think
it matter of Advantage to them; and therefore I left it to them to examine what
was most for their Convenience, and that I would give them further
Satisfaction, in case they desired a larger Information of your Majesty's
Sentiments; after which the said Deputies took their leaves, and about an hour
after that, the Deputies of Amsterdam came to Visit me, and to inform me of
their Endeavors, and that no matters came into debate before the States
General but what came by way of Memorial; but that notwithstanding, when a
Minister had discoursed with the Deputies of the States General, that the
Deputies did agree amongst themselves whether the matter then Discoursed off
ought to be a matter of deliberation or not, and that the Deputies of Friesland
and Groningham had given their words that they did agree, that all the
Discourse that happened in the last Conference ought to be taken into
deliberation. But

Sir, notwithstanding all these precautions, the Lords of Amsterdam dare not be
confident that the States General will take this Affair into deliberation; for
the Authority of the P. of O. and the direction of Pensianary Fagel is very
great; which appears plain enough, for that the Lords of Amsterdam could not
prevail so far with the States General, as to take into deliberation the
Memorials of the 5th of November. and the 29 of December. last, which I presented
to them; they also declared to me that they could wish that I would present a
Memorial, though it were only to make public the good Inclinations of your
Majesty to the Republic; alleging that the knowledge of what has been already
done, has had so considerable effects, that it is to be hoped they will have
more when it comes to be spread abroad. They also insinuated to me that a
Memorial might be so formed, as that the Proposals might seem no otherwise
intended but to the advantage of the States General: As for Example,

That I having observed from several Discourses from the Members of this
Government, the apprehensions they have of the Arms of your Majesty, in case
the Spaniards should not come to an accommodation before the end of Jan. of
which having the honor to give an account to your Majesty, and that your
Majesty had given me order to declare to the States General that in case they
remained as they were, and that they would send order to those Troops that were
sent to assist the Spaniards, not to Act otherwise then for the defense of the
Spanish Garrisons, that then your Majesty, for the quieting of the
Apprehensions of the States General, will promise and assure them to desist
from further Attacks, and turn your Arms elsewhere; and that he would be
contented only with quartering of Troops and raising of Contributions.

As to what concerns the Assurance which your Majesty expects from them, that
they will not begin any new Levy; that is an Affair that must be discoursed by
word of Mouth and not by Memorial; for that would look like meddling with their
Government: but it will be enough to lay before them, that they continue in the
condition in which they are, and such other Matters as may be convenient, and
then they will sooner think of the Cashiering of Troops, than raising more. The
Lords of Amsterdam have extremely pressed me to obtain this permission from
your Majesty, assuring me, that they will not be wanting, that it shall obtain
its end: They have also assured me there is hardly a day passes, but they gain
some of the Cities of Holland to their Sentiments, and that they have just now
obtained the like from one of the Principal, and that they are using all
endeavors to bring the Spaniards to an Accommodation, which if they cannot
obtain, that then such methods should be used as was proposed for the Peace and
Security of the Netherlands, and that they hoped that the Provinces of
Friezland and Groningham will come over to their Sentiments, and therefore
desired me to discourse with some of their Deputies, that they may continue
steadfast.

Sir, I can assure your Majesty, That the Lords of Amsterdam have been wanting
in nothing on their part and that they are not wanting in their endeavors with
other Cities: But, Sir, I must not forget to say before your Majesty, That some
of the Members of this State have made difficulty to allow your Majesty to come
with Militiary Execution upon the open Country of the Spainish Netherlands,
for that being done, it will be impossible for those Provinces to maintain
themselves, they being deprived of subsistence; and that it will tend
immediately to the taking away of the Barriere.

In case the ways through Flanders had been secure, I should not have taken the
freedom to have sent this Packet by a Courier; but because I could not have
written till Tuesday by the way of Liege, I thought it a matter of greater
importance then to defer it till that day, from giving your Majesty Account of
Affairs in this Country; for that it appears to me to be a Matter of so great
a Concern, that your Majesty be exactly informed thereof.

In case the Dispositions which I perceive in the Minds of People do not
suddenly change, this Affair in a few days will come to a great extremity. Your
Majesty well knows that in the beginning the Prince of Orange endeavored to
win those of Amsterdam to consent to the Levies, but not obtaining his end, he
would resolve it in the Assembly of the States of Holland; notwithstanding the
opposition of the Lords of Amsterdam; there was in the beginning but one City
that declared they could not consent, that a Matter of so great importance
should be brought to a Resolution without a general consent: The Prince of
Orange flattered himself that he could bring that City to agree with the rest,
and so have concluded that Matter. But the Lords of Amsterdam being animated by
the goodness of your Majesty, declared toward them, and being strengthened by
those Methods laid before them, were not contented only to refuse their Levies,
but inveyed severely against them, and have made so great an Interest in many
of the Cities, that several of them are come over to their Sentiments.

And thus your Majesty may see how this Matter continued for some time; the
Prince of Orange not being able to bear the Affront any longer, after four days
entered upon a desperate Resolution, for considering that there were more Cities
in Holland that gave their consent for the Levies, notwithstanding the
oposition of Amsterdam, then those against it, he took a Resolution, to cause
all the Cities to give their Voices; and though there might be six or seven
that might agree with Amsterdam in the same Sentiment, yet he intended to
conclude the Levies by pluralities of Voices.

But it is believed his principal Design was to save his Reputation abroad, by
causing the said Levies to be resolved on, against the consent of Amsterdam; it
being well known in this Country, that Pensionary Fagell can come to what
Conclusion he pleases, though against the Constitution of the Republic, when
assisted by the power of the Prince of Orange; and it is as well known that he
can have no great advantage by this Resolution, for that no man will venture to
lend money to the Solicitors for the advancing of these Levies. And this is the
Sentiment of the P. of O. which he declared to the Here van Harem; whom he also
told, that he would come to this Resolution the next Week: but though this
Resolution may be of little profit to the Prince of Orange, yet in other
respects it may be of great advantage to him, either by reason of those great
Divisions that will be made in the State, or by pleasing the Marquis De Grana,
thereby to make Spain believe that the Hollanders will send great Supplies to
them, and that the Amsterdamers use endeavors to prevent it.

Sir, As for me, I hope that for the same reason that makes me fear the Lords
of Amsterdam will not be able to obtain any thing against the will of the
Prince of Orange, that the States General will not have cause to complain of
your Majesty concerning the Assurance desired of them, that the Prince of
Orange should not be able to gain his end in raising the Levies against the
will of Amsterdam; and in case he pursues his Resolution, it will soon appear
that it will be to little purpose, for that it will be easier both for one and
the other side to traverse each other in their Sentiments, then to cause them
to take effect.

I must say this further to your Majesty, That Monsieur Paes, and others of the
same Sentiment have reassumed Courage; and to^d their Friends that they had
not flattered them in acquainting them with what our Majesty has done in
Flanders of Good 186, and yet less.

That the Lords of Amsterdam have had Resolution enough; and for certain, in
case the Prince of Orange shall attempt any thing by violence, he will meet
with more oppositions than he im^gines.

Sir, This is that which obliges me to represent to your Majesty, That I cannot
so easily and speedily as formerly, have the honor of your Majesty's Orders,
relating to Affairs that may accidentally happen; and in case your Majesty
shall think good to give me any Orders tending to your service, with permission
to execute the same as occasion requires, they may be of great use for the
supporting of those of Amsterdam to enter upon such Expedients as they shall
propose me, that so your Majesty might not be at a loss to present a Memorial
in case of necessity; but if not, yet to desire a Conference with the States
General, who will immediately send their Deputies to discourse with me in this
Affair: and in pursuance of this Conference, I would deliver over in writing
what has been discoursed betwixt us, which would be a means to palliate the
matter; for the Lords of Amsterdam are not a little alarmed at the pretended
coming over of a 136, and do say that it is nothing else but to amuse them,
that I am so earnest to make these proposi^ions to them; and there is nothing
will more advantage the interest of your Majesty, then to show them that i^^s
out of respect to them that you have bin so frank in your proceedings, and that
is it which must persuade them when we enter upon those expedients, which will
not too much engage your Majesty. I most humbly beseech your Majesty that you
will be pleased to let me know if there be any Affairs wherein I might launch
out my self to the uttermost, without being any obstruction to what your
Majesty demands, relating to the ruin of the open Country of the Spaniards, in
which I find so many difficulties, if the matter should come so far, which I
yet question: I do not give my self the honor to ask of your Majesty what I
must do as to the assurance that may be desired of the Lords of Amsterdam, in
case they cannot bring the States General to grant unto your Majesty what has
been laid before me; (as yet I know not what the intent of your Majesty is) I
can only say that the Lords of Amsterdam have not as yet explained that matter,
and have told me expressly that these are remedies they must only have recourse
unto, in case of the uttermost extremity; neither will they say any thing to me
of that Affair, before they have lost all hopes of obtaining from the States
General those assurances of giving your Majesty satisfaction; which they do yet
flatter themselves they shall obtain.


A Copy of a Letter from Monsieur de Saint Disdier to Monsieur de Mesmes.
THere has bin here no Alterations since I have had the honor of Writing to
you by Castle, I had also two days ago the same honor of Writing to you by
the way of Liege. The Lord of Amsterdam do their endeavors, and Monsieur
D'Avaux so manages his Affairs as to obtain his ends; and in case Affairs
cannot be brought to succeed according to our wishes, it must be imputed to the
great opposition we meet with. In the mean time we can promise our selves that
these Affairs will not come much short of our desires; as for me I make it too
much my interest as well in Relation of my Station, as to the honor of
Mounsieur D'Avaux, as to wish that all things may come to a happy Issue.

Sir, your most humble and obedient Servant, Saint Disdier.


The Copy of a Letter to Monsieur de Mesmes 9th Jan. 1684.
AFfairs here are brought to a great extremity, and I do foresee they will grow
more difficult. It i^ no^ likely that any thing can be obtained in the midst of
these disorders against the will of the Prince of Orange, but the Lords of
Amsterdam will never consent to the Levies: It is believed he will do it in
Opposition to them, which we must expect.


A Copy of a Letter from Father Limoion to the Reverend Father Grenier at
Marseilles, D^tea at the HAGUE, Second of January, 1684.
Most Reverend Father and Master,
THe Aff^irs of State in these parts is to prevent the United Provinces from
proceeding in the ^e^les, that so the King may the next Compaigne make himself
Master of the Spanish Netherlands, we flatter them here with illusory Promises:
for in all probability within four Months we shall have a Bloody War.

Yours.


FINIS.
Printed at the Hague by Jacobus Sek^ltus Printer to the States, and Re printed
at London for Randall Tayl^r 1684.


