AN Awakening Word IN SEASON, TO THE Grand-Jury-Men OF THE NATION.

LONDON, Printed for Arthur Jones, at the Flying-Horse, near St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet, 1684.

A Book, Entitled, A Discovery of Treason, Printed at Cambridge for Charles
Morden, a Bookseller there, and commonly said to have been Penned by Mr. Jenner
of Gaius College, one of the King's Chaplains, and Prebendary of the Church of
Sarum, has publicly undertaken to prove Dr. Whithy ( Praecentor of the same
Church, and Confessedly, the Author of The Protestant Reconciler) Guilty of
Treason; an Encourager of the New Plot; a Giver out unto the the People, That
the King and Governors were and are the Betrayers of their Liberties; and
therefore deserve Death. This in General; and in the Title Page of the Book.

In the Book it self (beginning at p. 60) it is proved against the said Daniel
Whitby, D. D.

1. That his Design is malicious and Treasonable, not only toward the King,
but also toward the Governors of Church and State, Page 60. 2. That he
scandalously makes the King and Governors, The Authors of all our present
Schism and Factions, Page 61. 3. That he affirms an Horrid Schism, with all its
dreadful Consequences, to have been Caused (he does not say Occasioned) by the
Imposition of them, throughout the Body of the Nation, page 62. 4. That
according to the said Dr. Whitby, in his Libellous Book; The King and
Governors, are proud Men, and the Plagues of the Earth, for Imposing things
Indifferent, p. 67. 5. That he the said Dr. Whitby, has east a great Lie on
the King and Government. 6. That according to him the said Dr. Whitby, The King
and Governors deserve Death, for Imposing things Indifferent, p. 68, 69. 7.
That (according to him the said Dr. Whitby) the King and Governors are Traitors
to the Commonwealth, and Betrayers of the People's Liberties: and that the
People ought not to yield to their Impositions; but ought to Rebel, and
vindicate their Christian Liberty; p. 70, 71, etc. 8. That never did Hugh
Peter's Preach and Print greater Treason than the said Dr. Whitby; upon the
pretended force of whose Treasonable Argument, Oliver and the Rump, with their
Rebellious Army, cut off King Charles the First his Head, p. 71, 72, 73. 9.
That the King and Governors are affirmed by Dr. Whitby, to want Piety and
Prudence, in their imposing upon the People things Indifferent, p. 74, 75. 10.
That the said Dr. Whitby does again sound the Trumpet to a New Rebellion,
odiously and maliciously misrepresenting the King and Governors unto the
People, as Idiots and Fools, as Wicked and Ungodly, p. 76. 11. That according
to him the said Dr. Whitby, The King and Governors are the Destroyers of the
work of God, and the Murderers of myriads of Souls, by imposing things
Indifferent, p. 77. 12. That he the said Dr. Whitby, feigns the King to command
Men to sin, when he commands their Obedience to things Indifferent, p. 79, 80.
Having Collected this single dozen of remarkable things in that Book, which
its Author has Entitled, A New Discovery of Treason, and faithfully cited the
several Pages wherein the Proofs are to be seen by every Reader; and where the
Pages of Dr. Whitby, in his Libellous Book, Entitled, The Protestant
Reconciler, are cited also: I do not wonder that the said Libel was made an
Example of at Oxford, where 'twas publicly Condemned to be Burned Alive, like
an Arrant Witch; because it had been known too well to have Bewitched silly
Creatures of each Sex with Rebellious Disaffections both to the King, and the
Church of England. And Rebellion being a Sin like the Sin of Witchcraft, it is
not strange the Witch was burned. Nor do I wonder, that the Author of the New
Discovery of Treason, has stigmatized Dr. Whitby as the Scurrillous Reconciler,
p. 66. or as a second Hugh Peter's, p. 72. or as a Janus with two Faces, p. 65.
whose Practices in a Cathedral (for the Keeping of Four Preferments, enough for
Four Better Men) do flatly contradict his Arguments for Noncompliance, and
Nonconformity. Nor do I wonder, that the People do Nickname him Whigby, who
has broken all the Statutes of God and Man, to Patronize the worst things in
our Modern Whiggs; and to make them much worse than before they were. I do not
wonder, that Mr. Thomas (a very loyal and learned Writer) has, in his
excellent Remarks on the Protestant Reconciler, put the saddest Dilemma on Dr.
Whitby, that ever was put by a good Logician upon an ill one: A Dilemma, which
evinceth him to be the worst of Men or Monsters, let him take which part he
will, p. 4. Nor do I wonder, that Mr. Thomas has proved the Railings of
Fanatics to be made by Dr. Whitby, his own entirely, page 4. and 5. And that
by three several Canons now in force, to wit, the Fourth, Sixth and Tenth, Dr.
Whitby stands sentenced unto an Excommunication, page 5 and 6, etc. Nor do I
wonder, that Mr. Thomas (though of the greatest Moderation) has told the World
in plain English, That he (the said Dr. Whitby) has played the Knave with two
Kings, page 10. for he proves the Accusation by unanswerable Arguments, page
11, 12, 13, etc. And other Arguments there are, which never yet came to that
Author's Ears. I do not wonder, that Dr. Womock, (now Lord Bishop of St.
David's) in his most excellent Book, entitled, (Suffragium Protestantium) has
publicly Gibbetted Dr. Whitby, as the weakest of Logicians, and worst of Men.
Nor do I wonder, that such an Apostate, in his Protestant Joyner, has showed
his Malice against the King's Commissioners at the Savoy, page 39, 40, 197,
198, 199, 330, 331. against the right Reverend Bishop Tailor, Bishop Davenant,
Dr. Potter, Dr. Tillotson, Dr. More, Dr. Burnet, Mr. Falkner, Judge Hales, and
others, in too many Passages of his Libel to be here numbered up, though I have
them ready. Much less do I wonder at his Abuses of the Learned and Reverend Dr.
Stillingfleet, as hypocritical and senseless, page 297, 298, 301, 302, 363. or
as a Man of weak Evasions, page 81, 82. much less yet at his avowed Partiality
to the Schismatics, page 202, 203, 205, as far as to page 208. and again, p.
320, 363, 364. Last of all, I do not wonder, that such a Monster of Ingratitude
to his own very good Lord, from whose Bounty he has his Bread, should
reproachfully brand so great a Prelate, as the right Reverend Bishop of Sarum,
under the Notion of Patron; To whose Instructions and Example, Discourse and
Counsel, he owes the small Improvements which he has hitherto attained: Yea,
from whose Favors and Protection, he derives the Comforts and Satisfactions of
his Life; yes, and the Encouragement of all his Labors. By all which sly
Insinuations, under the color of a Complement in a Dedicatory Epistle, it is
hard to say, how many ways he has publicly injured so great a Father of the
Church; as if the whole Crop of Mischiefs which his Protestant Reconciler had
done in England, had taken Root from his Lordship's Discourse and Bounty. I
say, I do not wonder at any one of these Enormities, or at all put together: I
do not wonder at his Zeal, his impertinent Zeal, his Zeal against Knowledge,
(rather than without it) for the Bill of Exclusion; or at the Timeing of his
Libel against the Government, when the King was at New Market, designed for
Slaughter in his Return. I do not wonder at any Wickedness which has
proceeded, or may proceed from the worst of Men: An Episcopal-Presbyterian, a
Canonical-Cathedral-Fanatical-Anarchical-Republican, an Antimonarchical-
Cromwellian-Shaftsburian-Royalist; an half-faced, whole-faced, two-faced
Brother.

But I and multitudes do wonder from day to day, and think we can never wonder
enough, that after so many lesser Criminals have been Hanged, Drawn and
Quartered, for fewer Crimes, less notorious than in Print; this Protestant
Joyner, in whose Printed Libel Stephen College still lives, is not yet Indicted
by any Grand Jury, for the Sedition, or the Treason whereof he stands charged
by Mr. Jenner, (if he is as really as reputedly the Author of the Book, which
occasions mine) but still lives wallowing in his many and great Preferments,
and slips his Neck out of every Collar prepared for, and due to him; merely by
the Verbal Mockery of a pretended Recantation, which cost him nothing but the
Pleasure of out-witting his Governors, by a Part acted in a Comical way;
besides the Pleasure of being known (by that Side-wind) to have been indeed the
Author of that Famous Book, whereof till then he was but suspected. And the
Comical Recantation (in but one transient Observator) had this remarkable
Beginning: I Daniel Whitby, D.D. Chanter of Sarum, and Rector of the
Parish Church of St. Edmunds, in the City and Diocese of Sarum, having been the
Author of a Book, called, the Protestant Reconciler, which through want of
Prudence and Deference to Authority, I have caused to be Printed and Published;
am truly and heartily sorry for the same, and for the Evil Influence it has
had upon the Dissenters from the Church of England, Establshed by Law, or
otherwise, etc.

Now, though the Loyal and Learned Author, who Penned and Published The New
Discovery of Treason, has proved the Design of the Protestant Reconciler to be
nothing but Anarchy and Confusion in Church and State, (page 82.) which is a
greater Treason than that for which by Law he is to be Hanged, (page 80.) Yet
so far has he been from being Executed at Tyburn, or Degraded from his
Priesthood, or under Excommunication, or Imprisonment for Life, or so much as
suspended from any Profits of his Preferments, that under the Notion of
Recanting, he has owned that Libel which was the Joy of his poor Heart, and the
Delight of his Evil Eyes; that which made him so dear to the Disaffected of
every sort; and lastly, procured him Letters of Thanks from the Anabaptists of
Munster, from the New England Congregations, and from the Quakers of
Pensilvania. All Three Printed at London for Benjamin Took, 1683.

Whosoever shall well consider, what a Judgment was pronounced in the Court of
King's Bench in Trinity-Term, vicesimo nono Caroli Secundi, against Mr. Joseph
Brown, merely for Publishing an unlicensed Book, called, The Long Parliament
Dissolved; and shall compare the signal Favor which was shown to the said
Brown, by the same House of Commons; which the very next Day fell so severely
on Mr. Thompson, (now Dean of Bristol) will justly wonder, that our
Grand-Juries have been as often in a deep Sleep, as Dr. Whitby, and his
Sedition, (supposing it does not amount to Treason) has been omitted in their
Indictments.

FINIS.

