THE Revengeful Mistress; BEING AN AMOROUS ADVENTURE OF AN English Gentleman IN
SPAIN.

In which are also contained three other NOVELS, Viz. The Wronged Innocence
cleared, The Generous Impostor, and The Unfortunate Colonel.

-- Quoties facit Ira nocentem
Hunc Sexum, rabie jecur incendente feruntur
Praecipites.
Juvenal, Sat. 6. Writ by PH. AIRS, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for R. Wellington, at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1696.

THE PREFACE.
ANobleman who had an Affection for a young Scholar of excellent Parts,
presented him with a large Gold Cup, wrought with curious Workmanship, and and
advised him to use it rightly, with Moderation and Sobriety. To whom the
Scholar returned this Answer. My Lord, In the Gift you have expressed your
Liberality; and in the Counsel, your Friendship to me: By the former, you have
enriched my House; but by the latter, my Heart. So'twas my Aim, that this TALE
should also be accompanied with such good Advice, as might make it of Profit,
as well as Pleasure, to Young Gentlemen designed to Travel, for whose Benefit
it was chiefly Writ: And by showing them where the sculking Rocks lie hid on
which other Vessels have been Ship-wrack'd, I would teach them to steer a more
secure Course, and preserve themselves from the like Misfortune.

It Is then fit they should know, that the Curtizans of Italy are notorious for
their Subtilties, by which they often allure Men of eminent Quality and Parts,
as well as Others, into their Snares, and so ruin many Noble Families. They
take 'em up into the Fools Paradise, caress and entertain 'em with Banquets,
Music, Dancing, and all Delights they can invent to gratify the Senses; but
having obtained their Ends; those whom before they flattered, they after pack
off in Scorn and Derision, with heavy Hearts, but with light light Purses:
Which Truth, some of our Young Gallants, sent to make Observations on Foreign
Countries and People, have been able to testify by a dear bought Experience.

But scarce any Nation under the Sun, is so abounding in this sort of Ill Women
as Spain. There, in Cities and great Towns, when it begins to grow dark, they
appear in Shoals, distinguished by their White Veils or Mantles, and have their
Places of general Rendezvous: Those of Toledo in the Zocodover, and those of
Madrid in the Puerta del Sol; where discovering their Faces, they show
themselves as in a Market, and ply for the Ruin and Destruction of Mankind.

And as these Lindas Margaritas are known to be the most witty, quick, and
entertaining of the World in Conversation; so are they above all others the
most impudent, and most nicely skilled, in all points of their accursed
Mystery; and consequently very dextrous in managing their Clients to all
Advantages; for they seldom part with any one out of their Power, so long as
they find he has Money, Goods, or Credit left. And then though several of these
Enamorados have been discarded by their Misses, in a naked and starving
Condition, with all their sparks of Love extinct; yet have they soon felt their
Bodies so enflamed, by an unnatural Fire kindled there, that they have scarce
been able to bring them to a good Temper again, so long as they lived.

'Twas therefore my Drift in the Principal Novel, to expose this sort of Vice,
and by Painting it in its proper Colors, to show its deformity; which I have
endeavored in the Character of a Young Man, who, whilst indulging himself in
Lewdness with his Mistress, fancied he was raised up to the highest Region of
Felicity, his Heart could wish to arrive at; which made him deas to all good
Admonition, and insensible of Danger, 'till he had run blindly on to the very
Brink of Perdition.

The Morality to be gathered from hence, is, That such Young Gentlemen, as in
their Travels abroad, or here at home, are inclined to the like Vicious
Courses, be persuaded to quit them in time, before they plunge themselves into
inevitable Ruin: And it may show the Parents or Friends of such, the danger of
committing them to the wide World, without some vigilant Eye, and strict hade
over them, to keep 'em in bounds of safety. For when once they hearken to the
Charms of those Circes, and lift themselves to fight under Cupid's Banners,
they throw off all thoughts of Danger, as they do of Virtue: Books are then
laid aside; all healthful Exercises dis-used, and ingenious Recreations
slighted. Their time is chiefly taken up in a fond Contemplation of the admired
Fair One, the Object of their Love, or more properly of their Lust. Their
Manners also and Ways of Living are quite changed, and all their Actions run
counter to those of other Men in their Senses. For though the bright Morn display
it self, inviting the Husbandman into the Fields to his Labor; the Scholar to
his Studies, the Traveller to his Journey; and and all Industrious Persons to
their several honest Employments; yet is this glorious Light of small Benefit
to the Intriguing Gallant 'till about Noon, when he opens his Eyes, rises, and
spends the remainder of the Day, in Dressing, Eating, and Contriving new
Methods of Entertainment for his Mistress; and when others are going in due
season, to their Natural Rest, he then sets out to prosecute his unlawful
Amors.

This is the common Practice of many in those hot Countries, who by such
Extravagancies, bring themselves to Misery, and to untimely Ends. And though our
Adventurer's Intrigue proved not so fatal, as some have done; and was not acted
with a common Strumpet; yet was it attended with as many Dangers as most of
that kind, and his Life by himself as boldly exposed; whilst he might well have
called to mind, the Misfortune which he knew had befallen a Young Gentleman,
the Son of a Rich Merchant in Spain; who being engaged in an Amrous Design with
a Lady, and finding himself like to be surprised in her Chamber, was
endeavoring to escape over the Tops of Houses; but from thence was shot down
dead by the wronged Husband.

And lest what I have hinted, should fall short, I shall add what Aeneas
Sylvius says emphatically on this Subject. Quid Meretrix, nisi Juventutis
expilatrix, virorum rapina, patrimonii devoratrix, Honoris pernicies, pabulum
Diaboli, Janua mortis, inferni Supplementum, discrimen vitae, mors blanda, mel
felleum, dulce venenum, pernicies delicata, malum spontaneum?

The other Stories intermixed herewith, were only intended to divert the Reader
with Variety.

THE Revengeful Mistress, OR AN Amorous Adventure.
THough Madrid have not the Title of a City, yet in respect of its large
Extent, its great Riches, and the Kings of Spain for many years honoring it
with their Residence, it has by much got the preeminence of the Ancient City of
Toledo, and is always styled La Villa Real de Madrid, the Royal Town of Madrid.
Nor has it this Title without just reason, since it is adorned with three of
his Catholic Majesty's Royal Palaces. The first is that which for Eminence is
called The Palace, much admired for its Beauty, standing within the Town, on
the banks of the River Mansanarez, and was built by the Emperor Charles the
Fifth; having on the top of its Curious Stone Front an old Brick Tower,
appearing as a blemish, but reserved on purpose there by that Monarch, for a
Memorial of his having kept his Rival in Glory, the French King Francis the
First, a Prisoner in it. The second Palace is the Buen Retiro, on the North
side of the Town, but seated on ground something higher than it, within a most
delightful Enclosure, resembling St. James's- Park; this glories in its fine
Gardens, shady Groves, its long Walks of Trees, and a Canal filled from a vast
square Pond, called by them a Sea, but is it self supplied with water brought
thither by an Aquaeduct, for about the space of two Leagues. The third Palace
is called La Casa del Campo, or the Country House, on the other side of the
River; chiefly intended for a place of pleasure, adorned, as all the other
Royal Palaces are, with Excellent Paintings; and has in the middle of its Chief
Garden an admirable Statue of Brass, of King Philip the Fourth, Father of the
present King Charles the Second, upon a Pedestal on Horseback, made by a great
Italian Master, being a Present to his said Catholic Majesty, by the then
Great Duke of Tuscany, and is esteemed to excel that which stands in the
Principal Court of the Buen Retiro. It Is also of no small advantage to this
Town of Madrid, to have the Neighborhood of three others of his Catholic
Majesty's Palaces not very remote. The first is El Pardo, at about two Leagues
distance, in a large Forest, to which the King often goes for his Recreation,
to divert himself, and his Court, with Hunting the WildBoar, and other Game,
which are commonly first taken in Toyls, and then in a great Court before the
Palace are hunted to death.

The Second is called Aranjuez, or to our pronunciation Arangwhess, about five
or six Leagues from Madrid, famed for its delightful Situation, as it were in a
Peninsula; being on that Languet of Land where the two great Rivers Tagus and
Harama have their Confluence, and the latter is lost in the former. This Royal
Seat is not so much remarkable for the House it self, as for its pleasant
Gardens, Statues, Fountains, and its spacious Walks; one of which is a complete
League in length, shaded all the way with a double row of tall English Oaks on
each side of it, planted there by King Philip the Second, the Husband of our
Queen Mary the First, near an hundred and fifty years ago. And from those two
Rivers, which wash the two outsides of this spacious Garden, are brought
thither, through Pipes, such vast quantities of water, as supply the Fountains,
and make such a curious variety of Waterworks, as is very amazing to the
Beholders. And there at Midday in Summer time, when the Sun shines, they can
make an artificial Rainbow, by playing several Pipes of Water from the tops of
some of the Oaks, across the said broad Walk.

The other Palace is seven Leagues from Madrid, which is about twenty English
Miles, and is that Celebrated House, the Escurial, built by King Philip the
Second, at the foot of the great Mountain which they call La Sierra de
Guadarama, and by him it was Dedicated to S^. Laurence the Martyr, who had been
broiled to death on a Gridiron. The Spaniards term this Magnificent Pile the
Eighth Wonder of the World: And well they may; for it is of so prodigious a
bulk, that it seems capacious enough to lodge the Inhabitants of a small City;
and yet it is so very regular and uniform in all its parts, that there is not a
Tower, Pinnacle, nor Window on one side, which has not the same to answer it on
the other.

There is in the Spanish Tongue a whole Book in Folio, writ of its description;
but I shall content my self to say it is a most Beautiful Fabric, all of a gray
sort of Marble, drawn down from the Quarries of that Mountain, and for the most
part of the Doric order built, expressing a Noble Solidity, as well as an exact
Symetry. In the Front, which is eight hundred paces broad, are three stately
Doors or Gates, of which that in the Center is the principal, and opens into
the first Court, where, before you, you have a view of the Grand Portico of the
Church, over which in Niches stand the Statues of the five good Kings of Judah,
and Israel, made much bigger than the Life, of Brass, and guilt in the Fire.
Into this Portico you advance by large steps, and are led into the Church it
self, which for bigness may compare with many Cathedrals, but will surpass them
in beauty; and underneath the great Hemisphereor Dome, you may descend into the
famous Oratory or Chapel, called the Pantheon, which, though under ground, is an
imitation of that admired piece of Building in Rome, so called by the old
Romans, but now, Santa Maria della Rotunda. Here round the sides are placed, as
it were in Niches, one above another, many Brazen Urns; in some of which are
preserved the Bodies of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and of the several Kings
and Queens of Spain since that time.

To make short, the whole Building was designed to resemble a square Gridiron,
to which the Church must serve for a handle; and on each side of the Grand
Portico, and of the first Court, are seven other Courts, making fifteen in all,
wherein are contained besides the King's Palace, which takes not up above one
fourth part of the whole, a Royal Convent of Monks, of the Order of St. Hierom,
and two Large Colleges, the one of Regular, and the other of Secular Students:
Also a vast Apartment over the Principal Gate, made for a Noble Library of
Books, reckoned to be little inferior to that of the Vatican in Rome, or the
Bodleian Library in Oxford. And here the Monks, after you think you have seen
the whole, lead you into one Room filled only with Excellent Greek Manuscripts,
of which they are more proud to talk, than skilful to use; and into another
full of Books written in the Oriental Tongues, which had been a Collection made
by that Learned Prince Muley Sidan Emperor of Marocco, and accidentally seized
at Sea by Don Iuan of Austria, in his return from the Battle of Lepanto, by
whom they were presented to King Philip the Second, to adorn this his New
Library.

But I should swell this little Piece into a large Volume, should I proceed to
give but a slight Description of the outward Beauties, and most Remarkable
things of this place, particularly of the Church, the several Cloisters,
Apartments, Halls, Galleries, Chapels, Sacristies, and other Stately Rooms, as
well private as public; or of the admirable Furniture belonging to them; as
the Exquisite Paintings of the greatest Masters in that Art, the World for
these two or three last Centuries has produced: Or speak of the immense Riches
in Plate and Jewels there shown in several places; or the Robes of the
Churchmen, Relics of Saints, Pieces of Antiquity, and other Curiosities. I
shall therefore only add this seeming incredible thing of this vast Fabric,
that the Spaniards affirm it to be no less than thirty three Leagues, which is
near a hundred Miles (as say they, it has been computed) for a Man to go, that
would walk about into every one of the Rooms of it. But I dare not undertake to
vouch for this, though I spent three days in viewing what was most worthy of Note
there.

But now to return to Madrid, which the Romans called Mantua Carpentana, or
Carpentanorum; I say, there is not any thing of Beauty of Grandeur, for which a
Town is Famous, but this Place may challenge for it a competition with the
proudest City in all Spain, a good River excepted, and a large Cathedral; but
as for other Churches, Convents, and Hospitals here, they excel in Curiosity
and Riches; so do the spacious Streets and Placas, or Piazzas, especially the
Placa Mayor, wherein the Noble Sport of the Bulls, called the Fiesta, or the
Iuego de Toros is exhibited upon some Eminent Occasions; but annually on the
three Festiaval Days of St. Ann, St. John the Baptist, and St. Isidro, or
Isidore, to whom they ascribe the Honor of Patron of the Town.

Hither the Court having drawn a great confluence of the Nobility and Gentry,
as well as Merchants of diverse Nations; there are, of consequence, many stately
Palaces and Houses of Grandees, and other Noblemen, who live here in great
Splendour; as do also many Eminent Persons of inferior Rank and Quality. The
Chiefest of the Houses are, first, that of the Marquess de Leche, built by his
Father Don Luis de Haro, Grand Minister of State, and Privado or Favorite of
King Philip the Fourth; then the Palace of the Dukes of Lerma, those of the
Dukes of Infantado, of Montalto, with innumerable others. There were likewise
two very stately Bridges over the small River; but the newest and finest of
them, almost as soon as built, was carried away, by force of a sudden and
violent Flood. And though the Town stand dry, on an Eminence much above the
River, yet is it so well supplied by Waterworks, and Fountains, that there is
seldom any scarcity of Water in it.

The several Foreign Ministers also, who are sent from the Courts of other
Princes and States, to make their Residence here, do not a little add to the
Ornament and Grandeur of the Place. Amongst whom our Kings Ambassadors did lay
their Claim to the third Seat in the Chapel Royal, and it was ever, without
dispute, formerly allowed them, after the Nuncio of the Pope, and of the
Emperor's Ambassador, who only had Precedence of them: Though of late Years the
French have contested for it and since that, to avoid the Mischiefs which
happened by the Retinues of the two Ambassadors fighting always whenever they
met, it has been accommodated. From this orderly placing in the King's Chapel,
of the several Ambassadors coming from Crowned Heads, amongst whom are also
reckoned those from the Republic of Venice, and States of Holland, they are
called there, Emvaxadores de la Capilla, Ambassadors of the Chapel.

'Twas during the Negotiation of a Person of great Honor and Abilities,
bearing this Character from our King, and residing in this Court, that there
happened a certain Affair of consequence, which was to be transacted in the
City of Toledo; for dispatch whereof, his Excellency appointed two of his
Retinue to go and attend there, till it should be finished: The one of these
was a brisk young Gentleman, of about Two or Three and Twenty Years of Age, who
had made himself a perfect Master of the Spanish Tongue; this was to be the
chief Speaker: And the other a Graver Person of above Thirty, but of much less
skill in the Language, and he was for the sober Conduct of this Matter. They
solicited daily, with all the diligence they could, but the Spaniards being
slow, and dilatory in all manner of Business, that which was supposed, would
have been brought to an end in a fortnight or three weeks time, proved the work
of a whole Summer. These two English Gentlemen, whom I shall call, for
particular Reasons, by Spanish Names, the Elder Don Enrique, and the other Don
Feliz, settled themselves in a Casa de Posadas, or House of Lodgings adjoining
to a great House, which stood at the entry into the Placuela de la vega; the
back part whereof overlooking the City wall, often afforded them a most
refreshing Air, in that soultry place, and always a very delightful Prospect to
the Eye for some Miles, over the Fields and Meadows, running along the River
side. But before I proceed further, it may not be unpleasant, nor unprofitable
to the Reader, if I also observe something of the Situation and Building of
this Town.

The City of Toledo, called in Latin Toletum, stands on a high large Hill, of
which near three parts are surrounded with the River Tagus, in the form, as I
may properly enough say, of a Horse-shooe. It was much beautified with fine
Building, and fortified with a strong wall; but not totally built, as some
erroneously conjecture, by one of the Kings of the Goths in Spain, flourishing
about the Year of Christ, 680. after his return from appeasing a Rebellion of
some of his Subjects; his Name was Wamba, as this Inscription over one of the
Gates does express.

Erexit, fautore Deo, Rex inclitus Vrbem
Wamba, suae celebrem portendens Gentis honorem.
And, according to the vulgar Opinion, the same Gothish King caused the
following Distich, to be Inscribed over another Gate of the City.

Vos Domini Sancti quorum heic proesentia fulget,
Hanc Vrbem, and Plebem, solito servate favore.
Addressed, as I conceive, to the Popish Saints or Martyrs, who formerly lived
or suffered Death for the Christian Religion there, and whose Shrines were then
remaining.

After the Conquest of Spain by the Arabian Moors, who divided it into many
petty Kingdoms, this City of Toledo, wherein the Gothish Kings were wont to
have their Residence, was made the Metropolis of a Kingdom of the same Name,
and Seat of one of those Kings of the Moors. It is now reckoned an opulent
City, standing in the very Heart or Center of the Kingdom, full of Merchants,
of Traders, and of Manufactories; from whence diverse sorts of Merchandise and
Commodities are sent to all parts of Spain, which bring back a Return of Money,
and of all things necessary, in a great plenty. It is divided into three and
twenty Regions, or Wards, which have their particular Magistrates, and over
them all is the Corrigidor. It Is adorned with many Stately Palaces, but that
called the Alcazer, or Palace-Royal, built by the Moors, is of no small
Ornament to the Town; the Fine Churches, the Rich Convents, the Townhouse, and
other Public Buildings, are very much boasted of; so are the Placas, and
Placuelas, which in all are seventeen; and the two spacious Hospitals deserve a
particular Remark.

But the greatest Glory of this City is, that it is an Archepiscopal See, and
honored with a Magnificent Cathedral; which, in my Opinion excels in Beauty,
most of the Churches of Spain, except that of Burgos, the Chief City of Old
Castile* Built, as they tell us, by Englishmen; of which, for its admirable
Curiosity of Wormanship, they use to say, La yglesia de Burgos es la Ioya, y
aquella de Toledo, no es mas que la Cascara. The Church of Burgos is the Pearl,
and that of Toledo, but the Shell or Casquet to hold it. But this may compare
for largeness of Structure, with any Cathedral in that whole Kingdom, except
one in Cordoua, which the Moors widened on the sides, making it from its form
of a Cross, to be an exact square Mosque for their own Devotions.

This is very remarkable for its great number of fine Windows, beautified with
curious Figures painted in the Glass, with variety of Colors; besides which
are counted 750 other clear Lights or Windows without Painting. The Chapels
about it are many, and enricht with Altars of curious Architecture, which are
Adorned with excellent Crucifixes and o'ther Images, and Pictures of Saints.
And it is very admirable to observe every day, but especially on Holy days, the
Priests Officiating in this Church, in their princely Vestments, sometimes
shining in Robes of Gold, sometimes in Silver, in variety of Silks, in Tissue,
in Purple, and in delicate Embroideries, and sparkling with Jewels of
inestimable value: So are the Images of the Saints dressed up, particularly
that of the Virgin Mary, for whom they have one Petticoat powdered with Flowers
of Pearls, intermixed with large Diamonds, Rubies, Emralds, Saphirs, and diverse
sorts of Precious Gems: They have likewise other rich Garments and Dresses for
her, with two Crowns of Gold, a greater and a less, both set with Stones of a
considerable price, which they put on her upon great Festivals, and when they
carry her abroad in Procession.

It would be a large Work to give a full description of this Church, of its
several Chapels, of the Vestry, and of the ChapterHouse, an eligant piece of
Building, the Roof or Cieling of which is finely gilt with Gold, and about it
are represented the Portraits of all the Archbishops that have ever been of
this See. The Relics also that the Priests show, are abundance; of which
they will tell you as many Wonders in one Hour, as you will be puzzled to believe
in Seven Years. The two Pulpits likewise in this Church, being curious Work,
are both of them well worthy our Observation. And to enter into this huge
Fabric, are six great Doors or Gates; Three on the North side; Two on the
South; And one in the West end, where is the Portico and principal Entry; all
of which Doors, are large, fair, and adorned with vast Plates of Brass, whereon
are finely Carved, many Figures of Saints and Martyrs, with other Ingenious
pieces of History.

The Archbishop, who is always a Cardinal, is Metropolitan of all Spain, and
for the most part is also Inquisitor General, or President of the Inquisition;
He is in Rank the next Person to the King; not only in Dignity and Authority,
but also in Subjects, Revenues, and Power; and is esteemed to be the Richest
Prelate, next to the Pope, in all the Christian World: For there are under his
Jurisdiction and Government, besides diverse little Villages, no sewer than
seventeen considerable Towns, from which the Rents of this Church are raised,
and do amount to above Two Hundred Thousand Ducats per annum.

But it is the River Tagus with its golden Sands, that brings in the Wealth and
necessary Conveniences to this City; that furnishes the Inhabitants with
variety of excellent Fish; makes their pleasant Gardens flourish, and supplies
their Houses too for all Occasions with Water, raised up by an incomparable
Machine to the top of the Hill; the Invention, as I was told there, of a Moor;
tho others will have it of an Italian.

It is this River, I say, that conveys much of their Manufactures into other
parts of the Country; that makes their Territory fertile in rich Wines, and all
sorts of delicate Fruits, excellent Corn, and Pasturage. I have Theme enough to
lengthen out the description of this Town much further, but shall only add,
that in it, is an University for the Study of the Civil and Cannon Laws, by
which all the King of Spain's Subjects are Governed: And that the City is
Famous, for having had Eighteen National Councils held in it, in the time of
the Goths Inhabiting there, in order to the Extirpating the Arrian Heresy,
with which those Goths were long infected.

But to return to our two Travelers, whom I have too long left at their
Lodgings: They, at their first coming to this place, finding no manner of
Acquaintance, for CoffeeHouses at that time were scarce known in Spain: and the
Grave Temper of these People, which will not easily admit of any familiar
Conversation with Foreigners, would have made them pass very unpleasantly there
their vacant time, that lay, as we say, but heavy on their hands, by the many
Obstacles and tedious Delays they met with in their Business, had they not both
been Studious and Lovers of Books, especially Don Feliz, who was something of a
Scholar, having a Genius also to Music, wherein he was on some Instruments no
mean Performer, particularly on the Viol, and on the Flageolet, an Instrument
rarely then heard in that Country; nor was his Voice very unpleasant in Singing.

With Reading therefore, or with Music, did they for the most part entertain
themselves, and often with Fencing, when either they had no Business abroad, or
by reason of the excessive heat of that Clime, they were constrained to keep
within doors. But their usual Recreation in the Evenings, was to take the fresh
Air in the Fields, and amongst the Vineyards, or to see the curious Gardens;
the pleasant Walks shaded with Trees, bearing a variety of the choicest Fruits,
and decked with most delightful Greens; and to view the Norias or admirable
Waterworks, with which the Spaniards industriously water their Gardens, supply
their Fountains, and keep their Grottoes cool. They often went to admire the
fine Houses of Noblemen, and other Persons of Quality, as well without as
within the Walls; or to view the most remarkable Churches and Convents; where,
by reason of the many Eyes to observe the Actions of Strangers, an English
Gentleman, who is there always looked on as a Heretic, had need behave himself
with great Prudence and Circumspection, lest by some rash Word or indecent
Gesture amongst their Priests, he run him into some ill Predicament, from
whence he will not find it an easy matter to extricate himself. In all which
places (the Churches not excepted) it is none of the least Divertisements for
Young Men to admire the delicate Shape, Mien, and Air of the Spanish Ladies;
and to Court them; but being veiled, we rarely get a sight of their Faces.

It was in Contemplating of some of these attracting Objects, that our youngest
Traveller was taken up, as he was walking by himself one Evening in the
Streets, when he was accosted by an ancient, but brisk Man, whose Reverend
Aspect, with long Beard and big Mustachoes, would have given him a greater
respect than he merited, by the Errand he was sent on. For after a formal
Salute, he asked the young Gentleman, if his Name were not Don Feliz? Of which
when satisfied. Then, Senor, said he, in a low voice, I am sent to discourse a
matter of secrecy with you, from a Lady of Quality. The young Spark, tho not
altogether a Novice at these kind of Intrigues in this Country, being in some
surprise at first, and not well understanding his meaning, Sir, answered he, I
presume you be mistaken in the Person you intend, for I am a Stranger, and not
yet so happy to be known to any Lady in this place. I fear I am mistaken
indeed, replied the Spaniard, smiling, since you are so backward to apprehend a
Message sent you from a fair Lady, who by me Invites you to her Lodging.

Our Gallant, to retrieve his Reputation after such a reproof; Sir, said he, I
confess my dullness, and shall readily wait on the Lady who has done me this
Honor, if you please to lead the way, and as we walk to inform me of her Name,
Quality, and Lodging. Why, now, answered the Spaniard, almost laughing
outright, you are as much too quick for me on the other hand; let it suffice
you to know, that she is such a one as makes no small figure in this Town: And
as for her Name and Lodging, you may perchance be satisfied of them ever long.
In the mean time, I can only acquaint you, that she lives toward the furthest
part of this City from hence; whither if you have the Courage to suffer your
self to be carried in a close Chair to Night, and will meet me at the place I
shall direct, I Will not fail to wait on you to her, and I am confident you will
not afterward repent you of the Visit.

After some small deliberation, whether or no he should engage himself in so
hazardous an Enterprise, our Gallant resolutely told him, that he would
certainly meet, when and where the Spaniard should think fit. They presently
then agreed on the hour to be ten that same night, at the upper end of a
Street, called La Call de las Carettes, just by the great Conduit or Marble
Fountain there; which was at least half a Mile from the place, where at that
time they were discoursing. After this assignation made, and many kind
Expressions which passed betwixt them, they parted; but with the greatest
Cautions imaginable of keeping this thing secret on both sides.

When our English Don had further considered of this Enterprise, and of the
dangers he would be exposed to, in suffering himself to be thus carried he knew
not whither, and by Persons to whom he was altogether a stranger, he began to
blame his own Rashness, in so easily consenting to such an unreasonable thing,
and was just staggering in his Resolution; but remembering that he was obliged
in Honor to make good his word; and hugging himself with the hopes of enjoying
the Conversation of so fair a Lady, as he fancied her already to be; he briskly
went to the appointed place, where he found the Old Gentleman staying for him,
with a Chair, and two Turkish Slaves, or other Chairmen disguised like such,
attending on him. 'Twas now no time to expostulate with himself, or them; the
Chair was held open for him; he went in, and was carried very far, but knew not
which way; 'till at last he was set down within a Portal, and was quickly led,
but with great silence, to a small backstair-case; where mounting two stories,
he was signed by his Guide, the Old Gentleman, to enter, and was there left. He
then pushing open the door, went into a spacious Room, hung with Rich
Tapestry-Hangings, having a Stately Crimson Damask Bed in it, and Furnished
with fine Napolitan Cabinets, two Noble Looking-Glasses; In-laid Tables of
Marble, of that manner which the Italians call impezzati; with a pair of large
Silver Candlesticks of Indian work, that had two great Wax Lights burning in
them; also Chairs, and all other Furniture suitable in it.

While he was taken up in viewing the State and Grandeur of this Bedchamber,
he heard a Door opening behind him, and turning about, saw coming toward him a
handsome Lady, seeming to be about the Age of three or four and twenty, of a
very graceful Presence and Mien, and if not to be extolled for an extraordinary
Beauty (that Country rarely affording such) yet might she justly claim there to
be admitted into the first Rank of Lovely Women. She had a Complexion clear
enough, a lively quick Eye, and little Mouth, with an admirable set of white
Teeth; her Face was Oval, her Hair of a shining Black, which hanging backwards,
in fine Puffs and Curls, was braided together with a cross Braid just below her
Neck, upon her bare Shoulders, after their Mode, and was curiously trimmed with
Knots of colored Ribon. She had an Excellent white Skin, and delicate hand;
her stature was middle-sized; she had a well-proportion'd Body, but rather
enclining to be sat, and all her habit, as well as graceful deportment, showed
her to be a Person of no mean Quality.

At her first appearing in the Room, our young Spark was somewhat surprised,
but his astonishment was very much increased, seeing the Lady make a pause, and
stop a while to view him; for as yet he knew not whether this were the Person
that had sent for him, or some other, who by chance was come in thither; but he
was presently delivered from his uneasy apprehensions, when he perceived her
to approach nearer, and with a smiling look bid him welcome, and thanked him for
the favor of that Visit. Then, before the suffered him to return an Answer,
she took him by the hand, which she pressed in hers, and made him sit down in a
Chair by her. Don Feliz having had time to recover his amazed Spirits, and no
longer doubting but that this was the Lady who had given him the Invitation;
made her, with great respect, a Complement for the Honor she had done him, in
thinking him, who was a Stranger, and unknown to her, worthy of receiving her
Commands. The Lady, whom we shall call Dona Faustina, fixing, in a most Amorous
manner, her Eyes steadfastly on his Face, told him, she could not believe less
of him, than that he was a Gentleman, and a Man of Honor; in confidence of
which, she having several times admired him, as she observed him in the Town,
had taken the boldness to give him that trouble, that she might be satisfied,
whether or no his Parts and Qualifications were correspondent to his Person,
and to the Idea which she had formed of him within her self. He assured her,
that he would be very industrious, to make good the best Character she could
conceive of him; and that he was proud to have any thing in him worthy the
Notice of so fine a Lady.

As they were thus entering upon their Complements to one another, they were
interrupted by two Reverend Matrons, there called Duenas, who are commonly
Widows, or wearing the Habit of such, by whom the Spanish Ladies are
constantly attended; some having two, others four, or six of them, acording to
their Quality. These are intended by the Husbands for watchful Inspectors into
the Actions of their Wives, but commonly prove to be their Ladies trustiest
Confidents in all their private Amors. The first of these two brought into the
Room a large gilt Salver, handsomely filled and heaped up with thin Biskets,
March-panes, and variety of dried Sweetmeats. The second had such another
Salver, furnished with Cups of rich Chocolatte, as well hot, as of that cooled
with Snow, also with Glasses of Hyppocras, and of the choicest Wines; which
having set down, they withdrew, leaving our Gallant and his Mistress to
Entertain themselves with their Junket. Though she often pressed him to refresh
himself, as their Phrase is, yet she had not the patience to forbear
interrupting him, and asking a Thousand Questions of England, and of London,
from whence he had informed her, he came; She desired to know the difference
which he thought was betwixt his Country and that of Spain; also in what
Station he was with the Ambassador; his Business in Toledo, and time of his
stay there. He satisfied as many of her Demands as he could; but when he had
acquainted her with the uncertainty of her last Particular, she seemto be
troubled at it.

After some further Talk, she told him she had heard say, that the English were
the Handsomest and most Beautiful Women of the World: Which Report, she
protested she was apt to credit, if the Women there had an equal proportion of
delicate Features with some Men of that Nation, whom she had seen. I confess,
Madam, said he, that as they have the advantage of a more Temperate Climate to
live in, so are their Complexions generally clearer, than those who partake of
a greater share of the Sun's Influence; but it follows not, Madam, that these
hotter Countries must be wholly exempt from pure Complexion, which indeed is at
the most but one Ingredient to the Composing of Beauty; for it must also have a
sweet Symetry of proper Features, a sparkling Eye, and a lively Air added to
it. But there can be no plainer demonstration of this Truth, than in your
Ladyship's Face; which, without Flattery, may compare with the most Celebrated
Beauties of the English Court. For all the World must allow, there is a
sprightly Briskness and Charming Air peculiar to the Spanish Ladies, which is
rarely to be found in those of other Nations, and does not a little recompense
any other Defect which can be objected to them. We are all of us, Senor Don
Feliz, highly obliged to you, replied the Lady, for this Compliment. But I Am
afraid, proceeded she, rising from her Chair, and gently pulling him by the
Hand toward the Bedside, since you have been accustomed to the Caresses of
those Admirable Beauties of your own Country, a Spanish Lady must be able to
make but a very small Impression in your Heart.

As he was big with a fine Speech to have answered her, she interrupted him, to
make him sit down by her on the Bed, where changing the Subject, the
Conversation was continued, with all the kind Endearments which on both sides
they were able to express; whilst the unkind Night, posting on after its
accustomed rate, having no regard to the uncertain Joys, nor consideration of
the few such happy Opportunities that Lovers meet with, they were surprised to
hear the Clock strike Four, when they had thought it had scarce been past
Midnight. She then told him, she was sorry she must put him in mind of
returning home; but before his departure, it would be very necessary to take
these Cautions along with him.

That in case he valued the Correspondence thus begun betwixt them, and found
not so ill an Entertainment with her, as to discourage his future coming
thither; He must be sure never to discover this Intrigue, but keep it secret,
with all the Care and Fidelity imaginable; and on no Pretense whatever,
disclose the least Circumstance, no, nor hint of it, to any Person in the
world; considering, that both her Honor and her Life too depended thereon. He
owned, that he had reason enough to be careful of it, since no Adventure that
had happened to him in all his Lifetime before, was ever so grateful as this;
and prayed her to rest assured, that he was sufficiently sensible of the high
Importance ot keeping this Matter secret, which had not only hers, but his own
Life and Happiness also wrapped up in it; and this last Consideration alone was
sufficient to seal up his Lips, but much more any Concern of hers; the least of
which, he should hereafter reckon a thousand times dearer to him than his own
Life. And he further added, she might be confident, that no Torture should ever
have power to extort any part of this Amor from him; for as he had more Honor
than to boast of it; he had not so little Sense to blab it out at una wares;
nor so much Vanity to make a Jest of it.

She likewise strictly charged him, not to be inquisitive who she was? Or where
she dwelt? And that if he should by chance ever see her alone, or with Company,
in any Window, Balcone, Coach, or Chair, he should immediately turn away his
Eyes, and make haste from thence, without any asking, or prying after her;
which would but give occasion of Suspicion and Jealousy, to the endangering of
both their Lives.

When he had solemnly protested to her, to be punctual in the observance of
every Article hereof, she took occasion to tell him, that he being a Traveller,
might no perchance have the convenience of Returns of Money, such as his Affairs
required; and entreated him to accept of a small Recruit for his Pocket
Expenses; thrusting into his Hand, a Paper with Ten Doblones, or Spanish
Pistols of Gold, wrapped up in it; which he, making an Apology, would at first
have refused, but, Quis nisi mentis inops, etc. being pressed to keep it, he
put it up. Then they took leave of each other, yet not without many Sighs,
Embraces, and tender Expressions of mutual Love, and of a prudent care and
wariness to preserve it; with an Appointment agreed on for him to return two or
three days after, according to the Notice he should receive from the Old Man,
who was quickly sent in by the Lady, to conduct our Traveller down stairs, and
into the Chair; in which he was conveyed back to the same Station where he had
been taken up, and was there left to walk Home by himself.

This lucky Adventure made our happy Lover not a little proud when he
considered, how at his first settling in that City, where he was altogether
unknown, he had so unexpectedly fallen into the Acquaintance of a Lady,
qualified with all those admirable advantages of Beauty, Wit, and Fortune,
which he reckoned he had met with in her; and his mind was so much taken up
with it, that there was scarce room for any other Thought: And now he esteemed
his felicity above his utmost wishes, were it not for one bitter Ingredient
thrown into all this sweet; which was to think how he was forced with all the
Art and Subtilty he was Master of, to dissemble the thing from his Brother, for
so his Comrade and he were wont to call one another.

The interval of time betwixt his first and second Visit, which was the third
Night after, seemed an Age to our impatient Lover; during which, he was so
transported with thoughts of the pleasure and satisfaction he expected, that he
could take but little rest at home or abroad; and every Person he saw coming
into the Piazza, where he was appointed to walk alone that Evening, he fancied
to be his old Friend: But at last, as it grew dark, he, to his unspeakable
comfort, espied the Reverend Conductor appear, and made haste to meet him.
Never was Man more transported with joy than Don Feliz was, to receive this new
Summons from his Mistress; and Senor Fadrique (for so was the Ancient Gentleman
called) when he had delivered the Message, and taken our Adventurer's Answer,
that he would joyfully obey the Directions, promised not to fail waiting on him
with the Chair at ten a Clock that Night, at the same station as the first
time. Both Parties were very punctual in meeting at the hour, and Don Feliz was
carried as before, to the Ladies Chamber.

It Is impossible to relate the great transport and happiness of our two Lovers
at this second interview. One while they passed their time in making high
Expressions of their Love and of their Constancy to each other, and the
cautious secrecy to be observed therein: By and by would she be asking him
Questions of the Mistresses he had had in England, showing as it were a kind of
jealousy of them, even at that distance. Then would they tell pleasant
stories, with which, and other delightful pastime contrived by them, did they
divert themselves 'till it was time to part; and that was not till about three
or four in the Morning, when Senor Fadrique scratched gently at the door, as he
had Orders from her, to put them in mind of it; which unwelcom Summons, much
against their wills, they were forced to obey.

Many other Nights did our happy pair of Lovers meet on this manner, to enjoy
themselves; and once as they were chatting together of diverse Matters, she
pressed him to satisfy her truly of a thing which she was very desirous to
know; and that was, if he had not another Mistress, either in Toledo, or in
Madrid? Upon his faint denial, she positively affirmed, that she was confident
he had; and further told him, she was informed he Courted her under the
counterfeit Name of Leshia. He then blushing, confessed he had formerly made
Love to such a one in Madrid, but protested he had quitted her a good while
before his coming from thence. 'Twas time, said the Lady, when you found your
Mistress of so compassionate and open hearted a temper, that she could not give
denial to any of her Gallants, for fear of breaking their hearts, but gave free
Entertainment to as many as came.

Don Feliz was not only ashamed to be thus reproached, but was infinitely
amazed at her knowledge of this Intrigue; which she easily observing, told him
laughing, she would on slight terms release him from the trouble she perceived
he suffered in his mind, by letting him know, that she came by her
Intelligence, from a Song which an Acquaintance of hers, by listening one day
under his Window in the Street, had heard him sing to his Viol.

With this fair acknowledgment, he had all his uneasy apprehensions reduced
into their quiet order again; but she urged him to repeat the Verses to her, it
not being fit to sing them in that place, where many times they were under such
strict confinement to silence, that they durst only whisper all their
discourse, and were affrighted at every little noise they heard, 'till one of
their Female Sentinels came to satisfy them what it was. He gave her a Copy of
the Song, and she seemed not a little pleased with it, when she understood that
both the words and Music were of his own Composition; admiting his great
proficiency in the Spanish Language in so short a time. The same Verses turned
into English, run thus.

To me, what Favor do the Meadows show,
If thus for all, their Flowers in common grow?
Or what if Springs to quench my Thirst descend,
If so those Springs, to all, their Waters lend?
For Light, and Heat, what do I owe the Sun,
If round the World, this daily Course he run?
Or how obliged for Luna's Influence,
If she the same to every one dispense?
O Lesbia, both in Form and Wit divine!
How do thou Natures chiefest Works outshine?
The Meads to Rival thee display their Pride;
On thee to gaze, the Brooks do cease to glide.
Thou have, than Sol, more Beauties in thy Face;
And thou in changing, do the Moon surpass.
If cheaply not exposed, how should I prize,
That Angels Shape, that Mien, those sparkling Eyes?
But Common made, each Grace I can refuse;
Which solely to possess, before a Crown, I Would choose.
Methinks, said Dona Faustina smiling, you have in this Song expressed a
greater Passion than the Subject required; but I am well enough pleased, to
think, that tho she be thus contemptible, she has given me the opportunity of
making this discovery of your skill in Poetry: But I should have been much
better satisfied, had it been possible for me to have heard this performed by
your Voice and Instrument together, which I am informed do accord with
admirable Sweetness. Don Feliz told her, he was happy to have gained the
Reputation of a good Artist in Music, with one who was so nice a Judge in all
Ingenious Accomplishments, as her Ladyship was, and that too, without his
having ever been put to the Trial.

From this Passage of Don Feliz's kind-hearted Mistress in Madrid, the Lady
took occasion to warn him of the dangers of meddling with those Common Women,
and gave him many sad Instances of fine Youths ruined by the cunning
Allurements of those bewitching Circes; not only in their Purses, but in their
Persons too. Particularly one in that City, who was so Handsome, Brisk, and
Gay, and so Enriched with all the Qualifications of a complete Gentleman* that
as he was reckoned the Darling of the Ladies, attracting their Eyes at all
times to admire him, whenever he appeared amongst them; so was he no less
respected of the Best and Gravest Men, for his Excellent Parts and Ingenuity;
and was an only Son, the Heir of an Honorable Family, and sole Branch of it
that was then remaining. He was no sooner loosed from the strict Government of
a Prudent Father, lately dead; but falling into an Acquaintance and League with
some of those Lewd Women, he in a short time squandred away a Noble Estate
among them, and then with crippled Limbs, and a disfigured Face, he was forced
to appear for a while the Scorn and Contempt of all that beheld him, till at
last he ended his Life miserably in an Hospital.

Many such Examples of Terror did Dona Faustina relate, to deter her Gallant
from running himself into the Snares of such Common Women. Those hot Countries
of Spain, Portugal and Italy, being very fruitful in producing such Tragical
Adventures daily: And I heartily wish, I could be able to say, that our colder
Clime of England, did seldom yield any of the like Nature.

Whilst Don Feliz, thus pleasantly enjoyed his happy Opportunities with his
Mistress, which were most commonly every third or fourth Night, it is easy to
be imagined that as his Brother Don Enrique must needs be very impatient to
know the Reason of his being abroad, and walking the Streets at such
unseasonable Hours; so he would omit no Industry to pump out the Secret from
him, and this not only to satisfy his own Curiosity, but to preserve his
Friend from those Mischiefs, into which it might plainly be foreseen he would
involve himself, if not forewarned of them in time.

And one day betwixt Twelve and One of the Clock after Dinner, (for in the heat
of Summer they usually dine there at Eleven) as the two Friends were going up
to their Bedchamber, which was over their Dining Room, to take their Siesta,
or Mid-days Nap, according to the lazy Custom of the Spaniards, who, not
knowing how to employ that time better, do commonly sleep till Three; they fell
again upon the old Topic, Don Enrique gravely reproving him, for using the Term
of Hermano, or Brother (for their Discourse was commonly in Spanish) when, said
he, you treat me more like a Stranger, of whom you had cause to be jealous,
than a Brother, whose Advice, it might be highly necessary to take in cases of
danger. For you carry on, proceeded he, your private Intrigues, which I can
well enough foresee, with half an Eye, must end, at least in the ruin of your
self, if not of us both, if you continue in these pernicious Courses; whilst I,
though I have had a little more Experience in the Affairs of the World, than
you can pretend to, am not worthy to be consulted about them, nor fit to be
entrusted with any part of this Secret, no, not so much as to know how to
disengage my self, in case I should, by your means, be brought into ill
Circumstances, nor be able to assist you, in any Exigency. I shall therefore
henceforward, disclaim that Title of Brother, and that of Friend too, as having
no pretense to either.

Don Feliz finding himself thus closely attacked again, would have defended
himself with his accustomed Excuses, protesting he exposed himself to no manner
of hazard, much less his Friend; but that there being a necessity of keeping
this Affair secret, he entreated him, if he had any Respect or Kindness for
him, he would forbear his further scrutitiny into the matter. Were there no
other apparent signs of a threatening danger to your own Person, replied Don
Enrique, than the unseasonable, and scandalous Hours, in which you almost
Nightly frequent the Streets, when even the Spaniards themselves, and those of
the Meanest Rank too, are scrupulous to do it; it were a sufficient Cause to
alarm any one, who had the least concern for you, to put you in mind of your
own Security in time, and to prevent the Ruin into which you are evidently
falling. Besides, continued he, since you have found out these Night-walks,
your In-come is much improved; you are much more flush in the Pocket than
formerly; but whence it arises, I am altogether ignorant; though I supposed, I
had known the strength of your Rents and Revenues, while in this Country, as
well as your self: And this your fear of a discovery, creates a suspicion in
me, that your new Current of Wealth, flows from some ill Source.

This rough Language nettling the young Spark; you press me, said he, more like
a Magistrate that was resolved, to draw a Confession from a Criminal, by any
means whatsoever, than like one who was concerned for his Friend's safety: And
in express Terms you charge me, as if I came by these Advantages of Money, by
some indirect and base way. I had thought the knowledge you have had of my
Birth, Education, and Manners, would have gained me a better Opinion with you,
than that you should conceive such mean suspicions of me; especially too,
considering that you your self have shared with me no small part of the
Benefit, and yet without any scruple of Conscience. But to clear your
Imagination of these Extravagant Conjectures; let it suffice to tell you, that
I have an Intrigue of Love with a Lady of this Town, which I have engaged never
to disclose, and must therefore conjure you to urge me no further in it; for
only by satisfying your inquisitive Humor herein, I should render my self the
most false and perfidious Man living.

You tell me, said his Brother, but what I before suspected; and as you have
given me this hint, so should you also discover the whole to me, who am, as you
know, your Friend, and concerned more for your Good than for my Curiosity; it
is but still, as it were locked up in your own Breast, because you can never
suffer Injury by it. Therefore I cannot forbear enquiring further, who, and
what she is; that in case I should not so effectually make you sensible of the
danger, which you, who are a Foreigner, do incur, in Courting a Spanish Lady,
be she Married or Single; yet you may at least, take my Advice, how to proceed
with Caution in your Amor for the time to come. But hereof be confident, that
though you still conceal the thing from me, you cannot always convey your self
so cunningly to your Mistress, and home again, but you will at one time or
other be discovered. There will be prying Linxes to find you out, and reveal
your crafty Intrigue, to the Jealous Husband, the Brothers, or other near
Relations, who will revenge this Affront done to their Honor and Family, with
your Death: Or in case she be a Common Woman, which I confess I can scarcely
think, by the supplies of Money you so constantly meet with, yet even such a one
will have her Gallant, that will shortly find his opportunity to cut your
Throat.

By this Discourse, our firm Lover's Constancy, was a little shocked, and
beginning to reflect on the dangers his Friend had been representing; he
confessed to him he knew not who the Lady was, but believed her to be of
Quality* that she lived very far off, but could not tell the place where; and
then related, the manner of his being carried to her Lodging and back. Don
Enriquez, being fully informed of the thing, used all the pressing Arguments he
could invent, to make him sensible of the dismal Consequence, that must needs
attend that rash and unwarrantable course of his.

And they continued their Talk on this Subject for some time longer, as they
lay on their Bed, till Sleep put an end to it, which kept them fast, almost
three Hours, that it was past Three of the Clock; and then as Don Feliz betwixt
Sleep and Wake, was beginning to rub his Eyes in order to get up, he was
startled at the rattling of a Stone in the Room, which somebody had thrown in at
the Window; for the Windows there are made with cross Bars of Iron only,
having wooden Shutters on the inside, but seldom have any Glass before them.
He got up and looked out to see who had flung it, but observed not any body
beneath, except Passengers walking by; then searching for the Stone, found also
a Note bound neatly to it, with a piece of Crimson Silk, and on it this
Superscription. A don Feliz el Estrangero: To Don Feliz the Foreigner. Which he
opening, Read as follows.

Don Feliz.
WEre you not the most perfidious Man living, you would not so easily have
betrayed the Trust I reposed in you. All your Pretenses, that no Torture should
ever draw from you the least Article of our Intrigue, are very quickly forgot:
And the whole Discovery made, without any damage to your own Person; while mine
is exposed for a Sacrifice to your Indiscretion. Is this the effect of your
fair Words, your repeated Oaths and boasted Fidelity? Could your great Courage
and firm Constancy, make no better Opposition to so slight an Attack? But I may
upbraid my self, for so rashly hazarding, both Life and Reputation in the Hands
of a Stranger; and yet I have learnt by this timely Precaution, not to expose
my self any more to the mercy of his Tongue, who has so mean a Spirit, as can
be induced to proclaim a Lady's Favors to him. No Excuse can palliate your
Crime, it is beyond all Reparation. But seeing I have escaped the Mischief, of
so base a Treachery, I can pass by the Affront, and attribute it to your Folly,
and the ill Manners you brought from your own Country. And having now thrown
you out of my Heart, I have also excluded you my Doors. Be not then hereafter
so foolish to expect any further admittance to

The Injured Dona Faustina.


It Is not possible to express the astonishment and confusion, that Don Feliz
was in at his Reading this Letter. Vexed he was at the Soul, to see the scorn
with which she treated him, and yet grieved, to think he should have been
prevailed with to tell the whole Adventure, by which he had now lost the Favor
of his Mistress; and more amazed was he, to consider who had been her private
Intelligencer, so soon to carry her the News of it; resolving to watch the
Eaves-dropper for the future, that if possible he might surprise such a one, he
would be sure to quit scores with him for the good Office done him. Then was he
enraged to reflect on his own Folly, that for Improvement of his Comrade, must
needs hold such a Discourse with him in the Spanish Tongue, which if in
English, might have been a Secret still.

He thus revolving a thousand wild Fancies in his Head, went down Stairs,
leaving Don Enrique a-sleep on the Bed, as he had all this while continued;
then walking about from Place to Place, and muttering to himself, he seemed as
one distracted, but could find no ease any where. When it grew near Ten a Clock
at Night, it coming into his Mind, that at this time was the appointment for
his waiting on Dona Faustina; he posted to the accustomed Station, where he
used to meet the Chair, hoping that this might only prove a Dream or Trick of
some other Person, and that the Lady all this while might not know of it: But
at the Marble Conduit, he found neither the Chair, nor his Friend Senor
Fadrique that should attend it, tho he staid till it struck Eleven. After this
disappointment he returned home, and to bed, without giving Don Enrique any
Account of the reason of his Disorder, tho often urged to it, with great
importunity.

In this Melancholy Humor, he passed his time for three or four days, during
which, no Musical sound was heard in their Lodgings; the Songs were now forgot;
the Viol hung up untouched and untuned, and all their Harmony was spoiled; for
their wonted Mirth, and cheerful Conversation, was turned either to a sullen
Silence, or jarring Discord, Don Feliz hardly affording his Brother, or indeed
any other Person a civil Answer, to any thing that was said to him, and looked
upon Don Enrique now, as the sole cause of all his Misfortune.

The fourth Evening after his being thus discarded, as it was growing dark, and
he was walking discontented by himself in the Placuela, he espied at a distance
Senor Fadrique, crossing the further end of it; whom, as fast as his Spanish
Gravity would permit he hasted to accost. The Escudero, or Gentleman Usher (for
that was his Office to Dona Faustina) seemed as if he were surprised at the
sight of Don Feliz, and though he pretended Business and haste, yet was he
content to be stopped for a moment.

After a short Complement, Don Feliz began to enquire of the Lady's Health, and
seeming to wonder why he had not been attended by him, with the Chair at the
old Station, the Night that had been agreed on. You know the Reason, Senor, I
conceive, answered the Old Gentleman, better than I, who am totally ignorant of
the matter, further, than that I find my Lady to have a great Quarrel against
you, and conjecture that some body has been doing you an unkind Office with
her; for she has told me in great fury, she has an Aversion to you, and is
resolved never more to see your Face; and she has charged me, that for the time
to come, I do not presume so much as to name your Name to her. I was attempting
to plead for you; alleging that she might be mistaken in her Suspicions of
you, or have entertained some envious Information to your prejudice, which you
might clear, if admitted to make your own Defense; and that she was too
rigorous thus to condemn an absent Person, merely by Hearsay; without allowing
him to speak for himself, by which she might be satisfied of the Truth of the
Fact, whereof he stood Accused. But she would listen to no Arguments in your
Favor, and commanded me to be silent; adding that what she had been told
concerning you, came from such Hands, that there could be no ground, in the
least to scruple the Truth of it.

Don Feliz's Trouble was increased, at the hearing this sorrowful Account of
the ill posture of his Affairs, with his Mistress, and yet, he longed earnestly
for a Reconciliation with her; for the obtaining whereof, he was content to
pass by all the Indignities she had put upon him, by the scornful Expressions
of her Letter, and her Words to her Servant. He therefore judged it necessary,
to retain Fadrique for his Advocate, who had often tasted his Liberality
before, and would consequently, he thought, be the readier to serve him now. He
then stepping closer to Fadrique, thrust into his Hand a couple of Doblones or
Spanish Pistols, which the Escudero did not much scruple the putting up; and at
the same time Don Feliz told him, he was sensible that he had highly offended
his Lady, but entreated Fadrique's kind Intercession in his behalf, since he
utterly refused to stay the writing any Note or Letter to her; and Don Feliz
desired him to press, that he might be once more permitted, at least to throw
himself at her Feet, to beg her Pardon; since that way of proceeding with him
was too severe, to punish him in the highest degree that was possible, without
hearing what he could say for the palliating his Crime, which, he said, he
doubted not but had been sufficiently aggravated by his Accuser.

The Gold seemed to have wrought the usual effect which it does upon Persons of
Senor Fadrique's, Profession; for before they parted, he showed himself much
more complaisant than at their first meeting; and now he protested, he would
hazard the loss of his Ladies Favor, for the Service of so worthy a Gentleman;
who, he said, he was persuaded, had been wronged by some ill-natured
Pick-thank. And in confidence of his good Success, he appointed Don Feliz, at
the usual Hour of Ten that same Night, to meet at the Conduit, where was their
constant Rendevouz; to which Fadrique engaged to come, either with, or without
the Chair.

Thus after a grave Complement, and the Spaniard's begging to be excused for
not staying till Don Feliz had writ, he went away, leaving our mortified Lover,
in great hopes of having Matters accommodated between his Mistress and himself;
but very impatient till the two Hours should be expired, it being now not above
Eight a Clock at the most.

As he walked about from one place to another, with great uneasiness to pass
the time away; still guessing doubtfully what would be the Issue of this
Message; and in case it should be listened to, and should come to a Treaty,
with the Lady, he was considering what he had to plead in his own Defense. On
this Subject, such variety of Arguments came flowing into his Head, that it
made him fear, lest when brought before her, he should be in danger to perplex
his Cause by over-doing, rather than advantage it. Presently he was transported
with Joy, to think, how fair he stood, for the regaining that happy State and
Condition he had lost by his Imprudence, and his dishonorable breach of Faith,
with a Woman, from whom he had received such kind Treatment: But then he
considered, that all the hopes he could muster, in his own Favor, were only
collected from the sordid compliance, and cringing of her Servant, who for the
Reward sake, would promise beyond his power of performance: By and by, he was
ready to fancy, that this had not been an accidental Rancounter, but a thing
designed by Dona Faustina, and Fadrique, to retrieve her lost Lover. Which
Conceit for some time, extremely pleased him; but he afterward fell upon
another more disagreeable Thought, of what the Consequence would be, if it
should not prove so, and began to consider how hard a matter it was, to appease
the Rage of a Spaniard, whethe^ Man or Woman, that had once been incensed
against another, but much more against one that had affronted a Lady, who Loved
him, and had entrusted her Honor in his Hands.

This last Thought brought into his Memory, a Tragical Story, which he himself
knew had happened, but just before his coming from Madrid, and was thus.

THE Wronged Innocence cleared.
THE Public Houses in which they sell Wine in Spain, are called Bodegones, and
are of no greater Credit there, than our common Alehouses are in England.
These have seldom more than one Room for the Entertainment of their Guests,
where every one calling for his Quartillo of Wine, being about half a Pint, he
mixes it with Water, drinks it off standing, and goes his way: But when
Acquaintance meet, they will fall into Discourse, for half an Hour or longer,
of News, or some other Subject; not much unlike the Conversation in our
Coffee-Houses. It was in one of these Bodegones, near the King's Palace in
Madrid, that certain Persons were accidentally met together, at about Eight or
Nine a Clock in the Morning, to take up their little Cup of Wine, and to chat a
while, round a Brasero of Charcoal; for it was a sharp Morning at the beginning
of March.

Amongst these, a Gentleman happening to commend a Lovely Young Woman, but
unknown to him, whom he chanced to have seen in the Street, at his coming in
thither: The Company fell into Discourse of Handsome Women, naming several, as
well of the the Town, as the Court, that were celebrated for Admirable
Beauties. Now there being present in the Room, one of the King's Yeomen of the
Guard, of that they call the Band of Flemings; he told the Company, that there
was not one of all those Ladies they had extolled, but must in Reason subscribe
to a fine Woman he had the Honor to know, which was the Incomparable Senore
Iacynta de Quinones; and described her with more Eagerness and Passion, than
was fit to be used, by any one in that Country, but much less a Stranger as he
was. And before he made an end, gave his Tongue the liberty of boasting, as if
he had received Favors from her. This Extravagance of his, did not a little
amaze those that heard him, but principally a Merchant, who was a near
Neighbor and Friend of that Woman's Husband; and he being desirous of a
clearer Satisfaction concerning this Matter: Sir, said he, you are a most happy
Man, to have the Enjoyment of so fair a Creature; but, with your permission,
may I ask if this be not the Wife of Senor Alouso de Quinones, the Rich Mercer
of Silks, who lives by the Church of the Incarnation? I must not descend to
such plain Particulars (answered the vainglorious Dutchman) after giving this
Account of her, and yet I shall venture to say, she lives not very remote from
that Church you named.

His Folly and Impertinence would have transported him further, had not the
Company been nauseated with it; and left him. But the Merchant in his walk
home, called on his Acquaintance the Mercer, and after a Preamble of the
Trouble he had suffered, to hear his Friend so publicly dishonored by a
Stranger, he gave him the whole Account of what passed; and protested it was
the least Mark of his Friendship he could possibly express to so worthy a
Person as Senor Alonso, to have cut that hoasting Villain's Throat, had he not
been surrounded by diverse others of the King's Servants: And added* that he had
nevertheless hewn his way through the midst of them, to do it, did he not in
Conscience believe the Lady to be Innocent, having only had the Misfortune to
suffer that Blemish in her Honor, by the unbounded current of a scandalous
Tongue; and that he feared by such an Action, to give a greater Authority to
the Report.

The Mercer dissembling his Passion, seemed to hearken to his Neighbors
Relation, with some slight, as not crediting the Fleming's boast; but so soon
as his Friend was gone, though he loved his Wife dearly as his own Heart, and
had never had the least cause of Suspicion of her before, yet was he now
transported with Jealousy to the highest degree; and going up Stairs, in a
great Rage, into her Bedchamber, he found her there sitting at her Table,
before her Looking-Glass, and dressing her Head. The violent Fury he was in,
gave him not leave at first, to utter one word, but walking to her, he with his
left Hand laid fast hold of her curious braided Hair, whilst with his right, he
drew out his Dagge^, which the Tradesmen there, as well as others, have
always hanging at their Girdles, and was pulling her back in her Chair,
intending to have sheathed it in her Breast; But upon a loud shriek which the
affrighted Gentlewoman gave, and her crying out to know the Cause, of this his
barbarous Treatment, who was about to Murder her, without acquainting her why
he did it; he stopped his Hand, and told her, that tho the Crime she was guilty
of, was of so black a Nature, that she Merited not to have the least Moments
Respit allowed her, from the just and favorable Punishment he was about to
infliction her for it; yet for her Souls ^ake, he would be so kind, to let her
first ask God Forgiveness of the foul Sin she had committed against Him, and
against so loving a Husband. And he charged her not to trifle away the little
time she had to Live, but dispatch her Devotion quickly, since the Revenge due
for so great an Injury, was no longer to be deferred. And as to her demanding a
Reason for this rigorous procedure; she needed but appeal to her own
Conscience, which could furnish her with Reason enough, to justify what he was
about to do. She then falling on her knees, with the Tears showring from her
Eyes, told him, that, she perceived, some Malicious Person, envious of the
Happiness she had enjoyed with him, had been insinuating false Inventions into
his Mind, for her destruction; and therefore conjured him, as he would answer
the contrary, before the great Tribunal, at the last and dreadful day, that he
would explain himself, and not thus cruelly butcher an Innocent Person, who had
never yet in any degree broke her Marriage Vows made to him, with which he
seemed to tax her, nor in any other respect had ever wronged him.

The Edge of the Husband's Rage being a little taken off, by this beginning to
expostulate, he proceeded to tell her, that tho she had managed her Amorous
Designs with that admirable Conduct, so as to keep them all this while
concealed from him, yet that her Galant had the Confidence to proclaim them to
all the World. She still on her knees, putting a stop to the current of her
Tears, prayed him to tell what Villain had the Impudence to utter so great a
Falsehood? Do you ask, demanded he, which of your Lovers has made this
Confession? It was Hendrick the Flemming, to day, did it publicly in a Bodegon.

I cannot deny (answered his Wife, expressing the height of Indignation in her
Looks) but I have seen that base Fellow, yet no otherwise than in your Company;
and I must own, that you have reason enough to justify the Revenge you are
about to Execute on her, who would prefer so contemptible a Wretch, to such a
Husband as you had I really done so. But since you are possessed with what has
been maliciously suggested against me, 'twill be a difficult Task to convince
you of my Innocence, by any Apology I can make; yet I heartily beg, that before
you proceed to take away my Life, you will give me leave for one. Hours time,
to go abroad by my self, and if I bring not back most evident Proofs of my
being wronged, and that your Honor, as also that of both our Families is
secure from Scandal, I will without murmuring submit to the Death, which you
threaten, and I shall justly deserve. And before you refuse me this Favor,
Pray, call to your Remembrance the tender Affection you have so often expressed
to me; also what Opportunities of dishonouring you, I have ever allowed my
self, during the two Years that I have been your Wife, and the little color of
Truth there is in this scandalous Accusation of abusing you.

These Motives, together with the real Love he had always had for her; the
humble posture she was then in, and sweetness of her Countenance, which
discovered not the least mark of Guilt in it, and withal, her never having had
any blot or least stain in her Reputation before, had by this time quite
disarmed her Husband's Rage.

You see, Sen^ora, said he, very calmly stepping back, and sheathing his
Dagger, you see what Influence you have over me; how easily I can comply with
your Requests, and how scrupulous I am, lest I should happen, through an Error,
to be Unjust to you, in not affording you a means, as I hope you may, of
clearing your self. All which would but more aggravate your Crime, should you
still prove guilty; and would raise my Resentment to so high a pitch, as would
make me search, till I found you out in your closest Sanctuaries, and thence
drag you, that I might Execute on you by a severer Method, that Exemplary
Justice, which I have now but threatened.

After he had concluded this Parley with her, he went down Stairs, and left her
to her self. She quickly followed, so soon as she was dressed, and had prepared
her self for her purpose; And when she had composed her Looks, that she might
not appear to have been Crying, she walked out, going directly to the King's
Palace, and up the great Stairs, which divide the two principal Courts, and
lead into the Guard Chamber. There she enquiring for Sen^or Hendrick the
Fleming, was told he was below in the Court, talking with some Merchants of his
Country: And one of his Brethren of the Guard, was so officious to serve the
Fair Lady, as to go out to the Ballusters of the upper Cloister, which is near
the Queen's Apartment, and from thence to show where he stood beneath, in the
Court; which was then, and is daily, crowded with Merchants and others, at
betwixt Eleven and Twelve of the Clock (for it was now about that Hour) so as
the Royal Exchange in London, is, at Exchange-time; For there is the great
resort of Persons of all Conditions, as well for their dispatch of Business
together, as for hearing of News.

The Lady having fixed her Eye on him, went down, and pressing forward till she
came where he was, pulled him by the Cloak; He turning, and seeing at this
Elbow a fine Woman, close veiled, left his Company, and began to imagine her
some kind Creature, who falling in Love with his Person (of which he himself
was not the least Admirer,) was come to give him an Invitation to some Amorous
Entertainment; He therefore looking sweetly on her, was about to accost her
with wanton Phrases, suitable to such Occasions. But it was not long before she
showed, that her Business was of a more serious Nature. For asking him first,
if his Name were not Sen^or Hendrick? And he satisfying her, it was so. She
opened her Veil, discovered her Face, and demanded if he knew her? He, as one
transported with Joy, and confirmed in his first Thoughts of her, answered
briskly, yes, Madam, I have often seen and admired you. But did you never speak
to me before? Proceeded the Lady, raising her Voice, and yet calmly. No Madam,
replied the Dutchman, I have never had that Honor, till this happy Minute.
Then base Villain, pursued the, let this be the Reward of thy Lying, Scandalous
Tongue: At which words, she drew out a small Pistol, which she had held ready
cocked under her Veil, and clapping it to his Breast, fired it, and shot him
through the Body.

The report and smoke of the Pistol, filled the whole Court with Astonishment;
none being able to guess at the Occasion of it, but those who had been present,
and heard the Words which passed between them; and those very Persons were so
amazed, that tho they beheld the thing done, and the Man fall, yet had not the
power to lay hands on the Actress; as scarce believing it could have been that
fine young Lady, who had done so bloody a Deed; she lifting up her Eyes, which
till then had been fixed on the dead Man, boldly told the Spectators; It was
she that had thus revenged her self on that Infamous Wretch, who had without
Cause defamed her, and done her so great Injury, that the Law it self was not
capable enough to repair it. And further added, that she had been careful to
observe, whether or no the Work had been as well performed, as it was intended,
for in case it had fallen short, she was prepared (showing another
Pocket-Pistol) to have done it more effectually. But that since she had thus
Executed on him, the Justice due to her wronged Innocence, she was ready to
suffer with Pleasure, the most rigorous Punishment that could be inflicted on
her.

The Alguazils or Sergeants belonging to the Court, who are the proper Officers
to seize and carry Offenders away to Prison, had, by this time, laid hands on
her, and were about to drag her to the Carcel de Corte, which is the chief
Prison of Madrid, (a Building, for its outward Beauty, more resembling a
Stately Palace, than a Goal) but that the Queen, (for it was during the Regency
of the present Queen Mother of Spain, and Minority of her Son, this King
Charles the Second, that our Story happened) having heard the Pistol, and been
told, that one of her Servants had been killed by a Lady, was curious to have a
full Relation of the Matter: And because that none was able to give her Majesty
any Satisfaction in it; She commanded the Woman to be brought up into her
Presence, to have it particularly from her own Mouth.

Sen^ora Iacynta, with the Tears all the while trickling down her Cheeks, gave
the Queen a large Account of what had passed that Morning, relating to her and
the Fleming; and tho she showed to have an undaunted Courage as to the loss of
her Life, for which she expected no Favor; and made appear the Satisfaction
she had in her Revenge; yet did she Modestly express her self in such proper
Terms, and with so becoming a Grace, under all that Misfortune, that not only
the Queen, but every one there present, was extremely affected with a real
Sorrow and Compassion for her. Insomuch, that her Majesty gave Order, that
instead of being sent to Prison, she should only be detained in the Palace till
the next Morning, and then appointed the whole Matter to be heard, by an
Alcalde de Corte* who is a Judge or Magistrate, before whom such like Processes
do properly come.

On the Morrow, when the Husband was brought into the Court; and he with the
several Witnesses who had been Summoned, were all fully heard; it appearing
that Henrick the Fleming, was a Person Notorious, for boasting a pretended
Familiarity with diverse Women of Eminent Virtue; and some also of considerable
Quality: And that by his last Words, he had owned in presence of so many Men of
good Reputation, that he had never till then spoke to the Lady, she was there,
by the Court declared Innocent of the Scandal that had been thrown upon her;
And this Sentence was therefore pronounced in her Favor.

That notwithstanding, Sen^ora Iacynta de Quin^ones, had been found Guilty of
killing a Man; and with a Pocket Pistol, a Weapon (in that Country) so
unlawful, that whatsoever Persons are taken, carrying such about them, they are
condemned to serve in the Galleys for the space of four Years; and tho this Act
had been committed within the Verge of the Court, and even in the Royal Palace
it self, where the striking but a Blow in a Quarrel, is a forfeiture of the
Striker's Right Hand: Yet it was the Queen's Pleasure, the Woman should be
pardoned, in regard the Fleming had but justly suffered for the Mischief, which
by his Scandalous boasting, he had like to have brought on an Innocent Person.

And the Queen was further pleased to prosecute her Kindness to the Woman, in
causing the Merchant her Husband to be made fully sensible, that since his
Wive's Virtue and Innocence, were so conspicuous to all the World, he should
hereafter esteem it so; and a kind Reconciliation, being proposed betwixt them,
was readily entertained by both, so that they were sent home very Loving
Friends, with an Engagement never more to upbraid one the other, with what had
happened on this Occasion.

This Story of the Woman's Revenge on the Fleming at Madrid, coming thus fresh
into Don Feliz his Memory, staggered his eager Resolution of meeting his
Friend, Sen^or Fadrique, at the Call de Carettees, at Ten a Clock, as had been
agreed on, and it extremely perplexed him to think, that he was so unhappy as
not to have any Confident whom he could entrust, or consult with, of what was
best to be done in this Exigency. At length he reflected, how poor and
dishonorable a thing it would be for him, out of a mere Faintheartedness, to
decline the seeing his Mistress, and the fair hopes he had of regaining her
Favor; especially when he had some cause to imagine, that his finding Fadrique
in the Placuela, looked rather like a thing designed than accidental; since in
all this walks up and down the Streets of the City, he had never seen Fadrique,
but at such times as he was to bring him notice of going the same Night to
Don^a Faustina. And withal, he conceived that so violent a Love as she had
always expressed to him, could not so quickly be converted into mortal hate,
seeing his Crime was not to be compared with the Fleming's; which was a public
Boast in a Tavern, voluntarily made, and of Favors too, which, as it appeared,
he had never received: Whereas this of his was only a discovery extorted from
him, by an intimate Friend, who was no less concerned for his safety than his
own, and consequently would never reveal the Secret, neither indeed could he,
since he knew it but imperfectly. Thus he ran on making a parallel of the
Circumstances on both sides, and concluding the whole matter in his own Favor:
that the Lady could have no ground for taking away his Life, as Sen^ora Iacynta
had done the boasting Flemming's.

As he was entertaining himself with these Thoughts, he plucking out his Watch,
saw it wanted not much of Ten a Clock; he therefore without allowing himself
any further time of Debate, went in haste away to his old Station, where he
walked almost three Quarters of an Hour, before he could see any appearance of
his Conductors, which began to discourage him and make him despair of Success
for that Night. But as he was giving his last Turn toward the Streets end by
which they used to come, he met Fadrique almost out of breath for haste,
looking with a pleased Countenance, and demanding Albricias, as their Phrase
is, meaning a Present or Reward for the good Tidings he brought; and then
acquainted him, that the Lady being at last overcome by the pressing
Importunity he had made on Don Feliz his behalf, was contented to admit him to
make the best Defense he could for himself.

Scarce had Don Feliz the patience either to answer, or to ask any Questions of
him, so overjoyed was he at the News; but getting nimbly into the Chair, which
by this was come up, he was carried away with great speed to her House; and
going up into the Room, saw her by and by enter, but in so furious a Passion,
that he soon began to repent his coming thither. She upbraided him with the
breach of all his Promises and Oaths, and with the poor weakness of his Temper,
that could so easily be wrought upon to reveal a Secret of that Importance, to
a Person whom he should rather have called to account for his rude
Impertinence, than have endeavored on that tame manner, to satisfy him in
every particular, and heedlesly to discourse it all the while with him in the
Spanish Tongue, so loud, as to give Listners an opportunity of bringing her a
Relation of it. Every little Circumstance of the whole Matter she aggravated
too, to the highest pitch, that a Woman's Anger and Malice could possibly
suggest. And in thus venting her Passion, she her self, raised her Voice so
loud, that one of her Duen^as was obliged to look in at the door three or four
times, and by signs to put her in mind of being more hushed.

He thought it not convenient to heighten the Lady's Rage, by a quarrelling
Justification of himself, tho sufficiently provoked to it, and yet attempted
mildly several times to excuse his Fault, by the studied Arguments he had
brought along with him; which was all in vain, for she gave him not the hearing
of them, neither regarded the Patience and Respect with which he bore all the
Indignities she put upon him. Which course usage was beginning to have kindled
as great a flame of Passion in his Breast, as was raging in hers, had he not
better considered the ill consequence of such a piece of Rashness, and
bethought himself of a more secure way to stop the current of her indefatigable
Tongue. He raised up his Body from the humble posture in which he stood to
sustain all the shock of her furious Reprimands, then stepping forwards, he
seized her in his closest Embraces, and gave her such a shower of Kisses, as
almost stifled her, with which he quickly silenced the Rattle of her shrill
Voice. After this, he pushing her gently backwards to the Bedside, ceased not
to prosecute his Amorous Victory, till he had quite disarmed her of all her
conceived Anger; for he urged so many Arguments of his Love to her, and pressed
them home with so much servency, as they were on the Bed together, that she
afterward confessed his Rhetoric was so powerful, and so very charming, she
could no longer forbear giving him a general Act of Indemnity.

After this fair Adjustment of all differences betwixt them, our two Lovers
thought fit to remove from the Bed to the Table, and the Lady giving her
accustomed sign at the Door, to her Duen^as, they brought in their Salvers of
Biscuits, Sweetmeats, and variety of delicate Liquors, with which Don Feliz and
his Mistress having refreshed themselves, they were for a while contending in
Words, which of them should utter the greatest Expressions of their Love and
true Affection one to the other, wherein they did not scruple to protest
solemnly, that they were ready to lay down their Lives, each for the other's
safety, in case of Exigency. And yet after all these Endearments, and Promise
of a perperual Amnesty of all Faults on both sides, Don^a Faustina could not
forbear hinting upon the old Topic again, by way of Advice to him, begging him
to beware of running into the same Error again, and to avoid all other
Occasions, that could afford the least cause of suspicion, and particularly in
case he should chance to see her in any Place whatsoever, that he should at the
instant, turn away his Eyes, and post quickly from thence, lest his very Looks
should betray the Thoughts of his Heart, and some curious Observer make from
thence a discovery of their Loves.

She then discoursed to him, how remarkable the English Merchants, and the
Flemencos, or Flemings, were in that Country, for their indiscreet gazing on
any Lady they liked, whether it were in Coach, Window, or elsewhere, and that
they had shown such seeming Pleasure and Delight, in staring in their Faces, as
if they had some crafty Intrigue with them, which Folly of theirs, had created
so violent a Jealousy in the Husband or other Relation, as has proved of very
fatal Consequence, and many times, to the Persons themselves, who gave the
occasion for it.

This Night their Conversation was interrupted sooner than ordinary, by one of
the Duen^as who came from the Post where she stood Sentinel (for those two
Women took that Duty nightly by turns) to observe what passed in the House, and
to bring speedy Notice thereof, for preventing any surprise that might happen
to them, so she packed him away in haste. But notwithstanding all their
Kindness, she seemed to retain some little displeasure still in her Heart, for
she either omitted on purpose, or forgot his Fee of two or three Doblones, at
parting, which she seldom failed to put into his Hand, on pretense of
satisfying the Charge he was at, in gratifying her Servants that waited on him,
and his Landlord for sitting up to let him in at his return home, with other
incident Expenses on her account.

From that time forward, the Correspondence of these Lovers, was carried on
with all the Success and mutual Satisfaction, they could possibly desire, they
still continuing their Nightly Meetings, at their proper and appointed Seasons.
And after the Transports of their Love were over, it was their Custom for
passing away the time, as they sat over their silver Brasero of Coals, to
entertain one the other with the pleasantest Discourses or Stories, they could
think of. She also took great delight in hearing how different the several
Modes of his Country were from hers, and in making Comparisons of one with the
other: The Beauty of their Women would sometimes happen to be their Theme, and
then the Constancy and prudent wariness of their Lovers; The Honor of the
first of these, she, by a general Report, allowed to those of his Country; but
the Credit of the latter she affirmed was to be attributed to the Spaniards;
for she could not believe the English to have Contrivance enough for managing
an Intrigue of Love, with that discreet Resolution as it ought to be, but she
said, she was confident they would be apt to spoil all, by being too timorous
on the one Hand, or too rash on the other. And added, that Lovers in England
(as she had been told) were not put to such hard shifts for finding out Ways to
court their Mistresses, as in Spain they were always forced to, and often
proved to the Hazard of their Lives; since the English, she said, had all the
Opportunities they could desire, of talking freely with Women, whether married
or unmarried, and even in the Presence of their Fathers, Husbands, or nearest
Relations, without Jealousy, or the least Scruple whatsoever, which made them
so careless of their Behavior abroad.

Don Feliz told her, he was not willing to enter into Argument with her for
rectifying the slight Opinion she had of those of his Country, as to their
Skill in the managing of Intrigues; or to justify the innocent Freedom there
allowed to Men and Women in their common Conversation: But if she pleased, for
the avoiding such Disputes he would rather strive to divert her with an English
Love-Story, of a very Modern Date; which contained something of Intrigue in it,
and therefore he hoped would the better relish with her. And he assured her
that the chief Persons therein mentioned were of his Acquaintance. The Lady
gladly accepted his offer, and he thus began.

The Generous Impostor.
'TWas on a fine Summers-day, at about Eight a Clock in the Morning, that three
Citizens, who had been Merry-making with some Friends in the Country, were
galloping from Ware toward London, and happened to see a Lovely Young Women,
in no mean Habit, sitting under the shadow of a spreading Tree, that grew on
the Road-side, betwixt Enfield and Edmunton. The melancholy Posture in which
she was, incited the Curiosity of the hinmost of the three to stop his Career,
that he might learn of the Lady, why she made choice of so dusty a place to
Repose herself in; and yet this sight had not Influence enough on his two
Companions, to make them halt, or to concern themselves for her; but calling,
away, away, they spurred on and left him. He coming nearer, perceived her to be
weeping, tho she strove as much as she could, to conceal it; which obliged him
to change, the Merry Complement he had designed to accost her with, into a more
serious Address; desiring, with great earnestness, to know if she had suffered
any Misfortune, or that any one had offered her an Injury; protesting he would
very zealously endeavor to serve her to the utmost of his power. The Lady
returning him Thanks for his Civility, assured him, that nothing of that had
happened to her, in her Journey; and added, that no Inconvenience attending
her, could be of so great moment as to make him lose his Company, for an
Enquiry after it. Mr. Cooper, (for by that Name I shall call this Gentleman,)
thinking to divert her, told her cheerfully, that he was a professed Knight
Errant, and never thought himself so well employed, as in the Service of
distressed Ladies, and tho he was not willing to be too officicious and
impertinent, yet could he not forbear pressing to know the Cause of her
Trouble. The Gentlewoman who was yet hardly able to restrain the Current of her
Tears, endeavored to persuade him not to be so inquisitive after that which
would give him very little Pleasure to know; but finding she could not put him
off with any Excuses, and that she was still urged, tho with great Civility by
him, to satisfy his Curiosity, she confessed that it was chiefly her
weariness, had put her into that disorder, having indiscreetly undertaken a
tedious Journey, which she doubted, she was not able to perform.

By this time, Mr. Cooper had alighted from his Horse, and sitting down by her,
began to show a Concern for her Trouble, with a Zeal to be assisting to her;
and desired to know the Places Name to which she was going. She satisfied him,
and that it was about four or five Miles off Cambridge. This, he said, was but
a small Journey, and needed not so much to discourage her; since she might very
easily be set down there by Night; and asked where her Horses, or Coach staid
for her? She renewing her Tears, owned that she was on foot, and had so come
from London that Morning.

He could not comprehend the Mystery of what he heard and saw; for after a
careful survey of the Lady, he was amazed to think, why so fine a Young Woman,
of such a genteel Appearance, and in that Condition she seemed to be, which was
big with Child, should venture so far on Foot. But guessing that his Service to
help her on her Journey, might be more acceptable, than to detain her longer in
that Place with frivolous Questions; he put her in mind of the danger of
sitting there on the cold Ground, and advised her to be walking forwards,
offering her his Hand to conduct her as far as Enfield. This Kindness she would
have refused, begging him to remember his Company gone the other way; But Mr.
Cooper persisted to wait on her, leading her along the Road; and as thus they
walked, could not but admire her discreet Answers to the several Quetions he
made her, and the graceful Passion with which she expressed herself, which
raised in him a greater desire to understand more of her Condition.

When they came to an Inn in the Town, Mr. Cooper left her a while to repose
herself, and after discoursing the Master of it, ordered a handsome Pillion to
be fixed on his own Horse, which was a stout Gelding, and an easy Pacer; Then
stepping in to his distressed Lady; after they had taken a small Bait, he
acquainted her with the sorry shift he had thought on, to convey her two or
three Miles on her way, there being no better Convenience to be had for her in
that place, which he entreated her to accept. Fain would the Gentlewoman have
dissuaded him from giving so great trouble to himself, alleging a thousand
Reasons against it, and concluded with the danger of being so found by any of
her Husband's Acquaintance, in a Stranger's Company: He assured her, that tho
he was unknown to her, yet his Intentions were very Honorable, for all his end
was but to do her this small Service, which he hoped could bring no manner of
blemish to her Reputation; and as for his own part, he had no apprehensions of
danger that could attend himself. And with such like Arguments the Fair Lady
was at last prevailed with, to be lifted up behind him; so on they Rode for
Waltham Cross.

This Gentleman, who was a Rich Merchant, of admirable Parts, not long since
returned out of Italy, and was somewhat under Thirty Years of Age; having this
Opportunity of Talking to the Lady, strove by a pleasant Entertainment of
Ingenious Discourse, to divert her Melancholy; and she also her self,
endeavored with her utmost Skill to dissemble it. But the many Sighs which at
unawares escaped from her, did too plainly discover, it was no small Trouble,
that was contained within her Breast; which how industrious soever she was to
conceal, our Generous Merchant was no less impatient to draw an Account of it
from her; but yet by all the most plausible ways he could invent.

They quickly got to Hodsdon, and she renewing her Entreaty to be set down
there, he spurred on the faster, protesting he would not for the World be
guilty of so much Barbarity, to leave a Lady in her Condition, till he had
brought her to her Father's House, whither she had acquainted him she was
going. His great Civility in this respect, and all the rest of his Carriage to
her was so obliging, that after some further pressing; she was contented,
infandum renovare dolorem, to discover to him, the whole Story of her
Misfortunes, which she related on this manner.

I do not doubt, kind Sir, but you will heartily repent the Charity you have
bestowed on me, when you shall find that your Generous Temper, and your
pressing Curiosity, had extorted from me a Secret that will render me the most
odious, and most contemptible Creature of all my Sex. And tho, to me, it be of
the most dangerous Consequence imaginable, to give you this Account, yet since
you have thus solemnly engaged never to divulge it, I shall believe you to be a
Man of so much Honor, as faithfully to keep your Word with me.

Be pleased then to know, Sir, that I am an unfortunate Daughter of Doctor N. a
Reverend Divine, and Minister of that Parish, to which I am now going, who
having not many Children, gave us, as we grew up and were capable of it, such
Education as his narrow Fortune of about Three Hundred Pounds a Year would
allow, being careful to instill into us the best Rules of Virtue and Piety. I
was sent to a Boarding School, to be instructed in the French Tongue, and those
other Accomplishments of Music, Dancing, and Fine Works, which Young
Gentlewomen are Taught at such places. Which Breeding as I was then told, was
to serve me for a Portion; my Father being able to add little more to my
Fortune, when I should happen to Marry: or else, that it was to qualify me for
the Service of some Lady, in case any such Opportunity were presented to me.

It was into the latter of these Conditions, when I ventured into the World,
that my ill Fortune guided me: For by the Recommendation of a Person of Quality
related to my Mother, I was entertained by a Baron's Lady to be her Woman. The
Good Lady Treated me, being Young, with much more Tenderness and Affection than
I deserved at her Hand, as by the sequel of my Story you will find, causing me
in those Accomplishments, which I had but rudely essayed to Learn at School,
now to be improved, by the same Masters who Taught her own Daughter. Which
Goodness of hers, I requited with the basest Ingratitude imaginable. For having
the Misfortune to be by some esteemed Handsome, or at least appearing so in the
Eyes of my Lord, whose Vicious Inclinations to Debauchery with Women, placed
him much beneath the Character, commonly given of him in the World, which cried
him up for his great Wisdom, Sobriety, and Goodness; By this reputed Saint, I
say, was I often solicited to Lewdness, which I resisted, for several Months,
with great Resolution.

At her coming to this Passage of her Story, the Young Woman's Tears brake out
afresh, that she was not able, for some time, to proceed in it, till mastering
that Transport of her Passion, and drying her Eyes, she thus went on.

My Lord's base Lust, seemed rather more inflamed, than any way abated, by my
resolute Denials. For seeing I was not to be won by fair means, he strove by
subtilty to obtain his Ends; watching many Opportunities to catch me alone, and
in Places convenient for his Lewd Purpose; all which Stratagems I still evaded
by my nimble slipping from him, and running into Company, where I believed he
durst not pursue me. Thus I endeavored to keep my Virtue unblemished, till one
unhappy Afternoon, when I knew my Lady was gone out to make her Visits, and
thinking he had also been abroad, because I saw but few of his Servants within
doors, who indeed, as I afterward discovered, had been sent out by him on
purpose; I was coming into my Lord's Dressing Room, intending to entertain my
self with some of the Books which usually lay there: But he, who was watching
for such an Opportunity, suddenly rushing out of his Study, caught hold on me,
and tho I long resisted, crying, and struggling, yet at last, he with Threats
and Violence, mixed with fair Words and large Promises, of what generous
Provision he would make for me, obtained his Will, leaving me for ever, with
the base Brand of a Strumpet.

Here was the current of her Discourse again interrupted, by another shower of
Tears, accompanied with a storm of sighs and sobs, which had such Influence on
our compassionate Merchant, that he was extremely touched with a Sense of her
Condition. And that he might divert her Grief, he put her in mind of her Story,
of which he was impatient to hear the Conclusion.

When afterward, (continued she, striving to suppress her Sorrow,) I had well
considered the black Deed that I had committed, and how ill I had stuck to
those Excellent Methods of Governing my self, which had been given me by my
good Father, I was almost distracted, and had it several times in my Mind, to
have made a way my self, could I have contrived an effectual Means of doing it,
especially too, when I found my Lord still pursuing the course of his Lusts;
but I was deterred from such Thoughts, by reflecting, that to destroy my self,
had been still to increase my Crime, by my adding Self-murder to it. And, my
Lord, observing my constant Averseness to all his Offers, and that I was not by
any Trick he could use, to be brought to a second Compliance with him, desisted
from any further Attempt.

It was not long before my Affliction, was infinitely increased, for I was
sensible of that which I dreaded more than Death it self, and finding my Shame
begin to be visible to the World, I could not think what would become of me. I
acquainted my Lord with it, who to prevent the Scandal that was like to fall
upon himself, got me packed out of doors, pretending to Marry me to a Citizen.
And seeing I absolutely refused to be kept for his Miss, gave me Two Hundred
broad Pieces of Gold, with which he hoped, I might either get me a Husband, or
at least be encouraged not to lay violent Hands on my self.

I took a private Lodging in the City to be brought to Bed in, but with so
blind a Pretense, that they might easily (as I could perceive) guess at the
Truth of the Matter: And out of doors I durst scarcely stir by Daylight, for
fear of being met by any of my Acquaintance. Here I staid till such time as my
own stock of Money, which I had been able to lay up, was beginning to sink very
low; and being continually tormented with the sting of a guilty Conscience, for
the Wickedness I had committed; I was possessed with a strong belief, that to
punish it, God would suffer me to be Murdered in that obscure Place, for the
sake of my Gold; some of which I had been obliged to boast of, for the gaining
me a Credit amongst those People, to whom I was a Stranger, for which reason
they had been unwilling at first to receive me in amongst them.

And having now neither Friend nor Confident to trust with the Secret of my
Misfortune; I, tho my first Intentions had been to lay my great Belly in that
House, durst not stick to that Resolution, lest dying in Travel, my Child might
be deprived of the Two Hundred Pieces of Gold, which I had-been careful to
preserve entire.

After I had revolved a Thousand Extravagant Thoughts in my Mind, to contrive
which way I should dispose of my self, without hazarding my own Life and my
Child's, or publishing my Ignominy; I, at last concluded to go into
Cambridg-shire, to my Father and Mother; who, I hoped would not be so
Uncharitable to let me perish in that Condition, though they should refuse to
entertain me in their House, having brought upon them so great a Scandal. For I
could think on no better Expedient, than to make a plain Confession to them of
my Misfortune, and afterward submit my self to their Discretion, to dispose of
me as they should think fit.

Now because I foresaw the Misery into which I was plunging my self, I
contrived to manage my Affairs with the greatest Frugality I could, and to that
end sending down my Trunks by the Carrier, I resolved for the saving of
Charges, to walk it after them on foot. So by break of day this Morning I set
out, and was able to reach no further on my Journey, than the Place where you
found me; and must have staid at Enfield for some Convenience of Coach or
Wagon to have carried me Home, had not your Charity been thus ill employed on
such an undeserving Wretch, which indeed is more Favor than I can expect from
my own Parents: For I am in dread, they will have so great Abhorrence of my
Wickedness, that they will scarce admit me into their Doors, or own me for
their Child, in this reproachful Condition.

Here she made an end of her Melancholy Relation, but gave beginning to another
stood of Tears, which very much excited Mr. Cooper's Compassion toward her,
and a desire of assisting her in this distress. He used the best Rhetoric he
was Master of, for appeasing her Grief, and for convincing her that it was now
too late to remedy what was past, by an excess of Sorrow: but that without
doubt* she might better expiate her Crime, by her future Good and Virtuous
Course of Life. He likewise advised her, that since the Circumstances of the
Thing were not yet known, she should strive to keep them under disguise, from
the knowledge of any Person whatsoever: And begged her that being so near Home,
she would not seem to have been Crying, but appear to her Friends, with the
most composed and cheerful Look, she could possibly frame.

After this, and a little further Consultation how to put some fair Varnish on
the Matter, they ended the Day and their Journey together, at her Father's
Door. Here they alighted, and were joyfully received by the good Doctor and by
her Mother, who wondered at their unlook'd-for Visit, and blamed Mrs. Katharine,
(which was her Name) for sending them no Notice of her coming; but they were
more surprised, seeing Mr. Cooper on his Knee, and asking their Blessing.
What Is this, Daughter, demanded the Doctor, have you also brought with you a
Husband without our Knowledge of it beforehand? Ay, by my Truth! said her
Mother, and a Great Belly too, or I am much mistaken. Mr. Fisher, (for so Mr.
Cooper had now thought fit to call himself) made a most Ingenious Apology and
Excuse, for carrying on his Courtship so secretly, without taking their
Approbation, and for concealing their Marriage for so long a time, alleging
such plausible Reasons for that, and for the quitting her Lady's Service, as
very well satisfied both Father and Mother; who besides a kind Reception, often
bestowed on them their hearty Blessing.

The rest of the Evening after Supper till Bedtime, was spent in much
pleasanter Discourse, and more agreeable Conversation, than the day before it
had been. But it growing late, and the Mother reminding them of their weariness
after so long a Journey, hastened away her Daughter to Bed, whilst Mr. Fisher
would needs stay below, till his Father should have Smoaked out his Pipe.

The Doctor was proud to find his Son-in-Law, so Ingenious and Wellbred a Man,
guessing him from thence, to be of Excellent Skill in his Prosession, which he
told him was a Surgeon: And he commended him for his Industrious Traveling
into Foreign Countries, as he informed him he had done, for Improvement of his
Skill in Chy^urgery. But it being high time to part, and for Mr. Fisher to go
up to his Chamber, he did so. And now was the critical Part to be acted, on
which depended the Credit of the whole Entrigue: For Mr. Cooper, to clear the
Young Gentlewoman of the Infamy that must have fallen upon her, was
necessitated, as you have heard, to own her for his Wife, tho under the
borrowed Name of Fisher, and now he must Lie with her too, that is to say, in
her Room, or else it might create a Suspicion hereafter, that this had been but
a Trick; and so this Generous Imposture might be detected.

She would fain have thought on some other Expedient, and have waved this; but
he judged it most requisite, for keeping up the Reputation they had now gained;
and protested a thousand times not to offer her the least Incivility; for that
he would only roll himself in his Cloak, as many a time he had been forced to
do in his Travels; would throw himself on the Chairs, and it being a warm
Summers Night, he doubted not but to Sleep very soundly. The Lady told him,
that He who out of the Generosity of his Mind, could condescend to act so mean
a Part as he had done that day, purely for the Charitable assisting of an
Unhappy, Young Woman, in distress; could not possibly, she was confident, be
guilty of breaking his Word with her, or of any thing else that was
dishonorable; and that therefore she should only lie in pain to think, he must
have so uneasy a Nights Lodging for her sake.

On this manner did Mr. Cooper lay himself down, where the tiresomness of his
days Journey, together with his sitting up late, gave him no Opportunity either
to find fault with the hardness of his Bed, or to seek about the Room for an
easier: For falling fast asleep, he awaked not till Five a Clock the next
Morning, tho he thought it to be much later; and fearing to be surprised as he
thus lay rough, he got up and walked out into the Fields, where he met his
Father with a Book in his Hand. The Doctor admired to see him stirring so
early; and after various Discourses of News, and of the Parts abroad beyond the
Seas which his Son Fisher had seen, the Doctor began to reckon up the several
ways, which he had contrived for their Divertisement, and what Visits they
should make during their stay in the Country, particularly to a Widow Lady of a
considerable Estate, who was his Wives Sister, and Godmother to his Daughter;
also to some of their Relations in Cambridge, and other Places.

But Mr. Fisher told him, he was extremely sorry to let him know, that his
Affairs would not permit him to enjoy those Favors designed him; for he was
obliged to be back at London, by to Morrow Night. The Father at first supposed
him in Jest; but finding him serious, was troubled to think he should so soon
part with his Son and Daughter; and hearing him after Dinner fall upon the same
Subject again, both Father and Mother were persuading him to put off his
Journey, if possible, for some little time longer, and pressed to know the
Necessity of such a hasty Return.

Sir, said he, I last Night acquainted you with some Circumstances of my
present Condition, but not all, and must now add, that I had lately an
advantageous Proposal made me by an Eminent Courtier, and my Honored Friend,
of going to Sea, as chief Surgeon to one of his Majesty's Frigates, called the
Dreadnaught, ordered to Convoy a Fleet of Merchant Ships to the West Indies,
where for some time she is appointed to Cruise, for clearing the Coasts of our
several Islands, and other Plantations there, of the Buccaniers, with whom they
are very much infested. So that besides the benefit of a handsome Sallary, such
considerable Advantages may be made by an industrious Traffic with the People
of those Countries, as have encouraged me to accept the Offer* For should I
have refused it, not a few Candidates of the most Eminent of our Faculty, in
the City, stood ready to have put in for the Employment. On this Occasion* Sir,
I have brought down my Wife, and doubt not of my Mothers and your Care of her
in my absence, and at my Return, I hope to be in a Condition of making a
sufficient Acknowledgment to you both, for the Favor you will do us.

At their hearing this, the Doctor and his Lady looked one upon another with
great Concern, perceiving such a Charge as their Daughters Lying in to be thus
unexpectedly coming upon them; together with the Maintenance of her, and her
Child; and no future Provision for them, more than the uncertain hopes of her
Husband's Profitable Voyage, to satisfy for all. The Consideration of which,
did so much perplex them, they knew not what Answer to make him.

Mr. Fisher (for so I must still call him) noting their Silence, and expecting
no less, at his starting the thing to them, took occasion to tell them, that he
guessed at the Reason of their surprise; which was, that they imagined, he
would leave his Wise and Child destitute of a Subsistence, and throw the
burden wholly on them, which he said was the least of his Intentions. Then
pulling out of his Pocket, a Purse with the Two Hundred Broad Pieces in it, he
threw it into his Father's Lap, adding, that though as yet, he had entered into
no Treaty concerning her Portion, which he should at present wave; he would not
go from thence without a Husband's Care of her; and acquainted them with the
Sum contained in it, which they found to be so.

The glorious Brightness of the Gold soon dispelled all Clouds of Doubt and
Suspicion out of the Faces and Minds of the good Doctor, and of his Wife, and
loosed the Organs of their Speech, making him now able to tell his Son, that
since the necessity of his Affairs would not permit them to be so happy to keep
him at present amongst them, they must be contented, to be deprived of him,
till his Good Fortune should bring him safe back, which they hoped would not be
very long. And they expressed great Fear of the many Dangers, which they were
sensible he must be exposed to, in the performance of such a Voyage. But the
Doctor assured him of his daily Prayers for his Preservation, his Health, and
good Success in his Affairs; and further, made him not only a Soleman Promise
of his utmost Care for his Wife and Child, but of Mustering up what Sum he
possibly could for her Portion, against his Son's Return from Sea.

The next Morning, after many kind Endearments expressed on all sides. Mr.
Fisher bad farewell to all his Friends, and spurred away for London, because
his Ship on which he was to go aboard, was ready to set Sail with the first
fair Wind, as he said; but he lest his pretended Wife in great Affliction, at
her parting with so Generous a Friend; and her Father and Mother were in little
less Trouble, to think of the long and dangerous Voyage he had undertaken.

It was but a few Weeks after her Husband's departure, that Mrs. Fisher was
brought to Bed of a Fine Boy, to the great Rejoicing of all her Relations; and
now nothing was so much wished for, as to hear good News of the Child's absent
Father, who promised to write by the first Opportunity he should meet with. But
instead of what they so earnestly expected, there came a Letter about three
Months after, from Mr. Fisher, giving an Account of his dangerous Sickness,
which Letter was enclosed in another, from the Surgeon's Mate of the Man of
War, bringing the sorrowful Tidings of Mr. Fisher's Death, who sell Sick on
Shipboard of a violent Fever and a Flux, which in few days had carried him into
another World, but not that which he was Traveling to have seen.

Our Young Widow's Grief for the pretended Death of her Husband, was so
admirably well counterfeited, that none could doubt the Truth of it; nor was it
possible for any one to imagine, that this Contrivance had been laid
beforehand, to be after this manner carried on, as it was. Her Father also and
Mother, who had an extraordinary Fondness for both Son and Daughter, were real
shearers of her feigned Sorrow, although their Son's stay with them had been so
short, and their knowledge of him so little. And that which added something to
their Trouble, was to consider the impossibility of recovering any part of his
Effects left on Shipboard: But they comforted their Daughter the best they
could, entreating her, that for her little Son's sake, the would not lay this
Affliction too much to Heart, left her Parents should have Cause to lament two
Deaths instead of one; and they made her large Promises of their future
Kindness to her, in her Fortunes.

She formally put her self into deep Mourning; and most of her Relations and
Friends, came to condole with her upon the Death of her Husband; amongst whom
was the Rich Aunt, her Godmother* who had great Compassion on her Niece, by
reason of this early Misfortune, being as yet but in the Nineteenth Year of her
Age. 'Twas this Consideration, that induced the Charitable Lady, to take home
to her House our Melancholy Widow, for some small time, till the violence of
her Grief should be a little abated, which did not endure very long. And there
her pleasant and discreet Conversation, was so charming to her Old Aunt, that
she could not think of parting with her, but kept her for her Companion, above
Two Years.

At this time, some extraordinary Occasions drew this Good Lady from her
Country Retirement, where she intended to have ended her days, and had
continued during her Widowhood, which was about Four or Five Years, and brought
her to London again. Amongst her Friends in the City, she took Handsome
Lodgings, for her Self and her Fair Niece; who for her Beauty and rare
Perfections was admired by all that saw her. And tho she appeared not often
abroad, except at the Church, which she under her Aunt's Wing diligently
frequented, yet had she soon acquired the Title of the Charming Widow; for that
Dress which she still wore, did most admirably become her.

One Evening, her Aunt and She being Invited out by some Ladies of their
Acquaintance, to an Eminent Ball, she there drew on her the Eyes of the young
brisk Citizens, who were extremely taken with her delicate Shape and Mien, as
well as with the sweet Air of her Modest Countenance. And some of them would
gladly have been making Courtship to her, had they not been awed by the severe
Regard of her Prudent Aunt.

Amongst the Crowd of her Admirers, was a Merchant of considerable Note, who
from the first Moment of his coming into that Room, had fixed his Eyes on her,
and from so fair on Object, was not able to remove them, but continued in his
Corner, as if Transformed into a Statue. Yet was it not Love only, that had
reduced him to this strange Condition, but withal a kind of Amazement, and
Trouble, which he had within himself, by reason of a strong Imagination, he was
possessed with, of having seen that Incomparable Person somewhere before, and
an Endeavor to recollect to his Memory where it was; but to no purpose, for
all his Conjectures served but to puzzle him still the more.

In this perplexity he remained till toward the conclusion of the Ball; when
his Impatience would not suffer him longer to rest, without endeavoring to be
satisfied, who she was: But as he stood up, and was about to inform himself by
some of the Company of her Name; the Lady casting her Eyes that way, happened
to espy him. The first glimps she had of his Face, and the Curiosity which
detained her Looks upon it, struck her into so great an astonishment, as is not
to be expressed, and seemed to have serch'd all the Blood of her Body into her
Cheeks. For tho she, at the very instant that she beheld him, knew him to be
her Generous Friend Mr. Cooper, yet the Report of his Death, for which, she had
as much lamented as if really true, under the Title of her Husband, and the
pretended Name of Mr. Fisher, having been so generally spread abroad, and their
Project been so formally carried on in all points, for almost the space of
three Years. without her hearing any News of him, in all that time, it had so
confounded her Reason, that for a while, she could hardly persuade herself, but
that she saw his Ghost. And so great an Influence had this Fancy over her, that
it quickly made the blushing Color retire from her Cheeks, leaving so chil a
paleness in its stead, that she immediately fainted, and dropped from her Chair
on the Floor.

This sudden Accident put a stop to the Harmony of Music and Dancing for the
present, and gave some disturbance to most of the Company that had taken notice
of her, as being concerned for her Illness, and particularly to her Aunt, who
after she had a little recovered her from that Fit, had her carried down to her
Coach.

Tho Mr. Cooper could not in all this time call her to his Remembrance, yet was
he as much troubled for her as if he had known her, and was very officious to
help her down the stairs: Nor was he at ease, 'till he had heard her tell her
Aunt, that this was only a fainting Fit, occasioned by the closeness of the
Room, and her want of Air in the midst of so great a Crowd. By that time she
got home, she was perfectly recovered of her Indisposition, and walked from the
Coach into her Lodgings; whither her Gallant had been careful to follow her
undiscovered; And there making Enquiry concerning her, he learned of one of the
Servants, that she was a Cambridgeshire Gentlewoman, Niece to the Lady D. who
had lately brought her to Town, and her Name Mrs. Fisher.

He then immediately knew her to be his once pretended Wife, and afterward his
Widow; which increased his surprise, and raised in him more than an ordinary
Curiosity, to find out some means of speaking to her. But because he was
fearful lest his being remembered by any of their Family, might be of prejudice
to her Reputation (for he knew not as yet, how things stood with her) he was
contriving some safe way to be first informed from her own mouth how he must
behave himself, in case she thought fit to allow him the liberty of Visiting
her, for the renewing their Acquaintance, so as to be out of danger of
committing any Mistake in that respect. He knew 'twas in vain to think of
effecting his purpose at that unseasonable time; and yet the earnest Longing he
had to see her, would not suffer him to afford his Eyes the least wink of Sleep
all the following Night: For now she seemed infinitely more Beautiful and more
Charming than at first, when he found her sitting tired on the Road side near
Enfield, weeping, and great with Child.

His thus reflecting on things past, made him begin to Censure her for that
ignominious Act, which to him she had owned her self guilty of, and must have
rendered her Contemptible to all the World, had not her Reputation been salved
up by his Industry, and Favor to her. And yet whilst he was thus blaming her,
he could not forbear admiring her, as the most lovely Creature he had ever in
all his Life time beheld: Which Admiration of her Person begat in him, at the
same time, a more favorable Opinion of her Miscarriage; for he considered that
Error to have been committed when she was but very young; that her Innocence
had been betrayed by the subtilty and Violence of a lustful Man, who in
strictness of Justice more deserved to have been Arraigned for a Ravisher, than
she to have born the Infamy of the thing. And he was willing to believe, that
the deep sense she had expressed of that sin, and her Detestation of the Fact,
had made so full an Atonement for it, that in case she had lived with that
Modesty and Reservedness which he hoped she had, he could not think but she
must now be reckoned a most Virtuous Woman.

The next Morning he got up betimes, and as he was beating his Brains for a
Contrivance how he might come to talk with her, he remembered that his Milleners
Shop was very near the Ladies Lodgings; to which he went, and by the Industry
of the Millener's Wife, found means to have a Billet converyed thither, and
delivered into Mrs. Fisher's Hand.

The Charming Widow, who had not only a great sense of Her Obligations to Mr.
Cooper, but had likewise a grateful defire of acknowledging them to himself,
was as much pleased at the Proposal of this Meeting, as he could possibly be
that made it. But because her Aunt had taken so great a liking to her for her
pleasant Company, and her prudent Behavior on all occasions, that she began to
call her Daughter, and had often declared, that if the young Woman made choice
of a second Husband with her Friends Approbation, she would add considerably to
her Fortune; Therefore was Mrs. Fisher cautious of giving her any Offense, or
raising a suspicion in her, that she entertained a Correspondence with any
Person, of whom she gave her not a fair Account beforehand. So she was glad to
make a Pretense of going out to buy Gloves, Ribbons, or some such knacks at the
Milleners, by which she got an opportunity to see her Friend, who staid waiting
for her alone in the Parlour.

Although this Assignation had been thus fairly made by Consent of both Parties,
yet was their Meeting the most surprising imaginable, for neither one nor the
other had at first any power to speak; He for the Joy he had to see her, though
he could hardly persuade himself that she was the same Person, being so much
altered to her greater Advantage; and She for the shame she had to think of the
disgraceful Condition wherein he first found her, and from which he had so
sucessfully relieved her. And this Thought made such an Impression in her Mind*
as had like to have cost her a second fainting Fit. But she striving to
recollect her Spirits, was beginning to make an Apology for her Ingratitude, in
neglecting to return her due thanks for all his Favors; calling him the most
generous of Men, and her good Angel. But Mr. Cooper quickly interrupted her, to
tell her how much he was rejoiced to see her again, whom he had not, by her own
positive Commands, the liberty to Write to, much less to have endeavored to
visit, left any Discovery should have been made of their Entrigue, to her
Prejudice.

When their first Trasports of Joy were over, with some Enquiries made of each
others Condition, since the time of his leaving her in Cambridge shire; he was
glad to find her Credit had been so well supported by his Industry; and to hear
she had remained unmarried ever since the Report of her supposed Husband's
pretended Death. He also let her know, that he still continued a Batchelour;
but did not acquaint her, that he, not long before had received an unkind Ba^k
from a fine young Woman, whom he had Courted above two Years; and that when
they were just at the point of Consummating their Happiness together by
Marriage; she had most unfaithfully discarded him, for the sake of being a
Lady; and the hopes of bearing Rule over her Husband; for she expected to be
linked in Matrimony with a Rich, but very foolish knight, who it seems
recanting his Bargain, threw her off at the very Church Door, and served her
(if possibly it could be) a more disgraceful Trick, than she had done her
Merchant.

It had been a hard matter for Mr. Cooper to master the violent Anger he had
conceved against all Womankind, so as ever to have a favorable Opinion of
them, after such ill treatment meant from that Mistress; had it not been purely
out of spite and Revenge to her, who was now striving again with all the Arts
and subtle Delusions she could possibly invent, to retrieve the lost Affections
of her slighted Lover. It was, I say, the resentment of this gross Affront, had
carried him on purpose to that Ball, to try if there he could espy out amongst
those Ladies, a more worthy Object for his Love; and by admitting a New Flame
into his Breast, extinguish the old.

Our admired Widow chanced to be the happy she on whom he fixed his Eyes and
Affections. 'Twas her Charming Face and modest Look, that represented to him a
thousand more Beauties and taking Graces, than he remembered ever to have seen
in his Unconstant and Faithless Mistress: And so great a Conquest had this made
of his Heart, almost before he could call her to his Remembrance, that now it
was not in his Power, if he would have endeavored it, to shake off her Yoke,
and to regain his Liberty.

He had had, it is true, some Conflict in his Breast, that very Morning, when he
was remembering, how Reproachful a thing it would be for him, who was a
Gentleman of a good Family, and a Merchant; should he Marry one, who had
acknowledged her self a Strumpet, and whose Beauty and Education, was all the
Portion she was like to have: But on the other hand, he considered, that her
Dishonor was scarcely known, but to himself; that her lovely Person and
singular Qualifications, if she had kept up to those Virtuous Resolutions,
which she had solemnly made, were a sufficient Dower for such a one as himself,
who by his Industry had already acquired an Estate sufficient to make him live
very happily in the World.

On this manner was he able, or at least willing, to solve all the Arguments
that his more serious Fancy, or his Doubts could any way raise against her;
that now there only remained this difficulty, which was, how to obtain her for
his own; and how to be satisfied in the first place of the Fears and
Apprehensions he had, lest she should be pre-engaged to some other Person, and
so all his Hopes of winning her, by any Interest or Merit, which he could
pretend to for his former Services, be frustrated. Such Thoughts as these did
so far embolden our Lover, that after some little further Scrutiny, into the
Widows Affairs, of which he received an Account to his full Liking; he could no
longer forbear declaring his Love to her, which he did with so much fervency
and Passion, that the Lady could not doubt but that it was real.

She had already sufficient Experience of his Ingenuity and his Uparallell'd
Generosity, to create in her a high Esteem of him for his admirable Temper of
Mind; and as for his Person, he might well be reckoned in the Eyes of an
Impartial Judge, a very desirable Man for a Husband: For his stature being
Middle sized, his shape well proportioned, in most exact Symetry, and the airy
Briskness of his Face and Mien, rendered him amongst the City Ladies, as Eminent
in his Sex, as she for her Beauty and rare Accomplishments, was in hers. And
besides all this, his Genius enclining him to thestudy of Painting and Music;
he, during his Factorship in Italy, while others of his Companions spent their
vacant Hours from Business in Drinking and Debauchery, took the opportunity to
Employ his in the Practice of these two Ingenious Arts; wherein, with the
assistance of the greatest Masters that the City of Florence afforded of both,
he became no mean Proficient on the Lute, and a most exquisite Artist at
Painting in Mignature.

Although nothing could have been more acceptable to the fair Widow than this
Addess of Mr. Cooper's, for he was the only Person, that for a Husband she
could have wished for; yet she received his Courtship with a Coldness, and
seeming distrust of all he said; and told him, that he had made choice of an
improper Subject to divert himself with; for when she looked back on her past
Miscarriage, which had rendered her despisable even to the meanest of Men, if
her Infamy had been publicly known, she was too sensible that she must be far
beneath his lowest Jests and Scorn: But as she had an abhorrence of that Fact,
which had cost her so much Grief, and indeed ought rather to be charged on
another than her self, and as she had also endeavored to expiate her Crime by
her sober and virtuous Deportment ever since, so she would always retain a
Resolution to live without Scandal, all the remainder of her Life. And that
since her Credit had been supported by his means, she could never take it
unkindly at his Hands, if he to show the Gayety of his Wit and Fancy should
think fit, in Meriment, to make her the pretended Object of his Love. He would
not suffer her to go on, but affirming that the Crime she mentioned was her
Lords, who well merited the Punishment, tho the Misfortune had fallen on her;
and waving that Subject, strove with all his Rhetoric to persuade her, that
his Courtship intended nothing less than what he suggested. Since all his
future Endeavors, should be to render himself worthy the Honor he aimed at,
which was to be accepted for her Husband.

In such Discourses as these, the time slipped away insensibly, and her long
stay being taken notice of by her Aunt, a Messenger was sent to call her home,
which brake off their Entertainment for that bout: But not 'till a convenient
time and proper place was agreed on, for the keeping up this Correspondence so
fairly revived betwixt them.

In short, after some few Meetings, and Conferences had by our two Lovers at
their appointed Rendevous, there was so good an understanding on both sides, of
the matter in Debate, that nothing was now wanting to conclude their happy
Union together in the Holy state of Matrimony, but the Consent of her Father,
and of her Aunt the Lady D. This proved no great Obstacle; for the Doctor no
sooner heard the high Character of Mr. Cooper his Daughter's Admirer, and had
received a credible Account of his ample Estate and Fortune, as also of the
frank Offer he proposed of making his Mistress a considerable Jointure, without
insisting on any Portion, but he readily gave his free Consent to the Match.
And after the Aunt was made acquainted with the thing, she having invited Mr.
Cooper three or four times to her Lodgings, noted his Excellent Parts, and been
extremely delighted with his pleasant Conversation, was so well satified both
with the Man, and his generous offer, that she declared she would also show
what value she had for her God-Daughter; and to promote the Match between two
such deserving Persons, was resolved to give her on their Wedding Day Two
Thousand Pounds for a Portion, and to settle the greatest part of her remaining
Estate, which was considerable, so as to fall to them after her own Death.

It Is not to be imagined but that Mr. Cooper, notwithstanding the Proposal
which he so briskly made to his Mistresses Father and Aunt, had some
Expectation of a Portion to be raised for her amongst them; but it was
infinitely short of this; which made him press to have the Wedding solemnized
with all possible speed, lest the Aunt's Bounty might any way be diverted or
grow cold. And to set all Wheels the nimbler a going, in order to a quick
dispatch, it was requisite to Oil the Lawyers in the Fist, who were to draw up
the Writings, in which he was not at all tardy; and so soon as those
Formalities of Signing and Sealing were finished, and the fine Clothes ready
against the appointed Day, they saw the good Old Doctor appear amongst them,
who had made a Journey to London, on purpose to see the Gentleman, so much
cried up for his rare Parts, who was on the Morrow to be his Son-in-Law, and to
give them his Blessing. The Doctor often protested that he was very much
rejoiced to find in him so great a resemblance of that worthy Man Mr. Fisher
his Daughter's first Husband, whose Person and Qualifications he highly
extolled: But neither the Doctor, his Lady, nor the kind Aunt had ever any
knowledge of the generous Impostor put on them by Mr. Cooper.

Well, the wished for Morning being come, the Solemnities of the Church were to
be attended, which joined our happy Lovers Hands, as their Hearts had been
before, and no sooner had the Parson done his part, but the good Old Lady
performed hers, in delivering them a Note for two Thousand Pounds to be paid at
sight, which was immediately accepted by her Goldswith, who was there a Guest:
And the Doctor ordered the same Person to make a handsome set of Dressing-plate
to the value of two Hundred Pounds, to be presented to the Bride. And he made
his Excuse to his Son and Daughter, for the smallness of his Present, but he
let them know, that he would take care for the good Education of his little Son
Fisher, and had already also improved for him, the two Hundred Broad Pieces,
left by his Deceased Father.

Don Feliz had a great Applause from his Mistress for relating so pleasant a
Novel, who Confessed she was extremely delighted with it, and did not much
disprove the Intrigue; but desired him seriously to tell her, whether the Tale
or chief substance of it, were true or no; for she doubted not, she said, but
it received much of its Beauty from him. He was pleased to hear her commend it,
and assured her that the Story had so much of Truth contained in it, that he
could scarce allow it to be called a Novel, since the two chief Persons therein
mentioned, were then in Being, and lived happily at that very time; having had
several fine Children together; and he affirmed that he had often heard Mr.
Cooper play with great Mastery on the Lute; had seen diverse of his Excellent
Limnings; and that he had this Story from a great Confident of Mr. Cooper's,
under these borrowed Names. But Don Feliz cknowledged, that he had strove to
set it off with the best Ornament he was able, and yet it very much needed her
Excuse for his imperfect telling it.

With all the pleasantest Chat they could invent, and such like Tales, our two
Lovers Don Feliz and his Mistress, passed away their spare Hours: And once she
was very pressing to know whether his intentions, at his return home into
England, were to Marry, or to live at Rovers, as she found by him he had
hitherto done: For she fancyed, that after he had had so many Mistresses, he
could hardly be at last confined within such narrow Limits, by a Marriage Knot,
as would tie him for ever to a Wife. To which he replied, that not having yet
considered the Point, he could give her no direct Answer. This he said, not
knowing whether she were Married or no; for he never yet durst ask her the
Question, fearing to incur her Displeasure for his being inquisitive after
that, which he thought she had no mind to discover. But she noting his
Hesitation, was the more pressing to be satisfied in her Demand.

Madam, said he, seeing himself obliged to answer, I am seldom Master of my own
Resolutions for any long time, and my return into England being so uncertain, I
doubt I shall have great difficulty to keep 'till then in the same Mind I now
am in; for I had formerly intended to have wedded my self only to my Books and
Viols, but upon a more serious Debate with my self, I am convinced, that
Marriage, as I have often been told, is a most honorable Estate, and the most
proper means to reduce a Man to Sobriety, who has been Extravagant; and to make
him live happily, without interruption to his Studies, and his Innocent
Recreations. Therefore have I resolved when I shall get home, to strive in the
first place to reform my Manners, become very sober, and then choose me a Wife
with whom I may partake of all that Felicity which other Married Persons enjoy.
I am glad, Don Feliz, replied his Mistress, to hear you have such an honorable
Opinion of Matrimony; but I much doubt whether all those who have Experienced
that state, will be ready to give the same Character of it which you do: And I
would gladly know whence all this Current of Felicity is expected; is it from
the good Conduct of the Lady, who shall be so happy to be your Wife? or rather
from your own prudent Management? for I have very frequently heard you express
your slight of our Sex, and am therefore afraid we shall lose the glory of it.

The Life of Man, Said Don Feliz, may not unfitly be compared to Music; the
delicate Harmony whereof is made by the Composition of several Sounds. For that
mixture of grave Tones, with others more accute and small, makes the Music
perfect, and so delightful as it is to our Ears. And this admired frame of
Man's Body, when enflamed with a Fever, or shivering with Cold, shows that we
are sick and out of order; but when those two Qualities are aptly united, the
Body is well and at Ease, to our unspeakable pleasure. The same thing may be
observed of a well-governed Commonwealth, which consists of different Orders
of People: There the Nobility and Gentry in Agreement with the Plebaeans, make
up the true Harmony which renders them all happy. And so Nature, the Mother of
all things, framed Man to Wisdom, and to undertake weighty and serious Matters,
which is plainly demonstrated by the grave deep Voice we Men speak with;
whereas, on the contrary, Woman appears the true Portraiture of Humane Frailty
and Folly; only designed to be employed in the most Childish and trifling of
our Affairs in this World; and that small Voice of theirs which they always
retain, hardly distinguishable from Childrens, gives us sufficient Evidence,
that they still partake of Childrens Defects. But when one and the other happen
to make a proper mixture, wherein Man's Wisdom governs their Folly, and that
Childish Folly of theirs qualifies the Wisdom of Man; from thence proceeds that
pleasant Life; from thence, I say, flows all that Current of Happiness. Which
high pitch of Bliss cannot be fully attained, nor this Celestial Harmony be
ever truly made, if Man and Woman be not solemnly joined together in Matrimony.

Don^a Faustina, laughing, told him, she saw he was very well pleased with the
Subject, because he took such pains to display his Rhetoric on it: and yet at
the same time could not forbear his usual Reflections on Women. But proceeded
she, for all your quaint Notions of Matrimony, unless the Air of England breath
a much kinder influence on Married Persons, than this of Spain, it is ten to one
but you will find some considerable difference between your Speculation and the
real Practice of it; that your Celestial Harmony is often interrupted by some
such Terrestrial Discord as shall make both your Hearts ache. They ran briskly
on, and were so zealous to maintain their Arguments; he for Marriage, and she
in dispraise of it, that they would have continued the Dispute 'till Break of
Day, had not Fadrique scratched at the Door and put them in mind of parting.

All the way Don Feliz went home, he could not forbear thinking of the
Discovery he had made, by this Discourse with her; for he concluded from
thence, that she must either be a Widow, or a Married Woman, and that her
Husband was not, or had not been to her liking, which made her so mueh inveigh
against Matrimony; and that this dislike had put her at first upon making him
those Invitations to her House; and he was pleased with his own Wit, that had
so industriously drawn this Secret from her. Another Night amongst the various
Subjects of their Discourse, they happened on that of Religion; and she would
then express a great concern for those of his Country, Ay que lastima, would
she often say. Ah what a pity it is, that a People so richly endued with all
the Gifts of Nature, should be so wilfully blind to be hurried away in a course
of Heresy and Atheism, refusing to be made sensible of their Danger of Eternal
Damnation, and to be brought back into the Pale of the true Church, which she
believed was that of Rome. And she was full of those Sayings which the Priests
teach them, to create in them an Abhorrence of the Herejes Yngleses, the
English Heretics, as they term us: She would also tell him, that Y^galatierr^
era tierra de Angeles, poro agora es tierra de Demonios, which is, that England
was once a Land of Angels, (alluding, as I conceive, to the many Saxon Saints
formerly Canonized here) but that it is now become a Country of Devils, meaning
since the Reformation. But she took a particular pleasure in relating the
strange Miracles wrought by our Saints of old, which she had read of in the
Flos Sanctorum; to all which she gave as much Credit, as to those recorded in
Holy Writ; and was often very angry with Don Feliz for endeavoring to rectify
her Judgment in those matters, and for attempting to show her the Absurdity of
their fabulous Legends.

Then would she Celebrate the Praise of the Irish Nation, who, she said, had
ever kept close to the Ancient Catholic Faith; she commended their diligent
frequenting the Churches, and the Expressions of their Zeal and Devotion there;
and she would heartily wish that the Eyes of the English were open to see their
Error, and follow the Example of that Excellent People. Yet after all, she
said, she could not but acknowledge, she had observed some of the Irish in
Spain, not to be so accute of Wit and quick of Apprehension, as the Spaniards,
nor other Countrymen residing amongst them, but were rather inclined to a
strange Blundering and Stupidity, not common to other People; which made her
curious to know if this proceeded from a general Defect, naturally incident to
all born under their Clime, or else happened to such only as came over thither.
Don Feliz assured her, that Ireland daily produced very accomplished Gentlemen,
brave Soldiers, and Men excellent in all Faculties: But that it was there, as
in all other parts of the World, that many for want of good Education, proved
very Dull and Ignorant; and that he had observed no other distinction betwixt
them and other Nations.

Their dwelling a little longer on this Subject, brought to Don Feliz's Memory
a Story, which falling pat to the purpose, and he knowing the Pleasure his
Mistress took in hearing such, gave her a hint of it, which made the Lady press
him to tell it. He obeyed, and began on this manner.

The Unfortunate Colonel.
AT the beginning of those dismal Turmoils in Ireland, which brake out about
the beginning of September in the Year 1641 or 42, if I remember aright, when
the Irish endeavored to extirpate the English utterly out of that Kingdom;
there was a Gentleman of an Ancient Family, and of an Estate of near 700 l. per
An. engaged therein, whose name was OCa -- He proved very active in that cruel
Treatment of the English, expressing on all Occasions, his implacable Hatred to
them; and being a Man of great Personal Valor, though his Conduct was never much
admired, he was after some time, honored with the Command of a Regiment. It Is
not to my purpose, nor is it sit I should trouble you, Madam, with the
particulars of that War; it will be sufficient to say, that the Irish being at
last worsted in it, all the Estates of such Gentlemen as had been instrumental
in kindling the Coals, or industrious in somenting the Flame of that Fatal
Combustion, were seized, and made forseit to the English. And amongst the rest
was that of Colonel OC -- which forced him from that time to Associate himself
with the Tories, since called Raparees, and to change his fine Seat for a Hut
in some Wood, or amongst the Boggs; for those are the common Retreats of such
Outlaws, who subsist only by Spoil and Rapine. This was his manner of living
till the Restoration of King Charles the Second; during all which time, his
Company having been only such as were then termed Wild- Irish, Men altogether
illitterate and rude; by their Conversation, our Colonel could acquire nothing
of Ingenious Improvement, for the bettering his Manners or Understanding, but
rather by his suiting himself to all their ill Customs, and Behavior, he had
degenerated into the lowest Degree of Clownish Barbarity.

After that good King was quietly settled on his Throne in England, to the
universal Joy of his Subjects, and and had also taken due care for establishing
the Peace and Tranquillity of his three Kingdoms; his Majesty had been pleased
to bestow a considerable Post under his Deputy in Ireland, to a near Relation
of our Colonels. Which News reaching his Ear; and being likewise made
acquainted, that a Court of Claims was Erected there, wherein such as could
purge themselves of the Imputation of those Cruelties practiced on the English
Protestants, in the horrid Massacre of them, and could make their Innocence
appear, that they had not bathed their Hands in English Blood, should have
their Estates restored. He never considering the palpable Guilt he lay under,
resolved on a Journey to Court, hoping by favor of his Kinsman to be
repossessed of his forfeited Estate. So mounting his Courser which was another
Rosinante, to Dublin he posts, there alighting at the first Inn he came to, and
being confirmed in the Account of his Kinsman's greatness, he prepared that
very Morning of his Arrival to wait on him. In order to this visit, he thought
it necessary to spruce up himself as well as he could, his Garb being then none
of the most Modish; for he was equipped in his ordinary Plad, which had served
him in his Function of Robbing, a narrow-brim'd Hatt with a High Steeple-Crown,
a pair of Pumps, with a long jingling Spur on his Right Heel, to show he was
just come off a Journey, and being a tall lusty Man, had a huge Basket-Hilted
Sword fixed in a broad Girdle to his side, somewhat after the Spanish Mode. He
then goes to a Barber's for a touch of his pollishing Hand, ordering him to
come and powder his Hair, and to prune his Head, which he affected to wear
extraordinarily long.

Whilst the Barber was at his Business, our Colonel acquainted him with the
visit he was about to make, and asked him many Questions concerning his Cousin;
which Partly gave the Barber Encouragement to find fault with the shaggedness
of his Short Hair, and unfashionableness of his long Beard* for a Man of his
Age, who owned himself scarce turned of Fifty; assuring him that at Court, to
which the Colonel was going, it was the general custom to have their Beards
shaved off Clean, and if their Hair were not very graceful, to have that also
cut off, and to wear a Perry-Wigg. Though the Collonel's stock of Money were
but small, yet was he willing to appear a Man of Mode; he therefore, after some
difficulty, was persuaded to part with both his Beard and Hair, and in a new
great blustering Wig, which there cost him fifteen Shillings, toward the Court
he marches, attended by his kind Friend the Barber* who had undertaken to steer
him to his Kinsman's House, near the Castle. As they walked the Streets, our
Colonel admiring the fine Accomplishments of his Conductor, and quaintness of
his Speech, thought him a fit Person to advise with about his Behavior amongst
the Courtiers. The Barber generously condescended to instruct him in all the
necessary Punctilio's to be observed there, which was taken for a particular
Favor, and when he had pointed him to the House, he left him.

'Twas just turned of Twelve a Clock when the Colonel advancing to the Gate,
enquired if his Coshen were within? The Porter laughing, demanded who was his
Coshen? Thy Master, said the Colonel, Sir G. L. is my Coshen, and I am come to
Dine with him. No, Sir, answered the Porter, my Master is gone up into the
Castle, and will not return 'till past one a Clock, his usual Dining time: But
my Lady is within. Then prithee Joy* proceeded the Colonel, tell thy Lady that
here is her Coshen Colonel OC* come to see her. The Porter supposing him some
Person of better Condition than he appeared to be, by his preposterous
outside, prayed his Lady's Page, who then happened to be present, to show the
Gentleman into the Dining Room. The Page waited on him up stairs, and leaving
him in the Room, went to acquaint his Lady.

Our Colonel who had a keen Appetite, having reserved his Stomach for a good
Dinner, was glad to see the Table so well prepared for it. And as he was
admiring the fine. Tapestry Hangings and other Curiosities there, he espied a
very great Looking-glass toward the upper part of the Room, which made him
desirous to know how his new Dress became him; and walking up close to it, saw
himself so strangely Transformed, that he could scarcely believe it was his own
Face he was staring at. For now instead of his short grisled Locks and Tufts on
his Crown, intermixed with Baldness, he beheld his Head with a huge Covering, or
rather Thatch of Black Hair, which being unskilfully Composed, stood strutting
out near a Foot on each side his Face, and instead of his long matted Beard,
reaching almost to his Waste, he found his Chin deprived of that which he
thought to be its greatest Ornament. The Sight was so very surprising, that
lifting up his Hands hastily to express his Amazement, and not falling into
Account, that tho the lower part of the Looking-Glass was supported by Brass
Hooks close to the Wall, the uppermost part thereof was hung enclining
forwards; he, in the raising, as I said, of his heavy Fists, hit his Knuckles
with that Violence against it, that down fell the Glass shattered all to pieces
on the Floor.

You may easily imagine, Madam, what trouble our Colonel was in at this
Accident, who not knowing which way to excuse it, was going Backwards to remove
as far as he could from thence, hoping by that means he might not be suspected
for the Person that had done it; but not turning to see the Course he steered,
he fell suddenly back into an armed Chair, from whence at the same instant, he
heard a great crackling Noise, and feeling somewhat break under him, he started
up, and found it to be a curious Instrument of Music, made of Ebony and Ivory,
or at least the Ruins of ^ne; being the Lady L's, Guittar, squeezed by him to
bits.

This second Misfortune added much to his Disorder, and as he was looking with
Amazement on one and the other; the opening a Door at the further end of the
Room, obliged him to turn that way, where he perceived the good Lady, who being
dressed very gay for reception of some great Persons, and Ladies of Quality which
were to dine that Day with her, was, upon the Page's notice, coming in to
entertain this Stranger her Kinsman. He, in the Confusion he was in, went to
meet and salute her, as he remembered the Barber had directed him, which he
performed in such an awkward manner, not being accustomed to those Ceremonies,
that with the rude shock of his Face against the Lady's, he made the Blood fly
out at her Nose; and in the drawing back of his Head, finding his blustering Wig
to be stopped, which was engaged in the Ladies Head-dress, either by some of her
Pins, or her Bodkin, he to secure his Wig, pulled it so hard, that he tore down
her Hair, Ribbons, and all her Head-Gear about her Ears.

When he saw how roughly he had treated the Fine Lady, his Cousin, he was going
to make an humble Congee, and to beg her Pardon for it; but his Scrape was
fetched with such a swing of his Leg, as endangered the throwing himself down
on his Nose; and the great Spur by his ungainly Motion, catching in the Ladies
rich Venetian Petticoat, not only made a great Triangular Rent in it, but with
the sudden Jerk, was like to have tript up her Heels, had not the Silk given
way by being torn. As the Colonel stooped suddenly to disengage his Spur, he
heard a loud Outcry behind him, and turning, saw Sir G's Daughter, a little
Lady of about Seven or Eight Years Old, with her Face all covered with Blood.
She was but just come into the Room, and standing at the Collonel's Back, more
intent on his Extravagant Behavior than her own safety, had received a
dangerous Cut on the Forehead, by his reaching to separate his Spur from the
Petticoat; For as he stooped, his Elbow happening to press down the great Hilt
of his long Sword, had suddenly raised up its Point, from which in his Journey
he had lost the Chape, and that hitting the Child's Forehead, had done her the
Mischief.

We may easily conclude, that the Colonel must needs be more than a little
sensible of all this Series of Mischiefs he had done, which were not possible
to be repaired by any Apology he could make: He therefore began to think of a
timely Retreat, and looking over one of his Shoulders toward the Door, was
sliding backwards that way, but so full of Confusion, he never minded, that on
his other Hand he was rubbing against the Sideboard of Plate and Glasses,
prepared for Dinner, which being only a Spanish Table, and loose in the Joints,
was easily overthrown.

This fall of the Table with a terrible Clatter, tho he was scarce sensible
what it was, so affrighted the Colonel, that out at the Door he flew, with a
half turn, and with such Precipitation, that tho he saw himself at the
Stare-head, it was impossible to hinder his pitching down Headlong, and with so
much Violence, as must certainly have broke his Neck, had not my Lady's Woman,
who was then coming up with a fine Pyramid of Sweetmeats, given him some
little Impediment in his Tumble, but full fore against her will, for she and
her Desert were overturned by him, with no small Damage to both: And yet this
could not prevent his rolling to the Stair-foot, where, as the Devil would have
it, lay the great Mastiff, who angry to be thus disturbed from his Natural rest
by all that hurly burly, fell upon the Colonel, but he getting nimbly up, so
bravely with his Fists and Feet, encountered his Adversary, as obliged him,
after some time, to give ground.

In this Skirmish, though our Man of War seemed to have had the better on it, he
lost both his Hat and Wig, and that of the two which lay nearest to him, being
his Hat, he, without much Difficulty, recovered it, but then finding it must
cost him a second Combat with the Dog to regain his Perriwig; and hearing a
doleful Cry of the Gentlewoman upon the Stairs, of Oh Lord he has Murdered me,
the Colonel began to apprehend, and not without Reason, that the whole Family
would soon Arm and fall upon him, to revenge the dismal Havoc he had made, he
thought it best rather to quit the Field, and leave the Spoil to his Enemy,
than hazard another Engagement; he therefore clapping on his Hat, ran straight
to the Gate where the Porter was standing, who seeing him come in all that
haste and Disorder, would have stopped his Passage; but the Colonel without
Interruption to his Carreer, giving him one sound Bang on the Pate with his
heavy Fist, left his Opponent sprawling on the ground, and made neither stop
nor stay 'till he got to his Inn. There quickly mounting his Pegasus, away he
flew by the speediest Journeys he could make to his Comrades, protesting he
would rather lose a hundred Estates, than be forced to appear at Court, and
there wait a long time with such abundance of Formality and Address, as he
himself had some Experience of, but by his kind Friend the Barber, was more
fully informed, that those Persons who expected to make any Friends there, were
obliged to, and all the while must be in danger, as he thought, of falling into
the like Misfortunes, as he had suffered that Day.

Before Don Feliz could reach to the close of his Story, he was interrupted
three or four times by Dona Faustina's violent Fits of laughing, which tho she
fain would have suppressed, yet were so loud that one of the Duena's was forced
at each time to come into the Chamber to advise them to be more hush and more
moderate in their Mirth, unless they intended to allarm the whole House to
their own Ruin. These sober Cautions, backed with Don Feliz's Entreaty, could
scarce restrain the current of her Laughter* she was so transported with
Pleasure at the hearing this Tale. But after she had better composed her self,
and returned him Thanks for the great delight he had given her in his relating
it: I will not, said she, be so rude, Don Feliz, to question the Truth of its
particulars, tho I cannot but admire at this long Concatination of Blunders and
Misfortunes, that attended the poor Colonel, and I shall content my self with
the Old Italian Saying. Se non e ver^, non e mal travato. If it be not true,
yet it is not ill Composed. Don Feliz was beginning to make an Excuse for his
ill wording, and his Hesitation in telling it, but she assured him, it needed
no Apology, for she was extremely pleased with that Nights Entertainment, and
to confirm what she had said, thrust into his Hand five Doblones at parting.

At those times when Don Feliz returned from visiting his Mistress; by reason
of the long stay he had made with her, which was commonly 'till two or three,
and sometimes four a Clock in the Morning, he had a Custom not to rise 'till
ten and often Eleven, which is their Dinner time, during the hot Season of the
Year: But on other Mornings he rose early with his Brother, and with him would
frequently divert himself, yet not with that Friendship and Intimacy as
formerly he had done. For he would retire many times into some Room alone, to
divert himself with his Instruments of Music; or to compose some little Poems,
Epigrams, or other Fancies in the Spanish Tongue, to present to Dona, Faustina,
who took great delight in reading them; or else he would walk abroad by himself
into the Fields, on purpose to avoid Don Henrique his Scrutinies into his
Night-Walks.

On this occasion, he had one Morning got out betimes, and taken a pleasant
Walk amongst the Gardens, that lie ranged along the Banks of the River Tagus,
with no other Companion than his Book, on which he cast his Eyes as opportunity
served; and in his return homeward, he observing the Caracol or Tour of Coaches
not far from him in the Vega, directed his Couse that way, to divert himself
also with the variety of curious Objects to be seen in them; for the Ladies
there and Gentlemen, do often take the Benefit of the Morning Air, as well as
of the Evening.

He had not long feasted his Eyes with the Prospect of those Spanish Beauties,
when to his no little Amazement, he espied amongst them a Face, which he had
been more accustomed to view by Candle than by Daylight; and tho quickly
covered with a Vail, yet could not the small Glimps he had of it, hinder him
from knowing his Dona Faustina. The motion of the Coach one way, and his
walking another, gave him reason to believe, that the Lady had missed seeing
him. And the finding her in this splendor, at the chief end of a rich Coach,
drawn by six good Mules well equipped; and attended by a Page and couple of
Footmen in gentile Liveries, made him conclude her a Person of no mean
Condition; and raised in him a more than ordinary Curiosity of knowing who she
was; especially when, to be satisfied in it, he conceived it was no great
matter of difficulty. For he took it for granted, that the Lady not being aware
she had been seen by him, he might with safety enough, at her going out of the
Ring, follow the Coach at a distance, amongst other Gentlemen also on foot, so
as to observe into what part of the Town it went, and there might learn her
Name and Quality. To this end he was drawing toward the Road that leads to the
City, but at so lazy a rate, and making so many stops and pauses to look back,
as might well give suspicion to any watchful Eye, that he could not be without
a Design in his Head, on some Lady in one of those Coaches, and of giving her
some private Signs for Assignation, which is very dangerous there, where even
to be too curiously prying after any Women, is esteemed a high Crime.

His patience was put to no great Trial in tarrying for her, for he presently
saw the Coach leave the Rest, and make toward that Gate of the City to which he
was going. As the Coach passed him, he seemed to take little notice of it, but
then left his station, and carefully followed after it. And though he twice saw
the Page, who had his Hand on the Coach Boot, after looking back, give the
Coachman orders to drive on faster, yet was he so earnest to pursue his
Intentions, as not to perceive he was observed, but mending his pace, he
endeavored still to keep up with them, 'till he heard the Page bid, Drive on a
Gallop, which made him by this time sensible that he was taken notice of; for
the Spaniards very rarely alter their poco a poco, their fair and softly, which
is but a Foot pace.

Don Feliz finding his Error, thought it highly necessary to change his Design;
and that he might not be suspected of dogging her Coach, he took a different
Path which led to another Gate of the Town; hoping by this Feinte, that the
Lady might fancy his Pursuit had been only made by Accident, and not in
contempt of her Commands. But when he had thought better on the Thing, it made
him blame his own Folly and Dullness, which had hindered him from reftecting,
that she must needs have perceived by his loytering there so near the Ring, and
his often Eying the Coach, that his Drift was to attend her Motion homewards;
and that she must have been told by her Page, who had often looked back, how
nimbly the Flamenco, (for so they commonly call Strangers) had followed after
her: For he now began to consider, when too late, with what searching Eyes,
such as are jealous do pry into; and how nicely they weigh every little
Circumstance, which they construe to their Prejudice.

Such like apprehensions as these made him very uneasy the rest of the
Morning, and on purpose stretch out his Walk longer than he had intended, that
he might have the satisfaction of thinking on this matter at large by himself
before he got home. All which served but to Augment his Trouble, and make him
expect with no small fear, such another rattling Bout from the Lady, as he was
forced to endure for his former Transgression. It likewise brought to his
Memory, the great Danger he then was in, not only of losing her favor, but of
feeling the effects of her Revenge for that Fault; as also the Difficulty he
had to obtain his Pardon, and to re-instate himself in her good Graces as
before. Then he set his Wits at work to study the best Excuses he could, for
pacifying her Anger, in case she should admit of a Parley: But all his
Invention could furnish him with no better a Plea in his own behalf, than
stiffly to deny he had seen her there; and that his sudden hastening after the
Coach, was but his immediate Consideration of the Suns Heat, and of the Hour of
the Day, which was then near Dinner time.

Being come home, he* after a short Meal made against Stomach, went up Stairs,
and threw himself upon his Bed, but could there take no rest, for vexing at the
ill posture his Affairs stood in with his Mistress; For of this second
Miscarriage, he had no body to throw the blame on but himself. His Brother took
notice of all this disorder in him, and though he pressed to know his grievance,
having occasion to Consult him about a Message sent them, in order to the
dispatch of their grand Concern in that place, yet he found him in so peevish a
Humor, that he saw it was to no purpose to mention it to him.

In a little time after, Don Feliz perceived his Brother fallen into a sound
sleep on the Bed by him, whilst he himself could not partake of that kind
Benefit of Nature, to give some respite to the trouble of his Mind, that was
perplexed also to think he should have so barren a Fancy, as was not able to
bring himself off from so small an Embarasment. In which condition he lay
musing 'till past two of the Clock, when he was allarmed at the Rattling of a
second Stone thrown into the Room, as one some time before had been. At that
very moment he was fully awake, though his Eyes were shut, and guessing what
that noise imported, for he knew it must needs be another furious Message from
his angry Lady, he started up and ran directly to the Window, hoping to have
had a sight of the Hand that flung it in; but was deceived, for the Person
whoever it was, had been too nimble for him, and was retired from his view.

But looking afterward for the Stone, he found it brought along with it a
Billette, or little Note tied up, and directed as the former had been; which he
was almost afraid to open; so much did he dread the Contents thereof: And
seeing his Brother who had been disturbed at the sudden Noise of running to the
Window, begin to rouse in order to get up, Don Feliz slipped the Note and Stone
into his Pocket, and going down Stairs into the Dining Room, he there trembling
opened it, and read as follows.

Don Feliz,
You have now given a second Proof of your Admirable Conduct in the Affair of
our Loves. How could you so rashly this Morning hazard your own safety and
mine, only to gratify an unthoughtful Curiosity? Sure you forgot you were in
Spain, where so many Eyes are open to observe, Tongues ready to proclaim, and
Hands prepared to chastise such indiscreet Behavior? This very Action being of
such danger to us as it was, would in another Woman, have raised so high a
flame of Rage, as would not have been extinguished, but with your Blood; or
would at least have dissolved the Correspondence for ever. But you know that
the Ascendant you have over me, will not give me leave to think of Revenge: And
the entire Possession you have of my Heart, may satisfy you, that it is
impossible for me, ever to remove you from thence. I can therefore only wish,
I were able to invent stronger Reasons than yet I have done* to oblige you to
be more advised for the Future. In the mean time I have been thinking of an
Expedient which, if rightly pursued may I hope prevent the Insamy I daily incur
by your Indiscretion: Which when you shall once be sensible of, I Am sure you
will not disapprove. And because I would fain have you make some Atonement for
your Fault, before it be worn out of Memory by a tedious Four and Twenty Hours
Interval, pray fail not to make your appearance to Night at the usual Place and
Time, and I shall send my Servants and Chair to meet you there. But of this be
confident, that for any Offense Don Feliz has committed against one, who must
own she loves him better than her own Life* he may expect to receive no greater
Punishment, than what he will find in the Embraces of

His entirely Affectionate Dona Faustina.


It was no small satisfaction to Don Feliz to be thus cheaply delivered from
the direful. Apprehensions he had conceived of his Mistresses Anger, and her
Resentment of the Affront: For the least thing he could have expected before
the reading her Letter, was the certain loss of her Favor, and perpetual
Exclusion from her Presence. He read it over again and again, and after a
strict Examination of every particular Sentence, he could not discover (besides
a sharp reproof for his Fault) any thing in it which expressed not a most
tender Affection toward him, and a great sweetness of Temper in her self, who
could to easily pass by a Crime, voluntarily committed against her positive
Commands; and he concluded he should be able at Night to pacify her fit of
Chiding in as ample a manner, as he had once before done on the like occasion.

Don Enrique, who knew nothing of what had so lately happened, was amazed to
see his Brother come again with so great Briskness up stairs; and observed that
now all those black Clouds of Discontent, which at his lying down to sleep, had
hung upon his Brow, were totally dispelled. He could not but be curious to know
the Reason of this sudden Change of Humor, and yet was unwilling to go about
to pump it from his Friend, having already made many Attempts of that kind in
vain; but he guessed it must needs proceed from some of those various Turns,
and Whimseys which his Love-Intrigue daily afforded.

The rest of that Afternoon was, by appointment of the Persons concerned, and
the Consent of Don Enrique, to be spent in Treaty about their Business which
had kept them so long in Toledo; and he was very well pleased to find his
Camerade in so good a temper of Mind to assist at it. They took their Papers,
went cheerfully together to the place where by Agreement they were to meet; and
there after a long Conference, and many hot Disputes, with certain Spanish
Gentlemen, to whom the matter had at last been referred, a happy Conclusion was
made of the whole Affair; to the greater satisfaction of Don Enrique, than of
Don Feliz, who could not but be very sorry to think that he must now leave his
Mistress, after this new Reconciliation, which he looked on as already done in
effect.

When they were come back to their Lodgings, they had diverse Discourses
together, on what had then passed in that final Adjustment of their Business,
and of the good End made thereof, after so long an Attendance on it: Making
also their Remarks on the formal Gravity of the Spaniards, and their slow
method of proceeding in all their Undertakings. And now the next thing to be
thought on, was to make their necessary Preparations for leaving that City, and
for their return back to Madrid. This thing was long concerting, which made Don
Feliz very uneasy, remembering his Assignation, and that it now drew near Ten a
Clock. He therefore snatching up a Sword and Hangers which lay on the Table,
and he supposed to be the same he commonly walked with, hooked it to his
Girdle, as the Spanish Mode is, and after a short Excuse for his haste, nimbly
tripped out of Doors.

At the old Station he found Senor Fadrique waiting for him with the Chair,
into which he entered with very little Ceremony, not to lose more time, having,
as he perceived, a little slipped his Hour; but the Turks made haste, and
quickly set him down within the Portal of the Lady's House. He was sufficiently
acquainted with the Method of going up into the Room, which was always with
great Silence and Circumspection, and therefore needed no Guide to conduct him
thither. But as he was mounting the Back stairs, by which he was accustomed to
go, he was not a little surprised to find his passage hindered by a stop Door on
the middle of those winding stairs, which 'till then he had never known to be
shut. To knock or scratch at it he durst not, for fear of making a disturbance,
but he pushed hard, and found it fast locked or barred. He then staid a good
while, expecting some body's coming to open it, but not hearing any one stir
that way, he put again his Hand to the Door, intending to have thrust harder at
it, but at the first touch the Door flew wide open, which somewhat increased
his Wonder, and began to raise a suspicion in him, that there was some unfair
play designed against him.

These new Observations discouraged him not, but forwards he went, and as he
entered the Room at one Door, he saw his Mistress coming in at the other to meet
him, with her little Lap-Dogg running by her; which 'till that time she always
used to bring in under one of her Arms. Her manner of accosting him too, was
different from what it wont to be; for tho she had ever at the first Entry,
expressed a pleasure to see him, it was still accompanied with a becoming
Gravity; but now instead of the violent Passion and Fury, which on the like
occasion, she had formerly shown, and Don Feliz at this instant expected, she
with a smiling Countenance and open Arms came up nimbly to him, and calling Ah
Bellaco! Ah naughtly Man, why would you be so unkind to forget my repeated
Orders to you? She clasped both her Arms about his shoulders, and charged him
with such a volley of Kisses, and with so much fervency, as now raised his
jealousy to a much higher Degree, than that Accident which occurred on the
stairs had done: For he could not comprehend the meaning of this new manner of
Salutation, not used by Women in that Country; nor could he guess whence all
this superabundant Kindness should proceed. This made him turn his Head to mind
the little Dog, which was fiercely barking at the Hanging, where, at the bottom
of them, he might easily see the Feet of Men moving to come out.

'Twas now no longer time to dally, for it plainly appeared there was a Design
laid against his Life; he therefore putting forward his left Leg, and having
his Arms about the Ladies Waste, he threw her across his Knee, with all the
force he was able, against the Ground: And at the same moment stepping back,
and clapping his Hand on his Sword, drew it at the first motion, and with it
flying vigorously at the three Assassins, who by this time with their drawn
Swords were slipped from behind the Hangings, and advancing toward him, he
charged the first of them with so home a Thrust, that he fell down, roaring out
Boto a Christo que estoy muerto! Dam'me I Am killed! This brisk Charge and quick
Execution, together with the lamentable Outcry of the two Persons, who seemed
expiring on the Floar, so much daunted the remaining Assailants, whom he now
discovered to be Senor Fadrique the Gentleman Usher* and one of the Chair-men,
that they began to shrink toward the Bed side, but keeping still on their
Guards.

Don Feliz's Business in that place, was not to prosecute a Victory, as once he
was about to have done, but to secure his own Life; wherefore observing their
motion, and how concerned they were at the Noise made by the other Chairman,
who lay wallowing in his own Blood; which had obliged the Lady, as we^l as she
was able, to creep to him, and endeavor to stop his Mouth with her Hands, He
resolved to take his Advantage of their Disorder, and make the best Retreat he
could from the threatening Danger, before the whole Family, as he doubted they
would, might Arm against him: For he expected they must needs be alarmed at
all this disturbance. He therefore rushing by them, nimbly slipped out at the
Door, and as he was shutting it after him, espying the Key left by chance on
the out side, he locked it, and was running down stairs; but there met with
another Obstacle; he found the Stop-door so fast shut again, that he could by
no Art nor pulling, open it. This put him to his Wits end, for he had no time
to deliberate what was best to be done; but fearing the Enemy might rally, and
Charge him in that disadvantagious Station beneath them, he was necessitated to
run up again, to endeavor an Escape over the Tops of Houses.

Being got up to the stairs Head, he saw a little Door, which he immagin'd
might possible open into some Gutter or other Outlet for his purpose, and was
stooping to creep through that way; but his Haste and wanting Light (being only
what the Stars and a small glimmering of the Moon then yielded) would not allow
him the Benefit, to see that his Passage within that Door had no Floar; for it
being but a narrow place or Cock-loft next the Tiling, was of no use, neither
had any thing to tread on, besides the Ceiling of the Chamber that was
underneath it; and the Joyces by which that was sustained. These Joyces our
flying Conqueror in his hasty Retreat missed, and happening to tread with all
his weight upon the Plaistering, it immediately gave way, and he brake through,
falling down headlong into a Bedchamber, where a Gentleman sat reading at a
Table, with his Sword lying by him.

The studious Gentleman being disturbed at this amazing Accident, seeing a Man
come Armed by such an unusual In-lett, with a Design as might be supposed to
attack him; threw aside his Book, snatched up his Sword, which he drew, and was
preparing for the Encounter. But just as Don Feliz had got up, was bustling to
recover himself after his Fall, and putting himself into a posture to receive
the Charge, he was the most astonished Man of the World, to discover that the
Assailant whom he was going to Engage, was his Friend and Comrade Don Enrique;
and that the Room in which they were, was their own Lodging. He then called out
Hold, Hold, Brother. By which words, (for he was covered with the Dust of the
broken Ceiling) the Mistake was perceived on both sides, and they knowing one
the other, it put an end to their furious Intentions.

Now if Don Enrique were surprised to see his Friend brought home into the
Chamber, by such a strange piece of Conjuration; Don Feliz was no less amazed
to find himself there, when he imagined at that time he had been at the
remotest part of the City from thence. Yet thus it was, and the Thing appearing
so very strange, Don Enrique could not forbear an immediate Enquiry, to be
satisfied of the Mystery thereof; but was entreated by Don Feliz to respit his
Curiosity, 'till a fitter time of Discoursing it, because he was then, he said,
as he had reason to believe, pursued for his Life, and knew not but his
Adversaries might probably fire down some Gun or Pistol into the Room upon
them. It was therefore, after a short Consultation, thought necessary, they
should immediately remove out of that Lodging. So down stairs they went, and
found their Landlord; for he being disturbed at the rattling Noise he had heard
from above, was getting out of Bed, and coming up to enquire what was the
matter.

They acquainted him, as briefly as they could, with their Resolution, and with
as much of the occasion of it, as was convenient at that juncture. To which the
Landlord, without Scruple, readily consented, and offered to get them a new
Lodging to their Desire. He had indeed been ever ready to show the great
Respect and Esteem he had for such generous Guests, as they had always been to
him; and more especially at this time he was willing they should see his
Diligence and his Zeal to serve them; for he had got some hint, that their
Business being now finished, their stay could be but very few Days longer in
Town. His offer was kindly accepted, and whilst he went up stairs to fetch
their Maletas or Portmantles, and to view the Breach in his Ceiling; his two
Guests went down and had unlocked the Door, but as they were just stepping into
the Street, they found they were strongly pushed at by two Persons, who had on
each side of the Door planted themselves, thinking to have stabbed them at
their coming forth.

The Pre-caution therefore which Don Feliz had given, of marching out very
circumspectly, and with their drawn Swords in their Hands, to prevent the
Mischief of such an Attack, proved very lucky to them; for their readiness to
defend themselves, and brisk answer of the Enemies Charge, did not only secure
them from this second Treachery but did so much discourage the Undertakers of
it, that they were easily forced by the two Friends to scour nimbly off* and
seek for Refuge in the Portal of a great House adjoining to their Lodgings.

In this last Skirmish the Assassins were found to be the same unhurt
Chairman, who had been left above; and his Companion was Old Fadrique, whose
bustling had now discovered him to be a young Man, by the letting fall of his
long Artificial Beard. Which two Valentones or Bravos had, as it seemed,
engaged to their Lady to Execute that in the Street, which they had failed to
do in her Chamber, but were glad to betake themselves to their Heels for their
own safety.

When their Landlord, who came Laden with their Goods* had overtaken his two
Guests, and had Conducted them safe to his Friend's House, which was far enough
off, in another part of the City; they made Enquiry of him, concerning his
Neighbors dwelling in that House, next to his, and were satisfied by him in so
many particulars, as that by the help thereof, they were able to unriddle the
whole Mystery of that Intrigue.

They found that the Lady who called her self Dona Faustina, was Wife of Don
Pedro de Solana, a rich Knight of the Order of St. Iago, who was turned of
Threescore Years of Age, and was Master of the great House, as he also was
Owner of that lesser wherein they lodged, which he let to Fancisco de Ayala
their Landlord. They were told that Don Pedro and his Lady had been Married
together above six Years, and she never with Child in all that time. They were
satisfied that she must have taken an opportunity of looking down when she
would, through a Peep-hole into their Bedchamber (which Hole by them had but
lately been Discovered) from whence she could hear and see every thing they
said and did there; and they guessed she might have been invited to that
Curiosity by Don Feliz's Music, of which she would often talk. They also
concluded, that the Letters which seemed to have been thrown in at the Window,
were only dropped down through the same Hole in the Ceiling. It likewise plainly
appeared, that the Contrivance of carrying him about so far in the close Chair,
was but to amuse him, that he should not be able to find out her Lodging. And
they conjectured that this Design of Assassinating him, did not altogether
result from her Desire to revenge the Affront of his disobeying her Commands,
and his unadvised Curiosity in endeavoring to find out who she was: But partly
too, because she having got Intelligence by her watching at the Peep-Hole, that
those two English Gentlemen had dispatched their whole Affair in Toledo, and
were speedily to return to Madrid; that therefore since she must now lose her
Gallant's Conversation for ever, she would suffer no other Woman, to whom he
might possibly speak with Scorn of the Favors of his Mistress Dona Faustina,
to have the future Enjoyment of him.

But they could not imagine what reason she could have, to contrive his Murder
in her own House, rather than in the street as they carried him in the Chair;
or in some By-Corner, Alley, or other private Hole; unless it should be, that
she thought in those Places, the Act might be more liable to a Discovery; or
because she her self had a mind to see the Bloody Execution more effectually
performed. And upon a further scanning of her last ambiguous Letter to him,
they admired how Don Feliz could have been so blind, as not to see, that at the
close of it, she in cunning Terms discovered how she intended to deal with him,
which was to hold him in her Arms, while her Servants should Murder him. It was
also then argued, how it was possible for Don Feliz, not to recollect, that he
must have often seen waiting at the next door, his Mistresses Coach, and the
Lyveries which she had that Morning attending her in the Ring: But to this he
protested, his Thoughts were so fixed on the Lady, and his surprise was so
great at that Moment, that he took very little notice of the Coach or Servants;
which at another time he might have easily known.

After these Remarks thus made, Don Enrique took occasion to Discourse the
matter at large with his Brother, and strove to make him sensible of the Wicked
and Extravagant life he had led in that Town, which had plunged him into so
much Mischief, as was the Murder of a Man, and the exposing himself to so many
imminent Dangers of losing his own Life, and of ruining his Friend; being
commonly the sad effects of such ill Courses. To all which Don Feliz soberly
attended, having very little to say, in any respect, for his own justification.
And after finishing this grave Lecture of Morality, it was observed that they
had by some Mistake made a change of Swords; for Don Feliz, at his hasty going
out to obey his Mistresses treacherous Summons, had, instead of his own,
snatched up his Brother's that had an open Scabbard, with proper Tiros or
Hangers belonging to it. This made him call to mind the benefit he had had by
that lucky Mistake, who might else have been killed before he could have drawn
his own Sword, which for its length being of the Spanish Marco, or Standard,
with an ordinary close Scabbard, could not have been done, but at two or three
Motions.

They made but two Days longer stay in Toledo, during which time they thought
it not convenient to show themselves too publicly, lest they might be found by
some others of the revengeful Lady's Agents to their further Prejudice, and
because they could not yet get Intelligence how it fared with the Chairman;
whether he were alive or Dead. But at their Departure for Madrid, they were
assured by their Landlord, that the Lady was pretty well recovered of the
terrible Fall her kind Lover had given her; and that the wounded Chairman was
in a skilful Surgeon's Hands, with great Hopes of his Recovery. Which News was
very welcome to Don Feliz, who had been more than a little inquisitive to know
in what Condition they both were.

Well, they now took leave of Toledo, and mounting a couple of good Mules,
they, with their Muletteer, rode jogging on together for Illescas, which they
reached that Night, as they did Madrid the Day after; Don Feliz promising a
thousand times, on the Road, to his Brother, never more to be drawn into such
ill Courses so long as he lived; but whether he may since have justly complied
with those Promises or no, I must leave it to his own Conscience to be the
Judge. I confess, I am apt to believe the best of him, for he was frequently
observed to repeat these Italian Verses.

Cortigiana che ti stringe,
E le Braccie al collo cinge,
Poco t'ama, e molto finge,
E nel fin, t'abruga o tinge.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS Sold by R. Bentley.
1 DIogenes Laertius, in 2 Vol. in English. The Art of Knowing one's self, in 8
vo, Dr. Eachard's Works, 8 vo. Queens Closet. Aesop's Fables. Richlieu's Last
Will and Testament, in 8 vo. The Roman History, in 8 vo. By Mr. Eachard. The
Complete Statesman, in 8 vo. Colbert's Last Will and Testament, in 8 vo.
Coesar's Commentaries in Folio, in English, with Cutts. Cyrus the Great, a
Play. Bonduca, a Tragedy. Lost Lover, a Comedy. Rival Sisters, a Tragedy, newly
Reprinted. The Moor of Venice. The Soldier's Fortune. Anna Bullen. Philaster,
or, Love lies a Bleeding. Caius Marius. Antony and Cleopatra. Destruction of
Jerusalem, in two Parts. Alexander the Great. Mythridates.
FINIS.

