A MEMORIAL Of His EXCELLENCY The EARL AVAUX, Extraordinary Ambassador from the
most Christian King, ^elivered to the States General, concerning the False
Interpretation, made to be the meaning of his Intercepted Letter.
THE Earl Avaux, Extraordinary Envoy of the most Christian King, well knows,
That he is not obliged to give an Account concerning what he has Written to
the King his Master: And that he is not Ignorant, That ^nderstanding People do
well see, that the Affair, con^ing which, he has informed His Master, can be
no ^udice to those whom he might name, if he thought it ^venient; neither ought
he to be troubled at what can (...) said of that Letter, which by force was
taken from the ^rier, of which your Lordships are informed. But in ^ard the
said Ambassador sees, That the said Letter which (...) ^ad the Honor to Write
his Master the 9th. of Janua^ ^^st, is Printed and Translared into several
Languages, (...) dispersed among the People; He cannot for^ear both (...)
Honor and Confcsence, to show your Lordships the ^guery and Cheat of him that
Uncyphered the Letter: (...) also to show you, not only how Wicked, but what a
^^barous Interpretation is given to it, thereby to draw ^minal Consequences:
But yet of what Nature soever ^y are, they are as publicly overthrown by the
strength (...) Truth, which lies scattered up and down in several ^ces of the
said Letter.

He, the said Ambassador, can easily believe, That most (...), (nay, even those
that have the Honor to bear a part ^he Government) did (before they had seen a
Copy of (...) Letter) believe, That by reason of the great noise that ^^h been
made thereof; and of sending it to the PRESS, (...) ^e dispersed among the
Common People, must have con^^ed some dreadful Treason against this State;
which ^^h occasioned some through Ignorance, and others out ^n ill Design, to
enlarge their Discourse upon this Mat^; as if there were such Matters contained
in the said Let^, as would make a Man's Hair stand up an end. But (...) said
Ambassador must not desist here, nor also with the ^ticulars of the Letter, but
will lay before your Lord^^s, That the only Construction which can be put upon
(...) Letter, was, to show your Lordships, by way of Memo^ the Sentiments of
His Majesty for the Peace of this public. As also, That the States General
could not be ^ught to a Deliberation of the Proffers of His Majesty ^hout a
Memorial, how Advantageous soever it might be (...) his State. That this was
the Sentiment of the Lords of ^^sterdam, and also the Answer of your Lordships:
(And (...) it was Advisable) the said Ambassador took this Me^d, which was so
absolutely Neecessary for restoring the ^ce, there being hopes, if this had
been accepted, a last^ Peace might have been obtained.

That the said Ambassador well knowing the Methods that ^se good Republicans
took toward a Peace, might take (...) Freedom without prejudicing any Man to
Write to the ^g his Master, in the same manner as though those good Re^^icans had
Communicated it to him themselves: And ^^e a^^o did concerning the Conference
which he had with the Deputys of Folland, Ereezland, and Groninghen: As also
relating to the Ship REGLE, the particulars whereof he had no Information of
from the Lords of Amsterdam; neither had they been in his Letter (as being of
no great Importance) if a Friend of one of the Deputys of the States General,
had not come and informed him when he was Writing his Letter; which was the
occasion he was not willing to forget any thing that might demonstrate to his
Master the Diligence of the Lords of Amsterdam, to do what they could for
obtaining a Peace. This Matter being presented to His Majesty, several other
Motives were joined with it, that so His Majesty might not attempt any thing
upon the Spanish Netherlands, which might engage the States General in a War;
but that on the contrary, His Majesty would Honor me with his Orders to
present a New Memorial, which made it clear to your Lordships; the good
Disposition His Majesty had to confirm the Peace of Europe.

And the aforesaid Ambassador must observe to your Lordships, That having
received no Answer to the two former Memorials, concerning the Methods his
Master proposed, for ending speedily the Differences betwixt his Master and the
Catholic King, (which was so great a Disturbance to this Republique) that his
Master intended not to present any more Memorials; and much less to cease his
Pretenses to that just satisfaction which Spain ought to give him, in case your
Lordships earnestly endeavored not to restore and procure the Peace.

And in regard the said Ambassador did in part perceive there was a Disposition
in the States relating to the Peace, according to what His Majesty expected;
He, for the more sincere Execution of His Majesty's Intentions, and Conformity
to the Desires which he perceived in most; rather for the Adjusting of this
Affair in Friendship then by War, did make use of all things which he thought
convenient to report to His Majesty, thereby the better to obtain those Orders
which were necessary for him to make known to your Lordships by a New Memorial,
the good Inclinations His Majesty retained for restoring a Peace, or at least,
the quiet of the Netherlands, in favor of this Republique.

The said Ambassador questions not but your Lordships have observed with what
sincerity he was Authorized by some Members of the State (whom he thinks
himself not obliged to name) to lay before the King his Master, That the States
could not consent to the Millitary Execution in the Netherlands, because
thereby the Citys would be deprived of all Subsistence; and that it would be
the cause of loosing the Barreir which His Majesty had granted to your
Lordships; to maintain which, the said Ambassador well knows the sincere
Intention of his Master: Neither did he know how to allege stronger Reasons
for obtaining from His Majesty New Orders to induce the States General to
Embrace some of the Proposals made for an Accommodation, before the difference
grew wider.

And who is there, according to the Remarques which the said Ambassador has
laid before your Lordships, that can imagine those Communications which the
siad Ambassador has had with his Majesty, thereby to show him the hopes that
the Differences which were arisen in the State (the Consequences of which are
to be dre^ded might be Friendly Adjusted; That this should be made use of as a
Crime against some Persons in the State, whoever they are, what Pollick or what
Civillian ever was of this Sentiment? And who is there which sees not,
notwithstanding the false Interpretation, which ought not to be given to that
which he had the Honor to Communicate to his Master, that yet the Truth
appears glittering in the face of the World.

The said Ambassador can plainly show to your Lordships, the wicked and false
Interpretations which are put upon this Letter; but the Nonsense that appears,
by adding several Words, and leaving out the Praeposition in several places, is
sufficient to show the Baseness of the Designs, to all those who understand
French. Besides, the said Ambassador sees sufficiently through the Cheat, That
the chief aim was to prepossess Men beforehand, without troubling themselves
whether the Cheat would be Detected hereafter or not; But the said Ambassador,
without Ravelling into the whole, will content himself with discovering only a
part of the Wicked Designs intended; It Is said in one part of this Letter so
falsely Intercepted, thus, Viz.

* That the Lords of Amsterdam were a little Allarumed about the Arrival
pretended of 136, which assured the main D^sign of my Proposals, was only to
keep them up.

The said Ambassador sees plainly, That by this strange Interpretation, it
should be understood, that the pretended Arrival of 136, was the Here
Ileinchias lately Arrived from France; and as if it should be said to him, That
all that was done concerning France, was only to detain the States General: And
that the Lords of Amsterdam were much Allarumed at this Discourse: And this is
the meaning which the Ambassador apprehends are given to these Words by the
Interpretation: Notwithstanding the next Words that follow, do clearly
overthrow it, in regard the Ambassador at the same time assures the King his
Master, Nothing can more advance his Service, then to show your Lorships, That
all things that are under debate with you, are with the greatest Integrity in
the World. This is so certainly True, that the said Ambassador does lay it as a
sure Foundation of all the Success which can be hoped for from the Proposals
which his Master makes for restoring the Peace and Security of the Netherlands.

The said Ambassador need do no more then lay before you the meaning of this
Base, Dubious, and Double-meaning Interpretation, to convince you of the Cheat;
but yet he must also observe to your Lordships, That he knew long ago when any
Important Resolution was to be taken in the States, that then some of the
Members always dispersed the contrary abroad, even such as they would have the
States conclude upon, and which best agreed with the Interest of those who
sought their own ends; which the said Ambassador observed at this time: For
when Reasonable Proposals were made by France, then a Letter was supposed to
come from Paris, containing (as was said) That all that was done by France, was
only to keep the States in suspense. This News was brought the said Ambassador
from a Member of the States whom he will not name, who often informed him of
Affairs of this Nature: But though he easily saw the Artifice that was used in
framing this Letter; yet it was not without leaving some Impression upon the
Lords of Amsterdam; therefore he thought himself obliged in those terms, to
Write to the King his Master; Viz.

* That the Lords of Amsterdam were not a little Allarumed concerning this
Letter, pretended to come from Paris, which says; I have no Orders to make
Proposals, but only to keep the States in Suspense.

Who is there that sees not the Baseness of those Uncipherers, that have left
out several Words, and altered others, the better to make a Criminal
Construction, saying; That the Lords of Amsterdam are not a little Allarumed:
That so it might be understood, That though they well knew the States were to be
Cheated, yet they would persist in their Design, which is the Vildest Cheat can
be put upon Interpretation, which your Lordships may plainly perceive by the
continuation of the Natural Sense, which ends this Atticle; but the said
Ambassador intends to lay before your Lord another part of the Cheat, which far
exceeds the fo^^ for in another part of the Letter it is said thus; Viz.

* I must inform Your Majesty, That those who a^^ inclined, have assumed new
Courage, and told their F^^^ that they had not flattered them; informing them,
that (...) Majesty would do the same that Your Majesty does in Fla^^ with the
go d 136 and yet les^.

But in case there were any obscurity in these Word^ should make no difficulty
to Explain it, in regard th^^ more of Falseness then Ignorance; he thinks
himself (...) obliged before he discover the Falseness, to declare to (...)
Lordships, That since his Master has began to act a^^ Spain to obtain the
Satisfaction demanded: That he (...) Writ several times to His Majesty, That
all those th^^ Inclinations to Peace, did almost loose their hopes of (...) a
Peace Established to this Republique, in case Your ^jesty possess Your self of
the Netherlands, which was (...) to be feared, in regard Spain had declared War
(...) France; but that at present seeing so many good Disp^^ons toward Peace
on the side of His Majesty, and so (...) Aversion to a War by the Principal
Members of this S^^ He must therefore inform His Majesty:

That those that are well inclined reassume New Cour^^^ they informed their
Friends that they never flattered them (...) is that upon which the Sense
hangs: That Your Majesty (...) do as much as He at present does, in favor of
the good!

In case your Lordships do cons^der this Passage (the altering several Words,
and the Express Suppos^tion of (...) Flanders, has quite another meaning then
that of the (...) ^ter, for that is quite Nonsense;) and then your Lo^^ will
with the same Ambassador acknowledge, The Design in this Interpretation was, to
let pass the Ad^^ which have been made by His Majesty in favour^^ Peace, and to
suppose the Hostilities that are now the Flanders: So that the Design was
basely to cause (...) believe, That the Lords of Amsterdam and the good
R^^licans not only granted, but also, that they had (...) themselves, that
Enough would be done; That is (...) more done then they could desire in the
Peace, (...) That they had never flattered themselves, that His (...) in favor
of those good People, would do so much and so far, that he would prefer the
Confirming the (...) of the Republique, and Security of the Netherland, (...)
all the Advantages that might be obtained by the W^^ of Spain.

There are few places in the said Ambassadors (...) where Words are not put in
by Supposition; and (...) least part a great Alteration is made: Endeavors
(...) been used to make Sense thereof, but cannot; for the beginning
Contradicts the latter end: Besides, Te^^ used which are not used in the whole
Letter, as the (...) Expressly and Plainly, and Your Majesty's Pleasure; whi^^
Words only framed, the better to force and dra^^ thence base and wicked
Consequences. But the said ^bassador has already told your Lordships, That he
(...) so little Instructed in the Nature of your Governme^^ that he knows a
particular Member can give no Se^^^ As also, that his Master will accept
nothing of that N^^

The said Ambassador does now content himself to your Lordships to understand,
the Injustice of succeedings, and has satisfied his Conscience in bearingness
to the good Intentions of those, who made no Attempts but to come to a good
Accommodation, if p^^

The said Ambassador cannot forbear to declare to (...) Lordships, how much he
wonders at what just now (...) to his Information; as that it is pretended to
draw C^quences out of a Letter, written by an Ecclesiastic (...) not only as
prejudicial to the Sincerity of all His M^^ Intentions (which appears by all
parts of the said A^^dors Letter) but also to the prejudice of all the P^^
Proposals which His Majesty has made for a long ti^^ ^wards restoring the
Peace; and especially may be s^^ the last Memorial I presented to your
Lordships.

The said Ambassador thinks not himself obliged to (...) to all those Frivilous
Reasons, well knowing your Lo^^ have Reason enough to put a Slight upon all
wh^^ Ecclesiastic has Writ, who knows no more wh^^ concerning His Majesty's
Affairs, then the least Do^^ of his House.

Given in at the Hague the 28 of Feb. 1684. and Reprinted in London for Walter
Davis in Amen.

