The Axe at the Root OF THE Innovation OF SINGING In the Worship of God; Lately
sprung up to the trouble of many, and the defiling of others.

OR, Some brief Queries; with an Introduction proposed to the Singers in the
popular way of singing Psalms, as translated, and Tunes as invented, and as now
sung together by the Professor and Profane, as an Ordinance of God.

DESIGNED For the Preservation of Right Worship, especially in the Churches of
Christ, that have upon the declaration of their Faith been Baptized.

By a Baptist.

In vain do they Worship me, teaching for Doctrine the Commandments of Men,

Matthew. 15.9. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1696

To all Christians of the Baptized Congregations, Salutation.
Dearly Beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ,
HAVING been conversant amongst you for Forty years past, I cannot be supposed
ignorant of your Practices in Matters of Worship; and am well assured
(notwithstanding some Differences in Matters of lesser moment) you have
maintained the Essentials of Salvation, and Church Communion, to your great
commendation. But of late, there has arisen amongst you certain Persons who
have troubled the Peace of the Churches, and have occasioned Divisions, to the
Grief of many, by innovating a Form of Worship never practiced (as I find in
all Histories) by any of your Brethren before you: Nor indeed in the World by
any other, till about the time of Beza and Calvin, in the last Century. And
that is, to sing in Rhyme by a set Form, and that by all the People together;
whether Saints or Sinners, Members or no Members, whether they are Young or
Old, understand or not understand what is sung.

For the Reverend Ri. Watson Doctor of Divinity, in his Book printed at London,
Anno 1684. about this Subject, Page 19. says thus, The Original of this
Device, (viz. of turning the Psalms of David into Rhyme and Meter) was not in
England, but first taken up by one Clement Marrot, a Groom of the Bedchamber
to the French King Francis the First, and having told us how he made Songs for
the King to sing. He adds Page 20. That he was prevailed with by Fr. Vetablus,
to relinquish his trifling Doggerel, and to turn David 's Psalms into French
Meter, and he did the first 30. and that the King sung them as he had done his
former Ballads. And as he afterward tells us, He went to Geneva, and was
encouraged by Beza and Calvin, and that afterward he turned 20 more into
Rhyme, by their means and procurement; and that the Papists were strangers to,
and Enemies against this Novel Practice, is plain: For that the Doctors of the
Sorbon complained of it to the King, and procured an Edict against the use
thereof. But he went to Geneva and there it was embraced. Now to know about
what time this was, we may guess by an Eminent Passage in History. That
disturbance given to the Duke of Guise, by those who sung Marots Psalms, Anno
1562. and for that Marot was with Calvin at Geneva; and the other is noted, as
happening quickly after they began to put these Rhymes of his into Practice: It
must have its Original from or about that time.

Therefore we may infer from thence, as we usually do on another Subject. We
say, that seeing our Adversaries cannot prove from Scripture or any Authentic
History, that any Infant was Baptized in the first two Centuries, it was
because the same was not commanded by Christ, nor taught by his Apostles. And
surely the case will hold good here also, seeing that 1500 years past, since
our Saviors time, and no instance to be given of any Church of Christ that
ever sung in Rhyme.

Now were there no other Objection against it than only the form of its
performance, it is not a matter so slightly to be passed over; because your
selves deny Sprinkling to be Baptism, purely from a wrong Form used in the
manner of applying the Water to the Person that is to be Baptized.

Besides, the Learned among you know, That it could not be the Practice of the
Jewish Church to sing in Rhyme; because neither the Song of Moses, Deborah, nor
the Book of Psalms, as they are in the Hebrew, are any of them in Rhyme, but
all in Prose: And yet certainly they must acknowledge the Jews had as great an
Obligation upon them to perform it in that mode as any now, in case it had been
an essential part of Singing. Moreover the Jews amongst us at this day, do
believe they sing, and in the same manner their Forefathers did; and yet all
they do is in Prose, not in Rhyme.

And I am as certain, there is no such Form of Singing expressed in the New
Testament to be practiced by Christ, or his Apostles, or the Primitive
Churches; Nor as yet have I met with any of our Brethren of a contrary
Persuasion, who have asserted it, although their Practice indeed is otherwise; for
they all sing in Rhyme: And when it has been demanded of them, why they sung
in a Form different from the Church of the Jews of old, and also from that of
the Primitive Christians? They have Answered, because they knew not how to sing
otherwise. I might make some Reflections upon this, which might not be very
pleasing; but I design Truth and not Division, and therefore shall forbear. As
to the other parts which belong to this Controversy, I find the Assertors of it
are divided among themselves; some having pleaded for it as a Duty simply
Moral, and so no need of a Gospel Precept. Others, they have pleaded for it in
both senses, and therefore think themselves at liberty to argue either. And
others, in the latter only as a Gospel Institution; and some as partly Legal,
and partly Evangelical, viz. The singing it self in the latter, but the Form of
doing it, and the Persons performing it, they take from the former, viz. the
Law. And therefore, till they are better agreed in the State of the
Controversy, I shall refer the whole matter to the Answer which shall be given
to the following Paper, which (in my Opinion) comprehends the true state of the
Case. And if our Brethren will please to answer these Queries, it may be great
satisfaction to the Doubting. Whereas if they must go without a particular and
due Answer, they will serve to keep me and others in our present and ancient
Practice; and we ought not to be blamed by our Brethren, for refusing to admit
any thing into the Church as an Ordinance which we have not a sufficient
Authority for, from the New Testament; because some of them cannot but know,
that all those Corruptions that are found in the Church of Rome, were not
brought in at once, but by degrees. Yea, even the Mass it self was brought in
by diverse Popes, at more than 12 several times; as for instance, one he
appointed the Confiteor, another the Introitus, another the Kyrie Eleyson,
another the Gloria in Excelsis, another the Gradual, another the Offertorium,
another the Canon, another the Memento, another the Te igitur, another the
Agnus Dei; with other things too tedious to relate, which has made it so
monstrous a piece of Worship as it is now found to be. And although I do allow,
that what our Brethern have done in bringing in this of Singing into the
Church, is not in it self a matter of the greatest moment; yet if by the same
Rule we should have Forms of Prayer introduced next, and after that other
things, which might also by degrees upon the same Foundation be innovated; it
might tend to the utter ruin of Primitive Christianity, which they know fell
out in the first Grand Apostasy. But hoping our Brethren design no such thing,
and that God will always stir up some of his faithful Servants to oppose it, if
attempted. I shall say no more, but refer you to the Queries themselves, which
I judge may be fit to be published for the benefit of those concerned, so far
as appears to me upon the reading of them: For I assure you, I am not the
Author thereof, and therefore will not assume that to my self which is the
Product of the Labor and Study of one, much better skilled in this Controversy.

But upon the request of the Publisher, have thought fit to write this
Introduction.

QVERY,
1. Whether or no the word Sung, be not added in Matthew. 26, 30. and in Mark
14.16. and in Acts 16.25. and in Heb. 2.12. For in none of those places the
term Sung is to be found as is affirmed?

2. Whether the Translators have done well in adding to the Word of God?

3. Whether they do well that justify the Translators who have so done it?

4. Whether they that Preach, and Print, and confidently urge from those Texts
they sung, do not deceive others, and justify the Translators in their adding
to God's Word?

5. Whether those Translations that read that, when they had Hymned, or given
Thanks, be not more agreeable to the Truth?

6. Whether the Term (...), Hymnesantes, does not as strongly imply, that they
lamented, as that they sung and rejoiced?

7. Whether there is not a greater probability, that they Mourned or Lamented,
than that they sung and rejoiced at that time?

Note, Now although you cannot take this Point from us, neither can we give it
you; yet seeing you will insist upon it right or wrong, make your best on it,
and answer these following Queries.

8. Whether or no if Christ and all the Apostles sung the Hymn together, that
the Hymn that they thus sung did not belong to the Passover, and ceased with
the Passover?

9. Whether or no as there was a Hymn belonging to the Passover, there was not
a necessity they should sing the Hymn as belonging to the Passover; otherwise,
how could it be said they kept the Passover?

10. Whether or no they sung two Hymns, the one belonging to the Passover, and
ceased with it; and the other belonging to the Lord's Supper, and remaining?

11. Whether or no if it be as it is said, that they sung together, and went out
singing, that they returned back to conclude with Prayer, as now you generally
do; but where is your President for it?

12. Whether (notwithstanding all that you have said) there is either Precept
or President for your singing either at the Lord's Supper, or before, or after
your Sermons? If you have, you are desired to produce it; for that will end the
Controversy about it: but nothing short of that will.

But seeing some of the Singers stick not to this, but fly to the Law for their
Refuge: As those seventeen Gentlemen, whose hands are put to a Pamphlet,
Entitled, A Sober Reply, etc. do assert in their third Argument. If singing
Gods Praises were under the Law with Voices lift up together, and the Saints
are in the New Testament required to sing, and no other way it prescribed or
laid down how they should sing: Then the Saints in the New Testament ought to
sing as they sang under the Old. But such was the singing of Gods People under
the Law, and the Churches are enjoined to sing Psalms in the New Testament, and
no other way prescribed or laid down how they should sing. Ergo. The Churches
are now to sing in the times of the Gospel, as Gods People under the Law.
Therefore let them answer these Queries following:

13. Whether or no the Jews when they sung in the Temple, or elsewhere, what
they sung was not in Prose?

14. Whether or no any sung in the Temple Worship, but the Singers only?

15. Whether singing was not an Office instituted of God for his Worship in the
Temple, and performed by the Levites only?

16. Whether all the Levites sung together, or only Asaph, Heman and Jeduthan,
and their Sons and Brethren?

17. Whether they had not a chief Chanter, to give Instructions in the Song to
the Singers?

18. Whether or no the Singers were not commanded to be clothed in White Linen?

19. Whether or no they were not commanded to sing with Music, viz. with
Cymbals, Psalteries and Harps?

20. Whether the Priests themselves were not appointed with their Trumpets, to
join with the Singers in their singing?

21. Whether or no all the Congregation which Assembled together, ever sung
with the Levites?

22. Whether the Jews ever sung in their Synagogue Worship?

23. Whether or no singing in our Cathedrals (if we must take our Rules from
Legal Practices) be not a more agreeable Practice than yours? for they Sing in
Prose, and have Music, and are clothed in White Linen, and have Choristers,
with a Chaunter to give instructions: but you have none of these.

24. Yet whether or no these Practices are not condemned by all judicious
Christians, as superstitious; and seeing you plead for your Singing from the
same Authority, what can yours be less?

25. Whether it be not a strange Doctrine, that there is no Direction how to
sing in all the Gospel?

26. If this be true, (as it is said) then whether it is not more strange that
we having no Direction, should be necessitated to sing as they sung under the
Law?

27. Whether it be not most strange, that instead of following those Directions
they have given, they should set up a way of Singing, in direct opposition to
that as practiced under the Law?

28. Whether or no 1 Cor. 14.15. where the Apostle Paul says, He will sing
with the Spirit, and with Understanding also, was not only Direction to the
Church, but a President also, whatever they have said to the contrary.

29. Whether or no what the Apostle Paul has said in Ephesians. 5.18, 19. if it be a
Precept; that be not the Precept, Not to be drunk with Wine; but be filled with
the Spirit: implying, that if they were not filled with the Spirit, they could
not speak to themselves in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs: And in
Coloss. 3.16. That the Word of Christ must dwell richly in them, in all Wisdom;
implying, that otherwise they could not admonish one another in Psalms and
Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, nor sing with grace in their Hearts; and surely,
this is most agreeable to the Apostles Doctrine and Practices whatever is, or
can be said to the contrary?

30. Whether or no it were not better to pluck off the Mask, and give over your
Singularity, and join with the other Auxiliaries, and rest in what you
practice, even in the Psalms as Translated into English Meter, with the Tunes
as printed and allowed to be sung by all people together, before and after
Sermons, and before and after their Prayers? For, is it not a clear case, that
if they were then Translated in English Meter, they were never Translated
before? and if they were then allowed and appointed to be sung, they were not
allowed nor appointed before. And never talk of repairing the Breach; for if
there ever was a Breach, it was then repaired, or it is not yet repaired.

But ceasing at present, hoping some of the great Singers will Answer these
Queries; it is also desired they would Answer this one Argument; for it is not
questioned but it is of more weight than those Three that have been levied
against it, though ushered into the world with the Authority of seventeen Hands.

That which Christ our great Lawgiver never commanded, nor his Apostles in his
Name never taught, nor practiced, cannot be a Gospel Duty.

But Christ never commanded, nor his Apostles never taught nor practiced in his
Name, that ever a Christian Congregation, when Congregated together, should
sing Psalms or Hymns promiscuously, or all together, both Men and Women, Young
and Old, Boys and Girls, Professors and Profane.

Therefore such a singing of Psalms or Hymns by a Christian Congregation, when
congregated together, is not a Duty.

FINIS.

