(...) SERMON Preached at Welde-House, In His Excellency the Spanish
Ambassador's Chapel: On the Third Sunday of ADVENT, December 12. 1686.

By the Reverend Father Br. JAMES AYRAY, Friar Minor of the Holy Order of St.
Francis, Chaplain and Preacher in Ordinary to His EXCELLENCY.

With Allowance and special Order of Superiors:

LONDON, Printed for William Grantham, Bookseller in Cock-pit-Alley, near
Welde-street. 1686.

A SERMON Preached at WELDE-HOVSE, In His Excellency the Spanish Ambassador's
Chapel: On the Third Sunday of Advent, December 12. 1686.
Tu quis es? Who art thou? John 1. v. 19.
THE great Saint Augustine was of Opinion, That that Man had his judgment best
placed, who less esteeming the Science of all things else, did make it his
chiefest study perfectly to know himself: And that a Soul was to be condemned,
who without making an inquisition into her own infirmities, did trifle away her
time in learning the secret, and less useful course of the Stars, and still
remained ignorant of the true way to Heaven. Grant and allow to worldly
knowledge the best and greatest advantages imaginable, yet still this
unavoidable misery attends the grandeur of it, That the most profitable
perquisits cease when life does last no longer: and that what was acquired with
the expense of great labor and pains, measuring out the shortness of Man's
breath only, remains no more, nor is to be found after Death.

The devout Saint Bernard, writing to Pope Eugenius, does humbly suggest unto
him, That the gain of an Universe would never countervail the loss of a Man's
own self. Read over and perfectly understand all the Scriptures; measure the
Heavens from East to West; span the whole circumference of the Earth; sound and
fathom the briny deep; and be ill read in the science of Nosce teipsum; be
ignorant, tu quis es, and you will resemble a Man who building upon a Quick-sand,
exposes his Foundation to certain ruin: so that only he has wisdom, who is
wise for himself, and suffers not the anxious care of learning things less
important to turn to his own prejudice: A teipso tua incipiat consideratio, in
to finiatur, tu tibi primus, tu ultimus; non os sapiens si tibi non es: These
are the words of St. Bernard.

The miraculous birth of St. John the Baptist, to whom the Jews do send a
solemn Embassy in this days Gospel, the holiness, and austerity of his life,
his retreat in solitude, and his divine preachings, are the occasion why they
doubt whether he be the Messiah so long expected: and therefore sending their
Priests and Levites demand of him, Tu quis es? John 1.19.
Who art thou? And this great Saint, great in the admirable science of Nosce
teipsum, waving all the Titles of Honor due to his Character, gives a slender
account of himself, and says only that he is a voice, John 1.23.
vox clamantis in deserto: manifesting by this answer of his, That he did
perfectly understand all the weakness and infirmities incident to Humane
Nature. And let our condition in this World be never so Elevated, our imploys
never so Glorious, the advantages of our Lives and Fortunes never so
Illustrious, we are still so inconsiderable, that wanting all Solidity, we pass
like a voice that is dissipated by the Wind. It is this important knowledge of
our selves, that I would have this pious Auditory to learn of the great
Precursor of our Savior; some precepts of which Science I shall here deliver
unto them, after having invocated the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, through the
intercession of the most knowing Disciple in this School; the ever Blessed
Virgin Mary I mean, who styled her self a Handmaid, when the Angel did Salute
her full of Grace, Ave Maria.

It is too true that Man does know every thing better, and himself less than
all things: whereas did he know himself well, he would know all things else to
perfection. Quid est nosse seipsum, quam totius mundi naturam nosse, says
Photius in his Bibliotheca: Man in knowing himself, would know the Nature of
all the World; and diving into the Eternal Secrets, he would there be informed
of all the Divine Decrees framed by the Almighty, for the good of the Universe;
he would there learn, that when God did build that wonderful Structure above
us, adorning and embellishing it with so many glorious Lights; when he
extracted this dry Land from the brackish Element, inhabited with Beasts and
Birds, Checquered and Enameled with Flowers and Woods; when he made that
admirable mixture of the Four Elements, and so mutually Incorporated them with
one another, he would learn that all the Productions which he then Created were
all for Man, and Man he designed solely for himself.

The Saints, who have been Educated in this School, and there commenced
Masters, have left behind a certain and clear method for the Acquisition of
this Science. Consider, says the Devout Saint Bernard, from whence you came,
and the contemplation of that vile and ignoble Nothing, out of which you did
first derive your Origin, will be the subject of your Shame and Confusion:
Regard your present State, and this place of Banishment, with the dangerous
disasters that surround you, will Administer unto you matter of Lamentation:
Call to mind the Journey you are to take, survey the Tomb where you are to be
served up meat for the Worms: Or, take a step further, and at a distance look
on Hell, where your poor Soul (which God forbid) may be the eternal subject of
Tormenting Flames. Or if you had rather arrive to this scientifical and most
beneficial Knowledge, by examining the several Stations of your own Life, the
Past, the Present, and the time to Come, make some serious reflections on the
vain and unprofitable use, and the inconsiderable advantages you have made of
the time past: Consider how great a circumspection is requisite for the time
present, and what Provisions you ought to make for the time to come: The Profit
we have already reaped in time past is so little, that it seems never to have
been; we must be cautious in the time present, which imperceptibly does pass
away; and a prudent forecast for the future requires an ample provision: These
three considerations shall be the three points of our present entertainment;
the Economy of this Day's Discourse, and the Subject of your pious and
favorable attention.

PART I.
THE greatest Misfortune that can befall poor Man, is to let his Days and Years
unprofitably pass away, resembling little Children, who unhappily die before
they are fit to taste the Sweets of Life: The most numerous part of Mortals are
deprived of vital Breath, before they attain the knowledge of living well; and
notwithstanding they have measured over a long series of many Years, yet they
are ignorant why, and to what end they have so long enjoyed this common Air.
Holy Job does suggest these my Thoughts, Job c. 10.
Fuissem quasi non essem de utero translatus ad tumulum: From the Cradle we are
carried to the Tomb, and are hurried out the World, before we could well know
the reason that first placed us in it; and forgeting all past Transactions, we
live tepidly; and without reforming the irregular course of our Life, may die
full of Years, but Young in virtue.

What is once past can never be recalled, it is as if it never had been; nor
can God himself, make that Day return, whose succeeding Night has once
Eclipsed his Luster; recall to mind all your past Pleasures, your Joys and
Divertisements, the Innocent Sweets you formerly tasted with so great a gust;
and the whole remain lies locked up in your Memory, without any sign or mark
else where. The Life of Man is like a Dream, and when awaked by Death, he is
convinced that the whole course of his Time has been only Fancy and Illusion;
Ps. 75.
finding both his Hands empty after his supposed large possessions. Dormierunt
somnum suum, and nil invenerunt viri divitiarum in manibus suis. And can such
imaginary Smoke make us lose the thoughts of Heaven, slight the menaces of our
God, and despise his Friendship? Can we for the love of such Trifles run the
certain hazard of eternal Torments? Quid nobis profuit, say those unhappy Souls
now arrived to their last and dismal home, Quid nobis profuit superbia, aut
divitiarum jactantia quid nobis contulit? transierunt omnia illa tanquam umbra:
The end of all our Pride, the rich and gaudy remains of all our Wealth, is an
immortal regret for having fooled away our Hearts on such airy Vanities. That
Man whom to Day you see interred, has all his Pleasures, with the empty titles
of his Honor, wrapped up in a Funeral Shroud; and a Winding Sheet will be the
only portion shall fall to your lot of all those ample Possessions you now
enjoy with so much Passion.

Notwithstanding, what is past can never be recalled, and is in effect as if it
never had been; yet once it had a Being, and such a one as all the Powers under
Heaven can never deface, or take away. Saint Bernard has well expressed this
in his First Book of Considera. and 12. Chap. Quae priora transierunt and non
transierunt, transierunt a manu and non transierunt a mente. Our past actions
leave behind them their eternal Species in our mind; nor can the damned in Hell
during the long space of a whole Eternity, L. 5. de consid. c. 12.
deface the Memory of an action perpetrated in a moment. Quod factum est, says
the same St. Bernard, factum non esse non potest, proinde and si facere in
tempore fuit, sed fecisse in sempiternum manet: Let the greatest discretion
moderate, and be the rule of your Life, imitate the Saints themselves in their
perfection, yet all your endeavors may, indeed, make satisfaction, but can
never obliterate a Crime once committed. The greatest, perhaps, amongst the
Pains in Hell, is that Sempiternal remorse, the perpetual Remembrance of a past
Crime foments in the troubled minds of those afflicted Souls: And that Worm
that eats and tears their disturbed Breasts, is a Torture above infernal
Punishments. The memory of a Crime guilty of their Eternal Ruin, begets a
Grief beyond expression, and the impossibility of a recalling creates a despair
not to be decyphered; but the strange consequences that follow such light
beginnings and the Eternity of Torments which must make an everlasting amends
for a momentary fault will certainly extort a most horrid Rage.

The Succession of things denote the Beauty of Order; and one thing preceding
the other does hinder confusion. But the mind of Man receives and retains
innumerable things without a burden, and rememorating things of an ancient
standing, still reserves the species newly imprinted. Contemplate the
Collection of all your past Actions, and see what a store of Iniquities you
have there laid up: Turn over the great Wardrobe of your past Crimes, and you
will find it filled with Lumber, with scarce any movables worth regarding.
Should God communicate unto you the perfect knowledge of one single Sin: Should
he let you see that the Enormity of it is infinite, because committed against a
Majesty that is infinite, the horror you would conceive would be extreme; and
the deformity of one Crime, rightly understood, is able to disturb a Brain most
justly seated. What then shall the terror be, to see all the Vices of our
former Days stand ranked in order, and all their Ugliness attending on them,
represented to our view in Shapes most dismal? To behold all our ill Thoughts,
our sinful Desires, our vicious Habits, our immodest Discourses, our unjust
Dealings, our Deceits and Lyings, our Pride and Vanity, all our Distractions
and Irreverences in the presence of our God, the Good we have neglected, and
the Ill we have done, with a thousand other things, which will then distinctly
show themselves in their most deformed dress? How great will then your terror
be, Job 15.14.
your astonishment and confusion? Terrebit eum tribulatio; by how much the more
satisfaction you did receive in the perpetration, by so much greater shall be
your pain, and the distaste you thence derive, equalizing the pleasure you
formerly had, shall augment your Grief, and Torment as much as heretofore they
pleased you.

This Landscape of your past Life exposed to view, whilst the Eyes of your Soul
contemplate the vanity of your conduct make some reflections on the words of
St. Romans 6.21
Paul, Quem ergo fructum habuistis tunc in illis, in quibus nunc erubescitis?
nam finis illorum mors est. What Fruit, therefore, had you then in those
things, for which now you are ashamed? for the end of them is Death. If you
cannot think on past Crimes, says St. John Chrysostom. without confusion, your
stock of Impudence must needs have been large, when you did commit them; and
tho then your Passion did pervert your Judgment, and Pleasure, or Complaisance
did induce you to please your Sense, or Man before your God; yet the
construction you afterward shall frame, will certainly be opposite to your
first Opinion, when you shall find that Grief and Confusion will be the only
remnant of all your Possessions.

Reflect on the incestuous Amnon, whose Love changing countenance, his Passion
being once satisfied, did hate his Sister Thamar, more than ever he had
affection for her, Ita ut majus esset odium quo oderat eam, 2 K. 13.
amore quo ante dilexerat. Our first Parents had no sooner committed that Sin,
the guilt of which they left as a Patrimony to all their Children, but their
Eyes opening, they did discover their own Misery, and fled each others sight.
You who lead a vicious Life, and whose sinful Conversation does grow into a
Habit, I fear you are not truly sensible of that displeasure which always
springs from Vice; nor do you foresee those Evils, the Seeds of which you have
already Sowed, and even now begin to Blossom. Thus you see the income of your
past Actions, and the Harvest you are to Reap of all your time ill spent, is
confusion here or worse hereafter: For all your Sins must here meet with a
Penance equal to your Life, or a Punishment as long as Eternity. Follow
therefore the advice of the Philosopher, non tanti emo poenitere, this
Repentance is of too high a price for me to purchase. And since the Fruits of
your past Labors have been but inconsiderable, be circumpect and cautious, and
retrieve your loss with a prudent distribution of the time present, which is my
second Point.

PART II.
THE extent of Man's Dominion is inconsiderable and short; and of all those
Days that compose his Life, only the time present is in his Power; the past is
now no more, and the future is yet to come; so that he is master only of the
time which now is, and that too is carried on such swift Wings as outrun his
Thoughts, and leaving no space for Consideration, outstrip fancy it self: the
Flashes of Lightning that pierce the Clouds: an Arrow that cleaves the Air: a
Ship which with wonderful swiftness Plows the salt Waves, and driven by an
impetuous Gale does till the deep: the Stars themselves who with their rapid
course do run through spaces immense in an instant, are only light expressions
of that prodigious swiftness, wherewith the time present does fly away: it is
an instant imperceptible, impossible to be cut in two: it is a Now, which is
now no more, no sooner here but presently gone, and dividing it self between
the past and the future, reserves only a point to save the denomination of
present; and yet this single point is the only thing at our command; and our
Orders reaching no further, we can only dispose of this imperceptible Now; and
the decision of our future bliss or pain does really depend on this so
momentary a durance, ex hoc momento pendet aeternitas.

Methinks I see the King in the Gospel dividing his Wealth amongst his
Servants, and reading a Lecture of Negotiation unto them, negotiamini dum
venio, Luke 19.13
improve these Talents I now leave with you, and your gain may easily double
the Principal; make a provident use of your present time, and your increase may
reach the infinite: but be sure not to let this occasion imprudently pass, for
amplius non erit tempus. Apoc. 10.6
It is bald behind; and once let slip, will probably never offer it self again:
post est occasio calva. It is a Folly next to madness, founding your selves
upon deceitful hopes to delay your Penance to an imaginary Hereafter, and to
put off the important affairs of an eternal concern, to a time which shall,
perhaps, never be. How many poor Souls are there now frying in Hell Flames,
because after once they had unhappily Sinned against their God, they wilfully
slighted the offered occasion of one favorable instant, alloted them by Mercy
for a reconciliation.

Oh! How the favors of our God are great, who prolonging our Lives does
solicit our hard Hearts by his divine Inspirations, to make good use of our
present time, and continuing us in this Pilgrimage of the Land of the Living,
the way to eternal bliss, does afford us means necessary to redress the
disorders of our ill regulated Consciences, and lay up the store requisite for
Heaven: ex hoc momento pendit aeternitas.

Whatever we have been heretofore, or whatsoever we are like to be hereafter,
does not fall under the consideration of our God: He will forget our past
Crimes, which a true Repentance has cashiered: He does not consider what we
may arrive to be, but as he does actually find us, so he frames his Judgment.
Pass therefore a general review, and take a full cognizance of all your
Spiritual concerns, and learn from thence what reason you have to hope or fear:
See how you stand with your Obligations, and what esteem you have had of works
of Council and Supererrogation.

Consult your Conscience and pronounce Sentence against your self, it is the
only way to avoid the severity of the Divine Decrees; 1 Cor. 11.28.
probet autem seipsum homo, see if any mortal Sin lies yet knowingly
concealed; whether Envy or Hatred, or any impure Desires lie covered in your
Breast; if in frequenting the Sacraments you have not committed some Sacrilege,
and profanely abused to your own Damnation, those things which were instituted
a means to purchase Heaven; if your affections lean not too much to the
Creature, and, dispising your God, pay the Tribute of your Adoration to an
unworthy object.

If this review convince you faulty, if this Scrutiny discover defects in you,
banish all delays, and let this present season be the serious moment of your
Reformation: The obstacles you do now meet with, hereafter will wax but
stronger; and the now offered Graces will be less frequent, and not so
efficacious; your vicious Habits will grow into a second Nature; and Sin it
self taking hold more firmly, will very hardly be rooted out. Modo, modo, St.
Aug.
and illud modo non habebat modum, said heretofore a great Sinner, though now a
great and glorious Saint; By and by, presently, and yet this by and by did see
the length of many days expire, (so hard it is, seriously, to go about the work
of a true Conversion:) what you now do: Qui hodie non est, cras minus aptus
erit. For hereafter you will not be able, at least not more willing: You will
want time; or if you have that, you may be destitute of Grace; if Grace present
it self, your Will accustomed already to refuse, will then not know how to
comply. Hell is full of Spirits, who presuming on the Mercies of the Almighty;
let slip the blessed time of their Conversion; and neglecting what was in their
power, grounded their Repentance upon the contingency of uncertainties: Apoc.
10.6
amplius non erit tempus. Now they will have leisure to Lament and Weep their
fill. Heaven's Gate is shut, and the Treasures of divine Mercies are all locked
up.

Examine the present State of your Soul, and look into your former Life, and
see what progress you have made: I fear you will have reason to say with Holy
Job, Quis mihi det ut sim juxta menses pristinos: Job 29.2.
would to God the Comportment of my former Years were now discernable in my
Behavior; or that my Carriage at this Age, were suitable to the Modesty of my
Youth.

That Man who aims at little, is with any thing satisfied; and he who will do
only what he is bid, grows Lazy and easily neglects his Duty; and,
notwithstanding all the projects he may have for the future, he still remains
in the same condition, without any sign of a better fortune: He does truly
resemble those Jews, who when desired to repair the Temple, Agg. 1.2.
answered, Nondum venit tempus: The time was not yet come: So wretched Man is
still put off with, It is not yet time: as soon as I shall have settled my
Affairs in the World: as soon as my Childern shall be disposed off: as soon as
I shall purchase this Estate, that Office, that Employ: as soon as I shall have
gained this Law Suit: as soon as I shall be at liberty, and free from the Cares
and Troubles of the World, I will then begin to think of serving God, and study
the Advancement of my own Soul.

But, Quis es tu? who are you inconsiderate Creatures, that do thus Capitulate
with Heaven, and imposing measures on your God, do lay your vain and fruitless
Projects for Eternity? 2 Cor. 6.2.
Ecce nunc tempus acceptabile: Behold now is the time acceptable: The future as
yet is not, and, perhaps, will have no Being for you, but in your own senceless
fancy: Nay, should it ever find an existence, it may be incumbered with more
and greater obstacles than now you meet with. When those imaginary designs are
brought to pass, which now so powerfully impede your progress in the way of
Virtue, that working head of yours shall be fit to create new difficulties ten
times more intricate and hard. Your cares and solitudes, your more urgent
occasions, if you make a right use of them, will rather further you in the way
to Virtue; and what you now falsely deem a hindrance, will certainly promote
perfection. All things do assist and cooperate with the Just; omnia
co-operantur in bonum iis, Romans 8.28
qui secundum propositum vocati sunt sancti: and drawing advantages from all
occurrences, they providently do lay up a plentiful provision for the future:
Which is my Third and Last Point.

PART III.
THis future or time to come, besides that it does hold us in suspense,
uncertain of our end, whether good or bad, gives us moreover reason to
question, whether there shall ever be any time to come for us at all; how it
may continue; and if its like to be favorable or averse.

The Son of God in the Gospel, does command us still to be upon our guard;
because we are wholly ignorant, not only of the hour that must put a Period to
our life, but even of the day that is to be witness to our death; vigilate quia
nescitis diem neque horam. Matthew. 25.13.
And Holy Writ does suggest unto us one fatal moment, which will turn all the
delights of this world into bitterness. Et in puncto descendant in infernum.
They whose chiefest study is an idle indulgence of their own slothful ease, and
who sencelessly content themselves in the enjoyment of vain worldly Pleasures,
do often find themselves grasped with the cold hands of a sudden death, when
they imagined themselves most secure; and in a moment they make a most
sorrowful change, parting with their darling Earth for the flames of a Hell
Fire; Job 21.13.
Et in puncto descendunt in infernum.

All the moments of our life are subject to the decisive stroke of Death, and
every hour may send us a melancholy messenger to Eternity: And as in time past
every moment might have been our last, so in this time to come every particle
may be the sad beginning of our misery. Wherefore be always watchful, and keep
your selves always in such a state as may send you to an Eternity that may be
happy and not unfortunate; let not Death surprise you unprovided, lest that
very instant you designed for Vice, be the last of your sinful life, and the
first of your pains.

The continuance of this future Hereafter is uncertain, and should it conduct
our gray hairs to the cold Tomb, its durance were but a day in respect of
Eternity; Ps. 89.
tanquam dies hesterna quae praeteriit. Imagine what is to come, by what is
already past; and by that dram of life which hitherto you have lived, guess at
the instability of what is to come hereafter. How stupid then must that Man be,
whose chiefest design is to frame a wretched Fortune here, and (exposing
himself to a thousand hazzards,) finds himself with all his projects dashed in
an instant? Oh! were it not much better, and more secure, to labor for an
Eternity of Bliss, and studying to increase your Fortune, lay the foundations
of it in a kingdom that will last for ever.

Holy Job, when most of all favored with Prosperity, dreaded the unlucky
strokes of Adversity; and being ignorant of the event, still remained prepared
for the worst of accidents; Job 3.25.
timor quem timebam evenit mihi, and quod verebar accidit. A prudent
force-sight renders Evils less troublesome, and a prepared Will receives
Misfortunes with a greater calmness; minus jacula feriunt quae praevidentur. A
Will perfectly resigned, kisseth the Rod before it strikes, and places the
disasters of this life in the number of Celestial Favors: It is armed by
Providence against the worst, and plainly discovers the hand of God in all its
Accidents; and entirely relying on Divine Wisdom, leaves it self to be
conducted by that God, whose Eternal Decree was the happiness of his Creatures;
1 Timothy 2.1
omnem hominem vult salvum facere.

If doubts and fears still attend the present state of our Affairs, the
expectation of our Eternity must needs be anxious: none can dive at once into
all the parts of his life, much less can he know his end. I will now suppose
you good, believe you virtuous, and deserving a Celestial Crown for your Duty
and Obedience to your God: But who knows the disorders that may follow a Will
subject to inconstancy; and a mind impatient of command, may at length spurn at
Heaven, and contemn the Orders of his Maker.

Solomon, the Son of so great a Father, the miracle of Wisdom, endowed with a
Knowledge from above, did lay so glorious beginnings as the World never knew,
or shall ever be acquainted with: strayed at last out of the way, began a
Sinful Journey, and such Crimes he did there embrace as gave occasion to his
lasting Posterity to suspect his final end. O Devout Christians, Who are you,
compared with this Prophet, and Son of a Prophet? Tu quis es? O never more
presume on your own force, Phil. 2.12.
but let the Admonition of the Apostle be your guide, Cum metu and tremore
salutem vestram operamini: With fear and trembling work your Salvation. Do not
imitate those persons over confident, who promising themselves the Joys of
Heaven, do day by day remit the works of Penance; and falsely think the
extremity of Time sufficient to redress the many disorders of their disturbed
Consciences. Oh! unhappy Souls, you do but vainly imagine your Names registered
in the Book of Life; for, for all you know, the Sentence of an eternal Death is
ready to pass upon you: Should you now at this very instant leave this Earthly
Stage, the assurance you have of Heaven, would, perhaps, dwindle to a Nothing,
and your big hopes be frustrated with an unexpected and everlasting Death. The
great Saint Augustine was never so afflicted, as when the dubious inquiry of his
eternal Inheritance molested his mind; and the desire to know, how he might
stand in the affections of his God, was a vexation that did perpetually torment
him. Eccl. 9.1.
Nemo scit an odio dignus vel amore sit. The Saints themselves lived in
perpetual apprehensions; and the continual Alarms they received about their
final Happiness, did incessantly disturb their quiet.

The Wise man does frame for Mortals a Lesson of Instruction, from the labors
of the Industrious Ant, who laying up in Summer her necessary Provision, does
pass the Winter in a greater Plenty. The profit of our past Actions is but
small, Gal. 6.10.
if any; and if we intend to live for Heaven, dum tempus habemus operemur
bonum, let us work whilst we have time. Cast an Eye back and reflect a little
on the Answer Saint John made to the Priests and Pharisees in this days Gospel,
Joh. 1.26.
medius vestrum stetit quem vos nescitis; there has stood in the midst of you
one whom you know not. Consider that God is always present with you, and it
will be a bridle to curb the irregular motions of your evil Passions, and
squaring all those Actions you shall then perform to the divine Rule, shall
adorn them with a Rectitude suitable to their Model.

I could wish I was able to persuade you, that Almighty God is always with you;
and when ^^y foul Temptation does solicit your less-well-regarded heart,
remember that God does look upon you; and if ever you intend to be wicked, be
so prudent in your own concerns and for your own sake, as following the counsel
of that great Light of the Church, Saint Augustine; Find out some obscure place,
where you may secretly commit your Crimes unseen by Heaven: find out a House of
all the Town the least regarded, and in the darkest hole of that obscure
retreat, search diligently into all the Beds and Chairs, least your God lie
there concealed; and if you can be so fortunate as to find a place hid from his
all piercing Eyes, go there triumphantly, commit the worst misdeeds and escape
unpunished. But wretched Soul, if all the Mansion be full of Eyes, if God not
only be in your Chamber, Ps. 115.9.
but in the very midst of your own Self, est in medio tui, How dare you presume
to do that in his Presence, which you would be ashamed the Eyes of Man should
see?

It is not sufficient to abstain from evil Works, medius vestrum stetit quem
vos nescitis: Almighty God is present with you, therefore lucernae ardentes in
manibus vestris, you must have lighted Candles in your Hands; and imitateing
the prudent Virgins, your Lamps must be well stored with Oils, your Designs
must be the practice of good Works; and laying up a Treasure for Eternity, you
must endeavor by your Prayers, Fasts, Almsdeeds, and the Love of God to
purchase Paradise. Your good Works alone will bear you company; and if your
Provision be but small, you will have reason to apprehend an eternal Dearth. A
wise Traveller provides a Viaticum proportionable to his Journey; and we are
all bound for the new World, and our abode there is to exceed the length of
time. Let us therefore be Provident, and make so good use of the time which now
is, as we may redeem the time already lost; and employing the whole present to
the best advantage, we make such large and ample provisions for the time to
come, as enjoying the Fruits of our Labors, through the Merits of our Lord and
Savior Jesus, we may be admitted to Praise and Glorify him for an Eternity
with the Saints in Heaven; which God of his infinite Goodness grant us all. In
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

FINIS.

