AN ACCOUNT Of what passed at the EXECUTION Of the Late Duke of Monmouth, On
Wednesday the 15th of July, 1685. on Tower Hill. TOGETHER With a Paper Signed
by Himself that morning in the Tower, in the Presence of the Lords Bishops of
Ely, and Bath and Wells, Dr. Tenison, and Dr. Hooper. AND ALSO, The Copy of His
Letter to His MAJESTY after he was taken, Dated at Ringwood in Hantshire, the
8th of July.
THe late Duke of Monmouth came from the Tower to the Scaffold, attended by the
Bishop of Ely, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, Dr. Tenison and Dr. Hooper, which
four the King was graciously pleased to send him, as his Assistants to prepare
him for Death; and the late Duke himself entreated all four of them, to
accompany him to the Place of Execution, and to continue with him to the last.
The two Bishops going in the Lieutenant's Coach with him to the Bars, made
seasonable and devout Applications to him all the way; and one of them desired
him not to be surprised, if they to the very last upon the Scaffold, renewed
those Exhortations to a Particular Repentance, which they had so often repeated
before.

At his first coming upon the Scaffold, he looked for the Executioner, and
seeing him, said, Is this the man to do the business? Do your work well.

Then the late Duke of Monmouth began to speak, some one or other of the
Assistants during the whole time, applying themselves to him.

Monmouth. I shall say but very little; I come to die; I die a Protestant of
the Church of England.


Assistants. My Lord, if you be of the Church of England, you must acknowledge
the Doctrine of Non-resistance to be True.


M. If I acknowledge the Doctrine of the Church of England in general, that
includes all.


A. Sir, it is fit to own that Doctrine particularly, with respect to your
Case. Here he was much urged about that Doctrine of Non-resistance, but he
repeated in effect his first Answer.


Then he began as if he was about to make a premeditated Speech, in this manner.

M. I have had a Scandal raised upon me about a Woman, a Lady of Virtue and
Honor. I will name her; the Lady Henrietta Wentworth. I declare, That she is a
very Virtuous and Godly Woman. I have committed no Sin with her; and that which
has passed betwixt Us, was very Honest and Innocent in the sight of God.


A. In your Opinion perhaps, Sir, as you have been often told; (i. e. in the
Tower) but this is not fit Discourse in this Place.


Mr. Sher. Gostlin. Sir, were you ever married to her?


M. This is not a Time to Answer that Question*


Mr. Sher. Gostlin. Sir, I hoped to have heard of your Repentance for the
Treason and Bloodshed, which has been committed.


M. I die very Penitent.


A. My Lord, It is fit to be Particular; and considering the Public Evil you
have done, you ought to do as much good now, as possibly you can, by a Public
acknowledgment.


M. What I have thought fit to say of Public Affairs, is in a Paper which I
have signed; I refer to my Paper.


A. My Lord, there is nothing in that Paper about Resistance, and you ought to
be Particular in your Repentance, and to have it well grounded. God give you
True Repentance.


M. I die very Penitent, and die with great Cheerfulness, for I know I shall go
to God.


A. My Lord, you must go to God in his own way: Sir, be sure you be truly
Penitent, and ask forgiveness of God, for the Many you have wronged.


M. I am sorry for every one I have wronged, I forgive every Body, I have had
many Enemies, I forgive them all.


A. Sir, your acknowledgment ought to be Public and Particular.


M. I am to die; pray, My Lord -- I refer to my Paper.


A. They are but a few Words that we desire: We only desire an Answer to this
Point.


M. I can bless God that he has given me so much Grace, that for these two
years last past, I have led a Life unlike to my former Course, and in which I
have been happy.


A. Sir, Was there no Ill in these two Years? In these years, these great Evils
have happened, and the giving public Satisfaction is a necessary part of
Repentance; be pleased to own a Detestation of your REBELLION.


M. I be^ your Lordship that yo^ will stick to my Paper.


A. My Lord, as I said before, there is nothing in your Paper, about the
Doctrine of Non-resistance.


M. I repent of all things that a true Christian ought to repent of. I am to
die; pray, My Lord --


A. Then (My Lord) we can only recommend you to the Mercy of God, but we cannot
pray with that Cheerfulness, and Encouragement as we should, if you had made a
Particular Acknowledgment.


M. God be praised, I have Encouragement enough in my self; I die with a clear
Conscience; I have wronged no man.


A. How Sir, no man? Have you not been guilty of Invasion, and of much Blood,
which has been shed, and it may be of the loss of many Souls who followed you?
You must needs have wronged a great many.


M. I do, Sir, own that, and am sorry for it.


A. Give it the true name, Sir, and call it Rebellion.


M. What name you please, Sir, I am sorry for invading the Kingdom, and for the
Blood that has been shed, and for the Souls which may have been lost by my
means, I am sorry it ever happened [which he spoke softly.]


Mr. Sher. Vandeput. [To some that stood at a distance.] He says he is very
sorry for invading the Kingdom.


A. We have nothing to add, but to renew the frequent Exhortations we have made
to you, to give some Satisfaction for the public Injuries to the Kingdom.
There have been a great many lives lost by this Resistance of your LAWFUL
PRINCE.


M. What I have done has been very ill, and I wish with all my heart it had
never been; I never was a man that delighted in Blood; I was very far from it;
I was as cautious in that as any man was; the Almighty knows how I now die,
with all the Joyfulness in the World.


A. God grant you may, Sir; God give you True Repentance.


M. If I had not True Repentance, I should not so easily have been without the
fear of dying. I shall die like a Lamb.


A. Much may come from natural Courage.


M. I do not attribute it to my own. Nature, for I am fearful as other men are;
but I have now no fear, as you may see by my Face, but there is something
within me which does it, for I am sure I shall go to God.


A. My Lord, be sure upon good Grounds; Do you repent you of all your Sins,
known or unknown, confessed or not confessed, of all the Sins which might
proceed from Error in Judgment?


M. In general for all, I do with all my Soul.


A. God Almighty of his infinite Mercy forgive you. Here are great numbers of
Spectators, here are the Sheriffs, they represent the Great City, and in
speaking to them, you speak to the whole City; make some Satisfaction by owning
your Crime before them.


He was silent here Then all went to solemn Commendatory Prayers, which
continued for a good space, the late Duke of Monmouth and the Company kneeling,
and joining in them with great fervency.

Prayers being ended, before he and the four who assisted him, were risen from
their Knees, he was again earnestly exhorted to a true and thorough Repentance.

After they were risen up, he was exhorted to pray for the King; and was asked,
Whether he did not desire to send some dutiful Message to His Majesty, and to
recommend his Wife and Children to his Majesty's Favor.

M. What harm have they done? do it if you please; I pray for him, and for all
men.


A. Then the Versicles were repeated.

O Lord show thy Mercy upon us.


M. [He made the Response.] And grant us thy Salvation.


A. [It followed.] O Lord save the King.


M. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.


A. Sir, do you not pray for the King with us? (The Versicle was again
repeated.)

O Lord save the King.


M. (After some pause he answered) Amen.

Then he spoke to the Executioner concerning his undressing, etc. and he would
have no Cap, etc. and at the beginning of his undressing it was said to him on
this manner;


A. My Lord, you have been bred a Soldier, you will do a generous Christian
thing, if you please to go to the Rail, and speak to the Soldiers, and say,
That here you stand a sad example of Rebellion, and entreat them and the People
to be Loyal, and Obedient to the King.


M. I have said I will make no Speeches; I will make no Speeches; I come to die.


A. My Lord, ten words will be enough.

Then calling his Servant, and giving him something like a Tooth-pick-Case;
here (said he) give this to the Person, to whom you are to deliver the other
things.


M. (To the Executioner.) Here are six Guinneys for you; Pray do your Business
well; don't serve me as you did my Lord Russel; I have heard you struck him
three or four times.

Here (to his Servant) take these remaining Guinneys and give them to him, if
he does his Work well.


Exec. I hope I shall.


M. If you strike me twice, I cannot promise you not to stir.

During his undressing and standing toward the Block there were used by those
who assisted him, diverse Ejaculations proper at that time, and much of 51st.
Psalm was repeated, and particularly, Deliver me from Blood Guiltiness, O God,
Thou God, etc.

Then he lay down, and soon after he raised himself upon his Elbow, and said to
the Executioner, Prithee let me feel the Ax; he felt the Edge, and said, I fear
it is not sharp enough.


Executioner. It is sharp enough, and heavy enough.

Then he lay down again.

During this space many pious Ejaculations were used by those that assisted him
with great fervency. Ex. Gr. God accept your Repentance, God accept your
Repentance, God accept your IMPERFECT Repentance; My Lord, God accept your
GENERAL Repentance; God Almighty show his OMNIPOTENT Mercy upon you; Father
into thy Hands we commend his Spirit, etc. Lord Jesus, receive his Soul.


Then the Executioner proceeded to do his Office.

This is a true account, Witness our Hands,

Francis Ely. Thomas Bath and Wells. Thomas Tenison. George Hooper. Sheriffs.
William Gostlin, Peter Vandeput,



A Copy of the Paper, to which the late Duke of Monmouth referred himself in
the Discourses he held upon the Scaffold.
I Declare, That the Title of King was forced upon me, and, That it was very
much contrary to my Opinion, when I was Proclaimed. For the satisfaction of the
World, I do declare, That the late King told me, He was never Married to my
Mother. Having declared this, I hope that the King, who is now, will not let my
Children suffer on this account. And to this I put my Hand this fifteenth day
of July, 1685.

MONMOUTH.
Declared by himself, and Signed in the Presence of Us,

Fran. Ely. Tho. Bath and Wells, Thomas Tenison. George Hooper.




A Copy of the Duke of Monmouth's Letter to the King, Dated from Ringwood the
8th of July, 1685.
SIR,
YOur Majesty may think, it is the Misfortune I now ly under, makes me make
this Application to You; but I do assure your Majesty, it is the Remorse I now
have in me, of the Wrong I have done You in several things, and now, in taking
up Arms against You. For my taking up Arms, it never was in my Thoughts since
the King died. The Prince and Princess of Orange will be Witness for me, of the
Assurance I gave them, That I would never stir against You; but my Misfortune
was such, as to meet with some Horrid People, that made me believe things of
your Majesty, and gave me so many false Arguments, that I was fully led away,
to believe, That it was a Shame and a Sin before God not to do it. But, Sir, I
will not trouble your Majesty at present with many things I could say for my
self, that I am sure would move your Compassion, the chief end of this Letter
being only to beg of You, That I may have that Happiness, as to speak to your
Majesty: For I have that to say to You, Sir, that I hope may give You a long
and happy Reign. I am sure, Sir, when You hear me, You will be convinced of the
Zeal I have for your Preservation, and how heartily I repent of what I have
done. I can say no more to your Majesty now, being this Letter must be seen by
those that keep me. Therefore, Sir, I shall make an end, in begging of your
Majesty to belie^e so well of me, That I would rather die a thousand Deaths,
than excuse any thing I have done, if I did not really think my self the most
in the wrong, that ever any Man was, and had not from the bottom of my Heart an
abhorrence for those that put me upon it, and for the Action it self. I hope,
Sir, God Almighty will strike your Heart with Mercy and Compassion for me, as
he has done mine with the abhorrence of what I have done. Therefore I hope,
Sir, I may live to show You how Zealous I shall ever be for your Service; and
could I say but one Word in this Letter, You would be convinced of it; but it
is of that consequence, That I dare not do it. Therefore, Sir, I do beg of You
once more to let me speak to You, for then You will be convinced how much I
shall ever be, Your Majesty's most Humble and Dutiful

MONMOUTH.

London, Printed for Robert Horn, John Baker, and Benjamin Took, 1685.


