A BESOME Of Truth, To Sweep away The Refuge of LIES, OR, Something in Answer
to one Francis Holdcraft (Priest) a Prisoner in Cambridge Castle; who has
belyed and slandered, and falsely accused an Innocent people, in Twelve parcels
of Paper; But his Lies and false Accusations are Swept away, and the Truth of
their Doctrine cleared and Vindicated; And his Lying confused Spirit Reproved:
Also the Ground of the Difference showed between the people (in scorn called
Quakers) and some other separated people: With a few words of good Council unto
all people into whose hands this may come. By a follower of the Lamb through
the great Tribulation, John Aynsloe.

London, Printed in the Year 1664.

A Besome of Truth to Sweep away the Refuge of Lies.
MAny are the Enemies which are and have been in all Ages of Gods Truth and
people; And many have been the Lies, Slanders, and false Accusations which has
followed the Lords Appearance in all Generations; for it has been the work of
false Prophets and Antichrists Priests, to speak all manner of evil falsely
without a cause, thinking thereby to cover their own Deceit and Hypocrisy,
with Revilings, and slandring of the Innocent, speaking Lies in hypocrisy; And
Truth always suffered by that Generation of Priests, under the name of Error;
and the Professors thereof, and the walkers therein, under the name of
Heretics, else could they never have effected their ends, to have brought them
to the fire as they have done many of the precious servants of the Lord, even
in every age* And great has been the opposition which the appearance of God in
this age (in his innocent people) has met withal, even from men of all Ranks
and Sects; but more especially from the Parish Priests, as may largely be made
appear: As Instance, A Petition from them to the then Parliament, Crying out
against them as Heretics and Deceivers; and crying for help from them against
this poor and despised people, whose Doctrine and Principle was almost every
where spoken against, and but then a very few in number in comparison of the
multitude of Priests and their followers, which was then against them; yet they
was not able to resist the Spirit by which they spoke, because they spoke with
Authority, and not as the Scribes; therefore they cried out to the Magistrates
to help them, though no hand was lifted up against them, though many times they
have been sorely beaten, stoned, stockt, whipped, scoffed, scorned, and
imprisoned, and that by the high Priests themselves, who have set on their rude
people to do it; Nay, I may truly say, most of all the persecutions that this
innocent people has met withal in this Nation, has been occasioned by the
Priests, who has not only stirred up the Magistrates (as being the chief
weapon that ever they used) but also by their Lies, slanders, false
Accusations, and Reproachful terms, which they Pamphleted abroad, to raise up
the rude multitude against them, and also to beget a disl^ke in the hearts of
all people of the way and doctrine of Truth which these people walk in and hold
forth, calling the Light of Christ Error and Heresy, and saying they deny the
man Christ, his Death and Resurrection; and that he is at the right hand of his
Father in the Heavens; and that they deny his Ordinances and Scriptures; among
whom I met with one Francis Holdcraft as none of the least of these Liars and
false Accusers, being as a Bryer in a thorn hedge, or as the Viper which came
out of the fire and seized upon Paul's hand. But his Bundle of Lies, slanders,
and false accusations, the Lord God will sweep away with the Besome of his
destruction, by which he will cleause the Land of evil doers, Liars, slanderers
and Backbiters, and he will also clear the innocence of his own people, and the
Truth of their Doctrine; and they also will shake off this Viper of his as they
have done many more; and the minds of the people he has deceived (will be
changed) and instead of calling them Error, they shall see them to be the Truth
of God as it is in Jesus; And this Francis Holdcraft shall then see and be
confounded, if he do not speedily repent, but it is greatly to be feared that
this Francis Holdcraft has his heart hardened, and his conscience seared as
with a hot Iron, and is accustomed to evil, in that he has so long continued
opposing of the Truth of God; and has at last showed himself in twelve parcels
or Pamphlets of Paper; wherein, though confusedly, yet very impudent wickedly,
has he belyed Gods servants, and labored what in him lay, to pervert the
Right way of God, and to turn the Truth into a lie; And has reproachfully
belyed the dead, which is not here to answer for himself, as instance James
Naylor, in whose life time he nor none of his generation, was able to withstand
(while he stood in the power of God) but was confounded by the power and Spirit
of God manifested in him in his day; and amongst the many Lies, slanders, and
false Accusations his Papers are stuf^ withal, which are as the Frogs that
covered the land of Egypt, or as the Locusts which came out of the bottomless
pit, or as the smoke that darkeneth the Air, this is one, That our Principles
does agree with the Jew and the Turk; for says he, These deny Christ come in
the flesh, viz. the Jew and the Turk; The Quakers, says he* when they first
arose and spoke plainly, they made Christ's birth and Death but a figure, herein
says he, the Jew and the Turk and the Quaker does agree: Here is all of
substance that I can find, so far as I have read his Papers; the rest and this
also, is a heap of Confusion, Lies, slanders and false Reports, which he has
raked up out of the unclean Channels of his corrupt heart, and gathered from
the mouths of that lying Spirit, which is entered into, and has its seat in
that Sect, of which he is the head, more then any other that I know of; for
certainly he, with many more which I might mention of his Brotherhood, makes it
their work to belly the Truth and people of God, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, Because I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you; And all manner of evil shall they speak of you without a cause,
because they have not known the Father nor me: And now I shall speak something
in Answer to this false Accusation.

Wherein does the Jew and Turk agree with us? Thou say they deny Christ come
in the flesh; We do not deny Christ come in the flesh (let all people witness
for us that has known our Doctrine and manner of life) but do confess unto all
the world that he is come and coming, and every eye shall see him, and he shall
judge thy Lying, Reviling spirit* as an enemy unto his appearance, in this the
day of his glorious arising, in which he is discovering the deceitful workings
of Antichrist, in thee and thy followers, who confess him in words, but in life
and power, and practice, does deny him; and are the greatest enemies he has in
this Nation, like as the Scribes, Pharisees and High Priests was in the days of
his flesh, who put him to death, though they looked for a Messiah, and had
Moses and the Prophets Writings, which did declare of the coming of the just
One, yet by them they could not see nor believe in him, no more then you now in
this day of his second coming, can believe and receive him, though you have the
Prophets and Apostles Writings, for they only testify of him, but could not
give the knowledge of him, neither faith to believe in him; for it is the Light
that shines in heart that gives the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus; and Faith is the gift of God, which cannot be received by the reading
of the Scripture, for it comes by hearing, not by reading; And as for us, we
believe and confess unto all the world, that there is no salvation in any other
but in this Jesus, who was born of the Virgin Mary, and was crucified without
the Gates of Jerusalem, and rose again the third day, and did talk with his
Disciples as they were going to Emaus, but they did not know him; and that he
came in amongst them, the doors being shut; and that he said to Mary, touch me
not, for I am not yet ascended to my father; and the same that Descended
Ascended unto the right hand of God in the Heavens; and this also we believe,
That he is come again, and coming; for certainly we did not know him but as he
was revealed in us: And as for the Turk and Jews, I know not what they believe,
I shall leave them to answer for themselves, only this is my faith concerning
them, That many of them is nearer the Kingdom of Heaven, then this man and such
as he, and will sooner enter into it; for Whoremongers and Adulterers shall
enter into the Kingdom of God before such Pharisees and Hypocrites.

And again in the same Page he says, The Turk and the Jew and the Quaker does
agree, they disallowing in principle of that Stone which the Builders did
refuse, they deny that man Christ Jesus, Emanuel, God with us, that is now at
the right hand of the Father in the Heavens; and presently after in the same
Page he says, The Jews and the Turks look not for salvation in any other then
in this Jesus of Nazareth the son of man, The Quakers therein agree with them
in principle, they deny the Rock, which is the Person of Christ.

Answ. Oh heap of Confusion and Nonsense! was there ever such Hodge podge
committed to writing by any man that has his senses? surely he that has but
half an eye may see from whence this comes, even out of the womb of confusion,
and a Brat of Babylon, for it will not cover thy nakedness, but it openly
appears; And I believe there is some of thy hearers will be ashamed of this
ill-favored Harlot.

And as for the Rock which thou say is the Person of Christ, the Rock Christ
we own, which was before he had a body, upon which the Prophets and the holy
men of God in the days past was builded, and which followed Israel of old; for
they all did drink of the same spiritual Rock which followed them, which Rock
was Christ, as it is written, 1 Cor. 10. 4. as for the word Person, which thou
so often uses in thy Writings, it is thy own imagination; for I find it not at
all Recorded in the Soripture; and thou to lay thy own Imaginations for a
foundation is an absurd thing, and manifests thy folly and ignorance; for
another foundation can no man lay, then that which is already laid, which is
Christ Jesus, as in 1 Cor. 3. 11.

And as for thy Groanings and Confl^cts which thou say that thou had (when
the Lord did first appear in his glorious manifesting of himself in his people
in the Northern parts) The cause of thy Groanings and Conflicts was because
thou refused his Appearance in thy self, who would have done thee good, and
quickened thy soul from death, as he has done many in this day of his glorious
Appearance and Visitation of the sons of men; but thou with many more would not
have him to rule over you, and it is to be feared that such has slighted the
day of their Visitation, and thine and their sad state is to be lamented; and
you may be wept over, even as Jerusalem was, for the Beast and false Prophet
which is seated in thy heart, was lo^t to loose their hold, or that the kingdom
of Antichrist should fall, who has been so beneficial to all his Ministers, in
giving them such great Benefits, and large Revenues, so that many of them are
like fatted Horses, being fed with the fattest of the Meat, and clothed with
the finest of the Wool; they may easily be known by their Idleness and
delicious ^aring, having many Benefactors for their bellies from every Quarter;
Among whom I find this Francis Holdcraft none of the least, notwithstanding his
fair speeches and pretended sufferings, for so I may truly call them (pretended
sufferings) for he has no testimony to bear for the Lord; for when he is
called before the Rulers of this world, he commits his Cause not unto the Lord,
but unto Lawyers, and thus he betrays himself and his followers, and gives
their enemies an advantage against them, having no other weapons to war against
them then that which they have in their own hand, Christ and his Apostles did
not so, they were bold and valient, and pleaded their own cause, and had the
Lord also to plead for them, and had a witness in every man's conscience to
plead their Innocence, and so is it at this day by those whom Christ has
raised up, who are bold and valiant, not fearing what man can do, neither dare
they go down unto Egypt for help, nor put their confidence in the arm of flesh,
neither take thought what to say, but as the Lord gives wisdom and utterance so
they speak; and they have a Witness in every man's conscience, and their*
innocence pleads their cause, so that the Lord God his appearance is much seen
amongst them by their* undaunted courage and meek behavior, and patient
suffering all things, giving their backs to the smiter, and their Cheeks to
those that have pulled off the hair; And it is to be observed among this
people, that their countenance did never fall, neither were they ever put to
flight, or in the least give way to any fear or deceit whereby their enemies
could have any advantage against them; And it is further observed, that in all
these times of Trial they have never removed their public Meetings, neither
changed the time, nor place, but rather has appeared more public; and the
Lord God has raised up a greater Zeal amongst them, which their persecutors
have taken great notice of, to their great discouragement; and the Innocence of
this people is in a great measure made known unto all people; yea unto their
persecutors, which has raised a love and pity in their hearts toward them
many times, that they have said, That what they have acted against them was
contrary to their minds, but that they were forced to it; So that all that has
come to pass concerning this people, the Lord has caused it to work for good
unto them in all their Trials and Tribulations, and has encouraged them in all
well doing, in their faithful and true Testimony which he has given them to
bear, and has to this day appeared for them, in taking of their parts in all
their Distresses, both of body and mind; and has so far brought his own
purpose to pass in them, that they fear not what man can do unto them, neither
in body or Estate, neither do they love their lives unto the Death; That they
may finish their Course with joy, and run the race which is set before them
with cheerfulness having the Mark of the high Calling of Jesus always before
them, and the reward always in their Bosoms, so that they rejoice that the Lord
has raised them up, and counted them worthy to bear witness to his living
truth Which they have been eyewitnesses of from the beginning, by all which it
does evidently appear that they are the People, and Saints, and Servants of the
most high God, and that they above all the families of the earth, he has
chosen to place his name in; for they have both heard his voice and seen his
shape: Therefore the voice of a stranger they cannot follow, neither bow to the
likeness of any thing in heaven above, or the earth beneath, but is made
willing in this the day of his power to forsake all and follow the Lamb through
the great Tribulations, that the sufferings that is yet behind of the body his
Church might be filled up, and others seeing their faithfulness and patience in
their sufferings, and their boldness and Zeal for the Lord in this trying-day,
is provoked thereby unto jealousy; And many by their good Conversation is won
unto Christ, and glorifies our Father which is in heaven, unto whom be all the
glory, and pure praises, and honor given and rendered by me and all his Elect
seed for evermore.

Now it may be quaeried by many sober minded people what is the ground of the
difference between this Francis Holdcraft and these people called Quakers,
seeing they are both sufferers together and separates from the Church of
England; or what should move this Francis Holdcraft to write so many Papers
against this people, seeing they have so many enemies already, and are the only
people that is persecuted, that bears the weight and burden (for all others)
in the heat of the day, who alone are found faithful in their trials, and is
upheld by the power of God in all the violent tempests that to this day is come
to try their foundation; so that the eyes of many people is upon them, and the
desire of thousands is for them that they may still be upheld in their
Testimony; that they that are yet afar of may be brought near, and others that
are already brought near, may be made to partake with them of their reward; for
it is generally believed by many, and well known to some sober minded people,
that they seek the good of all, and would do unto all men as they would men
should do unto them,

To this may be answered he that is born after the flesh always persecuted him
that was born after the spirit; and this was first seen in Cain and Abel, two
of the first that did sacrifice, something there was then that put a difference
between their Offerings; for it is said the Lord had respect unto Abel and his
Offering, but not unto Cain and his Offering: And this is the very ground of
the matter between Francis Holdcraft and his Brethren and the people which is
in scorn called Quakers, for God has respect unto them and their Offering, but
not unto Francis Holdcraft and his Offering; therefore is he risen up in great
wrath against this people, but this that puts the difference betwixt Offering
and Offering many people are yet strangers unto, and it is very needful that it
be known; for in vain does people offer sacrifices while God has no respect
unto them, for what is the Chaff to the Wheat, or what is the form where the
power is wanting, or what will it avail any though they give their goods to the
poor and their bodies to be burnt, if they want Charity. Now I may speak to
inform the minds of the simp^e, honest hearted in few words: There is a seed
which God has sown in the hearts of all people, and this is Abel or Jacob,
and as this is felt in the heart of any to offer unto the Lord; this is that
which he has respect unto, and which his love is unto, as in Romans 9. 13. For
it is said, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. Now this is nothing to
them that hold a particular Election of persons, for this is a seed* and the
promise is not unto seeds as unto many, but unto the seed which is Christ; for
the Apostle speaking of them in the womb* calls them two Nations or two Seeds:
Now the other seed which the enemy sows, which is called Cain or Esau being
the firstborn, and that which is most forward to offer, this is also in every
man's heart (I mean in unregenerate men) and this the Lord has no respect unto,
though it fast and pray, and preach never so much, for this is that which God
hates and is reprobated, for I will put enmmity says the Lord betwixt thy
seed and her seed: And these two can never bereconciled together, neither the
people which are of these contrary seeds, for Light and Darkness cannot agree,
where Christ the Light the seed of the Woman is felt in the heart to bear Rule;
Darkness and Enmi^y is done away, and he is the one Offering which the Father
has respect unto for in him only he is well-pleased, and with them alone that
hear and follow him, and is obedient unto his appearance in them, and does
whatsoever he does command them.

And all Dear people into whose hands this may come, wait to feel this Seed in
your hearts; for it is this that begets all the breathings and desires in your
hearts after the Lord; I say, wait that ye may become acquainted with it, for
it is the Elect Seed of blessing, and in it is all the promises of God, yea and
Amen; herein waiting will you make your Calling and Election sure; for in it
shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed; And except it had been for this
blessed Seed we had all been like Sodom; but blessed be the Lord who has left
us a Seed, and Called and Elected many in it, and is yet calliug and electing
many more: for this is the Seed by which he will replenish the earth, and them
that are joined to it, when he will Sweep the Land of evil doers: But some may
say how shall we know this Seed of blessing, this Elect Seed? ye shall know it
by its Meekness, Gentleness, Patience, long suffering, and its breathing after
God always, and cannot be satisfied in any thing below him, neither feed upon
that which dies of it self; but it is its meat and drink to do the will of God;
Oh wait to know such a thing in your hearts, and join your selves to it, that
ye may be accepted in it, then will ye be one in heart with all Gods people,
and the ground of difference and various offerings will be taken away, and the
one offering will be known, and the Sacrifice which the Father accepts, and
the Return from the Father will be felt in the hearts, and blessings and peace
will be your portion, with all the rest of the children of the Kingdom, who are
set down with Abraham, Isaa and Jacob, in the Mansion which Christ has
prepared; Oh Dear people, this is the Pearl of great price, which all is to be
sold for, even that which is called the least of Seeds, yet it becomes the
greatest of Plants in them that believe; for it is the Lord alone that causes
it to prosper, and showers down his blessings upon it, so it becomes as the
Trees planted by the River side, that brings forth its fruit in due season,
whose Leaf shall never wither; but the Leaves of this Tree is for the healing
of the Nations; So blessed and happy are they in whose hearts this is put forth
and prospers; even so do thou arise, oh my God for the gathering in of this
scattered Seed; even so be it. Amen.

J. A.
Cambridge Castle, the Seventh Month, 1664. Where I remain Prisoner for the
word of God, and Testimony of Jesus, during the good pleasure of the Lord, and
am well content in his will.
THE END.

