THE MEMOIRS OF THE Countess of Dunois; Author of the Lady's Travels into
Spain. Written by her Self before her Retirement. By way of ANSWER to Monsieur
St. EVREMONT. Containing withal A Modest Vindication of the Female Sex, more
frequently injured by Imprudence and Misconstruction, then Defect of Virtue.

Made English from the Original.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill in Amen-Corner. 1699.

To the Honorable Propham Conoway, Esquire.
SIR,
THE Countess of Du^^^^ so famous for Her Travels into Spain, and a no less
Celebrated Court Star of France, has now taken a Passport from the General
Peace, to make her Tou'r in England. This is She, whose Noble Gallick Veins are
not only enricht with all the outward Charms of an Extraordinary Beauty, but
She is Mistress also of such Admirable Wit and Gallantry, that the Rich Gem
within is no way undeserving the Fair and Noble Casket that contains it.

It Is very probable therefore, that all these Advantages have set Her to that
height of Universal Admiration, that Detraction and Envy, (the common Repiners
at Perfection and Excellence) have not been a little industrious to shade and
tarnish so dazzling a Brightness: But all their weak Assaults against Her
Unshaken Honor, have rather augmented Her Worth and Reputation, and fixed Her
Name Immortal as Her Innocence, whilst both France and Spain sat Judges in Her
Cause; and weighing it in the Noblest Balance, have Enshrined Her Righted
Virtue with a Sacred Comment in some of the most impartial and Indelible
Records of Europe.

This Fair Stranger, Sir, who at present has given me the Honor of officiating
for Her Interpreter, most humbly by me, begs Your Protecting Goodness to hand
Her into the Court of England.

And now, Sir, if I may be permitted to give This every way Deserving Lady some
little knowledge of the Merits of Her English Patron, I must do ye Both this
Justice, to assure Her, that She is in the hands of Honor, and lodged in very
Hospitable Walls.

She Will find You, Sir, a Person so Excellently Accomplished, so Truly Furnished
with all those Merits and Endowments, that Wit and Learning, and every Other
the Noblest Faculty of a Generous Mind, and a great Soul, can possibly infuse;
and such the Handmaid of the Almighty, Great Nature, did allow You, making Them
Your Hereditary Glories, Virtues no less then even born with You, whilst You
derive Your immediate Veins from an Apollinary Original, a Father that shined
so mmany Successive Glorious Years, the Chosen Darling Oracle of our AUGUST,
and FAMOUS ALBION SENATE.

With all these Powerful Charms, and such Infinite Deserts, and, Sir, with all
the Smiles of Heaven to Crown 'em, You have been singl'd out for that Peculiar
Favorite of Providence, that even Contending Families have Rivall'd for You,
whilst to invite You to new loads of Honor, You have Assumed the Name of
CONOWAY, to make Your Adopted Laurels as Rich as Your Native Ones.

But now, as much as my own Ambition has Aspired to make You this Public
Address, I have yet a more Attracting Influence that draws me to Your Feet;
which is to let the World know, how much I stand indebted already to Your
Generosity for those repeated Showers of ever-smiling Goodness You have been
pleased to pour upon me; and that all the Returns that my Poor Pen in this
small Present can make You, is but a Thanksgiving-Offring, the Pure Obligation
of Duty and Gratitude from,

SIR, Your most Obliged, most Devoted, and ever Humble Servant, J. H.

(...) in their Miscarriages, then want of Virtue. The Memoirs of my Life will
make it Evident, that it is not always safe to judge by outward Appearances; and
that a little Beauty, more of Youth, and Deficiency of Judgment, are frequently
more injurious to their Reputation then the Crime it Self.

THE MEMOIRS OF Madam, the Countess of -- Before her Retirement.
Book the First.
IT IS not to justify my self, that I undertake to write the Memoirs of my Life.
For it is a long time since that God has given me the grace to look upon the
Injurious Reports that have bin spread abroad concerning me in the World, as a
punishment of my vanity. And for that reason I submit my self to the conduct of
his Providence: Happy in this, that I am sensible of my own Innocence as to
every thing that Calumny has laid to my Charge; but on the other side,
unfortunate to have lost the merit of my Innocence by the Scandals to which I
have bin too guilty of giving the occasion.

I thought it might be permitted me to write my own History, were it but to
justify by my Example such Persons of my Sex as have of late been made the
Objects of common Reproach. It Is well known to what degree Reproaches are
improved in that respect; seeing that nowadays we meet with so many People so
adventurous to maintain, That there is hardly an honest Woman in the Town. It Is
true, the malignity of Men is not the only reason of the little justice which
they do us, seeing there are Women, who may be thought to have taken delight in
confirming the ill opinion which men have of us: And indeed, there are none who
have done more injustice to their Sex, then they who have written the Memoirs
of their Amors, and dispersed into the World Letters for which their Passion
and Debauchery found Materials. From their Examples men have condemned all
those whom they suspected of having any Amorous Intreagues; and when a Woman
has once got the Reputation of a Coquette, she is presently adjudg'd to be one
of those that make it their glory to be so.

I therefore thought it might be one means to destroy this growing Opinion, by
a faithful recital of the Adventures of my Life, to show, that a Woman may be
defamed, yet not be guilty; and that there is many times more of Misfortune
then Irregularity in the Conduct of several Women, upon whom the Public is
pleased to throw their Scandals. There is also another benefit to be reaped
from these Memoirs: For from thence you will learn to avoid all such
Misfortunes as are looked upon as Crimes; and to shun those things which may
give occasion to fully the Reputation of Women, by observing where I my self
became an ill Manager of my own.

I am well descended as well by the Father's as by the Mother's side; but it
was the first of my Misfortunes that I was born too soon; for my Mother was
hardly arrived to Sixteen years of Age when she lay in of me. And because that
in Ten years after my Mother had no more Children, I was looked upon as Heiress
of my Father's Estate. All this while my Mother was too young to let a Daughter
grow up with her at home, that would have kept the Hand of her Dyal from
standing long at Sixteen. So she sent me to a Grandmother, who had that fond
love for me, which Women advanced in years have manytimes for Children by whom
they expect the continuation of their Name and Family. She made it her business
to infuse into me, upon the score of my Birth and Beauty, all the Vanity and
Pride she had been guilty of her self; and the first thing that I learnt, was,
that I was Fair, and destined to the most noble and elevated Pretensions. With
these Fancies I was flattered all along; and I had already attained Eleven
years of Age, when my Mother was brought to bed of a Boy. But no sooner was
this Son and Heir come into the World, but my Grandmother began to lavish out
all her Affection for me, upon him; my Beauty was no longer flattered: No more
talk of my being a Princess or a Duchess at least: No -- I must stifle all
those gaudy Expectations: My Brother had bereaved me of all those great
Advantages. On the other side, they began to instill into me Inclinations to a
Religious Life; and at length, they told me flat and plain, it was the manner
of living, and all the Preferment my Parents had designed me.

I was already big enough, and had so much Reason about me, as to be deeply
sensible how disastrous such a Resolution would be to me: And the very thoughts
of it infused into me as great an aversion for my nearest Relations, as before
I had respect and complacency for 'em. My Father was the only Person for whom I
still preserved some little affection; for he still seemed to have something of
kindness for me. So that whenever they talked of putting me into a Nunnery, I
always had recourse to him, and to him made known my Reluctance and Despair.
Which I so well expressed in words accompanied with tears, that my Father himself
could not refrain from weeping. But he, good man, wore not the Breeches: And
therefore he advised me, for his sake, to suffer for a while the
Inconveniences of a Convent, with a promise that I should not long be under
that Confinement, but that he would dispose of me so soon as I was ripe for
Marriage.

Upon this I obeyed, and I was put into a Nunnery, where the Abbess was my
Father's Cousin German; and in her I met again with as much fondness as
formerly my Grandmother had for me. Which together with the hopes that my
Father had given me, was no small consolation to me.

Now in regard I had all the liberty I could desire in the Nunnery, I had so
accustomed my self to do what I pleased, that no body durst contradict me: And
being thus flattered and caressed, it was no wonder if I gave a second harbor
to all that vanity which my Grandmother had infused into me. The Praises also
which the Nuns continually gave me, daily swelled this Vanity: And by that
means I came to understand, that Convents, where young People are allowed the
liberty I had, are no better Schools for Children, then the Houses of Fondling
Parents that idolize their own Issue. The more I was persuaded that all Nuns
were Saints, the more I soothed my self that I deserved their Praises; and the
more vainly I flattered my self, that there was nothing in me to be amended,
seeing those very Persons who were entrusted with the care of my Conduct,
applauded every thing I did, and every thing which I desired to do.

In this manner I was bred up, with little instruction in the Duties of my
Religion. Not that they omitted to teach me the grounds of it; but in regard I
had an excellent Memory, I made it my application to study those grounds,
rather to show my wit, then for the sake of information: Nor did I make any
difference between the Articles of my Faith, and the Songs and Verses which I
got by heart. To me they seemed all alike, and I looked upon it only as an
exercise of my Memory, which was put upon me to try whether I had a good one or
no. How many times have I ^amented afterward my being so little taught the
difference between Solid and Trivial! and my being left to my self to make my
choice of which of the two my Fancy best approved. Both Nuns and other Persons,
who are entrusted with the Education of Children, are very imprudent to make no
distinction between things of so different a nature; but rather to permit the
study of Trifles, before the Memory and the Heart are well seasoned with the
first impressions of Truth and Virtue.

The reading of Romances brought me to reflect upon things, of which till then
I had but a confused and imperfect apprehension. By reading them, I learnt
there was a Passion that gave to Women an absolute dominion over Men. And I was
not a little overjoyed to think, that I could as well as others pretend to that
empire; and that perhaps I had an opportunity already to exercise that Power.

In short, I called to mind, that when I lived with my Grandmother, there was a
Person of Quality who loved me, and who usually called me his little Queen. I
recalled to my memory all the marks that he gave me of his Affection: And I
made no question but that that Affection was an effect of that same Passion
which I found so well expressed in Romances. I was sorry I had bin ignorant of
it so long; and that I had made no better use of my empire over that Lover. Who
is regard he was a Person of Quality, and one that appeared to have more merit
then any of the rest with whom I was acquainted, seemed to me most worthy of
paying me his Assiduities. I resolved therefore to engage him to give me a
Visit, that I might please my self with enjoying the honor of submitting a Man
to my own Laws.

I was too young to have any other motive to this Attempt then vanity: Nor
indeed was I acquainted with any other; neither did I believe that Love was any
other thing then that same Power and Command wherewith I flattered my self.

The course which I took to engage the Marquess of Blossac (for that was then
his Title) to come to me, was to write to him. To which end, not knowing what I
did, I copi'd out of several Romances, what seemed to me the most endearing, to
express that I very much desired to see him. That is to say, I wrote a most
passionate and tender Letter, without being sensible of the thing which I
expressed, and without divining in the least that there was any harm in writing
after that manner. This without doubt is an effect the most innocent that the
reading of Romances can produce in the mind of a young Person. But after all,
it is a dangerous effect; seeing that by accustoming our selves to read the
Language of Love, we expose our selves, how harmless soever our Intentions may
be, to love the name of it, and to feel the effects and power of it.

Romances therefore having taught me, that there was a secret and mysterious
method to be observed in the delivery of Letters; I bethought my self of
putting mine into a small Bundle of Rarities wrought by the Nuns, of which I
pretended to make a Present to Blossac upon the Festival Day of the Nunnery's
particular Saint. In this manner then I sent him my Letter, with orders to the
Bearer to deliver the Bundle into his own hands. Thus had my Passion bin never
so violent, it could not have taught me to take better measures then my own
Vanity inspired into me. For the two Passions of Love and Vanity force Women to
act for the most part much after the same manner, as I found by experience in
the progress of my life.

Blossac received my Letter; and had always looked upon me as a Child: But he
found that Letter so witty, that his first thoughts advised him to show it to
my Parents, to the end they might see what an extraordinary Daughter they had.
However, he met with so much Passion, so much tenderness in it, that he
believed it impossible that I should write in such a manner, without being in
some measure sensible of what I had written to him. And the younger I was, the
more he flattered himself with being the first Object of a growing Passion: And
whatever in my Letter seemed to him to be above my years, he ascribed to
nothing but Love. So that from thence forward he began to love me in earnest,
and returned me a most passionate Answer, wherein he promised to come and see
me the next day.

However, I met with something in his Letter that offended me; for he called me
his Pretty Child. Now I had never read that the Hero's in Romances gave such
Language to their Mistresses; so that I expected him with impatience, that I
might have the pleasure to abuse him for it. He came; and because he had not
seen me in above a year before, he found me so well grown, though then but in
the Twelfth of my Age, that the sight of my Person completed what my Letter
had begun. He became my most Passionate Lover; nevertheless, being desirous,
before he discovered his Love, to be assured, whether I had reason enough about
me to sustain the weight of such a Declaration, he applied himself to me with
the same terms of familiarity as formerly, calling me his Little Miss, and his
Pretty Sweetheart, and teling me with an Air of Fondness, that I was the most
delicate Girl in the World. All these low Titles I took ill; and therefore in
the Tone of a Romantic Heroess, I talked to him as Astrea talks to Celadon,
when she banishes him her presence. At first he laughed at my Childish
Indignation; but seeing me persist in the same Language, he was so much the
more at a loss, because he loved me with so much the more tenderness. Thereupon
he came to a serious Explanation of himself, and told me after such a manner,
as somewhat daunted me, that he was ashamed at his years, to confess himself so
weak as to have a Passion for me; however, that he could not forbear to let me
know, as much a Child as I was, that his Life and his Repose depended upon me,
and that he should dye without an Assurance that my heart was his. And he
pronounced these words in such a manner, that they pierced my very Soul: And
had I had but a little more Experience, I should have understood to have made a
distinction between him and others; and that it was no longer that I acted by
the same Motive that obliged me to send for him.

I then forgot all that Romances had taught me concerning the Disdain and Pride
of their Heroesses: I fell a weeping; and begging his pardon for having
offended him; I assured him of the surrender of my heart, and that I would
never say any thing to him again that should excite his Anger. He was overjoyed
to find such an alteration in me, and continued his Arguments to persuade me
how passionately he loved me, when our Conversation was interrupted by the
coming in of the Abbess; for then he fell a cockering me again with
tendernesses suitable to my Age, and calling me Pretty Child, advised me to be
a good Girl. Nor was it out of Policy that I forbore to show my self displeased
with his Discourse, but because I found an inclination in my self to pardon
every thing in him but indifferency. I was so much afraid he did not love me,
that having found an opportunity before we parted, to ask him whether he were
still offended, I obliged him to swear that he would love me as long as he
lived.

Thus it was, that without knowing what it meant, I surrendered my self up to
that fatal Passion that since has so much troubled my repose. 'Twas not for any
other design that I desired to see Blossac, but only to trample upon his
Submission, when I became so much his Slave, that I took delight in nothing
else but thinking of him. To such a Precipice had the aerie Vanity of Romances
insensibly led me.

I loved, yet knew not what Love was: And I loved so much the more, because I
was ignorant what it was to love: Nor would my Ignorance permit me to contend
with what I knew not. I saw nothing that frighted me in the kind Sentiments I
had for Blossac; nor had I any desire to be afraid of Consequences which I
foresaw not. I studi'd nothing so much as how to please him, and find out ways
to see him often. Romances then, that formerly were my chief delight, began to
grow irksome to me; I did not like it that their Heroesses should take so much
pleasure in treating their Lovers so uncivilly: And I blamed their Pride so
much the more, the less I understood that it was a virtue to be proud. Thus
whither is it that we may not be transported, when we unwarily deliver up our
selves to a Danger which we understand not, yet for which we have a kindness!
When I was alone, I would be writing Letters to Blossac; and though I knew not
there was any harm in what I did, yet I was most terribly afraid of being taken
in the Act. But it was impossible for me to be so cautious as to preven^ it.
Some of my Epistles were found, and carried to the Abbess, who blessed her self
to see Satan so prevalent in a Girl of my years. She sent for me, and asked me
where I had learnt to write after that manner? I knew not what answer to make
her, seeing her, as I thought, in such an angry Mood. And my silence making her
believe that I was better instructed, and more guilty then indeed I was, she
told me, I deserved to be buried alive for writing such Letters as those. Upon
that I fell a blubbering, and pleaded for my self, that I did not think there
had bin any harm in writing after such a manner. But she gave me such a Juniper
Lecture by way of answer, as opened the eyes of my Understanding, and soon
convinced me of my Errors; and I was so ashamed of what I had done, that I
began from that very moment to have as great an aversion for Blossac, as I had
kindness before. But among all the Abbess's Pious Taunts, and Matronly
Sentences, there was none that made so deep an impression upon me, as her
upbraiding me for having given a Man an occasion to believe I was in love with
him. She told me, there was nothing so mean and despicable; and that Virgins
who had no more wit then so to expose themselves, were the slight and contempt
of those very Men by whom they sought to be beloved.

This touched me to the very Soul: So that I was not so much afraid of the
Scandals and other Inconveniences, to which, as she assured me, I had exposed
my self, as I was ashamed to have done a thing, which as they told me, would
make me the scorn of the Person whom I loved.

I resolved therefore not only not to write to Blossac any more, but never to
see him again. I promised the same to the Abbess, and I consented to let my
Paper and my Pens be taken from me, to let 'em see that I had a desire, by my
disdain, to make amends for my overforwardness, which now I blamed in my self
as much as they could do.

The Abbess had reason to believe, by my ingenuity and submission to her
Corrections, that there was nothing but Innocence in what I had done. However,
she was one of those who will never miss an opportunity to exalt their own
Merit, and get a Reputation for Zeal and Regularity, whatever becomes of their
Neighbors. This Lady, who was never looked upon to be one of the exactest
Governesses in the World, informed my Parents of what had happened, in hopes
that they would judge, by the Account she gave 'em of her Vigilance, that she
was not a Woman that would suffer any other then Virgin Mary's in her House.

This was the first Stain that ever blemished my Reputation, and which inclined
so many People to judge amiss of my Conduct; and doubtless the Imprudence of the
Abbess was the cause of all my Misfortunes. For had she known how to manage
this first Fault, I might perhaps have afterward consented to whatever they
demanded of me, to repair it.

My Mother judged by those Letters, that I had an inclination to Gallantry;
which together with some other Reasons that she had to make me a Nun, made her
give the Abbess a strict charge to mould me for that course of life.

The Abbess perceiving how much I endeavored to obliterate the Fault with
which I was upbraided, believed the change of my Behavior to be an effect of
my Repentance: She knew not that Pride was, the cause of it, and that this
Pride proceeded from no other Reason, but because I would not be despised by
Blossac. It never came into her thoughts that a Girl of no more then Thirteen
years of Age should be capable of such a refined piece of Cunning. She believed
I had quite forgot Blossac; and that now being recovered from that little
Love-frenzy of mine, I would readily yield to those Reasons she should make use
of to persuade me, that the only Heaven upon Earth was a Nunnery.

She told me that all my Relations knew what had passed between Blossac and my
self: And that after such a Transgression they could not think of marrying me;
because no body would marry a Maid who had bin guilty at my years of an
Intreague: That the Story had made a great noise, and done me so much injury,
that there was no other way for me but to betake my self to a Religious Life.
Then she made me a long Harangue upon the Pleasures of Retirement; she
flattered me with hopes that I might suddenly come to be her Coadjutrix, and
that she would leave me her Abbey.

I was not so much a Child as not to see whither all this tended; nor so much a
Fool as not to know that there was nothing but Innocence in the main thing with
which they upbraided me. And I as readily found by the Abbess's Sermons, that
my Relations had a great desire to make a Nun of me. Now in regard there was
nothing so remote from my Resolutions, as the Sentiments which she strove to
infuse into me, I gave her this confident Answer, That that same Gallantry
which she inveighed against so much, was not a thing so criminal as she would
needs persuade me. But though what you tell me, said I, were true, yet if it be
my Parents absolute pleasure that I must vail my self, I make no question but
to obtain this Liberty from them at the least, to make my choice of another
House.

The Abbess astonished at my Answer, and my Resolution, endeavored to sooth me
up, and assured me she would talk no more of it.

After all these Disputes I perceived in my self a violent desire to see
Blossac, and to inform him of every thing that the Abbess had told me. For not
doubting but that he would be glad to marry me, and for that he was otherwise a
Person suitable to my humor, I thought I could not do better then to renew my
Friendship with him. I quite forgot that petty Pride which I assumed upon the
discovery of our private Familiarity; nor was I afraid of his despising me when
I renewed those Addresses that seemed requisite to recall him. And thus it came
to pass, that they restored me to my Passion by the cares which they took to
divert me from it.

It was now near ten Months that he had heard no tidings of me, from the time
that I had told him I would see him no more. He had endeavored to penetrate
into the motive that induced me to this change. But at length the Nuns having
informed him, that I had shown his Letters, and that I only made it my business
to make him my Sport, he was ashamed that he had ever had any kindness for me.
He took me for a Child, and for one who had a Character of Inconstancy and
Deceit, which it became him to avoid; and with th^se thoughts he resolved to
forget me.

He thought me unworthy of his Sedulities; at what time I found a way to let
him know, that I desired to speak with him, and that I desired him to come
disguised to the Window of the Speaking-place, where I promised to be at such
an Hour. But he received the Message with a disdainful smile, and bid the
Messenger tell me, he would come and see me when I had learnt more wit.

What a Rage was I in, when they brought me this Answer! I began to believe
what the Abbess had told me, that forwardness in Persons of my Sex always drew
contempt upon themselves.

I was sensible of all the mortification that could cast down a Person
naturally vain, when her Vanity is humbl'd to the lowest degree. I could not
tell what course to take to disingage my self from the Trouble which I had
brought upon my self. Prompted by my Revenge, sometimes I sa^e musing which way
to take away the Life of a perfidious Contemner of my Favors; but then again,
condemning so violent a Resolution, nothing would serve me, but to throw my
self at his Feet, that I might regain him by my Tears. In short, a thousand
extravagant Ideas rolled in my mind, which the reading of Romances had
furnished me withal, and which my Youth confirmed.

After I had spent two or three Months in this doleful condition, I fell into a
languishing Distemper, the cause of which the Nuns were ignorant of. I admired
the guidance of my Discretion at those years. For I made no body the Confident
of my Grievances. And my vanity made me a Dissembler; for I was too much
humbl'd in my own Eyes, to make my self lower in the Eyes of others.

At length, overwhelmed with grief, and not knowing what to resolve, I made as
if I had had a liking to a Religious Life.

This alteration in my Behavior astonished the Abbess and the Nuns, who
mistook the irregular motions of a Heart too much devoted to what it loved, for
the effects of Grace. Never did Virgin testify a more ardent Zeal to take the
Veil upon her, then my self. For I was impatient to try, whether the noise of
such a Sacrifice would not awake Blossac to a recollecting himself: And on the
other side, I had before my Eyes the Honor which such a goodly Action would
procure me in the World.

So soon as my Relations were informed of my Design, they hastened me to take
the Habit upon me: And indeed considering the steps that I had made, I could
not well go back. However, I found an Expedient to suspend the execution of a
Design which began already to terrify me. I told my Parents, that I did not
find they led such regular Lives as I could wish, in the Nunnery where I was;
and therefore being desirous to renounce the World in good earnest, 'twas my
intention to make choice among all the Nunneries, of one the most Austere that
I could hear of.

Now no sooner had I declared my resolution to go to another House, but the
Abbess and the Nuns endeavored to dissuade me from taking the Habit upon me in
any House whatever. They told me that I was not of a Constitution proper for a
Convent; and some there were who made me the Confident of their secret disgusts
against Retirement.

I ascribed all this good Counsel to the irregularity of their Lives: Nor
indeed was I at all troubled to have found out new Reasons for my leaving their
Convent. I was therefore still importunate to be carried to another Nunnery; my
Mother also compli'd with my desires; and so I left the Abbess and her Abbey,
not knowing whether I had reason to be sorry or to rejoice.

The Nuns no sooner saw me out of their House, but they told me, like a company
of Charitable Baggages as they were, that I was a Coquetting Slut, whom they
were overjoyed to be rid of; neither did they fail to make my pretended Amorous
Intreague the subject of their Tittle-tattle to those who were ignorant of it
before.

When I came to the Convent I had made choice of, as well for that I was not
yet Fifteen years of Age, as because the Nuns had bin informed of all the
Reports which had been spread abroad concerning me, they thought it proper to
defer the putting me among the Noviciats, but only gave me the Habit and Title
of a Postulant.

This Convent seemed to me quite different from the other: For the Nuns lived
all in a perfect Regularity; every one appeared contented with her Condition;
there was a holy Emulation among 'em; and in short, they performed all their
Duties with an extraordinary Exactness. More then this, the general opinion of
their Sanctity had drawn to their House Ladies and Virgins of the highest
Quality; and they were so accustomed never to frequent other Houses, that they
would not so much as converse with a Lay-sister. They desired always to have
Prelates to officiate at all their Solemn Festivals, and never to hear any but
the most famous Preachers. Now whether this Affectation were altogether exempt
from Pride, and all suspicion of Vanity, is a question not so easily determined.

One would have thought however, that being so vain as I was, I should have
agreed with a Convent where I met with so much Vanity; but besides that I had
very little Piety, I scorned that Ridiculous Vanity that sacrifices only to
Rank and Outward show. I was only an Idolatress of that vanity which Beauty and
Merit inspire; with some kindness too for that other Vanity, to see my self
adored by the Person for whom I had an affection.

And this Vanity made me still retain a lively remembrance of the Affront
which, as I thought, Blossac had put upon me: Nor did I so loudly proclaim, as
I said before, my Intention to be a Nun, but only to try, whether the Noise of
my Design would rouse him to prevent it. But I heard nothing of him; and in the
mean time the Day appointed for me to take the Habit upon me, drew near.

Some few days before, my Father came to see me, and putting the Question to
me, whether I really persisted in my Resolution to take the Veil, only my Tea^^
made answer for me. By that he understood more then I durst let him know. He
told me, he was glad I had not so much Zeal, as others would persuade him I
had, for a Condition which he could not permit me to embrace, as having
resolved to marry me to a Gentleman whom he had made choice of for me. He
farther added, That the Match was suitable to the Condition of his Affairs, and
that he was come to talk with me about it. He did not name the Husband whom he
had designed me; only he told me in general, that he was a Person with whom I
should live happily, well descended, and of a good Estate; but that the
Business was to be speedily concluded, and to be kept private from the
knowledge of my Mother; for that though the Match were never so advantageous,
she would oppose my Marriage, having such an aversion as she had for my
advancement, and absolutely resolving to make me a Nun. He told me moreover,
that to make sure work, he had designed to take me from the Convent by force;
and gave me an account what measures he had studied for that purpose.

I had not so easily consented to my Father's Design, but that I imagined at
the same time, that the Husband he had provided for me might be Blossac
himself. I had also some remnants of Romantic Notions rolling in my Head,
which made me believe that Blossac had an intention to make a Knight Errant
Wedding of it, by some pleasing surprise, which would be so much the more
agreeable to my Humor. I asked my Father therefore whether he were not the
Man? And the manner of my Father's refusal to explain himself, fully persuaded
me that it could be no other then Blossac, Besides, I was so wrapped up with a
belief of this Fancy, that I durst not press my Father any farther, for fear of
finding my self deceived. So that I only told him I should be ready to obey him
in every thing. Thus while my Mother was preparing for me a Religious Vail, my
Father was providing for me Nuptial Sheets. A thing perhaps which never
happened before, that two such different Ceremonies should be preparing at the
same time for the same Person.

Some days after this Discourse with my Father, he returned to the Convent,
bringing my Mother with him: And then it was that he desired her to let him
take me out from the Company, that he might have the consolation of taking his
last farewell of me, since he was after that to resign me wholly to God and the
Blessed Virgin. My Mother consented; and then my Father taking me by the hand,
while my Mother was talking with the Nuns, led me into the Court. At the same
time three sturdy Fellows came to us, and taking me up in their Arms, carried
me without the Gate, and then threw me into a Coach with six Horses. Presently
the Coachman drove away, and I was out of sight in the twinkling of an Eye.

My Father being now to act his part, returned in a seeming haste to the
speaking-Room, and with an air of Grief and Fury told my Mother a plausible
Story, such as his Invention had supplied him with, and then pretending a world
of eagerness to pursue the Ravishers, he flew to his own Coach, leaving my
Mother half mazed, and the Convent in such an uproar, as might well be the
effect of so strange and unexpected an Accident.

My Mother, who suspected not my Father in the least, accused Blossac to be the
Contriver and Author of This, and swore she would spare for no cost, till she
had obtained full satisfaction for this Violence.

On the other side, my Father, who knew better then any body what was become of
me, made the Coachman drive this way and the other way, till he had almost tired
his Horses, and then sending him back to my Mother, bid him tell her that he
was going to take post in pursuit of me, according to such directions as he had
received from the Country People.

In the mean time the Coach, wherein I was, whirled it away full speed; never
stopping till it was toward night, that we came to a Place which I was
altogether unacquainted with, and where my Father met us about an hour after
our Arrival.

As for my own part, during the whole Journey, I could not find out for my life
who the Lady, nor the three Men were, that bore me company. They answered to
all my Questions, That my Father would satisfy me.

When he arrived, he told me the Lady was a Friend of his, whom he had desired
to keep me company; and that the three Men were honest Fellows, and faithful
Servants of his; how that he would not leave me till he had delivered me safe
into the hands of my Husband, who lived at such a Place, which he named, and
where his Estate lay. All this while these Stories did nothing correspond with
my Imaginations that this Husband might be Blossac: So that now beginning to
find I was mistaken, I conjured my Father to have pity upon me, and not to
sacrifice me to a Person for whom perhaps I might not have the least
inclination. But he only bid me have patience, and all would be well. Thus we
continued our Journey, and much ado I had to resist the Mortal Inquietudes that
turmoil'd my Thoughts; though I did not altogether despair of finding such a
Person in my Husband, whose Complacencies might make me forget Blossac.

In the mean time I observed, during our Journey* that one of the Men that
accompanied me would be always viewing me with a nice and inquisitive Eye;
(...) besides that, was very officious to please me. Nevertheless, it never
came into my mind so much as to guess that he was the Person designed to be my
Husband. However he was the Man. And when we were come within half a day's
journey from the Village whither we were traveling, he left us, without
discovering who he was. So soon as he was gone, my Father asked me, what I
thought of him? and whether he were not a handsome Gentleman? And these
Questions he put to me after such a manner, that I knew beforehand what he was
going to say to me. However I made him no reply to his Interrogatories, for
fear my answer should not please him. I know not whether he found by me, that I
had no great stomach to the person of the Man; however, after he had
acknowledged him to be the Husband he had provided for me, he told me, he had
only left us, to return again and meet us in an Equipage more becoming his
Quality. How are poor Maids to be pitied, when their Parents seek only their
own Interest in the preferment of their Children! I will now then tell ye the
Reasons why my Father sacrificed me to this Gentleman.

He was the Son of a Counselor of the Parliament of his Province, who not
having any inclination to the Law, had purchased a very great Lordship, with an
intention to get it erected into a Marquisate. Which being somewhat difficult
to obtain, he had recourse to my Father, who had formerly bin his Father's
intimate Friend, and who by his Credit at Court procured him what he desired.
His Estate indeed was very considerable, and therefore he was doubtless an
Advantageous Match for a Virgin who had no Portion.

There was yet another Reason of greater importance that pressed my Father to
marry me. For this Gentleman, after he came to his Estate, had lent my Father a
Considerable Sum of Money; and he had so ordered his Business, that my Marriage
was to extinguish the Debt. It Is true, he did not tell me all this at first; he
only told me that he was utterly ruined if I did not comply with his Desires.
But when he heard me conjure him not to precipitate my Marriage, he thought it
behooved him to tell me the whole Truth, with this farther Circumstance, that my
Mother knew nothing of the Debt, and that she would be like a Mad-woman, if
ever it came to her Ears.

I did not complain to my Father for seeking by my Marriage to repair the
Decays of his Estate; but I could not forbear telling him, that I was sorry he
did not sooner let me know the Reasons that induced him to marry me, for that I
was persuaded that if he would have bestowed me upon the Marquess of Blossac,
he would have been as generous to have engaged the payment of the Debt upon the
same Condition. At which my Father fell a laughing, and embracing me, My dear
Child, said he, thou do not understand the World; we live not in an Age,
where Persons of Estates pay so dear for their Wives.

I replied, that he was not acquainted with Blossac's Humor, and that if he
pleased, before he married me, to make him the proposal of marrying me upon the
same Conditions that he gave me to another, I made no question but that he
would accept 'em.

I gave this Character of Blossac, because I loved him; and not being able to
conceal from my self the Affection I had for him, I endeavored to persuade my
self, that the Good Qualities which I conceited in him, rendered him a Person
worthy of my love: And judging of his Sentiments by my own, I imagined he would
never refuse to obtain me at any rate whatever. Thus I forgot the Contempt of
which I had till then accused him: And I had still the vanity to flatter my
self that he would never have patiently endured my being married to another,
had he bin informed of my Destiny. Upon this, I desired my Father to let me
write to him, and to put off the Wedding till I received his Answer. But my
Father told me I was a Chicken, to imagine that a Man from whom I had not heard
in so long time, would impair his Estate to purchase a Bedfellow. Yet such were
still the vain Hopes, wherewith I was wont to flatter my self in the succeeding
course of my Life: For I always had a good opinion of those that loved me.

In the mean time my Husband met us with a Magnificent Train; and then, I must
acknowledge, he appeared to me quite another thing then what he seemed to be
upon the Road. So that after I had for some time wistly viewed and considered
him, I felt no farther reluctance to give him my hand; and therefore making a
virtue of necessity, I resolved to make the best of my Fortue.

We stayed no longer in the Town where we arrived, then to get all things ready
for the Nuptial Ceremonies: During which time I was visited by all the
Neighbors; and in regard my Father was with me, no body ever dreamt that I had
bin hurried away in a Coach and Six Horses to a stolen Wedding.

So soon as the fatal Knot was tied, we went to my Husband's Lordship, where my
Father left me, having all the reason in the world to believe that he had
disposed of me to a plentiful and happy Being. He had before his departure
written to my Mother, that he had met with my Ravisher, and had forced him to
marry me: That I had bin more fortunate then prudent; for that I had suffered
my self to be forced from the Convent by a Person of a great Estate, and of no
mean Birth.

My Father was desirous that I should approve his writing to my Mother after
that manner; and that my being forced from the Nunnery should be thought a
Contrivance of my own. And this was another Blot upon my Reputation, and of
which I too plainly foresaw the Consequences. For no body that saw my Father's
Letter, questioned the truth of my being stolen by force; and they as little
doubted that it was my Contrivance, because they were ignorant that I was
altogether a stranger to my Husband at that time. Besides, my former
Inclination for Blossac, so well known, rendered all that my Father had written
too probable to be denied: Nor was it any wonder that I should have so much
wit, at Sixteen years of Age, to manage a Nuptial Amor, which was the only
Remedy I had to prevent my being locked up in a Cloister.

Thus it fell out, that though I never deserved it, I had all the Honor, or
rather all the Shame of this Intreague: My Wit was admired; but People neither
thought, nor spoke so well of my Prudence and Conduct. The Story of my being
taken by force out of a Nunnery, was the Discourse of all Paris for a long
time, and every body told it after a different manner. The Idea that all
Persons had of my Wit and Contrivance for the carrying on of an Amoros
Intriegue, sheltered my Father from having any hand in it. But the Relation it
self of the Matter of Fact was so remote from Truth, that I should have denied
it my self, had I heard it repeated; for there was no disguise which they did
not make me put on to facilitate my Escape out of the Cloister* insomuch that I
was strangely surpised to find that a certain Author, in a Book, wherein he
has the goodness to name me, should presume to aver, that I was disguised in
Man's Apparal, and that I made my Escape in a Gardner's Clothes. Thus if there
be but the least foundation for Slander, she believes her self fully authorized
to publish whatever Malice dares invent. And I am assured that so many
Scandalous Stories as are every day made upon Persons of my Sex are only the
effect of this Malignity. But it is too early yet to make Reflections. I have
many other Adventures to recount, wherein you will find that Slander has as
little spared me, though no more guilty, then in this.

One of the first, to whom the Story of my being forced from the Convent, and
my Marriage, was told with all the most malicious Circumstances that Public
Report could imbellish it withal, was Blossac. Which when he had heard, he
seemed to repent his refusing to meet me at the Time and Place appointed. For
he had no other Reasons to forbear seeing me, then the noise which our Letters
had made; and not believing, that being so young as I was, I could have
Discretion and Conduct enough to make use of all the Means and Opportunities
that might present themselves to favor our Private Meetings, he resolved to
stay till I had more Judgment. And besides, he was not well satisfied with me,
because he still conceited it was I who had informed the Abbess of our private
Amor. At least it was this that he told me in excuse of himself. For my part,
I am persuaded, by what happened after that, that from the time of those
Reports he ceased to love me, and that his Flame did not re-kindle, till the
noise of my being forced from the Convent gave him to understand, that I was
not so much a Child as he took me to be.

However it were, when he understood that I was married to a Person much below
him in Quality, and inferior to him in Estate, he resolved to find me out, not
able to forget in what a passionate manner formerly I was wont to breathe into
his Amorous Breast my Vows and Resolutions to be always his. Nor was it an
unusual thing for him to visit the Province where my Residence was, because his
Grandfather had bin Governor of it; and for that the Gentry of the Country had
a great value for his Respect and Name.

Book the Second.
WHILE Blossac was meditating the Recovery of my Affection, I was wholly taken
up with the care of pleasing my Husband. Me thought I loved no body but him,
tho in truth I could make daily discoveries, as well in his Disposition, as in
his Person, of those defects which in some measure staggered my Inclination. He
was a Man naturally given to debauchery, and one who preferred Wine and Good
Cheer before all other Pleasure. He would be frequently fuddl'd; and in that
Condition he was very offensive and disobliging in his Language. He would be
still upbraiding me, That instead of bringing him a Portion, I had bin the
cause of making him part with some of his Choicest Acres: And this Reproach he
would usually throw upon me in Public. All People blamed him, and took my part
at those times; but there was no alteration; it was not an Injury that was
offered me now and then. Nevertheless, I dissembled it so well, that I gave him
not the least occasion to accuse me of failing in my Complacency and Respect
for him. I led a Life in the Country very retired; having only the Society of
one Gentleman that lived in the Neighborhood, a Person of Wit and Learning.
This was M^de Balzac: He brought me to love Reading and Study; and by his
Advice I applied my self to read more solid and substantial Authors then any I
had hitherto known; I found my self also well inclined to learn the Languages,
and to write with more exactness then the generality of Women. This was both a
diversion to me, and procured me much honor in the Province; so that I became
an Umpress among the Wits, and Judge of their Works. Now receiving so many
Verses every day as I did, it may well be thought that they were sent me
composed in my Praise; and among Sparkling Wits, I Will assure ye, there were
some that made love to me in Verse. But I received nothing from their hands,
with which I did not make my Husband acquainted; nor did I perceive that he had
any inclination to Jealousy. But I did not long enjoy this Repose. Some body
informed him, that before I was Twelve years of Age I had written Amorous
Letters to Blossac, which had made a great deal of noise. Which made him
believe, that having discovered such an early inclination to Love, I must needs
retain it still; and being moreover conscious of his ill usage of (...), a
conceit came into his head that I could not love him, and that therefore I must
have an Amorous Intriegue elsewhere.

Nor was it long before he knew of whom it was that it behooved him to be
jealous. Blossac was come into the Province with some of his Friends; and
presently they came all together to pay me a Visit. I was alone in the Castle:
But it is impossible to express in what a strange disorder all the motions of
my Body were, when I beheld the Man who once had bin so dear to me. On the
other side, he seemed to me no less embarrass'd then my self. After the first
Complements, his Friends commended the Situation and Beauty of the Castle, and
desired to see the Apartiments. Which while they were doing, Blossac made a
dextrous Escape from his Friends, and having found a way to speak to me in
Private, he gave me to understand in the most tender Expressions in the World,
that he had always loved me, and that I could not in justice deprive him of a
Heart which I had formerly given him. But I had still so much power left as to
conjure him never to think more of me, at least, never to make me any more
Visits. Nor did I forget to forbid him to write to me, fearing as I
acknowledged to him, that my Husband would have no good opinion of any familiar
Intercourse between us.

While we were thus in parley together, my Husband arrived, and it was no
body's fault but his own, if he did not perceive that Blossac and I had both
been weeping. I am apt to believe that he was sensible of the disorder wherein
he found us, but he dissembled it, and all the rest of the day demeaned himself
with great civility.

The Marquis of Sauveboeuf was one of those who accompanied Blossac; and
resembl'd very much the Young Sparks of the Times: He was inconsiderate, and
loved to talk to Women without discretion. I know not whether or no he had ever
heard, that I had once a kindness for Blossac, or whether it were out of a
humor to please himself by crossing my Husband; but all the time we sat
chatting together, he would still be telling him, that I was the most Beautiful
Woman that ever he beheld in his life; and frankly confessed that he would make
love to me, but that I lived in a Province so remote. However, because what
Sauveboeuf prattl'd was only in jest, my Husband took no offense at it. So that
when I saw that my Husband seemed so well to understand Ralliery, to remove
that jealousy which he had of Blossac, I resolved, though very imprudently, to
bestow the main of my Civilities upon Sauveboeuf, and seem desirous to please
him. Wherein I did very unadvisedly; for Blossac grew jealous of it; my
Husband's Suspicions were thereby confirmed; Sauveboeuf loved me in earnest;
and all three took me for the Arrantest Cocquet in nature.

After our Company had left us, my Husband no longer put any constraint upon
himself, but began to reproach me with what I had formerly done for Blossac,
and with what I had now done for Sauveboeuf; he swore he would not be the Cully
of my Amors, and that I should never stir out of the Castle.

Some days after, he made a show of having intercepted one of Blossac's Letters
which confirmed his Suspicions. He had bin so cunningly malicious as to compose
the Letter himself: But I knew not what to think of it: For indeed,
notwithstanding the Injunction I had laid upon Blossac not to write to me, I
was afraid lest he might have ventured a Letter; and I found my self in a
strange Labyrinth.

And here I will aver it with the same sincerity with which I purpose to write
these Memoirs, that it was not so much what the Jealousy of my Husband caused
me to fear, that busied most my thoughts in the sad Reflections which I made
upon my Destiny, as the consequence of an Amor, of which I had formerly bin
sensible, and which had then got the mastery of my Heart. I was more pleased to
think that I was beloved by Blossac, then I was afraid of my Husband's
Resentment. I pardoned Blossac also for his imprudence in writing to me: And
lastly, Whatever seemed to assure me of his Fidelity, made a deeper impression
upon me, then all the Dangers to which he exposed me. Nevertheless, I will say
thus much more with the same sincerity, that I had no design in all this,
contrary to my Duty. I was also prepared to suffer whatever my Husband should
inflict upon me. Nor did I hope for any other happiness, then to observe a
blind obedience to his Humor, and to foster at the bottom of my Heart the
secret pleasure of loving another, with so much the more fidelity, because I
was resolved to yield nothing to my Passion. What an Example of Virtue should I
have bin, had I had a Husband endu'd with greater Prudence! But he spared me so
little, and took so much care to cry me down, that Vexation and Despite made me
lose something of the delicacy of my Sentiments. 'Twas my Opinion that I might
seek a means to secure my Repose, provided I did nothing that could bring
reproach upon my Actions.

My Husband's behavior toward me, gave occasion to all the Reports that were
spread abroad at that time: 'Twas believed he did not use me so, without just
cause: Nay, it was reported, that during the Visit which Blossac paid me, my
Husband had surpised me in the very Act.

My Husband gave credit to that Scandal, and conceited with himself, that it
became him to treat me as if I had bin guilty. So that the fear of being
oppressed, made me study the most speedy way to free my self out of his hands.
To that purpose, one of my Women, and my self, disguised our selves in the
Habit of Country Girls, and intermixing our selves with the Workmen that
wrought in the Castle, we went out in the dusk of the Evening along with them,
and walked it to a Place where a Lacquey, whose Fidelity I had gained by
Reward, staid for us with Horses.

After we had rode all Night, we came the next Morning to a Convent, the Abbess
of which had promised me sanctuary.

So soon as I was safe there, I wrote to my Husband, complaining of his
Severity, which had constrained me to betake my self to flight: And to my
Father, to inform him of the Reasons why I left my Husband. I besought both the
one and the other to examine without passion whether I had deserved such usage.
My Affection also tempted me to write to Blossac: But I had strength enough to
resist that Temptation; fearing lest my Letter might be intercepted, and
produced as a Testimony to prove me guilty, at a time when it so much concerned
me to appear innocent.

My Husband made me no return: But my Father sent me word, that I had done ill
to leave him; that he would write to him, in order to engage him to take me
home again; and that he would not fail to be speedily with me, and be a means
to return me reconciled into his hands.

How easy is it for People who behold the Misfortunes of others only at a
distance, to take that course which then my Father took! I was so ill satisfied
with his Letter, that I wrote him an Answer, That I would rather dye then
return to my Husband, who being the first to accuse his Wife of a Disorder,
which he well knew she was innocent of, had thereby acquired a right to misuse
her when he pleased.

My Father to appease me, and at the same time to convince me that I was in the
wrong, sent me a Letter which my Husband had written to him, wherein he only
complained of my little Affection for him, without mentioning a word of those
Jealousies and Suspicions which he had manifested to me: Protesting on the
other side, that he had always adored me, and swearing that he would spare* for
nothing to make me forget the Causes which he might have given me to complain
of him.

My Father was moved with the Tenderness that appeared in that Letter; and at
first I was mollifi'd with it my self; so little of evil did my Heart contain,
and so easy would it have bin for my Husband to have lived happily with me,
would he have bin so pleased himself. But at length, upon a review of his
Letter, I perceived the Spirit of it, and I saw well that his Softness was only
an Artifice to surprise me. And this confirmed me more then ever in my
Resolution never to return home again.

All this while my Reputation was cruelly attacked: And then I began to
understand, that of all the Resolutions that a Woman, whether guilty or
innocent, can take, the worst is to leave her Husband's House. Yet after all,
how prejudicial soever this Resolution was to my Reputation, it seemed
necessary for my Repose, and I was of opinion that my Quiet ought to be more
dear to me then my Honor. Doubtless this was an Illusion: For the one cannot
be lost without the other: And an honest Woman must never hope for repose, that
neglects the care of her Honor. Such are the Extremities to which we are
reduced by Matrimony. What Woman therefore would engage in it, did she but
consider, that there is no other remedy for an unfortunate Woman, but to
endure, without daring to complain of her Sufferings, or seek the means to
avoid 'em?

But in regard, that when I married, I did not apprehend it was my duty to
render my self unhappy, I only made it my endeavor to set my self at liberty.
And I may also say, That the less ground I saw for the Reports that were spread
abroad against my Honor, the more Courage, and the greater Resolution I had to
contemn 'em. But I must also confess, that the more I was persuaded that People
had an ill opinion of me, the more I accustomed my self to slight the
Probabilities that might confirm it. I minded only to preserve my self
innocent. That was all the virtue and the merit which I proposed to my self.
Neither did my Delicacy aim so far as to appear exactly what I was: whether it
were, that I despaired of success, or that the love of my repose made that
Niceness seem to me quite out of season. But in short, 'twas only the obstinacy
of People to cry me down, which fixed me in that disposition of mind. I wish
that Women, who are under the same Circumstances, may not follow my Example; if
there be any one however that can do otherwise.

But to let my Father see that my Husband's Letter was full of Artifice, I sent
him a new Scroll of all his severe Usage and Menaces with which he continually
worri'd me, and put me into hourly Frights; and conjured him not to overwhelm
me with Despair, by obliging me to live with him again. I must confess, that my
Husband's ill usage of me was not sufficient to authorize a Separation; but it
was too terrible for me to endure. I tremble every time I think upon it, that
he should threaten to keep me locked up in the Castle; and it raises my Anger
when I call to mind the injurious and threatening Language which he continually
peal'd in my Ears. More then this, I did not believe that a Woman was bound to
stay till utmost Extremities to be separated from a Husband: Nor did I much
mind whether the Law or my Parents made the Separation, provided we might be
parted.

In the mean time I understood that my Father, instead of returning an Answer
to my last Letter, was preparing to deliver me back into my Husband's
possession.

On the other side, my Mother, who was afraid of nothing more then that I
should return to Paris, and put her to charges, wrote me troublesome Letters,
wherein she gave me those admirable Lessons, which I much question whether she
would have practiced her self, had she bin in my Condition.

This made me take a Resolution which I withstood at first; but which, after
all, was that which flattered me most, and of which the very thought afforded
me consolation in the midst of my Troubles and Afflictions. I wrote to Blossac,
and gave him an Account of my Condition, desiring his Advice and Assistance.
However, because I was still afraid lest my Letter should be intercepted, I let
nothing fall from my Pen that might give him the least hint that I had still a
Passion for him. I only seemed to repair to him, as to a general Friend, not
knowing where else to address my self, But this Precaution quite ruined me in
the good opinion of Blossac, or rather served as a pretense for his
Inconstancy. For certain it is, that if he had always loved me, he would never
have quarreled with me for making so little a show of my Passion, because he
might well judge that I could not in prudence write otherwise, considering the
Circumstances I was under.

I have already told ye, that he was jealous of my Civilities to Sauveboeuf.
This Jealousy was strengthened by the many Reports which my Husband had spread
about to my Disgrace. For in all Companies where he took pains to dishonor me,
Sauveboeuf's Name was not forgotten. And the very naming of a Person who was
famed for being one of the greatest Intrieguers about the Country, was enough
to render the Calumny probable.

Now Blossac not finding in my Letter my former tenderness of Expressions,
believed me another Woman; and that it was not out of inclination or preference
that I addressed my self to him, but out of pure necessity. So that he was
neither a Lover that had the Tenderness, nor a Friend that had the Generosity
to serve me. He returned me an Answer the flattest, the most spropositous, and
the most offensive in the World, reproaching me with my ill Conduct, and my
natural propensity to Coquettry. Alas! he forgot that 'twas himself who had
infused that propensity into me: And his Perfidiousness went so far as to make
that criminal in me, which I had only done for his sake.

I read over his Letter no less then ten times, not being able to persuade my
self that ever he could have been capable of so much Ingratitude as to write to
me in that manner. But being fully at length convinced of it, I ceased from
that moment to have any longer for him, I will not say, not only the least
Inclination, but the least Esteem. I was astonished that I should be so long
before I understood it; and I repented that I had not taken a Resolution to
despise him, from the very time that he refused to give me the meeting already
spoken of. This speedy change in my heart in reference to Blossac, convinced me
that there is not any Woman sensible of her Honor, who is proof against some
certain Injuries. From that time forward I could never endure either to see, or
have any value for him. All that I could do, in consideration of the Sentiments
which he had inspired into me, was only never to name him. I know not whether
all Women will approve this speedy Resolution of mine to forget him. But I can
hardly believe there is any Woman so low-spirited, as to continue her Affection
to a Man that should forsake her in necessity, and under a slight Pretense,
when unfortunate only for his sake. We may pardon Inconstancy, Fantastical
Humor, and even Injuries themselves, when they are not the Character of a Base
and Interested Heart; but I cannot believe it other then a Crime to love a Man
who suffers a Woman whom he had loved, and who craves his Assistance, to become
a prey to her Enemies. He ought to have served me without any hesitation, and
that done, he might have chosen whether he would have loved me or no. And
therefore in my opinion I did no more then what any Rational Woman would have
done, in defacing him out of my heart.

So soon as I had received the forementioned Letter, and that it had caused so
sudden a change in my Affection all things, methought began to look with a new
face. I did not think my Husband's Behavior so hateful as it seemed to be: I
blamed my self for having left him; and I expected the arrival of my Father
with as much impatience, as fear of seeing him before. I found no reluctance to
submit to what he had propounded to me; and I looked upon the Misfortunes which
I had so much dreaded, to be no other then the effects of vain Terror. By which
we may see, that Love is that which gives what Tincture it pleases to things;
and that when a Woman ceases to have a Passion for another Man besides her
Husband, she has courage enough, either not to magnify the causes of her fear,
or else not to be afraid at all. How happy had I bin, had I considered these
things sooner, and had always remembered 'em during the continued course of my
Life.

How great a power did my Father believe he had over me, when he beheld me so
submissive to what- (...) not how, from the Sparks that stopped him, came riding
up with his Sword in his hand, and threatened to kill me. Upon which Sauveboeuf
not believing it safe to trust me in such rude hands, carried me away by force,
notwithstanding all that I could say or plead for my self.

Thus by the most unexpected Accident that ever was, I found my self as it were
torn from the hands of my Husband, at a time when I began to love him; and I
became at the same time an Innocent Occasion of new Stories and fresh
Calamities to the prejudice of my Reputation, when I was wholly taken up with a
desire to have fixed my self to my duty.

What a noise did this Story make; and what did not People say of me in the
World! My Father and my Husband made no question, but that it was a Contrivance
of mine which had engaged Sauveboeuf to this Act of Violence: And being so
prepossessed, they made no wonder that I so readily consented to my
Reconciliation; and after this, my Father no less readily believed whatever my
Husband had told him before. And indeed, Probabilities rendered the Proceeding
so Criminal, that neither the one nor the other could well excuse me. And upon
this they were so incensed against me and Sauveboeuf, that without any
consideration of their own Honors and my Reputation, they went to Bourdeaux,
to make their Complaint to the Parliament.

But they were not a little amazed to meet Sauveboeuf there, who to justify me
as I had desired him, had followed 'em to that City. However, 'twas in vain for
him to lay before 'em, that I had no hand in the Violence: For that was thought
to be an Excuse only to hinder the Prosecution of the Law.

In the mean time Public Report had spread abroad a new Story, by which it was
given out, that Sauveboeuf, having forced me from my Friends, only to satisfy a
transitory Passion, had left me so soon as he had humored his loose Desires.

What a troublesome thing it is to lie at the mercy of certain Conjunctures!
while every body takes the liberty to vent Probabilities for truth; so that it
may be said that the good or bad Reputation of Women depends upon the
Circumstances of their Adventures.

Besides that Sauveboeuf was well esteemed in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and
had very powerful Friends, there was another Reason which hindered my Father
and my Husband from prosecuting this Affair. Nor did Sauveboeuf shun 'em, but
waited on 'em himself to give 'em an Account of his Conduct; and among other
things he told 'em, that the same day that he forced me from 'em, he carried me
back to the Nunnery which I left that Morning. Certainly they must have bin
most dreadfully prepossessed against me, to question my Innocence after that.
For, in short, had I loved Sauveboeuf in such a manner as they seemed to
believe, and to that end, had engaged him to force me out of their hands, most
assuredly I would never have returned the same day to the Convent; I should
have doubtless chosen some other Sanctuary; nor would I so soon have taken care
to justify my self.

My Father and my Husband made a show of giving credit to what Sauveboeuf told
'em; and so, quitting their Prosecutions, perhaps because they thought they
should get nothing by 'em, they returned to me, who stayed all this while in
the Convent. But this Visit was quite different from the former. They both of
them distrusted me; neither had I those kind thoughts of my Husband as before,
while I began to look on Sauveboeuf with no indifferent Eye.

Thus we quitted the Convent a second time: But then I must acknowledge, I
followed my Father and my Husband with as much Reluctance and Sadness, as
Cheerfulness and Joy before this unlucky Adventure.

My Father staid with us a few days; and before he left me, he prepared me for
all the cold Treatments of my Husband, which in a little time he failed not to
make me sensible of. I did all that lay in my power to remove from my Father's
mind all those Suspicions, which my being forcibly carried away had created in
him. But he made me answer, that nothing but my future behavior could
undeceive him, and that if ever I gave him occasion to be displeased with me
again, I must never expect to find any Protection among my Relations. And thus
I became exposed to greater Misfortunes then those which hitherto had befallen
me.

Some time after I found my self to be with Child; and because it pleased my
Husband to forget that we had bin together near two days when he came the first
time with my Father to the Convent, he imputed to Sauveboeuf what he ought not
to have imputed to any but himself. Never had Calumny a weaker foundation: For
all the World knew, that since my first acquaintance with Sauveboeuf, he had
never spoken to me but in the presence of Witnesses. But whether it were that
my Husband resolved to ruin me, or that it was his pleasure to assert an
untruth, he openly declared that I could not be with Child by him.

Then I foresaw all the Sorrows that afterward befell me. I wrote to my Father
an Account of my Condition, and of the Injury my Husband did me: But, my Father
di'd about the same time, which redounded still to my disgrace, and became an
addition to my Misfortune, because his Death was imputed to my having broken
his heart. Nor was there any body now left to whom I could repair for Succor,
but my Mother, who perfectly hated me; and for fear I should return home, was
the first that confirmed my Husband's Suspicions, and infused into him thoughts
of shutting me up in a Nunnery.

I shall not say anything how I lived after this with my Husband. There is no
need that the World should be informed of my ill usage, to beget compassion of
my Misfortunes. My Condition was sufficient to make People apprehensive that
never Woman was more unfortunate.

I also owe so much prudence to the Memory of a Man whose Wife I was, to say
nothing of him, more then what I cannot dispense with letting the World know:
But certain it is, that I suffered whatever Cruelty and Scorn could invent to
torment a Woman.

At length, in the midst of that despair to which I was reduced; and dreading
as well for my self, as the Child in my Womb, all those dismal Consequences
which I had reason to fear, once more I thought it my best way to commit my
self to the Fortune of a second Flight. This Design of mine I imparted to
Balzac, who, as I said before, was a near Neighbor of mine, and often came to
visit me. He advised me to go to Bourdeaux, and complain to the Parliament.
This, no question, was good Counsel, but my love for Sauveboeuf would not let
me follow it, and forced me to take a bad Resolution. I went to the Marchioness
of R -- For the vexation of having recourse to a Rivaless did not so much
prevail with me, as the hopes of obtaining by her Assistance the succor and
protection of a Person whom I loved: But I never committed a fault in my life,
for which I deserved to be more severely rebuked, then this. Yet after all,
whither must a Woman carry her Complaints, when she is altogether void of
Succor, and has also a prevailing Passion in her Heart that blinds her Reason.

Sauveboeuf was in Languedoc; and the Marchioness, as jealous of me and could
possibly be of her, found a means to render fruitless all the Letters which I
wrote to him, either by stopping 'em, or by prepossessing him against me. At
least this was what I imagined; not being able to persuade my self, that a Man
should testify so great a Passion for me, yet never write me back one Answer,
in such a deplorable Condition as mine.

Thus it was that I was well enough punished for the choice I had made of the
Marchioness's House. Not that the Marchioness failed in any point of Civility
toward me; but on the other side, did me a thousand good Offices: But in short,
I suffered my self to be beholding to a Woman who received Letters every day
from Sauveboeuf, while I could hear no tidings what was become of him. I found
I was too unfortunate to have faithful Friends. But as unfortunate as I was, I
found my self vain enough not to digest the seeing another so severely
preferred before me.

I resolved therefore to quit the Marchioness, and that I might conceal the
motive of my Resolution, I faign'd the Receipt of Letters from my Mother, who
had sent for me to lie in at Paris. She believed it; or else she dissembled the
believing of it: And so, though very near my time, I set forward in the Road to
Paris, not knowing where to lodge when I came there: For I never thought that
my Mother would ever receive me.

I ordered therefore two Places to be hired in the Public Coach under another
Name; and so I departed, attended only by one of my Chamber-maids. Now in
regard that none of the Passengers knew me, I heard my self frequently talked
of during the Journey. Nothing made more a noise in the Province, then this my
second Flight from my Husband's House. 'Twas all the Discourse of the Strangers
in the Coach; and I had more then once an occasion to be angry at the fooleries
which they prattl'd. There was one Man, whom I never saw in my life, who
averred that he was perfectly well acquainted with me, and who not dreaming
that he was trifling in my presence, maintained, that it was none of his fault
that he had not bin one of my Gallants. He affirmed, that I had left my Husband
to run after Sauveboeuf; and he added to all the rest a thousand Abominable
Circumstances. And thus it is that we meet with People every day, who
corroborate Scandal by a false Honor which they attribute to themselves; and
who, that they may seem to be privy to Affairs that make a great noise, invent
Particulars of which they pretend to understand the original Reason. I had a
mind more then once to have confounded those Calumnies by discovering my self:
But I thought it much better, without making my self known, to take the Lady's
part, of whom so much ill was spoken.

I was not ignorant that I was become the public Discourse; but I never
imagined that Scandal was arrived to that height, as I had reason to know, to
my cost, by the Things that were discoursed of in my own hearing. Which shows
us, that how much vilifi'd soever a Woman may be, she never thinks her self so
much cried down as she is. And therefore it would be very requisite sometimes,
that they who have given the World an occasion to censure their Conduct, should
hear what People say of 'em. Perhaps they might make a better advantage of such
a piece of Knowledge then I did. For I believing that nothing could be charged
upon me, to the prejudice of that Fidelity which I owed my Husband, whatever
they said moved me no more, then only to stir up within me a secret desire of
Revenge. Whereas I should have understood, that seeing outward Appearances
afforded Calumny such fair Handles to lay hold of, I should have bin more
circumspect to have avoided 'em.

The heat wherewith I took the part of those Ladies whom the Public signalizes
for Adventures, won me the Friendship of a Young Gentlewoman who rode in the
Coach with her Husband. They were Persons, who after they had resided for some
time in the Province where the Husband had a very considerable Employment, were
returning to Paris, where they had left their Family. The Husband was called M.
Laval: And Mademoiselle Laval was a Lady pretty enough to make me believe that
she was a little concerned in my defense of the Women. However, they seemed to
live, both of 'em, in perfect agreement, and their Union made me envy their
happiness, and bemoan the Fate of Young Virgins of Quality who are sacrificed
to Interest.

I had ^^ill taken my Measures, and was so near my Time, that I was forced to
stop in a Little Village, within a Day's journey of Paris. Mademoiselle Laval
would not leave me; but judging by my deportment that I was a Person of
Quality, desired her Husband that he would let her stay with me: And he was so
complaisant, as to give her permission.

I was brought to bed of a Boy, who has since made me amends for the
Misfortunes of his Birth, by his Merit, and the Reputation he has acquired. But
a Son, who has bin so much the more a Sufferer for my sake, because he never
failed in his Respect and Tenderness for a Mother, who too frequently, yet
without being guilty, gave him occasion to complain.

I was three Weeks before I was able to sit up; and all the while Mademoiselle
never left me; for which I obliged her to accept of a Diamond, as a small
recompense of her Care. Soon after her Husband came to visit us, and seeing the
Present I had made his Wife, he offered me his House in Paris: A kindness which
I was willing to accept, till I had sounded how my Mother stood affected toward
me.

So soon as I came to my Lodging, I sent her, by my Maid, a Letter, which I had
written in such a Style as I thought most prevalent to mollify her Obduracy,
giving her an account of my being brought to bed, and of the Reasons that
forced me to leave my Husband. But upon reading it, she burst out into such a
heat of Indignation against me, as no way became a Parent, nor would she
vouchsafe so much as to ask where I lodged: Neither did my Maid, seeing her in
such a Chafe, think it proper to tell her. All that the Maid could obtain from
her was, that she would receive the Child; and I ordered it to be carried to
her, with a second Letter, which had no better Success then the former; for she
still refused to see me.

This Severity of my Mother most cruelly perplexed me: And I thought to have
applied my self to my Relations: But fearing to find them no less morose and
inflexible then she, I resolved to let no body understand who I was but
Monsieur Laval, and Mademoiselle Laval; in hopes thereby to engage 'em to a
continuance of their Cares. But it had a contrary Effect. Monsieur Laval became
jealous. He imagined that the Friendship which his Wife had showed me, had no
other ground then the conformity of our Inclinations. The Stories that had bin
told him in the Province, and what he had heard in the Coach, made him believe
me to be a Woman that had neither Honor nor Conduct; and thus assuring himself
that I was a Person of a lewd Conversation, he bid his Wife give me fair
warning to provide me another Lodging, and forbad her to have any farther
familiarity with me.

Mademoisel Laval, who had still a greater friendship for me when she knew who
I was, was at her Wits-end, having received such absolute and peremptory Orders
from her Husband: She told my Maid, and she brought me the News.

These unseasonable Tidings made me very uneasy: Nevertheless I told Madam
Laval, that it was her Duty to obey her Husband; and I made her a long Sermon
upon that Subject, stuffed with Admonitions and Lessons, which I had more reason
to practice then she. But this is not the first time that we have seen People
quick sighted in the Omissions of others, that were always blind in the
observance of their own Neglects.

She promised me, that whatever Lodgings I took, she would find a way to come
and visit me. Thus I left Madam Laval's House, and hired a Lodging ready
furnished; from whence I sent, time after time to my Mother, that whenever she
pleased to hear me, and be a means that I might have justice done, I would not
refuse to return to my Husband. But I was astonished, when instead of receiving
any answer from my Mother, I understood that my Husband was come to Paris, that
he never stirred out of her House; and that both of 'em spared for no cost to
obtain an Order from the King to shut me up in a Cloister.

Fearing therefore lest they might accomplish their Design, I resolved to lie
concealed, till I could meet some Person, under whose Protection I might have
justice done my Innocence.

In the mean time, my Money was almost all gone, and I began to be afraid of
Necessity and Poverty, which are doubtless the severest of all Punishments,
when my Maid came to me with a great deal of joy, and told me, that she had met
Blossac, that she had informed him where I lay, and that he had promised to
come and visit me the same day.

Now that which filled my Maid with so much joy, was her hopes that Blossac
would offer me Money; for she was not ignorant of my Wants; besides that, a
Person the least scrupulous of any in the World, and would willingly have
propounded to me all sorts of ways to get Money, had she found me disposed to
follow her Counsels.

I chid her severely for telling Blossac where I lodged, seeing I had resolved
never to see him more; and at the same time, after I had paid my Landlord, I
removed immediately to another House, letting no body know where I lay, unless
it were Madam Laval; resolving rather to suffer the Indignities of Want, then
to be obliged to so unworthy a Person. All the while my Maid used all her Art,
with a world of Tittle-tattle to vanquish my unseasonable Pride, as she called
it, and quoted me a hundred Women of as great Quality as my self, to convince
me by their Example, that I was not to refuse any Relief when I stood in need
of it. But at the same time Madam Laval, who guest at my Condition, brought me
Forty Pistoles, which she desired me to accept. I perceived she had sold the
Jewel which I gave her; so that I refused at first to receive the Money. But
judging by the manner of her presenting it, that she would think her self
highly disobliged if I refused her Offer, I compli'd with her Kindness.

As for my Maid, she endeavored to persuade me to admit Blossac to give me a
Visit, though it were but once, and no more; and seeing she lost time in
Persuasions, she went her self to find him out, and told him doubtless where I
lodged: for he appeared to me like an Apparition* when I least expected him.
It Is true, my Misfortunes had not altered me in the least; and I was glad that
he found me the same as he had seen me formerly, that I might make him the more
sensible of the Entertainment I resolved to give him.

Madam Laval was then in the Room, and was a Witness of our Converse. So soon
as he saw me, he blushed and turned pale almost at the same time. Presently, at
the first view of him, I rose up, and going toward him, I asked him what his
Business was, and desired him to be gone. Nevertheless, he would have put on an
Air of Familiarity; but finding such a coldness in my Reception, he laid aside
his Gayety, and asked me what I had to object against him? I answered him, that
I knew him not; that in truth, I took him formerly for one of my Friends, but
that I had bin mistaken in him. Now because he was conscious that he had
provoked me, he told me, that if he did not come to my Assistance, he had
Reasons for it, which he hoped would satisfy me, when I heard 'em. But
perceiving that I would not heark'n to him, he drew a Purse, which he desired
me to accept; adding withal, that I might have occasion for it. I refused it;
he would have given it my Maid; but I forbid her so severely to receive it,
that she durst not disobey me. Blossac seeing me thus obstinate, in a kind of
fury put up his Purse into his Pocket, and going out of the Room, in an
insolent manner told me, that the next time I wanted him, I should come after
him.

I made Madam Laval acquainted with the Reasons I had to be offended with
Blossac, and she commended me for using him as I had done.

She had a Kinsman that lived at the Hostel' d' Epernon, whose Name was
Morille: And one day she took an occasion to talk to him concerning me, and the
Condition I was in. Morille was generous and obliging: And for that Reason,
compassionating my Sufferings, he spoke of me to the Duke of Candale.

The Duke, to whom my Name was not unknown, and who had heard talk of my
Adventures, gave Morille Orders to wait upon me, and to give Madam Laval two
hundred Pistoles for my present Occasions. Madam Laval was too much my Friend,
to conceal from my knowledge that Morille acted by the Duke of Candale's
Orders: And I was willing to be beholding to the Duke, because I had reason to
believe, that what he did was only out of Generosity; of which I was so much
the more readily convinced, because he did not seem to have any desire to see
me.

I must confess, I was not a little taken with the Duke's Civilities; and a
little thing perhaps would have persuaded me not to have taken amiss a Visit
from him. But I understood soon after, that there was something of Interest in
his Generosity. For so soon* as he understood that I had accepted his two
hundred Pistoles, he sent to me that he might be admitted to kiss my Hand,
which I could not well refuse him. He spoke not a word that tended to give me
the least intimation of what he had done; and always interrupted me, when he
perceived me going about to testify my acknowledgment. But though he were so
diligent to prevent my Acknowledgments of his Generosity, he affected no less
to talk of the Passion, which as he said, he had for me: And I was bound to
hear him, and to believe some part of his Discourse.

There was nothing in my heart that opposed the Inclination that I had for him,
but the necessity of being obliged to him, under which I labored. Thus by an
odd effect of Scruple and Delicacy, the same things, which having convinced me
of his Generosity, had infused into me an esteem and value for him, hindered me
from resolving to give him proofs of it. I must confess, that had I not bin
beholding to him, I am apt to think I should have had as great an Affection for
him as he protested Love for me. But imagining with my self, that it would be
suspected my Passion was grounded upon Interest, I took a Resolution to resist
whatever might ripen an Inclination for him. For this reason I answered him in
such a manner as might deprive him of all hope; and I conjured him also never
to see me more, till I was in a condition to acknowledge his Bounty.

Book the Third.
BUT the World is so persuaded that Women are altogether governed by Interest,
that the Duke of Condale made no question of my having a private Amor
somewhere else. Which made him talk to the Count of B -- of my contempt of
Interest, as of a Novelty newly come into the World. The Count, who was one of
those that believed there could be no honest Woman, told him that he had bin a
Cully to his own Generosity; and offered to give him proofs of it. To which
purpose he resolved to enter into a strict acquaintance with me, as well to
undeceive the Duke, as to rank me among his Heroesses. But he was mistaken in
his Aims; for he found nothing in the Reception I made him, that was for his
purpose, to embellish his Memoirs withal. After I had refused to hearken to a
Person who had highly obliged me, it could not be imagined I would be over
hasty to flatter the Assiduities of one who attempted my Virtue, to make sport
with it.

At first he sent me Letters without any Name; as if my Fortune had depended
upon his Conquest; and because he wrote better then another, he thought I would
be glad to entertain a Correspondence with so witty a Lover. I found his
Letters very pretty; but I was not in a Condition to take any delight in
reading 'em: And when I saw that he persisted in writing to me, I not only
refused to receiv 'em, but burnt those which I had already received, in the
presence of Madam Laval.

However, the ill fate of those Letters did not discourage the Count; and being
informed of the time and place where I went to Mass, he made his appearance
there several times; and because I would not be seen to take any notice of him,
he accosted me. At what time after he had testified to me his extraordinary
desire to be acquainted with me, he talked to me of his Letters. I answered
him, that I had never read 'em; that the Business which detained me at Paris,
would not permit me to lose so much time; and more, that I did not understand
why he should pretend to so much Boldness, as to write and talk to a Woman who
had no acquaintance with him, nor ever desired to have any. These words put him
quite out of order; so that he brushed away from me, and went to tell the Duke
of Candale, that I was not a Woman who had common sense.

The Duke of Candale laughed at him for his Presumption, and conceived a greater
esteem for me. Nevertheless, he was not so eager to pay me his Assiduities; but
forbore to visit me, whether it were that he despaired to reap any fruit of
his Pains, or that he were naturally impatient.

In the mean time Necessity pressed harder and harder upon me every day. And
though none of my Relations were ignorant of the Wrongs my Husband and my
Mother did me, none of 'em sent me any relief. It Is true, that some of 'em were
downright with my Mother, and laid before her, how much she was bound in
Conscience to assist me; but her Hatred supplied her with Reasons that stopped
their mouths. And then they cried, her Mother knows more then we; there must be
something in the matter, or else a Mother could never be so cruel to her own
Flesh and Blood. For it is always a much more easy thing to condemn the
Unfortunate, then to afford 'em any Succor in their Distress. Nevertheless
there was a Lady who took some compassion upon my deplorable Condition. This
Lady was the Duchess of Chastillon; and tho she were my Mother's Friend, she
offered me both her House and her Table. But by the unlucky influence of my
Stars, all the Dutchess's Favors and Bounty became fatal to her Reputation and
mine.

The Abbot Fouquet was one of her Acquaintance, and gave us frequent Visits.
This Abbot the Duchess would be still obliging to make me Presents; to which
purpose she made use of a means that put me to no little shame. We frequently
played all three together, and in regard the Abbot never played but with a
design to lose, I won considerably every day. Nevertheless, Madam de Chatillon
not contented with having supplied me with Money by this means, after she had
one day won, at the Fair, a Service of great value, she caused it to be sold,
and pressed me to accept the Money. But the Abbot, who was desirous that Madam
de Chatillon should be beholding to him for it, bought the Plate again the next
day, and sent it her home to her House.

This Piece of Gallantry made a great noise; and because few People knew the
motive of Charity that induced the Duchess to act in that manner, they thought
she had sold the Service merely for the sake of the Money. And as for the
Abbot, after this, there was no farther question made of it, but that he was in
love with Madam de Chatillon, and that I was the Confident privy to the
Intreague.

This Scandal spread abroad to that degree far and near that the Duchess was
constrained to remove me from her House. And I parted from her with all the
Sorrow, that it was possible for me to be sensible of, for having innocently
given an occasion to the Injurious Reports that had bin raised to the prejudice
of her Honor. And they made the same interpretation of my Removal, as they had
done of her Bounty. For they gave out that I was only sent away, because she
perceived that the Abbot Fouquet was in love with me. And indeed he was
meditating Secret Designs, which I discovered afterward.

After I left Madam de Chatillon, I put my self into a Convent; and three days
after the Abbot Fouquet brought me a Letter from her, wherein she sent me word,
that notwithstanding the Reasons which obliged her to refrain my Company, she
was still my Friend: That it became me seriously to think of forcing my Husband
and my Mother to do me Reason; and to the end I might have more liberty to act
then in a Convent, she had given order for a House for me in such a Quarter of
the City, where she would take care that I should want for nothing. I
really-believ'd that this Letter came from Madam de Chatillon: And being
earnestly desirous to put an end to the Disputes between me and my Husband, I
consented to what she had ordered in my behalf, without any more ado. So that
after I had returned her a thousand Thanks in a long Letter, I quitted the
Convent, and went to the House prepared for me, in company with Mrs. Laval. For
her Husband, who was then in the Province, no longer minded his Wife's coming
to see me, so long as he perceived that I had found Protection and Support.

I found in this Lodging an Apartment very richly and modestly furnished, as
also a Coach with the Ciphers of Madam de Chatillon. I admired her Generosity,
and often complained to her in my Letters, that notwithstanding I received so
many Favors from her Bounty, I had not the liberty to visit her. For I forgot
to let ye know, that when we parted, she told me 'twas not convenient we should
visit one another. I must confess, I never received any Answers to my Letter;
but the Abbot Fouquet, who still undertook to deliver 'em, and who frequently
came to visit me, always brought me Compliments and Excuses in the Dutchesses
Name. However, in a little time I began to consider, that the Abbot's Visits
were too frequent: But in regard he still brought me news of Madam de
Chatillon, and that he seemed to visit me only upon the account of my Business,
I durst not desire him to forbear coming so often.

In this manner I lived for some time, without dreaming in the least that there
had bin any foul play in these Civilities that were shown; when Mrs. Laval one
morning entered my Chamber, and gave me to understand with tears in her Eyes,
that the Lodging where I lay, belonged to the Abbot Fouquet, and that it was
the Public Talk of the Town, that he kept me. In a word, That Madam de
Chatillon was no way concerned in any of these Favors, for which I thought my
self wholly beholding to her Liberality.

It is not to be imagined how much I was astonished at this News. Methought I
saw at that very instant every thing that I had not the wit to see before. I
made no doubt but the Things which had bin told me, were true; and I admired
how I could be so palpably cheated. Presently I flew to Madam de Chatillon's
House; but so soon as I appeared, she came toward me, and loading me with
Reproaches, bid me be gone out of doors immediately. This Reception seized me
with amazement; I fell into a swoon, from which they had much ado to recover
me: I asked in vain to speak with Madam de Chatillon, but she refused me
admittance, and sent me word again to make haste out of her House. This Usage
having too sadly convinced me of the truth of what Mrs. Laval had told me, I
resolved to return no more to that Fatal House; but went directly to the
Convent which I left some Weeks before: But the House refused to admit me: And
I found by the Language which they gave me, that I alone was ignorant of the
Trick that had bin put upon me.

Mrs. Laval, who knew me to be innocent of all this, gave me the best comfort
that she could; and, I believe, that had it not been for her, I had stabbed my
self. She carried me to one of her own Friends, where she left me, till she
went to fetch away such things as were properly my own; but more especially to
seek for the Letter wherein M. de Chatillon had offered me the Lodging. There
she met the Abbot Fouquet in a heavy toss to know what was become of me. She
told him that I was fallen ill at a House where I intended to have spent the
Afternoon, and that they had put me to Bed. He really believed what she told
him to be true, and desired Mrs. Laval to be his Guide to the Place where I
was; nor could any thing that she could say to be rid of him, prevent his
coming along with her: Neither indeed was she unwilling that he should see me,
to the end I might school him for the injury he had done me. But so soon as I
perceived him, my Tears that were but newly ceased, burst forth again: I had
not strength enough to speak a word. So that Mrs. Laval beholding me in that
Condition, told him the true Reason of my Affliction.

But the Abbot with a smiling Countenance bid me be of good cheer, assuring me
that nothing had bin done but by Madam de Chatillon's Order: And to prove the
falsehood of all those things which had bin told me, he alleged the Respect
which he had always had for me.

I was so cast down by the Troubles and Vexations attending this Adventure,
that I listened with delight to the Assurances which he gave me, that all was
but a false Alarm. So true it is, that in overwhelming Misfortunes we lay hold
on every Bough to save our selves. But in short, the Reception which the
Duchess of Chatillon gave me, no way agreed with the Abbot Fouquet's Oaths: So
that without examining any farther, whether it were true or no, I desired him
to refrain all manner of Visits for the future. He obeyed me; still protesting
at his departure, that he had done nothing but what Madam de Chatillon had
ordered him to do.

So soon as he was gone, I immediately sent away to Madam de Chatillon the
Letter which had bin the cause of so many bad Effects. Which Letter the Abbot
Fouquet had devised on purpose to decoy me into his Lodging, with a design to
have told me more of his mind when opportunity should assist him.

However, Madam de Chatillon being persuaded that I had acted by consent with
the Abbot, as yet continued to harbor a Conceit that I had contrived the
Letter in my own justification; nor would she begin to do me justice, till she
saw me persevere in my Resolution never to return to that Lodging again. But
afterward the Abbot himself fully undeceived her, by confessing that he had
counterfeited the Letter, to the end I might be in a Place where I might be
more at liberty to look after my Affairs: Adding withal, that he had not made
use of that Artifice, but only to oblige me to accept of the Lodging.

But the World judged otherwise of the matter: For it was the public
Discourse, that I had bin engaged in an Amorous Intriegue with the Abbot, but
that being weary of me, he had turned me out of his House. And thus I underwent
both the Shame and Mortification to be looked upon as a Mistress abandoned by
her Gallant.

Madam de Chatillon, and the Abbot Fouquet, endeavored in vain to undeceive
the Public. All the Favor which they, who believed I left the House by my own
Choice, did me, was to say, I had not done it, but to avoid the Prosecutions of
my Mother and my Husband.

It Is true, that They, no sooner both of 'em understood that I lodged in a
House that belonged to Abbot Fouquet, and which he furnished for me at his own
Charges, but they presented a Petition against me, and they were just upon the
point of obtaining leave to seize me when I left those Lodgings. I had notice
of it, and I thought it my best way to conceal my self. For I suppose that no
body would have advised me to have delivered my self up to the Hatred of a
Mother, and the Jealousy of an Enraged Husband.

So soon as Madam de Chatillon was fully convinced of my Innocence, she
employed all her Credit and Friends in my behalf; and she had enough to procure
me an Injunction to stop all farther Prosecutions against me. By this means she
set me at liberty to appear and solicit a legal Separation from my Husband.
She recommended me to a Magistrate who promised to assist me, and who took upon
himself the management of my Business. I had also a yearly maintenance of a
Thousand Crowns allowed me by Decree, which secured me from the Gripes of Want;
all which I should have done at my first coming to Paris. But though I could
have spared for no pains, how could I ever hope to have brought it to pass,
when I had neither Protection nor Friends?

The Magistrate with whom Madam de Chatillon had brought me acquainted,
provided me a Lodging in the House of one of his Kinswomen; where he came to me
every day, and gave me an account of what he did for me. So that I blessed my
self that I had got for my Friend a Person whose Zeal appeared so fervent.
Therefore it was that I wholly reli'd upon him for the management of my
Affairs; and gave my self up to enjoy the Repose which I had bin so long
deprived of.

But this Magistrate had another aim; for he insensibly gave me an occasion to
discover that my Person was no way displeasing to him; nor was I at all
alarmed at his good Opinion. On the other side, I was extremely glad of it;
imagining that his Zeal being enlivened by Love, my Business could not go amiss.

He had a proper handsome Son already in the King's Service, and who went by
the Name and Title of Marquess of St. Albe: He was brisk, polite, and witty; he
came frequently to his Kinswoman's House, where he had a fight of me, and soon
became his Father's Rival.

The method of Courtship which these two Lovers took was very different. The
Son always respectful, durst not open his Lips to speak of his Passion: The
Father emboldened by the Services he did me, never scrupled to discover his
love to me. I then began to repent of delivering up into his Hands the whole
management of my Suit; but 'twas now too late. He was become master of it; and
I could not be without him.

I therefore lent him a patient Ear, and heard with moderation a Language which
my Misfortunes had rendered odious to me; and I forbore all manner of Ralliery
to a Person, whom it became me to be careful of displeasing. Nor could I put
him quite out of hopes, for fear of exasperating him against my Interests;
believing that by keeping him in suspense, I should engage him to serve me: But
this Conduct of mine produced a contrary effect. He persuaded himself, that
since I heard him with so much calmness, I had an inclination for him; and with
these thoughts he redoubled his Assiduities, and pressed me to declare my self.
I must confess, that till then, I saw no great harm in his Addresses, which
were rather a diversion to me. But now I began to dread the Consequences of
such an Amor. And indeed, considering these new attacks upon my Reputation, I
had reason to be of this opinion, That whatever good Intentions a Woman might
have, it was always dangerous to her Honor to suffer her self to be beloved.

His Solicitations became so earnest, and his Importunities so pressing, that
I knew not what course to take, that I might be rid of him. My first thoughts
prompted me to let him plainly understand the vanity of his Hopes: But then
considering he was a Person I stood in need of, I altered my mind, and took a
Resolution, which in truth I ought not to have taken. For I made him believe I
was not insensible of his love, and constrained my self to suffer it with some
compliance. This way of proceeding augmented his foolish Hopes, and within a
few days after he had the boldness to let me understand as much. Had I not bin
restrained by Honor and my Duty, yet my aversion for him would have preserved
me from offending: For the Extremities wherewith I was threatened, seemed to me
less severe then the Compliance which he demanded. So that I gave him all the
Ill Language that Anger and Contempt could inspire into my thoughts, and
desired him to meddle no more with my Business. And to the end I might wholly
disingage my self from him, and deprive him of all opportunities of seeing me,
I was preparing to leave his Kinswoman's House; when a new Accident befell me.

The Young Marquess of St. Albe was beloved by a Damsel that waited upon his
Mother; I know not what passed between 'em; but this Maid perceiving that her
Lover began to neglect her since his acquaintance with me, she resolved to
watch him. Now it happened one day that she found a most tender and passionate
Letter which he had written, with a design perhaps to have put it into my
hands. However it were, the Maid never questioned but that it was intended for
me; and to punish me for having got her Lover away from her, in the height of
her malice she resolved to answer it in my name; wherein she made me write
whatever was proper to make the World believe that I loved St. Albe as much as
I was beloved by him. And to suppress all proof of the falsehood of the Letter,
which was none of my Hand, she gave it out that I had reasons for what I did.
This was but a shallow Contrivance: However, it passed among those who only
sought to put me to trouble.

The Maid, who made use of this Stratagem, was not ^gnorant of my being beloved
by the Father of her Galant, because she was her Mistress's Confident, who
being naturally of a jealous humor, had the Curiosity to have her Husband
watched; and you may be sure she was nothing sorry to have an opportunity to
plague him. She therefore jeered him every day with his affection for me; and
to let him see how unfortunate he was in his Courtships, she showed him the
Letter which his Son had written to me, and my pretended Answer to it. The
Father, who was already jealous of his Son, was fully convinced of the truth of
his Amor when he read those Letters. He never troubled himself to examine a
Story that was so sillily contrived; but overjoyed that he had got proofs of
the secret correspondence between me and his Son, he resolved to observe no
measures of civility with me, and flew out into a most violent Rage against
his Son. In vain his Friends persuaded him to more mild and gentle Sentiments.
This unnatural Father, who by his Credit, and his Office, had Authority enough
to bring about his unjust Designs, threw his Son into Prison, never considering
the indignity of such usage. For in short, St. Albe was already an Officer, had
Courage, and was well esteemed in his Regiment. Nor was he content with
punishing St. Albe; but comes to me on purpose to affront me. He upbraided me
with debauching his Son, and let go a Torrent of Injurious Language, and as he
went out, told me that I deserved no less to be sent to some House of
Confinement.

I thought at first that he himself had counterfeited those Letters on purpose
to pick a quarrel with me: Afterward I accused his Son to have bin the Author
of 'em; believing, that in imitation of some Young Sparks, he might have framed
'em, to give himself the Reputation of a Fortunate Gentleman. I was laboring
under the violence of these various Agitations, when the Magistrate returned to
me again. It seems he had considered that I had said nothing in my own
vindication; and therefore it was probable he would have heard what I could say
for my self. But I received him with all the disdain imaginable. But I scorned
to undeceive him about the Letters, so extravagant he seemed to me in his
Behavior. I only bid him be gone, and trouble me no more with his
Impertinences. The next day the Maid, who had bin the cause of all this
Disorder, seeing St. Albe in Prison, moved with the misfortune of her Lover,
came to me and confessed what she had done: And upon her promise to confirm her
Confession to me before his Father, I sent for him again. Nor was he long
absent; verily believing that I had sent for him back to make my peace with
him. He heard the Maid's Recantation; but he would not believe her; at least he
counterfeited Incredulity. He asked me, in derision, how much I had given her
to make that Confession; farther adding, that he was no Fool to be put upon by
my little Artifices*

When the Maid was gone, and he saw me alone, he told me, there was but one way
to prevent the noise that he was going to make in the World; that he needed not
to interpret what he meant; for that I knew well enough what it was he desired.
'Twas in vain to tell him, that the course he took to gain my Love, was the
only way to make me hate him. He continued obstinate in his impertinent
Pretensions; telling me, that men of the Long Robe were not Persons that used
to be foiled in their Undertakings. In short, he forced me by his insolent
Language, to return him as bad; to which he replied with Menaces and
Reproaches, swearing as he went out, to acquaint my Mother and my Husband with
my Irregular Actions.

I went immediately to give the Duchess of Chatillon an account of every thing
that had past. She spoke to the Magistrate, and with a great deal ado obtained
so much favor from him, as to promise her that he would make no noise, nor
show my Mother the Letter which he had in his custody. However, the Villain
told the Duchess so many plausible Stories concerning my pretended Intriegue
with his Son, that she firmly believed him; so that I was forced to endure the
Sermons that she preached to me upon Folly and Indiscretion. 'Twas in vain to
assure her that the Magistrate was a wicked Fellow, and that I resolved to stay
no longer in his Kinswoman's House. She laid before me the need I had of him,
and scared me with the fear of his Revenge. I found my self then reduced to a
necessity of dissembling; so that we patched up a Reconciliation, upon
condition that he should speak to me no more of his Passion. He promised me so
to do, though resolved not to keep his word, and more obstinate then ever to
make an ill use of the need I had of him.

In the mean time, the Unfortunate St. Albe took a resolution to write to me,
and begged of me that I would endeavor to procure his Liberty. Moved therefore
with his Sufferings, and forgetting the just Reasons I had to refrain from
meddling in his Business, I listened to my Compassion. I sent imprudently to his
Mother the Letter which he had written to me, and wherein he made me a lively
description of his Ill usage. I made no question but that her heart would have
bin mollifi'd with reading it; but she was more jealous then compassionate, and
preferred her desire to embroil me again with her Husband, before the care of
delivering her Son from his oppression. She showed her Son's Letter to her
Husband; which proved the cause of a new Prejudice against me. For the Father
reassumed his first Fury, and swore he would ruin me, if I did not shun his
Revenge by satisfying his Passion. I likewise acquainted Madam de Chatillon
with this Accident, who blamed me for receiving and showing St. Albe's Letter;
and told me I must get out of this Labyrinth as well as I could.

Now then to get rid of the Magistrate, a certain Stratagem came into my head
that brought me into new trouble. I made a show of surrendering to his
Importunities, and I promised him a meeting the next day at a Place appointed.
But I went the very same day to his Wife, and made her acquainted with her
Husband's Follies, and the meeting wherewith I had flattered his Hopes. I
thought it might be permitted me, considering my Circumstances, to take this
Course, seeing that his Wife had let loose all her fury against me; and gave
out that I had as much kindness for her Husband, as indeed I had a real
aversion for him.

I thought, to the end I might undeceive her, that it would be my best way to
inform her of what passed between us; which I did, withal desiring her to give
our meeting an interruption, and affording her all the opportunities of doing
it.

This Woman, who imagined that this was not the first meeting I had given her
Husband, thought at first I had entrusted her with a false Secret; but at
length she was convinced of my Sincerity. She thanked me then for the Advice I
had given her, and assured me she would do what I desired. But her
mismanagement of the Affair turned the innocent means which I made choice of to
disincumber my self from my Persecutors, to my prejudice.

I was hardly arrived at the Place appointed for my meeting the Magistrate, but
she appeared, bringing along with her two other Relations, who were to be
Witnesses of this Adventure.

This Scene would have been a diversion to me, had I not thought, that they who
were to be Testimonies of her Husband's Shame, might be likewise Witnesses
against my self; and that it was impossible but that an Affair that would be
known to so many People, must expose my Reputation after a most cruel manner.
The Wife also, who would have it thought that this was not the first time her
Husband had broke his Conjugal Covenant, instead of informing her Witnesses
that I had acquainted her with the Assignation, told 'em quite the contrary,
and bestowed upon me a liberal share of the bad Language which she gave him.
The Husband all in confusion sneaked out of the Room without speaking a word:
At what time I thought the least thing the Wife could have done would have bin
to have given a fair Testimony of my Innocence to the People whom she brought
along with her. But she was as wicked in her Generation, as her Husband was in
his; for she upbraided me before their faces with debauching her Husband. This
Adventure presently took wing, and the Public that already had a prejudice
against me, made no scruple to believe me engaged in a re^l Intriegue with the
Magistrate. However, I did what I could to undeceive the two Kinsmen; and they
listened to me, believed me, and offered me their Protection.

The Husband, who had not the least suspicion of my informing the Wife of the
Rendevouze, came to see me the next day. But then I told him, I durst not be
seen with him any more; conjuring him in the midst of those Extremities to
which he had reduced me, to let me understand the condition of my Affairs,
since I could not in honor employ him any longer. He bid me not to trouble my
self; for he would serve me to the end; that the Adventure the day before was a
trifle; and that his Wife was a kind of Beldame, to whom no body gave credit.
Then he renewed his Importunities to answer his Desires: But he no longer
talked like a Master; nor was I any more afraid of him. Of all this I gave a
faithful Account to Madam de Chatillon, who ordered me to leave my Lodging with
the Magistrate's Kinswoman, and fell out with the Magistrate himself in such a
manner, that she would never suffer him to come near her more.

But understanding after this, that his Wife had never surpised him at the
Assignation, but by the Information that I gave her, he would not let go his
hold, resolving to ruin me, or vanquish my Reluctance.

In the mean time St. Albe found a way to break Prison; upon which his Father,
who was extremely troubled at it, and knew not what was become of him, came to
acquaint me with it; and talked to me as if I had had a hand in his Escape; and
it was true that it was so reported abroad in the World. For his Father gave
out these Reports to scare me, in hopes to overcome me by dint of Defamation;
persuaded that I would at length take off my Mask, when I saw my self lost in
my Reputation. And this was the only hope wherewith he flattered his Passion
for me. But the more he strove to defame me, the less occasion I thought I had
given, and the greater was my comfort to find my self innocent: For God had
given me the grace to look so many Misfortunes in the face, without losing my
Reason. I defended my self from the Accusation of having contributed to St.
Albe's Escape, and justified my self with so much the less trouble, because I
was ignorant of the means he had made use of.

And now the Father resolved to make his last Effort for obtaining what he had
bin so long desiring with so much importunity. To this purpose he came to give
me notice that my Husband was just upon the point of obtaining a Sentence in
his Suit that would be nothing for my advantage; but that he alone had a Trick
to delay Judgment, and that he would assist me in such a manner, that I should
gain my Cause, if I would heark'n to his Suit. I answered with disdain, that I
would with patience wait the end of my Business; and that how unhappy soever my
Destiny were, I would rather choose to be unfortunate, then purchase my Repose
by so foul a Crime.

The Lodging where Madam de Chatillon had placed me, when I left the
Magistrate's Kinswoman, was a House which had several Lodgers that were not
acquainted one with another. I had the first Apartment, and I had no converse
with any of the People that lodged in the House. As for Mrs. Laval, she lived
with her Husband, who was returned from his Province: It Is true, that she
frequently visited me, and that was all the comfort I had. At the same time
also I hired the Maid again that I brought with me from my Husband's House, and
who left me when I went to live with Madam de Chatillon. I must confess, it is a
pernicious thing to the Reputation of a Young Woman, to keep Servants so full
of Mercury as she was. And it should be the first care of a Person of my Sex to
avoid entertaining in their Service wild and disorderly Wantons, and never to
be too familiar with Servants, how modest and regular soever.

This Maid had many ill Qualities, as will appear by the sequel or the Story.
Nor had she ever seen St. Albe. which was the occasion of an Adventure which
may seem fabulous, but which fell out as I am going to relate it.

My Maid having frequently heard how eagerly the Magistrate persecuted me with
his impertinent Courtsh^p contrived an Enterprise which she never imparted to
me.

She had already got acquaintance with the People of the House; and one day she
told me, that there was a very pretty Lady among the rest of the Lodgers who
every day very diligently inquired after my health; and manifested an earnest
desire to be acquainted with me. I bid her be sure not to bring her to me; for
that I resolved to have no converse with Persons that I knew not, having reason
to be afraid of every body, in the Condition I was in. Nevertheless my
Curiosity led me one day to take a view of her from my Window. It Is true, I had
not time to examine her well: However, I observed something in her Countenance
which methought was not unknown to me; but I could not remember where I had
seen her.

All this while my Maid had laid a Design in her head, which she resolved to
put in execution, while I spent the Afternoon with Mrs. Laval. She went to the
Magistrate's House, and after she had asked to speak with him in private, she
told him, that my unkind usage of him was only to try his Constancy: And
moreover, that it was no wonder that I had so scornfully rejected him, since he
never made me any Present: That Women were biased by Interest; assuring him
that his Courtships would be acceptable to me, provided he would be but
liberal. In short, That if he desired that I should comply with his Addresses,
he had no more to do, but to come the same day to my Lodging. The Magistrate
promised not only not to fail, but to bring Money along with him. The Maid,
having thus taken her leave, went to the Young Gentlewoman before mentioned,
and proposed to her that she would be pleased to admit, under my Name, and in
my Habit, the Visit of a certain Gentleman, whose company was very diverting to
me; telling her withal, that if she would do me that kindness, I should look
upon it as an infinite Obligation. The Lady made some Scruples at first, but at
length accepted the Proposal. She suffered 'em to dress her in one of my
Habits; but still while she was dressing, she would still be laughing, as if
she had found a Mare's Nest. She demanded also the Name of the Man that was to
come; but the Maid gave her a wrong Name, which really satisfied the
Gentlewoman, to do whatever they desired of her, but still laughing, and
telling him that she was never cut out for an Actress.

Soon after the Old Fornicator of a Magistrate arrived; at what time the Maid
going to meet him, and taking him aside, gave him to understand, that before he
was to be introduced into the Apartment where I was, I desired him not to
meddle with the Window Shutters, but to let 'em be as they were; adding withal,
that I had ordered her to take the Money, because it was beneath her to ask for
it. Presently he put a Purse into my Maid's hand, and entered my Apartment with
all the Joy, which the hopes of a Blessing, from which he thought himself not
far remote, could inspire into him. At the same time there was so little light
in the Chamber, as would hardly admit the distinction of Objects. However, he
could perceive a Young Person, that seemed to him to be very handsome; and
being so prepossessed as he was with the Idea of his Pleasure, he never
suspected in the least any Trick to be put upon him. He accosted the Lady; but
finding her as mute as a Fish, and that he could not get one word out of her
Mouth, he began to distrust his Good Fortune: But though she would not speak,
as busy as he was about her, he thought he heard her laugh: Upon which he stepped
to the Windows to let in the Light; but while he was fumbling about the
Shutters, the Lady having opened the Chamber Door, was going to fly for it.
Which the Lawyer perceiving, more nimble then she, laid hold of her; but seeing
her Face stood motionless, as if he had seen a Medusa's Head; while the Lady
wrests her self out of his Hands, and ran up into her own Apartment.

Down came the Magistrate, and having got his People about him, up stairs he
went again, and demanded his Son to be delivered into his hands; his Son, who
lay concealed in the House in Women's Habit.

All this while my Maid thought verily that the Magistrate had bin stark
staring mad; for she was utterly ignorant that the Lady, whom she had got to
act my part, was the Unfortunate St. Albe. For it seems that after he had
escaped from the Place where his Father had imprisoned him, he had disguised
himself in Women's Habit, and was come to lodge in the same House where I lay,
in hopes that being thus secured from the Persecutions of his Father, he might
meet with an opportunity to offer me his Service.

The Magistrate having caused the Chamber Door to be broken open, St. Albe was
delivered into his hands in the same disguize he had on; that is to say, in my
Clothes. What a dreadful Accident was this for me! Though an Angel should have
descended from Heaven to have born witness of my Innocence, he would not have
bin believed. 'Twas known that St. Albe had a love for me; and he was found
lodged in the House where I lay, disguised in Female Habit, and in Clothes that
belonged to my self. Could any body believe otherwise, but that all this was
done by Consent. What a folly was it in St. Albe, since he had taken a
Resolution to lie at my Lodging, that he did not sooner make himself known? or
at least that he did not refuse to comply with what was desired of him? But he
never dreamt of his Father's coming, especially after the Maid had given him a
wrong Name: Besides, that his Love made him look upon the man, for whom the
Cheat was intended, as a Rival, upon whom he was willing enough to revenge
himself.

During this Hurly-burly at my Lodging, I expected my Maid, whom I ordered to
come to me. But being quite tired with staying for her, I desired Mrs. Laval to
accompany me to my Lodging. When I came there, the Neighbors told me the whole
Story of this Adventure; and my Maid not coming, I thought her afraid to see my
face.

They who heard this Story, made no question but that it was a Contrivance of
mine. They thought it had bin a Device of mine to make sport with the
Magistrate; and gave it out, that I had done it after a very facetious manner;
but at the same time, they shrewdly suspected that St. Albe and I were agreed
together; and thence inferred that I was an ill Woman for betraying him in that
manner to his Father. In short, They thought me to be of the Humor of those
Amorous Dames, who care not what becomes of their Lovers, so they may but
satisfy their Revenge, or their Divertisement.

However, the Consequences of this Affair were not so pernicious to me as I
imagined. The Magistrate was advised not to make any noise, because he could
not do it, without making himself a Laughing Stock to the whole Town: And
therefore he only gave out, that understanding his Son lay disguised in the
House where I lodged, he only went to fetch him thence.

By this means I found my self delivered from a hateful and importunate Lover.
He had no mind to make love any more to a Woman that knew how to play such
Tricks as those. So that he only hated me from the bottom of his heart; and the
weight of his fury fell upon his Son, whom he caused to be more closely confind.

All this while my Suit remained in the same condition still; for the
Magistrate did nothing for me; and Madam de Chatillon's Interest so far
prevailed, that neither my Mother nor my Husband could get any ground upon me.
She had so ordered the matter, that none of the most famous Advocates would
meddle with the Cause; but still answered my Adversaries when they came to
entertain 'em, that it was a Cause no way proper for the Bar; but rather to be
ended by a Friendly Accommodation: But because we could not agree upon the
Conditions, there was nothing done on either side. However, I still enjoyed my
Allowance without seeing either Husband or Mother; though it is true, that I
took all the care I could to avoid their Company.

What was become of my Maid all this while, I knew not; nor was I at all sorry
to be so rid of her, till I heard how ill a use she made of her Absence to my
prejudice: For in all Places where she came, she would be always bespattering
my Reputation. And I will tell ye one Adventure, by which you will fully
understand the Character of this same wicked Baggage.

She then perceiving that nothing made the Magistrate so mad as to be imposed
upon by one of his own Sex, made sure of a handsome young Female, and persuaded
her to take my Name upon her. And thus it was, that she offered me to several
Young Sparks at the Court, as a Woman whom necessity had reduced to seek her
Subsistence by this way of living. Among the rest, she addressed her helf to
Blossac, and told him, that I had bin a slave to my Reputation, which was the
only Reason that made me refuse the offer of his Purse; but that I would not be
so haughty, when I thought my self secure from being known; and provided he had
so much discretion as to make a show of being a Stranger to me, that he might
assure himself of success. Now in regard that Blossac had never done me the
honor to have any great respect for me, he readily gave credit to the Wenches
fair Story; and desirous to revenge himself of the Inconstancies which he laid
to my charge, he accepted the Proposal, with a design to insult over me. This
was doubtless his Intention, because he told the Maid that he would bring some
of his Friends along with him, when he gave me the meeting; resolving they
should be Sharers with him in his good Fortune. Blossac therefore told his
Friend of it, and his Friend told another, and so it spread insensibly all over
the Town.

The Duke of Candale, whom I sometimes met at Madam de Chatillon's, was
astonished at the Reports that were spread about concerning me, and was so
civil as to believe 'em false. He also informed Mrs. Laval of what he heard,
who besought him to let her know his Authors; and he confessed ingenuously that
Blossac was his Intelligencer.

In a word, Blossac had given the Duke an account of the Discourse between him
and my Maid; and having also told the Place and Day appointed for the Meeting,
the Duke knew not what to think of it; but being desirous to be convinced of
the truth, he requested Blossac that he might accompany him to the Assignation.

Mrs. Laval acquainted me with what the Duke of Candale had discovered to her;
nor did we know to whom to impute a Story so extravagant. I confess the first
motions of my Imagination accused my Mother and my Husband, whom I saw
persisting still so obstinately in their Resolutions to ruin me. But all this
while there was nothing of certainty in Surmises.

In the midst of these Perplexities Mrs. Laval and I were debating which way to
put a stop to these violent Calumnies, when word was brought me that the Duke
of Candale desired to speak with me. I was glad of the opportunity, in hopes
that he might give me some light into these Mysteries. He entered: But seeing
that he only talked to me of general Matters, I interrupted him, and asked him
the meaning of the many Reports that so terribly attackt my Reputation, and of
which he had alreary bin talking to Mrs. Laval. Then he up and told me what had
passed between him and Blossac, with a farther Account of what had passed
between Blossac and my Maid. Adding, with a smile, that he came to see whether
I was at home or no; because he had bin told I was to have bin at another
Place; and that Blossac stayed for him to carry him to the Meeting. At length
he concluded, that he would still make a show of believing as they did, that he
would meet Blossac, and go along with him, and that he would send me word who
they were that made use of my Name.

I was overjoyed to become Mistress of the means that would so suddenly
enlighten me into these dark Secrets that had so much disturbed my Rest: And I
begged of the Duke of Candale to give me all the clearest Informations he
could, that so I might cause Blossac to be surpised in company with the Person
that had assumed my Name. I told him of what importance it was to my
Reputation, that this Affair should be made clearly out, and conjured the Duke
to do me justice. He promised me; but he told me withal, that it would be much
more for my Honor that my Husband should surprise Blossac; because it could
not be thought but that he knew of the Reports as well as others; that he would
go immediately and give him notice that I had given Blossac a meeting, and that
it would be no body's fault but his own if he did not surprise me. I approved
the Duke of Candale's Design; and so leaving to him the management of all
things, I took my leave of him with as much joy, as I was overwhelmed before
with sadness and amazement.

The Duke of Candale so well ordered his Business, that my Husband and my
Mother had notice of the Assignation before he met Blossac. And the People whom
he employed to carry 'em the News, would not let 'em be at rest, but peal'd it
in their Ears, that there was no time to be lost: Though indeed they wanted no
Spurs, as believing that this Adventure would put an end to their Process; and
therefore they resolved not to let me escape 'em this bout.

In the mean time the Duke of Candale returning to Blossac, told him, that an
Accident had fallen out, so that he could not possibly go along with him.
Blossac therefore seeing no other remedy, went all alone to the Place
appointed, while the Duke followed him at a distance, and kept himself
concealed in the Neighborhood, resolving to be a Witness of what happened. As
for my Mother and my Husband, they were so indiscreet as to tell all the World
that now they had me safe: So that the noise of their Design ran like Wildfire
from one end of the Town to the other; insomuch that they were attended by a
Train of several Persons, that laughed in their Sleeves to think they were going
to be the Spectators of a strange Sight; that is to say, of a Husband, who was
going, as he thought, to convince himself of being a Cuckold.

Blossac was met by my Maid, and he was hardly entered the Room where the
mistaken Gentlewoman stayed for him, but my Mother and my Husband, with all
their Troop, were close at his heels. Upon the noise they made, out came my
Damsel: She was known, and when they saw her, they made no question I was not
far off. Presently the Doors were forced open; but then, to tell ye who looked
most like a Changeling of the Two, when they saw themselves both mistaken,
would be too hard a Task for me to undertake; it is only for you to imagine. My
Mother dropped out first, my Husband sneaked out after her, and Blossac followed
him, looking all like People upon the News of a great Loss at Sea. So soon as
they were gone, the Duke of Candale arrived, and gave order for seizing my Maid
and her Coadjutrix; and after he had given farther order that they might be
secured, he made haste to my Lodging to acquaint me with the issue of the
Adventure.

I was in hopes this disappointment my Husband had met with, would have bin a
sufficient Proof of my Innocence, and of the little ground he had for all his
Suspicions and Surmises; and I looked upon this Adventure as a finishing Stroke,
that would have put an end to all my Misfortunes. But People made another
interpretation of it. They cried, that all this was but a Trick of my own
nimble Wit; and that my Maid, by agreement with Blossac and I, had drawn my
Husband and my Mother into this Snare, to make it serviceable toward the
gaining of my Cause. In short, the less reason they had to believe I had a
share in it, the more convinced they were of my having a hand in it, and the
better they judged it carried on: Every body laughed that heard of it, and I
only, by it, reaped the Applause of being a Woman of Wit and Address. But that
was not the commendation that I sought: I desired only that I might have my
due. But it is impossible when a Woman is engaged in Concernments that will
admit of two Interpretations, to avoid the worst, and enjoy a happy Reputation;
it is not enough for a Person of my Sex to govern her self according to the
Rules of Wisdom and good Conduct; there must be nothing that will carry two
Senses in the Accidents of her Life: A Woman must needs be always guilty, when
Innocence has need of so many Justifications. Happy those Women who are not
exposed to these Inconveniences. A smooth even way of living is the only thing
in the World which they ought most of all to desire; and they ought to accustom
themselves betimes to look upon Intriegues and Adventures as the Rocks of their
Repose and Honor. I my self confirmed the Tour which was given to this Story,
by my compassion upon the two Confederates in Custody. For being persuaded that
I had no more need of Proof to justify my Innocence, I thought 'em Objects of
my Pity; nor could I endure to hear of the Punishments that were threatened to
be inflicted upon a Maid that had served me: So I ordered her to be set at
liberty, together with her Accomplice. I must confess, I could not have
committed a greater Act of Imprudence, and never was Compassion more
unseasonable. For then, with much more reason then before, it was adjudg'd that
the Maid had acted by my Orders, when it was known that I was the occasion of
her Release.

I advise no body therefore to do as I did: This Creature became so forgetful
of my goodness toward her, that she was afterward always the first to raise
and spread about the Town a hunderd ridiculous Stories of me. A Woman who has
Servants that expose her Reputation, ought to cause 'em to be punished without
mercy.

My Husband about the same time returned into his Province; whether it were
that he could not brook the shame of his last Adventure, or that he thought his
absence requisite to make me hearken to an Accommodation; for he began to be a
weary of lying alone; and since I had found Money and Friends, my Mother, who
could not endure the sight of me in Paris, had persuaded him, that it was for
his Interest to be reconciled, and live with me.

For my own part, I could not take a better Resolution then to consent to such
a Reconciliation, had it bin only to turn the last Story to my advantage. The
World would doubtless have more easily believed that I had no hand in it, had I
immediately after returned to my Husband. Well then, he sent a Gentleman to me,
one of his Friends, whose Name was Montalzac, with Orders to make me very fair
Propositions, if I would forget what was past. Nor did he only entrust that
Gentleman with this Negotiation, he also employed an Ecclesiastic, who was a
Famous Director. But these two Angels, instead of forwarding this
Accommodation, put it farther off, by the different Methods which they took.

Montalzac had not seen me above twice, before he gave me to understand he was
in love with me, and that the only motive that induced him to labor a
Reconciliation between me and my Husband, was, because that being his
Neighbor, it would be the more easy for him to visit me. As for the Director,
he troubled me with long Discourses that were offensive to me: He would be
proving in Mood and Figure, that I could not in Conscience live apart from my
Husband; and he repeated so many disobliging Stories about my ill Conduct, that
he made me mad. I answered him, that I had nothing to do with his long Sermons,
and sent him away with great indignation. He was not accustomed to be so rudely
handled; but on the other side, had the Reputation of an Oracle in all Pious
Negociations which he undertook. So that he looked upon me as a Reprobate: And
after he had left me in a kind of Passion, he went and gave out in all
Companies where I came, that my heart was hardened, and that I would dye in my
Iniquity. Of all the People that ever attacked my Reputation, no body did it
with more malice, nor more elaborately then this devout Ecclesiastic. He
thought he did God good service in defaming me; and I quickly found my self
become a Prey to the fury of False Zealots, who cried out that I was a
Gangreen'd Member that was to be cut off from the rest of the Body. Such sorts
of Zealots are never to be employed in Affairs of the same nature with mine; at
least they ought to be instructed before they go to work, that Mildness and
Patience are the most approved means to obtain success; and operate much more
effectually then the Transports and Invectives of an over-passionate Zeal. It Is
a strange thing that they, who, by reason of the Confidence which their
Profession demands* ought to be the most sparing of the honor of their
Neighbor, should be, as generally they are, the first that rend and tear it
with most inhumanity. A Director, by virtue of his Office, will never pardon
those by whom his Zeal is ill received: And Zealots, like the Person whom we
speak of, are seldom soft and charitable, but when they are flattered and
applauded.

As for Montalzac, so soon as he had discovered his Passion to me, I began as
soon to suspect all the Advice he gave me: And for fear that by admitting his
Visits, he might think I had some intention to flatter his Hopes, I told him, I
would acquaint my Husband with his audacious discovery of his Amorous
Sentiments to his Friend's Wife: And that notwithstanding my real Inclinations
to an Accommodation, I would defer it till he had a more faithful Friend for
his Neighbor. Montalzac, fuming, to see himself so disdainfully rejected,
resolved to observe all my motions, and to inform my Husband of every step I
took; which he did exactly; but still setting out the most innocent things in
what Colors he pleased. Thus let a Woman be never so discreet and wary, it is
impossible she should avoid the strokes of Scandal and Calumny, when she is so
unfortunate as to be beloved by wicked People.

While they were thus laboring to reconcile me to my Husband, I had a greater
desire then ever to be parted from him. The Protection of Madam de Chatillon
had procured me the same Favor from Monsieur the Prince. I must confess, that
had I not bin so powerfully supported, I should have bin more willing to have
hearkened to my Husband's Offers; but all that came near me, persuaded me
against 'em; some out of Interest; others because they would not give
themselves the trouble to let me see the inconveniences of a Design, wherein I
ran the hazard of ill Success. And indeed there are few real Friends, that know
how to give Women those Counsels which are most agreeable to their real
Exigencies. There was no body but Mrs. Laval, who thought it unfriendly to
flatter me. She told me every day, that I could not take a more honorable
Course then to live with my Husband; and insisted that it behooved me at least
to hear the advantageous Offers which he made me. But I was not then in a
condition to relish the solid Reasons with which she supported her wholesome
Advice. The ill Usuge which so good a Woman daily suffered from her Husband,
made me afraid of the like from mine. I had not as yet learnt the Lesson she
had done, that the Reputation of a Woman is never secure, when she lives
asunder from him, whom God has once united to her. On the other side, I thought
I should be happy if I could obtain a Separation; and this was that which I
only thought it my duty to labor for.

St. Albe had still recourse to me under the Oppression of his Father; nor can
I deny, but that the respect with which he always accompanied his Passion for
me, made me very desirous to be serviceable to him. I imputed all his Father's
ill usage of him to my self: I was moved that he should so long disguize
himself for my sake; and moreover, I pardoned him all reports to which he had
exposed me, in favor of the pleasing Vengeance which he had given me the
occasion to take upon his Father's Importunities. I was also good-natured; and
tho as yet I fe^^^o motions of affection for him, however I had too ^^^t an
esteem for his Person, to refuse him whatever I could in civility contribute
toward the making of his Life less miserable. To sum up all in a word, I did
not think it was a crime in him to love me, and I thought that an Amor which
was no way offensive to me, could be no inducement to hinder me from doing
that, which I would have done out of generosity. Thereupon I spoke to Madam de
Chatillon in his favor, laid before her the sad condition of the Young
Gentleman, and begged of her to make use of her credit in his behalf. She was
well pleased that I took his part; however at the same time she made me
sensible, that it would be another blot upon my Reputation, should it be known
that I had any hand in serving him. Which made me request her to procure St.
Albe's Liberty, yet so that I might not be seen in the business. In short,
Madam de Chatillon spoke to Monsieur the Prince, who obtained an Order for his
Release, and at the same time procured him an Employment in the Army better
then that which he had before.

It was presently the Public Opinion that Madam de Chatillon had never
procured St. Albe's Liberty, had it not bin at my request. But give me leave to
question whether I was to be blamed for concerning my self in his behalf. The
Delicacy which I owed my Reputation, did not require me to be insensible of the
misfortunes of a Person, who for his merit and his Youth was worthy of
compassion. There was not any body but my self to whom he could have recourse;
and I never repented of the service I did him. Whatever occasion afterward it
gave to be objected against me as a Crime, it had bin a great piece of Cruelty
to have abandoned St. Albe in that deplorable Condition wherein he was;
especially when it was in my power to relieve him. How careful soever a Woman
ought to be of her Honor, I am of opinion that it is lawful for her to do a
good Action. And when a Woman is defamed upon those accounts, she is only to
complain of certain unhappy Circumstances that sometimes will not suffer Women
to do good Actions unpunished.

So soon as St. Albe was got safe out of his Father's Clutches by the Credit of
Monsieur the Prince, Public Rumors gave it out more then ever, to be an
effect of the love that was between us. This was what his Father spread abroad
in all Companies; and Montalzac was no less diligent to inform my Husband of
the Common Report. Which obliged me to a steady Resolution never to see St.
Albe more: And though I did not think I had deserved any thing of Reproach for
having procured his Liberty, yet I thought it my duty to avoid a sort of Visits
which would have drawn a Scandal upon me with much more justice.

But St. Albe had a heart as generous as my self; and as the injury that I
might do my self in acting for him, had not hindered me from being serviceable
to him; he on his side could not believe, that the wrong which his Gratitude
might do me, was a sufficient Obstacle to hinder him from showing it. He
thereforefore several times by the Solicitations of others begged the favor
of admitting him but to one single Visit: But finding me obstinate in my
denial, he resolved to see me whatever it cost him. It Is true, I had better
have given him admission at first without so much opposition; but my Nicety
proved prejudicial to me upon this Occasion.

At the same time Madam de Chatillon went to her Signiory of Marlou, whither I
accompanied her, and where the Abbot Fouquet came often to visit us. Certain it
is, that Madam de Chatillon would never have suffered his Assiduities, but
because she was unwilling to displease a man who had too much Credit at Court,
which is an Argument that she was not so guilty of Coquetry, as a Scandalous
Memoir would make her. She was always convinced, since the Adventure of his
Lodgings, that the Abbot had a kindness for me; which was the reason perhaps
that she carried me along with her to Marlou; in hopes that the Abbot would be
more then ever my Servant, or at least that she might put upon my Account the
frequent Journneys that he made to Marlou. I conjectured her Design; but I was
so highly beholding to her, that I was willing for her sake to expose my self
to whatever could be said of me; and I think I had reason to do as I did. There
are certain Obligations that will never permit us to be ungrateful; and I
should have thought it a ridiculous piece of Niceness to have opposed Madam de
Chatillon's Design. I thought it sufficient if I did not contribute by my ill
Conduct to the Sinister Constructions which the Journey might produce, if at
least such Complacencies might be allowed of without Reproach. In a word, I set
my self above all Scruples. These are also Circumstances which it is
troublesome for a Woman to be engaged in; and where a Woman cannot do a good
Action without losing something of her Honor. But what must she do! She must
either renounce the World for good andall, or else resolve to meet with these
Inconveniences sometimes.

Book the Fourth.
WHILE we stayed at Marlou, the Lord Digby who had hired a House in the
Neighborhood, thought himself obliged to pay a Visit to Madam de Chatillon;
but this Visit was attended by so many others, that presently a Report was
spread about, that my Lord was in love with her; nor was she sorry it should be
imagined that my Lord bent all his Assiduities to her: For then she was in
hopes it would not be noised about that she had any kindness for Abbot Fouquet,
when she hearkened to another.

The Abbot, at his first coming to Marlou, said nothing to me that seemed to
make me any way the Object of his thoughts. But so soon as he perceived that my
Lord was in love with Madam de Chatillon, he was desirous to try whether she
would not discover some effects of her Jealousy. I understood his Intentions by
the continual Complaints he made of her to my self: And it may be well believed
that I had no desire to comply with his faign'd Affection for me. But the more
I was resolved to give him no Answer, the more I imagined it might be lawful
for me to carry my self civilly toward him. This engaged him farther then I
intended; and things came to that pass, that I thought my self assured that he
loved me really. I resolved therefore not to keep him in suspense: For I told
him plainly that all his Pains would be in vain. But then I found by
Experience, that a Woman hazards her Reputation no less by giving marks of a
Passion of which she is not at all sensible, then in declaring an absolute
Aversion.

The Abbot told me, he wondered I made no better use of his kindness, since it
was in his power to do me an injury by discovering my private familiarity with
one of my Lord's Domestic Servants. Those words surpised me, and I desired him
to interpret his meaning, which he refused to do, but flung out of the Room
full of despite and anger.

A little while after I was going to inform Madam de Chatillon of what had
passed; but she interrupted me, telling me that I was a Fool, and ran the
hazard of ruining my self past all redemption; that it was known that St. Albe
was with me every day; and that to the end we might see one another with more
convenience, I had ordered him to disguise himself: in short, that he waited
upon my Lord in the nature of his Valet de Chamber. I protested to her, that if
that were the Business, I knew nothing of it; that I had never seen St. Albe
since his being released out of Prison, and that I understood not the meaning
of these Discourses.

However, what Madam de Chatillon told me, was true: For St. Albe, still
possessed with his Love, and not knowing what course to take upon my refusal to
see him, yet understanding that I was at Marlou, and that my Lord Digby paid
frequent Visits to Madam de Chatillon, got into his Service under a borrowed
Name. But I had not as yet seen him; he satisfied himself with only seeing me
sometimes in the Crowd, waiting for the Opportunity which he sought. However he
was known, and upon that it was imagined that we conversed together every Day.

I begged of Madam de Chatillon, that St. Albe might be spoken to, and desired
to be gone, before the Business made any further noise, and that I should be
his mortal Enemy if he disobeyed me.

Upon this Madam de Chatillon sent for St. Albe, and laid before him the
Injury which he did my Reputation. But he appeared to her so pierced with
sorrow for having displeased me, and so ready to obey, that she took pity of
him, and promised him that before she returned to Paris, she would give him an
opportunity of seeing me, and immediately sending for me, she left me with him.
He threw himself at my feet, without being able to speak one word: On the other
side, I had not the power to chide him; I only laid before him the Injuries to
which he exposed me by his Follies; and told him, that it behooved him to
overcome a Passion that was neither convenient for him or me; that I would be
always one of his Friends; but that I should hate him, if he did not apply
himself more seriously to the Duty which he owed the King's Service, and made
it his endeavor to render himself worthy the Favors which Madam de Chatillon
had procured him. This said, away he went, charmed with my gentle reception of
him, and as he left me, told me, that he should never be happy, till he had for
my sake lost a Life for which he was indebted only to my Goodness.

However, this could not be carried so privately, but that it came to the Ears
of St. Albe's Father and Montalzac; who Both made it their business to publish
this Adventure, set forth and garnished with a thousand horrid Circumstances of
their own.

The Abbot Fouquet seeing all his Attempts upon me proved unsuccessful, renewed
his Sedulities to (...) declared to Montalzac, that I was sorry my Husband was
in such a Humor, for that I was sincerely inclined to a Reconciliation with
him.

Montalzac assured me, that if I would give him any hopes of success in his
Amor, he would work my Husband to other Sentiments. This made me bethink my
self of managing Montalzac to the best advantage; for I knew he had a great
power over my Husband; and I considered, that if he did not accomplish his
Negotiation, yet that at least I should make it apparent to all the World that
I desired an Agreement, by my keeping fair with Montalzac. Therefore I played
the Dissembler upon this Occasion; and so forbearing to promise Montalzac that
I would reward his Diligence, I left him some glimmering Hopes that I might one
day not be insensible of his Passion. From that very moment he imagined that
his Person was not displeasing to me. But believing me prepossessed for St.
Albe, he required a Promise from me that I would never see him more. To which I
returned him an Ambiguous Reply, without any tartness in the least. On the
contrary, as if I had bin to justify my self in every thing that had bin
rumored in the World concerning St. Albe and my self, I told him, that in
truth I was beloved by him, but that I had always used him very severely; that
my manner of receiving him at Marlou, was a convincing Proof of what I said;
that I had forbid him to come near; and that in short, I had quite given over
seeing him; when just as I had spok'n the words, St. Albe comes into my Chamber.

I leave ye now to judge at the Trouble and Astonishment I was in; because that
really I had not seen St. Albe in a long time before, and that I knew not what
was become of him. I spoke to him therefore like one that was heartily angry
with him, and bid him be gone immediately. Nor did St. Albe dare to offend me,
but retired with all the submission imaginable, begging pardon for his having
displeased me. However, his unexpected Arrival persuaded Montalzac that all I
had told him was false; and because that St. Albe withdrew so quickly, he
thought it to be a Trick concerted between us. Oh, said he in a king of
Ironical Ralliery, You are very sincere indeed; who dares question your Virtue?
The World certainly does ye a great deal of wrong to suspect your Chastity: In
short, he gave me so much offensive Language, that he made me angry. I then
repented I had sent away St. Albe, and I was just about to have sent for him
back, to let Montalzac see how little I cared for what he thought of me; so
true it is, that Women care not what they do, when they are provoked However, I
did not recall St. Albe, but satisfied my self with only sending away Montalzac
with a befitting Indignation.

Now as St. Albe went out of the House, he understood that the Person whom he
saw in my Chamber was the Marquis of Montalzac, and therefore calling to mind
at the same time the ill Offices he had done me, he resolved to wait his coming
forth, and revenge the Injuries I had complained of St. Albe never considered
the Consequences of what he was going to do, but followed the motions of his
Anger. So soon therefore as he saw Montalzac, he closed up with him, and asking
him how he durst defame a Lady who deserved to be spoken of with so much
respect, he presently forced him to draw his Sword. For some time they sought
without any advantage; but at length Montalzac, after he had wounded St. Albe,
fell dead at his feet. This Duel was fought almost under my Windows, and the
noise with which the People, who, though too late, made haste to part 'em,
filled the Street, obliged me to open 'em; where the first sight that struck my
Eye, was St. Albe, who, though scarce able to stand, endeavored to gain the
Door of the Hostel' d' Entragues. I could not be so cruel as to shut it against
him; on the other side, I ran down, and was the first who ordered him to be let
in. So soon as he saw me, he fell at my feet, and with a languishing Tone,
Madam, said he, I dye the happy Person that has revenged the Injuries done you.
But I begged the Master of the House to carry him without delay through a
Backdoor into a Neighbor's House, where his Wounds were dressed the first time;
and from thence I took care to have him removed to another House a little
farther off. And by this means it so happened, that the Pursuit, which was
after him, could not find him out.

However, the thing happened at such a time that Duels were punished more
severely then ever, and I saw that St. Albe would stand in need of Great Credit
to procure a Gentle Prosecution on the King's Side. To this purpose, away I
flew to Madam de Chatillon's, and informed her of the whole Adventure. There I
luckily met the Abbot Fouquet, who promised me that the Informations should not
be given to the Proctor General his Brother, till he had viewed 'em; and that
he would so order it, that it should appear as if St. Albe had bin first
assaulted.

The Abbot was as good as his word; so that by his Diligence and his Care, no
harm ensued, but St. Albe had liberty to appear abroad, so soon as his Health
would permit him; his Pardon was procured and dispatched; so that nothing
remained of this Adventure, but the Prejudice which it did my self. For how was
it otherwise to be believed but that I had a kindness for St. Albe, considering
what I had done for him? Nevertheless I only served him out of generosity and
compassion, and my Opinion was, that Women, the most severe Professors of
Virtue, would have done as much as I did. All the while that St. Albe lay
private, I never went to see him. I must confess, I put a constraint upon my
self in so doing; because that besides that my Visits might have contributed to
his Cure, the love which he testified for me was accompanied with a charming
respect and awful submission. Perhaps the greatest part of Women, who enjoy an
unbleblish'd Reputation, would not have bin so nice upon such an Occasion.

Nevertheless, when I considered what the World talked publicly of St. Albe,
and my self, it was an affliction to me, and I thought my self unhappy: For in
short, St. Albe's uninterested Zeal did me as much harm, as the Character of
those who loved me with less niceness. Thus there is no Lover which it does not
behove a Woman to be afraid of, seeing there is so much danger in the Visits of
an honest man.

Now in regard the Abbot Fouquet believed that I had a love for St. Albe, he
was no less persuaded that I was greatly beholding to himself, and therefore
thought he had a right to demand of me some Marks of my acknowledgment. He told
me, that seeing he had for my sake saved the Life of my Lover, he expected from
me a piece of Service which I could not deny him without Ingratitude; which was
to give him information how Madam Chatillon demeaned her self with the Marshal
d' H^quincourt, who for some Months had seemed to be very much her Servant. I
made him answer, that I had not yet observed that Madam de Chatillon had any
kindness for those that had a love for her, and that she only admitted 'em into
her Company out of civility. I added, that it became him better to understand
Madam de Chatillon's Character, which was rather to seek the settlement of a
Good Fortune, then to live under the uncertainty of Wanton Amors.

The Abbot de Fouquet told me, he knew that well enough; however, he desired me
to do him the favor which he requested of me.

But though I was obliged to the Abbot Fouquet, yet I thought my self much more
beholding to Madam de Chatillon; and therefore I failed not to give her an
account of the Trust which the Abbot endeavored to repose in me. To which, You
are not the first, said Madam de Chatillon to me, whom he has tried to engage
to inform him of all my Actions. He is a jealous Friend, who cannot endure that
any body else should have a kindness for me; and because I cannot love him
after such a manner as he desires, he conceits that I reserve that sort of
friendship for another. With these thoughts he torments himself; all those that
visit me disturb his rest, and upon the least appearance he frames Suspicions
to himself, which he will not suffer to be rooted from his mind; he disperses
'em in the world, and finds out people that spread 'em abroad in all Companies.
Is it not He who has endeavored to persuade all the Earth that I love Monsieur
de Candale, and Monsieur de Nemours? I do not wonder therefore that the Visits
of Marshal d' Hoquincourt alarm him; it is the Character which he bears. But
you know, added she, the Reasons that induced me to be civil to him: And I must
now dissemble. Do you make as if you had never spok'n to me; I permit you to
give him an account of my Demeanor with the Marshal; but it will be to no
purpose for you to tell him the truth; he will never believe ye; he will accuse
ye of Dissimulation; for he is a Man who will not be satisfied with any
Relations that make his Injustice appear: In a word, it is his desire that
People should speak ill of me.

What Madam de Chatillon told me, came to pass; for the Abbot believed I would
never betray her; and when I assured him that no man could have a just
Suspicion of Madam de Chatillon's Virtue; he told me, he well knew what
thoughts it behooved him to have of it, and flew into a passion because I would
not tell him an untruth.

Nevertheless, Madam de Chatillon forbore not to see him, but still admitted
his Visits: And this Compliance alone it was which caused her Conduct to be
suspected; but for this, she had preserved entire the Reputation which she
deserved.

For my own part, I had still more reason to complain then Madam de Chatillon,
being obliged to be careful how I offended my Friends, and finding my self in
such a condition as gave opportunities to authorize whatever the World would
say of me. For when a Woman lives apart from her Husband, she furnishes
Discourse with Weapons against her self; nor is it thought an injury done her
to suspect her Behavior.

St. Albe was no sooner cured, but his Father died; and happy for him he died
so suddenly, that he had no time to make a Will, whereby to disinherit him.

The first use that St. Albe made of his Inheritance, was to offer it to my
self. He wrote to me, that I was Mistress of all his Estate; and desired I
would permit him to make it over to me by a Deed of Gift, for a particular
Reason. His Friends were all for having him to marry; and in regard it was
impossible to consent to any such Proposal, he thought to rid himself of their
Importunities, by letting 'em see that he had disposed of his Estate.

Though this Proposal seemed to be very extravagant, yet I was not insensible
of the Gentleman's Generosity. And at the same time I bewailed my Misfortune to
be beloved by a man, who, the more capable he was to perform Heroic Actions,
the more he prejudiced my Reputation. And how did I expose my self to the Fury
of his Relations, when they should come to understand the Design which he had
propounded to me! A Rock so much the more dangerous, by how much I felt my self
more pleasingly flattered; for I knew then, it would not be possible for me to
hate a man that gave me every day new occasions to esteem him.

Had I not had a thousand Reasons of Prudence and Virtue, yet methought I would
not have bin without 'em then, to render my self worthy the Sentiments which
St. Albe had for me; and I desired no other Proof to justify my Conduct. From
that time forward I was convinced, that there was no Woman, let her have but
never so little Reason, that can deny her self not to be touched with
Principles of Honor, when she is beloved by a Man who only deserves to be the
Object of her Affection. And if we meet with Women every day who are somewhat
nice in fixing their Amors, it is because they can find no Person who merits a
more refined Delicacy. For generally the Character of those by whom they are
beloved, is that which procures 'em their happy or unhappy Destiny; and nothing
teaches 'em their duty better, then a Lover who understands the performance of
his own.

That which St. Albe did on his part, taught me what it behooved me to do on
mine. I resolved not only to refuse his Offers, but also to oblige him to
marry. I sent him word, that he would ruin me by doing what he intended; but if
he desired I should have a kindness for him as long as I lived, that it behooved
him to comply with the Desires of his Relations; which I conjured him to
accomplish, by the care it became him to have of my Reputation.

My Answer afflicted him; he fell sick; and during his Sickness he wrote me
several Letters, wherein he endeavored to persuade me to consent to the Deed
of Gift. But I resolutely refused him; and wrote to him fresh Exhortations to
marry, unless he had a mind to lose my Favor for ever. And indeed it was easy
to be seen, that I could never have avoided the Persecutions of his Family, had
they had the least intimation of his Design.

As for the Donation, I suppose he considered the ill consequences that would
infallibly have attended it, and therefore never spoke to me more concerningit;
but he sent me word that he could not resolve to marry; for that seeing I had
refused him, he valued no body else beside. And the pleasure which this
Sentiment infused into me, hindered me from opposing it, which was the reason
that I could not avoid being made the Object of what the Malice of his
Relations could throw upon me.

For in regard that they were very earnest with him to marry, and so much the
rather, because a considerable Match was offered him, which they were afraid of
missing, they imputed his refusal of it to me. So that his Kindred being
prepossessed with that Opinion, broke all the Laws of Decorum with me, and fell
upon my Reputation with all the cruelty imaginable. On the one side they sent
to my Husband, and peal'd it in my Mother's Ears that St. Albe kept me; and on
the other side they hanted St. Albe with ridiculous Stories of my pretended
Amors. And things were carried so high, that a Great Lord, who had a mind to
marry his Daughter to St. Albe, proposed the sending me away to my Husband by
force, which I had notice of; and upon that, falling out with St. Albe in good
earnest, I sent him word that I would hate him, and never see him more, if he
did not comply with the Desires of his Friends.

He tried diverse ways to dispense with this Necessity; but seeing that the
longer he delayed his Marriage, the more bitterly they inveighed against me, he
promised to marry the Party proposed to him: He went to see her, and the
Articles of the Contract were soon signed.

After he had given me this proof of his Submission, he begged leave that he
might pay me a Visit; nor did I think it proper to refuse him. He came to me
with such a face of Grief, as made me repent of what I had exacted from him;
nor could I dissemble how great a Sharer I was with him in his Sorrow. But in
short, said I, there is no other way for you to assure me of your Love. Marry
then; and to complete the proof of your Affection for me, you must likewise
love the Person whom you are going to marry; and as you demean your self to
her, I shall judge of your love to me. But have a care how you behave your self
with the least scorn and contempt, for the reason of it will be presently
conjectured. Well, Madam, replied St. Albe, with a sigh, I will do what
whatever you command me; but my Relations and my Wife shall know, that it is to
you they are beholding for it; and upon condition that they come and ask you
pardon for the Injuries they have done you. No, said I, that would produce a
bad effect; for your Wife will never love ye, when she should come to
understand that any other then her self had obliged you to marry her. But as
for your Relations, I give you leave to let 'em see that you had all along a
kindness for me; nevertheless, that I never was the Woman who gave you bad
Counsel. At least permit me, Madam, replied St. Albe, to bring my Mother
hither, that she may be acquainted with your Sentiments, and by that means be
enabled afterward to undeceive those who verily believe 'twas you that
obstructed my Marriage; for I protest, said he, concluding, that I will never
marry, if somebody does not know, that it was only done by your Command. I
answered him, that he might bring his Mother to me; and that I would gladly see
her, since it was a Satisfaction which he would not be denied.

Thus St. Albe, by causing this sort of Amends to be made me, thought he had
found a means to bind me in a Tie of Friendship with his Mother, that so he
might have afterward opportunities to see me. Nor did he conceal this
Inducement from me; and I was sensible of it, because I found that I could
hardly dispense with a perpetual absence from him: Besides, that I thought it
would be a means to silence the Prittle-prattle of the World, when they should
see me in friendship with his Wife, and the rest of his Relations.

His Mother failed not to come and see me with the first; for since the
Adventure that befell her Husband, she had an inclination for me. And (...) and
besides that, I was beginning to think seriously of reconciling my self to my
Husband. He would have said a great deal more, but I refused to hearken to him,
and bid him be gone.

He returned the next day, but I denied him admittance, and at length he
despaired of ever making me alter my Resolution. But when it was known about
the Town that I went no more to visit his Wife, 'twas then given out that she
had forbid me the House; and this Report confirmed what had bin formerly spread
abroad concerning me. I must confess I found my self under very unfortunate
Circumstances; for I could not carry my self with that circumspectness upon
this Occasion, but that some ill interpretation or other would be put upon my
Behavior; so that I rather chose to suffer that it should be said St. Albe had
sacrificed me to the jealousy of his Wife, then that it should be reported he
had sacrificed his Wife to his Affection for me.

But when St. Albe began to be assured of my Resolution never to see him more,
he laid aside all constraint upon himself, and began to lead his Wife a very
ill life: Upon which it was presently given out, that I had advised him to take
that Course to satisfy my Revenge.

So soon therefore as I found that St. Albe neglected to pursue the Counsel I
had given him, I began to abate of the good opinion I had of him. He appeared
to me to be too much like other men; I accused him for want of Niceness; and I
was so unjust as to imagine with my self that his Behavior offended me: I
thought he failed in the respect and value which he owed me; and therefore I
resolved to cure him of his Passion; seeing there was no other way to oblige
him to live lovingly with a Woman, whom he would have thought sufficiently
amiable had he not had a love for me.

I communicated this Design to Mistress Laval, and we agreed together, that I
should make a show of being in love with a Gentleman whose Name was Savigny,
with whom I had bin acquainted for some time, and whom I frequently saw at
Madam de Chatillon's, whose Kisman he was; and that Mistress Laval should go to
St. Albe, and tell him as a great Secret, of this new Amor of mine. I was in
hopes by this means that St. Albe would have relinquished all his kindness for
me, and that he would have lived lovingly with his Wife, when he thought me
prepossessed for another. I was too well acquainted with St. Albe's Discretion,
not to be afraid lest he should make an ill use of this Confidence, or that it
was not in his power to defame me. Which made me determine to give him proofs
of this imaginary Intriegue by several Letters which I feigned to have written
to Savigny, and which Mrs. Laval was to show St. Albe as one of the greatest
Secrets in the World. I must confess, this Artifice lay a little too open to
discovery. For they that were but never so little acquainted with me, knew full
well that I had no manner of private engagement with Savigny, and that he never
came to my Lodging. However, I fancied that St. Albe might suffer himself to be
surpised by it; and perhaps it might be no trouble to me to try him that way;
or at the worst, I thought that if he discovered the Artifice, he would
understand thereby that it was my absolute desire that he would live more
lovingly then he did with his Wife, since I made use of so strange a means to
oblige him to it.

A part of what I foresaw came exactly to pass. For it was not in St. Albe's
power to have an Opinion meanly favorable of me; since never any man made good
the Character of a True Lover better then he did, which is to have an
inviolable esteem for the Person whom he loves. But it was not only the value
he had for me, that hindered him from giving credit to the Secret that was told
him with so much caution; the good Opinion he had of Mistress Laval, would not
permit him to believe her. He was convinced that a Woman so much my Friend as
she was, could never be induced to betray me; so that he told Madam Laval in
plain terms, that he would not believe one tittle of all her Insinuations.

Mrs. Laval orejoy'd to find him so honest a Gentleman, acknowledged to him,
that I had made use of that means to let him understand how much his Harshness
to his Wife offended her.

St. Albe could not refrain from tears, when he saw that I did the same thing
to engage him to his Duty, which others would have done to draw him off from
it. And he desired Mrs. Laval to give her self the trouble of delivering me the
following Letter.

I Surrender, Madam, to your Goodness in my behalf. Mrs. Laval can tell ye,
that I never hesitated one moment to take your part against your self. The
esteem which I have for you, made me judge at first sight, that you had a
design to impose upon me. But undeceive your self; for nothing shall ever
create in me any other Opinion of your Virtue, then what I first conceived,
when I sacrificed my heart and Life to your Service. I shall submit to what you
enjoin me: However, permit me to beg of you, in recompense of this Sacrifice, a
share in your heart: I cannot forbear admiring it; and I suffer extremity of
pain, because I cannot deserve it. Assist me to support the Misfortune to which
you condemn me, in obliging me to show another what I can never be truly
sensible of for any but your self: Convince me from time to time that you have
not quite forgotten me; and suffer me to flatter my self that I should have bin
more happy, if your Duty and mine would have allowed me that felicity.

Mrs. Laval delivered me this Letter, and she wept when she gave me an account
of what she had observed of Great and Heroic in the Sentiments of St. Albe. We
both together admired and bewailed the unhappy* Chance of my Destiny, which
made so many People cherish such bad Opinions of me, those especially among
whom I endeavored to gain that esteem which I thought was due to me, while the
only Person that I would have had prepossessed against me, could not suffer an
ill thought concerning me to enter his Breast.

How happy should I have bin, said I to Mademoisel Laval, if all men were of
his Character! Alas! why are they not so? -- what a detestable inclination have
they to judge amiss of Women? At least, added I, since I have met with one who
partakes not either of their Blindness or Malignity, it is but just that I
should have an esteem for him only, and this is that I will do the whole
remainder of my Life. Happy if they who were the Authors of my first Affections
had resembl'd him. But no, replied I presently, it would have vexed me to the
Soul, if ever any other but St. Albe had merited an esteem which I would have
bestowed upon another. Well, said Mrs. Laval, but what at length is your
Resolution? Will you grant him his Request? will you let him hear from you
sometimes? Alas, replied I, wherefore should I not? Can I do too much for a man
that thinks nothing too good for me? Go, find him out, I conjure ye, and tell
him he may reck'n upon what ever I can grant him without prejudice to my Duty;
and if ever I come to be in a condition -- But stay, replied I as soon, we must
not flatter our selves with idle Hopes -- tell him I am wholly his -- provided
that he never sees me, and that he never requires any Letters from me; which
though they may be altogether innocent, will however render me suspected. You
have much ado, replied Mrs. Laval, to take any Resolution, Madam -- for my part
I advise ye not to send to him at all; but to wait till he performs what he
promises to ye, and that an opportunity present it self to let him know how
sensible you are of it. I submitted to her Advice; though I must acknowledge,
that had Mrs. Laval but never so little inclined to have given me other
Counsel, I should without delay have taken it; and it may be I might not have
bin sufficiently* Mistress of my self, to have prevented the declaring to him
the entire Passion I had for him.

If I had reason to be satisfied with St. Albe's Letter, I was much more
pleased with him, when I understood his kind demeanor toward his Wife. He was
so careful in his behavior, so full of respect and complacency, that he was
become a Model for all Husbands. Whatever passion I had for him, I had no
inclination to be jealous of him: And I thought my self so well acquainted with
St. Albe's Character, that I attributed to my self whatever he did for his Wife.

But the World made another judgment of the Matter: People believed that St.
Albe's kindness to his Wife proceeded from his being separated from my Company:
And they cried, there was all the reason in the World to remove me from him,
seeing it was I who set 'em formerly at variance.

St. Albe was at his Wit's end when he heard 'em talk at this rate; but he
durst not undeceive 'em; for that if he intended to live in peace with his
Wife, and follow exactly my Advice, it behooved him to be careful how he
discovered me to have any hand in the change of his Humor.

But Madam de St. Albe, being fully persuaded that her Husband's kindness to
her was only due to her own Merit, was the first that railed against me in all
Places. It Is true, she was more reserved in the presence of her Husband, before
whom she durst not so much as utter my Name, for fear of recalling to
remembrance what was past. Of this every body informed me, and advised me to
ask St. Albe the reason of it. But I had no mind to do it, and I found my self
inclined to speak as much good of her, as she spoke ill of me. I must confess,
this Moderation deserved no great applause; for methought, that a Woman under
my Circumstances could not well do otherwise; besides that I loved St. Albe too
well, not to pardon the Tittle-tattle of his Wife, upon whom I could not be
revenged, without setting 'em again together by the Ears.

About this time he was engaged to go to the Army; and because he thought my
Allowance not sufficient to maintain me, he found out Monsieur Brice, who was
entrusted with the payment of it; and putting a considerable Sum into his
hands, he desired him to let me want for nothing; and so to manage the
Business, that I might think my self beholding only to Mr. Brice. And he, was
so exact in the performance of what St. Albe had recommended to his care, that
I was a long time ignorant whence this Generosity proceeded. But when I
understood it, my esteem and my love increased for a man so worthy to be
beloved. I must acknowledge I needed no new Testimonies of his Merit to make me
resolve to love him as long as I lived: I was fully determined upon that
already; but at the same time I promised my self to do nothing for him but what
might correspond with my Duty. The innocent Pleasures of loving St. Albe, and
being beloved by him, was my comfort in the midst of all my Sufferings with
which my froward Destiny afflicted me; and whatever compassion the recital of
my Misfortunes drew upon me, I thought it a thing to be really envied, that I
should have the happiness to meet, in the Person of St. Albe, with a Lover
worthy to possess my heart, and in the Person of Mrs. Laval, with a Friend that
so well merited my Confidence.

St. Albe's absence gave his Wife her full liberty to exercise her hatred
against me: Nothing pleased her so much as to hear my Conduct ill spoken of.
Her Gossips, who understood her Sentiments, fed her Malice with their
compliance; so that at length she resolved my ruin to all intents and purposes.
And to bring about her Design, she bethought her self of contriving several
Letters of her own head, wherein she stufft a world of horrible Fictions
relating to Mrs. Laval and my self. These Letters she put into the hands of the
Director, of whom I have already made some mention; who believing that the
Glory of God required him to be revenged upon me for slighting his Admonitions,
showed 'em with a hypocritical gravity to Mrs. Laval's Husband, and after that
to my own Husband, and my Mothe. Nor did he stop there, but found a way to have
the Queen informed of my loose behavior, with an humble Petition that she
would be pleased to interpose her Authority to remedy those Disorders which he
could not but lament; and of which he might have easily seen the falsehood,
would he but have taken the pains to examine by whom those Letters were
written. But Prudence and Charity are Virtues to which Hypocrisy is a Stranger.

Book the Fifth.
WHEN Reputation is become a prey to the indiscreet Zeal of counterfeit
Godliness, the Mischief is without a Remedy. The Letters before mentioned made
a most terrible noise; and Madam de Chatillon informed me that the Queen had
bin made acquainted with 'em, and that she had bin importuned for an Order to
have us Both confind, Mrs. Laval and my self. All this was done by the pious
Care of the Director before mentioned, as I have already said. And I made no
question but that our Enemies had obtained their desires, had not Madam de
Chatillon bin so kind as to undeceive the Queen. But she justified me in such a
manner, that the Director could do us no harm.

In the mean time Madam de Chatillon advised us to betake our selves to some
Convent, till our Husbands could be brought either by fair or foul means to do
us justice. Which Advice we followed; and I can say we did it without
reluctance.

After this I made it my business to bring my Suit to an end. To which effect
Madam de Chatillon took the pains to speak to my Judges, and the Cause was just
ready for judgment, when my Mother came to me, and proposed an accommodation
between me and my Husband. I was apt to believe that my Mother did this of her
own head, without any Order from my Husband: She was afraid, lest having such
powerful Friends at Court as I had, that I should have obtained an absolute
Separation, and lived continually at Paris; where, for her that still aspired
to go for a young Widow, a Daughter of my years was the most mortifying Sight
in the World, and therefore she would fain have got me out of the way: But she
did not find me to be in such haste to correspond with her Desires. I told her
that I had bin too much abused to be satisfied with a private Agreement, and
therefore I would be justified in Public: Which Answer did not a little
exasperate her against me, so that we parted no way satisfied one with another.
But for my part, I must confess 'twas not so much my Husband's ill usage, and
my Mother's unkindness which obliged me still to thwart her in what she
desired: I was mad that a Mother, who had always forsak'n me when she saw me
without support, should make her Applications to me, when she saw I had no more
need of her.

Therefore, as I said before, I moved every day by my Counsel for Sentence in
my Cause, and was just upon the point to obtain it, when the Death of my
Husband put an end to the Suit after an unexpected manner. He was returned home
with an intention, as they said, to have suborned Witnesses against me; at what
time he was seized with a sudden Sickness, that gave him no time to do me
justice. However, he declared before his death, that he repented of his
unkindness to me; that he had bin jealous without a cause of my behavior, for
which he blamed himself; and that he desired that all the World might know,
that I was innocent of all those things which Scandal had laid to my charge,
and of which he confessed himself to be the chief cause.

The Tidings of his Death reached first my Mother's ears before they came to
mine, so that she made more then ordinary haste to inform me of it, and it
would have bin a difficult thing to have added any thing to her Demonstrations
of Joy and Tenderness. All the Ladies in the Convent came to complement me upon
the News. But then I, who took notice that I was looked upon before by the same
Persons as a Woman whose company they rather suffered, then were plea'd with
among 'em, was struck with admiration at their Civilities, and how much they
congratulated themselves, that I had done them the honor to make choice of
their House for my Abode.

The first Counsel that my Mother gave me, was to go forthwith into the
Province, and look after the fair Estate which my Son was then Heir to: But the
Death of another Person, which happened almost at the same time, changed my
Fortuue much more to my advantage. For my Brother being about Fifteen years of
Age, had overheated himself in the College, and dying of a Pleurisy, left me
the sole Heiress of a considerable Fortune.

My Mother was so grieved for the loss of my Brother, that I thought she would
never have survived him. I offered her all the Consolation that I could give
her, and might have bin a comfort to her, would she but have done me that
justice that would have made me capable of being so; but I endeavored in vain
to persuade her, that she should regain in me what she had lost in my Brother:
She had the same Sentiments of me as formerly; whether it were, that she
imagined her former Harshness to me would not permit me to love her, or that
she still continued her malicious Inclinations to ruin me.

The change of my Fortune was so much the more accept^ble, as being that which
I the least expected. The first thing then that I did in this same Exaltation
of my Fortune, was to bethink my self of a way to make Madam Laval some
satisfaction for the Obligations she had laid upon me. I reconciled her to her
Husband, to whom I lent a considerable Sum of Money to buy an Employment in the
King's Household; but he lived not long in his new Advancement. After that, I
would have provided an advantageous Settlement for Mrs. Laval; but she
testified so great a desire to live with me, that I consented to it; so much
the rather, because I was assured of her Sincerity, and that she had a more
then ordinary love for me.

While I was giving these demonstrations of my Gratitude, the World, accustomed
to empoyson all my Actions, failed not to give out, that I had procured an
Employment for Mrs. Laval's Husband for no other reason, but because I was in
love with him. But I shall not need to say any thing in contradiction to such
an irrational Calumny.

As for St. Albe, I had still a passionate love for him; and I answered the
marks of Tenderness which he continually gave me, as much as Decency and
Decorum would permit me. It may well be thought that the change of my Fortune
was no small pleasure to him: And I must confess, that when I found my self my
own Mistress, I repented that I had obliged him to marry; I should have bin
overjoyed to have made him a Sharer with me in my Estate. It Is true, he was not
my Equal in Quality, nor rich enough to pretend to marry me; but what he had
done for me, and the respect with which he had always accompanied his Passion,
made me believe that there was no Person but he in the World who was worthy of
me; but there was no ground for me to give him any such hope. On the other
side, I thought, that if I gave him an occasion for the least Presumption, it
would but serve to augment his Misfortune, and create in his Breast a greater
contempt of his Wife: Therefore I resolved to conceal from him more then ever
the Sentiments of kindness which I had for him. I paid him exactly what I
thought was due to him, and in my Turn offering to him my Estate to be wholly
at his Service, I desired him to allow me an opportunity to testify my
Gratitude to him. But at the same time I conjured him to use all his Endeavors
to stifle a Passion, which would but only serve to render him unhappy.

He loved me with so much delicacy, that he durst not contradict the Resolution
which I seemed to have taken to forget him: How unwilling soever he was to
receive the Money which I sent him, he only accepted it for fear of displeasing
me; and fearing lest the outward marks of his Love should prove at length
offensive to me, he took a Resolution to dissemble it as much as he could, and
consenting to my Resolution neither to see him, nor admit his Visits; he only
sent me word that his Love should last as long as he lived, but that he would
never give me an occasion to complain of him.

This Submission of his, rendered him still more dear to me; and if it were my
grief that I could not do for him what I would, it was my equal joy that I had
in him a Lover who was proof against all Trials.

There are but few Women, perhaps, who are capable of containing themselves
within those bounds which I prescribe my self; perhaps, because they know not
how to relish what is most exquisite in the pleasure of being beloved. For my
part I am of opinion, that a Woman may dispose of her Love with her Duty, yet
have nothing to upbraid her self for so doing.

Soon after the Death of my Husband I had several considerable Matches
propounded to me by several People. However, what I had suffered during my
first Nuptials, or rather my love for St. Albe, made me reject all their
Proposals.

Then no body made any scruple of keeping me company, or of professing
themselves to be my Friends. For I was rich, and my Wealth had quite defaced
the remembrance of whatever had bin invented to my ruin. Then I understood the
humor of the World: They who had the most defamed me, were the first that
sought my Acquaintance; and swore that they never gave credit to the Stories
published by my Enemies. But I was nothing dazzled with this Change; I knew
still how to distinguish People that had bin kind to me in my Misery, from
those that only flattered my Abundance.

The Affairs wherein the Death of my Husband had involved me, obliged me to
take a Journey into the Province, where my stay was longer then I expected: And
passing through Lions, I understood that the Duke of Candale lay there so
desperately sick, that he was quite given over. Touched with this News, and
forgetting then the Reasons which I had to believe him none of my Friends, I
only remembered what he had done for me, and I thought it my duty to offer him
my Service in the Condition he was in. So soon as he perceived me, he could not
forbear asking me pardon for not having sent to me in so long time; and he told
me, sighing, that it had bin his misfortune not to know his Real Friends. I
answered him, that I would freely pardon him what was past, provided he would
but strive to recover his Health. He replied, he was sensible he should dye,
but that he was glad that Death had given him so much time as to assure me,
that he always had a greater esteem for me then for any other Woman. After
that, he told me what Women he had loved; and I perceived I was not the only
Woman to whom he had proved inconstant. Oh! if I might but live a little
longer, cried he, I would make known to the World, that there are Women both of
merit and virtue; and my Example should undeceive all those who are the cause
of the Injuries that are done 'em. I could not forbear weeping, seeing him
persuaded that he was going to dye: He also wept himself; and our Tears made
People believe that there had bin a mutual Amor between us.

Thus what I did out of mere gratitude for the Duke of Candale, turned to the
prejudice of my Reputation after a strange manner. So true it is, that when a
Woman is unfortunate, she cannot do a good Action, which shall not be conster'd
in a bad Sense. For presently it was spread abroad, that I had bin driven out
of the Duke of Candale's Chamber as an Object that terrified his Conscience.
But what will not People say* when they have a mind to defame a Woman! However,
I was little moved with these Rumors. For because I was not conscious of what
they laid to my Charge, I thought it my duty to neglect 'em. Nor was it a
wonder that I was not more cautius for the future then I had bin till that
time. My Innocence hindered me still from keeping a guard upon my self, and was
the first cause of the Attacks that were made upon my Reputation. I should have
bin more studious of outward Appearances, had my Desires bin more irregular.
But Hypocrisy and Grimace seemed to me the most unworthy of all Vices: I was
ignorant how much People have need of 'em in their Conversation in this World.

I met in the Province a Lady whose Misfortunes had rendered her no less
illustrious then my self: And because I undertook to write these Memoirs for no
other reason then to prove that People are frequently mistak'n in the judgments
which they make concerning Women, I thought it proper in this Place to relate
the Story of this Lady, by which it will be seen how deceitful outward Shows
are; and I shall set it down in the following words, as she repeated it her
self.

When the Duke of Beaufort, said she, first made his Applications to me, I was
ambitious enough to wish him for my Husband; and I flattered my self with those
hopes, because he gave me some reason so to do. The Duke of Nemours his Brother
in-Law, at the same time also testified a very great Passion for me; and
doubtless I had had a greater love for the Duke of Nemours, but he was married,
and I was too proud to hearken to a Lover who could not be my Husband.
Therefore I gave an ear to the Duke of Beaufort, and endeavored to separate
him from the Duke of Nemours. Now it was the less known that either the one or
the other courted me, because all People were persuaded that they were
otherwise engaged; nor was it believed they had any other Quarrels then such as
frequently divided the whole Court, and of which the two Ladies, with whom they
seemed to be in love, were the occasion. The Duke of Beaufort also promised to
marry me, so soon as he had brought about a Design which he had in his head,
and which he imparted to me.

The Promise of a Match so advantageous, augmented my Pride, and made me carry
my self more stately toward the Duke of Nemour; but I made it my business to
humor the Duke of Beaufort. The Duke of Nemours had too great a conceit of his
Merit, and too much Wit not to unravel the reason of my preferring his Brother
before him. Nevertheless it made him mad, to have the meanest share in my
Affection; and he endeavored to infuse into me a contempt of his Rival. But
notwithstanding all the unpleasing Portraitures he gave of him, I still
continued my compliance with the Duke of Beaufort.

The Duke of Nemours was so enraged at this, that seeing he could not put me
out of conceit with his Rival, he resolved to make his Rival have an ill
opinion of me. Therefore he informed him by a Person suspected to neither, that
I betrayed him, and that the Duke of Nemours spent whole Nights with me.

The Duke of Beaufort took no notice of any thing to my self, but resolved to
have me carefully watched. On the other side, the Duke of Nemours, who made no
question but his Brother-in-Law would set Sentinels enough upon me, dreamed of
nothing else but how he might procure a Witness that would swear he saw him
enter my Chamber in the Night; and at length he gained one of my Servants, who
left open a low Window that looked into the Street; and through that Window it
was that the Duke of Nemours entered, at such a time when he was sure to be
observed by the Duke of Beaufort's Spies.

This Adventure was not long kept secret, but was published the next Morning;
and all the while I knew nothing of it. And indeed what care, what caution can
be sufficient against Adventures of this nature! What Woman can promise her
self to be exempt from disgrace, when there needs no more then an Enemy or a
Lover to satisfy his Revenge upon her.

But when I understood what had past, I went to the Duke of Beaufort to ask him
the reason of spreading such a Scandal. He answered me, that I knew better then
any body; that it was no Calumny, because his Rival had bin seen to go in and
come out of my Lodging but the Night before. Upon that I made such a Hubub in
my House that I discovered the Truth. I sent for the Duke of Beaufort to come
to me; he came; and the Lacquey who had bin bribed, confessed the whole truth
before him, so that at length he began to believe, or else he made a show of
believing I was innocent. I told him farther, that I was not satisfied with
those Proofs, but that I would give him others yet more convincing, by obliging
the Duke of Nemours to disown the thing himself. But the Duke desired me to
forget the Adventure, assuring me that he desired no other satisfaction, and
that he was fully convinced of my Innocence.

However, I saw no other way to restore my Reputation to its first integrity,
but my marrying the Duke of Beaufort: But I soon perceived he had flattered me
with false hopes; he abated his Sedulities, and insensibly forbore to visit me.
And to ^ustify this change of his mind, he wrote me word, that during the
Agitations of his Fortune, he could not think of marrying. So that I plainly
saw, I was no longer to reck'n upon him. I must confess, it was no great
trouble to me to forget him, because I never loved him. However, I was vexed he
had escaped me; and therefore not caring to live any longer at Paris, I retired
into my Province. Where, while I remained in my own Signiory, which as you well
know, borders upon the Duke of Savoy's Territories, another Adventure befell me.

One Evening word was brought me, that two Gentlemen, having lost their way in
following some Chase or other, desired to know whether I would be so courteous
as to afford 'em a Lodging till the next day, in regard it was late, and they
being quite tired, it was impossible for 'em to ride any farther. The Person
that spoke for 'em would not tell me their Names; only he assured me, they were
Persons of Quality, and that I would not repent me of the kindness I did 'em.

I had with me a Lady, one of my intimate Friends, and an old Gentleman, who
was nearly related to me. I was also at a stand, whether it became me to
entertain Gentlemen who refused to let me know who they were: But when they
appeared, I found such an Air of Nobleness in their Faces, and they requested
me to lodge 'em with such a graceful demeanor, that I could not refuse 'em.
These two Persons were the Duke of Savoy, and the Marquess of Fleuri, who under
pretense of having lost their way, came out of curiosity to see me.

The Duke of Savoy had for a long time an earnest desire to be acquainted with
me. He had seen my Picture, among others of the Ladies of the Court of France
that had been sent him; and in regard he was an Amorous Prince, who took
delight in Adventures, understanding that I lived in a Castle bordering upon
his Dominions, his Curiosity led him to give me a Visit, in company with the
Marquess of Fleuri.

The Duke of Savoy, who was unwilling to discover himself to any body but only
to me, that he might not lose time, made a sign to the Marquess to engage in a
discourse with the Old Gentleman, and the Lady, my Friend, while he kept me in
discourse: And then so soon as he could speak without being heard by any body
but my self, Madam, said He, you see ^ Prince, who for above these two years
has had so great a Passion for you, which has made him forget his Quality, that
he might have the Honor of seeing you. I am the Duke of Savoy; but I do not
ground my Hopes of gaining your Favor so much upon my Quality, as upon the
most tender and p^ssionate Love that ever was pledged to Womankind. While he
was thus talking to me, I kept my Eyes attentively fixed upon him: A sort of
surprise which he perceiving, and afraid lest I should interrupt him, tho it
were only to show the astonishment I was in, he earnestly desired me not to
disclose it to others that He had discovered himself; and after a World of
Amorous Ejaculations, he pressed me to tell him what Impression they had made
upon my Heart.

But I was not overhasty to let him understand my Sentiments; I perceived in
my self an Inclination for the Marquess of Fleuri, before I knew who he was;
and I was sorry that I had shown any thing of Complacency to the Duke of Savoy,
because I foresaw he would prove an Obstacle to my growing Passion: In short, I
was already more in love then I could imagine my self to be. Instead of
answering to the Duke of Savoy's Amorous Importunities, I asked him with a kind
of unseasonable Transport, the Name of the Person that accompanied him; but
immediately repenting that I had bin so foolish to put such a Question to him,
I fell into a sort of Rambling Gibb^ish, that put the Duke into a fit of
Laughter. However, he attributed the little Ramblings of my Expressions to the
Disorder of my Mind, and still pressed to know what he was to hope for. By
which time, having a little recollected my self from the Agitations that
turmoyl'd my surprised Thoughts, I told him, I could not think my self any way
obliged to him for a seeming Honor that so much exposed my Reputation. He
laughed at my niceness in point of Reputation; and told me, that the thing which
he required from a Woman that he loved, was, that she would lay aside that part
of Delicacy. Upon this Subject we had a long discourse, and our Conversation
ended in many earnest Invitations, which he made me, to the Court of Savoy.

The Marquess de Fleuri, as my Friend afterward told me, was under a strange
disturbance all the while that the Duke of Savoy was talking to me; and she
could perceive, I was a Person who had made no small Impression in his Breast.
Therefore, before we parted, the Marquess took his Opportunity, and whispering
me in the Ear, Madam, said He, I shall dye if you surrender to the Duke of
Savoy a Heart which I alone deserve, because of that Infinite Love which I have
for you. He was unwilling to say more to me, for fear of being observed; and I
must confess, it was my happiness that I could not have time to discourse him
in private; for I should have had much ado to have concealed from him the Joy
which the assurance of his Love infused into me; considering how little we are
Mistresses of our selves in the first Agitations of a violent Passion. At the
same time the Duke of Savoy desired leave that he might tarry the next day also
at my House; which the Pleasure of the Marquess de Fleuri's Company, and the
Hopes of understanding who he was, easily prevailed upon me to grant.

When my Friend the Lady and I were alone together, I gave her an account of
the Conversation I had had with the Duke of Savoy; but said not a word to her
of my Inclinations for the Marquis de Fleuri: Not, that I distrusted the
Sincerity of her Friendship; but because Secrecy is always the first thing that
inspires us with a Real Passion. My Friend would hardly believe me at first,
when I told her that one of the Persons was the Duke of Savoy; but fully at
length convinced, she blamed me for consenting to let 'em tarry all the next
day. She foresaw better then I did, the Consequences of this Adventure; and
told me moreover, that if it should come to be known, the Higher the Duke of
Savoy's Quality was, the more my Reputation would suffer. I assured her, that
he should never have any occasion to boast of any thing that could do me an
Injury, and that I did not find in my self the least Inclination for him. We
spent all that night in discoursing of this Adventure, not being able in all
that time to think of disclosing to her my Sentiments for the Marquess de
Fleuri; a fault for which I have often since that time deservedly blamed my
self; for a Woman has never more need of the Counsel and Advice of a prudent
and discerning Friend, then when a Passion begins to blind her. When she thinks
to be her own Conductress, she makes a thousand false Steps, and falls into a
thousand mistakes.

Thus then, consulting no body but my self, I resolved upon two things that
were ill contrived, yet which at the same time seemed to give me an occasion to
satisfy both my Inclination and my Virtue. I took a Resolution not to let the
Marquess de Fleuri understand the Sentiments I had for him, nor to discourage
the Duke of Savoy, that I might not be deprived of the Marquiss's Company. This
Design appeared to me Heroic; besides, that it concerned me to try whether the
Marquess loved me really or no; and I thought there was no better way to
convince my self of this Truth, then by making a show of having a greater
Fondness for the Duke of Savoy then I had. The next day I put my project in
Execution; as being only civil and complaisant to the Duke of Savoy, and
carefully avoiding to discourse or cast my Eye upon the Marquis de Fleuri.

As for the Duke of Savoy, whose love for me, was one of those sorts of
Passions, that never languish by degrees, but seek a speedy satisfaction; he
was so charmed with my converse and disposition, that without any more ado, he
proposed to me what his Passion made him desire. On the other side, I who had a
design to manage him, returned him no such Answer as I should have done; so
that he thought there was now no more to be done, but to find an Opportunity
that we might be both in Private together. He dissembled therefore, and having
made me promise him to take a Journey into Savoy, he took his leave of me, and
I believed him really gone. The Marquis of Fleuri endeavored in vain to speak
to me before they took horse, for I still avoided him; so that all he could do,
was to slip a Billet-Doux into my hand, which I had not the Power to refuse;
and therefore so soon as they were out of sight, I opened it in great haste,
and found the following words.

Nothing but an Affection for you as violent as mine, could force me to betray
the Duke of Savoy, by giving you notice that he is this night to be let into
your Chamber. Your Conversation has flattered him; but since I have found you
worthy of my love, I cannot believe you give to his so much Encouragement.

The Marquis of Fleuri's Merit was too well known, and I had had such an
advantageous Relation made of it, that I was overjoyed when I understood 'twas
He that loved me no less passionately then I did him already. However his
Bill^t put me into a great perplexity, so that I thought at first to have shown
it to my Friend; but in regard I was unwilling she should understand the
Sentiments which the Marquess had for me, I only told her what I had heard of
the Duke's Resolution. She laid before me, that I had done ill to flatter the
Passion of that Prince, and asked we what was my Intention? I answered her,
that I saw no likelihood that he could put his Design in execution; however,
that I would break his Measures, by keeping her all Night in my Company, and
giving order that no body should be let into the Castle* But she advised me to
take another course, and to spend the Night among the Ladies in the
Neighborhood. But alas, I could not relish that Advice; for the hope of the
Marquiss's Company overruled me to stay at home, and there expect the issue of
the Adventure. And I thought that standing upon my guard would be enough to
secure my Reputation.

After I had given all such Orders as I thought necessary to frustrate the
Duke's Enterprise, I retired betimes in company with my Friend. I thought that
after such Precautions as I had taken, there could be no fear of the Duke of
Savoy: But I had to do with a Prince sufficiently ingenious to bring about his
Amorous Designs. One of my Women whom he had bribed, had let him in betimes
into the Castle, and locked him up in my Wardrobe. The Marquess of Fleuri was
also hid in one of the Courts, where being discovered by one of my People,
there was presently a loud Cry of Thieves; all my Servants were immediately in
Arms, and they had certalnly killed him, if my Friend and I, so soon as we
heard the noise, had not immediately ran down to his rescue. By that means we
saved the Marquiss's Life. In the mean time the Duke of Savoy entered my
Chamber: But in regard I was now assured of his being in the Castle, I did not
return to my Chamber without my female Friend, in company with the Old
Gentleman and the Marquess.

The Duke of Savoy seeing his Design discovered, showed himself; and I flew out
in bitter Language against him; but he did but laugh at me; and ordering the
Marquess of Fleuri to follow him, he left the Castle before day. On the other
side, I was vexed to the Soul at the Marquiss's departure; and methought I
perceived so much affliction in his Countenance for the same Reason, that I was
about to have stopped him.

Some days after I received a Letter, wherein he sent me word, that he loved me
above all Women, though he could not question but that I loved the Duke of
Savoy as well. But then the vexation which the Marquess of Fleuri's Letter gave
me, made me sensible that I loved him more and more: Yet I could not understand
why he should be so positive that I loved the Duke of Savoy. Thereupon I
recalled to mind all that I had said, and all that I had done, that could
manifest any such Inclination for that Prince; and not being able to live in
that uncertainty wherein I was, I took a Resolution to go to the Court of Savoy.

I never examined whether or no my Design was contrary to my Honor, and I shut
my Eyes against whatever could divert me from it; and only listening to my Love,
made have to be gone.

The Duke of Savoy was surpised at my Arrival; for he never expected to see me
at Turin, considering what had past. But being one who loved to flatter
himself, he thought I had repented of having used him no better, and imagined
that the motive of my Journey was out of a design to please him.

The Marquess of Fleuri was jealous of the same thing; and was mortally
perplexed at it; but whether it were to make himself amends for his loss, or to
be revenged upon his Rival, he made all his Applications to a Person for whom
the Duke seemed to have a very great Affection. This was a young Lady of
Bretagne, whose Name and Adventures are known to all the World. So that when I
had taken a journey into Savoy for the sake only of the Marquis of Fleuri, he
was laboring to forget me, and loved another.

I spared for nothing of Bravery to make a show: Wherein I followed my natural
Inclination to Luster and Expense. This made a cry at Court, that all my Finery
was at the Duke's Charge, and the Marquis was carried away with the common
Opinion: And this Opinion advanced his Affairs with his Mistress. For a fancy
took her in the head, that the Duke of Savoy had an affection for me: And
judging by the present what he might hereafter do for me, she listened to the
Marquis of Fleuris's Addresses.

I undeceived her Royal Highness, who had suffered her self to be prepossessed
as well as others: And giving her a faithful account of what had passed between
the Duke and my self, my Sincerity pleased her, and she was pleased to honor
me with her Friendship.

My heart however could not be at rest: The Marquess of Fleury seemed to shun
me in all places: I knew of his Intriegue with the Lady of Bretagne; nor was
the Duke of Savoy ignorant of it.

One day also discoursing with me about it, he told me, I was the cause he
suffered unrevenged the Affront which the Marquess had put upon him; and that I
might judge by that, that he intended to have no other Mistress but my self. I
discovered to him some part of my Sentiments, which no way satisfied him; and I
laid before him the injustice which the Marquess did him, and that in honor
it became him not to relinquish to another, a Person whom he had once loved:
And Jealousy infused into me a wonderful Eloquence. The Duke of Savoy also
could not but perceive how much I was concerned in the injury which the Marquis
did him: For according to the manner that I talked to him, it might be easily
perceived that I was more offended at it then the Duke.

But as much taken up with the Person whom he admired as the Marquess was, he
could not but observe, that I had little kindness for the Duke: And the love
which he had once had for me, and which was not quite extinguished, made him
keep a strict watch upon the Motions of that Prince; and he perceived that the
Duke was ill satisfied with me, and that I avoided him with care. This was the
reason that he forbore to shun me, and that I had a sudden opportunity to
discourse him. He talked to me of his Suspicions; I undeceived him; and my joy
to find that he still loved me, would not permit me to conceal from him the
affection I had for him.

Nor did he make an ill use of his Information: Never was a violent Passion
accompanied with more respect. I desired him to be contented with the Assurance
which I gave him that he was beloved, and conjured him to be careful of my
Reputation. I met with a Character in him far different from that of other men,
who believe they have a right to be rude and uncivil with a Woman whom Scandal
has not spared. Quite the contrary, the Marquess told me, that he would do
himself the kindness to convince me by a respectful adherence, how much he was
assured that I deserved a better Reputation; and begged my permission to do me
that Service in public, as to persuade the World into the same Opinion he
himself had of me. Which demeanor of his appeared to me so noble, and so
generous, that I could not refuse him what he requested; and from that time
forward he began to redouble his Addresses to me, as to a Woman that he
intended to marry. For I flattered him with hopes that I would marry him,
though it were not my design: And perhaps I may be blamed for putting him in
hopes of a thing which I never intended to do. I will not deny but that there
was something of Treachery in it on my part: But one Consideration which some
People perhaps will censure for Chymerical, would not permit me to think of
such a Match. I foresaw, that so soon as the Marquess of Fleuri should marry
me, there would have bin those who would have laid before him, with a world of
aggravation, the Stories that rendered my Conduct suspected in France. And I
was afraid, that his Passion being satisfied, would have bin rambling after
other Objects, while I must have bin the forsaken Monument of his extinguished
Love. And I looked upon the expiration of his Love as the greatest Misfortune
that could befall me. This was the Reason that prevailed with me against that
Match: Now that which obliged me to put him in hopes of marrying me, was this.
I imagined that nothing could be more for my Honor, nor more conduce to the re
establishment of my Reputation, then to see a man of his Merit, and his
Delicacy, make me the only Subject of his Addresses, and judge me worthy to be
his Wife, when so many People seemed to take delight in scandalizing me for a
Woman that had neither virtue nor government of her self. I thought it lawful
for me to make use of such an occasion to recover my Honor.

The Marquess of Fleuri's Constancy to me provoked the Duke of Savoy, and drew
upon me the hatred of the Damsel of Bretagne. She had bin already jealous of
the Duke of Savoy's Sedulities to me; but the Marquess of Fleuri's Inconstancy
offended her Vanity to that degree, that she resolved to be revenged both of me
and him. To this purpose she reconciled her self to the Duke of Savoy, whose
Levity she managed so well, that she easily accomplished what she undertook.

The Duke of Savoy soon after sent the Marquess of Fleuri to the Court of
France: And though we saw that this Employment was only a pretense to part us,
yet there was no remedy but Obedience.

However, I was not so sensibly displeased at this same Separation as I should
have bin, had we not bin both in hopes to meet each other again at Lion, where
the King and the Duke, with both their Courts, were to be toward the end of the
Year.

Book the Sixth.
THE Duke of Savoy, after he had thus removed the Marquis of Fleuri, minded
nothing more then to lay such a Snare for me, as might either put him into a
Condition to triumph over me, or else give him an occasion to revenge himself
upon the Marquis by defaming my Conduct.

The Damsel of Bretagne and I became very good Friends upon the Assurances I
gave her, that I never had bin engaged in any Intreague with the Duke of Savoy.
She begged my pardon for being jealous of me; and because it concerned me that
the Duke should court her more then evr he had done, I did my utmost to
preserve a good understanding between 'em, and by a persuasion of bad Policy,
permitted the Duke to visit her at my Lodging. Thither she came frequently, and
there it was that the Duke met her as often. Nor did the Report, that the Duke
came thither for my sake, much trouble me, because it was well known that I
never was with him but in the Damsel's company: Besides that, I thought him
quite estranged from me, while he was so passionate a Lover of his Mistress.
However, the Report continued that he was still a zealous Servant of mine; and
there were People that sent the Marquess of Fleuri word, that the Duke was
never from my Lodging, and that we were both engaged together in a familiarity
which began to make a noise. This Rumor renewed his first Jealousies; he wrote
to me therefore in such terms, as plainly showed him to be persuaded that I was
not cautious enough of my own Reputation, or his Delicacy, and earnestly
desired me to find out a way to avoid the Duke's coming any more to my Lodging.
'Twas in vain to lay before him the Reasons I had to permit him; there was a
necessity that for his satisfaction I must break off the Duke's Visits.

To that purpose I faign'd my self sick, and affected Privacy: But it was said,
that all whatever I should do would turn to the prejudice of my Reputation: And
they who made it their business to defame me, made their Comments upon my
Sickness, and gave out that I was with Child. In Savoy 'twas said, that the
Marquess of Fleuri had done my Business; but into France they sent him word,
that it was by the Duke of Savoy. There were also some People who pretended to
know the truth from my own Servants; and perhaps there might be some one among
'em who might undertake to support this false Report: For frequently our
Servants are our most dangerous Enemies.

When I understood what the World said of me, I showed my self, to undeceive
such Persons as had too lightly given credit to the Scandal; and People of
Sense were undeceived. But in regard there are some who will sooner believe the
worst then the best, there were others gave out I had miscarri'd; and others
looking upon things according to their prepossession, pretended to discover in
my Countenance and my Gate several signs of that Imposture; yet I was never
better in health, never looked better then I did at that time.

But the most pernicious Effect of this Calumny was not what was reported in
Savoy, but what was believed in Paris. The Marquess of Fleuri was fully
persuaded of the truth of it, and wrote to me to the same purpose. Upon the
receipt of his Letter I was not a little nettl'd and embittered against him: His
giving credit to such Reports with so much easiness, rendered him so different
to me from what he always had bin, that I repented of having thrown away my
Love upon him: And then it was that I found by experience, that Absence
operates more ways then one to the prejudice of Love. This begat a little
coldness between us, and we forbore writing one to another. He that will
undertake to love a Woman, ought to have a strong Head, more especially when
the Person upon whom he desires to place his Esteem, has the misfortune to have
Enemies. For I believe there is no man strong enough upon that account, since
the Marquess of Fleuri, who was a man of the best Character that ever I knew,
was so weak as to believe whatever Tales and Stories reached his Ears.

These Scandals and Reproaches pleased the Duke of Savoy, as much as the
Marquess of Fleuri was vexed to hear 'em; and thereby 'twas easy to understand
the difference of their Love.

The Duke of Savoy, who had only a Roughhewn Passion for me, never laid my
Defamations to heart: Nay, he rather believed it would be no hard matter to win
a Woman who had little Reputation to be cautious of. For this is that which
happens but too frequently: There are few Women, when the greatest part of
their Honor is sacrificed, make any scruple to offer up the remainder. On the
other side, the Marquis of Fleuri, who never loved me but because he thought I
had not merited my Misfortunes, was at his wits end to have the least reason to
question my Innocence; his Love not being able to support it self without
Esteem, which was the foundation of it, he valued not a Heart accustomed to
surrender.

At the same time the Marquess of Cah -- fell in love with the Damself of
Bretagne, which was a Match of great Advantage for her; and in regard the Duke
of Savoy had a desire to bestow her, he desired me that I would be pleased to
visit her sometimes, and to accompany her when the Marquess proposed to carry
her abroad: He also desired me to speak to the Marquess de Cah -- in favor of
his Mistress; which I did with that success, that he married her within a year
or two after.

One day the Duke of Savoy proposed the taking of a Tour by Water upon the Poe;
where I was present with all the Court. In our return, it was perceived that
the Barge which carried us began to leake: And presently the Duke of Savoy
ordered us to be set ashore, where Coaches were ready to receive us, and carry
us to Turin, from whence we were not above a League, and Night drawing on. I
know not by what Enchantment, thinking to have taken Coach with the Marquess of
Cah -- and his Mistress, I mistook, and put my self into another, which drove
away like Lightning, and wherein I found my self alone with a single Person
whom I knew soon after to be the Duke of Savoy. I was sufficiently vexed that it
should be said I returned alone with the Duke; but I had juster cause soon
after to be more afflicted. The Wheel of our Coach broke, as the Duke himself
had taken order, and we were forced to alight, as Fortune, or rather Design
would have it, near a House which belonged to the Marquess of Fleuri, and which
flew open to us as soon as the Duke's Name was heard. It seems, 'twas no new
thing in that Principality to see the Duke engage himself in such Adventures,
and never was Prince less shie of public Discourse upon that score. I made no
scruple to enter the House, believing the other Coaches had followed us; but
they had taken another Road, and I was all alone with the Duke of Savoy.
However, I thought to meet with Company in the House; and when I understood
that it belonged to the Marquis of Fleuri, I flattered my self that no
Misfortune could befall me, and that in the House of so dear a Lover I should
be nimble and cunning enough to defend my self from any Affront that his Rival
could put upon me. Hardly were we entered, when a certain Person arrived; you
will scarcely believe it, when I shall tell you it was the Marquess of Fleuri,
seeing I have told ye that he was in France: However, it was He, and you shall
hear the reason why he returned.

Receiving no Letters from me, and being no less able to persuade himself to
write to me, he took a Resolution to come and satisfy his Curiosity and his
Jealousies upon the Place it self; for he loved me really, and was at his
Wit's-end that he could not be assured of my Virtue. Nor was it a hard matter
for him to take this Journey, because the Court of France was then removing to
Lion; and therefore taking his advantage of these Circumstances, he took Post
and came to his House with a design to remain there Incognito, and not to make
known his return to any but those by whom he intended to inform himself of the
truth of things.

He arrived almost as soon as We; and the Housekeeper telling him that the Duke
of Savoy was but just come before with a Lady, his thoughts misgave him
presently that 'twas my self. He was at a stand whether or no he should conceal
himself, when the Duke who was desirous to know who he was, perceived him; and
presently taking notice of him, asked him why he was not in France, and
wherefore he was returned without his Order. The Marquess, in his own excuse
made answer, that his Negotiations being at an end, he thought he might be
permitted to leave a Place where he had nothing more to do.

The Duke of Savoy, who despaired not all this while to vanquish my Reluctance,
commanded the Marquis to go and stay for him at Turin, as being unwil^ing he
should see me in his Company. Thereupon the Marquis made a show of yielding him
Obedience, tho having more exactly informed himself who the Lady was that the
Duke of Savoy had brought along with him, he understood it was my self. But
then it was that he minded little the Disobeying of his Prince, provided he
could but convince himself by his own Eyes of what he had bin long doubtful,
and in some measure persuaded. Now in regard he was better acquainted then any
Body with the Apartiments of his own House, he hid himself in a Closet, where
he could hear and see what was done in the Chamber where we were together.

Nothing could have fallen out more to my Advantage; for the Marquis de Fleuri
was a witness how coursely I handled the Duke of Savoy; and his Esteem for my
Virtue restored me to his Heart, and made him lay aside all his Jealousies. In
the mean time the Duke pressed me to correspond with his Passion, and he urged
his Importunities to that degree, that the Marquis thought it no longer became
him to conceal himself, but that it was time to succor me in that distress. He
appeared then, and never considering that he exposed himself by so doing to his
Ruin, he entered the Chamber where we were, and approaching the Duke with a
world of Respect, he besought him to be pleased that he might afford me the
Succor which I implored. The Duke laid his hand upon his Sword, and had I not
interposed between, he had certainly killed the Marquis; which he might have
easily done, because he neither offered to defend himself, nor to avoid the
Duke's fury by flight. However the Duke's wrath was not appeased by the
Marquis's Submission; he confined him to his House, and forbid him to stir from
thence till further Order; I also underwent the Duke's Resentment; for he sent
me back to Turin, and told me 'twas his Pleasure I should appear no more at
Court; and so taking Horse he rode a private way to Turin.

Report and Scandal would have never spared me, had it bin known that I had bin
alone with the Duke; but I was sufficiently bespattered the next day; for then
it was known that the Duke and the Marquis had had a Rancounter. It was
reported that I had given the Marquis a Meeting, and that the Duke would never
have minded coming back alone with me, had it not bin to break the measures
which the Marquis and I had taken to meet one another.

All this while, I must do the Duke that Justice, that he was always an Enemy
to Violence; and that he had not been so rude with me, but that he thought me
to be of the Humor of those Women who would have that torn from them which
they most eagerly desire to part with. So that whatever was violent in the Duke
of Savoy's Behavior was only to be attributed to the misfortune of my
Reputation. He might have managed me better, had he bin better acquainted with
my Humor, and had he not built too much upon the Opinion he had of my former
Intrigues.

The next day he came to see me, and having made me a thousand Excuses, desired
me to appear again at Court. And as for the Marquis of Fleuri, he requested me
in respect of him, not to take it amiss, that he continued in his confinement
forsome few days, for returning without his Order. But the Marquis of Fleuri,
who did not believe he should come off at so cheap a rate, was not to be found
when they sought for him, neither did any Body know what was become of him.

Though I was a little surpised that he had not found a way to send me word
where he was, yet was I not much disturbed at it; but rather glad that he had
betaken himself to flight, because I imagined he was returned into France,
whither I was suddenly to follow him. In short, I departed with the Court of
Savoy in a little time after, and we came to Lions, where the Court of France
was expected in a day or two.

The Marquis of Fleuri had bin in that City incognito, ever since what had past
in his own House; and now he was no longer jealous; nay, the same adventure
seemed to have given a new vigor to his Passion; he frequently came to see me;
but because I was afraid least he should be discovered, I persuaded him to
bethink himself of reconciling himself to the Duke of Savoy; which I thought it
might be no difficult thing to do at a time when that Prince had nothing but
Divertisement in his thoughts; and it is true that there never were seen so
many Pastimes and Divertisements as while the two Courts remained at Lions.

The Marquis told me that he knew but one assured means to appease the Duke of
Savoy, which was for me to marry him. Thereupon he called to my remembrance the
hopes I had given him to that purpose, and pressed me with so much Importunity
no longer to delay a Thing that would restore him to his Master's favor, and
make him perfectly happy, that I had not the power to let him understand my
resolution never to be his Wife. I only told him I did not think he could
regain the Duke's Confidence by such a Marriage, because his Highness loved me
still too well, to let me choose for a Husband a person with whom he thought he
had just reason to be offended.

The Marquis de Fleuri was too Amorous to be satisfied with that Excuse, and
upbraided me with want of Affection for him. But then I told him frankly that I
would never marry him, because I feared that Marriage would abate his Love. He
could not relish so exquisite a Piece of Delicacy; and therefore thinking my
mind altered, he began to revile me, and intermixed his Taunts with a little too
much bitterness. That displeased me, and I found there was too much
unpoliteness and Interest in his Love. I was at my Wits end, that he had not so
much Delicacy as my self; and out of a strange and fantastic Humor not easy
to be comprehended, the more I loved him, the more reason I thought I had to be
dissatisfied with him. Fain would I, that it would have contented him to be
assured, that I gave him in my heart a Precedence above all other men, and that
he had bin as apprehensive as I, of what I imagined would one day destroy so
fair a Union.

In the mean time it was known that the Marquis of Fleuri was at Lion, and that
he visited me every day. And I know not whether he were in hopes to engage me
to marry him, by giving out that we were already married; but such a Report was
spread about, and I understood that he was Author of it.

The Duke of Savoy also spoke to me about it, and upbraided me for not having
informed him how nearly I was concerned in the Marquis of Fleuri's Fortune; and
protested to me that since he was my Husband, he would not only pardon him for
what was past, but that he would endeavor by his Favors to render my
Residence in Piemont acceptable to me. I assured the Duke that there was no
such thing as a Marriage, but I besought him to restore the Marquis to his
Confidence. This Request made his R. Highness believe that I had some reasons
to keep my Marriage private. He therefore sent for the Marquis, and restored
him to his Familiarity. Thereupon, so soon as I saw the Marquis of Fleuri, I
chid him for not undeceiving the Duke in his opinion of our being married; and
I told him that I took it very ill that he himself had spread abroad the Report
of it. He did not at all deny it, but desired me to forgive a fault which he
thought necessary to reconcile him to the Duke his Master. Afterward he gave
me an Account, after what manner the Duke had restored him to his friendship,
and made that an Argument that I could have no longer any reason which could
hinder me from Marrying him. I returned him the same Answers I had done when he
urged me to give him my consent; but seeing me steadfast in my determination not
to marry him, he flew out into such a violent Passion that I could not have
thought him guilty of, and told me, that he began to think that whatever had
been said of me was true. I was so sensible of that Affront, that in the height
of my Anger which it had infused into me, I forbid him to see me any more. With
that he flung out of the Room, and I was more provoked at his obedience, then I
was with his Injurious Language; for his manner of leaving me, made me judge
that it would be no difficult thing for him to forsake my Company.

I never had such violent pangs of Grief as then; but at length I recovered my
Courage and Resolution; and whatever passion I felt for the Marquess, I scorned
to recall him again. Thus we should always be Mistrisses of our Passions, were
we not too much in love with 'em.

In the mean time, the Marquess of Fleuri, after he had left me, took post, and
went I know not whither. And they that were my former Scandalizers took no
compassion upon me on that occasion. But I made use of the old Remedy,
Patience, and leaving both the Courts at Lion, returned to my own Territories,
resolved to comfort my self for the loss of a Person who had not delicacy
enough to be contented with my heart. For if I had not the advantage to bring
the Marquess to my Sentiments, I had at least the consolation not to have bin
so weak as to conform to his.

The Lady who recounted this Story to me, told me an infinite number of other
Adventures that had befallen her; and while I tarri'd in the Province, we often
made those Reflections together, which her Destiny and mine gave us an occasion
to make upon the Misfortunes of Women.

After I had put an end to those Affairs which detained me in the Province, I
returned to Paris. There the Baron de Sarcelles, who was my Kinsman, came to
see me so soon as I was arrived, and gave me to understand, that during my
absence he had made a particular Acquaintance with St. Albe and his Wife; that
he gave frequent Visits to both; and in short, that he had listed himself in
the number of their Friends. He told me farther, that Madam St. Albe had
charged him to make a perfect reconciliation between her and I; that she was
absolutely undeceived in every thing that had bin infused into her concerning
my familiarity with her Husband; that she most earnestly desired to give me
cause to forget what was past, and to become one of my Friends. As for St.
Albe, I had heard no tidings of him all the while I stayed in the Province: And
though I was fully convinced that he durst not write to me for fear of
displeasing me, yet I was troubled that I could hear nothing of him.

I persuaded my self that Sarcelles spoke to me after that manner by St. Albe's
Order, who had brought his Wife to hear Reason, and had advised her to be
Friends with me, that he might recover the lost advantage of my Society. I
loved St. Albe too well to deny my consent to a Reconciliation that flattered
him with so much delight. And besides, I was glad to find his Wife reduced to
Reason, and that she sought my friendship: So I told Sarcelles, that I would
willingly wait upon her, and that he might carry me to her when she pleased.
Nor did he delay to bring us together; at what time we talked of nothing that
was past; nor did any thing fall from me, during our whole discourse, that
could give her an occasion to recollect her memory: and when she went about to
talk of any thing to that purpose, I always interrupted her; and because she
loaded me with her Caresses, I imagined that she loved me in good earnest. I
asked her for her Husband; she told me, he was in the Country, and that he
would not return in three Weeks. I durst not ask any more particular Questions;
but I made no doubt but that when he should come to know that I had visited his
Wife, he would write to me, and hasten his return; nevertheless, I heard no
news concerning him. I repaid Madam de St. Albe her Visit, who after that came
frequently to see me, always bringing Sarcelles along with her, which made me
believe 'em to be good Friends, but I little suspected 'em to be in that
familiar league together as they were.

St. Albe returned by this time out of the Country, but was not very hasty to
come and see me; which very much disturbed me; but because I thought he would
not presume to visit me without leave, I went to his House, two days after I
understood he was come home. He was then with his Wife, but received me coldly;
nor did he say one word to me how joyful he was that I should become a frequent
Visitant of his Wife, which I expected from him. I observed however in his
Eyes, that still he loved me, and that it was with great constraint upon
himself that he forbore to let me know how glad he was to see me again. He
seemed to me to be sad, and I saw that he was dissatisfied: However, I said not
a word to him in his Wife's presence; but having given him my Hand to lead me
to my Coach, Well, Sir, said I, how like ye Madam St. Albe's Discourse in
reference to me? Is not this a wonderful Change? If outward Shows may be
believed, I am apt to think she loves me with all her heart. St. Albe returned
no Answer. Upon which, why so silent? said I. You cannot but know the cause,
replied he; I am troubled, Madam, that you have so easily done for Sarcelles
what you have so often refused to do for me. How so, replied I, was it not you
that persuaded Madam St. Albe to be reconciled to me? Upon those words he
smiled, and told me, I could not be ignorant of the Motive that induced her to
that Reconciliation. The Place would not permit us time sufficient to clear
this Mystery; for had I kept him longer, it would have bred suspicion; and
therefore I only desired him to come to me the next day and unfold this Riddle;
telling him withal, that I should not take him for my Friend, if he did not
release me from the trouble I was in. He promised to obey me; and so I left him
for that time, not knowing what to think of the Story.

So soon as I came to my Lodging, I told Madam Laval what I had heard and seen,
and we thought we had divined the cause of St. Albe's Melancholy. But he came
the next day and unfolded it himself. I am no more a Visionary, said he, nor a
Jealous Shallow-brains then another; nor do I love Madam St. Albe so well as to
be alarmed at her private Familiarities. But I love you, Madam, with a
delicacy that renders me sensible of your Honor. All the World believes that
Sarcelles courts my Wife, and that you are the Manager of their Private
Conjunctions.

This Complaint of St. Albe touched me to the quick: I asked him whether he
could accuse me of so foul a piece of Treachery? No, Madam, replied St. Albe,
though I had some reason to wonder at first, that you should visit my Wife at
Sarcelles's request, a Person whom I hate, and whom I had ere now full dearly
made repent of his Insolence, but for the honor which he has to be your
Kinsman, yet I did you justice without delay. I thought you were imposed upon
by the Artifices which they used to draw ye to my House, and I thought that
your Compliance proceeded only from your Civility and your Natural Goodness. Do
you believe, said I, hastily interrupting, that I had no other Motive -- and so
saying, I blushed, and fixed a more tender look upon him then ever I had done,
while he beheld me in the same manner, and both stood speechless for a time.
Yes, Madam, replied St. Albe at length, though you have always bin so cruel to
make me sensible of your indifferency for me, I was less troubled to imagine
with my self that you sought see me again, then to believe you capable of
Malice or Blindness. As for Malice, said I, I never had any; but I think I have
bin a little too blind; and I would have you be convinced, that 'twas my desire
to see you again that was the cause of my Blindness. For, in short, St. Albe, I
knew your Merit to the full, nor could I be insensible of so many Testimonies
of your Friendship, as you have given me. I thought, added I, it had bin you
your self who had persuaded Madam St. Albe to desire my company: I saw nothing
in her Conduct with Sarcelles that gave me any cause of suspicion, and I am apt
to believe that nothing criminal passes between 'em. St. Albe took no notice of
my last words; he only minded to assure himself of the sincerity of my
Sentiments for himself; and though he could not doubt but that I loved him, yet
was it the first time I ever disclosed my Sentiments to him. Nor did I repent
that I had let him understand 'em: He accompanied with so much respect the Joy
and Transports which the assurance of my Love infused into him, that he still
appeared to me more worthy of my love: And I believe there would be little
reason to upbraid Women for being so weak as to let men know they love 'em, if
all Lovers were as respectful and as delicate as St. Albe.

After he had a hunderd times renewed his Oaths to be eternally mine, and to
exact no other recompense of his love, then the pleasure of loving me, and
being by me beloved, I put him again upon the Story of Sarcelles, and he told
me, that he had bin for a long time a Sedulous Courtier of his Wife, insomuch
that it had bin the talk of the Town, and that Sarcelles and his Wife
foreseeing that his Patience might at length be tired, they bethought
themselves that the only way to preserve their Union, was to draw me to Madam
St. Albe's House, because that St. Albe being still in love with me, the
pleasure of my Company would make him amends for the trouble that Sarcelles
gave him.

I found much probability in St. Albe's Relation, and that put us into new
Confusions: For I could not forbear visiting Madam St. Albe without depriving
my self of her Husband's Company, and exasperating her a second time against
me: On the other side, I could not continue my Visits without blasting my
Reputation in the World. I understood also that Public Report had begun to
bespatter me already, by giving out upon my renewing my Visits to Madam St.
Albe, that we acted all four by concert; and that St. Albe for the pleasure of
my company had prostituted his Wife to Sarcelles.

This Report appeared so injurious to my own, and the Reputation of St. Albe,
that for the more speedy stifling it, I resolved neither to visit St. Albe nor
his Wife any more.

St Albe had too great a value for my Honor, and was too sensible of his own,
to disapprove my Design: But because it was too great a trouble to us to want
the company of one another, there was an Expedient found out, that I should
refrain for some time from visiting Madam St. Albe, and that during that time I
should oblige Sarcelles to carry himself with more caution.

But this turned also to my prejudice: For in regard it was known how coldly
St. Albe had received me, and that the Visit was not known which he paid me the
next day, 'twas reported abroad that I forbore to see his Wife, because the
Husband had found it out that I favored Sarcelles's Designs. Which made People
believe that I loved St. Albe better then he did me; and I was looked upon as a
Woman that never minded any thing else, provided I might but satisfy my own
Passion. However, I deserved a better Reputation; and I believed that few Women
would have had the courage that I had, to refrain the Company of a Person I
loved, when I had so favorable an opportunity to see him every day.

About the same time Madam St. Albe fell sick, and notwithstanding all the
Remedies that could be administered to her, she died of the Small Pox. Her
Death ruined St. Albe, who having no Children by her, was obliged to restore
what she brought him: And because he had bin no good Husband of his own Estate,
he was forced to despoil himself of all he had to satisfy his Wife's Heirs: So
that he fell from a Plentiful Estate into great Poverty.

It was now some time ago that the Duchess of Chatillon had proposed to marry
me to the Duke of -- who was a Widower, and who had a Daughter much about the
Age of my Son. The Duke also agreed, if the Match went on, that my Son should
marry his Daughter, which was a very advantageous Match for my Son, and which I
ought not to have refused, had it bin only because Madam de Chatillon proposed
it: But I could not resolve to marry again; not that the Experimented Vexations
of my first Marriage made me afraid to venture, but the Esteem and Affection I
had for St. Albe. Nevertheless, because I could not foresee the death of his
Wife, I had accepted the Civil Proposals of Madam de Chatillon, and could give
no other Reason to put off my Marriage, but the tender years of my Son.

Madam de St. Albe died just at the same time that Madam de Chatillon pressed me
to forbear insisting upon that Reason. But St. Albe being a Widower, I thought
it became me not to marry any other; and that which before was only an effect
of my Passion, was now a Reason of Generosity. I was rich, and he was poor; I
thought I could not in justice refuse to relieve him, and I knew no way to
afford him a more noble Relief, nor more comformable to my Inclination, then to
marry him. This was the real Motive which engaged me in a Design which has bin
so much blamed by those who accused me of only consulting a blind Passion. But
to justify my self from this Reproach, I shall give an Account of the manner
how our Marriage came to be concluded, by which it will be the better seen how
worthy St. Albe was of the Advantage he met with in marrying me. Any other
Woman, had she bin in my place would have done as I did: For I dare be bold to
say, there are Women still who have noble Sentiments, and they who believe they
act only out of humor or interst, are not acquainted with 'em.

When St. Albe, after the loss of his Wife, saw himself reduced to lose the
best Estate which he enjoyed, there was nothing talked of about the Town but my
Marriage with the Duke of -- and whether St. Albe apprehended that the Match
was too too much for my advantage for him to endeavor to persuade me against
it; whether really he did not believe I loved him so well as to prefer him
before the Duke of -- or lastly, whether he were ashamed to find himself
without an Estate, he left Paris, and withdrew to some Remainder of his own,
which when he had sold, he designed to go for Holland, and seek for some
Employment in that Country. As for my own part, I had seen him but once since
the death of his Wife; and though I had taken a Resolution to marry him, I had
not said a word to him of it; I only offered him what Money he stood in need of
to redeem his Estate. He had thankt me for my Offers, but would not accept 'em:
Two days after which, he left the Town, and I knew not for some time what was
become of him; when at last, after much Expectation, I received the following
Letter.

The LETTER.
I Thought it proper, Madam, to inform ye, that I am quite discharged from the
Heirs of Madam de St. Albe. If I made no use of the Assistance you had the
goodness to offer me toward the conclusion of that Affair, be assured, it was
not out of my fear of being burdensome to ye, nor of being beholding to you. I
know the generosity of your Soul; but I did not think it convenient to accept
your Favors at a time when Fortune offered you an Advancement to Title and
Dignity in the World, if any such there be that may be thought equal to your
merit. I must always love ye however, but suffer me to conceal my Destiny from
ye, till your Marriage is accomplished. Never enquire, or trouble your self,
whether I shall be happy or miserable: Whatever be my Lot, I shall be truly
happy, when I know that you enjoy your full content.


Upon the reading this Letter, I felt my self turmoil'd with various
Sentiments. At first I was charmed with St. Albe's Generosity: Then I accused
him of loving me too little, since he gave me my Liberty with such a seeming
unconcern'dness. Methought his Letter did not become a tender Lover, and a
little thing would have made me deem him inconstant. But at length, I knew him
too well to continue long those sinister thoughts of his Affection, and I made
this judgment of him, That he loved me so much the more, the more resolved he
appeared to sacrifice himself for my sake.

Thereupon I sent away a Messenger with a Billet, wherein I earnestly desired
him to return to Paris, having something of importance to impart to him; and
for the more speed, I ordered the Messenger to take Post. He found him ready to
go for Holland; but not being able to withstand my Orders, he laid aside those
Thoughts, and returned immediately to Paris.

Book the Seventh.
IN the mean time, Madam de Chatillon was so importunate with me to conclude my
own, and my Son's Marriage, that I thought it my Duty no longer to dally with
her. I told her therefore, that for my own part I was fully resolved not to
marry; only if she could so bring it to pass that my Son might marry the Duke's
Daughter, the Obligation she would lay upon me, would be still the same. But
she told me, the Duke would never consent to the Marriage of my Son, unless he
married me first. To which I answered, that if it were so, there was no farther
thinking either of the One or the Other. Upon which Madam de Chatillon
upbraided me with having little Affection for my Son, since he would never meet
with a Match so Advantageous as the Duke's Daughter. But I replied, that my Son
was too young to think of Marriage, and that I had no mind to sacrifice my
Liberty and Repose to his Interests. I see now, said Madam de Chatillon, that
you intend to marry St. Albe. Which words she uttered in such a Tone, as
hindered me at first from acknowledging it to be my real design. If you marry
him, added she, you will commit a great piece of Folly: It is a Match that will
be universally condemned; and besides, I am afraid it is a Match of Inclination.
Afterward she laid before me the Inconveniences that would attend it.
Notwithstanding all this, because it was my Interest that Madam de Chatillon
should approve my Resolution to marry St. Albe, I gave her such a Portraiture
of the Man as did not displease her; and when I showed her his last Letter, she
altered her mind. After she had read it, she told me, that she piti'd St. Albe,
and that she would not advise me to abandon him to his despair.

You may easily judge how joyful I was to see that Madam de Chatillon approved
my Design. What a pleasure it is to be applauded in our Wishes and Desires!
After that, I made no scruple to discover my heart to a Friend who confirmed me
in my Sentiments. I acknowledged to her that I had refused the Duke for no
other reason, but only because I was resolved to marry St. Albe; that I was
moved with his ill Fortune; and that after what he had done for me, I looked
upon it as a piece of Treachery and Ingratitude to forsake him. Madam de
Chatillon commended my Generosity, and promised to serve me as far as lay in
her power; but she told me withal, that my Marriage was to be kept secret; and
I resigned all my Concerns into her hands. Then send St. Albe to my House,
replied she; it is requisite that I should talk with him first, and that I
should fully understand him, before I acquaint him with his Happiness: For if
he resembles other Men, I would never advise ye to marry him. It Is necessary,
that before you make him your Husband, you should be sure; that you may have
nothing to tax your self with afterward; and that you know whether he can make
you so happy as you expect.

I was glad that Madam de Chatillon was pleased to take upon her the trouble;
well assured that St. Albe would appear to her the same that she would have him
to be; and besides, I was not sorry that any other but my self should prepare
him for a Happiness which he so little expected. It came into my mind also,
that while Madam de Chatillon took upon her this Affair, I might be able to
say, that 'twas She who had advised me to it. And I desired no more then to be
able to clear my self from every thing that might be objected against my
Conduct in this respect.

After I parted with Madam de Chatillon, I met with St. Albe, who tarried for
me at my Lodging. I told him, that I could not but disapprove a scrupulous
Niceness, that would not suffer him to be beholding to me; that I knew the
Condition of his Affairs, and that I had thought of a way to set him up again,
of which Madam de Chatillon would tell him more; that what we had designed to
do for him would be no Obstacle to my Marriage with the Duke of -- At which
last words St. Albe immediately changed Color -- Alas, Madam, said he, why
have you sent for me back? for in your presence that strength fails me which I
had remote from your sight. Go to Madam de Chatillon, said I, she will revive
your Courage. Which said, I would not permit him to speak any more, but sent
him away. I must confess however, that had he stayed but never so little
longer, I should not have had the power to have concealed my Intentions from
him. For I was nothing scrupulous of my Sentiments since Madam de Chatillon
approved 'em.

The next day St. Albe went to wait upon Madam de Chatillon, who showing him
the last Letter which he had written to me, and which she had then in her own
Custody; What was your Design, said she, in writing this Letter? Confess the
truth, did not you believe it would have wrought with the Marchioness to have
broke off her Marriage with the Duke of --? For if it were true that you
approved that Marriage, you would have left her to conclude it without saying
any thing. I will not dissemble with you, added she; for it is manifest by this
Letter, that you did fancy to your self ridiculous hopes, and that you imagined
that for love of you, a match so much to her advantage would have bin broken
off. Is it possible that you should so little understand your self, or that you
should be ignorant how impossible it is for my Friend to marry you? This
Lecture put St. Albe quite out of Countenance, who after a silence for some
time, Madam, said He, what is there so Criminal in that Letter? or where have I
given Demonstrations of those vain Hopes for which you blame me? Never
dissemble, replied Madam de Chatillon, you love the Marchioness, you believe
her to be in love with you, and you would have her marry ye? Who I! Madam --
answered St. Albe; No -- Madam -- so far from it, that were it her desire, I
would be the first to oppose it. I have too high a value for her Honor, to
allow that she should prefer an Unfortunate Beggar, who has nothing but an
Honest Heart, before a Person that is going to exalt her to that Illustrious
degree which she deserves above any Person in the World. I am glad, said Madam
Chatillon, to hear ye confirm what you have writ to her; for I must not conceal
it from you, that the Marchioness would hardly be induced to marry the Duke of
-- did she not believe you to be so just a Person as to consent to it: you have
been already too badly used by Fortune, to be loaded with more sorrows; 'twas
her pleasure therefore, I should see you, that I might prepare you for this
Marriage; and to show you that you are still in her thoughts, she is resolved
to give or lend you forty Thousand Crowns to set you up in the World again;
with this you must be content, and I must tell you, few Women would have been
so generous. But this is not all, she and I have consulted together, and we
have some thoughts of helping you to a Wife; and it will be your fault if you
do not marry a handsome Lady that will bring you a fair Fortune. If you love
the Marchioness, you will promise me to accept of this Match. This is that you
must resolve upon, nor shall you stir from hence, till you have promised to
marry the person that we recommend to your Affection. I promise you, Madam,
whatever may contribute to render the Marchioness happy. I married once already
for the Love of her; and you may assure her, that in loving her I never
conceived the least vain hope of what you seemed to intimate: I only made my
happiness consist in loving her, and I will always love her. You would talk at
another rate, replied Madam Chatillon, interrupting him, were you her Husband:
believe me, Wedlock alters the strongest Inclinations; and were the Marchioness
inclined to marry ye, I would persuade her to the contrary, for fear lest
Wedlock should have the same effect upon you. Wherefore, Madam, cried St. Albe,
does your Ladyship take such delight in tormenting, by soothing me with those
Idea's with which I never flattered my self? I will amuse ye then no longer,
replied the Duchess, the Marchioness intends to marry ye. She is an unwary
Woman, who in so doing follows her own Inclination, never considering to what
Extremities this Marriage will expose her. But I hope that you will be more
discreet than she; and that it is none of your desire that she should render her
self ridiculous to all the Kingdom. St. Albe, upon those words, beheld the
Duchess with an awful silence, and perceiving she had done, Madam, said he, I
cannot not think you serious in your Discourse: I never flater'd my self that
the Marchioness had so much inclination for me, as you would seem to persuade
me: but if it be true, that her design is the same which you mention, I am
assured that the infinite Respect and Love which I shall have for her till the
separation of Death, will justify her Choice; and that there is no Body that
will censure her for marrying the only person who atall times did justice to
her merit; I loved her as soon as I saw her; from that very time I never ceased
to adore her; and the love which I have for her has bin always steadfast and
permanent. Can it be possible, added he, transported with Delight, and throwing
himself at Madam de Chatillon's Feet, that the Marchioness should have any such
design as that wherewith you bless my Ears? Oh Madam, in the Name of God, I
beseech ye never to oppose it. If you love her, you ought to desire her
happiness: I dare presume to say, that I am the only person who can make her
happy. -- Here his Tears stopped him, and would not permit him to say more.
Madam de Chatillon also felt her self wholly vanquished; and raising him from
the ground, No, said she, I shall never oppose your Union; she can also tell
ye, that 'twas I who confirmed her in her resolution to marry ye. And I can
farther assure ye, that if she does not marry you, she will never be Wife to
any other Person.

In what an Ecstasy of Delight and Satisfaction was overjoyed St. Albe, when
he heard such Confirmations of his Felicity as these! He embraced the
Dutchesses Knees, conjuring her at the same time to deal sincerely with him.
Madam de Chatillon answered him, that to let him see, she did not deceive him,
she would send for me; which she did, and I as soon repaired to her Lodgings,
impatient to know what had past between 'em, where St. Albe was still upon his
Knees when I entered the Room. It Is well you are come, Madam, said she, for I know
not what to do; and if you do not take some speedy care, I Am afraid St. Alhe
will die at my Feet. I knew not what the Duchess had said to him, and
therefore seeing him in that condition, I was afraid she had put him into a fit
of despair, by telling him that I intended to marry the Duke of --. Scared with
these thoughts, Ah, Madam, said I, you have bin too cruel to put the poor St.
Albe in pain -- and to St. Albe, cried I, What has she told ye, that so
terribly afflicts ye? -- Then turning to me, and embracing my Knees in the same
manner, -- No, Madam, cried he, I cannot believe what I have heard -- my
happiness is so unconceivable, that it astonishes me. I was then afraid lest
Madam de Chatillon had told him too much; and blushing, I asked him, what
happiness it was had so transported him? Alas, Madam, replied he, I am not able
to express it; all that I am sensible of is only this, that I adore ye; I wish
that you could read it in my heart. I find then, replied I, that Madam de
Chatillon has betrayed me, and it is in vain to dissemble any longer. Rise, St.
Albe, and hearken to me; I love you; and all that you have done for me for
these dozen years together has convinced me that you merit my Affection. I
never thought that the Disposal of Providence would order things in such a
manner as to testify the impression which your Accomplishments have made in my
heart. I must also tell ye farther, that tho we are now in a fair way both you
and I to a lasting Union, I should hardly have resolved upon it, had ^ot your
misfortunes deprived ye of your Estate. But now you

It Is true, 'twas Passion that fixed my Resolution to marry St. Albe; but I saw
nothing of so much inequality in the Match, that was any way a lessening to my
Honor. He was a Gentleman, and a Person of singular merit: And I am persuaded,
that had he bin as rich as I, they who blamed the Marriage most of all, would
have bin the first Advisers of me to it. For my part, I was not of their
Opinions that, Estate and Fortune are to be the Rules of Wedlock; but on the
other side, the less St. Albe was worth, the more I thought my self obliged to
do things generously. But Generosity is not a Virtue that men imagine we ought
to boast of when we marry. That Engagement is only looked upon as a driven
Bargain, where we are to propose nothing to our selves but Profit and Interest.
But I insist too much upon the Justification of my Conduct: it is enough for me,
that my Marriage was approved by all those that are endu'd with noble and
virtuous Sentiments.

St. Albe was nothing altered in his Behavior after he had married me, but
rather redoubled his Consideration and Respect for me. I thought my self then
going to lead a Life of Happiness and Tranquillity: But I was not yet arrived
at the end of my Sorrows. My Marriage being made public, all the Women, except
Madam de Chatillon, forsook me, lamenting my ill Conduct: And had you heard
'em, you would have thought they would have more easily excused a piece of
forbidden Galantry then this Lawful Marriage. Such is the Unjustice of the
World, to judge of things by fantastical Conceit and Capriccio. They pardoned
me no more for having married a man that I loved, then formerly for having
sought a Separation from a Husband that I could not endure.

The Old Count of -- who had served me in my former Misfortunes, took my part
at Court, and came to visit me, on purpose to give me an Account of the Good
Offices he did me, by answering those that told Idle Tales and Stories to the
Queen concerning my Marriage. At my House he met with Mrs. Laval, with whom he
entered into a long Conversation. She was witty and comely withal; and the
Count took a liking to her. He judged by her Fidelity, and her constant
Adherence to me, that a man might be happy in his old Age to have a Woman of
her Character; and with these, and perhaps some other Considerations, he
returned the next day, renewed his Discourse with Mrs. Laval, and in eight days
after made her a proposal of marriage: And though he had Children married, yet
for her he was a considerable Match. For my part, I had such a desire to see
Mrs. Laval advanced to a degree becoming her Merit and her Virtue, that I
spared for nothing to bring about the Match. At length the old Count married
her, but kept a private Wedding, and the Marriage being a Secret, his new Wife
remained at my House; whither while the old Count came every day to her, People
began to talk of them, as they did of St. Albe and me, when they thought we
were not married.

The Count therefore, to stop the Mouth of Scandal, declared his Marriage,
carried his Wife, whom henceforward I must call the Countess of -- to his own
House, and caused all the Honors to be paid her, that were due to the Wife of
a Person of his Quality.

Nevertheless, the Old Count's Marriage became a Story full of divertisement;
and they who had enured their Tongues to Scandal and Calumny, could not forbear
talking. They renewed the Stories of my past Galantries, and failed not to
bring in the Countess of -- for her share, of whom they told a hundred Idle
Tales.

I found my self in this manner become a third time a prey to Envy and
Reproach. Which when they fasten once upon any Woman, let her Conduct be never
so void of Offense, she cannot shun the Whirrits of their Malice.

The Children of the Count of -- beheld their Father's Marriage with an Evil
Eye; and not being able to null it, they endeavored at least to poison the
pleasure of it. To which purpose they maliciously ordered Letters to be
delivered to the Count, wherein they gave him Hypocritical Advertisements of my
irregular Life, and that the Countess his Wife was my Companion and Sharer in
all my Pleasures.

The Count, who was a Person but of weak Parts, gave credit to those Letters,
became jealous, and desired his Wife to see me no more. But she refused to give
him that Satisfaction, convinced as she was, that he was in the wrong to
require it of her: Withal she conjured him to tell her who infused into him
those vain Suspicions of my Conduct. Upon that he showed her the Letters he had
received, and she thought she knew the Hand: she also showed 'em to me, and I
found they were written by Blossac. He was both a Friend and nearly related to
the Children of the Count of -- and in regard he was acquainted with my first
Adventures, it was an easy thing for him to make what use of 'em he pleased, as
he had done in those Letters: For there was nothing more lewdly invented, no^
more unworthy an honest Gentleman, then what he sent to the Count.

Though I had an Opinion bad enough of Blossac, yet I did not think he could
have bin guilty of so much Baseness; nor could I divine any other Reason for
it, unless it were out of despite for the deserved Scorn that I had put upon
him. My second Marriage had more incensed him; whether that he were naturally
an Enemy to every thing that was a pleasure to me, or that in despite of his
wicked Disposition, he had still preserved some remainders of a passion for me.
For th^^^ are some People who let loose their fury against a Woman, for no
other Reason, but because they cannot forbear having an affection for her. They
revenge themselves upon her for the want of merit, which renders 'em despicable
in her Eyes: Nor do I believe there can be any Enemies more dangerous to the
Reputation of Women, then Lovers that cannot gain the reciprocal Affection of
their Mistresses.

The Countess then, no longer doubting but that the Letters were written by
Blossac, gave her Husband a desccription of him, and demanded justice of him
for the Calumnies thrown upon her. The Count, who was a Man of sincerity, but
somewhat of a rude and unpolished nature, swore that if it were Blossac who had
written those Letters, he would force him either to prove his foppish Tales, or
else make him eat his words. Presently the Count went to look for him, and
having found him, he asked him whether he had writ the Letters which he had
received? But instead of returning an Answer, Blossac fell a laughing; and then
with the Air of a Person zealous for the Count's Interest, he told him, that
he had nothing to object against his Wife; only he was willing, as his Friend
and Servant, to let him know that I was very bad Company, that no body was
better acquainted with me then he, for that he had formerly bin a sharer of my
Favors; till finding me to be a perfect Coquette, he forbore my Company. Mon.
Blossac, says the Count, this that you say deserves a serious Consideration: My
Wife has told me other things, which no way agree with what you tell me: Come
along then, and let us see whether you will make good these Stories to her
Face. Blossac answered, that he was not a Person (...) was to be compelled to
give such strict Accounts; that he had done the duty of a Friend to inform him
of what he knew; and that he might make what use of his kindness he pleased; if
not, he might let it alone. And having so said, he would have snatched the
Letters out of the Count's hands; but the Count lifting up his Cane, threatened
to use him like a Rascal as he was. Upon which Blossac drew; but he was
compelled to put up his Sword and retire. The Count made a great noise about
this Adventure; he complained also to the Queen, and soon after Blossac was
committed to the Bastille. But though he appeared to be guilty enough, I was
not looked upon as innocent. 'Twas believed that he was not committed to the
Bastille for the Falsehoods written in his Letters, but for having uttered
Truth, which a Civil Gentleman is never allowed to publish. So that all the
Ridiculous Stories that had bin so often and so unjustly attributed to me, were
renewed upon occasion of this Quarrel.

This Tempest was no sooner calmed, but the Death of my Mother, which happened
about the same time, gave an occasion for the raising of new Batteries against
my Reputation. Tho all the Estate that was at her disposal was but very small,
yet she made a Will, by which she disinherited both me and my Son, and left
what she had to a Kinsman a far off, a Man that was hardly known in the World.
This Kinsman, desirous to make the best of the Will, finding he should be
hardly able to make it good, endeavored to insinuate into the Public, that the
reason why my Mother had disinherited me, was, because to her certain
knowledge, she was assured that my Son was none of my Husband's. And for proof
of this, he published the Reasons which my Mother had given of her being so
well assured; that is to say, he revived whatever my Husband had formerly
invented to ruin me. All which Scandals had bin so often reported, so often
refuted, that I wondered there should be still any People so vain as to give
themselves the trouble of renewing 'em. But it is not with Calumny and
Reproach, as with other things that displease and grow nauseous with being
often repeated. Stories that have bin told a thousand times over, are still
new, when they are revived to the prejudice of another; and there are People
who have itching Ears, and who are always ready to listen to 'em.

Soon after the Count had wedded Madam Laval, I married my Son, and at another
time it would have bin the greatest grief to me in the World to have lived
apart from two Persons so dear to me; but I had a Husband, the Consolation of
whose Company made full amends for those Lesser Disquiets. We spent the Winters
at Paris; and when he departed for the Army, I retired to one of my Manors,
where I had no greater pleasure, then to write to him, and receive Letters from
him. Three years of my Marriage we spent in perfect Union; nothing troubled our
Felicity: And in truth, all the honor of so happy a Union was due to St. Albe.
For never did man accompany his tenderness with more respect and good humor;
but men were never born to enjoy an uninterrupted and lasting Happiness in this
World.

The Manor where I made my usual Residence, when my Husband was in the Army,
adjoin'd to the Estate of a Gentleman whom I must call the Count of Velley: A
Person whom particular Reasons had obliged to quit the Service, and who had
purchased a considerable Employment in the Province. Now in regard he was not
satisfied with the Court, he rarely went thither; nevertheless his Business
called him frequently to Paris. This Person, so soon as he had made himself
acquainted with St. Albe and my self, proposed to us the letting him have an
Apartment in our House at Paris. He was a Widower, and had only one Daughter
about Eighteen years of Age, whom he had caused to be bred up in a Convent.
However, Velley was yet young enough, well shaped, and had a great deal of Wit:
He was born with so great an Inclination for all sorts of Sciences, and was so
studiously addicted to 'em, that he had attained to a considerable perfection
in 'em: But among all the Good Qualities, he had one very Bad one, which had
like to have ruined St. Albe and my self, and which we never were so curious as
to mistrust.

Velley, who could not believe, after all that had bin reported of me in the
World, that I was an Enemy to Gallantry, took a fancy to court me. Now in
regard I was not sensible of any Inclination for him, I was not offended with
the marks which he gave me of his Love; I treated him also after such a manner
as made him believe I was not displeased with his Courtship: I also perceived
what he drove at, because he redoubled his Sedulities, and gave me sufficient
Intimations that he was passionately in love with me. Till then I little minded
his Courtship; but when I found him in earnest, I carried my self more warily,
and so behaved my self toward him, as to let him see there was no hopes. And
whether it were that my entire devotion to my Husband made him forbear his
Courtship, or whether he looked upon my Severity as an Artifice which I made use
of to engage him the more, he spoke no more to me concerning his Passion, and
we began to live together as if he had never mentioned any such thing to me.

St. Albe returned from the Army, and we went to spend the Winter at Paris.
Velley accompanied us, and having fetched his Daughter out of the Convent,
presented her to me. She was witty, and cheerful in her humor, and I was glad
of such a pleasant Companion in my House. It Is true that her Beauty was so
lively and so charming, that had I bin never so little addicted to Jealousy, or
rather could I have imagined that St. Albe, who loved only Me and the War,
could have bin of a humor to alter his Inclination, I might have bin afraid of
her Allurements. I gladly therefore accepted Velley's Proposal to let him have
an Apartment in my House, though my Husband told me it would be inconvenient to
lodge Strangers under the same Roof: but I assured him they were People that
would be no trouble to us in the World. He was not accustomed to contradict me,
and therefore would not oppose a thing which I seemed to desire; but added he
with a smile, blame no body but your self for what may happen, for Mademoiselle
de Velley is very amiable. I answered him also with a smile, that instead of
alarumming my self at that, I desired he might find her to his humor, for I
loved him too well to dislike what he loved. But he found too soon that I did
not mean as I said.

About a Month Velley and his Daughter had lived with us, when I perceived that
St. Albe labored with a secret melancholy that tormented him, and which he
strove to conceal under various Infirmities of which he complained; he spent
the Nights without sleeping; he sighed continually, and me thought he avoided
the sight of me; for when I came to him to ask him what he ailed, he shunned me,
and sighing only cried that he was very ill. This began to disturb me, and I
desired him to enter into a Course of Physic, to which he answered, that
nothing but death could cure him. I redoubled my cares and my Caresses, which
he coldly received, and which I attributed to his Distemper; I judged him to be
very sick indeed, since instead of being a comfort, I was become a trouble to
him. I was so persuaded that his indifference for me was no other then an
Effect of his Disease, that I durst not complain of it for fear of adding to
the pain of his distemper, the trouble which I thought it would be to to him,
should he perceive me to be discontented with him. I made it my Business to
divert him, and in regard that Velley was a Jolly-man, I desired his
Conversation. But I found that his Company rather augmented then lessened my
Husband's Disturbances: only methought that Mademoiselle de Velley's appearance
gave him some Relief.

This began to create disturbances within me of another nature: I felt
Suspicions and Jealousy brooding in my Breast. But then thought I to my self,
if he loves Mademoiselle de Velley, wherefore does his Love make him sick,
since he sees her every day, and she, if I mistake not, no way seems displeased
with his Company? It must be doubtless then Remorse of Conscience for being
thus perfidious to me; and he seeks to punish himself for his falseness in
loving another.

I had so good an opinion of him, that I made no question but that his
sickness, supposing he did love Mademoiselle de Velley, proceeded from his
being ashamed of his having Sentiments offensive to me; but then again I was as
soon of another mind, and thought him like those Husbands who cannot endure the
sight of their Wives when once they become unfaithful. While I was rolling
these thoughts in my mind, Velley entered my Chamber, seemingly pierced with
Grief and Vexation: in which condition, when I asked him what he ailed, Madam,
said he, I have strange News to tell ye, -- you here behold a Man at his Wits
end -- of necessity I must leave your House -- I understand your Husband
Monsieur St. Albe's Disease -- Here are two Letters which he has written to my
Daughter, and which I intercepted -- read 'em, and then tell me, whether I am
not the most unfortunate man in the World to come to your House, to be the
trouble of your felicity and Repose. I took the Letters, trembling, I opened
'em, and found the Hand to be St. Albe's. The first contained the following
Expressions.

The LETTER.
WHY lay ye to my Charge my Affection to my Wife? Is it because you are not
convinced after all that I have said to ye, that Acknowledgment only forces me
to have some sort of value for her. I married her only to raise my Fortune; but
it is my Heart, it is Inclination and Choice that fix me to your self; and if you
continue your Rigours, you will certainly be the cause of my death.


It Is impossible to express the shame and indignation that seized me after I
had read this Letter. I had not strength enough to read the other, but Velley
pressed me to peruse it, and it was thus indicted:

The LETTER.
COnfess, that the Reproaches which you cast upon me about Madam de St. Albe,
are but a Pretense which you make use of to conceal from me the Aversion you
have for me. For in short, what would you have me do to convince ye that I hate
my Wife, since what I do every day before your Eyes, is not sufficient to
persuade ye of the Truth? You see I can hardly endure to look upon her. What!
-- what would you have me stab her! to let you see how odious she is to me? --


Ah, Perfidious Wretch! Cried I, how have thou been able to delude me all this
while! -- No -- I will not not follow thy Example -- but it behooves me to be
revenged of a Traitor -- My Sighs and Tears would not permit me to say more --
and how it came to pass, I did not die under the pressure of my overwhelming
sorrows, I cannot say.

Book the Eighth.
VElley strove to comfort me, and asked me, what Satisfaction I desired his
Daughter should make me? It Is not your Daughter, said I, that I complain
against, but against a Man who has abused my most sincere and constant Love.
Speak, Madam, replied Velley, what Commands will you be pleased to lay upon me;
I adore ye, I will sacrifice my life to serve you in your revenge; for I must
not dissemble with you, the injury done you has renewed in my heart all those
Sentiments of Kindness and Affection which formerly my Love disclosed to your
Disdain. Let your Husband alone to follow his indiscreet Passion: I Will answer
for my Daughter, that her Verture shall sufficiently punish him for his
Treachery. And as for your self, Madam, forget an unworthy Husband were it only
to make a happy change, and vow your Embraces to a Lover that adores ye.

I was at that instant so deeply persuaded of St. Albe's infidelity, and so
resolved to revenge my self, that I hearkened to every thing that Velley said
to me; and I thought that the more he loved me, the more ready I should find
him to assist me with his Counsel and his Services; and to tell ye the whole
Truth, I must confess my Vanity was so humbled by St. Albe's Contempt, that I
would have listened to any man that would have but pretended to afford me
Consolation. For the supplys of Pride are infinite in the heart of a Woman.

I desired Velley not to forsake me; but to assist me as a Friend. He advised
me to take no notice to my Husband of any thing that he had said to me; and as
he went out of my Chamber, he told me he was going to study some pretense or
other to put his Daughter into a Convent; and indeed he carried her that very
day to St. Anthonies Abbey.

After this Discourse I went to Bed, where I was seized with a Fever. St. Albe
desired to see me; but I desired him to let me take my rest: however he came
into the Room without my leave. He took me by the Arm, and as he was feeling my
Pulse, I perceived the Tears that trickl'd from his Eyes. He asked me whether I
knew that Velley had carried his Daughter to a Convent? But I made him no
answer: for I believed the tears he shed to be no other then the effect of his
Grief for being separated from his Mistress. He conjured me to take care of my
Health, but still I made him no answer; so that he was forced to leave me.

I spent that Night but very ill; and the next Morning they told me that my
Husband desired to see me; but I sent him word that I had need of rest, not
having slept a wink all night. With that he went away; and about Noon a Letter
was brought me from him; and I was also farther given to understand that he had
taken Horse, without leaving any word whither he was gone. The Contents of the
Letter were these.

The LETTER.
SInce my Presence, Madam, is an Obstacle to your Health, and that I am one of
those Testimonies whom you desire to be soonest rid of, I take my leave of you
for ever; if you chance to hear of the death of him who robbed me of your heart,
seek no farther for the Author of it then my self. I wish that time would give
me strength to forget you, even to desire no further revenge. It is not
necessary the Public should be informed of our Differences; but you may tell
those who ask you what is become of me, That Business has called me into the
Province.


This Letter I read over and over again above twenty times, yet could not
apprehend the meaning of it. Could it be possible, thought (...) to give him
any occasion to suspect my Loyalty? No, it is a pretense which he takes to lay
the blame at my door. But to what purpose does he absent himself? It Is because
he thinks I love him too well to endure him out of my sight; he believes me
ignorant of his infidelity; he knows I am sick; and desiring my death, he picks
a quarrel with me, that he may quite overwhelm me. For what else can be his aim
in betraying me? Alas, continued I with tears in my Eyes, it is I who ought to
complain that his heart is taken from me. Is it possible that St. Albe, that
St. Albe, so different from all other men, should be capable of so foul a
Treason! These were the Reflections which I made; for I was so prepossest
against him, that it never came into my mind that he might be innocent.

After Dinner Velley came to see me, and gave me an account how he had carried
his Daughter to a Convent: he told me also that she went with a hearty good
will, as being tormented to the soul to be the occasion of St. Albe's being in
love with any other but his own Wife. I told Velley that he had left Paris; at
which he seemed to be in a great fit of Admiration, and buzzed it into my Head,
that St. Albe was meditating violence to his Daughter. Then I showed him St.
Albe's Letter, at which he seemed to be more surpised; and after he had stood
a while in a Brown study, he told me that my Husband had wrote to me in that
manner for no other reason but to puzzle and amuse me, and to oblige me perhaps
to run after him, but that it behooved me to stand upon my guard; for that if I
did not keep steadfast, he would make an ill use of my weakness and my fondness
for him. Velley would afterward have entertained me with Vows and
Protestations, and a long Preamble of his Passion; but I cut him off short, and
told him that besides other reasons which I had for not hearkening to him, my
Husband's Letter furnished me with one more: for in regard I thought he was in
part suspected by St. Albe, I was willing to shun him. Afterward I desired him
to change his Lodging, under pretense that it did not look well for a stranger
to lie in my House, while my Husband was absent.

I showed the Letters which St. Albe had written to Mademoiselle de Velley, to
the Countess of -- as also the Letter which he had written to me upon his going
out of Town. She told me, she understood nothing of the Business; but that she
feared that both St. Albe and I were deceived. It Is requisite, added she, that
I should see and discourse Mademoiselle de Velley, perhaps I might then pick
out something of the Truth. I approved her Contrivance, and away she went to
St. Anthonies Abbey to find the young Lady; but the Bird was flown; and the
Abbess told her that her Father had sent for her from thence to put her into
another House. The Countess coming back to bring me the News, found Velley with
me, who swore he knew nothing of the matter, and therefore it must certainly be
my Husband, who had made use of his Name to carry away his Daughter^* At the
same time also away he ran, pretending to inform himself more fully of the
Particulars; and returning in the Evening, he told me his Conjectures were too
true; that his Daughter was lost, and that he would prosecute my Husband, who
was the only man that could be suspected for having stolen his Daughter. To
which purpose he desired me to return him his Letters, which would be of great
service to him in point of Evidence. But I refused to deliver 'em; for I had
still some remainders of kindness for St. Albe, which made me earnestly request
Velley to desist from all Proceedings against him. I confess I had some reason
to urge it for the sake of my own Honor; but I was more concerned for St.
Albe's Reputation.

In the mean time a Report was spread abroad in Paris, that St. Albe and I were
parted; 'twas also said, that I desired to be rid of him, because he was an
Obstacle to my familiarity with Velley. And all this while I kept my Bed,
detained there rather by my own Vexations, then by any Distemper that troubled
me. I also pressed Velley to leave my House, because his Lodging in it at such
a Conjuncture, authorized the greatest part of the Scandals that flew abroad.
And well it was I was rid of him; for no sooner was he got to his new Lodging,
but he was apprehended by the King's Order, and carried to the Bastile.

I made no question but that St. Albe had really stolen Mademoiselle de
Velley; nevertheless, though I was truly incensed against him for his
Perfidiousness, yet I could not choose but be afraid of the danger that
threatened him for stealing the Young Lady; and I was extremely troubled
because I knew not what was become of him; neither would I enquire after him,
because I was unwilling to let him have the pleasure to know that I troubled my
self about him. I was haughty enough to conceal the weakness which I found my
self still sensible of for an Ungrateful Person, who as I thought deserved my
hatred.

Two or three days after Velley was apprehended, I received a Letter from his
Daughter, who sent me word that she was in the Abbey Aux-Bois, where she desired
to see me. You may be sure I did not at all defer that Visit, but taking the
Letters which my Husband had written to Mademoiselle de Velley, away I went in
haste to the Abbey Aux Bois.

There I found her so much the more afflicted for the confinement of her
Father, because she was ignorant of the reason of his Commitment: And I was so
impatient to be informed of what I desired to know, that instead of chearing
her up, I asked her briskly where my Husband was, and whether he had not
fetched her out of St. Anthony's Convent? He! Madam, answered Mademoiselle de
Velley in great Surprise, what business of his was that? 'twas my Father
fetched me from thence to put me here. How! replied I, with some commotion of
mind, is it not true that my Husband courts ye? No -- I Will assure ye, replied
she, nor do I apprehend the meaning of these surprising Questions. What think
ye then of these Letters, answered I, showing her the Letters which Velley had
given me. I know not what to say to 'em, replied Mademoiselle de Velley, after
she had read 'em, but I never received any Letters from Monsieur de St. Albe,
nor did he ever declare to me that he had any such Passion for me. Ah!
Mademoiselle, cried I with a more then ordinary agitation, if what you tell me
be true, where am I, or what have I done? If my Husband be innocent, how guilty
am I! Mademoiselle de Velley was extremely astonished to hear me talk at that
rate: Her Astonishment too appeared to me unfeigned, which made me ask her more
Questions, and her Answers confirmed me in my thoughts that Velley must have
imposed upon me. However, the Letters seemed to me to be St. Albe's own
Handwriting, and I judged that he might have written 'em to some other Person.
Upon that, I asked Mademoiselle de Velley if ever my Husband had said any thing
to her concerning her Father's making love to me? She answered that St. Albe
had never mentioned any such thing to her; but that by his Sighs and his
profound Sadness he seemed to her to be assured that there was an Intreague
between Velley and My self. I blamed her for not having given me notice of it:
However, now believing I had dived to the bottom of the Villainy that had bin
put upon me, I desired Mademoiselle de Velley to go along with me home; to
which the Abbess was the more willing to consent, persuaded that I took her
away, that she might be the more at liberty to solicit her Father's
Enlargement. This made all People believe that I was concerned for Valley's
Confinement, and that we corresponded in private. But I valued not what they
could say; my Business was only to clear up the truth of a Mystery, wherein I
began to perceive that a Surprise had bin put upon me. My Cautions vanished
then, lest St. Albe should think I ran after him; I ordered him to be sought
for in all places where I thought he might be found. But I could hear no
tidings of him, and I saw my self become a prey to all the most dreadful
Torments of Grief and Disquiet. I did whatever lay in my power to discover the
truth of this Adventure, and used my utmost endeavors to speak with Velley, in
hopes he might be able to afford me full satisfaction; but no body was
permitted to come to him; so that I fell sick again, and Grief had infallibly
killed me, had not an unknown Person put into my hands a Packet of Letters
directed to me. I knew St. Albe's Hand and Seal, which made me open 'em in
great haste, to read the following Lines.

LETTER.
I Send you, Madam, the Letters which convinced me of your Infidelity and my
Misfortune. Judge by the reading of 'em what effect they were most likely to
produce in a heart that adored you: I cannot survive this Change of Yours. I
have lost the desire of revenge, because I cannot do it without publishing your
Inconstancy. After a languishing Life I am going to my Grave; and I love you
still so well as not to be ashamed of a Death which all the World will
attribute to my weakness; but which perhaps will not appear to you so full of
shame, whenever you are pleased to call to remembrance how dearly I have always
loved ye.


After I had read this Letter, I opened with the same impatience the Letters
enclosed, and which contained the Proof of my Infidelity. And indeed the Hand
and Style of these Letters was so like my own, that if I had not certainly
known that I never wrote 'em, I should have bin deceived. The Contents were
these.

LETTER.
WHerefore do you upbraid me thus with what I did for my Husband? It Is a piece of
cruelty to recall to my remembrance Things that overwhelm me with sorrow. Is it
not sufficient that I here declare that I only live at present for your sake;
since I have made you master of my Person and my Heart, can you envy what I did
for another out of civility and necessity? Find out a way to deliver me from
his sight, and to remove those troublesome Testimonies that torment me.


I had not patience to read the rest of the Letters which were all of the same
nature: For now I no longer doubted but that my Hand had bin counterfeited as
well as St. Albe's, and that the whole was done by Velley. In short, 'twas he
who wrote 'em; for he had a singular Talent to counterfeit all manner of Hands;
and as afterward I understood, he was sent to the Bastile for having
counterfeited the Hand of a Great Minister of State. I was then sensible of the
Fraud that had then put upon me, and without losing a moment's time, I inquired
of him that brought the Packet, where my Husband was. I understood by him that
he was at St. Florentin: Thither I flew in a Post-Calash, and in Thirty hours I
arrived where St. Albe was. I found him very sick, and almost past his Senses,
as it were gasping between Life and Death. I threw my self about his Neck, and
embracing him, with Tears in my Eyes, I cried out aloud, My Dear St. Albe look
upon your own Wife. He opened his Eyes, I redoubled my Outcries, and Embraces,
and at last I perceived that he began to know me. It Is not to be expressed what
then I felt in my heart; and I believe that never any Person was sensible of
the like; for where is that Woman that ever was under the same Circumstances?

Half an hour after St. Albe came perfectly to himself, and knew me exactly:
However, he had not strength enough to speak; only his feeble hands by grasping
mine, expressed his meaning; and I saw the Tears come trickling from his Eyes;
which was the cause I felt two contrary Passions at the same time struggling in
my Breast, Joy and Grief. How grieved was I to see him in that plight! how
overjoyed to find him still the same in affection and tenderness! How dearly
soever I loved him before, I never felt till then such tender motions.

St. Albe by degrees recovered strength, and I gave him an account of Velley's
Villainy, showing him the Letters which he had counterfeited. But he was no
sooner convinced of my Innocence, but he had like to have relapsed into the
same Condition from which I had recovered him, such were the effects of his
Grief, Repentance and Joy; Oh, Madam, said he, I am unworthy of your Goodness:
Is it possible I should be so base to suspect your Virtue? I ought to have
distrusted my own Eyes, rather then have injured your Virtue, as I have done.
Revenge your self, dear Madam, upon a Husband so unworthy your Embraces, and
let me die to make an Atonement for such unmanly Jealousies. Live, answered I,
my dear St. Albe, if you desire that I should live; it is I that am the
Offender; it is I that never understood your Real worth; and had I not bin quite
forsaken by my Senses, I could never have thought it in your power to become
unfaithful. These Renovations of Conjugal Friendship contributed more then all
the Doctors Prescriptions to St. Albe's Cure. So that in a little time he was
in a condition to travel, and we returned to Paris, to the wonder of all those
who had bin Testimonies of this Adventure.

In the mean time Velley killed himself in Prison to avoid the Punishment he
foresaw would be inflicted on him. A Death so terrible was a greater revenge
for the Villainous Legerdemain that he had played us, and we began to pity his
Daughter. And therefore, knowing well she had no share in her Father's Crime,
we solicited for her, and prevented the Confiscation of her Estate.

This Adventure which had thus embroiled my Husband and I, did but serve to
unite us more lovingly together: I began to relish the Delights of my Marriage,
and never was St. Albe more kind and obliging then after that time. And
therefore in retaliation, I thought it my duty to spare for nothing that might
render him happy. The Employment of -- which I purchased for him in the King's
Household made all people murmur, and set my Relations all in an uproar about my
Ears. But St. Albe was esteemed at Court for his true Merit; and he performed
an Action besides, which stopped the Mouths of his Detractors, and made 'em judge
more clearly of his Character. He had a tender love for my Son, because he was
my Son, and for that he had a high value for every thing that belonged to me.
He had no sooner obtained the Government of -- which the King conferred upon
him without asking, in recompense of his good Services; but he obtained a Grant
of his Employment for my Son, and made him a Present of it. On the other side,
my Husband still bare in mind a lively resentment of Blossac's ungenteel
Practices to my prejudice, and had long waited an opportunity of revenge, which
at last Fortune put into his hands.

They Both served in Flanders; where St. Albe understanding that Blossac made
it his Business to speak disgracefully of Me and himself in all Company that he
frequented, his Patience could no longer contain it self. He forgot the
Prohibitions against Duelling for my sake, and sent Blossac a Challenge:
Blossac met him at a private Place at a distance from the Camp, where while
they were actually engaged one against the other, they were surrounded by a
Party of the Enemy; and instead of duelling each other, were forced to defend
themselves. Blossac was presently wounded, and constrained to surrender to
three Troopers, who disputing whose Prisoner he should be, were about to have
knocked out Blossac's Brains, when St. Albe, who had disengaged himself from
those that surrunded him, perceiving Blossac's danger, forgot his private
Enmity, and flying to his Succor, fell upon the three Troopers that had taken
him, killed one, and putting the other two to flight, saved Blossac's Life, and
rescued him from the Danger he was in. It Is true that St. Albe was assisted by
some Officers of our Troops, who observing some Passages between him and
Blossac, and seeing 'em Both walk off together privately from the Camp,
followed 'em at a distance, and came in time enough to beat off the Enemy's
Party; which had they not done, as well St. Albe as Blossac might have both
undergone the same Fate, and both perished together.

Blossac could not be so ill-condition'd as not to be moved with what St. Albe
had done for him; so that he acknowledged in all Companies that he was
beholding to St. Albe for his Life, and offered to make me all the public
Satisfaction I desired. He confessed that all his Evil Practices were only the
effect of his Despite to see himself rejected by me; yet after all, he could
not forbear his having a very great affection for me: He desired St. Albe also
to beg my pardon in his behalf. St. Albe, contented with this Satisfaction,
demanded no more; and having informed me of this Adventure, we both concluded
that Blossac had bin sufficiently punished for his ungenteel demeanor, by the
shame and mortification of being beholding for his Life to a Person against
whom he had always had an uncivil Enmity. From that time forward he always
shunned me: Nor did I know, nor did I care whether he continued his love to me
or no; but this I am sure of, that the Hatred of Men of his Character is less
pernicious to Women, then their Love; and that the greatest Misfortune that can
befall us, is to be beloved by men, who not being able to win the Affection of
those they court, prove so base as to seek their Revenge by throwing Scandals
and Calumnies upon those that ^light their Addresses. There are another sort of
men no less to be feared by Women; and those are they who would prefer
themselves to a Reputation by a familiarity with those they court, when there
is no such thing; and as if I had bin destined to suffer whatever could attack
a Woman's Honor, I was still exposed to that Misfortune.

Now though it were not to be questioned but that I had a singular Affection
for St. Albe, yet there were People who persuaded themselves, it was impossible
that a Woman upon whom Scandal had fastened so many Adventures, should be
constant to a Husband. The Chevalier de Clausonne prepossessed with this Error,
undertook to court me; He was a Young man very handsome indeed, and who had no
other defect, but the vanity to be thought a Fortunate Man in the World. He
took an acquaintance with my Husband, and became one of his intimate Friends.
St. Albe was naturally very grateful for Civilities done him, and moreover he
loved Mirth and Good Company, and because he looked upon Clausonne to have a
Sportive Wit, he introduced him into my Company. And now you shall hear what
method Clausonne took to bring about his Design. He came every day to my House,
but he let fall nothing in his Conversation that might give me the least
occasion to distrust him; so that believing he had no farther Ends, I was
pleased with his Company. He was still ready to do whatever I desired him;
which made me sometimes write to him, and frequently send to his Lodging. On
the other side, he was no less careful to make known the confidence I had in
him: However, he was not very apt to show the Billets he received from me; but
though he did not show 'em, he omitted nothing that might make People believe
that the only reason why I wrote to him so often was, because I loved him. All
this he reckoned as an honor to him; and by the manner of his letting it be
imagined that we understood one another, he gained the Credit to be looked upon
as admitted upon the Score he aimed at, by all those who knew not upon what
account I suffered his Company. It Is one of the greatest Faults a Woman can
commit, to be guilty of these sorts of Familiarities with Young men; and I
would never advise any of our Sex to follow my Example. It Is true, that I was
far from thinking it could be believed that a Woman of my Years and Experience
should begin to dote upon a Young man. Nevertheless the World imagined it, and
began to talk aloud, that my Husband was the Cully to his Friendship with
Clausonne. And the Chevalier himself confirmed this Report by his Assiduities,
and the Impostures which his Vanity invented. But at length I came to
understand what People talked of Clausonne and my self, und told my HusHusband
of it, who did but laugh it, and advised me to contemn reports, and to admit
Clausonne into my Company as I was wont to do. He laid before me, that if I
forbid him my House, it would but give a credit to those Fooleries that were
spread abroad, whereas the still permitting him to keep me Company would
extinguish all those flying Rumors. I followed my Husband's advice, and since
he did me that justice which I deserved, I did not think it became me to vex my
self with with what others thought of me. For these reasons I still admitted
Clausonne to come to my House, with the same frankness as before. But I never
troubled him with any more Errands, nor with any more of my Billets: I also
took the same care to avoid being with him alone, and never spoke to him but in
Company. He was apprehensive of this Alteration, and suspecting the cause of
it, he went and told the Confidents of his Vanity, that I had obliged him to
behave himself with more caution, because I perceived that my Husband began to
be jealous of him. They gave credit to Clausonne's story; and there needed no
more for them to give out that St. Albe was jealous* and they reported also
that there had been some fallings out between him and I upon the account of my
pretended Gallantry.

Clausonne came not now to my House as he was wont, but he affected to follow
me where ever I went, and he carried this Affectation so far, that I took
notice of it, and ordered him to be told that I took his way of proceeding very
ill; and that if he did not mend his Manners he might chance to repent it. He
was afraid of my Threats, and after that, carefully avoided my Company; and at
length he gave out that I was fickle in my humor, and had sacrificed him to my
Husband's Jealousy.

Tho this Affair seemed to be but a Trifle, yet it was a very great damage to
my Reputation: for it is not enough for a Woman's Honor that her Husband is
satisfied with her Conduct: We are in an Age so prepossessed against the Wisdom
and Virtue of Women, that if a Woman lives lovingly with her Husband, people
believe he is either blind, or else that he does but dissemble. Clausonne
indeed ought to have bin punished for his idle presumption; but the remedy had
bin worse then the Disease; which shows how unhappy the Condition of Women is,
seeing it is the same thing whether they revenge or not revenge their injured
Reputation.

But my Husband's good Opinion made me amends for the injustice of the World;
and it was apparent after so many adventures that our Union could never be
disturbed but by death. But so it fell out, that St. Albe died in the flower of
his Age, and in the midst of all his Hopes: and after that, my time was wholly
taken up in grieving for the loss of so dear a Husband, and so worthy of my
sorrow. Pardon me therefore if I recite the Particulars of so sad a Separation.

At the Battle of -- and the taking of -- which followed that Battle, St. Albe
had given all the Proofs of Prudence and Va^^ur that could be expected from an
Officer of his Reputation; and it is said he could not have failed of as high a
Recompense as could have bin conferred upon a Soldier. But three or four days
after the taking of -- advancing a little too far to observe the March of the
Enemy who was going to fall upon one of our Garrisons, he received a
Musket Shot through his Body, which was not thought so dangerous at first.

So soon as he was wounded, he wrote me word that his Wound was but very
slight, and desired me not to afflict my self* But I could not obey him in
that; I was extremely troubled for him, and hastened to the Town whither they
had removed him. For two or three days he was in such a condition as made us
hope he would live. But all of a sudden his Fever redoubled, and it was thought
he had an Aposteme in his Breast: however it were, he was the first that knew
all Remedies were useless, and that he should die. Perceiving himself therefore
in that condition, he sent for me to his Bed side, and ordering all the People
to be put out of the Room, he uttered these last words of a Dying man.

Flatter not your self, Dear Wife, with hopes of my Cure; I am too sensible
that you and I must part. Then taking me by the hand, My business is done, said
he, and I must leave a Life wherein I had no other delight but that it gave me
an Opportunity to serve and please you. Many things might escape me which
perhaps you might not so well approve of, perhaps they might be contrary to
your good liking; but attribute them rather to my defects, then to any ill
intention: for I have always sought to render my self worthy the Honor you did
me. I die full of acknowledgment of your Goodness. I lived happy because you
loved me: and I owe that little Reputation I have acquired, to the Design I had
of rendering my self worthy of your Love. I have endeavored to live like an
honest Man, and to do my duty, because I had the Honor to be your Husband. I
have made no Will, because I have nothing but what is your own, and what you
may dispose of. Assure your Son I die his Servant; and be kind to my Servants.
So farewell, farewell for ever. Withstand your Grief, and promise me you will
not suffer your self to be overwhelmed with sorrow. And as you are the only
person that makes Life desirable to me; be so kind to my weakness, for I must
confess that seeing you, I have not that Tranquillity I ought to have to think
of the Grand Affair; be so kind, I say, as to withdraw your presence from my
sight.

While he thus breathed forth these dying words into my Bosom, my Condition was
to be pitied. I bathed his hands with my Tears. My sobs and sighs were the
Passing-bells that towl'd his departure; nor do I know which of us two were
most concerned in the last moments of our Separation. When he desired me to
leave the Room, my strength forsook me, and I know not what became of me. He
was sensible of my being fallen into a swoon, and finding his tenderness did
but hasten him to his end, he was unwilling to spend in useless sorrows the
small remainder of those minutes that were left him to prepare for death;
therefore he called the people, and caused me to be carried away.

They put me to Bed, where I came to my self* in two or three Hours: I would
fain have returned to him, but they would not let me; nor would they let me be
at liberty till he had breathed forth his last gasps. Every one was taken up
with his own grief. His Servants were all in tears; the Soldiers pressed in, in
Crowds, to see him, and kiss his hands. The Officers withdrew profoundly
silent, and had not strength enough to oppose my passage into his Chamber,
where I beheld him breathless. Good God! what a Spectacle was it to me! 'Twas a
Miracle that I survived him; however I stopped the Deluge of my Tears to pay him
my last Duties, and I signalized my Love by the Magnificence of his Obsequies.

Here I end the Story of my Life; tho in the Design which I proposed to my
self, to show the great unjustice done our sex, I may be able to find new
Proofs of that Injustice in what afterward befell me when I had utterly
renounced the world. For I found by experience that the most exact retirement,
and the most sincere and blamless Conduct are no sufficient shelter from the
Thunderbolts of Scandal. When a Woman has once bin famous for being a Lover of
Gallantry, people will have it that she must still retain the same inclination
in retirement; and every Friend or Director that comes to her, must be her
Servant.

I hope to continue the Design I have begun in justification of Women. I have
known several who have bin as little spared by public Report as my self; and I
shall show by the recital of their Adventures more clearly then by my own, That
outward Appearances are frequently deceitful, and that there is more misfortune
then Irregularity in the Conduct of Women.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Cockerill, in Amen-Corner.
GEography Rectified: Or, a Description of the World in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Countries, Islands, Cities, Towns, Seas, etc. Also their
Commodities, Coins, Weights, etc. The Third Edition. With Eighty Maps. By
Robert Morden.

The History of Portugal down to the present Year School. Written in Spanish by
Emanuel de Faria y Sousa. Knight of the Order of Christ. Englished by Captain
John Stevens. In 8vo.

Geography Anatomized: Or, An exact Analysis of the whole Body of Modern
Geography. With Maps. The Second Edition. By P. Gordon, M. A. Fellow of the
Royal Society.

A Week of Soliloquies and Prayers; with a Preparation to the Holy Communion;
and other Devotions added to this Edition. By Peter Dumoulin, D. D. Price 1 s.

Marriage promoted: In a Discourse of its Ancient and Modern Practice, both
under Heathen and Christian Commonwealths. Together with their Laws, and
Encouragements for their Observance. By a Person of Quality. 4to. Price 6 d.

A Discourse against Customary Swearing; and a Dissuasive from Cursing. By the
Honorable Kobert Boil. 8vo.

An Essay on Sundry Projects. 8vo.

Interest of Europe with Respect to Spain Considered. 4to. Price 6 d.

Lex Talionis: Or, The Best way to prevent the Persecution of the French
Protestants. 4to. Price 6 d.

The Poor Man's Plea to all the Proclamations against Profaneness, etc. Price 6
d.

In the Press, Reprinting, and will suddenly be published, The Works of Mr.
Stephen Charnock, M. A. and late Fellow of New College: Being Sermons preached
on the Attributes of God, and Several other Subjects. 2 Vol. Folio.

In the Press, Reprinting, Sermons on Several Occasions, Vol. 1. By John
Conant, D. D. Published by the Bishop of Chichester.


