AARONS ROD Blossoming: Or, The Orthodox Government of the Church of England by
Bishops, Presbiters, and Deacons, Asserted, from the Practice of the Apostles,
the Testimony of Councils, Synods, Fathers and Doctors, from the Apostles time
to this day: And that it is Analogical to the Institution of the Church under
the Law.

And thou shall write Aaron's Name upon the Rod of Levi, for one Rod shall be
for the House of the Head of their Fathers.

And it shall come to pass that the Man's Rod whom I shall choose shall Blossom,
and I will make to cease from me the Murmurings of the Children of Israel,
whereby they Murmr against you,

Numb. 17.3, 5. LONDON, Printed for Richard Butler, next door to the Holy-Lamb
and Three Bowls in Barbican. 1680.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To the Honorable CONYERS D'ARCY, Only Son of the Right Honorable CONYERS
Lord D'ARCY MEYNILL and CONYERS.
Honorable SIR:
IT is not my Ambition, nor was it ever my Desire to appear in Print, but was
always of your Honors Opinion for that, and did ever then think my self most
secure, when most private: Nor had I now exposed this to the public view, had
not the duty I owe my too much Dishonored Mother the Church of England, the
Importunities of some Friends, and the great desire I had to show your Honor
some Fruit of the Vine your Honor has preserved, like so many persuading
Orators prevailed with me, to present your Honor with this Clustre, by the
smalness whereof your Honor may well guess the Soil to be a Wilderness wherein
it grew. I must confess my repentance is ready to arrest my design, when I
consider the small proportion the Present carries to your Honors Greatness,
till I call to mind, that Heaven it self delights to have her name sung though
from the mouths of Infancy and Ignorance: and, that small things do often explain
the greatness of devotion; and though your Honors Piety, Charity, and Loyalty,
(whereof the whole Fame of your Honors Country is but one entire Panagyrick)
may render your Honor the Admiration of this Age, yet I here intend an
Epistle, not an Encomium, lest I betray the shallowness of my Judgment, in
offering to draw an imperfect Copy in a place where the Original can be its
own Orator, and appear with so much Luster.

It is from hence I receive my Encouragement to commit this Orphant to your
Honors Protection: For, though it be already Legitimated and Licensed by the
Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of London, yet I think it fit in these Seducing
and Apostatising Times, to Patronage it with as much Virtue as I could, that
under the name of two such Godfathers, it might with less scruple pass for a
good Christian.

I humbly therefore implore your Honors acceptance thereof from him who will
be ever ready to approve himself an obedient Son of this Orthodox Church, and
glory in nothing more, than in being by your Honor esteemed

The Humblest of your Honors Votaries Basiphilaos.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THou may, perhaps, wonder at my folly and confidence to hold a Candle to
the Sun, and employ my Time and Pen on a Subject that has been so copiously
and curiously handled by several Worthies of this and precedent Ages, eminent
for Piety and Learning, and Giants in both in comparison of my self: For which
I have only this Apolagy, that this was at first intended for my own private
satisfaction; but, the frequent Importunities of some Worthy and Learned
Persons, after some struggling, (I being ever averse to popularity) have
prevailed with me to make it public, in respect of its brevity, whereby many,
who have neither Time nor Money to expend upon larger Volumnes, may, I hope,
receive so much satisfaction at least from this short Treatise, as to stay
their Stomachs, and keep them from rebellion in these seducing times (which is
commonly the Child of Ignorance, Ambition, Prejudice, or misguided Devotion.
And it is probable, the more Curious may find something that has been omitted
by others: For though a Giant may see further than another Man, yet set a Dwarf
upon a Giants Shoulder, and he may see further than he.

I confess the too violent Contentions and disputes of Eminent, Learned, and
Pious Men of both sides upon this Subject, caused me to decline both, for fear
of being biassed by either, and apply my self to the Fountain of Scripture and
Antiquity, Reasons surest Guides.

Pruning, I must confess, and Reformation I allow of, but Eradication and
Deformation I tremble to hear of, and hope never to see: God forbid that
personal Errors should destroy a thing so Ancient, and sealed with the Blood
of so many Martyrs. Though Judas die in the Consciousness of his Treason, yet
another must succeed him in his Bishopric.

I endeavor to crowd as much as I can in a little room, yet hope to satisfy
all, who are not more addicted to their Wills than Reason (if mine deceive me
not) for I look upon Grave obstinacy, Pride, formal Ignorance, and deluded
Credulity to be my only Gainsayers) however I have hereby discharged the Duty
I owe my Conscience, and hope to find the benefit of that, which is all I look
for; and sufficient to arm me against the Obloquies or Misconstructions of
those, whose Hearts are full of that which their Tongues must utter, or break
with the Plerophory: But I had rather suffer the Censure of the Malevolent,
than to be thought to consent to that which my Conscience approves not; if this
excuse me for writing, I am glad; if not, I have pleased my self in giving an
account of thus much of my Faith to the World, and in the discharge of my
troubled Thoughts and Conscience.

AARONS ROD Blossoming: Or, The Orthodox Government of the Church of England by
Bishops, Presbiters, and Deacons, Asserted, from the Practice of the Apostles,
etc.
IN Discourses Rhetorical, men desire to show the Power of Nature, improved by
Art; which we call Eloquence; in Logical Disputes, the quickness of
Apprehension, and the improvement of Judgment: the one often makes a
difference betwixt Subtilties, and attempts to puzzle Reason: The other
(rightly employed) defines and settles a Truth obscured by different Falsities.
In matters of Faith, we lay aside Reason, and yield to Scripture's Truth, as
other Faculties of the Body do to their Informer the Rational Soul; and, as
Young Scholars to their ipse dixits: We believe therefore, what neither Sense
nor Reason can make us to conceive.

I believe the Scripture to be the Sacred Word of God: and what Truth I find
therein, I conceive it to be Jure Divino: My Reason, I confess, is bound, and
yields in the Point of Episcopacy, that it is Jure Divino; because I find for
it so many ipse dixits in Sacred Writ: My Judgment also is further
strengthened therein, by Reasons sufficient to settle Humane Belief.

Opinion, we define to be haerens and dubia de veritate in animo presumptio, a
questionable and doubtful presumption in ones conceit that a Matter is true:
And Cognitio est rerum conceptarum per experientiam scientia: Knowledge is a
sure Apprehension of the Matters we conceive by experience of their Causes and
undoubted Grounds of Truth: And Resolutio, is dubii depositio, the abandoning
of all Doubting. I am past Opinion; and acknowledge my self satisfied and well
resolved, that Episcopacy is Jure Divino, and endeavor to give an Account
thereof in this Treatise.

I will not (...), withstand or resist; or seek Evasions or subtle Answers to
evade or elude Gods Truth: Nor do I love (...), to be in Suspense: Having well
weighed the Truth here asserted, I find cause to say (...): Great is the force
of Truth, and has prevailed: And to satisfy the World what Reason I have for
this my Confidence, I leave a Testimony thereof in this Discourse.

I therefore define Episcopum to be, Presbiterum cum additamento superioritatis
quoad regimen in Ecclesia: A Bishop to be a Presbiter, having an Addition of
Superiority, for the Governing of Gods Church. His Charge is to Oversee the
Clergy, and their Flocks; the Word, I confess, in a large signification, may be
taken for a Major of a City; in Homer, Ajax is called (...) the Bishop or
Orderer of his Army: But our Episcopus, est cleri and gregis in sua diocesi, is
Overseer of his Clergy and Flock bounded within his own Diocese: He is also
Presbiter, an Ancient, and therefore Experienced and Able to inform and direct.

As for the Inferior Presbiter or Ancient, and Diaconus, Minister, or Servant,
they are distinct and subordinate to the Bishop or Superior Presbiter, both in
the New Testament, and in the Practice of the first Century, and in all Ages
even to this Day. Let it not trouble any man, that the Apostles sometimes term
themselves and Bishops, by the Title of Presbiters: they call themselves also
Diaconos, Deacons, in a general Notion: our Presbiteri^^s would have Bishops to
be, pastores jure divi^o, praesides jure ecclesiastice; principes jure hum^no
and diabolico; Pastors by Gods Law; Presidents by Ecclesiastical Law; Lords by
Humane and Diabolical Law: How little ground they have for this, let my ensuing
Discourse testify.

Our Bishop is a Presbiter, or Ancient Pastor set in eminent superiority over
the Clergy and their Flocks, with relation to the Government of them in Matters
Ecclesiastical; and such, I say, the Apostles instituted, and to them gave a
Charge how to demean themselves, (...) perpetual Succession whereof by practice
has continued from Christ's Time to this Day.

Now for jus divinum, I take that to be of Divine Right, which is warranted in
Sacred Scripture de credendis and agendis, in matters to be believed, and done:
Let this serve for the present; it will be more enlarged occasionally in some
part of this Treatise: Only here I add, that (...) the Practice of the
Apostles, which never was questioned, and excepted against, and is recorded in
the Canonical Scripture, has in it a jus divinum, and shows what is of Divine
Right de facto.

These things premised, I proceed to Objections against my Assertion, and
answer them particularly.

Object. Eminent Superiority and Lordly Authority over the People, is that
which the Lords of the Gentiles may, and do challenge, and practice as their
due jure humano, by Humane Right, and therefore (...), by the Law of things
opposite. Eminent Superiority, and Lordly Authority over the Clergy and People
of God, is that which Bishops ought not to challenge or practice jure divino;
For Proof they bring. Matthew. 20.25, 26. The Princes of the Gentiles dominantur,
Lord it, and Rule over them; but you, non sic: Or, it shall not be so with you.
And the 1 of Pet. 5.2, 3. Feed the Flock of the Lord, taking the Oversight
thereof; not by constraint, but willingly; not churlishly, or covetously for
filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind; neither as being Lords over Gods Heritage.

Ans. To this I Answer, That the Measure of Domination not the Matter, lies in
the word, sic; and so is expounded by the other words, not by constraint, but
willingly; not churlishly, or covetously; not as though ye were Lords
dominering over them, but that ye may be Ensamples to the Flock: Non herile aut
regale imperium exercentes, sed pastorali superioritate and paterna
gubernatione utentes: Not exercising a Master-like or Kingly Command, but using
a Pastoral Superiority, and Fatherly Government: And so this rather (as I
conceive) confirms Superiority and Episcopacy, than destroys it: For the word,
sic, so, takes not away the Legality, but qualifies the Power given, by saying,
(nay commanding) let it be used, sic, so; which I prove to be the meaning of
the Apostle by this Argument.

The Practice of the Apostles is not contrary to Christ's and their own
Doctrine, and the Sense thereof; but the Apostles did practice Eminent
Superiority, and such lawful Authority as Christ forbids not, over the Clergy
and Flock, and instituted Successors, therefore their Doctrine allowed the
same: And so, that cannot be meant by the words above, which is pretended,
(viz.) That there should be a Parity in the Clergy; and that Episcopacy is
Dominium in Clerum, a Lordly Rule over the Clergy, and (...), an usurped
Authority.

The Successors which they instituted, are warranted by Christ when he said, I
am with you to the end of the World: that is, I am with you, while you live,
and with Successors in your stead, governing and teaching the Church to the
Worlds end. Hence it was, that the Apostles ordained Bishops to succeed them:
So did the ancient Fathers in the purer times; and this Course has continued
ever since.

The Practice of the Apostles was in superiority over others of the Clergy: and
to the Bishops whom they constituted to succeed themselves in place over the
Clergy, they gave a superior authority: Neither did they either practice, or
ever mention that parity in power, which the Presbyterians so much endeavor to
introduce: And therefore the Apostles never understood the words as these men
do, (viz.) that they should disallow of Bishops in superior authority above
other of the Clergy.

To make the Practice of the Apostles evident, I appeal to Paul, who gave to
Timothy and Titus Episcopal Power, to the one in Ephesus, to the other in Creet.

Now to clear this, let us first oleanse the Springhead, and then the Streams
will run clear down to aftertimes. I have, above, to this end, defined
Episcopum, if we observe what he is, then shall we evidently see, whether St.
Paul did institute such a Calling or no.

Of Civil Bishops I speak not, but of Spiritual; and a Bishop of this kind, I
defined to be, presbiterum, cum additamento superioritatis, quoad regimen in
ecclesia: He governs the Clergy and their Flocks in Spiritual matters: Bishops
of this kind St. Paul did institute; he made Timothy and Titus Episcopos Cleri
and gregis quoad regimen in ecclesia; Bishops of the Clergy and their Flocks,
and to have Ecclesiastical Government over them; whereas, before, they were but
Presbyters, or Disciples, brought up under him; by this Institution were other
Presbyters made subordinate to them, in governing and teaching the Church:
which to prove, I thus argue.

He that is ordained, and so ordained, that he has power constituere
presbiteros per civitates, to ordain Presby ters in every City, is greater than
those, who have no such power in their Cities and Churches; and they who may
correct what is defective are superior to those, for whom matters defective are
corrected: but Timothy and Titus had such power given them, and did so correct
things defective, and none of the Presbyters had the same from the Apostles,
(no not Timothy nor Titus whilst only Presbyters) therefore I conclude
undeniably, that Timothy and Titus were Superiors, as Bishops, over the
Presbyters, in their several Charges and Divisions, Timothy in Ephesus, and
Titus in Creet.

That they had this Power given them by Paul, appears, Tim. 1.5.22. Lay hands
suddenly on no man. Tit. 1.5. For this cause I left thee in Creet, that thou
should set in order, things which were wanting, and ordain Elders in every
City, as I had appointed thee. If any other in those Churches could have
ordained Presbyters, why was Timothy sent to Ephesus, and Titus left at Creet
for this very purpose? And if the Cretians could have set in order things
defective, what need was there that Titus alone should have this Commission?

St. Jerome (no great Friend to Episcopacy) gives us in his Epistle to Evagrius,
page 329, this as a Distinction (...), remarkable, betwixt a Bishop and a
Presbyter, saying, quid facit, excepta ordinatione, Episcopus, quod non facit
Presbiter: What does a Bishop, except the Ordaining of Others, which a
Presbyter does not? And it is worth the observation, what the Ancient Father
and Champion for the Blessed Trinity, Athanasius, has in his Second Apology,
(viz.) That Colithus, a Presbiter of Alexandria, had constituted Presbyters;
But what became of them? Recissa est haec ejus ordinatio, and omnes ab eo
constituti, in Laicorum ordinem redacti fuere: The ordaining of others by him,
was made invalid, and they who were ordained by him, were degraded and made
Laics.

So then you see, that Bishops are Eminenter superiores presbiteris; Eminently
superior to Presbyters, having power affirmative and negative, by the Opinion
and Practice of the Ancient Fathers. This confirms what the Apostles had
taught and practiced, and appointed others in place above the ordinary
Presbyters to do.

Now I come to show the Second Difference betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter: And
wherein a Bishop has eminentem superioritatem, a clear Superiority above a
Presbyter: that is, in Excommunication; which was called Mucro Episcopalis, the
Episcopal Weapon; and was a Power given to Bishops Successors of the Apostles,
and was ever practiced by them: This appears, in that, an Account of it was,
and is expected at their hands; as it is manifested by the quarrel, which our
blessed Savior had against the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, namely, that
he suffered some of his Church, who held the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans; and
against the Angel of the Church of Thiatira, that he suffered the woman Jesabel
to teach and seduce the people: By this it is apparent, that Christ expected
they should do what they had by their places power to do; namely, that they
being Angels of their Churches, (whom I affirm to be also Bishops thereof, and
Successors to the Apostles, as is sufficiently proved by the most reverend and
learned Archbishop of Armagh, and Beza himself, calling them (...) men in place
above others) should Hereticos coercere and ex Ecclesia ejicere, keep under
Heretics, and cast them out of the Church.

If here it be objected, that we must not argue from dark and mystical places
of Scripture, such as is the Apocalypse: I answer, that I argue from a plain
place, and from the plain words and direct Scope of the place; and not from the
mystical Sense or Interpretation, neither can we here admit of that
distinction, that Angelus is in this place to be taken Collectively, pro tota
Ecclesia for the whole Church: For, I conceive, there is not a word in
Scripture but has its weight: and was it not as easy to have said Ecclesiae,
as Angelo Ecelesiae, if Angelo had not something more in it then Ecclesiae? and
why not Angelus Ecclesia the Angel the Church? but Angelus Ecclesiae the Angel
of the Church, if it had been to be taken Collectively? but the terms are
different, and of a distinct force, like those panis Domin^, the bread of the
Lord: and panis Dominus, bread representing the Lord.

Besides, to come to Timothy and Titus, they are enjoined to command others
(...), not to teach other Doctrine: and obturaro ora deceptorum and hereticos
rejicere: to stop the mouths of deceivers, and to reject Heretics: these
things were commanded them, and an Account accordingly expected of the
performance thereof, which manifestly proves, that every Church had its
Angelum, who had Episcopal Authority and Jurisdiction eminent above other
inferior Clergymen, and not many Angels in each of these Churches, all of
equal Authority and place: or, at least, the Angel in each of the seven
Churches, was so absolute in his power, that he was (...), Chief Governor; the
Presbyters only Assistants to him: he a Spiritual Justice; and of the Quorum,
they of the Council.

The difference also of Episcopal Authority from that of Bresbyters, appears in
the Cause of Excommunication, where there was an Appeal to the Synods, which
either confirmed or disolved them, but none to the People, none to the
Presbyters, this is confirmed by the ancient Council at Nice, Can. 5. and at
Antioch, Can. 6. and Jerome himself writing to Riparius concerning Vigilantius,
an heretical Presbyter, is angry, that the Bishop under whom he was, did
acquiescere ejus furori, and non virga Apostolica, virgaque ferrea, vas inutile
confringere, and tradere ad interitum Carnis, ut spiritus salvus fiat, did
quietly give way to his fury, and not rather break in pieces that unprofitable
vessel with his Apostolic Staff and rod of Iron, and deliver him up to the
destruction of the Flesh, that his Soul might be saved.

And it seems strange to me, that any should think, that our Blessed Savior
his Executioners, Administrators, and Assigns, knew not the meaning of his Will
and Testament, as well as we in these days. Christ, who ascending to Heaven,
gave Gifts to many, would not deny this Gift so necessary: He, I say, giving
supereminent Gifts to the Apostles ad fundandam ecclesiam, for the founding of
his Church; would not deny to their Successors, those which were necessary
ecclesiae fundatae, to the Church being founded: and so necessary, that nothing
more concerns the Church. Would he not, or could he not inform his Trustees how
he pleased to have his Church (his Household) governed in his absence? To say he
would not, is derogatory to his Wisdom, and Goodness; to say he could not, to
his Almighty Sovereign Power.

I therefore conclude these Points;

First, That Ordination of Presbyters, was left to Timothy and Titus, as to men
of higher place and Authority, and not to the Presbyters, who were of inferior
Degree.

Secondly, The Power given to the Angels of Ephesus, and the other Churches,
puts a difference of Superiority betwixt a Bishop and an ordinary Presbyter,
and other the Teachers of the Churches, and gives them commission prae ceteris
tam Clericis, quam Laicis; above others, both Clergy, and Laity, yea a coercive
and castigative Power.

Object. Further they object, That Episcopacy is not jure divino, because
Christ did not command it in the Gospel.

Answ. To this I answer, That jus divinum aliter in se habet in credendis,
aliter in agendis: There is a difference of divine Right in matters to be
believed, and matters to be done. In matters of Faith, there must be textus
manifestus, aut convincens deductio; a clear Text, or a sound Consequence. As
for example, (In the beginning God made all things) that is textus manifestus;
but there is only convincens deductio concerning the Mystery of the blessed
Trinity, which is only proved thus:

There came down at Christ's Baptism, the Holy Spirit in the form of a Dove; and
a voice was heard, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased:
Here we find the Spirit in the form of a Dove; there is heard a voice, and
Christ is seen in the water, we know by the light of Scripture. and the light
of Nature, that there is but one God; and that from one, all things are, and
that in one they terminate. And that there is aliud medium, copulans primum and
ultimum, one between both, coupling the first and the last. Seeing also we read
that there is a Father, a Son, and a Spirit, and that there is but one God: We
hence infer, by necessary deduction, that there are three persons, and but one
God; Besides, this deduction is further confirmed by that Text, (...), These
three are one; which, in some sort, is textus manifestus, a clear Text.

Now a Matter of Fact may be inferred to be jure divino, as I suppose, if I
prove, 1. First, That the same Fact was the Practice of the Apostles. 2.
Secondly, that it is Analogical to the Institution of the Church of the Jews,
which was settled according to Gods Appointment, by the Mediation of Angels, by
the Ministry of Moses and Aaron. 3. Thirdly, That it is pointed at, and
insinuated, in the New Testament. 4. Fourthly, That it has successively
continued since the Apostles time, as elsewhere, so particularly in Britain.


If these points can be proved concerning the Fact in question, (viz.)
Government by Bishops, I hope none will deny it to be jure divino.

Now for Proof and Confirmation, that Episcopacy is jure divino; I will prove
these Points, and then say something concerning the Practice of other Churches.

And first; St. Paul the Apostle and Dr. of the Gentiles, gave Power and
Authority to Timothy and Titus, ordinare dignos, to ordain men worthy, and to
examine such as were faulty; to reprove and discharge such as were guilty, and
did (...), teach other Doctrine; and were offensive to the honor of their
Callings, and to cherish such as did well. Those things are evident in the
Epistles of Paul to Timothy, and of that to Titus: From Paul's Practice of
Superiority over these two, and from the Institution of Timothy and Titus to be
Bishops, I prove Episcopacy to be practiced by the Apostles, to make which
good, I thus argue:

If St. Paul himself practiced eminent superiority, and, in the Epistles
alleged, gave all that power which of right Bishops challenge, or does belong
to the definition of a Bishop, to Timothy and Titus, then Paul himself did not
only practice Episcopacy, but did also Constitute them Bishops; but verum
prius, ergo and posterius.

That he had (...), a Bishopric as the other Apostles had, see Acts 1.20. and
did diligently run his course therein, no man will deny; and that he gave Power
to Timothy and Titus, the same which he himself had; To Ordain, to Punish, to
Convent, to Reward duplici honor,
with double honor, the Epistles alleged do sufficiently prove: Therefore
Paul himself practiced superiority, and constituted Timothy and Titus Bishops
in place superior to Presbyters, whom they had Authority to Ordain, Convent,
and Punish.

Object. If they object, That Presbyters with a President may do the same, even
all things which are commanded Timothy and Titus; and therefore these things
were spoken to Timothy and Titus, and to their Presbyters, Collectively, in the
Persons of Timothy and Titus.

Answ. I answer, Their Old Friend (Collectively) will do them as little good
here, as elsewhere; for this is but petere principium, an Evasion which I have
formerly taken away: And now, further I argue, Such as the Charge is, such is
the Power; but the Charge is personal that is given to Timothy and Titus
particularly, and therefore the Power and Authority given, is personal; to them
for their time, and to their Successors in place after them; and not to them,
and the Presbytery Collectively; nothing in place where such Charge is given,
does intimate the Presbyters or Deacons interposing themselves in these
Episcopal Actions with Timothy and Titus; If they will have these Privileges
and Performances to belong to their President; they must plead them due to him
as he is Successor to Timothy and Titus, and so he is in effect (if you give
him Continuance in his place) a Bishop indeed: The bare Name of a President
cannot make him of a different Calling from a Bishop, whenas he acts the part
of a Bishop in all those points by St. Paul prescribed. The Practice of all
times (especially the first Century) warrants not a Monthly or Yearly President
doing nothing for Ordination, Convention, Punishment, and Reward, without the Advice and Consent of a company of Presbyters: But it allows Bishops
Superiority to Presbyters, and Presbyters to Deacons; yea it placed Bishops
Successors to the Apostles, as were Timothy and Titus; and Presbyters and
Deacons subordinate to Bishops as to the Apostles whilst the lived.

St. Ignatius, the next Bishop to Evodius, he received Episcopal Charge from
the Apostles; and writing to them at Antioch, when he was carried Prisoner to
Rome, he uses these words to the Laity, Obsequium prebete presbyteris, and
Diaconis; be ye obedient to your Presbyters and Deacons; and adds to the
Presbyters, pascite gregem apud vos, donec Deus ostendit (...), feed the Flock
under you, until God show who shall be your Governor: and hereby establishes
Superiority to Bishops, and enjoins the Presbyters Obedience. The same Father
in an Epistle to the Ephesians, acknowledges Onessimus, (named often by Paul)
to be their Bishop; and exhorts them, saying, (...), as it becomes you, submit
your selves to your Bishops Advice: Thus here we find St. Paul's Charge or
Ordination observed and followed by Ignatius, who lived in the first Century,
and whose Worth and Authority clouds of Witnesses do confirm.

In the same Journey he writes to the Church of Smirna, and salutes their
Bishop by name, and exhorts the Flock, (...); to follow their Bishop, as Jesus
Christ did his Father; and the Presbytery as the Apostles. The Bishop here
spoken of was Policarpus; as Ireneus his Successor, affirms; and multa accepit
ab illo de sancti Johannis vita and conversatione; Cotemporary with Ireneus,
and by whom he was informed in many things concerning St. John's Life and
Conversation.

In the life time of Trajan the Emperor, St. John returning from his
Banishment out of Patmos, where he wrote the Revelations, summoned the Seven
Bishops, (who are conceived to be those named in the Apocalips the Angels of
the Seven Churches) and used their Ministry for settling and ordering his own
Metropolis of Ephesus, and the other Churches in Asia; (as the ancient Greek
Records, found in the Library of Photius, testify) Concerning this Apostolical
Superiority, and practice of Constitution, and Ordination of Bishops, is
frequent mention in Ireneus, Eusebius, and Jerome.

So that by that which has been said, we see, that Episcopacy is (...),
warranted by the practice of the Apostles; because that viventibus,
constituentibus, and confirmantibus Apostolis; and viris Apostolicis, patribus
and doctoribus testantibus; The Apostles and Apostolic men being alive; seeing
it, appointing it and confirming it; and the Fathers and Doctors being
eyewitnesses thereof, there were these three distinct Degrees in the Clergy,
(viz.) Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons.

Now to the Second Point, That Episcopacy is Analogical to the Institution of
the Church Government of the Jews in the Old Testament, which Moses, as a
Prince, did establish by Gods appointment in the Wilderness, and which
continued in force, till the Veil of the Temple rent, and the Gentiles became
Heirs to Abraham: And the Promises made to him, were made good to us his Heirs
by Faith and Adoption: Because the Jews, Abraham's Heirs according to the Flesh,
by their own default and disobedience, forfeited their Interest in that
Conveyance of Inheritance which they claimed from their Father Abraham, by the
Evidences registered in Moses and the Prophets: Episcopacy and Subordination
thereto, I say, holds Analogy and a kind of proportion of the
Jewish-Church-Government; for God, in it, appointed an High Priest, Priests,
and Levites, subordinate one to the other; such is the Subordination of the
three Degrees in the Clergy. In the New-Testament-Church, St. Jerome near the
end of his Epistle to Evagrius, observes, and says, scimus traditiones
Apostolorum sumptas de veteri Testamento, quod Aaron and filii ejus atque
Levitae in templo fuere, Hoc Episcopi, Presbiteri, and Diaconi sibi vindicant
in Ecclesia scil. Christiana: The Orders delivered to the Church by the
Apostles, were taken out of the Old Testament; the same Subordination which was
in Aaron, his Sons, and the Levites, now appear in the Christian Church, in our
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. This proportion is made undeniable by St.
Jude, who Charges some in the Christian Church, with the Gainsaying of Korah;
now there can be no gainsaying like that of Korah in the Christian Church,
except there be distinction and subordination of Superiors and Inferiors in
the Clergy, as there was in Korah's time, and was gainsaid by him and his
Accomplices, desirous of superior honor, and of higher degrees and places than
they had a Calling unto. Here then you see, that God would have a Proportion of
Church Government betwixt the Old and New Testament.

And it is further worthy the observation, that both the Church and
Commonwealth of the Jews, had in their Government a kind of proportion
established by God: For the Church was Monarchical in Aaron; Aristocratical in
some Select Priests and Levites; so was the Commonwealth Monarchical in Moses:
Aristocratical in some Select Princes of each Tribe governing under Moses; and
Democratical in the rest, and in the whole Body of the People. And such is the
proportion betwixt our Church and Commonwealth, and such has it been from the
first foundation; this will, I hope appear when I come to speak of the
Succession in our Church; and what kind of Government thus suitable to that of
the Jews, is in any one Church, may be in all Churches; namely; all degrees of
men subordinate to their Princes, and all Princes or Kings, subordinate to
Christ, without having any King on earth Head over the rest: As all the degrees
of men in the Churches were subordinate to the Apostles, and the Apostles,
going to several and far remote Nations, were all equally subordinate to Christ.

To conclude this then, seeing the Constitution of Episcopal Government, is so
agreeable to that which is most absolute, and was established by that Wisdom,
that no other Commonwealth and Church ever was, (as one observes) dictante
Deo, Constituente Mose, God ordaining it, and Moses putting it in Practice, why
should any endeavor to alter it? It is held an Axiom amongst Architectors,
that it is not wisdom to pull down a main Post of a Building, especially so
ancient and well settled, except we be sure to settle and fix another which is
right and fitted to our purpose, which yet for all the Workmans skill may have
a private Flaw in it, which cannot be discovered; and so may the Building fall
on the Builders Heads.

Thus much for the Analogy and Proportion betwixt Episcopacy, and the
Church Government of the Jews.

Now, in the Third place, I come to prove, That Episcopacy was pointed at, and,
in some sort, deciphered in the New Testament. What I produced before
concerning the Authority of Ordination, Convention, Punishment, and Reward, put
upon some special persons, may serve sufficiently to this purpose; Yet
something more I will here add. Be it so, that when the Apostle says, If any
desire the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good work, that this is spoken of
an Inferior Bishop or Presbiter, which is an Overseer of the People committed
to his charge, as well as of a Bishop Superior, who has the oversight of the
Clergy and People: Yet will it follow, that, if the Office of an Inferior
Bishop or Overseer of his Flock be a good Work, (as indeed it is) then much
more they who have labored in that painful Harvest first, and afterward, in
their elder Years, are advanced to the Superior Bishops Office of Overseeing
the Clergy, of Ordaining, Conventing, and the like, as aforesaid, undergo and
perform (...), a good work of greater eminency and more Notable; for,
certainly, there cannot be a more blessed Work, nor more holy Calling in the
Clergy, than to succeed the Glorious Apostles and Martyrs in their places and
callings, as Heirs do their Parents in their Estates and Possessions; and to
deliver and teach Sacred. Doctrine to Faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also, as St. Paul bids Timothy, Tim. 2.2. To this purpose St. Austin
upon the 45th. Psalm. Thus Glosses, Pro patribus tibi nati sunt filii, Children
shall be instead of Fathers; saying, Patres missi, sunt Apostoli; pro Apostolis
filii tibi nati, constituti sunt Episcopi; hodie enim Episcopi qui sunt per
totum orbem, unde nati sunt? ipsa ecclesia patres illos appellat, ipsa filios
genuit, and ipsa illos constituit in sedibus patrum; the Fathers sent to us
were the Apostles, the Sons which were appointed, are Bishops; for at this day,
the Bishops in all the world, from whence did they arise? the Church it self
calls them Fathers; she her self begot these Sons; and she her self has put
them into the Seats of the Fathers: Here you see the Succession of Bishops
proved plainly by Austin, as before by Ireneus, Eusebius, Ignatius, and a Cloud
of Witnesses, who sealed their witness with their Blood, and are those whose
Robes are washed in the Blood of the Lamb; and who shall shine brighter than the
Cynosure amongst the Stars of Heaven.

Besides all the Witnesses and Proofs already brought, I will produce one Text
more to prove Bishops to be Successors of the Apostles jure divino: In that
Great Synod, Acts 1. where were assembled the eleven Disciples, and fere centum
and viginti, other persons Believers about an hundred and twenty, St. Peter
moved the consideration of an Election of one in the place of Judas, and urges
two places in the Psalms as Prophesies which must be fulfilled, Psalm. 69.25.
and Psalm. 109.6. there the Holy Ghost prophesied by the mouth of David
concerning Judas, Let his Habitation be void, and let no man dwell therein: Not
his place only void, but (...), let another take his Bishopric. Mark well the
words, and grant we these two Assertions:

First, That no man will say there is a tautologie or vaniloquium in the words
of Sacred Scripture, or that any word may be altered, or can be bettered.

Secondly, That the Scriptures should be understood, as near as we can,
literally, and as the plain sense of the place will bear, and so as may stand
with the Analogy of other Scriptures.

These things granted, I thus argue:

That which the Spirit of God by the mouth of a prophet has foretold, and the
blessed Apostles in a Synod have ratified, that, I say, is an undeniable Truth,
and may plead its jus divinum; But David did foretell, by the Inspiration of the
Spirit of Prophecy, that Episcopacy should succeed Apostleship, and the
Apostles ratified it in their Synod, therefore Episcopacy succeeded Apostleship
jure divino: It is not any other word which is attributed to Matthias's Place
but (...), a Bishopric; and he succeeded Judas.

Object. If any here object, That Matthias had (...), the Bishopric of Judas;
so that Judas's Apostleship, is there called a Bishopric in a general notion,
as it imports an Office or Charge; and that therefore Episcopacy did not
succeed Apostleship; but that both of them were of right attributed to the
Twelve, chosen by Christ, and both given to Matthias who succeeded Judas.

Answ. Suppose this be granted, it makes much more for what I intend: For
first, If they be terms of so near Affinity, that they serve to express one and
the same Office in a different regard; then it follows, that in regard of their
Affinity, the one may more easily succeed in the others place: For where there
is a likeness of Nature, there is facilior transitus, an easier Change of one
thing into another; as of Air into Fire, because of their agreement in the
quality of heat.

Secondly, Seeing the Term of Apostle, was by those and after times in some
sort appropriate to some few, it remained, that the other Term, of Bishop,
should be left and turned over to their Successors; and with respect to this,
Matthias is expressly said to succeed in Judas's Episcopacy: And the chief
Officers of the Clergy are termed Bishops, rather than by any other Name. This
we read to have been the constant practice of the first Century; in which (as
it is likely) the Executors and Feofees in trust of our Lord, best understood
the Meaning of the Testator; and had Gifts extraordinary ad ecclesiam and fidem
stabiliendam, as to establish our Faith, so the Church too, and could best fit
right terms to Persons, and Callings.

But to come close to our selves; This Island received Christianity very soon,
even in the days of Tiberius, as Gildas Brietto (a grave Author writes; who
wrote Anno 493. And as another Gildas after him confirms. This Gildas was
called Albanicus, and (as some will have it) preceded the other: He testifies,
that after the dispersing of the Disciples, by reason of the Persecution,
Philip sent out of France, Joseph of Arimathea, and diverse others, who preached
the Gospel in this Kingdom; their Doctrine (as Malmsbury has it) was afterward
confirmed by other Preachers, and Doctors here. This is also witnessed both by
Origin, and Theodoret; (not to speak of those, who some of them affirm that
Paul some that Peter, and some that James were in this Island, and visited the
Church here established; (as Baronius, a Romish Writer, and of special note
has it.) It is further said, that Insula Glacialis (which we now call
Glastenbury) was granted them by Arviragus, King of the Britains, and that
Joseph of Arimathea, lived, died, and was buried there: This is attested by
diverse memorable Records, alleged by the studious and learned Searchers into
the British Antiquities.

As for that report of Lucius and Eleutherius of Romes Supremacy, mentioned by
Beda and Marianus Scotus, and so often alleged by diverse others; I must either
think that Rome had changed her Customs and many of her Tenants, or question
the Truth of the Relation: My reason for this, is, because when in the year
601. Austin the Monk first required obedience to the Roman Church in three
things, (viz.) in pascate celebrando; in baptismo ministrando; in predicando
Anglis Saxonibus: In Celebrating Easter; in Administering Baptism; in Preaching
to the English: His Motion was refused, and Austin utterly disliked, quia (to
use the words of another) Augustini fastum spernebant, they disliked Austin's
Pride; and well they might, for he was haughty and harsh, and did contrary to
his Directions from Gregory Bishop of Rome, who sent him hither; for he
insensed Edelfred, so against the poor Christians of Bangor, that he put 1200
of them to the Sword; Of this the reason is given, quia noluere obsequium
Augustino prebere, because they would not submit to Austin's Will: For this was
indeed the quarrel, as our Writers say. This their refusal to yield to Austin
the Monk, I produce as a Proof, that the Christians, which he found here, held
in many things with the Eastern Churches, as having their Doctrine from
Jerusalem and Sion, whence the Gospel was to be sent, Isaiah. 2.3. Malachi 4.2.
to the Nations; and whence as Salvation went, Psalm. 14.7. so likewise the
Doctrine of Salvation; for Christ, who gave the Apostles Commission to go to
all Nations and preach the Gospel, did bid them stay at Jerusalem (not at Rome)
till the Holy Ghost had furnished them with Gifts for the work commanded. This
further appears, by that resolute Answer which the Abbot of Bangor gave to
Austin the Monk, Anno 601. (viz.) that he and his acknowledged no Superiority
in the Bishop of Rome over them, nor any Superior but their own Archbishop
Caer Leonis, or (as some will have it) Senovensis, qui sub Deo solus possitus
fuit super illos, ad super videndum and ad faciendum illos servare viam
spiritualem, who alone was, under God, made an Overseer or Bishop to them, that
he might make them observe the Spiritual way. Seeing this stout Champion thus
answered, it is propable that they were of the Primitive Institution: And this
I rather give credit to, because, if the Bishop of Rome had then held the
present Tenent of that Church, (viz.) that their City is the Spiritual
Metropolis, and that their Bishop is Caput Ecclesiae, our Predecessors would
have acknowledged the Pope and his See, as they had been taught. But Baronius
says, that our English Bishops are as Ancient as those of Rome, and it is
probable they were.

For this we have good proof, that at a Council held at Arles, Anno 314, we had
three Bishops, (viz.) Eborius de Civitate Eboraci Episcopus, Restitutus de
Civitate Londini Episcopus, Eldelphius de Civitate Coloniae Londinensium; and
exinde, Sacerdos Presbyter, Arminius Diaconus: Eborius Bishop of York;
Restitutus Bishop of London; Eldelphius Bishop of Colchester; and after them,
Sacerdos a Presbyter; Arminius a Deacon: These subscribed in this Council; here
therefore I observe, that in the year 314, we had Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons, the very Government now in question; and Romish they were not, (as I
conceive) because they then acknowledged not a Subordination to Rome, and
because Urban the Second called Learned Anselme, Patriarcha Brittanniae, the
Patriarch of Britain: Therefore methinks it should not now be questioned
whether Episcopacy be a Romish Relic; but rather that it should be confirmed
as an Evangelical Ordinance, and as Ancient as the first Institution of
Churches, and as a Calling appointed by the Apostles. What more have we for
Baptism of Infants? What more for our Lords Day or Sunday, but convincing
Deductions from the Scriptures, or the Practice of the Apostles, and the
Observation of the same in the Churches of God successively to this very day?
And yet we hold both these to be Sacred Ordinances, and of Divine Institution;
though they be both questioned by some men of the Reformed Churches, as
Episcopacy is among some of Ours: The Case is alike, and as clear, (if not
clearer) for Episcopacy, that it had a Divine Institution.

If what is formerly said satisfy not, I will only use this Argument more, to
prove that Episcopacy is jure divino. If the Charge given, Tim. 1.6, 14. be to
Timothy personally, and be perpetual; then it is to One person namely to
Timothy and to the Successors in his place; for Timothy was Mortal, so that
the perpetuity of the Charge must reach to all his Successors until the
Appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: But the Charge is personal to Timothy, and
perpetual even to the Appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, therefore it is to
one person, (viz.) to Timothy and to his Successors for ever.

Object. If it be here objected, that the Charge was given to Timothy, as
elsewhere the Keys to Peter; and according to that which is said, quod dixit
Petro, dixit ceterisque Apostolis, what was spoke to Peter, was spoke to the
other Apostles also.

Answ. I answer, It is true; for, what was said to Timothy, was said ceterisque
Episcopis and Successoribus little; both to other Bishops and their Successors,
as Christ's giving the Keys to Peter, was to him and the other Apostles; but
not to all Disciples, Deacons, and Widows.

To sum up all: Since it appears that Episcopacy, Presbytery, and Diaconatus,
are according to the practice of the Apostles; Analogical to the Institution of
the Jewish Church appointed by God, and established by Moses; pointed at, and,
in some sort, deciphered in the New Testament; and strongly insinuated by the
Successors of the Apostles, to have been received and practiced by them, as
commended to them by Divine Authority: Since these three Orders in our Church
are derived so high, have continued so long, even from the Primitive times to
this day, we may well conclude, that, as Presbyters and Deacons, so Bishops are
jure divino; especially, seeing Episcopacy is so generally confirmed, and has
been so constantly continued by the Aphstles, Apostolic men, Councils,
Fathers, and Doctors.

And much the rather I am induced thus (as I have said) to judge of Episcopacy;
because the contrary part have not the like Proofs, Warrant, and Approbation
for their Presbytery; and can bring no sufficient and convincing Authority for
a Quarterly or Yearly President, joint Presbyters, and Lay Elders usurping
Pastoral and Episcopal Jurisdiction. And here in confidence of my Cause I add,
That if they have any lawful General Council, or any Synod (except their own)
which established Church Government by such a President, Presbyters, and
Lay Elders as aforesaid, I will renounce my Opinion, and yield the Cause.

Now it concerns us very much to be well advised, and truly to judge of these
Matters; because it appears in a Seditious Pamphlet, entitled the Prelates
Pride, that the Author thereof, and such as he is, care not what Government be
established, so that Popery (which we wish more rightly than they) may be
abolisht; Episcopacy and the present Government (which how inconvenient it may
be they know not) may be abolisht; and they have Liberty and Toleration (which
what settled State will permit) to profess what Religion they please to make
choice of, and what shall best suit their own Interest, (the Card they commonly
sail by: So may we have as many Religions as there be at Amsterdam; and
unpeople all our Plantations, by calling home many Phanatical Scismaticks, who,
under color of dislike of the Church Government here, have fallen out with our
Religion, and framed to themselves diverse Opinions (if not Religions) contrary
to ours not only in Form, but Reality.

Seeing then there is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father
of All; let us endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace:
That there may be one Body, and one Spirit, even as we are Called in one Hope
of our Calling, Ephesians. 4. Let us stick fast to that one Truth which we are
taught; and be steadfast in one Faith; and agree jointly with one accord, like
Children of the same Father and Mother: Let us not loose the Honor of our
Church Government, but reform the personal Errors, if any such be; and sinde
Reformation signifies nothing else, but the reduceing and setting Matters into
the Form in which they were most perfect; let us constantly bold our selves to
the Form kept and practiced in the primitiver and purest Times, and in the
First and Second Centuries; in which we shall find the Order Episcopal,
Presbyterial, and Diaconal observed, and ever since confirmed by National
Synods, and Councils of our own, near 1400 years ago, (or 1000 at least) and
practiced in many Successions, before and since.

Nothing now remains, but Prayers and Endeavors for the Continuance of the
Establishment of the present Government of the Church of England, which is so
agreeable to the Ancient Constitution.

Only now here I wish that we may save the Honor of our dear and aged Mother,
and punish her Sons, if any have dishonored her by pride, tyranny,
covetousness, or any other way; and that the Church and Commonwealth may hold
such Correspondency, as they did in the days of David; and as Kings were
nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers to the Church in her Infancy; so in
her Age, she may find Kings to support her, if weak: And if any of her Children
be like Eli's, their Father may correct them, so that their Mother may not be
dishonored and ruined.

I conclude with that of St. Augustine, si quid tota ecclesia hodie frequent at
per orbem, hoc quin ita sit faciendum disputare, insolentissimae est insaniae;
if any thing at this day be of frequent use in the whole Church, to question
and dispute whether it ought so to be, is a most insolent Madness, Epist. 118;
and that it is Arianism, to say, That Presbyters (in Common Acception) are
equal to Bishops, such as were Successors of the Apostles; and such as St.
Augustine himself was: This Epiphanius reckons it among the Ancient Heresies,
and time has not bettered it: And whether it resembles and comes near the
Antilogie of Korah or not, (my self not being rigid and prone to censure) I
leave to be determined by Others.

FINIS.

