BEING A TRANSCRIPT Of Several LETTERS From AVERROES an Arabian Philosopher at
Corduba in Spain, to METRODORVS a Young Grecian Nobleman, Student at Athens, in
the Years 1149, and 1150.

ALSO Several Letters from Pythagoras to the King of India, together with his
Reception at the Indian Court, and an Account of his Discourse with the King,
and his Gymnosophists, and his Rules and Precepts: His Account of the Power and
Efficacy of Numbers, and Magical Uses thereof. To which is prefixed, a Latin
Letter by Monsieur Grinau, one of the Messieurs du Port Royal in France, to the
Ingenious Monsieur Gramont, Merchant at Amsterdam, concerning the Subject of
these Papers, and how they came to his Hands.

The Whole containing Matters highly Philosophical, Physiological, Pythagorical
and Medicinal. The Work having been long Concealed, is now put into English for
the Benefit of Mankind, and the Rectification of Learned Mistakes.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Grace Church Street. 1695.

Epistola Praefatoria ad Librum Sequentem; Scripta a Domino Grinau ex
praefectis Portus Regii in Gallia, ad Ingeniosum Dominum Gramont, Amstelodamae
Mercatorem.
SAepe saepius (Dignissime M. Gramont) Occasionem testandi meam erga te
Gratitudinem expetivi, quam tandem nactus, non potui non prehendere. Sub tuis
enim auspiciis and impensis primo operam dedi literis, utpote ex Angusta
oriundus familia. Et necesse est and fas videtur inde aquas redire unde
primitus exiebant. Hocce Opusculum quale quale est inopinato (and praeter spem)
casu in manus incidebat. Quod non citius mihi accidit quam Tibi committere
destinavi. Nosti optime Mr. Le Petit, Amicum Nostrum pusillo licet corpore,
magno Valentem Ingenio, pluribus abhinc Annis in Andaluzia apud Cantabros
Hospitantem. Iste Vir, parvulus quidem, and inter nostrates facetissimus
Congerro, copiam mihi fecit hujuscemodi literarum. Etiam and fidem dedit eas
Averroeana manu, ve^usta latinitate Conscript^s fuisse, and ex Librario suo
apud Cordubam, Anno 1231. Millesimo Vigentesimo Trigesimo primo inde traductas,
and in privatam cujusdam* Nobilis Andaluzensis Bibliothecam repositas.

Jam vero reddenda est ratio, quamobrem ego hasce Literulas in manus tuas misi,
ingentis munificentiae impar sane (...).

Novinte, Amicissime V. etiam vel a primis ^unabulis literas sitire, and plus
operae studio Philosophiae dedisse quam caeteri opibus comparandis. Hae sunt
verae Divitiae quae nec animis satisfacere neque Corpus laedere possunt, quo
enim plus potantur eo plus sitiuntur.

Averroem itidem in medium inducere huic veritati astipulantem possumus: In
confesso est apud omnes qui vel primoribus labris Medicinam illibarunt, illum
de hac art optime meruisse; quippe qui regulas conservandae sanitati, sanae
rationi innixas tradidit, qui temperantiam, quasi utramque paginam in hac re
facientem, omnibus proposuit. Illum vero de Menstruo hoc, de quo jam agitur,
calculum suum adjecisse testantur libri ab ipso conscripti Medicorum filiis
haud quaque ignoti; quorum quidem copia Arabice Manuscriptorum, in Bibliotheca
Collegii Medicorum Londini, unicuique petenti exhibetur. Non is fuit qui temere
sententiam suam de rebus tulit: Arcanorum utpote naturae scrutator
sagacissimus, investigator insignis: Quin and Arabs cum fuit, (sole equos suos
non tam procul ab ista regione jungente,) hoc quicquid est secreti, tantum
negocii neotericis facessens, illum latere non potuit. Nec in dubium utique
revocari potest, quin scripta nostrae Pythagorae ipsi ad manum fuisse, vel
saltem fando audivisse de ipsius effatis; quoniam per omnia secum usque adeo
sentire videtur, ut intercessisse sibi cum illo vel per literas vel aliter
arctiorem consuetudinem nemo dubitaret. Pythagoram vero quod attinet, omnes
consentientiore pronunciant ipsum fuisse virum antiquis moribus, sincera fide,
honorem nedum Existimationem vulgi parum affectantem, bono humanis generi
prospicientem unice, sine fuco, citra verborum lenocinium, sine verbis
proletariis auram popularem Captantibus, plane sine fuco aut dol^ malo, prout
rationi non absonos putaverat, conceptus suos literis mandasse': Adeo ut
proclive est credere illum promovendae sanitati, incolumitatique tam Corporis
ac animae sum nitentem fuisse. Quid multis? tot tantaque scripsit, tantis a
multis retro seculis ipsum extulerunt laudibus cuncti sanioris mentis Literati
ut nefas omnino fuerit existimationem tanti viri criminatum iri. Siquis autem
Luxuriae patriocinari satagit, dum Pythagoram parum sanae mentis ac injuriae
mortalibus illatae insimulant, quod promovendae sartaeque tectae conservandae
sanitati animae corporisque coelitus afflatus omnibus Carnium usus, interdixit,
dixit, secum perpendet velim quot strages, quantum malorum Ilias nobis
incubuit, quot truculenta morborum Symptomata hisce diebus Medicorum remediis
illudentia, ferociter instantia nobis ingruunt, nisi ab ingurgitatione omne
genus Carnium: Unde Languores desidiae, unde in nos impetum faciunt morbi
Scorbutici, Asthmatici, quibus impar est congressus naturae, nisi a crebro and
intemperato indulto ciborum usu; adeo ut non possumus non dicere nec indicta
causa, gulam plures occidisse quam gladium. Hae sunt V. Amantiss. rations qua
propter hasce literulas tibi Communico. Primo statim vultu videntur esse
praeludia Tyronum, quando vero praeparatis Animis imbibantur, tanto videbuntur
celeberrimis Antiquorum Philosophorum sententiis convenire, quanto censentur ab
hodierna Scholarum recedere disciplina. Multa quidem molimur and tamen nihil
agimus, nisi Trojanum equum inducimus qui omnia evertit.

Apage ergo Scholarum Rudimenta, Nugamenta. Quo enim plus eis incumbimus, eo
minus sapimus. Quinque apud Scholas and septem in Academia consumpsimus Annos
and etiamnum deliberamus utrum Conclusionem Syllogismi partibus annumeremus. O
Discipulorum dura Ilia, qui gustant quae non possunt concoquere.

Hic solummodo praefert nobis facem Natura, and quo diligentius eam sequimur eo
propius veritati accedimus, Optima Scientiarum Magistra and Dux Vitae.

Non opus est Dom. Gra. pluribus verbis, quam ut has literas in testimonium
maximae erga te Gratitudinis accipias and boni Consules.

P. Grinau.
Dat. Non. Apr. 1687.
A Letter Prefatory to the Ensuing Discourse, by Monsieur Grinau, one of the
Messieurs de Port Royal in France, to the Ingenious Monsieur Gramont, Merchant
at Amsterdam.
I Have often sought for an Opportunity of Testifying my Gratitude toward you,
which having at last found, I could not but lay hold on. Under your Influence,
and your Expenses, I first applied my self to Study, deriving my own Birth
indeed from a very mean Family. And it is necessary that Rivers should return
from whence they first flowed.

This little Treatise, such as it is, very unexpectedly fell into my Hands, and
immediately I determined to send it to you. You know our Friend M. L. Petit, a
Person, though of a weak Body, yet of a very strong Understanding, who has for
many Years since resided in Andaluzia in Spain, that little Man, and pleasant
Companion, first gave me a Copy of these Letters, and also affirmed that they
were written by Averroes own Hand in Ancient Latin, and in the Year brought
from his Study at Corduba, and laid up in the Library of a certain Nobleman at
Andaluzia.

Now I am to give an Account wherefore I present these Letters to you, an
unequal Return of so large a Bounty. I know, Sir, that from your very Infancy
you have Thirsted after Learning, and taken more Pains in the Study of
Philosophy than others in the Acquiring of Riches. This indeed is the true
Riches, which can neither cloy the Mind, or injure the Body; for the oftener
they are tasted, the more they are desired.

We have Averroes himself confirming this Truth, who is acknowledged by all
that have but the least Relish of Physic, to have very well deserved from that
Art, he having laid down Excellent Rules, built upon sound Reason for the
Preservation of Health, encouraging, and commending Temperance to all his
Disciples. And what his Opinion was concerning the Menstruum of the Stomach,
his Books, hardly unknown to the Learned, do abundantly discover, whereof there
is an Original Manuscript Writ in Arabic, to be seen in the Library of the
College of Physicians in London: For being a severe Searcher, and diligent
Enquirer into the Secrets of Nature, he never rashly past Judgment upon things:
And being an Arabian, and having a nearer Communication with Phoebus,
whatsoever there is of Secret in this Business, that has created so much
trouble to our Modern Physicians, could not be unknown to him.

Neither can it be suspected, but the Writings of Pythagoras were in his Hands,
and their Sentiments are so much alike, that none can doubt but that there was
an Intercourse and Correspondence betwixt their Souls.

As to what concerns Pythagoras, Mankind with one consent agree that he was a
Person endued with Ancient Morals, and Sincere Fidelity, affecting neither the
Applause nor Estimation of the Vulgar, having only a particular regard to the
Welfare of Mankind, not stuffing his Writings with Rhetorical Flights to
captivate the Understanding of the Ignorant, always commending many wholesome
Rules, and useful Notions, to the Service of the World. So that it seems he was
altogether bent to promote the Health and Welfare both of Body and Mind. What
need is there to say more, so many Excellent Things have been Written by him,
and with so many Praises have all the Learned in former Ages extolled him, that
it would be highly unreasonable to suspect the Reputation of so great a Man.

But if any one shall so far Patronize Vice and Luxury, as to charge Pythagoras
with Madness, for Interdicting Intemperance, and Killing, and Eating of Flesh,
let him consider whence all these Slaughters, and Cruel Symptoms of Diseases,
passing the Understanding, even of Physicians, do proceed, except from an
^ntemperate Ingurgitation of all s;orts of Flesh? Whence comes the Languor of
Sloth, Scurvies, Asthma's, etc. which Nature is hardly able to overcome,
unless from a repeated Indulgence in the Eating of unwholesome Food, so that we
may truly affirm the Gullet to have destroyed more than the Sword.

These are the Reasons, Sir, that induced me to Communicate these Letters to
you. At the first sight indeed they seem to be the Exercises of Young Scholars,
but when they are imbibed into prepared Minds, they will by so much the more
appear to accord with the Judgment of the Best Philosophers, by how much they
seem farther removed from the present Practice of the Schools; where indeed we
endeavor many things, but do nothing, unless induce a Trojan Horse that
overthrows every thing.

Away then with these Trifling Rudiments of the Schools; for the more we apply
our selves to them, the less wise we grow. We spend Five Years at School, and
Seven in the University, and yet are in doubt, whether the Conclusion is to be
reckoned part of a Syllogism. O the stubborn Guts of Scholars that can endure
to swallow what they can never digest.

But Nature carries a Torch before us, and the more strictly we follow her, the
nearer approach we make to Truth; she being the best Mistress of Arts, and
Guide of Life.

There Is no need of more words, only I beg you would please to accept this Address
in part, as a Testimony of the Gratitude of,

Sir, Yours, P. Grinau.
Dat. Non. Apr. 1687.
THE CONTENTS
Of the First Letter. BEing a Commendation of Averroes his Learning. A modest
Request to that Philosopher to give a full Satisfaction concerning the Nature
of the Menstruum of the Stomach. Of the Second Letter. That the Prejudices of
Education ought to be subdued. That Philosophy allows a greater Liberty for the
Exercise of Reason than the Mysteries of Faith. The Vulgar Notion of the
Menstruum Described, and Disapproved, and the Reasons of Disliking it assigned.
The Inconsistency of the Common Opinion Demonstrated (...) the Nature of the
Menstruum. That Egg-shells and Oystershells are of the same V^^tue in M^^^^inal
Operations with Powder of Peart, (...) often used by Apothecaries for the (...)
Purposes, and at the same Rates. Of. the Third Letter. Th^^ ^^e Nature, Quality
and Oper^tion of the Menstruum Described. I^ Resembl^ (...) with the Universal
Menstr^^^ of the World. The principal seat of its generation. That a disordered
Menstruum is an Argument of an Indisposed Constitution: And how the disorder
may be Remedied. Of the Fourth Letter. That Experience i^ the truest Ground of
Knowledge. The Reason why Physicians commonly Mistake in the Notion of the
Menstruum. The Office of the Menstruum. Too much Nourishment prejudicial to the
Menstruum. The manner of Concoction of Food in the Stomach, etc. The Benefits
of the Menstruum in Application to external Wounds and ^^res, etc. The proper
Means of gene^^ting the Menstruum; and what Meats and Drinks destroy it. Of the
Fifth Letter. Whether there be any Fixed Salts in Vegetables or Animals,
Determined Ne^^tively; with the Reasons assigned. Bitter Herbs afford most
Salt. No Chemical Art can unfix Salt. The proper way of unfixing it. The
Physical Uses of Fixed Salts. What sort of Salt is most Medicinal. All Spirits
drawn from Vegetables, have the same, or very like Operation. From what
Vegetable the best is Extracted. Of the Sixth Letter. Methods to be Observed by
Consumptive People. The Nature and Use of Milk discoursed of. The proper Season
of the Year for ^ating it. Methods to be observed by each Constitution. Of the
Seventh Letter, The Excellency of Herbs, and how prepared. That Wind is an
Epidemical Distemper: The best way to prevent and rem^^^ (...). The Occasion of
(...), and the (...) of (...) them. Of Fasting a^^ (...) the Ind^^^ Physici^^^
and Brachma^^ us^ with their (...). Of the Ei^^^ ^^^ter. Methods the Brachmans
prescribe to be observed by their Women, during the time of their Impregnation,
Lying-in, giving Suck, etc. in respect both to Mind and Body. Silence
Recommended. Cheerfulness Commended. The Brachmans Opinion of the Power of
Music. Their Receipt to Cure Swelled Breasts. Sugar a great Balsamic. Their
manner of the Education of Youth. The great Influence and Power of the three
grand Spirits of ^^e World. Idleness Condemned. The Reason why their Children
never depart from the Law of their Fathers. An Inst^nce thereof produced. Of
the Ninth Letter. The Brachmans Opinion of the Soul of Man. The Original of
Man's Depravity. All Violence and Oppression of Inferior Creatures forbid.
Their Notion of the proportion of Rewards and Punishments in ^he other Life, An
Account of their Belief of Transmigration, and the Middle State. The Power of
Sympathetick Prayer. Of the Tenth Letter. The Indian King's Summons to
Pythagoras to appear at Court. Of the Eleventh Letter. Pythagoras his Answer to
the King of India. Abstinence from eating Fl^^^ proved as Ancient as the World.
Violence to inferior Creatures forbidden upon account of Moral Justice and
Goodness. Hunting Condemned. The Dignity of the Animal Nature asserted and
proved. How the Knowledge of Divine Magic ^s attainable. Of the Tw^l^th
Letter. Pythagoras his Account of the Powers, Virtues and Efficacy of Numbers:
The Method of using them in the Cure of Diseases. Of the Discourse between
Pythagoras, and the King of India. Prejudice, Custom, and common Opinion,
Enemies to Knowledge and Virtue. The Original Composition of Man. The Occasions
of his Degeneracy. The true Reason of the Liberty of the Will assigned. That a
Lawless Liberty to do what we will, is a mistaken Notion of the Power of Man.
Wherein the Dignity and Power of Man does cousist. In what ^ence Man is the
Image of God, and how ^he ought to Govern Inferior Creatures. Power to do any
thing is no Argument for the Lawfulness of doing it. The Mortality of Brutes no
Reason for our Abusing them.
Of the Thirteenth Letter. Of the Nature of true Religion. That it does not
consist in the Observation of external Ceremonies. Wherein it does consist.
That the Imposition of needless Things in Religion, gives Birth to most of the
Confusions that happen in the World. Of the Fourteenth Letter. Of the Power,
Excellencies and Effects of Music. The Subject of the Hymns and Songs of the
Pythagoreans, the Reason of their use of them annexed. An Extract of Twenty
Eight Precepts that Pythagoras left his Disciples.

Metrodorus the Grecian to Averroes the Arabian, sends Health.
Most Learned and Renowned Averroes,
HAving often read over thy Works, and considered with my self the mighty
Reputation of thy Learning, wherewith the whole Universe is filled; I am
astonished at the unconceivable Activity of thy Wit, which in an imperial and
uncontrollable manner extends it self over all the works of Nature, searches
into her most secret and abstruse Recesses, and like an Universal Intelligence,
seems alone to actuate the whole World of Philosophy. How much, and upon what
accounts Aristotle himself stands Indebted to thee, thy very Detractors in
spite of all their Envy are forced to acknowledge. And for what Advantage I in
particular have received by Thy Writings, let this plain Confession thereof be
accounted by thee for a Testimony of my Gratitude, that I owe all the
Reputation for Philosophy that I have in these Parts, to the sole Influence of
thy Spirit and Genius. Thou seem in all thy Discoveries to have some
particular Inspirations, and Nature appears to have singled thee out as a
Subject whereon she would be lavish in the Bounty of her Favors. Thou art
admitted to a particular Intimacy, and have been able to trace her through all
her windings and turnings, and discerned her naked in her bare and simple form.

Proceed therefore, most Noble Averroes, to imitate that Heaven from whence
thou have derived thy Knowledge in the further communication of the Rays
thereof to Mankind. And since I have been honored with some acquaintance of
thy Thoughts, continue to instruct me yet more fully in the Mysteries of
Philosophy. I find by the Writings of the Physicians and Philosophers of these
times, that they make the Menstrum, as they call it, whereby both Appetite is
provoked, and Food in the Stomach is digested, to be a certain Acid Juice or
Humor in the Stomach, that by virtue of its Acidity or Acrimonious quality
only, has power to separate and concoct the Food, which indeed is a Notion I
could never digest. ^ entreat therefore, thou would send ^hy Opinion of this
Operation of Nature in Writing by this Messenger, whom I have ordered to stay
at Cordu^a till thy leisure shall allow thee op^ortunity of doing it. Farewell.

Dated Athens, 1149.
Averroes to Metrodorus.
Worthy Metrodorus,
I Had been better pleased with your Letter, if you had been more sparing of
your Complements: As to the Opinion the World has of me, I take it in good
part, though it is a thing I shall never endeavor after, always having in chase
a far Nobler and Richer Prize than public Fame, even Truth it self. This is
the mark I aim at, and as often as I hit the white here, I am as proud of the
success as he that has Conquered a Kingdom. From my Youth my Studies bent that
way, and the greatest Difficulty I ever met with, was to subdue in me those
prejudices that I conceived from the Authority of common Consent and Belief. I
approve your dislike of the Vulgar Notion of the Menstrum well enough, only I
could wish you had at the same time annexed your Reasons, which since you have
omitted, I will endeavor by what I shall suggest to confirm and settle your
Judgment in that Point, and if I can possibly assign the true reason of what
you enquire after. There are somethings unalterably to be believed upon the
sole Credit and Authority of their Tradition, withal being of such a Nature as
no humane Inquisition can arrive at any further knowledge of. Such are the
Mysteries of our Religion, concerning which we will endure no dispute, our holy
Prophet Mahomet, the prime Favorite of Heaven, having given his Word for the
Truth thereof. But in Philosophy we are left to a larger Latitude, like those
of our Countrymen, whom they call wild; we are obliged to the Authority of no
Person, but at Liberty to pick and choose, change and resettle our Opinion as
often as our Reason directs; as a Ship that has the Port in view, shall
notwithstanding by reason of a contrary Wind be forced to tack and shift her
Sails a great many times before she reach the Haven. Let us therefore,
Metrodorus, launch forth boldly into this part of the Sea of Nature, and try
what Discoveries we can make beyond the experience of former Adventurers. They
indeed, as thou say, affirm the Menstrum to be an Acid Juice in the Stomach,
which by Virtue of that quality only has power of provoking Appetites, and
procuring Digestion. How this Notion came to be generally embraced, I cannot
tell, but to me there is nothing in Nature appears more monstrous and
ridiculous, for were it at all so, we should in some manner or other be made
sensible of it: For no sooner is your Meat or Drink descended into the Stomach,
but it must of necessity incorporate with this sharp Liquor, whereby the whole
would soon become sharp too, which is indeed contrary to all experience; for if
a Man Vomits an hour or two after he has Dined, what he brings up shall be
sweet on the taste, and the quality very little altered, except what he has
eaten and drank be of a sour Nature, or his Stomach debauched and corrupted by
sharp Juices. For if the Stomach did naturally generate such a Liquor, we
should unavoidably discover it when we were hungry by its flux and reflux in
the Mouth; let this Menstrum be of what nature it will, it must of necessity be
abundantly increased by Fasting. Besides, if it be of an acid or sour quality,
how is it possible that our Food, which consists of all natures and tastes
should assimulate it self with this? What a Confusion and Ataxy would be soon
felt, to the utter prejudice of the Tone of the Stomach and digestive Faculty?
The whole frame of Nature in the Microcosm would be disordered, Acidity being
an extreme, will admit but of very few things to accord and agree with it. But
this Consideration, above all the rest, does more and more astonish me: Is it
not preposterous to assign that for the cause of any thing, which of its own
nature must necessarily work the quite contrary Effect? It is agreed on all
hands, That whenever sharp and sour Juices lodge in the Stomach, they wound
Nature in her digestive and attractive Faculties, contract and harden the Food,
whereby it becomes more difficult of Separation and Concoction, generate
Crudities, and consequently Obstruct the free Circulation of the Blood and
Spirits; inducing a general Heaviness and Indisposition over the whole Body.
Sharp Humors beget pricking Pains in the Breast, Gripings in the Bowels,
sharpness of Urine, Fluxes, Gouts, and an infinite Train of Distempers. If the
Complexion be Melancholic, Obstructions and Opilations arise, from whence
Head-achs proceed, and that Inimical Distemper called Vapors, for which there
is no Remedy in Physic, the most available is Temperance and Order. If the
Complexion be Choleric they give Fevers, Rheumatisms, etc, If Sanguine they
cramp Nature in her very Radix by Convulsions, Consumptions, Loss of Appetite.
If Phlegmatic they beget abundance of Crudities and indigested Matter, which
by certain passages is conveyed from the Stomach to the Lungs, and there
becomes condensed into a white tough Substance that sticks to the Windpipe:
But when this slimy Matter is generated in great quantities, it is attended with
excessive Coughs, shortness and difficulty in Breathing, and an unconceivable
variety of Evils that make Life it self uneasy, by affecting the whole
Microcosm with an universal Dyscrasy. Moreover, I would fain know to what
purpose Physicians so frequently prescribe Sweetning Medicines to their
Patients. Is it not to abate sharpness of Humors? First in the Stomach;
Secondly in the Blood, as Pearl, Egg-shells, Oyster-shells, Crab's-eyes, etc.
which in Operation are much alike, viz. To rectify the Stomach, and purify
the Blood. And our Apothecaries can tell you, that they often use Powder of
Oyster-shells with as good success as that of Pearl: I for my part know no
reason against it. Therefore, I say, if these and many other Medicines are
given to temper and allay sharp and acid Humors, must they not as often as they
are given have a very disastrous Effect upon the Menstrum? If that be, as they
tell us, an acid Juice? Why then should sharpness and acidity be an Enemy to
Nature? For I do not see how there can be any natural quality in the Stomach,
that is an Enemy to it self; but Experience teaches, that all extreme
qualities are abominable to Nature in her simple and undepraved state. From all
which Considerations it appears, that the Liquor or Menstrum of the Stomach,
which Nature has ordained for the Concoction and Separation of Meats and
Drinks, can neither be sharp nor sour, sweet nor bitter, nor salt, nor
astringent, nor of any manifest taste or quality, so long as it remains entire
and undebauched; and when any of the forementioned qualities are perceived, it
is to be taken for granted, that the Stomach is out of Tone, and entering into
disorder, as will more manifestly be apprehended, when we have taught what the
true nature of this Menstrum is.

Dated Corduba, 1149.
Metrodorus,
I Have already given my Reasons for your dislike of the common Notion of the
Menstrum, and having had a freer Communication with the Superior Powers, since
I wrote, whereby I believe the whole System of Nature, as you call it, was
revealed to me, I am unwilling to adventure the hazard of my Reputation, in
acquainting you with my Thoughts on the present Subject. You know very well the
Inconvenience we lie under on account of our Country men. It Is true some of our
Predecessors have been acquainted with the Jewish History; and there are those
alive who think they have done Wonders, both in their Translation and Remarks,
and as I am informed, the Christians make use of it to good purpose: But be
that as it will, I am sure I may assume a greater Liberty in Philosophy, I am
resolved now not to be bound to the Custom of the Schools, not to tie my self
up to Art and Figure, but barely attend the Inspiration of our Prophet and his
Angels in the Publication of that whereof I shall have the satisfaction, and
thou the Benefir.

The Menstrum or Liquor of the Stomach, has the nearest affinity and
resemblance of Dew. What Dew is to the Earth, the same is this to the Body of
Man: There being as great a necessity of this moist Vapor or Menstrum for the
service of the Body, as there is of Dew or Rain to impregnate and assist the
Earth in the productions of her Fruits. And as the greater World influenced by
the Wisdom of its Divine Creator, and the Operation of the Elements and
Celestial Bodies does generate to it self a proper and suitable Menstrum, viz.
The Rains and Dews of Heaven, whereby the whole System of Nature is maintained
and made fruitful; so it is with the Microcosm or little World: Man also has a
power given him by the friendly Courtesy of his Maker to Concoct and Separate
the Food in the Stomach by unconceivably fitting it for the Nourishment of the
whole Body; and as that Liquor or Menstrum of the greater World, is of a mild,
simple Nature, gentle in Operation, and of no apparent and remarkable Taste, as
is evident from Water it self, which if it were sharp, sour, bitter or sweet,
etc. could never be a Menstrum suitable to the Nature of Vegetables, Fruits,
Grains, Seeds, etc. whereof there is a wonderful Variety, beyond the Limits of
Humane Arithmetic: And it is utterly impossible for a Menstrum, wherein any
Humor is predominate, to assimulate it self to such a variety of Qualities.
The very same is likewise to be understood of the lesser World Man. So
Metrodorus, you may perceive that in a sound, healthy Constitution, the proper
Menstrum is in its own Nature an Insipid Liquor, abounding in quantity as the
Health and Strength of the Constitution abounds. The principal Seat of its
Generation is in the Mouth and Glandulous parts of the Head, and increases
accordingly proportionable to the free and undisturbed Circulations of the
Blood and Spirits; those whose passages are clear from Obstructions, where the
Blood and Spirits have a freer and quicker Motion, beget great quantities of
it, and consequently enjoy a sharper Appetite, and better Digestion, are of
sound, healthy Complexions, free from Drought and Heat, Vivid, Brisk and
Lively: On the other hand, if there be any manifest or distinct quality
discovered, forthwith the Stomach and whole Body is out of order, the Appetite
becomes blunt and dull, Indispositions and Diseases suddenly follow: This is
sufficiently observable in such who live Temperately, that use to Fast a proper
time after they have eaten, till the Food be Concocted, this Liquor in them
becomes plentiful, they can eat a good Meal without desiring Drink, having
sufficiency of this Natural Moisture to temper and dispose the Food for
separation: But Intemperance certainly depraves the Stomach, and debauches the
Appetite, diminishes the Menstrum, and converts it into a tough Nature, or some
or other of the forementioned qualities, which all are Infallible Indictions of
a disordered and irregular Constitution. For it is a sure Rule, where the
Menstrum is disordered, the whole Body is in danger. You are to Note also, that
every Man after due Fasting, has the greatest quantity of this Liquor, which
as soon as he has eaten does much abate, the Food, as it were, soaking and
drinking it up by the heat of the Attractive Faculties, especially if the Food
be dry, salt or solid, it requires to be moistened and softened by another,
wherewith Water has the nearest Affinity, as appears, in that it being drunk
after any thing sweet, sour and bitter, or of whatsoever extreme quality,
still retains its simple and natural Taste: And Experience tells us, those who
used themselves to drink Water have the sharpest Appetites, and best Digestion.
Besides, we daily see those that have not this Liquor in such plenty, cannot
eat so fast, nor swallow so thick as those that have, especially if they eat
Bread or dry Food (as I said before) but are continually sipping and drinking
to drive it down: From all which we see it is of manifest Advantage to Nature
to have a liberal Flux thereof from the Mouth to the Stomach, as being that
which principally assists Nature in her other Functions, and carries along with
it unquestionable Symptoms of the state of the Body. Thus I have in some
measure, Metrodorus, discovered to you your desire, and shall continue to
illustrate it more fully in my next, when I come to Answer an Objection of our
Adversaries against us; Farewell.

Dated, Corduba, 1149.
Noble Metrodorus,
WEre Friendship like that of other Professions; did it propose a private and
personal Advantage in all its undertakings; or did it at one view represent all
the Difficulties a Man must engage in doing his Duty, I had either not wrote to
you at all, or had desisted now. But to make use of the hazard of my
Reputation, for a Testimony of my Affection, I shall proceed to enlarge a
little further on the Subject in hand. As the best and truest Knowledge in the
World is founded upon Experience, if rightly understood, so the strongest and
most pernicious Errors are derived thence, if Imperfect Essays, and Accidental
Events are mistaken for it. The Foundation of our Adversaries Opinion is laid
on this, That generally when People Vomit, (though never so soon) after eating
or drinking, what they bring up seems to have a taste and favor of another
quality than what they received; from whence they conclude, (and that rashly
enough) that the disgorged Matter derives its taste from the Menstrum or Liquor
in the Stomach which has infected it, and from that Consideration infer a more
irrational Consequence, viz. That the Menstrum or Juice of the Stomach must
necessarily be of the same nature and quality that this Vomited Matter seems to
be. This is a mere mistake of Nature's Operations. For be this voided Matter of
what taste soever, it cannot derive its quality from the proper Menstrum; and
if it be ill and unpleasant, it can argue no more than that it proceeds from a
corrupted Stomach. For the Stomach being before (by ill habits) depraved, and
now by the accession of unagreeable Food disturbed, takes the opportunity to
discharge it self (as well as it can) of both its troubles at once, which is so
far from giving us a true account of the Menstrum, that it only argues a
depravity in the Stomach, chiefly arising from an undue lying of the Food in
the Vessels for want of due Concoction and Conveyance, by which means all the
sweet and good qualities are drawn forth, and almost nothing out Excrement
remains; for of what^oever quality that be that you make ^our Meal of, if you
Vomit strait after ^t; what you deliver shall be sweet, or ^etain the same
taste, or be very little ^ltered, unless there be a manifest disorder in the
Menstrum it self, of which ^o Person can be ignorant.

The Business of the Menstrum (as we have said before) is to supply the Mouth
and Stomach with moisture. It being of a mild Nature, and gentle Operation,
bows and applies it self to all sorts of Meats or Drinks that enter the Body,
tempering and incorporating it self with them, and by the power of its pleasant
moisture, and the gentle heat of the Stomach, which (whatever some think) is no
hotter than our Blood, melts and softens the Mass, whereby the attractive
Powers and Faculties of Nature, from all the Parts and Members of the whole
Body, Extract all the sweet and wholesome Virtues of the Food, every part
drawing such proportion of the Juice and Nutriment as is sufficient to supply
its wants; but if there be too much Food taken in, then the attractive Faculty
is overcome by the Surplus, and abundance of Juices, and the Stomach becomes
dull, heavy and indisposed. I am bold to say, Metrodorus, that nothing is more
injurious to the health of the Body than too much Nourishment, too Rich Foods
and strong Drinks; the most Simple are most Natural; the great difficulty lies
in finding out the just measure and proportion in quantity and quality. Now
when your Meats and Drinks come into the common Bag of the Stomach, as into a
Lembeck, where they are all mixed, melted, and dissolved, then the Operative
Faculties of Nature separate and divide them into diverse qualities. First, into
a Milky Chyle, whence the attractive Faculty draws forth the Virtue, and sends
it into the Blood and Spirits. Secondly, in a Phlegmy Liquor, which is white,
and conveyed to the Lungs, where it is separated again, and one part thereof
congealed and hardened, having no other way to void it self, but only by the
Windpipe. Those whose Stomachs are foul, do not digest their Food to a
requisite degree, send gross and flatulent Juices up to the Lungs, begetting
Obstructions and Shortness of Breath. For this white Matter, or light frothy
Substance, is by the natural heat of the Stomach, coagulated into various
Consistencies, according to the power of the Heat and Circulations of the Blood
and Spirits. In such in whom the heat is potent, and the Circulations free,
those gross Juices are contracted into hard Lumps, and Nature sends them up the
Windpipe with ease and pleasure, and casts them forth. But in Phlegmatic
Complexions, whose heat is less, and the Circulations of the Blood and Spirits
dull and obstructed, this Matter becomes tough and glewy stops the Breast, is
the Original of Coughs, shortness of Breath, soreness in the Stomach, etc.
Lastly, another part into Excrement, which the Expulsive Faculty drives
downwards, and carries off in the Draught; and also into thinner Substances,
which Nature strains into the Ureters, and expels that way.

The Uses and Benefits of this Noble Liquor are many: without it we could
neither chew nor swallow. Neither could the Attractive Powers of Nature perform
their Operation in drawing forth the Virtues of the Food, and disperse and
scatter them into all the Members and Parts, to the universal Nourishment and
Welfare of the whole Body. This is that they call an Euscrasy, a good Habit and
Complexion of Body: when this Menstrum performs all its Duties naturally and
undisturbedly, then there is a good state of Health, the Complexion is fresh
and gay, the Spirits brisk and lively; strength and agility daily increases; in
fine, the whole Microcosm is in ease, health and pleasure.

Nay, this Menstrum in its pure and simple Nature does not only promote
Digestion, and assist Nature in her internal Works, but also it reaches and
extends it self to the Cure of External Wounds and Sores. It is a Practice as
Salutiferous as Ancient, to use fasting Spittle for Sore Eyes, and several
sorts of Swellings. This is often done with good success, if the Method be
continued; that is, if it be often applied. For it is a constant and repeated
Application that overcomes and cures. I have known a Man, without any Advantage
of Book-learning and Languages, that has done Wonders in the Curing of
Deafness, and Distempers in the Ears, to the Amazement of many Learned and
Famous Physicians, by the sole aid and virtue of fasting Spittle, with a
quicker and more certain Effect than any Poultice or Plaster whatever: Dogs,
and many Animals, have no other way to Cure most Wounds; and I my self,
Metrodorus, have done the same: Which are all instances of the Balsamic Virtue
of this Menstrum. Bread chewed in the Mouth asswages all Tumors and
Inflammations, if worked into a Poultice, and applied seven or eight times a
day, till the Cure be accomplished. So unconceivable is the Excellency of this
Liquor, that if the Powerful Virtues of it were vulgarly known, your Common
Empericks and Surgeons would have but very little Practice. In many Cases
most People might be their own Doctor, and deliver themselves from a great deal
of Expense and Torment. We have in our former Letters said somewhat of the
Generation of this Liquor. It is generated more or less in all parts of the
Body, but especially in the Mouth, and Glandulous Parts of the Head, augmented
by the Heat and Motion of the Brain, and the quick and uninterrupted
Circulation of the Blood. The more in quantity this Menstrum arises, the
sounder and healthier is the Constitution, Respiration is freer and less
troubled, and Digestion more easy.

The Proper and most Natural Means of the Generation of it, is Temperance,
thin, fine Airs, all manner of moderate Exercise in the open Fields, especially
by Running Rivers, where the Air is more penetrating, and affords finer
Spirits, that occasion brisk and lively Circulations. This is evident from the
Constitution of People accustomed to such Exercises and Works, they have
sharper Appetites, better Digestions, generally exempted from Drougth and
Dryness in the Mouth, Obstructions in the Stomach, Asthma's, and other Evil
Consequences of a Close and Intemperate way of Living. Meats and Drinks that
usually promote and increase it, are those of the most mild and simple Nature,
such as plain Water gruel, Conjieu-gruel made of Rice, etc. Milk-pottage half
Water, eaten from February to August; for after Cows are with Calf their Milk
is tough and jellious. Bread, Butter, some Cheese, several sorts of Herbs,
Roots, Passets, Coco-nuts, Eggs, and other things of a temperate Nature. On the
other side, all Salt Meats, strong Drinks, Tobacco, and all other things that
are unequal in their Parts, are Enemies to consume and dry up this Balsamic
Liquor. The frequent use of such things beget Fevers and Scorbutic Diseases,
as do also all violent Exercises, too large Meals, and too long fasting. These
do mightily weaken the digestive and attractive Faculties of the Stomach,
induce a torpid and languid heaviness over the Members. Idleness is also an
Enemy to it, for those that would have good Blood, fine Spirits, strong Limbs,
and sharp Appetites, must Labor even to Weariness, after which give Nature her
due Rest, and Temperance will perfect the work.

Thus, Metrodorus, I have at last resolved your Doubts in the Matter you
desired, and absolved the Nature of the Menstrum according to my best ability.
I question not but I have stirred up the Choler of some young Physicians of our
time, but I matter it not, if I have given you satisfaction, I have my ends;
however, I have done my endeavor.

Dated, Corduba, 1149.
Averroes.
IT is not possible for me, Averroes, to express in words, the great and
unaccountable satisfaction I have received by your Letters, nor have you less
honored me by so Noble a Correspondence, than you have enlightened and improved
my Understanding, by the Discovery you have made to me of Nature's Secret in
the Business of the Menstrum. Methinks the Sun does not with more radiant and
powerful heat reflect its Rays from the lofty Mountains sides to the humble
Valleys, than you have clearly from the height and universality of your
Knowledge at once darted into my barren and uncultivated Soul, the more
Illustrious Beams of Light and Truth: You were ever, Averroes, the Subject of
my Wonder, but now the Object of my Emulation; nay, it would almost stir my
Envy to see the Possession and Monopoly of so much Science in any Person's
Hands but yours, who so well know how to use it, and so bountifully to dispense
it. And I beseech you, let the Accomplishments of my Desires hitherto, be an
Encouragement to me of hoping to prevail with you to give my Curiosity some
further Satisfaction in the Works of Nature, particularly in this, whether
there be any fixed Salts in Vegetables or Animals, according to the common
Opinion of Philosophers and Physicians, which shall be embraced by me with the
highest Testimony of Respect and Honor.

Athens, 1149.
Metrodorus,
IT is not the least Delight I take, to see a Person of your Eminence and
Quality so vehemently to aspire and thirst after Truth, besides the Complacency
I have to be able to contribute any thing toward your Noble Endeavors. I
greatly commend your Emulation, which can never be unjust, while you have so
inestimable and desirable a Prize in Chase, the Attainment whereof will more
illustrate your Name, than all the Trophies and Dignities of your Ancestors. In
answer then to the Question you sent me, I deny that the Sal-nitral Virtues of
things can be fixed; for then there would be no waste or decay: for you must
know, that so soon as any Animal, or other thing, arrives to its highest degree
of Perfection, those Salnitral Virtues or Balsamic Spirits become more or less
Volatile, according to the Nature and Strength of that thing. Could you by any
Art continue and maintain the Oily Virtue, or Sun's quality, in any Animal or
Vegetable, so long would that thing remain in full strength and vigor. All
Death and Decay arising from the Evaporation of the fine Spirits and Volatile
Salts. Take any Herb when it is in full force and virtue, dry it a little in the
Sun, but not too much, then burn it into Ashes, and from these Ashes you may
gather a great quantity of that Matter which the Physicians call fixed Salt.
(Amongst Herbs, Wormwood affords the most by reason of its bitterness and
heat.) But if you take the same Herb, and expose it to the Sun and Elements
till it becomes light, dry, or like Chaff, till it has lost its smell and
taste, and then burn it, you shall find very little or none of that fixed Salt.
There can be no such thing as fixed Salt in any Vegetable, so long as it
remains entire; for if it were there, it were impossible for it to evaporate or
fly away; but if you burn this Herb when it is in its full Virtue; the heat and
violence of the Fire does Coagulate or Condense the Volatile Spirits, and Oily
Qualities into a fixed Salt, which Effect is to be assigned to the mere
accidence of the Fire, and nothing else; even as the Balsamic or sweet
qualities in Spirituous Drinks, by a fierce Fermentation are turned and
transmuted into a quite contrary Nature. By these little Arts Men can change
one quality into another, but for the most part for the worse, viz. They can
transmute the Noble Spirits and Virtues into a keen and sour quality, and
thence into a fierce Sulphurous Spirit. And also in Vegetables, by the help of
Fire captivate and fix the fine and Volatile Virtues into a sharp standing
Salt, and neither the one nor the other can be reduced to their former state,
but by the powerful Operations of the Heavens and Elements, which by their
wonderful and undiscerned Influence, can change and unfix that that was fixed,
so that it becomes Volatile again, so great and admirable is the Power of God
in Nature's Works. None of the Chemists Furnaces with their fierce and terrible
Fire can unlock the Body of Salt so fixed; if you have any desire to do that,
you must hearken to the Voice of Nature, and attend her Motions and Works in
her own way. Take your fixed Salt, either of Herbs, Stones, Wood, etc. sow or
mix it with the common Earth (it will abundantly enrich the Soil* and enable it
to produce a large and plentiful Crop) and by this means the Fixed will become
Volatile again, and is the Life, Power and Virtue of all Vegetation, but in
time it will again evaporate. There is no fixed Salt in Nature, nor made by
Art, that this Method will not unlock and unmix, till it becomes a pure, fine,
Volatile Spirit, but only the Crude, Unseparate Seawater-Salt, that we use with
our Food, which some affirm passes through us undigested.

The Physical Uses of these fixed Salts are much the same in Operation, as to
quality, though they differ in strength and power, according to the Vigor,
Heat and Virtue, the Body from whence they are Extracted is endued with. All
Salts i^ their o^n Nature are quick, penetrating, and opening, and of excellent
use, ^^ng duly compounded with proper Medicines. Of all sorts of Salts, that of
Tartar is the best and most Medicinal; for it is more subtle and penetrating
than any derived from Herbs, etc. And those Physicians that have this by them,
have no occasion to search for other, let the Disease be what it will.

Thus, Metrodorus, I have over and above answered your Question, both by
proving that there can be no fixed Salts really in Animals or Vegetables: And
have also given you the true nature and use of all fixed Salts Extracted thence
by Art. I had thought that by this time I had fulfilled your Request. But
another Question, suggesting it self, relating to the former, I shall a little
trespass on the Limits of ^^^stolary Confinement, in order to offer somewhat by
way of Solution to That, and so entirely dismiss the present Subject: Having
already affirmed, that there is very little difference betwixt fixed Salts, I
shall proceed a little further to acquaint you with somewhat of the Nature of
Spirits drawn from Wine, Sugar, Fruits, etc. in Physical Operations.

All Spirits, be they drawn from what they will, have, as to quality, one and
the same Operation, only weaker or stronger, according to the Nature of the
Matter from whence they are Extracted. Being taken inwardly, they have all,
more or less; a hot-penetrating Virtue, and are of good use, if properly
administered, viz. now and then as Medicines, but otherwise they become
destructive to the natural Heat, and inimical to the Vital Powers; and after a
Series of Paralytick Contractions of the Nerves and Sinews, induce, as their
utmost Malignity, Death it self, which consideration ought to have a peculiar
place am^^g those who would make the most ^^ a short Life, and not lose the
advantage of the most inestimable Blessings the Gods can bestow, even Health it
self: When by Burning any Herbs, etc. to Extract its Salt, which by no other
Method can be obtained, do not you destroy, or at least change and transmute,
all the lively and brisk Volatile Virtues into another quality of a contrary
Nature and Effect? The same is to be understood of all Vegetations when
fermented: And hot strong Spirits drawn from them, are much less Medicinal than
fixed Salt, if not partaking of some necessary Qualification.

Therefore as to those forced Spirits of Scurvy grass, etc. which make Men look
like so many spotted Leopards, which the public and scandalously Licensed
Quacks and Empericks, together with their Orvietan, or disguised Mi^hrida^^,
Aqua S^iptica, of which not one knows truly, even the Etymology of the Word,
which destroys more than they pretend to Cure, are only to be regarded as so
many Cheats put upon Mankind, and a mere Trick for an Impudent Blockhead to get
a Penny at the Expense and Hazard of a Life better worth than his own. For I
look upon all those Cattle as the Pest and Plague of a Nation, and ought to
have the Libera nos fixed over their Door, if ever they deserve to be Owners of
an House.

But, Metrodorus, for fear I should over-lash, I will quit the Discourse at
present, and say somewhat more in my next; wherein setting aside the prejudices
of Education, the common Method of Physicians in the Country, where I at
present live, and the Vulgar Opinion of Philosopers, I shall endeavor, by
following my Mistress Nature, to contribute what I can to the satisfactory
Curiosity of a Person, I believe so desirous of being acquainted with Truth;
Farewell.

Dated Corduba, 1149.
Averroes to Metrodorus.
SInce my last I have met with some Occur^^nces that I think may be of use to
you in the Study you are engaged in. I am sufficiently acquainted with the
Noble Disposition of your Soul, which sets too high a value upon Truth, to l^^
any thing pass by you unexamined, and scorns to despise any thing, merely
because it is easy to be had, and at a cheap rate. The true value of things is
never lessened by their being ordinary and common; for we are yet ignorant of
the Nature of that which we most familiarly converse with. How many are the
Doubts the Philosophers are perplexed with about the Substance and Operation of
their Souls, even whilst they are employing them? And how few, if any, are
acquainted with the Constitution of their Bodies, whilst they daily carry them
about with them, and seem to take so much unnecessary care for them? Were we
but better informed of our own Natures, it would conduce much more to the
gratifying our Curiosity in the search of Truth, and withal, deliver us from
the power of many Accidents that so often surprise and overwhelm us. There
would be less need of the Doctor, would every Man become his own Physician,
which would very easily be done, could we but maintain a regular observation of
the condition and temperament of our Constitutions. Having therefore of late
been particularly engaged to make some Observations on a Consumptive Person, I
shall briefly communicate to you what Methods ought to be followed by People
afflicted with that Disease, and that generally only, not entering into a
Philosophical Disquisition of its Origin and Cause.

To begin then, The lowest and simplest Foods, and smallest Drinks, are most
advantageous to such as labor under wasting Distempers. All Spoon Meats made
^^ Oat-meal and Water eaten with Bread, but without Butter, are proper. Some
commend Flower and Water eaten with B^ead and Salt two or three times a Week,
and Chocolate made with Water, and only sweetened with Sugar. Sometimes let your
Food be mean, and other times rich, for Nature loves Variety; but then remember
to eat sparingly: Such People ought to be cautious of visiting the Shades of
Venus, which is extremely prejudicial, and is perhaps in many the Original of
that Distemper. All sorts of strong Liquors are to be avoided, also new Milk,
though the Learned do often advise it. Salt is very proper in most Foods, it
strengthens the Stomach, and procures Appetite. In fine, Temperance is the main
thing to be observed, and it is safer to err in quality than quantity, which
over-burdens Nature, stagnates the Blood and Humors, and induces a general
Ca^hexy through the whole Body. It is very wholesome also to walk in the Fields,
especally by Running Rivers, where the Air is more fine and spirituous, and
more readily penetrates the Body on all sides, wonderfully helping the
Circulation of the Blood, and facilitating Digestion: Lying alone on Quilts and
Flock Beds is beneficial for Consumptive Persons. Their Clothing ought to be
moderate, rather inclining to thinness, for heat gotten by Exercise is surely
most salutiferous. Once a Day let them remember to drink a Pint of good Water,
which will cleanse the Vessels of the Stomach, and help Concoction, the often
changing their Clothes will contribute much to a Cure, provided they take care
not to catch Cold. This may be thought a strange Method, but, Metrodorus, I
have seen the Power and Virtue of it by Experience: It abundantly refreshes the
Spirits, enduing them with new Life and Strength, increases the Menstruum of
the Stomach, sharpens the Appetite to an high degree, and unconceivably assists
Nature in several respects.

But because I have touched a little upon Milk, I shall give my Opinion of it a
little more fully. Milk in its own Nature is a noble* healthy Food, but some
better than other, according to the disposition of the Cattle from whence it is
drawn, and the Nature of the Pasturage whereon they feed; from whence arises
that great variety in the several forts of Butter and Cheese.

The principal Season of the Year for the eating of Milk, is from the beginning
of April to the last of July. It is good indeed at all times of the Year,
provided the Cows be new Milch; for it is by no means to be eaten after the
Cows have taken Bull, for then it becomes thick, and as it were stagnated,
difficult of Concoction, and exceedingly detrimental to wasting People, and
naturally generates frothy and phlegmatic Juices in the Stomach, which is
drawn and attracted by the Lungs; and Nature having no other way to disburthen
her self of these Crudities, is necessitated to send the greatest part up the
Windpipe, occasioning Asthma's and Coughs, the foundation of inexplicable
Diseases, which discovers of what importance it is to be very wary in our method
of eating and drinking.

I shall, before I finish this Letter, make some Observations that may be
useful to several Constitutions, if duly regarded, and then take my leave of
you till another occasion gives me liberty to discourse further on this
Subject. The Phlegmatic ought to eat when they break their fast, Bread, Butter
and Cheese, or some other dry Food, and not drink till two or three hours; of
whatever you drink let it be of a middle strength. This method will not only
Purge by Urine, and open the passages, but beget a brisk Appetite for a Dinner.
To eat a Toast and Oil together, with a draught of good Ale and Beer, is very
wholesome; but if the Party inclines to fatness, then walking in the open Air is
a good Remedy. It prevents Obstruction, and gross Humors and unperceivably
assists the Operation of Nature.

The Sanguine Complexion ought chiefly to desire the most natural, proper sort
of Diet, such as simple Water Gruel, which by the innocent simplicity of its
Composition tends directly to the quelling and moderating the extravagant
motions of the Blood and Spirits, which soon reduce themselves to their
intended end, if not excited by the exorbitant power of Imagination. Variety
and alteration in the Administration ought to be observed, for Nature is
pleased not only with a variety of things, because it is compounded of them,
but because it is conducive to Health. In the Morning it is good to be sparing;
but after the fourth or fifth hour they may drink a Pint of an Exhilarating
Liquor to their very great advantage. The Choleric Complexion requires in the
Morning half a Pint of good Water. ((...)) 'Twas the Theban Poet's Expression,
but never the less true; for being his Horace says, Nulla manner diu nec vivere
Carmina possunt Quae Scribuntur aquae potoribus, etc. However true it may be in
Poetry, I am sure it is false in Point of Health. Let such feed on Water Gruel,
or Pap made of Flower, and be cautious of drinking strong Liquors, yet after
Dinner they may drink a Pint of Wine, Beer or Cider, etc.

If the Disposition be Melancholic, let them take some exhilerating Spoonmeats
for a Breakfast dressed up with Butter, Bread, Sugar and Salt. Their Dinner ought
to be much of the same nature, for the more they eat thereof, the more it will
extend the Vessels of the Stomach and Breast, and quicken the Spirits into a
brisk and lively Motion, and withal dispose them to a desire of Mirth and
Company, than which nothing can be a more ready and easy Cure.

Persons of any of the aforesaid Constitutions, must beware how they drink
strong Liquors in a Morning, which naturally in the best Complexions, create
and excite Fumes in the Brain, and an unremovable Dullness or Lethargy through the
whole Body. For certainly Spoonmeats accordingly prepared are in the Morning
the properest Food, As well on account of their simplicity, which is more
agreeable to Nature, as that they are moist, and most easily assimulate
themselves with the Crasis of the Stomach, and pass handsomely off in Urine, etc.

But if they are Aged People, they ought to eat that which is easy of
Concoction for the first part of the Day, and after three or four Hours such
easy Food as their Stomachs shall desire, but withal sparingly. And if they
exceed, let them walk in the open Air, and employ themselves in some Exercise
even to Lassitude. This is evident from the Country People, who for the
generality enjoy a better state of Health than those who live always in Town,
and if any of them miscarry, it is to be attributed to their Intemperance and
Unskilful using the best and greatest Blessings bestowed on Mankind.

I shall only add this, that two Temperate Meals a Day is the best Method to
preserve or recover Health. And of Bread, that which is three or four Days old
is better, and more Salutiferous than that which is newer, whether it be to
recover a lost Appetite, or strengthen a decaying one.

Thus much, Metrodorus, I thought fit to Communicate to you at present, if any
thing occurs worthy your Knowledge, assure your self I shall not be wanting one
Post to gratify your Curiosity.

Dated, Corduba, 1149.
Averroes to Metrodorus.
A Friend of mine being just upon the point of taking his Journey into Greece,
I thought my self obliged to lay hold of this opportunity of Communicating some
few more of my Thoughts, and recommending a Person to you with whose
Conversation I promise my self you will be extremely delighted; for a finer
Understanding, a stronger Judgment, and a more bold and happy Imagination, I
think, are not to be found in any Man alive. But I shall say no more in his
behalf, because I would not forestall the Entertainment you are like to meet in
his Society and Friendship.

I have for several Days lived wholly upon Herbs, and find them exceeding
healthful Food, and perhaps the most connatural and agreeable to the
Disposition of Humane Bodies of any thing in the Wo^^^. I would advise that
they be always eaten raw, with Oil, Vinegar and Salt, with Bread, Butter or
Chief, for as much as they are of an hotter Nature then, and afford a finer
and more delicate Nourishment, and generate less Wind, being far more cleansing
than when they are boiled. The boiling of them does, as it were, unlock the
Astringent Band of Nature, so that the Liquor in which they are steeped, draws
forth and exhales all the warm Sal-nitral Virtues, whereby the Herb becomes
crude, and consequently more purging, than raw. Cabbage and Coleworts, being
boiled and eaten, do not only puff up and swell the Body, and increase
windiness in the Bowels, but also generate ill Blood, from whence dangerous
Humors and Obstructions do proceed. But if you take a light, hollow Cabbage,
or tender Colewort, and eat freely of them, with Oil, Vinegar, Salt and Bread,
etc. you will find no such Operation; the Effect will be gentle, your Stomach
will be warm, and free from (...) Wind o^ ^welling The like is to (...) o^ all
sorts of eatable Herbs and (...) whi^^ may be fed upon to the gre^^ (...) an^
advantage of Nature.

I have observed Wind to be almost an Epidermeal Distemper, especially in Aged
People: And the best way to disappoint and prevent it, i^ by eating all your
solid Food, as Flesh, (...), etc. quite cold, but Spoon-meats may be eaten as
warm as the Blood, or somewhat warmer: And I do assure you, the constant use of
this method, will clear the Head and Stomach from Wind, beget finer Blood,
brisker Spirits, and cause a lively Circulation of all the Humors, etc.

Cold is another Original of most Distempers, which proceeds generally from an
irregular Intemperance in Diet, Exercise, or Coition; thence arise Fumes and
Vapors into the He^d, Wind in the Stomach, Obstructions and Opilations in the
Breast and Lungs, which can no otherwise be prevented than by observing a due
and sober moderation in Eating, Drinking and Exercising. And hence it is, that
oftentimes, though there be no downright Sickness, yet Persons find in
themselves a general Indisposition, they have little or no Appetite, are hot
and uneasy. In such cases a gentle Purge or (...) may be good; but a proper
method in Meats and Drinks, will give Nature the best and quickest Relief, in
regard Repletion, Intemperance, and an over-abounding Nourishment, are the
Foundations of most Distempers. A due Fasting therefore is very beneficial.
Abstinence is good at all times, but especially in Sickness; for when Nature
has lost her way, the motion of the Blood and Spirits are interrupted, the
Stomach is foul, the Attractive, Digestive and Retentive Faculties are depraved
of their Natural Power, the Palate disordered, the Qualities in contention one
with another, like Parties in an ill-govern'd State. What madness is it to
force this miserable Creature to swallow down the Inhumane Doctor's nasty
Pills, (...) ^renches, Cordials, Jul^^^^ and (...), when the Cur^^ ^ight
abundantly better, with more Ease, and less Charge, be effectually Accompl^sht.
The Indian Physicians did strictly forbid this Abominable Practice: And the
Wise Brachmans ^^d Bannians do in all such cases advise Fasting, and (...)
their Patients to take very little, if any thing, besides Conjieu, which is
nothing but Water and Rice boiled together, which Liquor the Sick constantly
drin^^ they adm^^ not of any sor^ of Fruit, (...), Currants, and interdict the
use of all sorts of Spice, as permcious to ^^e Stomach, by reason that they
heat the Blood, and are hard of Digestion. But what shall we say? These are so
inveterate by Custom, and strengthened by Interest, that it is hardly to be
expected that Reason should convince the worst part of Mankind.

Thus, Metrodorus, you see the Vanity of an old Man, who had at any time rather
be thought Impertinent than Ungrateful, which has been the only reason of
venturing thus far on this Subie^t. If the Gods give Life and Leisure to write
to you again, you shall have an Account of the Opinions and Prescriptions of a
certain sort of People to whom a greater Respect is due than to my self. It
has been my Folly to venture hitherto, who am looked upon as an Infidel where
I live, and am alone beholden to the favorable Opinion of some Persons (who
have surmounted the little difficulties of Prejudice and common Education, and
by their own single Virtue established to themselves a Character above the
common Level) for all the Reputation I possess. For to deal plainly with you,
my Friends have better Sentiments of me than I dare own, and such as would make
me blush, but that I have Learnt the difference betwixt Affection and Flattery.
Farewell.

Dated, Corduba, 1150.
Metrodorus*
HAving of late had some Respite from Business, I remembered my Promise to you,
which I have at last performed. I have here sent you an account of the Practice
of the Indian Brachmans. They are a sort of Philosophers, for whom I have ever
had a great Esteem, for as much as I have observed them very nearly to follow
Nature in most of her Prescriptions. A Method that I highly Approve, and shall
therefore Recommend to you some Observations of theirs, perhaps not unworthy
your Meditation.

First then, for the Method they use with their Women, during the time of their
Impregnation, Lying in, and giving Suck.

Their First Precept is, That they be very Exact and Punctual as to the
quantity and quality of their Food, and that they drink nothing but pure Water
as it comes from the Spring.

They command them to eat at set Meals, viz. about Eight in the Morning, and
Four in the Afternoon: For when the Worlds great Eye the Sun, that Center of
Heat, has mounted the Meridian, they command all Laboring People to rest and
abstain from eating and drinking, especially Women with Child. For that the Sun
does forcibly open the passages of Nature, exhaling the Spirituous Virtues,
from whence proceed Wind and Vapors, etc. but about Four Afternoon they allow
a greater Liberty for a full Meal, for the Evening being cool, they have a
considerable time to digest their Food, the greatest part of that time being
allotted for Rest.

They likewise advise a due Fasting, and at some times to abate in the quality,
and at others increase it again. Also to give Nature that which is most like
her self, viz. variety of Foods, but this at several Meals, and not all at one
time, seeing that the Humane Nature is allied to all things, and compounded of
Variety.

On the other hand, they affirm, That a due Abstinence infinitely conduces to
an healthy and happy Life. It fines the Spirits* cleanses the passages, frees
the Circu^^tions from gross Matter and Obstructions, confirms the Faculties of
the Mind, rendering them fit for the Contemp^ation of Wisdom and Virtue.

They command their Women to Labor and Exercise gently, Morning and Afternoon,
in regard that it will contribute as much to their Offsprings Health as their
own, and deliver them from the trouble of all Windy Diseases and Vapors, with
which many Women are so extremely afflicted.

They Recommend Silence to their Women, as a Noble Virtue: It makes the Mind
sedate, grave, and thinking, strengthening all the Powers thereof, whereby they
become more considerate, and better able to endure the Inconveniences they may
meet with. For the Spirits of Women are naturally more Volatile than those of
Men; so that much Talking does spend and wast them, weaken the whole
Constitution, and beget swelling, angry Humors, equally prejudicial to the
Child, as to the Mother. For there is an extraordinary Sympathy between them,
upon which account the greater care is to be taken.

They also commend Cheerfulness, a Pleasantness both of Mind and Manners, to
their Women, for they affirm the Composition of the Elements in Women are of a
more fine and softer Nature than in Men, for which cause they are more
subjected to Passions, apter to Love or Hate, and consequently sooner, and more
deeply wounded both in Mind and Body. Wherefore their Priests teach them
several Divine and Moral Songs, Hymns of Praise, etc. Believing that Music
has a certain secret power of moderating and composing the Pathetick Motions
of the Soul, rendering the Mind more equal in their Operations.

If any of their Women chance to have (...) swelled ^r^^sts or Tumors, they
r^ach them to make this following Po^^tice, which they esteem to have an
Universal Tendency and Effect. Viz. Ta^^ Rice and boil it in Water, and when it
becomes thick and soft, they take a bitter Herb called (Tantaraboys) cut it
small, and mix it with the Rice, adding to a Quart of this Two Ounces of good
Sugar, and apply it to the Sore Ten or Twelve times in Twenty-four Hours, which
gives Ease the first time, and in a few Days heals the Distemper. They have a
great Opinion of Sugar, taking it to be one of the greatest Balsams in the
World, if mixed with proper Ingredients, and will often apply it alone to Cuts,
Sores and Wounds.

When the Brachmans do administer any Inward Medicines, they do it all by
Numbers, affirming, That God has made all things by Number, Weight and Measure.

Thus you see, Metrodorus, I have hinted a few Observations of the Brachmans in
reference to their Women, I shall only subjoin somewhat concerning their Method
of Educating their Children, and so endeavor to bring this Letter to a Period.

The first Thing they suggest and insinuate into their Children, after they can
speak, is, That God has Endued Mankind with Three Demons or Spirits, that like
Three Kings make War, and are in continual strife who shall obtain the Dominion
over the whole Body, which they properly call an Inward Warfare. The first
Spirit is of the Nature of that Great Celestial Body called Saturn, from whence
Originally proceed Avarice, Calumny, Malice, Pride, Envy, Violence, etc. But
from the second Spirit or Demon comes Love, Pity, Mercy, Compassion, etc. as
also Temperance, Chastity, Sobriety and Philosophy. And from the third proceed
mixed Thoughts, various and wanton Discourses, Laughters and Merriment, and all
that is called Fantastical.

They labor hard to make their Children understand the Nature and Operation of
each of them, that they may be sensible which has the reigning and predominant
power in them.

They call the second Spirit the good Demon, and with great earnestness
inculcate to their Children, that they should be Governed by its Dictates, and
observe its Directions.

They teach them, that it was from this good Angel that their Seers and Holy
Men received the Law of Innocence. They inform them, that it is a great
Blessing, and a Token of being a particular Favorite of Heaven, to avoid
Violence and Oppression, especially toward those Inferior Creatures that
cannot defend or help themselves. That the greater part of Mankind are governed
by the Counsels of the other Demons, from whence proceed Wars, Murder,
Destruction, and all manner of Mischief.

From Three Years old to Seven they Instruct them in the Precepts of Moral^^^
setting before them the Excellence o^ ^ertue, and the Reason of their Duty.
Above all things, they commend to them a strict and severe Justice, which they
never depart from; for these Instructions are so early graffed in them, and so
plainly represented to ^^em, that they become, as it were, incorporate, and
grow up along with them, insomuch that they are no longer Moral Precepts, but
have in them the force of Nature.

They also very Vehemently and Pathetically set before them the Ugliness of an
Idle Life. Nay, they say, Idleness is inconsistent with Life, for Life in the
very Expression implies Activity and Motion. They greatly commend to them
moderate Labor and Exercise, and frequently put them upon the Practice of the
same, even in their very tender Age. They are very Exact in teaching them the
Art of Numbering, and acquaint them with the Method of God's Works (...) Worlds;
viz. The Heavens, Star^ and Elements, the Amazing Varieties (...), Vegetations
and Minerals; how they were all made, and are wonderfully sustained by the
Invincible Power of the Omnipotent Creator. They teach them the Motions of the
Celestial Bodies, their Courses and Distances, Postures, and Configurations,
and Influences* (...), they keep them continually (...) in what either Employs
their Understanding, or Improves their Manners, always accustoming them to the
Exercise of Patience, and the E^^^rance of Hardship.

Having therefore such an Early Education, and continually before their Eyes
the Examples of their Parents and Associates, the Notions of these Truths do,
a^ it were, enter into their very Natures by repeated habits, that nothing can
remove them* Having been Instructed that every word in their Law proceeds from
God, and at the same time, having imbibed a true Apprehension of the Excellency
and Justice of that ^eing, they look upon it as his positive ^ommand, and dare
not disobey. Thus a^ Esteem of their Law is planted in them, that no Avocations
of Business, nay, nothing but invincible Necessity can exempt them from a
punctual compliance with the same.

I shall here insert one passage of their nice exactness to the Rules of their
Law. It is held Sacred amongst them to keep themselves undefiled from any thing
they think unclean, and if such an Accident happen, they a^^ compelled to
repair to a certain pla^^ of Purgation, where they are to undergo all the
Discipline of that Mystery, before they must enter on their Bus^^ess. Some of
that Religion, who were Factors, came to Surat to Buy up a Commodity to be
Transported into Persia. The Europeans having notic^ thereof, and knowing the
Obligation these People lay under, one of their Merchants came near the Place
where they sat, and unawares took off one of his (...)* and touched them.
Immediately ^^ great*Cry was heard, for the (...) ^ound themselves polluted,
and (...) forced to leave their Business; (...) to the Place of Purgation, to
the designed Satisfaction of the European Merchant.

If any of their Princes at any time desire their Daughters for Concubines,
they love their Longing, for they will submit to the Severest Tortures rather
than break their Vow. They are never to be Engaged in the Armies of their
Kings, for as much as they abominate all manner of Violence, etc. Nor can they
ever be prevailed with to become Servants, being extremely Jealous of their
Original Liberty. In all Revolutions of States they are free, and enjoy under
all Governments an undisturbed Exercise of their Religion* on account of their
Peaceable Deportment. They abhor all strong Liquors, their most customary Drink
is Water. They lie upon hard Quilts; oftentimes on the bare Ground. They
neither Invade nor Covet any Man's Property, they are tenacious of the Customs
of their Ancestors, and remain secure in the Satisfaction of their own Virtue
and Integrity.

Dated, Corduba, 1150.
Metrodorus,
THere is one thing more that will (...) me with Matter for another Letter, and
that is, Their Opinion of the Transmigration of Souls, which shall be the last
concerning these People that I shall trouble you with hoping that my
over-forwardness in this matter, shall be understood as an Evidence of my
Willingness to embrace any Occasion of signifying the Respect I bear to a
Person of your Character, and ^ Lover of Virtue.

All our Philosophers and Seers, both Indians and others, do firmly believe,
That God has made Man in his own Image or Likeness; which all acknowledge, but
few have so well considered it as they ought: And that Man does contain the
Principles and Properties of all things Corporeal and Incorporeal; Also* (...)
^e is endued with an Elementa^^ (...) ^^pable Body, which Body is (...),
enlivened or informed by an Et^^rial Spirit, and so answers to the great Body
of this World, from whence the same is taken, and therefore is an Abridgment or
Epitomy thereof. And as he does contain all the true Properties of the gross
Elements, viz. Earth, Air and Water, that nourish and sustain the Body; He has
also the Principle of Fire and Light, that is, an Immortal Soul and Spirit,
which gives Life and Motion to the Body of Flesh, and answers to the Soul of
the great World, or that mighty Spirit, which is the Moving and Vivifying, and
most wonderfully Creative and Conservative Power in this vast System of Things,
which we call the World; and which does preserve and maintain every part
thereof in Beauty, Splendour and Harmony. Now in this Illustrious Estate, Man
was Created, and in him all Forms, Qualities and Powers, stood in equal Weight
and Measure* and if Man had continued in this (...) then he would have imitated
his (...) in all well-doing, and Governed all the Host of Heaven in Love, and
have been a Preserver and Guide to all inferior Creatures, which would have
powerfully attracted, not only the sweet and benevolent Influences of Heaven,
but also the Prayers and good Wishes of all the under-graduated Creatures,
which was the station he was made and ordained for, and to be a Co-worker with
his Creator in all Friendliness, Love, Compassion, Mercy, and doing unto all,
as ^^ch would be done unto: But Man departing with his Will and Desires, out
and from this Glorious State of Unity and Concord, into all the contrary
qualities, viz. into inequality, discord, fierceness and wrath, by which he
forfeited the Grand Charter or Law of his Creator, and so quickly dispossessed
himself of all the good Properties and Powers his Creator had endued him with,
by which he is now become an Enemy, not only of himself, but also of all
^reated Beings. He Curses and Destroys all, and all Creature Curse him, and the
Evil Wishes ^f these Creatures do not proceed from them causlesly, and
therefore they very often take effect, and powerfully draw down the
Thunderbolts of Vengeance on their guilty Heads: For that Great and Natural
Law of Retaliation will have its Operation, and take place either in this
World, or that which is to come, whatever some may vainly fancy to the contrary.

Therefore they do Command all their Disciples and Followers to forbear all
Violence, Oppression and Killing; for the Infinite Deity delights not in
Manslaughter; Strife, Wars and Contention, enter not into his Tabernacle: Our
Creator does accept of the Practices of every one that does well, and imitates
him in well-doing, for he is equal in all his Methods, and causes the blessed
and glorious Body, the Sun, to shine on the Just and Unjust, and commands the
(...) of the Celestials to (...) upon all. The Blessings of the Four Worlds are
equally distri^uted to all Creatures: Inferiors have a^ equal Privilege ^^th
the Superiors he only preserves and ^ustains the Universal System of Nature by
the Hand of his (...) s^read Providence, (...) they (...) all (...) in them
lies to be like him. God will not Oppress nor Kill, therefore they will not: He
gives Life, and does also preserve that Life; his Love and Compassion are by
his good Powers (...) unto all (...) this cause th^^ will not strike, hurry,
hunt, oppress, kill, (...) violate any of those good Laws God has ordained for
the preservation of his Offspring, firmly believing, That if they do by their
Practices of Life precipitate themselves into Oppression and Violence, that
they must undergo the severe Law of Retaliation, either in this Life, or that
which is to come: If they do wrong, or unlawfully take any thing from their
Neighbor, they are obliged: to return threefold, which is a full pardon for
the Injury done: And the great Law of Nature is thereby fulfilled and
consequently the Sin pardoned; (...) hunt, oppress or kill any of (...)
Creatures, what Satisfaction can we (...) in this World? Therefore th^^^ great
Evils that cannot be: recom^en^e^ here, must of necessity be (...), on the Soul
and Spirit in the World to come, there to be recompence^ according to the
Merits of the Evil: and therefore they believe that all that have unjustly
Ruled in this World, shall certainly in the Life to come be punished with a
Bestial or Servil^*state and condition; and they that have polluted themselves
with the Blood of their own kind; their Souls shall enter violent, furious Men,
of untractable Dispositions, that shall Live Miserably, and Die by the Fury of
War, and Humor of Princes: But such as have by continual Violence Oppressed
and Killed the Unrevengeful Animals, their Souls and Spirits shall be
precipitated and revolved into the most Sava^e and Brutish Bodies. All such as
(...) in the Wrathful and Sensual (...), do in the next World arise wild
Beasts, all according to the Nature of the (...) what qualities soever it
(...), such a Body it attracts and clothes i^ self with. Therefore none in the
Life to come arise Men, but only such as have retained Humane Property, that
have been Merciful, and done Justice unto all Creatures; such pass immediately
into the Regions of Glory, and Sing the holy Songs of Peace; others who have
Lived mixed Lives, compounded of good and evil, who have been Merciful to Man
and Beast, and at other times they have committed Evils; and Oppressed God's
Creatures, so that for the good which they have done, they enter into middle
Regions, where they are purged from those Evils they le^t unrepented of; in
which time they make full Retaliation* Such Souls, the Prayers and good Wishes
of Innocent Men do mightily help and comfort, and consequently shorten the time
^^ Retaliation; For the Prayers of good and (...) People, have power to break
open all Principles, and whenever it find^ (...) simile, it incorporates, and
the good Powers a^^ strengthened thereby: For all God's Powers, both in the
Internal and External Worlds, are moved by Sympathy or Likeness; for Inequality
and Discord cannot move Equality; therefore the good Wishes and Prayers of
Obstinate, Revengeful and Contentious Men, do not avail the Deceased Soul, who
is past into the middle Regions for Purgation, and who with great earnestness
presses toward the ^ood; and therefore no Prayers nor Wishes can profit such
Souls, but only such as proceed from Innocent, Just ^^en; for every Word, Wish
and Prayer has power only to penetrate into, and open the Gate of its own
Fountain, that is, Evil Men's Wishes and Prayers penetrate and open the Fountain
of Wrath, and strengthen it: and on the co^^rary, the good Wishes and Prayers
of the (...), Innocent Man* have (...) into Heaven, and all good, o^ whatever
^^ like it self; for the Celestial Powers and Properties of (...) Internal
Nature, are not only moved, ^^^ned ^^ incorporated by sense, and ^^^son, as
amongst Men; no, but by Concord, Equality and Harmony: And for this cause we do
so earnestly, and with so great pains and diligence press our Children and
Disciples, to enter with their Wills and Desires into Innocence and Well-doing,
being confirmed in this great Truth, viz. That Men cannot draw nigh, nor become
one with the Fountain of Benignity, nor be heard of the Soveraig^^ Being, but
as we become like unto him, for every Like is molded by its Likeness; Blood
requires Blood, (...) the Merciful shall obtain Mercy from the God of Peace and
Compassions. For these and the like Reasons we have (for many Generations)
totally abstained from all Violence, Oppression and Killing, either of Men or
Beasts; for every thing, both in the good, and also in the evil, do as
naturally, and as pow^^^^lly, stir up and strengthen its own ^r^perty, as the
Loadstone attracts Iron: We do likewise firmly believe, and it is one of our
principal Points of Doctrine which we teach our Disc^^les, viz. That if any Man
do suffer his Will and Desire to enter into the Practice of Vanity, Oppression,
Violence and Killing, both Men and Beasts, be it under what pretense it will,
such do precipitate themselves into the divided Powers of Nature, viz. into
harshness, fierceness, wrath and savage bestiality, by which they lose Humane
Property, and grow hardhearted, cruel and sordid, having no Compassion,
Fellow-feeling or Mercy. And if Men Die in this savage, brutish state, they
shall in the Internal World, when the Soul shall be reinvested with a new Body,
we say, such polluted Souls will naturally attract such Matter out of all
things, as the Spirits are capable, and have a simile with. Bu^ on the
contrary, (...) those that in their Lives have observed the Rules of Justice,
and refrained all Violence, Oppression, Killing; Intemp^^^^ce and Discord, and
who have introduced their Wills and Desires into Innocence, Mercy, Compassion,
and doing unto all Creatures as they would be done unto, all such shall not
only immediately pas^ into the Regions of Peace and (...) but be clothed with
more perfect ^^ beautiful, and more glorious, human^ Shapes and Forms. For it is
not to be doubted, and our Ancient Seers and Philosophers do confirm, that in
the beginning, when the great and most wonderful Creator moved himself, and had
a desire to manifest the hidden Mysteries of the Internal Worlds, he clothed
all the vast numberless variety of Creatures, in each Climate and Country,
with Corporeal Bodies, according to the Nature and Property of the Spirit; for
each Spiritual Substance had power to attract out of all things such Corporeal
Matter for a Covering or Body as had a simile with its own Nature, as appears
most manifestly by the Shapes, Forms, Inclinations and Dispositions of each
Creature, and as the Internal Property and Disposition of each Creature did
vary; and where the fierce Wrath did predominate, and had the Ascendant in the
Spirit, there sprang ^^ wild, savage Beasts, and cruel na^^^ed Birds of prey;
but where the ^^^lities of the Internal Nature were (...) equally mixed, there
were framed more benign and friendly Creatures, as Beasts and Birds more
humane, tame and tractable, called clean Beasts and Birds; also where the
Spirit was more noble and equal, so the Bodies and Frames were accordingly: And
as Man was in his Primitive Properties and Qualities, greater and more noble
than any other of the Creatures visible, so the great Creator gave him a
proportionable Body above all the rest of the Lower Creation; for all departed
Souls, who in their Lives keep the holy Laws of Humanity and Innocence have
appeared to their (...) humane Forms and Shapes: The (...) to be understood o^
the good Demons, and Heavenly Powers, whenever they have had occasion to
cloth themselves with Terrestrial Bodies, they have appeare^ in humane Figures
and Shapes, it ^^^ing the Ind^^^^nsible Law of God a^^ Nature, for every Spirit
or (...) Power to cloth it self with a Bod^ ^^^table to its own Nature,
therefore (...) Seed as Men sow in this (...) Life, such a Body they shall be
(...) with in the Internal World, (...) they have introduced their Wills into
Wrath, Fierceness, Oppression and Violence, etc. such a Body the Soul may
greatly be expected to have in the other Life; the Truth of this, the whole
Universe, and the numberless number of Creatures, both in the ^nimal, Vegetable
and Mineral Worlds do Testify and Witness. Here, Metrodorus, you have a
tedious, yet imperfect account of the Doctrine of the Metempsych^sis, first
(...); as they report; by Pythagoras, (...) has since been embraced by Men of
Eminent Learning and Virtue. It seems to be founded on the Notion of Natural
Justice, the exactest Measure of Retaliation. I leave it to your better
Judgment to determine the Point, but to me the Hypothesis seems probable, till
a more Certain and Divine Revelation shall be pleased to acquaint us with a
better.

Dated, Corduba, 1150.
The In^^^^ King's Letter to Pythago^^^, upon his Arrival into that Country.
Pythag^^^^,
WE have been informed by our Officers in the Provinces thro^ which thou have
Traveled, that thou art a very Learned Man, which is a Qualification we have
always esteemed and cherisht. But it seems to us, that thou art not so Wise, as
thou art reported to be Learned, in that thou go about spreading New
Doctrines, and Superstitious Observations, persuading my People to forbear
following the Customs of our Ancestors, preaching up an Abstinence from Flesh.
The Great Creator of all things, as he made the World for an Habitation for
Men, so no doubt the Creatures are subjected to their Dominion, and ordained
for their Use and Convenience. Wherefore we Charge you upon Peril of our Royal
Displeasure, that upon sight of this our Letter, you forthwith repair to our
Palace Royal, that we may hear what Thou have to allege in behalf of those New
Opinions thou have vented in several Parts of our Dominions.

Farewell.
Pythago^^^ (...) First Letter to the ^ndian ^^ng.
Most Renowned King,
OUR Religion recommends Abstinence from Flesh. Your Majesty would in your
Letter seem to blame me on that account, as if I had taught an unreasonable
Doctrine, and for this reason, that as God had given the World for an
Inhabitance, so the Creatures for Subsistence. I acknowledge not only your
Slaves, but the Beasts of your Territories are your own, and you may use them
as you please. But as the Notion of Tyranny is unreasonable, so the Practice is
unfeisable, and whoever puts it to the push, will quickly find the Effects; for
all the Philosophers in the World can never persuade us that we are Slaves, nor
all the Rhetoric in the World convince the Brutes that they are of another
Opinion. The Gods have made your Majesty a King, Sovereign of a Numerous
People, committed to your care, to be Preserved and Maintained, not to be
Pillaged and Destr^^ed. So it is with the Universe, i^ (...) ^^eatures are our
Subjects, they are (...) our Slaves. Nature has provided a many ways to
continue its Species, without being beholden to the Slaughterhouse. However,

I shall say no more than what an Epistolary Latitude will allow me, and assign
my Reasons, and make the best of my way to your Court.

What I have Preached (O King) in your Dominions is no Upstart Opinion, nor
Fantastic Humor, but what I am able to abide by, and make good. For the
Antiquity of our Course of Life, and the Innocence of our Doctrine, may be
proved of equal date with the Foundation of the World.

The Jewish Doctors teach, That Adam the first Man, was placed in a Garden* and
that Herbs and Fruit were his (...). And all Philosophers agree, that in the
Golden Age the Eating of Flesh was never tolerated. It was the Corruption of
Mankind introduced the Vice: Though afterward in the World's Degeneracy, the
Precept happened to be not so inviolably observed; yet the best Spirits, and
most virtuous Inclinations, tied themselves up to the strictness of our Rules
and Discipline.

It is alleged by your Teachers, That we oblige our Followers to the
Observation of things frivolous and vain, as not to kill any kind of Vermin,
etc. for fear of being guilty of Murder: Whereas the reason of this Prohibition
in its nicest severity, is only to take Men off from their Natural Fierceness
and Barbarity, lest by accustoming themselves in Cruelty toward Beast^ and
Insects, etc. they should in time fall foul on one another. So that Universal
Kindness is the Root of our Principle, and the safety of Mankind, the reason of
our Precept.

They also upbraid our Principles, in charging us with destroying that Princely
and Royal Recreation of Hunting, which has ever been accounted a Noble
Exercise by all great Persons in all Places, and in all Ages, and withal
extraordinarily conducive to the Health of the Body, and improvement of the
Mind in accustoming it to hardship, and the discipline of Virtue; but this is a
mistaken Allegation; for Nature needs not be beholden to Fury and Passion for
its relief or support. It is an Invasion upon the Natural Rights of the
Inhabitants of the four Worlds, and Men in the fierce pursuit of this Cruel
Pastime, are far more Ravenous than Dogs, Bears or Lions; for what those
rapacious Animals do, is only in order to support their Lives, but more
inhumane Men do it out of mere Wantonness. Though the Creatures are Dumb, and
cannot address their Creator after the manner of Men, with dissembling Hearts,
and lying Tongues, yet there are powerful Complaints against Hu^ane Injustice,
sent up by them in a natu^al way, which at one time or other will be heard to
the Confusion of their Unmerciful Tyrants, We are mistaken if we suppose it no
Crime to ^^tcher and Abuse these Infe^^our Creatures, as if ^^ey were not parts
of the Almighty Workmanship, and wholly exempted from the sense of Pain. Are
they not compounded of the Sevenfold Nature? Or is any of ^^e Elements wanting
in their Constitution? Are they not the Sons of the Stars, and partake of their
Influence? And have they not all kept God's Laws, and the true method of
Nature, and according to their kind, faithfully adore and worship their
Creator? They are innocent and harmless in all their ways, though it is true
they are not endued with Immortal Souls, and therefore the same Service is not
required from them as from Man, who is created in the complete Image of his
Maker, furnished with Excellent Gifts, Divine and Natural, appointed to be a
Prince and Governor over this Inferior World. Your Priests likewise are very
inquisitive to understand how we arrive to the Knowledge of Philosophical and
Sym^athetical Magic. The first step to this great Work, is to turn our Eyes
inward* and with a sedate Mind, meditate on the Unity of Powers, Qualities and
Properties, out of which Man is compounded, or that his Soul and Body do
contain the true Nature of Things, both Material and Immaterial: On the one
hand, Wrath, Envy, Contention, Fierceness and Intemperance; and on the other,
Love, Mercy, Clemency, Compassion, and whatever deserves the Name of Virtue and
Goodness. These are the two Fountains of those Powers whereby Mankind is acted.
The first excites to Violence and Oppression, the last to Innocence and Mercy;
so that those that would purchase any Honorable Reputation in the World, ought
to command their Wills and Desires to enter into this benevolent Fountain: For
be pleased to observe, Man*s Mind is free, and no sooner has this Benign Power
obtained the Ascendant over the inward Enemies o^ our Members, but forthwith
the Eyes of our Understanding are opened; and we have a true taste of the
Universal Harmony. Thus we our selves, after we had inbibed the Rays of this
Light, beheld all the Good that is in Things, and by help of this Distinction,
the Beauty of Infinite Love appeared plainly to the Eyes of our Mind; and being
thus Enlightened and Confirmed, Error vanished, and Truth shone out in its
Native and Original brightness.

After we had for some time Conversed in the Holy Sanctuary, where we saw and
heard things unutterable, this Holy Light, and Distinguishing Power, rendered
us capable of Contemplating the wonderful Power of God, the Method of his
Providence, and Course of his Government, managed by the Active Spirit of Life.

We also lifted our Eyes up to Heaven, and considered the daily Motions of the
Celestial Bodies, the Sun, Moon, and the numberless Company of the Stars, their
Rising and Setting, continual Courses and Revolutions, and the Various, and yet
Harmonical posture of their Configurations: Likewise the great variety of
Beasts, Birds and Fish, together with the Vegetables of the Earth, how every
Creature, both Heavenly and Terrestrial, do with sedate silence constantly
submit to observe and obey the Laws of their great Creator. It Is Man only that
has violated all Goodness and Sobriety, and by the Ministration of the Evil
Powers has destroyed the Laws and Privileges of all other Creatures as well as
his own, enslaving them in the highest Bondage; for which depravity there is no
Remedy, but a speedy entering of the Mind into the Holy Principle and Divine
Power. These Considerations prompted us to lay a Foundation of Innocence,
Self-denial* and Temperance in our Hearts, being assured that the good is
always drawn and united to the good; and on the other side, the bad does with
the strictest desire and intimacy join and incorporate it self with the bad. So
that whosoever offers violence to any Creature, at the same time opens the
Gates of Wrath, Fierceness and Revenge: And on the contrary, he that preserves
any Creature by his good Inclinations, sets open the Doors of Love and
Gratitude. No Man can be a true Governor and Preserver of his own Rights and
Privileges, nor of the Creatures, unless the Fountain of Mercy and Compassion
has got the Ascendant over him. For the true Religion is to keep God's Laws,
and in all things to imitate the good; and whoever breaks the Laws of Nature by
hurting the Innocent, is Irreligious, and a Transgressor in the highest degree.

Besides, we account praying to the Deities the meanest part of Religion: It is
but a kind of Lip-labor, and may for any thing we know be no more than
Hypocrisy, having singly no Evidences of its sincerity. It Is the Observation
of their Laws that the Gods regard; and One Act of Temperance and Obedience is
of more avail with them than an Hundred Superstitious Sacrifices, and
unnecessary, and uncommanded Penances. That Man approves himself most agreeable
to them, who carries most of their Image in his Life and Actions. Obedience to
their Laws, and Conformity to their Natures, is the fairest Acknowledgment of
their Sovereignty, and the highest Act of Honor a Creature can pay to his
Benefactor and Creator. Whilst we live under the Conduct of our good Genius,
observing the Rules of Justice and Gentleness, we become truly Religious. It Is
by this soft, sweet, silent Voice that we open a way to the Center of Goodness.
The Internal Powers have Immaterial Ears, they neither he^^ nor accept of
Lip-service. What pleases them must proceed from an Universal Power of Virtue
within, that does assimilate with all that is good; for by the Eternal Law all
things are endued with a natural and influential Virtue, which by a
Sympathetical Inclination joins with its simile whenever it finds it. This is
that that opens the great Fountain of Benignity. It Is the Practice of Goodness
that unites Men's Souls to God.

These, O King, are the Considerations that moved us to prohibit Violence and
Cruelty, to keep our Hands clean from the Blood of Animals, and to commend to
our Disciples a Friendly Conversation with all things, to represent to them the
Deformity of Vice, and the Beauty of Virtue and Gentleness, being well assured
by the Universal Voice of God, and his Law in Nature, that an Hecatomb of Bulls
cannot be so acceptable a Sacrifice to him as an unpolluted Mind, and a Will
wholly prepared to follow his Directions, and submit to his Providence. It Is to
a strict and severe imitation of him that we solicit our Followers, who is not
delighted with Cruelty, but is extremely pleased with the practice of Justice,
when Men have Learnt the Art of doing to others, as they would be willing to
have others do to them. For no Man was made to be a Tyrant; and an Epicure, to
domineer at pleasure upon his Fellow Creatures, who at all times, and in all
respects answer the end of their Creation better than himself. ^ut being
hurried by the Spirit of Igno^ance and Error, he is become the common Disturber
of Nature's Harmony, putting her whole Frame in Tumult and Combustion.

If Men pass out of the Body in this wrathful Disposition, what Regions must
they enter into, and what Bodies must they be clothed with? And since by the
secret Power of the Eternal Law, every Spirit or Soul does naturally attract
such matter for a Body as is suitable to its self: Those that have lived in the
Power and Operation of the Lion, Tiger and Dog, and so far brutified their
Nature, as to resemble those Animals, must they not expe^^ to be clothed in
such hideous Forms and Shapes? As on the contrary, the Virtuous and
Compassionate shall be adorned with the Garments of Innocence and Light.

The first step to Virtue is to do no Hurt, the next is to do all the Good we
can, even to the least of God's Creatures. What Creature soever you show
kindness to, the same does naturally call upon the Fountain of Benignity for a
Blessing upon you; so on t^^ other hand, the Cries of Oppressed Innocence take
the deepest Root, both in the Fountain of Love, and the Fountain of Wrath. The
Good attracteth and praises the Good; and the Evil the Evil. Every Thing and
Principle delights in its like: This is demonstrable in all Natural Things that
proceeded from the Immaterial World, and is in all its Particulars, Forms,
Figures, Qualities and Operations: And whoever does understand the outward,
cannot be ignorant of the inward; for in the great depth they are both one. The
understanding whereof is of infinitely greater moment than your Men of War, for
they are Sons of Violence, which do naturally attract the Malignity and Evil
out of all things, and the Curse of all Creatures takes place in them.
Therefore, O King, be pleased not to suffer any false Reports to Exasperate
your Royal Inclinations against us, who have no design of stirring up Sedition
to the Embroilment of your State or Kingdom, but only to communicate that
Innocent and Benign Light Heaven has darted into ^ur Souls, to as many of the
Great Maker of the World's Creatures as we can persuade to embrace it; that
they may by perusing the Precepts of true Virtue and Philosophy, become Dutiful
and Peaceful Subjects in their present State, and Blessed, and Happy Spirits in
the future. As we doubt not, O King, shortly to make apparent, when we ^^all
have the Honor to be admitted into your Royal Presence.

Second Letter.
Most Noble Prince,
YOur desire I shall answer so far as I may. The Virtues and Efficacy of
Numbers are wonderful in their Operation, when aptly and properly applied, as
the most Eminent Philosophers do unanimously confirm and teach. Now Number is
nothing else but a repetition of Unity, for Unity does most simply go through
every Number, and is the common Measure, Foundation and Original of all
Numbers, and contains every Number joined together entirely, the beginner of
every Multitude, always the same, unchangeable.

It is the highest Number in Musical Harmony; where all Forms and Qualities
stand in equal Weight and Measure, and may justly be called Concord; therefore
from Unity all things proceeded, nothing was before it, nor nothing is after
it, and all things that are, desire the One, because they all proceeded from
the One God, Creator of an Creatures, which do endeavor to return to that One
Fountain whence they proceeded. All Clemency, Mercy, Softness, Compassion, and
doing unto all Creatures as we would be done unto, proceeds from the Unit^ and
Concord, and is the Fountain from whence all true Knowledge and Religion
arises; Unity and Harmony is the Preserver of all Creatures; Light and Loye are
the Off spring and Sons of Concord: All those are most happy that obtain it,
and all Creatures are most miserable without it: Equality and Order are the
Sinews and Health both of the Body and Mind, not only in this World, but in
that which is to come. For this cause, Order, and the proper practice and use
of Numbers, do mightily fortify men against the Temptations of evil Demons,
and at the same time most powerfully attract the holy Powers and Communications
of good Angels. For in what Creature soever the natural Qualities stand nearest
equasity, or have made themselves so by observing God's Law in Nature, they
make that Creature most happy. He that Sins against God's Law, breaks and
violates the Unity of his own Principles.

By all the Philosophical Mediums and Circumstances in Religion, the first
Founders intended to draw Men into some order, that they by degrees might
through the Forms obtain the Unity. That those People are most happy that
taught their Followers to live an innocent, harmless Life, which bears the
nearest Relation to Unity and Concord: For we do affirm, That no inequality nor
evil inclinations, can or do arise or proceed from the Soul or Mind of that
Man, whose properties and inward qualities keep equal weight and measure. All
Evil proceeds from the many, that is from the inequality of the inward Powers
of Men's Souls, therefore Harmony is the highest state of the Soul, and the
compleatest composition of the Senses. Is not order the Original, which is
nothing else but a complete Number, the very Fountain whence all good
Government proceeds, both in the Celestial and Terrestrial Worlds? Let us
consider the Heavens, Stars and Elements, with their wonderful and amazing
variety of Creatures wherewith the Four Lower Worlds are endued, more
especially the Celestial, where the holy and various Powers of good Demons are
beyond all humane number, and all act and work in that exact Order and Number
which the great first Being created them in; therefore all the Beasts, Fishes
and Fowls of Heaven are more innocent, and consequently more happy than Men,
because they have kept their Law, and Unity, but Man has broken it in the
highest degree. All Peace and Happiness is comprehended within the Limits of
Equality and Concord; and on the other side, All Misery and Evil is within the
Bounds of Inequality and Discord, so that there is a necessity that every Man
should govern himself according to Order and Number, or some body for him; for
such as have not prudence to govern; and to give necessary Orders for
themselves, ought to be governed by others; there being but few that have Minds
that are able to govern themselves, most being contented with the Rules of
Custom, be they better or worse, therefore it is one of the greatest Evils in
the World, to be a Teacher and an Inventor of evil Customs; and on the other
side, it is one of the greatest Blessings to Teach and Invent innocent Customs,
and good order of Living; for Man has broken himself off from Unity and Order
to that degree, that few incline to Virtue, except the greatest number go
before them, and that it become a Custom to be Innocent and Virtuous: Therefore
the Brachmans praise God, and his holy Powers, that they have not given the
World any precedent of Violence, nor brought any evil Custom; for Tradition and
v^in Customs rule over most Nations* and Men are so highly graduated ^^ them,
that most of them will not only Kill others for not observing their Customs,
and believing in their Prophets; but they will die themselves, rather than
leave an evil Custom to embrace a good one; so far are Mankind degenerated from
Unity and Concord. For this cause we Teach our Followers to be careful, that
they in their common Communications do not utter or speak words that proceed
from Fierceness and Wrath, nor to give themselves Liberty to Complemental
Jesting or Flatteries, nor suffer the Tongue and the Heart to Rencounter each
other; and for the better observation and distinguishing from what Center and
Quality all Words and Discourses proceed, they divide the Soul and Mind of Man
into three Parts, Powers or Spirits, which some of our Philosophers call
Qualities or Principles, they being the Grounds or Foundation, whence all
Imaginations, Inclinations, Words and Works do arise and p^^^eed, viz. The
first Power in Man's Soul is fierce, severe and wrathful, and when this Power
does obtain the Ascendant, the Imaginations, Words and Works are harsh, bitter,
surly, bold and fierce, filled with Envy and Malice, tending to Violence and
Hurt; But when the second Power governs in the Center of the Soul, then the
Imaginations, Words and Works are signed with the Character of Modesty, with a
Mild, Friendly, Courteous Behavior, filled with Mercy and Innocence, always
tending toward Unity; But if the third Power or Quality have obtained the
upper Region of the Soul and Heart, then the Imaginations, Words and Works are
frivolous, frothy, mixed with wanton Jestings and Laughters, between Jest and
Earnest, always tending to evil. But oftentimes there is a mixture of these
Q^^lities or Powers, which run so high, that no Humane Number can penetrate
into, or comprehend them, which is done by the help of Art and Reason, which do
mightily ^eceive such, to whom such Discourses are directed, that do break the
Unity, and make a great Tumult and Discord in the Soul. Upon which account we
esteem it unlawful to show Anger to our Children; nor do we allow them to see
vain fantastic Plays and Games; nor when Men, who are worse than Dogs, that
cause one fierce Beast to fight with another; neither do use them to Jest with
or Jeer one the other, being well satisfied that in their green Years, every
thing takes deep Root, that the Essences and Qualities thereof do never depart,
and the Concord being broken so early, it proves a work of great difficulty for
such, either to distinguish the Good from the Evil, or to obtain the Harmony of
Nature, or of their inward Powers: For let Men know for Truth, that the middle
Spirit or Power is given unto Man by his Creator, that Man might by its sweet
and friendly Influences, qualify the Fierceness and Wrath of the first, and
the fantastic Folly of the third, and so bring them all three into an equal
Tone or Concord. We believe that the Knowledge, Power, Operation and Government
of these three Spirits, and to be able to distinguish them, is of absolute
necessity; for if we do not distinguish the nature of these Powers, we cannot
have any true Knowledge, and where there is no Understanding, there is no
Order, and where there is not Order, there cannot be any Concord or Unity.
Therefore we do as much as in us lies advance Temperance and Order, and do
prefer the use of Numbers, believing that God has made all things according to
Measure, Weight and Number; and the more we imitate him, the nearer we draw,
and fitter we are to be joined to the uniform Powers of God in our selves:
Therefore the Brachmans, when they prepare or administer Physic, make use of
certain Numbers and Words, according to the present Dictates of the Harmonical
Powers of their Souls; always observing to make use of the first Number that
arises in the Soul, as being most simple, entire and free from the multiplicity
of Thoughts, and stands nearest unto Concord, which some of our Fathers call
the Good Genius, or Good Spirit; but the Jewish Rabbis entitle it the Oracle,
which being diligently waited upon, and its Dictates observed, it reveals in
Men's Souls the great Mysteries of God, and makes known the Secrets of Nature,
and all the degrees of Temperance and Cleanness: It is this good Demon that
teaches the proper use of Numbers, and all things necessary: For this cause
when any that are Distempered desire a Medicine, this good Spirit or Power is
ready, and does immediately Dictate unto the Physician, what Methods, Herbs,
Words or Numbers he shall observe and administer. But for the most part we
observe the Numbers and Method of Words following, viz. The Unity which in
Medicine has great Power and Virtue, when it arises entire and unmixed with
the Imagination, or multitude of variety of Thoughts, then we are directed by
our good Demon to some one simple Herb, and also how to prepare and apply it to
the Sick Person, and when we gather it, we do turn our selves to the most
glorious Eye of Heaven, and utter words to this purpose; O thou one only Power,
Creator and Preserver of all things, and who have endowed this Herb that I now
gather with an inward and secret Virtue, bless the Use thereof to A. B. that he
may by its sweet Influences and thy Blessing be restored unto perfect Health of
the Body and Soul.

But note, that our Physicians or Brachmans do not keep nor observe a constant
Method either of Numbers nor Words, they always vary according to the Dictates
of the good Demon; for the Oracle of our Souls will always imitate God and
Nature, whose variety is not to be comprehended by any humane Number; in which
wonderful variety consists the highest degrees of unity; Therefore Man should
not put Locks on the Doors of his Spirit; for nothing hurts the holy Powers so
much as to fix them in constant methods: For this cause Herbs and Medicines
have not such efficacy and power to Cure Diseases and Infirmities, as some of
the Philosophers and Physicians talk of, they fixing certain Virtues in them;
and so they administer them, having no regard to the power of the Soul, nor to
the present Dictates of the good Demon its Son, so that the Herb or Medicine is
dead, and without Life and Spirit: But on the other side, when he that
administers observes the Voice and Dictates of the Spirit or Light of Men's
Hearts, then the Medicine or Herb becomes full of Life, and has a wonderful
Operation, and Cures to an high degree. This is the method we and our Followers
observe in the Practice of Physic, always following the Directions of our good
Demon, which leads us into as great variety, as there is of Creatures in the
Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms, or four Worlds: And though we Cure even
to a Miracle with Sage or Balm, yet for the same or like Distemper we are led
or directed to some other Herb or Thing at another time by our good Angel;
therefore we esteem it a great Sin to observe certain methods, and to kill Men
by outward Authority: No, all our Authority and Power is from our Souls and
good Angels, which Men ought to consult in all difficulties. We do also make
great use of the Number three, as being a holy Number, and a Number of
Perfection, and most powerful, not only in Medicine, but also in Religion. We
also prefer the Number Four, it being endued with great Power and Virtue, being
as it were the Foundation and Root of other Numbers, as well of Artificial
Things as Natural and Divine. The Number Five stands us in great stead in all
our Magical Operations; this Number is as it were the Birth of the Son and
Daughter of Light, and a Flame of Love, and is the wonderful Perfection and
Virtue in all Operations; and some of our Fathers have entitled it the Number
of Wedlock, and of Justice: This Number does contain many great Mysteries,
which aptly used are of good success. -- The Number Six is also of great use,
and is a Number of Perfection in all the Magical and Sympathetical Operations
of Nature: Also the Number Seven has no less Virtue and Power than the other,
and of which all our Fathers have made great observation in Sacred Things, in
which Numbers all Mysteries are most complete. The Number Eight our Fathers
have made great use of, and they call it the Number of Justice and Fullness:
Note also, that the Number Nine is of great Virtue both in Medicines and
Religion, and in all Magical Operations: There are also many other Numbers that
are of great use and benefit to all that live Innocent Lives, and observe God's
Law in Nature; for Man is in Nature, and therefore he must work and penetrate
into the inward Mysteries of God's Law, by the power of his Soul, and light
thereof. This, O King, is some part of our methods in the Practice of Physic:
We dare not in this place discourse of our Secret and Divine Magic, nor of the
wonderful things that are performed by the power of Sympathy and Antipathy, the
publishing thereof is forbidden us; but this is sufficient to the wise, and he
that understands how to practice and apply these Rules and Methods here set
down, is not far from the great and most Secret Knowledge distinguishing the
good Powers of God, the true understanding of which is the highest degree, both
of Divine and Natural Magic.

An Extract of some of the Precepts and Rules that Pythagoras Recommended to
his Disciples and Followers.
O Thou doubly compounded Man, framed of an Earthly Body, influenced by an
Immortal Soul, convert the Eye of thy Understanding inward, study thy self, and
thou shall know the wonderful Powers and Qualities God has implanted in thee.
Thou art the Similitude, the Resemblance of all Powers, Worlds and Elements. In
thee the true Natures and Properties of all Created Beings are contained. Thou
art the Son and Offspring of all Worlds, both Material and Immaterial, whereby
thou Vertually containest, and Symbolically representest the Essences and
Qualities of them all. For the Great Creator has endued every Being with an
Influential Virtue and Vice, but more especially thee, O Man: By which means
there is a Secret and Sympathetick Operation and Working of one Body on
another. For which cause we Command and Recommend to our Disciples and Children,

I.
Temperance, and an Abstinence from all Hurtful Things in Eating, Drinking and
Communication. That they keep themselves Clean and Unpolluted. Besides, we have
a particular regard to the great Law of Retaliation, to which man must submit
either in this or the other World. This is the Law of Justice, by which all
must be tried, and none can be exempted: Which is the Original Ground and
Reason of our Prohibition of Killing Living Creatures, and Eating Unclean Foods.

II.
The Gods are not only the Creators, but the Preservers of all Creatures; and
none can enter into the Regions of Bliss, but such as observe the Rules of
Justice, and in all Things imitate them. For whosoever opposes them must be
compelled to undergo the Severity of Retaliation, seeing every thing is moved
by a Sympathetick Motion and Inclination, and not according to Sense, as some
vainly imagine, but according to God's Eternal Law in Nature, and her secret
Operation.

III.
The Heavens, Sun, Moon, Stars, and all the Elements distill their genuine
Influences, and prolifick Virtues on all Creatures. The most inferior have an
equal share in the benefit of those Immortal, Preserving Powers according to
the Capacity of their Nature. So that to obtain their Favor, we must of
necessity be like them in our Works and Communications.

IV.
We likewise forbid all manner of Violence and Murder, not only of those of our
own Kind and Species, but likewise of all inferior Animals. For no Man can do
the Work of the Spightful Powers, but he must at the same time enter with his
Will into their Qualities, which have an innate power to advance all kind of
Cruelty, darkening the Soul, and rendering it apt and ready to receive and
embrace the Suggestions and Impressions of evil Demons, making it a Companion
of all the Rapacious Beasts of the Wilderness, which we call a double and
treble, falling from the height of Good to the fathomless Abyss of Evil,
clothing the Soul with a Bestial Body, the Essences whereof will stick to it
in Eternity. For this Practice is contrary to the Laws of Creation and
Preservation, it is Man only (by a whimsical Conceit) that makes the
distinction, and not the holy Powers, for the Imaginary Security of himself,
and the Maintenance of Society.

V.
Houses and Hospitals, sufficiently endowed, must be provided to preserve the
Inferior Animals from the Injury of the Elements in their Old Age. For Charity
and Kindness to innocent and helpless Creatures, is the most acceptable Service
to the good Powers, attracting the benevolent Influence of all things. The
increasing Dew of the Celestials shall never be wanting where Love abounds.

VI.
Whosoever shall Rescue or Buy any Beast, Bird, or other Creature, from the
Hands of the Slayer, shall be blessed in all he has, does, and be made partaker
with the happy Communications of good Demons; for Charity where there is no
Interest, and when the performing it is chargeable, powerfully unites the Soul
to all that is good and excellent, and is most agreeable to the Fountain of
Goodness it self.

VII.
Give Respect and Honor to all inferior Creatures, (because they bear in their
several Natures the Stamp and Impress of thy Maker's Wisdom and Power as well
as thy self) especially to the Cow and Ox, they deserve it at thy hands, upon
account of their serviceableness to thee. They are Creatures of great Value,
and the holy Powers will not excuse, if thou abuse and torment them.

VIII.
Touch no Dead Body, for they are unclean; and if it so happen that any do,
they shall be compelled ^o undergo a Hundred Days Purification, and pay Ten
Pieces of Money toward the Education of Poor Children, etc.

IX.
Drink not out of the Cup, nor Eat out of the Dish of those that Eat unclean
Foods, or Drink strong Drink; if any he found so to do, they shall suffer a
Hundred Days Purification, and pay Ten Pieces of Money for the uses
abovementioned.

X.
No Strong Liquors, Wine, or the like, shall be drunk, only pure Water, which
is the Mother of all Liquid Fountains, and moist Elements. For all Strong
Drinks are injurious to Nature, and destroy the Health both of Body and Mind.

XI.
If any Steal from, or Rob his Neighbor, he shall restore Ten-fold, either in
Goods, Money or Labor. And when any Person is Condemned in this manner, if any
shall Jeer, Deride or Reproach him with his Crime, the Person so doing shall
undergo the same Punishment, for Justice is the end of the Law.

XII.
Every Fifth Day in the Year shall be a Fasting Day, or a Day of Abstinence,
and the Master of each Family shall cast up his Account of Expenses, and what
he has saved shall be given into the Public Stock for Charitable Uses; for the
Gods are much Delighted with clean and unpolluted Minds, and Charitable Souls.

XIII.
Let it be a Law, That all Ancient Men dispose of their Estates to their
Children, and Kinsfolks, and other good Uses, reserving only a Competence for
their Maintenance; that as much as in them lies they may free their Minds from
the Fatigues of this World, in order to be the more fit to Communicate with the
Gods and Heavenly Powers,

XIV.
Singing and Music ought to be practiced, and is of great use, especially at
the time of going to Bed, for it naturally composeth the Animal Spirits, and
prepares the Intellect for the Conversation of holy Demons; for all Composition
and Concord is begotten by its simile.

XV.
No Man shall be the Husband of more than one Wife; for many Women disturb and
discompose the Harmony and Unity of the Mind, and Strength of the Body, and is
often the Source and Foundation of Enmity in Families and States.

XVI.
You shall be obliged to Pray to the Celestial Powers three times a Day, and
after each Prayer Sing an Hymn of Thanksgiving to the Gods.

XVII.
If any have in their own Judgment offended in Eating or Drinking to
Intemperance; or in any other thing wherein their Consciences accuse them,
though it does not fall under a public Censure; They shall purge and cleanse
themselves by Fasting and Prayer for one Day, which will contribute to the
Resettlement of the Mind and Strength of the Body.

XVIII.
You shall Eat and Drink twice a Day, at Nine in the Morning, and Four in the
Afternoon, which will be sufficient to supply the wants of Nature in that
respect.

XIX.
No Woman shall Marry after she has been the Wife of one Husband, but remain a
Widow, and subjected to a retired and sedate Life, and easy Employment. For
Widows sooner become wanton than Maids, and consequently more bold and forward.
And by this means their Husbands Offspring shall be better secured in their
Rights, and the Descent or Division of Estates more equally preserved.

XX.
Every Son shall be bred up in his Father's Trade, for as much as they easily
learn what they daily see and practice in their tender Years. So that they will
become not only more Curious in their Arts, but put their Parents to little or
no extraordinary Charge, having learnt their Trade at the Age of Fourteen or
Sixteen Years, which is usually the time others are put out.

XXI.
Let Women accustom themselves to a quiet, sedate Life, especially during the
time of their Impregnation. Nothing is more hurtful to them than too much
Talking and Passion. Let them live temperately, avoid sharp and sour Foods,
which will greatly conduce to the Health of themselves, and the Child they are
pregnant with.

XXII.
From Three Years of Age to Eight is the principal time for Teaching Children
all Science and Art, and all other things they are capable of handling. Then
Impressions take the deepest Root, and the Mind then is least prepossessed with
Passion and Prejudice. It is inconceivable to imagine what Children may do, if
betimes they are rightly instituted. I observe most lose great part of their
time for not being early instructed in true and proper Methods. For in this
tender Age they are like Trees planted by the Hands of a Skilful Husbandman, in
their due and proper Season.

XXIII.
Let all the Food of Children be of a light and easy Concoction, for they
afford both a dry and moist Nourishment, fit for their Age.

XXIV.
If any Man Despise, Undervalue, Reproach or Backbite his Neighbor, or the
Poor, he shall (if his Circumstances allow it*) pay a Hundred Pieces of Money,
and be Excommunicate for a Hundred Days: And when he has made this
Retaliation, the Holy Bramen or Priest shall say unto him, The Gods and
Celestial Powers dispense the Influences of their Benefits to the Just and
Unjust, to all equally according to their Pleasure: And if Man would ever be
united to the Good, it is his Duty to imitate them. For there is no Mark or
Character of the Favor of the Gods but this, which is the highest Number, and
compleatest Composition of the Soul.

XXV.
Let not Youth speak in the presence of the Elders, not having first asked
leave, for it is contrary to all Harmony and Order. And it shall be the Care of
Parents not to suffer any unseemly and undecent word to be spoken in the Ears
of their Children.

XXVI.
All Differences arising between Man and Man shall be referred to the Decision
of Three Persons acquainted with the Matter, Two of whom shall discourse the
Business, and if they cannot adjust the Controversy, the Third shall have
Power to do it, to whose Sentence they shall, without Appeal, be obliged to
submit. And if any Passion arises, the Beginner of the Strife shall be Fined
Ten Pieces of Money for the Use of the Poor.

XXVII.
In all Buying, Selling and Bargaining, he that Sells shall pay to the same Use
One Piece of Money for each Hundred, and so in proportion, be the Bargain more
or less.

XXVIII.
Seeing we have already commanded Temperance, it will be necessary only to
subjoin, That you rest from your Labor from Eleven a Clock till Two in the
Afternoon. For the composing and settling the weary Faculties of the Soul, is a
great prop and support of the Health of the Body.

Third Letter.
AS to the Innovations, O King, concerning our Religion, wherewith we are
charged, I have these few things to return by way of Vindication, both of our
Doctrine and Practice.

Our Profession is not to introduce new Principles, for Religion, I mean true
Religion, is the same in all places, and at all times. The Ceremonies and
external Rites thereof indeed are various, but these are as it were but
Religious Complements, which the Gods do very little, if at all, regard, in
comparison of the substance, which is sincerity in Thought and Deed, and an
earnest endeavor of being joined with, and an exact conformity to the
Principle of Divine Light and Love. The Spirit of Wisdom leads all her Children
in the Universal Temple, where there is no Controversy nor Contention about
Words and naked Forms; but there they all imitate their Creator, by doing good,
and living innocently. Religion consists chiefly in a Virtuous Course of Life,
an exact and entire Obedience to God's Law; that is, that we labor to preserve
the Likeness of his Image in our Souls, in being Just, Temperate and Harmless.
Nor is there any difficulty herein at all; for the Ways of God, and the
Observations of his Laws are plain and easy, but the Humors and Inventions of
Men are difficult and fantastical, very often pernicious both to Soul and
Body: For when Men degenerate from the Light, they become deluded by the power
of a false Imagination, and vain Conceit of themselves, to Assert their own
Notions, and private and mistaken Opinion of Things for Religion, violently
imposing them upon the Faith and Consciences of Mankind, as the Oracles of
Truth and Wisdom.

This has been the Source and Inlet to all the Controversies and Distractions
in the World, and the Foundation of all the Misery, War and Calamity that
invades and domineers in every corner of the Earth. For when by treading in the
Paths of Virtue, we keep close to the Universal Law, we are in a direct way to
be led to the true Mother of Peace and Unity, and then all Contention and
Strife will cease to have a Being in our Souls. It ought then to be our great
Concern to Abstract our selves from the Sensuality of the Multitude, which is a
very good step toward true Religion and Regeneration, living in a constant
Imitation of our Creator, in being Innocent, Just and Holy: For it is not in the
Circumstance of External Rites, or Invented Ceremonies that Religion does
consist, but in an Universal Purity of Soul, in all respects conformable to the
great Law of Justice, Love and Temperance, from which Estate Man is fallen, and
Fierceness, Wrath and Inhumanity have arose in their place; and till this
Principle be again renewed in the Soul, ^here can be no true Religion
acceptable ^o the Universal Creator, and First ^eing.

Therefore it is that we have prescri^ed Rules of Temperance, Meekness, and
Love to our Disciples, that by cor^ecting the Principle of Fierceness and
^itterness in the Soul, they might be ^ssimilated to the Divine Nature. For ^e
could never persuade our selves ^^at the Gods have any Pleasure in the
^estruction of their Creatures; and do ^elieve that all Bloody Sacrifices are a
^ench in their Nostrils. How is it ^ossible to conceive the Fountain of love
and Goodness, to be delighted ^ith Cruelty? I have found in most ^ountries
where I have Traveled, ^^at the main Business of Religion is ^uilt upon fine
Shows, pompous Pa^des, and a ridiculous Observation of ^^less and uncommanded
Ceremonies; ^^is is mere Superstition, and not Reli^^on. Men have submitted and
enslaved themselves to common Practie^ and choose rather to embrace a mistak^
and groundless Opinion for Religion than put themselves to the trouble o^
finding out the Truth, which indee^ is the highest Enoblement of a Rationa^
Soul. Custom hides the Truth from all Men in one degree or another; an^ it is no
small part of Self denial to ove^come the Inveiglements thereof.

So that these things considered, ^^ that imposes Laws of Instituted Worship on
other Men, ought to begi^ with the Knowledge of God's Nature and himself,
endeavoring to understand both in a competent degree. H^ must distinctly and
attentively conside^ the stupendous and amazing Wonde^ of the Work of Creation,
and strive^ much as in him lies to conform his Injunctions to those, and
imitate the mo^^ perfect Example.

Whoever therefore Worships God by the direction of Custom and Opin^on, is
highly mistaken; for by the means he considers God rather as h^^ Inferior, as
if he were obliged to be de^ighted with such manner of Service as he shall be
pleased to allow him. Can any thing import a more undutiful Contempt of the
Divine Being? Shall we deface the Light of his Image in our Souls, to follow
the Conduct and Guidance of our own Extravagant Fancies. The most profuse
Sacrificer Honors not God at all, if he offers not with a Mind intentively
devoted: For Sacrifices and Victims of Irrational and Innocent Things, are but
Fuel to the Flames, and the prey of Sacrilege; but a Mind zealously fixed
Espouses the Divine Nature: For all like most infallibly tends to its like, and
a Wise Man can only properly be said to be a Priest, a Lover of God, and fit to
pray; for he only can Worship who confounds not the Qualities of what he is to
Adore; but first making himself the Sacrifice, erects a Statue of God in his
own Breast, and Builds in his Soul a Temple for the Reception of the Divine
Light.

Hence it follows, that he only is tr^ly Religious, who having attained t^
Knowledge of things Divine, returns h^ own Perfections as the greatest Glor^
unto the Cause from whence they flowed, wholly resigning and devoting him self
to a desire of Enjoying that which is altogether able to satisfy him.

Thus much, O King, we though fit to Write to Thee concerning Religion, that
thou might perceive th^^ the Amendment of Men's Manners, an^ the leading them
from the darkness o^ Superstition and Error into the Light o^ Truth and Wisdom,
is the principa^ Scope and Design of our Doctrine, an^ not the Embroilment of
Kingdoms and stirring up Sedition, as we have been unjustly represented.

Fourth Letter.
Most Renowned King,
ANother thing I find to be matter of Complaint against us, is our practice of
Singing contrary to common Usage and Custom, nor do I know any grounds for
Admiration, except that the Consent and Joyfulness of our Sufferings may create
Wonder in our Persecutors. We are persuaded that the Soul of Man (when rightly
tuned; that is, not misguided by Passion, nor swayed by Interest) is a perfect
Composition of Harmony.

Music is endued with wonderful Excellencies, and equal Parts, not only of the
Celestials, but also of the Terrestrials: For numerous Sounds digested into
pleasant Songs, do wonderfully quicken the inward Faculties, and by a soft and
natural Inclination, and Sympathetick Attraction, allure and unite all the
Virtues and good Powers; and its influence is so great, when it proceeds from a
well-tuned and composed Mind, that it does not only change the Affections,
Intentions, Gestures, Motions, Actions and Dispositions, but it imposes its
own Harmonious Properties, both on the Singers and the Hearers. It pacifies the
disorder of the Spirits, not only of Men, but even affects Birds and Beasts.
Wild Indian Elephants are tamed by Melodious Voices, yea, the Elements
themselves submit to their power. Do not laboring People sing to mitigate the
Toil of their Employments; for Harmony chears and refreshes the Animal Spirits,
causing an equal Operation of all the Qualities, which in all respects forrifie
Nature, and at the same time chase away dull, sordid Thoughts, and Saturnine
Humors, rendering the Body and Mind capable to receive Divine Impressions.
Music is a sure and constant Friend to Health, and many times we have known
Diseases give place to its salutiferous strains, by a Magical Power, and Sweet
Violence, raising all that is good into equality, by moderating the Affections,
and composing the Mind. Harmony is the true Music of the Spheres, acquainting
Mankind with the Sympathetical Concord of the Universe, that Golden Chain which
unites Heaven and Earth. It is the true Entertainment of Man's Soul, fitting
and preparing the Mind to understand both Divine and Humane Mysteries; likewise
our Preservation and Salvation in this World, and in that which is to come, do
consist in a Harmonious Disposition of Parts.

Now our Songs are both Prayers and Praises to our Creator, for his Infinite
Goodness and Mercy. Sleep is as it were a transitory Death, during the Body's
natural repose, having shaken off for that time the Fetters of the gross
Senses: And while the Spirits are upon the Wing, and as it were in the Suburbs
of Eternity, the holy Demons, or good Angels and Spirits, have their secret
Intercourses with our Souls, by whom, (as we are found worthy) they open and
communicate the Divine Mysteries, to such as have submitted themselves to the
Government of the Innocent Harmonious Powers, (as I said before.). Sleep is a
transitory Death, in which state there is no progression or passing of time
perceived by our Senses; and if we pass away into Eternal Regions, we esteem it
a Blessing, and all our Fathers say, That an easy Death is a Favor from the
Powers of Heaven, as being nearest equality; therefore we sing out our Prayers
and Praises to our Creator, and as much as in us lies, do keep our selves
sensible and mindful, that we may expect to be called out of this World every
moment; also that our Dreams may be Equal and Harmonious; for Dreams and
Visions are the greatest and clearest Arguments of the Immortality of our
Souls, and the only way and means whereby our Creator does vouchsafe to reveal
and communicate his Secrets to the Sons of Wisdom. It is also to be noted, that
our Songs being composed of equal Parts, and being impregnated by the Virtue
and Power of our Minds, they do by a mutual Consent and Agreement, compose and
unite all that is good, by a Sympathetical Inclination, which renders us
capable of the holy Unity.

These are the Reasons, O King, that moved us to Recommend Music and Singing
to our Disciples, the good and innocent Effect whereof we have oftentimes and
abundantly experienced.

An Account of a Personal Discourse between Pythagoras the Indian King and his
Gymnosophists, asserting the Truth of his Doctrine, as (...) as found in an
Ancient Latin Manuscript, attested by Averroes own Hand.
AS soon as the King of India heard that Pythagoras was come to Court, he
ordered his high Chamberlain to provide convenient Lodgings for him and his
Companions, and assigned him a Day when he would give him Audience of what he
had further to allege in defense of those Doctrines he had Preached in his
Kingdoms, particularly touching that Precept of his, forbidding to eat Flesh,
or use any other manner of Violence toward these innocent and harmless
Creatures. The appointed Day being come, and the King seated on his Royal
Throne, with many of his Courtiers and Gymnosophists about him, Pythagoras was
ordered to approach, and the King received him after this manner:

Pythagoras, we are assured, as well by thy Letters to us, as also by the
reports of diverse Persons, that thou art a very Learned Man, we have therefore
thought fit to send for thee to our Court that we might have some Personal
Discourse with thee. We declare unto thee, that we do not approve of taking up
things upon Trust, and are utterly unwilling to encourage a Practice merely
because it has been customary. But to us it seems strange that thou should
teach our People absolutely to abstain from eating of Flesh, and to forbear
that Noble and Ancient Pastime of Hunting, the first Exercise of Young Heroes,
and that which fits them for the attempting all Warlike and Glorious Actions,
contributing as well to the Improvement of the Mind, as to the Strength and
Agility of the Body, calling it a Cruel and Inhumane Recreation, altogether
unbecoming the Dignity of Humane Nature. Let us then freely hear thy Reasons;
convince us, if thou can, Pythagoras, and we our selves shall readily become
thy Disciple.

After which Pythagoras thus began his Discourse; May it please your Majesty,
we have in our defense two potent Enemies to Encounter, Common Opinion, and
Ancient Custom. I am not at all insensible how difficult it is to prevail upon
prejudiced Minds, and to persuade Mankind from the Practice of those things
they have ever believed and used. But what we are now about to prove, is not
Built upon the Authority of any Tradition, but is the result of pure Truth and
Light darted upon the Understanding, by the Friendly Operation of the Creator's
Spirit, viz. upon the Souls of as many as have learnt to preserve the Original
Principle in them, in observing the Dictates of God's Law ^n Nature. The
Composition of Man at first, was all Love and Sweetness; it was by the
malicious Suggestion, and powerful Instigation of the Evil Demon, that Wrath,
Contention, Fierceness and Cruelty set up their Throne in the World. For Man
having estranged himself from the Fountain of Benignity, became a violent Enemy
to his Fellow Creatures; and having by his evil Practices degenerated from the
Principle of Love, and defaced the Image of God, wherein he was at first
Created, following the directions of Evil Spirits, turned an exasperated
Persecutor of the innocent Inhabitants of the Lower World, wild in his
Imaginations, and untractable in his Dispositions. His great Creator had
provided plentifully for him, without exposing him to offend in such a Rude and
Barbarous manner. He appointed the Earth to him for an Habitation, together
with his Fellow Creatures; he ordained the Ground to bring forth Fruit, Herbs
and Corn for their Food, and the gentle murmuring Rivers for their drink, the
Gra^s for their Beds, and the Thick spreading Trees to defend them from the
scorching heat of the Sun: It is likely too he ordained the Beasts of the Field
for the Service of Man, so far as they might be serviceable without suffering
Injustice, and being Cruelly dealt with. He was on every hand furnished with
what might contribute to his Necessity or Delight, without being compelled to
pollute his Hands in Blood, and worrying and tormenting harmless Creatures that
bore God's Image, and the express Signatures of Divine Wisdom, as well as
himself. It was for other Ends he was sent into the World, viz. to Contemplate
the Glories thereof; and in Reflection thereupon, to adore with an holy Heart
and unpoluted Hands, the Immense Power, and Bountiful Wisdom of his Creator. He
was therefore left at liberty, that his Actions might be Humane, not that he
should become a Lawless Tyrant, and an uncontrollable Destroyer. It Is true
indeed, the poor Brute Animals are constrained to their motions, they have the
necessity of an unavoidable Law upon them, which they cannot transgress,
neither shall they receive Reward for the observation of it: It Is Man only
whose Actions are capable of Reward and Punishment. Therefore it is that he was
sent into the World with a Law written in his Heart to guide him in the paths
of Virtue, Goodness and Innocence, that keeping up the Divine Life, he might
preserve the Image and Resemblance of his Maker, and not degenerate to, so poor
an Ambition, as of Exercising an Unjust and Tyrannical Barbarity over Innocent
Animals, that continually acknowledged his Superiority over them by their
Natural and Implanted Fear of him.

Then a certain Gymnosophist of India that stood by, said, If things are as
thou say, Pythagoras, these Inferior Creatures are in a happier and more
blessed Condition than Man himself: For what becomes of all his boasted
Authority? Where Is the Dominion he pretends to hold by his Creator's Bounty,
and the peculiar Excellence of his Nature, if these Creatures are exempted from
his Jurisdiction, and not subjected to his Government? Thou have said, that Man
is the Image of God, and the Perfection of his Maker's Works in this Lower
World; Where Is the Pre-eminence then, if he has nothing to glory in, but the
liberty of his Will, which had better a Thousand times be confined, which at
one time not only exposes him to inexplicable Perturbations here, but thereby
Subjects him to his Sovereign's Indignation, and to endless Torments hereafter;
whilst those Creatures enjoy an undisturbed security, free from the danger of
suffering worse in another place? The natural necessity of their Actions, makes
all their motions easy, and delivers them from the fear of Transgression and
Punishment. Our Doctors have taught us, That as God is Sovereign Master of the
Upper Worlds, and has all Angels and Spirits subject to his Dominion; so, as
an Image of himself, he has planted Man Lord in the Lower World, and endued him
with Authority to command and control all inferior Beings. That they were not
Created as so many Pictures, only to gratify the diversion of his Eyes, but
were also made for his Use and Service in as many ways as he shall think fit to
employ them; some to furnish him with Food, some with Raiment, and others to
serve him for Recreation and Diversion. Nor in this does it appear that any
Violence is exercised upon them; for as much as having no Immortal Souls, and
being but Temporary Beings, they have no Charter to plead with Privilege of
Immunity from such Services as the natural and peculiar ends of their Creation
seem to design them for. For had the Great Creator, who is perfectly Good and
Gracious, and cannot endure to see the meanest of his Creatures abused,
intended otherwise, he would have provided means for their preservation,
furnished them with ability to avoid or resist impending mischief, or
restrained this exorbitant Appetite in Man, and have turned the stream of his
Inclinations another way. For as the Fabrication of all things was the Effect
of his Power, so the particular management and determination of all to their
proper and respective ends, is guided by the conduct and concurrence of his
Providence. And as his Wisdom at first ordained these Creatures for such and
such Ends, so his Spirit inspires Mankind with Power, Sagacity, and Desire to
compel those Creatures to the Accomplishment of those Ends for which his Wisdom
had before contrived and appointed them: So that Man is but the Manister of God
in this matter, and in this respect at once pursues the end of his own Being,
and that of other Beings too.

After the Philosopher had thus discoursed, he retired a little, and the King
stood up and said, What say thou, Pythagoras, to these Arguments, for to me
they seem to have some Face of Reason in them. For if there be any Injury done
to the Creatures in reducing them to our Service, and using them for our
Pastime, it must proceed, either because they have a natural Right of being
exempted from our Power, or from some mutual Contract and Stipulation agreed to
betwixt Man and them. If thou can make either of these out, we shall gladly
quit the Cause, and submit to thy Doctrine. For if thou provest the former, we
must acknowledge our present Practice to be an Invasion; if the latter,
Injustice: But if thou can prove them both, we shall readily confess it to be
a Complication of Tyranny, Cruelty, Oppression and Abominable Iniquity.

Then Pythagoras advanced forward, and after having made submissive Reverence,
answered; Most Mighty King, It is not only the greatest Honor, but the most
desirable Happiness and Satisfaction, that I have the Liberty to defend the
Doctrine I have taught my Disciples before so Discerning and Sagacious a
Prince, that is willing to submit the Custom of many Ages, and the Practice of
many Countries to an Unbyassed and Impartial Disquisition: This shall
Illustrate thy Name more than the Trophies of thy Ancestors, or the Success of
thy Indisputable Courage and Bravery, that has Built so many Obelisqs to thy
Fame through all the Territories of thy Enemies. Truth is the Brightest Gem in
the Regal Diadem, and sets it off with a far more shining Luster than all the
Praises of Poets, or the extravagant and misapplied Commendations of
Dissembling and Hypocritical Parasites. I see, O King, it is the Genius of thy
Disposition to thirst after Truth and Knowledge, and thou seem to place a
more than ordinary Felicity in the Enjoyment of it. It is indeed a Noble Prize,
and always Rewards its Adorers with lasting and inestimable Blessings. But the
Misery is, few possess it. I shall, I doubt not, before I have finished my
Discourse, convince your Majesty of the Truth of my Doctrine, as well in
reference to those two Points your Majesty has neatly comprised the whole
Controversy in: As in Answer to what that Grave Philosopher has before been
pleased learnedly to allege. I shall first therefore, in humble Submission to
your Majesty, begin with his Discourse, because it seems introductory to your
Majesty's Conclusion.

He affirms our Doctrine to state Brute Animals in a happier Condition than
Man, and that it fullies the Dignity of Humane Nature in contracting its
Dominion, and limiting the extent of its Power, as if the Excellency of Mankind
consisted in a boundless Liberty of doing all the mischief it can to Creatures
that never did them any Injury, and are unable to deliver themselves from their
Oppression. Is this the Glory of Humane Nature to oppress the Innocent, and
overthrow the Weak? Is it the Pride of a River to overflow the Banks, and
destroy the Neighboring Countries with a violent Inundation? Do not all Men
dread and oppose it, and endeavor to repair the Breach with all the skill and
speed they can? Do not they combine together to reduce the unruly Element to
its proper bounds and limits? It is the Extravagance, not the Dignity of a Man,
to commit Violence upon whatsoever is weaker than himself. He ought to be
looked on as a Madman, he has violated his Reason, before he durst injure one
of the meanest of these inferior Creatures. It is a mistaken Notion of Man's
Power and Dominion, that puts him upon these Actions. All the Power he has, is
to do good, and not evil; and if ever evil happen to be the Effect of that
Power, it is an abuse, and not the right use of it. When a Man restrains all
those Passions of the Soul that prompt him on to unreasonable Actions; when he
bridles and curbs those Appetites that solicit him to Intemperance; when he
banishes that inordinate fear that Enslaves the Soul, in submitting it, through
the Apprehension of some present danger, to commit a dishonorable and
inglorious Action, when he incourages those Noble Seeds of Justice and
Fortitude that would lead him on to an entire Conquest over his Lusts, and
distempered Affections; in short, when he proposes Virtue, Honesty, and the
satisfaction of a good Conscience, as the end of his doings, then he evidences
his Dominion, then he exercises his Power in a due and regular way. It Is this
dignifies his Nature, and enobles him to a degree of Honor much above his
Fellow Creatures. But when he suffers himself to be hurried on with the
impetuosity of unruly Affections; when he permits Wrath, Fierceness and Cruelty
to usurp the Throne over Meekness, Patience and Humility; when Love, the
Noblest and most Endearing Power of the Soul, shall give place to Lust,
Chastity to Incontinence, and Sobriety to Madness, he is so far from being a
Man, and exercising any just Authority, that he is utterly unmanned, and has
debased himself beneath the condition of any of those Creatures he pretends so
unjust a Dominion over.

Besides, when we affirmed Man to be the Image of God, we never understood, as
that Philosopher insinuates, That God had set him up in Representation of
himself; and that as God is the God of Heaven, so Man should be the God of this
World: This is so wild a Notion, that it is inconsistent either with the Order
of Things, or the Nature of a dependent Being. It is an Impious and
Sacrilegious Invasion of the Creator's Royalty, and a Conceit of the Blackest
and most Rebellious Tincture imaginable. Is not he the God of Heaven and Earth?
Are not all the Beings in the Four Worlds, and in that Invisible World too, the
Work of his Hands? As they had their Original Existence from him, so they have
their continual dependence on him. He holds his Sovereignty over them by a
Right of Creation, whereby they owe to him a Natural and Indispensible
Subjection. And is Man any more God's Creature than any of the rest? Are they
not all their Maker's Workmanship as well as he? Do they not all bear in them
the undefaced and indelible Characters of a Divine Power and Wisdom in a more
unfullied and unspotted Purity than himself? Whence then can proceed his
pretense of Right over them, who never offended their Creator, nor sinned
against the Law of their Being, as he hourly does? Let him exemplify his Right
of Claim to their Subjection and Obedience, if he would prove his Authority, or
we shall never believe him. It Is in this respect only that Man is said to be
the Image of God, when his Will and Affections are conform to God's Laws, and
when he makes those the Measure of his Actions; when he lives in an uniform
Adoration and Imitation of his great Creator's Perfections, making his
Universal Benignity, Love and Mercy his Example and Pattern. Not exercising an
Usurped Tyranny over Creatures more innocent than himself, vainly conceiting he
has Right, because he has Power to Oppress. It is indeed true, God has endowed
him with Faculties much transcending his Fellow Creatures; he has given him a
capacious Understanding, a quick Imagination, a nice Judgment, a retentive
Memory, and a fagacious Discernment of things; but then he expects from him a
more rational and perfect Service, than from those to whom he has assigned less
Noble Qualifications. He has therefore furnished him with a liberty of Will,
which is the Foundation of Humane Action, that so his Virtues might in a more
proper manner be said to be his, not that he should be left at liberty to do
what he pleases, and thereby become not only an Enemy to himself, but to the
whole Creation beside. He was instructed with those Noble Faculties, in order
to follow his Creator's Example in Goodness and Bounty, and not out of a
ridiculous persuasion of his own Strength and Authority, ambitiously and
fatally endeavor to imitate his Power and Sovereignty. (...) (...), his
Scepter, his Trident, and his Thunder; he will not have Man to meddle with any
of these. It Is Goodness and Virtue alone that declare him to be the Image of
God.

As impertinent also is the Argument, That because these things are in his
Power to do, therefore they are lawful: For the lawfulness of any thing does
not consist in the easiness and possibility of its being done, but in the
Justice of doing it. It is unreasonable therefore to argue, That the Governor
of the World has given Man Authority to Kill, Torment, Destroy and Devour his
Fellow Creatures, because it is in his Power so to do, otherwise he would have
made better Provision for their Security. This is a grand mistake, and an
impious Arraignment of the Creator's Government and Care of his Creatures. For
you are to know, O King, Man is here in a state of Probation, and the Freedom
of Will, and Occasions of exerting it are allowed him for a Trial both for
himself and others, that he may perceive by his Inclinations of acting Violence
upon his Fellow Creatures, how much he degenerates from the Example of his
Maker, and that Original Purity wherein he was Created, that so by a timely
reflection upon his Cruelty toward those Inferior Beings, he may lift up his
Eyes for Pardon to the Fountain of Benignity, and beg of him to renew that
Principle of Compassion and Mercy in his Soul that was at first implanted in
him. For assuredly, though these things at the present seem to be connived at,
there shall be a Day of Reckoning, when Justice shall be done upon uprepentant
Mankind for their Inhumanity toward these poor Creatures, that send up
incessant Groans and Petitions for Deliverance from the Oppression of their
Tyrant, Man.

I had almost forgot one thing, and that is, w^ere he urges that there can be
no Injustice, for as much as the Creatures, we are speaking of, are but
Temporary Beings, and not Immortal. If this Allegation has any force of an
Argument, it must of necessity be against him. For if they are but Creatures of
this World only, it is very unreasonable we should cut short their Lives. If
they are but (...) of one Day's existence, why should we contract them to an
hour. Is it not enough their Creator has determined their Being but for a
little while, why should we inhumanely disturb it, or lessen it? It is the
Happiness of Man, that when he falls here, he shall rise again in another
place, and if he behaves himself according to the Dictates of the Law of God in
Nature, in Peacefulness, Gentleness and Temperance, without the imputation of
Revenge, Cruelty and Blood, he shall be renewed in a more Blessed and Glorious
Condition than it is possible for him here to enjoy.

Neither can all the subtilty of Rhetoric in the World convince that these
hard usages we bring these under-graduated Subjects to undergo, were ever
appointed as the end of their Being by their Maker. Indeed in one sense it is
their end, viz. as it often happens that our Barbarous usage of them puts a
period to their Lives. In that respect we do but too often make an end of them;
a woeful end indeed. To destroy with delight that which God has made, to pull
down with Violence what he with Wisdom has Built up. This is making such an end
of Things, that if it be not timely repented of, will end in our own
irremediable Destruction.

Now, let blind, wretched, inconsiderate Man grow Proud and Plume himself in
this vain Conceit, that he is God's Minister to execute Violence and Injustice
upon Creatures more Innocent than himself. Now let him ^^ast of his Imaginary
Dominion over his Fellow Creatures, who is a daily Slave to a numberless Train
of Abominable and Detestable Vices, that hurry him about at pleasure, and not
suffer him to be Master of himself one Hour in a Month, nor perhaps one Month
through the whole Course of his Life. Let him think it is sufficient to exercise
his Rage against his own kind, if there be a necessity for Cruelty, and not
indulge the Impetuosity of a Transported Passion against the Liberty and Lives
of the Great Creator's least Offending, and most Obedient Subjects. Then
Pythagoras held his Peace, and the King signified the Satisfaction he received
from his Discourse, by ordering his Servants to take their Instructions from
him for the Dressing his Food, that by beginning with himself, he might become
a Royal Example of Reformation to all his Subjects throughout his Dominions.

FINIS.

