Actual Justification RIGHTLY STATED. CONTAINING A True NARRATIVE OF A SAD
SCHISM Made in a Church of CHRIST, at KILBY in LEICHESTERSHIRE. PROVING, none
of the ELECT are Actually Justified before FAITH.

GAL. II. XVI. -- We have Believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be Justisied
by the Faith of Christ, etc. LONDON, Printed by B. Harris, in
Maiden-Head-Court, in Great East Ch(...) and Sold by J. Marshal, at the Bible
in Grace-church- street. 1696.

THE INTRODUCTION: Proving, There is no Actual Justification, or Actual Union
with CHRIST before FAITH.
THose many Errors that abound among us, is one of the sad Evils of these
Times, which tend to make our Days Perilous; though I must Confess some of them
are more Dangerous and Pernicious than others; as the Socinian Erors, that
ut(...)ly Destroy the Foundation of Christianity: And evident it is, That
between the Socinian, Arminian, and Baxterian Errors, on the ^ne hand, and
those called Antinomian Errors, (though I do not call them Antinomians) on the
other hand, Christ seems to be again Crucified in his Holy Doctrine, as in his
Sacred Body he was Cru^ified between two Thieves.

The Error that is here Confuted, appertains to those last Menti(...)ed, in
which you will find what hard Measure the Author has met with from some of his
Flock, who charged him with False Do (...)rin; but how Unjustly, will appear in
this Narrative.

The Point that he strives to Oppose is this; Viz. That an Elect Person is not
in actual Union with Christ; nor actually Justified in God's Sight, before
Faith: Or does actually apprehend and apply the Righteousness and Merits of
Christ by Faith to his own Soul.

1. He does not say, Faith Justifies as it is a Sacred Habit, or Act, (...)ch
less in respect^ of the Fruits and Effects of it.

2. Nor that it is the matter of our Justification; but it is said to Ju^tify
only in Respect of the Object Christ Jesus, whom the Soul ap(...)ehends, or
receives by Faith: Christ's Righteousness only being the Material Cause of our
Justification, and the Imputation of it the Formal Cause thereof: Which our
Reverend Brother asserts, is not Imputed unto any Adult Person, though Elected to
his actual Justification, before he is Actually, or Personally United to Jesus
Christ; and therefore not in Actual Union with Christ and Justified from
Eternity, as some say; nor from the Death of Christ as others say:

3. He steadfastly Believes, God's Election of particular Persons from
Everlasting, for whom he gave his own Son to Die: And that the Election of the
Father, the Redemption of the Son, and the Application and Sanctification of
the Holy Ghost, are of Equal extent.

4. That Christ Dyed as the great Representive, common Head, Root, and Surety
of all the Elect, doing and Suffering in their Room and Stead; whatsoever he
did and Suffered (...) as their Head and Representative; and that he has made
full Satisfaction to the Justice of God, and answered all the demands of the
Law for them: So that all they for whom Christ dyed, shall certainly be Saved,
as an act of Justice, and Righteouiness, as well as an Act of Sovereign Grace
and Goodness.

5. That Faith, by which the Soul apprehends Christ is a Grace of the Spirit,
purchased by Christ, and freely given to us as a sign of God's Eternal Love.

Moreover he and we with him, distinguish, or explain Union with Christ, and
Justification thus;

1. That all the Chosen of God are Decretively Justified, etc. from Eternity.

2. Vertually at the Death, or rather at the Resurrection of our blessed
Savior.

3. Yet that no Adult Elect Person is really and Actually in Union with Christ,
and Actually Justified before he does Believe in him: And so is transplanted
out of the first Adam as a common Head, and implanted into the second Adam: It
being impossible any should stand in (or grow out of) two cwo common Roots at
one and the same time; since all (as considered Actually in the first) are Dead
and under Condemnation; and all that are Actually in the Second are made Alive
and brought into Justification, and declared free for ever from Condemnation,
Rom* 8. 1. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his.
That is Actually his, though many of them may be in the Election of Grace.

As touching the Sins of the Elect before Faith, we say they are charged upon
them by the Law, under which they remain till they Believe, or are United by
the Spirit, unto their blessed Covenanting Head; and are by the same Law with
other Unbelievers, under the Sentence of Condemnation, though their
Justification, Pardon, and Salvation is secured for them, by God's eternal
Election; and in Christ by Virtue of his Covenant Transactions with the Father,
and as (...)ed by his Blood and Merits.

As to the Sins of the Elect, after Grace, or Actual Union though (...)ey are
Required to Repent of them, and may not have the Sense (...) Pardon of them in
in their own Consciences, till then, yet the (...)lt of them is never Charged
upon them, Christ having born all (...) Vindictive Wrath due to all their Sins,
as well those committed (...) Faith, as before they Believed, otherwise it
could not be said, (...) is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8. (...) Therefore whatsoever Mr. Coleman says about the Sins of
Believers; (...) Repentance, and Pardon, he does not Believe they are ever
(...) in a state of Condemnation, Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of
(...)'s Elect, that is such Elect ones that are united to Christ.

(...) Justification is but one Act, it is never more nor less after we are
(...)d to Christ, or are in a state of Grace. Though Sanctification, as (...)s,
is a progressive Work, yet so is not our Justification; there can (...) no
breach made on that any more than in our Adoption; once a Child (...) ever a
Child. Now the Notions we oppose are these following; (...) 1. We say, The Sins
of all the Elect, while they remain in Vnbe(...), are charged upon them by the
Law; and that the Righteousness of (...)rist is not actually imputed to them,
until they do believe in Jesus (...)is it. It Is one thing for God to Purpose or
Decree to discharge an (...)t Sinner, through Christ's perfect Righteousness
and Satisfaction; (...) another thing for him actually to acquit discharge and
pronounce (...) Justified by the Application of Christ's Merits. Now the
asserters (...) the contrary Notion, do seem to say that neither God's Justice
nor his (...)y Law does charge Sin on any Elect Person, though under the power of
Unbelief, and vile, and profane Persons; see Mr. Air Vindi(...)
Justificationes, Gratuitae; last Impression, p. 94. 95. He asserts, (...) all
the Elect before Conversion and Faith, stand actually recon(...) to God, and
Justified before him; Page 45. Nay from ^ternity, (...) 31.

Ans. May we not find a Medium, or a way to Reconcile this seeming
Dif(...)ence; he says before God, or in his Sight; may not that be said (...)e
done before God, or in his Sight, that is not actually done on (...) Creature;
these men referr to the Will, Decree, and Purpose of (...): now if they mean no
more then this, we will no longer con(...) with them; we deny not but in the
will, Decree, and Purpose of all the Elect were Justified from Eternity. And so
was the World (...)d also from Eternity, viz. in the Decree and Purpose of God,
(...) Christ was so Slain before the Foundation of the World; but did the (...)
Decree, and Purpose of God give the World an Actual existance from Eternity?
Or, was Christ actually Slain before the World began; See Mr. Air, page 35.

Nor do (says he) they whom they call Antinomians, assert Justification before
Faith, in any other Sense, than in Respect of the absolute and immutable Will
of God. Admit this only to be taken with respect to God's Deerre; or that they
are all Decretively Justified; which seems to be what he says we are agreed:
Yet in Page (...) he says more, viz. That all the Elect at the Death of Christ
were the reby free from the Law, delivered from the Curse, reconciled to God,
and made Perfect and Complete in the sight of God* Now we will admit of this if
they mean only Vertually, as Christ (...) Surety and Representative was then
actually Justified: But pray Not Here; as Christ Dyed and rose again, as the
Representative and common Head of the whole Election; not only to our
Resurrection to a sta^^ of Spiritual Life; but also as to our Reserrection at
the last Day* Does it therefore follow that it may be said, We are now
actuall-^ raised out of our Graves? and actually ascended and glorified in
He^ven? for so is our Head and Forerunner risen, ascended and glorified it
must therefore only be taken, That we were then Vertually Ju^^^fied in him, not
Actually in our own Persons; and Vertually we ascen^ed and are grloified in
him; for we are not all of us as yet Actually in Heaven; yet as truly Glorified
(say we) then, as we were Ju^^^fied when Christ rose from the Dead. Besides,
those of this sort, (...) assert our Justification to be at the Resurrection of
Christ, ought to te(...) us when the Saints were Justified, that lived three or
four Thousan^ Years before Christ Death? Or, did they go to Heaven before the^
were Justified?

But to look back again to them that assert the Justification of the Elect to
be from Eternity: They argue thus; viz* To Justify God's act, but God's acts
were all one entire act; and from Eternity there is no Colatural act in God.

I Answer, Whatever God's acts be in himself, yet we must d^stinguish between
the act of God's Decree and Purpose, and the actual Execution of his Decrees;
or else you may say the World and (...) things else were from Eternity.

Mr. Air says page 89. [Quoting Mr. Kendal] That God's Wi(...) or Decree to
remit our Sins, carries in it a remission of them Ta^tamount: For who shall lay
any thing to the Charge of God's Elect*

Mr. Air adds; viz. This Decree (says he) has so much in it that it looks so
well like unto Justification, that it may be so called without Blasphemy: Now
if this be not to Confound the Decrees of God, with the Execution of them, I
Know nothing. (...) (...) that Justification is the Will of God not to Punish;
because says (...) The definition which the Holy Ghost gives us of
Justification, is most (...)erly applied to this Act of God: Now the Act of God
he refers (...) is the Decree and Purpose of God; this he calls Justification:
So as (...) the Elect are indeed then, that is from Eternity really and
actually Justi(...) which we say is only a decretive Justification; it is God's
Will Decree that all from everlasting should be raised out of their Graves
(...) be Judged; but are they therefore all from Eternity actually so (...) and
Judged? Sirs; the Will or act of God's Simple Decree, (...) an immediate
Existence, or actual Accomplishment to nothing so (...) or decreed; because
they are only his Will, Act, and (...)e before time, of what shall actually be
done, and accompli(...) in time: Therefore we must distinguish between the
Decrees of (...) and the actual Execution of them. What though all immanent acts
in (...) are but one Simple Act, in whose Decrees there is no Priority,
(...)Posteriority, as Hillary speaks, Omnia Penes Dum, aequabili A(...)tatis
infinitate Consistunt. Yet as to us, and as to the Real and (...)al Existance,
Execution, and Application of them to various Things (...) Objects there is
both a Priority and Posteriority; some of them (...)g early actually done, as
the Creation of the World, etc. and (...)s long after, as Christ's actual
Suffering, etc. and the Saints Re(...)ction: The first Covenant was thus before
the second, the Law the the Gospel; Sin the Fall, Death, Wrath and
Condemna(...) (...) before Grace, Quickening Justification and Glorification.

Therefore that which I shall in the last place do, to Confute their (...)ion
about Justification before Faith, or from Eternity (if they (...) more than
what we have here hinted) viz. Actual Justification of (...) Persons of all the
Elect, shall be to show the Absurdities that (...) will fofollow such a Notion.

(...) They by this Notion confound Election and Justification, (...) Election,
which is the Act of God's Decree or Choice, from (...)rlasting and
Justification, of an Elect Sinner from (Condemnation, (...) which he was fallen
in time) the same immanent Eternal Act: (...) also it tends to Confound the act
of God's Decree, with the (...)tion of it.

2. This Notion of Actual Justification from Eternity is attended with (...)
strrange Absnrdity, viz. That the Elect never fell in the first (...) they
never were under the guilt of Sin, nor under Cordemna(...); for certainly if
they were truly and actually Justified form (...)ting, there was no time when
they were charged with the guilt (...), or were brought under the Sentence of
Condemnation, Who (...) any thing to the Charge of God's Elect, who are
actually Justified: But were not all the Elect by Nature Children of Wrath,
even as others, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. and were not all bought under Condemnation by
the Sin of the first Adam; see Romans 5.

3. Then also it will follow actual, Justification is not, cannot be the
declaring, acquitting, and Pronouncing of an ungodly guilty and Condemned
Sinner, through Christ's Righteousness, Just and Righteous in God's sight,
because Justified from Eternity, and so without guilt or spot.

4. Also it holds forth, That if all the Elect were Justified from Eternity, as
Mr. Air and others affirm, even by that one sole and simple act of God, then
how could they be said to be Justified at the Resurrection of Christ? Does it
not follow from their Notion that the Elect are twice Justified? and so there
must be in their Sense a Posterie or Colatural act in God to their
Justification.

5. These Men say that Faith only Justifies us Declaratively, or a^ it gives
the Revelation or Evidence of it, to our own Consciences * Which if so then the
state of ungodly Persons, if Elected, though Swears, Drunkards, Whoremongers,
Murderers,) etc. is good; and Justification changes not the state of the
Sinner, he being in a safe and sav(...) State before, though he did not know it,
being not Condemned unless in his own Conscience, God never charged him with
Sin, saw no Sin in him, but imputed Christ's Righteousness to him from
Eternity; and not more Justified after he believes then he was before*

6. Then also it will follow, No man has that Justification which is said to
be by Faith, or through Faith, but he that feels the Comfort of it in his own
Conscience, or has it Revealed and Evidenced to him by the Spirit, being fully
persuaded and assured he is Justified; which we say many true Believers do not
arrive unto; assurance not appertaining to the Being or Essence of Faith, but
is the highest Degree thereof; see 1 John 5. 13. Some who do truly Believe do
not feel and know in their own Consciences that they do Believe, but have
Doubts about it.

7. It Is directly contrary to the express Word of God, John 3. 18. He that
believes on him is not Condemned, but he that Believes not is Condemned
already, because he has not Believed on the Name of the only Begotten Son of
God. -- That Unbelievers are Condemned, is the express Words of the Text: Now
who can Condemn them but either God's Law, his justice, or their own
Conscience: They say neither Law nor Justice do or can Condemn them. And it is
clear (say we) that their Conscience cannot.

1. Because it is asleep, and as the Apo^^le says Defiled, See Tit. 1. 15.

2. Another Reason is clear in the Text, from the cause of Condemnation, viz.
Because they Believe not: Now who will say that Natural Conscience does Condemn
for Unbelief; for if so, the Spirit in the ex(...)tion of his Office, and for
which he is sent, is thrown away Joh. 16. 8 (...) are Condemned by the Law, and
till they Believe, they remain under (...) Condemnation. Unbelief Condemns as
it is a rejecting or refu(...) to apply the Remedy: Not otherwise. And let them
be whosoever they (...) (though one of God's Elect, or comprehended in his
eternal Decree of E(...)on, and Love of Intention, Pity, Purpose, and
Benevolence) yet he remains ^^^demned till he Believes, or has actual Union
with Christ; For he that (...) the Son, has Life; but he that has not the
Son, has not Life. 1 John (...) 12, If we have the Spirit and do Believe, we
have Union with Christ, (...) have the Son; but if we have not the Spirit, if
we have not Faith, we (...) no actual Union with Christ, or have not the Son:
If any man have not (...) Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8. 8.
Moreover, how can he that is (...) to the Lord, be said to be one Spirit with
him, if this Union be before Faith? (...)8 Actual Justification before Faith,
or Actual Union with Christ, is attend(...) with this Absurdity; Viz. A Man may
be said to be actually Dead and A(...)e, Condemned and Justified at one and the
same time; Nay, be a Child (...) Wrath, and yet a Son of God; have actual Union
with, and united to (...) first Adam, and yet be in actual Union with, and
united to the second Adam at one and the same time.

9.It Presupposes, That a Man may be actually in Christ, and be actu(...)y
Justified, and yet no change of Heart, as well as no change of State: (...)
that all before Regeneration are Children of Wrath, is evident; and is it (...)
Positively said, If any Man is in Christ he is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
(...) any man be said to be truly and actually Justified, and not actually in
Christ. (...) to. 10. It presupposes, That a Man may be a Justified Person
that is not es(...)tually called: Now all know and grant there is no effectual
Vocation be(...)e, nor without the Spirit of Christ, and Saving Faith be
wrought in the Soul. 11. It also holds forth or presupposes, That a Man may be
a Justified Person (...) be actually Justified, and yet not be Sanctified:
which is contrary to these ^^riptures, Romans 8. 7, 10, 30. 1 Cor. 6. 11.

12. Moreover it follows from their Notion, That a Man that is in actual
(...)ion with Christ, and is actually Justified, may be without (nay,
utter(...) incapable of enjoying) Communion with Christ. Can Christ have
Com(...)n with and Delight in filthy Swine? Or, Can Light have Fellowship with
(...)iese? Can a Man in a state of Enmity against God, have Commu(...)n with,
and delight in God? Therefore says a Reverend Divine, The (...)tive and Real
Change are both at one time, 1 Cor. 6. 7. But ye are (...)ctified, ye are
Justified; Charnock on Regen. p. 32.

13. It Presupposes, That there may be Union between two Persons, (...)en but
one Party only Consents; which is very absurd for any to assert (...); It Is
Christ that brings the Soul to Consent, he gives the Soul Faith as in the
succeeding Narrative is Noted; which is his Love-token. Grace infused in us as
the Effects of Christ's Love, constrains the Soul to Love him, and ^o to
consent to take him as it is Lord, and only Object of its Affection: But till
this is done, there is no Real Union. We deny not but Christ apprehends us
before we can appreh^nd him; he first takes hold of us by his Spirit; and
infuses the Habit of Faith, before we can act Faith; there is the act of
Unition before there is a complete Union.

14. It tends to put Men upon Temptation to slight the holy Law of God, and
renders the Doctrine of Repentance needless, or a mere Legal Doctrine: Hence some
of them have intimated that they have nothing to do with the Law, Nay, and have
uttered such Words and Expressions concerning the Law, that are not fit to be
mentioned; as in particular, David Culy (one of Mr. Davis's Disciples, and a
Teacher sent forth (as I am informed by him) affirmed; as it has been proved
against him by Credible Witnesses, That the Law was of no use either to the
Conviction of Sin, or as a Rule of Life. Moreover their Airey and uncouth
Notions leads them out to assert other Strange and Rediculous; nay Blasphemous
Expressions. For the same Culy said, That a Believer in Christ was as Righteous
as God himself. To which Mr. Rix a Reverend Minister, Replied, That the
Righteousness of Christ was imputed to Believers, etc. But he answered, He had
nothing to do with Christ's Imputed Righteousness; nor the Righteousness of the
Manhood of Christ, but they were as Righteous as God himself. Quoting that
Text, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Again he the said Culy affirmed, That Jesus Christ was the
greatest Reprobate in the World: Mr. Coleman's Maidservant hearing him utter
these Words, said, Have a Care what you say, for it is against the Person of
Christ, and it is Blasphemy. Something to the same Purpose, another of them
uttered lately in London: Also Mr. D -- s July 1696. in a Sermon Perached in
London, mentioning that Text, Hob, 2. 14. 15. For verily he took not on him the
Nature of Angels, but he took on him the Seed of Abraham: affirmed, That Christ
did not only take or assume the Seed or Nature of Abraham; or of the Elect, but
he assumed the Persons of all the Elect also: Which is contrary I think to what
any Orthodox Minister ever asserted. Brethren, pray Consider, That the human
Nature which Christ assumed, was Hypostatically united to the Divine Nature;
therefore if he assumed the Persons of all the Elect, then all the Persons of
Elect are brought into the Hypostatical Union in the Person of Christ.

But may be some may Object and say, He only meant Christ assumed their Persons
Representatively etc.

Answ. That could not be his meaning, because he brought in Christ as thhir
Head and Representative, etc. as another distinct Argument, to prove what he
was upon. But further to Confute his Notion, take what Dr. Owen says; viz. It
was our Nature he assumed and not the Person of (...): (Then say I, not the
Persons of all the Elect.) Again he says Many (...) Persons cannot be
Hypostatically United:, for that is to be one Person and no (...)e: There may
be a manisold Union Mystical, and Moral, of diverse, of (...)y Persons; but a
Personal Union there cannot be of any thing; but (...) distinct Natures: And as
the Son of God could not assume many Persons, so (...)sing that human Nature,
which he did unite to himself, to have been a Person (...)ere could have been
no Personal Union between it and the Son of God. Again says (...), It is only
the assumption of our Nature unto Union with the Son of God, An(...)edent unto
any individual Personal Subsistence of it is own, that can (...)ute such a
Union: In his Treatise, Entitled, Twofold Discourse concerning the Spirit. p.
52, 53, 54.

15. This Notion of Justification before Faith, seems directly contrary to
those Scriptures that hold forth That we are Justified by Faith, etc. in (...)
all that Believe are Justified; and particularly that Text, Gal. 2. 16. Even we
have Believed, that we might be Justified by the Faith of Christ, (...)c. Not
that we might know we were Justified before, or might be in (...) own
Consciences; but that we might be actually Justified, Justification (...)
applied to Faith, (1.) not by Faith (as our Orthodox Divines note) as it is an
act of ours; (2.) Not by Faith as it is the efficient cause thereof; for in
that Sense it is God that Justifies. (3.) Not by Faith as the Meritori(...)s
Cause of it, for so we are Justified by the Blo^d of Christ. (4.) Nor that
Faith procures it from any intrinsic Virtue simply Considered to be (...) that
Grace; but by Faith as an Instrument, i. e. as a Hand that receives Christ and
his Righteousness, or applies the Remedy to our Souls; Faith Justify us
Objectively as it apprehends Christ. Suppose a Friend should offer to give me a
Thousand Pounds, and I stretch forth my Hand to receive it, it is not my Hand
that inriches me, but it is the Gift given: the (...) Hand applies to cure my
Wounds, does not Heal me, but it is the said Balm: But if by Faith we are
Justified, then not before it, nor without it. Moreover, if by Faith we are
actually united to Christ, and are the Children of God, then not united to him,
nor actually God's Children before we Believe. They that were stung in the
Wilderness, (the Type of guilty Sinners) were not Healed before they looked up
to the Brazen Serpent; were not to look to it, that they might know they were
Healed, or have the Declaration, or feeling Sense of that Cure which they had
before, but by looking they were a tually Healed.

16. Lastly, This Doctrine of theirs, tends to lead People to venture on Christ,
or throw themselves on Christ Presumptuously, and conclude they are Justified,
though they continue Wicked and ungodly, and do not experience the Effects of
Christ's Death and Resurrection in themselves; for though we affirm God Justifies
the ungodly, i. e. That we are such Just when we Believe (and so come to Christ
as Sinners, as convinced and ungodly Sinners, without any previous
Qualifications) yet Faith does not leave us in, and under the power of Sins,
but purifies our Hearts and Lives. Faith has a twofold Use; First by God's
Ordination, as it apprehends and receives Christ it is said to Justify us; and
by its own Spiritual Virtue it Rennovates and Sanctifies us.

I must Confess, by reading some Passages in Mr. Ayre's Treatise, and that
passage of Mr. Davis, mentioned in this Narrative, I cannot see that these Men,
by all the Noise they make about Justification before faith, that it is anything
more than that which we call a decretive and Vertual Justification: So that it
appears, it is but about strife of Words that these poor People made that Schism
in the Church at Kilby: Mr. Davis says, That the Elect are dead in Traspasses
and Sins, and under the declared condemnation of the Law and Gospel, till they
Believe, and then, and only then, they are freed from Condemnation; which I
take (says he) to be actual Justification by faith: And that he will stand by
the Assemblies desinition of Justifying faith! and that the Moral Law holds the
Elect, during their Unregeneracy, under it is condemning Force till they believe.
I would know, what is it we say more or less? Why then does this man make this
Stir, and Division in Churches?

Mr. Air says Justification actively Considered, as it is in God (who is the
Justifier) was Complete and Perfect, before we had a being; and in this Sense,
Faith is not the Instrument of it, and Dr. Twisses (whom he Quotes) says, It
was ours before we Believe in respect of right, because of the intention of the
Father and the Son -- though not in Possession and Enjoyment.

Ans. Suppose a man intend to give, and also purchase an Estate for a Child
that shall proceed from my Loins of the hundred Generation from me; can that
Child be said actually to have the posession of (...)t Estate so long before
it is born? Nay to have any proper or personal right to it? We deny not (...)
our right to Justification in respect of God's Decree and Intention before we
were born; nor of that Vertual right in Christ, as our head, and Representative
at his resurrection: Certainly these men fight only with their own Shaddows;
for what is this to an actual and personal right? Can men be actually Justified
before they have a persoual and actual Being? It Is enough that our right is
secured for us in Chrisr, and shall in time be actually conveyed and Applied to
us.

To Conclude, I think it not amiss here to give you the Sense of all the
Pastors, Ministers, and Messengers of our Persuasion on this Point, as it was
asserted in their General Assembly, held in London, Sept. 3. 1689. representing
about one Hundred and six Churches; where this Question was (...)ed; viz.
Whether Bellevers were not actually Reconciled to God? actu(...) Justified and
Adopted when Christ Died? etc. The Answer was; That the Reconciliation,
Justification, and Adoption of Believers are (...)fallibly secured by the
gracioue Purpose of God, and Merits of Jesus Christ; yet none can be said to be
actually Reconciled, Justified and Adopted, until they are really implanted
into Jesus Christ bp Faith; and so by Virtue of this their Union with him, have
those Fundamental Benefits actually conveyed unto them: And this we conceive is
fully evindenced, because the Scripture attributes all those Benefits to Faith,
as the Instrumental Cause of them, Romans 3. 25. Chap. 5. 11. Chap. 5. 1. Gal. 3.
26. and gives such Represenfation of the state of the Elect before Faith, as it
is altogether inconsistent with an actual Right in them, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. 12,
etc.

The Ministers that Subscribed to this and other Positions in behalf of
themselves, and the whole Assembly were as follows; William Kiffen. Hanserd
Knollys. Andrew Giffard. (...)bert Steed. Thomas Vaux. John Tomkins. Toby
Wells. Benjamin Keach. Samuel Buttall. Isaac Lamb. Christopher Price. Robert
Keat. Richard Tidmarsh. James Webb. John Harris. Thomas Whinnel. James Hitt.
Edward Price. William Phips. William Tacey. John Ball. William Hankins. Paul
Fruin.


I might add Dr: Owen, Dr. Goodwin, and many other Reverend and Orthodox
Divins, that say the same thing with us.

Mr. Perkins says, Justisicaeion before God, is when God reputes a Man Just;
and that only for the Merits and Obedience of Christ. So soon (says he) as a
Man Believes, he is presently Justified: Faith therefore Justifies, because it
is an Instrument to apprehend and apply that which Jnstifieth, viz. Christ's
Obedience. On the Galatians: Vol. 2. page 209. p. 235.

Bishop Usher says, (speaking of the Adult) There is no Union with Christ
without Faith. And agaih says, Faith Justifies only Relatively in respect of
the Object it sasteneth on, viz. the Righteousness of Christ; by which Faith we
are Justified; Faith being the Instrument, or Begger's Hand to receive the
Alms. Body Divin. page 195. 196.

I might Cite a Volumn of our best Authors to the same Purpose: See Dr. Ames' s
Marrow of Sacred Divinity. p. 112. 117. The receiving of Christ is that whereby
Christ being offered, is joined unto Man, and Man unto Christ. Again he says;
Faith does Justify, but no otherwise, but as it apprehends Christ's
Righteousness, by which we are Justified.

Mr. John Simpson, who was called an Antinomian, Says; By Faith we are
Justified as the Spiritual Instrument formed of God. See his Perfection of
Justificotion. p. 112.

Take what the Reverend Mr. Tho. Cole delivered at Pinners-Hall,July 21. 1696.
He said, The Marriage Bond between us and Christ, is on Christ's part* the
Spirit* and Faith on ours; by which the Spirit Unites the Soul to Christ: There
can be no Union without Faith; nor no Faith without Union: for it (that is the
Spirit) works both, and brings in a Comfortable hope of Pardon, from that full
Satisfaction, made by Christ to the Law and Justice of God; so redeeming ns
from the Curse of the Law, and setting us at Liberty.

Question. But may not a Debtor demand immediately his Discharge, as soon as he
hears his Surety has discharged his Debt?

Answer. Among Men the Debtor finds the Surety, and so may in point of Justice,
demand his Discharge; but there is a great difference here, seeing God found
our Surety, not we: therefore, though what he did was in our Stead and Room: Yet
we having all in a way of Sovereign Grace, as well as in a way of Justice and
Righteousness; the Father and Son might in that Eternal Compact between them
Both, agree how, and when we should have the Benefit of Christ's Merits, and
actual interest in him; and so be Justified; which no Adnlt Person has until
he Believes, or receives the Spirit the Bond of that Union. We must not say
with the beforementioned David Culy, That we may go to God with holy Impudence,
and say, Father! put off thy Righteousness? for it is mine. Are not these
strange Expressions? As if we were Justified by the Essential Righteousness of
God: Yea, by the Righteousness of the Father; and may Demand it with holy
Impudence; or rather unholy Impudence.

I Will add no more but this one thing; I desire those Persons, who are so fond
of this Notion, would Consider, What profitable Use can be made of
Justification before Faith: Also know that, That Doctrine that has no
profitable Improvement to be made of it, but many Absurdities to attend it, is
not a Truth of Christ: [But so it is here; Ergo] But Sad it is that People
should be so left as to tare a Church in Pieces, because their Minister is not
of their Opinion; as will appear By the ensuing Narrative.

A true Copy of that Paper that was Wrote by the Agreement of Mr. Winkles, and
the Rest; who Charged Mr. Coleman with dangerous Errors, and for which they
made that undue Separation or Schism.
FIRST, We the Members grieved of the Church aforesaid, have a long time sat
under his Ministry (that is Mr. Coleman's) and have not Profitted; and
according to the Rules of Christ we (...) labored to be satisfied in this our
Brother's Judgment, To know Whether or no it was his Judgment which he
Preached, yea or no; and (...)ing no Reformation in his Doctrine, we the
Members grieved before(...), do think meet to enter our Dislikes to these
Doctrines follow(...)* which he has delivered;

First, That Sermon which you Preached from the 25th. of Isa. (...) 6. after
Brother Overen who kept that gracious Promise only (...) the Elect, but you
strained it further than to the Elect.

Secondly, when you Preached from Coloss. 3. 11. But Christ is (...)ll and in
All; you said, Be Christ's and he will be Yours; if (...) make him your All,
and in All, then he will make you his All (...) in All.

Thirdly, When you Preached from the 2. Cor. 5. 17. If any man (...) in Christ
he is a new Creature: You said, it was not Election; (...) in the Purpose of
God, which caused us to be in Christ, but being (...)med, of God, Regenerated,
and Born again. And likewise you (...)med, That the Law is to be Preached
first, and not the Gospel (...) poor Sinners, which is contrary to the
Commission Christ gave to his Disciples; he said, Go unto all the World, and
Preach the Gospel to every Creature. Mark 16. 15.

Fourthly, When you Preached from Jer. 2. 4. 14. Jerusalem wash thy Heart from
wickedness that thou may be saved: Your whole Discourse tended to put the
Creature upon doing for Life, and not from Life, and a principle of Love; you
quoted those verses in the First of Isaiah; Wash ye, make you clean, put away
the evil of your doings from before mine Eyes? you Exhorted the Creature to do
his part; and then no doubt but God would do his part.

Fifthly, You said, the Law ought to be Preached before the Gospel, to convince
Sinners of their Sins; Which is contrary to that that is said, The Spirit shall
convince the World of Sin.

Sixthly, You affirm their is no Union before Faith, but that Union is the
effect of Faith, and not Faith the effect of Union.

Seventhly, You affirmed, That what Christ did upon the Cross, his Death and
Sufferings was not the Elects; nor that they have any right to it, until they
Believe.

Eighthly, You said, That we were not Sinners, till we had Acted Sin; and if no
Sinners, then no Objects of Christ's Love, nor Justified Persons any ways: For
you said, They must be Sinners before they can be Pardoned, which, to us, was
the overthrowing of Original Sin, the Representive-Ship of our Lord for us, as
Elect.

And as for Discipline, there is many who walk disorderly; as some for
Drunkenness, others neglecting the Ordinances.

Mr. Henry Colman's Answer to their Charge, in which he has Cleared himself,
of those pretended Errors Charged against him.
THese things following, are the Just Defense of the Innocence of Henry
Coleman, Minister, and Chosen Elder, by the Church at Kilby, in which it
appears under their Hands; and (...) Unjustly many of them have departed from
him, and the Said Church. And the better to Color over their Schism, have
Written (...) Sent forth a Paper they to whom Please, and Say what they Please,
(...) purpose to Impair his Reputation amongst other Christians; and to (...)ke
their bad Cause appear Good and Plausible: And sent one of (...)ir Papers to
Coventrey, where by the Providence of God, it came (...) the Hands of him the
said Henry Coleman, who never before (...)ld get a Copy, though they have been
required thereto (...) himself and Messengers, and Letter: So Unjust and
Inju(...)us was they toward him. Though their Paper was Written near (...)
years since, and was the Fruits and Effects of a Fast Day, which Circumstances
aforesaid, do make it appear That they Fasted for Strife, and Debate, to Fight
with the Fists of Wickedness.

And by which Unjust dealing, he the said Henry Coleman has been (...)capable
of either Confessing his Mistakes, (if there were any) or of making his Just
Defense; but now having the Paper of their Exceptions, which they call Errors,
Providentially come to his Hand, does make (...) Defense as follows;

I. In your Preamble you Say, That you Unfeignedly gave in your Dissatisfaction
against your Brother Coleman, and the rest of the Members of the Church
aforesaid that walk Disorderly:

Ans. You do not tell me in your Paper, In what we are Disorderly; but such is
your Conceited Confidence, you think that all you say (...) Write must be
believed to be True. If you mean what you Write, (...) your long Answers to our
Queries about one Grinding on the Lord's Day, it appears more Excusable (by
Christ's excusing the Disciples, who plucked the Ears of Corn on the
Sabbath Day) than Selling Shop Goods on the Lord's Day: Says Christ; ye
Hypocrites, pluck first the Beam out of your own Eye, and then you may see
clearly to pluck the Mote out of your Brother's Eye!

You instanced, in Drunkenness; I know of none that were Charged with that Sin
but William Tharp, who was Suspended in Mr. Farmer's time; and by a --
Confession of his sin he was Charged with, it prevented an Excommunication: And
if you know of any others, the Sin lies at your Door. But is it not an apparent
and great Evil, for some of the chief of you to set your Hands to the
Church-Book for Union, and then to go off from us without ever showing us a
Reason for your so doing. And is it not a Disorder to choose an Elder whose
Habitation is about thirty miles off. -- Thus your Complaint is justly turned
upon your own Heads, and the Charge not True, to say no worse: But to Proceed:

You say, You sat a long time under my MINISTRY, and could not be Profitted.

Ans. No wonder, (when your minds were so Corrupted, and your Judgments so
Perverted, that no Sound Doctrine could be Believed by you:) that Persons are
not Profitted by the means of Grace, when they are given up to Delusions and
Errors.

You say, you found no Reformation in my Judgment and DOCTRINE.

Ans. You think meet to enter your Dislike to the Doctrines following; which
you say I delivered: If you had put in Deformation instead of Reformation, you
had spoke more Truth. If you had said, I Refused to be Deformed according to
your Deformed Doctrine, or rather Nonsensical Doctrine, you had said True, for I
can neither Reform nor Conform to that which has neither Truth nor Sense in it:
But I shall come to Examine your Charging my Doctrines, in which I shall do
these three Things*

1. Examine in what you have Wronged me, in wresting my Words, and setting down
my Doctrnes in Words, contrary to my own Judgment and Sense.

2. Ingeniously Confess my mistakes if I have Committed any.

3. In Justifying my Doctrines against your false Charge; and these things I
shall do upon every Head as I go on.

1. Upon Isa. 25 6, You say I strained the Words farther than to the ELECT: And
so does the Prophet, for it was a Feast of Fat Things to all People; I hope the
Elect are not all People, except you will say, the rest of the World are Beasts
and not Men. I hope you will Grant, That this Feast of Fat Things is meant of
Christ and his Benefits: He is the Bread of Life, and Water of Life and He is
to be (...)dered to more than the Elect: For he is to be offered to every
Creature, Mark 16. 15. He is to be tendered to all; Nay, and those are Invited
to partake of this Feast that make light of it, and Refuse to come and partake
of this Feast, as well as those that come and partake of it. For the Proof of
which I cited Matthew. 22. 1. to the 8th. Lake 14. 16. 17. 18. If you call this
Straining of it farther than to the Elect, I will stand by it, and Justify it
against all your Exceptions.

2, Upon Coloss 3. You say I said, Be ye Christ's, and he will (...) yours: If
you make him your All, and in All, then he will make (...) his All, and in All.
These Words I do not Remember; but (...)nce you bring these Words into your
Charge as a Crime, you should have showed in what the Crime consisted: Your not
being able to distinguish between the Duty and the Grace, by which Men are
enabled to perform the Duty, causes your Mistakes, and to take an Offense
where none is given. Is it not by Grace that we Choose Christ? and is it not as
true, He Chooses those that Choose Him? Prove. 8. 17. I Love them that Love me.
So, James, 4. 8. Draw nigh unto God, and he will Draw nigh unto you. So,
Zachary, 1. 3. Turn you unto me, and I will Turn to you. Is it not by Grace
that we love Christ? and is it not as true, that he Loves them that Love him?
Is it not by Grace if any Draws nigh to God? and is it not (...) true, That God
Draws nigh to such? Is it not by Grace that any Turn to God? and is it not as
true, That God will Turn to such that Turn to him?

That Crime, in these words you Charge me with, You (...)y as well charge upon
those Holy Texts I have Cited, as to be Offended at the Words you say I Spoke:
But as the Arminians, by the Duty destroy the Grace; so you by a Pretense to
the Grace destroy the Duty: Such is your Ignorance and Folly.

3. You say I said, from 2. Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a New
Creature. That it was not Election, nor the Purpose of God, which caused us to
be in Christ; but being Formed of God, Regenerated, and Born again.

Ans. In this you wrong me; for I never thought that Election, or the Purpose
of God, was no cause at all of our being in Christ; but I have often Affirmed,
That our Election, and the Purpose of God, is the Efficient and Antecedent
cause of our being in Christ: For we were Elected from Eternity, but our
Ingrafting into Christ is in Time, or else, How could we be said to be out of
Christ before calling? Also, How could Junia and Andronicus be in Christ before
Paul? Romans 16. 7. And the Ephesians be said to be sometimes without Christ.
Ephesians. 2. 12. That at that time you were without Christ; yet Paul's, and the
Ephesians Election, took place as soon as June's and Andronicus. (2.) If we
were in Christ as soon as we were Elected, then we could not be Guilty of
Original Sin when we came into the World; for there is no Condemnation to them
that are in Christ; Romans 8. 1. But it is Evident, that by Adam's Sin, Judgment
came upon all Men to Condemnation; Rom, 5. 18. And all the World, as they stand
in the first Adam, all are Guilty before God, Rom, 3. 19. So that it is for
want of Distinguishing between Election as the forerunner of our being in
Christ and our Actual being in him that causes your Mistakes: As for the
Purpose of God it will be more cleared up, by what I shall say upon this Point.
Gods Purpose in it is own Nature, cannot be the immediate Actual doing of the
thing Purposed, but the Purpose of Necessity must be Antecedent to the thing
Purposed, or else the Purpose is Destroyed: And so God Purposed to make the
World from Eternity, but the World was not made from Eternity, but in time; So
God Purposed to call a certain Number into the Fellowship of his Son, 1 Cor. 1.
9. And hence Believers are said to be called According to his Purpose, Romans 8.
28. Romans 9. 11. So that it is evident, That God's Purpose was Antecedent to our
Calling, or else it could not be said, We were called according to his Purpose.
So that from hence I conclude, That a Man may be in the Election and Purpose of
God, and yet at present be no New Creature, and so not in Christ; For if any
Man be in Christ he is a New Creature. And to say, that any Man is in Christ
before he is a New Creature, is to give the Text the Lie, and to destroy the
Doctrine of Christ about Regeneration; and to suppose a Person may be in
Christ, and not Regenerate, this must of Necessity run you into a desparate
Absurdity on the Right Hand, or the Left: For if you say, a Person may be in
Christ and not Regenerated, then a Person may be Saved and not Regenerated:
This is to give Christ the Lie, who said, Except a Man be Born again he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And if you say a Man may be in Christ, and
not Regenerated, and so not Capable to Enter into the Kingdom of God, then a
Man may be (...) Christ, and at the same time be in a Perishing state; this is
(...) give the Apostles the Lie, Rom, 8. 1. There is therefore no
Con(...)ation, to them which are in Christ Jesus, Thus those that are (...)t
wilfully Blind amongst you, may see your Absurdities and Mis(...)es.

4. Upon Jeremiah 4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thy Heart from Wickedness that thou
may be saved: You say my whole Discourse (...)ded to put the Creature upon
doing for Life, and not from life, and a Principle of Love; and I Cited those
Verses, Isaiah, ^. 15, 16.

Ans. I say, This is absolutely False, for it has all ways been (...)trary to
my Principles, to Preach Duties from any such foundations; neither am I so weak
to think, that a Dead thing (...)n work for Life before there can be either
Motion or Action: Neither did any of you hear me say, as you Affirm; but in our
Judgments, you thought my Discourse tended to what (...)u say; and all the
Reason you seem to give, is because (...) cited Isaiah, 1. 15, 16. So that you
seem to cast the same Re(...)lections upon the Prophet, and the Holy Ghost
speaking by him, that you cast upon me; and does not the Apostle James, speak
the same thing with the Prophet, James, 4. 8. Cleanse your Hands, (...)
Sinners, and Purify your Hearts, ye Double-minded Men.

5. You said, that I said, The Law ought to be Preached before the Gospel, to
convince sinners of their sins, which is contrary to that is said, The Spirit
shall Convince the World of sin.

Answer. That the Law does convince of sin is evident, Romans, 7. 7. and
Romans, 1. 3. 19. That Sin is the Transgression of the Law is as plain, 1 John
3. 4. Thus, by the Scripture it is Undeniable that the Law convinces Sinners of
Sin; and that it might to be Preached, I Prove 1. From the Doctrine of
Repentance; and 2. From the Prophets and Apostles Practice.


1. From the Doctrine of Repentance, I Argue thus; That if the Doctrine of
Repentance ought to be Preached every were, then they that Preach the Doctrine
of Repentance to the People, must first tell them what they must Repent off:
But the Doctrine of Repentance ought to be every were Preached, Luke 24. 47.
Therefore those that Preach to the People must first acquaint the People with
what they ought to Repent off; if there is no Law to be Preached, then there is
no sin. Romans 4. 15. And if there is no Law to be Preached, then there are no
Sinners, and then also there is no need of Repentance, nor no need of a
Mediator: Therefore the Law must first be Preached to Sinners, to make them
sensible of Sin, and of their Undone Estate by reason of Sin, that they may
Know the Want, Worth, and Necessity of a Savior; for the Law, all Grant, is
not to be Preached to Believers for any such End, because they are not under
the Law, but under Grace. Rom 6. 14. Therefore I Conclude, That the Law ought
to be Preached first to sinners for the Conviction of Sin; and

2. I prove that the Law ought to be Preached first to Sinners for the
Conviction of Sin, from the Practice of the Prophets, and Apostles* and for
this I shall give some Instances; see the 2 Samuel 12. Nathan Convinces David of
his Sin in the matter of Vriah, by a Parable of one that had broken the Law, by
Covetting and taking of another's Ewe-Lamb; and when David was Convinced, he
said, I have Sinned ver. 13. Then the Prophet Preached the Gospel to him;
saying, The Lord has put away thy Sin, thou shall not Dye. The Law admits of
no Remission, but, That Soul that Sins shall Die. So in Joel 2. The Prophet
Preached Law and Wrath to the People in the former part of the Chapter, and
then afterward Preaches the Gospel; Ver. 12, 13, 14. So in Jeremiah 41. 18.
When they were under Conviction of Sin by the Law. then the Gospel was Preached
to them; v. 20. Moreover, the Apostle Peter Preached first the Law to the Jews,
Acts 2. 23. Compared with Verse. 36. And when they were Convinced of their
Murder, which was the Breach of the Law, then he Preached the Gospel to them;
Verse. 38, 39. I might give you many more Instances: also I might ask you, To
whom do you Preach the Gospel, if not to Sinners? and if the Gospel is Preached
to Sinners, it Implies the Law; for, how can they be Sinners if the Law be
Destroyed: Where there is no Law there is no Transgression. Destroy the Law and
Christ is dead in Vain; For Christ came to Redeem those that were under the
Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5. And the Apostle says, That (...)y were so far from
Destroying the Law, that they Established it; (...) 3. 31. And whereas you say,
To Preach the Law first is contrary (...) that in the 16th of John, The Spirit
convinces of Sin: I would have (...) know, That the Law of it self, is a dead
Letter, but it is the Spirit (...)t sets in with the Law, by which means the
Law is set home with (...)were on the Hearts and Consciences of Sinners; and
makes them Cry (...)t, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? when pricked to the
Heart. (...) is the Law that Wounds, the Gospel Heals: But it appears, You
(...)re not able to Distinguish between Law- Conviction and Gospel- Conviction
which is the Ground of your Mistake; That Text John 16. (...) 9. Has this Text
no relation to Law- Conviction, but a Gospel-Conviction? He shall Reprove the
World of Sin, True, the next part (...)ly refers to the Gospel viz. of Sin;
because they Believe not (...) me. The Law says nothing of Faith, neither is
it of Faith, Galat. 3. (...). The Law convinces of Sins relating to it self
and its Precepts. (...) is the Spirit in the Gospel that Condemns the Sinner
for the Sin of Unbelief, John 3. 18, 36. Mark 16. 16. So that I have proved
that (...) take Offense at Truth in this Point.

6. You say that I affirmed, That there is no Union before Faith.

I have Answered this Point in a Letter to Mrs. Farmer; and therefore if you
had not been Prejudiced, you would have put this out of your Paper, except I
had received an Answer from her, who was Silent about it, and since she has
set her Hand to Mr. Knollys's Words, (...)o Positively says, That by Faith,
the Soul in it is Conversion, (...) is United to Christ. So I hope she will be
so Faithful as to Vindicate this Truth against you: For if Actual Union be by
^aith, it cannot be without Faith, nor before it: But if she neglect, or
refuses to Vindicate what she has set her Hand to, let the Blame for ever be
upon her own Head. One should have thought Mr. Rich. Adams' s letter might have
Satisfied you, which answered the Charge of False Doctrine you laid to my Charge
on this Point, we told you that it was the Opinion of Dr. Owen, etc. and also
of all the Baptized Churches of our Way, That Actual Union in order of Nature,
is not before Faith, unless any of late are Deluded into Antenomian Notions;
(...)t because this our Answer is now made Public, I shall give you the same
Answer I gave to Mrs. Farmer; and by that show your Weakness, or Mistakes; and
that is by Enquiring into two Things; 1. By Enquiring into what we were while
in Unbelief. And 2. By Enquiring into the Nature of Union it self.


1. We and all Men while in Uubelief, are in the Flesh and cannot please God,
Romans 8. 8. Heb. 11. 6. What in Union with Christ, and yet at the same time
cannot please God? Whilst we are in Unbelief, we are all Children of Wrath, our
Natures being Corrupted by the Sin of our first Parents, Ephesians. 2. 3. Condemed.
John 3. 18. And the Wrath of God abiding on all. John 3. 36. And yet for all
this United to Christ. 3. Whilst in Unbelief we are in a state of Enmity, being
in the Carnal Mind: Romans 8. 7. Aliens and Enemies in our Minds by wicked Works,
Colloss. 1. 21. Haters of God, Romans 1. 30. What, cannot we please God? What,
under a state of Wrath, Aliens and Enemies against God, and yet in Union with,
and United to Christ at the same time? What, Strange Doctrine is this? and how
contrary to the Scriptures. Thus I come to make enquiry into the Nature of
Union.

1. A Conjugal Union is an Agreement of two Persons together, by which they
Twain become One Flesh; and as Conjugal Union must arise first from one Party,
which commonly is the Man, his Affections goes out after the Woman he seeks to
make his Wife, he Sues for her Love by Arguments and Gifts; yet here is no
Union till she Consents, and is Actually United to him in her Affection, and is
Joined to him, and he to her, by God's Appointment and Ordinance This is the
true state of Union: The Application is easy. God and Christ have a Love of
good Will and Affection for the Elect whilst they are Enemies; and from that
Love they Invite, Woo and Beseech poor Sinners to be Reconciled and United 2.
Cor. 5. 20. by their Ministers; verse 18. And this is looked upon as done by
the Father and the Son; Luke 10. 16. And to the end they may be Reconciled, he
gives to them the Gift of Repentance; Acts 5. 31. and the 11. 18. And the Gift
of Faith, Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 22. To the end that all things may be of God, 2
Cor. 15. 18. To the exaltation of free Grace, and through the hearing of the
Word of Reconciliation the Holy Spirit is given, Gal. 3. 2. 5. Acts 10. 44* By
which they are joined to the Lord in a Perpetual Covenant, that shall not be
forgotten, Jer. 50. 4. 5. Thus being joined to the Lord, they become one Spirit
with the Lord, 1 Cor. 6. 16. And by this are Married to Christ, Romans 7. 4. And
this is their actual Union with Christ, they being Reconciled to him, as well
as he being Reconciled to them: But can this be when we are Strangers to the
Covenant of Promise, Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and without
Christ, Ephesians. 2. 11. 12. Aliens and Enemies in our Minds by wicked Works,
Unrighteous, such that could not inherit the Kingdom of God; and such ^ere some
of you: But ye are Washed, Sanctified, and Justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 6.

11. Which does clearly show that there must be two Changes, (...)e one of
Qualification, and the other of Condition, Titus 3. 3, 4, 5. Your Mistake is,
You cannot distinguish between Love, as it is a (...)pose of Union in Christ,
and our being actually Reconciled and (...)ited to him; therefore you say,
Faith is the effect of Union: If you had said, Faith is the effect of Love, you
had said True: But I say, says is the Bond of Union on our part; moreover,
there may be love in one Party where there is no Union; Union is a mutual
Agreement of both Parties, by which both Parties are joined together more than
in Love and Affection. The Lord open the Eyes of your ^nderstanding: Truly my
Soul is Troubled for you.

7. You say I Affirm, That what Christ did upon the Cross, his Death and
Sufferings was not the Elects, nor they have no Right to it until they Believe.

In Answer to this I shall give you my Judgment in the Words of two Authors,
one in great Esteem with yourselves, and that is that Worthy and Learned Divine
Dr. Goodwin; and Mr. Davis. Dr. Tho. Goodwin upon Ephesians. page 296. Part 2.
States this Question:

But you will say, How are we Saved in Christ, and Justified in Christ upon
Believing, when we were Justified from our Sins in Christ, when he Rose, and
had Sin taken off from him? Did not he represent us then?

The Answer is as follows: To instance Adam will clear all; Were not all men
Condemned in Adam, yet no man is Condemned in his own Person till he is Born;
yet Representively in Adam all Dyed: So it is here, so far as we take Christ as
a Common Person Representing us; what was done in him, was done for us in him;
and so from Eternity: Before Christ Dyed we were Saved in him in that Sense,
according to the Grace that was given us in Christ before the World began;
Says he in 2. Tim. 2. 9. Christ himself Purchased it, with a Reserve till we
did Believe and Repent, or else we are not to have that Benefit of his Death:
The Bond lay in God the Father's hand, till we should come in to him for it. I
do not say the Scripture uses the Word from Everlasting, but only that the
Grace was given us in Christ; and Christ dyed Representively; but when we come
to Exist in our own Persons, then it is applied to us, and we are Saved in our
own Persons, by that Grace which once Jesus Christ purchased as a common Person
for us.

Thus far Dr. Goodwin, where you may see the very Thing you Charge me with as
Error, proved to be a Truth in plain Words, by this Grave and Learned, Divine,
that no man could, or did find Fault with as ever I could hear of: You may see
your Foolish and Unsound Notions laid down, and proved to be False by this
Great and Judicious Man, in the second Part of his Exposition of the Ephesians,
Page 144. 135. 294. so on, and in diverse Places in that Book.

Mr. Davis, in his Vindication against the Rowel Pamphlet, Says; I do not see
what need there is of all this Noise about Words, as I have constantly Preached
and Affirmed, That Elect Sinners are dead in Trespasses and Sins; and under the
declared Condemnation of Law and Gospel till they Believe; and that then, and
only then, they are freed from that Condemnation, which I take to be actual
Justification by Faith. And he further adds, That he shall stand by the
Assembly's Definition of justifying Faith. And in 24. Artic. of the said Mr.
Davis's Confession of Faith; he Says, That the Moral Law holds the Elect
during their Unregeneracy, under it is Condemning force till they Believe.

Thus far Mr. Davis: Thus you see the Man you so much admire, is of my Mind.
But to Proceed, The Elect are dead in Trespasses and Sins, and under the
declared Condemnation of Law and Gospel till they Believe; and that then, and
not till then they are freed from that Condemnation. If the Moral Law holds the
Elect during their Unregeneracy under its Condemning force till they Believe,
what Advantage have they, while in Unbelief, save only they are secured from
the Execution of that Condemnation, by the gracious Purpose of God, and Merits
of Jesus Christ? To which Words I gave my Assent, and since have set my Hand to
the same: Though you refused it, and some of those that did, and especially
Benjamin Winckles, who was a Member of the first General Assembly with me, and
since has with me and others set his Hand to the same Words; but after all
this, is shamefully gone off from his first and second Act. I have Proved by
these two Authors, That there is no actual Benefit conveyed to the Elect,
whilst in Unbelief.

8. In your last Exception you say I said, We were not Sinners till (...) had
acted Sin; and if no Sinners, then no Objects of Christ 's love and Pity, nor
Justified Persons any ways, for you said they must (...) Sinners before they
can be Pardoned, else it would overthrow Ori(...)nal Sin, and the
Representive-ship of Christ for us as Elect.

To this I Answer; That this first Part is manifestly False, I never (...)d, We
were not Sinners till we had acted Sin; but I said, None (...)uld be Sinners,
either by Original Sin, nor Actual Sin, till their Existance: For how car we be
partakers of Adam's Sin till we par(...)ke of Adam's Nature? For Nothing can
partake of Nothing; (...) Nothing is not capable of the Imputation of Sin or
Righteousness, (...) Impute Sin or Righteousness to Nothing, is the greatest
Nonsense (...) the World. And what were we before we were Created; that which
is Nothing can be the Object of Nothing; and so not of Love, no further than a
Divine Being has an Idea of that which is (...)t, but in Time shall be. That I
said they must be Sinners before they can be Pardoned, is True: Would any
Persons that were right (...) their Wits, or that have common Sense;, as
Rational Creatures, bring in such a thing in Charge against me, would fain
betaught by your Profound Judgments, How a Man can (...)e Pardoned of Sin if he
never was guilty of Sin? Can a Man be (...)aid in any Sense to be Forgiven of
that he^ss not guilty? If Repentance be Antecedent to Forgiveness, Sin must be
much more An(...)ecedent to Forgiveness; but Repentance is Antecedent to
Forgiveness, therefore Sin must be much more Antecedent to Forgiveness. The
Major Proposition is but stating the Question; it is the Minor that is to be
Proved: The Minor is this; That Repentance is Antecedent to Forgiveness, I
prove from these Scriptures, Psalm 32. 5. Where David's acknowledging of his
Sin, and his Confessing of his Transgressions, was Antecedent to his Pardon;
And thou forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. Acts 3. 10. Repent and be Converted
that (...) Sins may be Blotted out; The conclusion must of Necessity follow;
For if Repentance be Antecedent to Forgiveness, Sin must be Antecedent to
Repentrnce; for w^ere there is no Sin, there is no (...)ed of Repentance, Luke
15. 7. nor no foundation for Repentance. (...) to the last Clause of this
Charge, You say, That it seems to you, (...) me to say, [ They must be Sinners
before they can be Pardon'd] (...) Overthrow Original Sin: One would Wonder
that ever any that have made a Profession so long, should be so Blind and
Ignorant as to think that which does the most Establish the Doctrine (...)
Original Sin, should Overthrow it: If you say we are Pardoned before we are
Sinners, then we must be Pardoned before we come into the World; for we are
Sinners asscon as we come into the World, our Natures being Corrupted by the
Fall of our first Parents Romans 5. 16, 17, 18. Romans 3. 9, 10. But if we were
Pardoned before we come into the World, then we came not into the World guilty
Sinners, and so not guilty of Original Sin. For to say a Ma(...) is Pardoned,
and yet at the same time is Guilty, is Nonsense.

One of your Number (you know who it is) Subscribed to what (...) Reverend Mr.
Knollys has said concerning this Point, in his Book Entitled, The World that
now is, etc. p. 35. 36.

This Faith (says he) Jesus Christ is the Author of, and will be the Finished
of it, Heb. 12. 2, And therefore called the Faith of the Son of God Gal. 2 20.
by which Faith, the Soul in it is Conversion, is united to Christ, and kept
through it, by the Power of God unto Salvations compare Ephesians. 4. 13. with 1
Pet. 1. 3.

Thus I have made it Appear, That I Establish the Doctrine of Original Sin; and
your Notions necessarily Destroy it: And thus have turned this Charge upon your
own Heads: For the time to time, where you show or carry your Exceptions to be
seen by others, do me the Justice to show my Answer, that I may speak for my
Self and then I Care not to whom you show your Exceptions. You (...) not been
so long without an Answer, had you been so Just as (...) have given me a Copy.
And now I shall leave you to Consider my Answer, Praying that God would
inlighten your Understandings, (...) you may return again to the Truth you once
Professed; and to the Church with whom you once were Members.

POSTSCRIPT.
REader, this Answer as to the substance of it I formerly gave to their Paper
or Charge against me, though I have Corrected it, and left out some Expressions
that might seem a little too hard upon them, they having Disturbed my Spirit;
and O that God would graciously appear, and recover them out of that Snare into
which they are fallen, and return them again to that Church in which they have
made a grievous Schism, to the dishonor of God and Scanda^ of Religion, for no
other Cause then what you read in this Narrative O with what Joy should we
Embrace them! Certainly the Mistake(...) arise from want of Wisdom, to
distinguish between a Virtual, and Actual Union, and Justification.

But is it not Sad, that for these things good People should be (...) away to
divide and rend a Church of Christ, to pieces. I shall not now aggravate that
Evil upon them, it being lately so well done by the Reverend Mr. Isaac Chauncy,
(in his book Concerning the Keys (...) Dr. Owen, and others.

FINIS.

