AN ADDRESS To his GRACE the Lord Archbishop OF CANTERBURY, And the Right
Reverend the BISHOPS, Upon account of their late PETITION.

By a true Member of the Church of England.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Randall Tailor. 1688.

MY LORDS,
YOU know best how unexpected your late Address was to his Majesty, who had
contributed so much to the placing of most of you in your Episcopal Chairs, and
would so willingly have believed you were of the same Loyal Temper you
expressed in his Royal Brothers Reign. How his Majesty resented it, I hope you
will reflect upon, because you ought not to forget it.

I cannot but foresee that some, who have no kindness either for your Order, or
as you are Protestant Bishops, may from this Provocation sharpen their Style,
and expose you with no less severe Reflections than such as some have formerly
published against Dissenters from Church and State; but it is not my Design to
pursue such Methods.

I doubt not but the Concern you have to preserve the Religion as by Law
Established, and the Station you are in, were powerful Incitements to you to
show your Zeal for the Religion you profess, and to show your Pastoral Care:
But whether in Prudence or upon Necessity you were obliged to take this Course,
or use such Expressions to your Sovereign (who in all Respects might challenge
another sort of Duty from you) is what I crave leave to Expostulate with your
Lordships.

That your Lordships are endowed with a plentiful share of Learning, is not to
be denied; and that you have heretofore in Times of trial manifested not only
your Loyalty, but your Zeal for the Person of the King, I will not dispute: But
that in this late Vnpresidented Action your Lordships did so well ponder and
consider all the Prudential Rules that were requisite to govern so bold an
Undertaking, is what many are unsatisfied in; since to some, and that no small
number of them that wish well to the Church of England, your Procedure is both
adjudged Disloyal and Prejudicial to your Interest.

Your Lordships cannot but know, that it is the undoubted Prerogative of the
King, to Summon and Dissolve Parliaments at his Pleasure: It is a Fundamental
of the Monarchy never disputed but by the Black Parliament. And it is as much
his Prerogative to declare for what Purpose he convenes them. This has been
usually inserted in the body of the Writ, or declared in the Speeches of the
King and the Lord Chancellor at the opening of the Parliament.

What then can hinder, but that our Great and Generous King, who is above all
mean Arts of Dissimulation, may somewhile before the issuing out of his Writs,
acquaint his Subjects with some Matters he intends to insist upon in his
succeeding Parliament? None surely can censure this timely notice, as contrary
to any known Law, but rather as an open Frankness of a Prince that consults the
Public Good of his People abstractedly from the single Concerns of any Party;
for by this timely notice men's Minds will be better prepared to consider the
Reasons his Majesty lays down, why he wishes and expects a Compliance: Yet
this neither abridgeth the Electors of their free Choice, nor can deprive the
Members when convened, of their due Liberty of Debate.

It would be no small Fault in me to express the Motives which induced his
Majesty to emit his Gracious Declaration in other words than they are composed
in; and since your Lordships are unwilling they should be published in our
Churches, I will here insert them.

We humbly thank Almighty God, it is and has of long time been Our constant
Sense and Opinion, ( which upon diverse occasions We have declared) that
Conscience ought not to be constrained, nor People forced in Matters of mere
Religion. It has ever been directly contrary to Our Inclination, as we think it
is to the Interest of Government, which it destroys by spoiling Trade,
depopulating Countries, and discouraging Strangers; And finally, that it never
obtained the End for which it was employed. And in this We are the more
confirmed by the Reflections we have made upon the Conduct of the Four last
Reigns, etc.

In which it is obvious to all the unprejudiced, and those that are not
Malcontents, that the great Design of the King is, that a true and lasting
Brotherly Affection and Harmony may be conciliated amongst all his Subjects,
how different soever in particular Sentiments of Religion; that the Brambles
and thorny Shrubs of Discord may be stubbed up, which have so overspread his
Dominions, and that by Freedom, Liberty, and Security from molestation in
pursuing men's Religious Worship, they may be at ease, and encouraged quietly to
pursue their several Vocations, either to live Hospitably upon their Estates in
all happy accord one with another, or by the Increase of Trade enrich the whole
Kingdom; by which single Liberty of Conscience our Neighboring Commonwealth
has prospered to such a degree, that it is not to be wondered at, that a People
wise enough to know their own Interest, should, by all the Arts they can use,
divert the Subjects here from closing with the King in so publicly beneficial
a Design, which to the shame of our weak Intellectuals, will be the inestimable
loss of the Wealth and Renown of the Kingdom, if we readily and Vigorously
concur not with his Majesty's Desire. Besides, if an Unjust Peace ought to be
preferred before a most Just War, this Method carries with it a moral
Certainty, that when this Liberty according to his Majesty's Declaration is
Established by Act of Parliament, there will never be occasion or Vmbrage of
disquieting the Government upon that account, which will be a Felicity our
Fathers would have purchased at the rate of some hundred of Subsidies; since I
believe most are by this time convinced, that the rigorous Constraint of
Conscience was one of the primary Causes, whereby Ambitious and designing Men
brought about the Subversion of the Monarchy, and the infinite effusion of
Blood and Treasure.

I foresee your Lordships will object, That Two Parliaments have declared their
Judgments against Toleration, and the late King of Blessed Memory yielded to
them, against his public Declaration from Breda, and his actual granting of
Indulgence afterward, and his Resolutions to adhere to it: But your Lordships
know the Grounds of both. As to the First, he was won to it by his willingness
to gratify the Importunity of those, whom He and his Blessed Father had
experienced to be such Loyal Sufferers with and for the Royal Family; and the
necessity of Supplies may well be judged to have constrained him to comply with
the Latter.

But hence it no ways follows, that a Vote or Address of One or Both Houses of
Parliament should be any sufficient Ground for your passing your Sentence upon
the King's Declaration, and his Dispensing Power: For where the Judges have
determined the Point of Law, it, at least in your Lordships, seems to be
Extrajudicial acting out of your Diocese, and to be the assuming a Power I
never read that your Lordships Predecessors challenged.

To have declared it to have been against your Consciences, or your Religion,
had been something modest; but to Arraign the Legality of the King's
Proceedings, in any respect, is something with the boldest: especially upon
such a Ground, that One or Two Parliaments had given their Judgments against
the like. For your Lordships know, it is not beyond our Age, and so cannot
easily be forgot, that the Votes of the Lower House passed for a Bill of
Seclusion of our Gracious King; yet I hope you will not think those sufficient
to engraft an Argument upon for the Legality of that Vote; However it seems
that you that are against the Dispensing Power, would insinuate, that a Vote of
One or Both Houses is sufficient to supersede a Prerogative of the King, and
will not allow that His Majesty may dispense with some Penal Laws, which is one
of the Flowers that not only adorn, but make up the Crown.

I now beg leave to enquire of your Lordships by what Principles of the
Christian or Protestant Religion you can disobey the King's positive Command in
reading or causing to be read his Gracious Declaration, no ways inconsistent
with the Laws of God, Christian Charity, or the Practice of several Countries?
I have indeed heard of one Minister, who, upon King Charles the First's
commanding the Publishing the Proclamation for Liberty of some Lawful
Recreations and Exercises on Sundays after Even-Prayer, commonly called the
Book of Sports, told his Congregation, That in Obedience to the King's Commands
he had read it to them; but withal tells them, That God Almighty had given
Command to remember to keep holy the Sabboth-day. But this Command of the King
has nothing in it against Divine or Moral Precepts: And your Lordships well
know what Power the Laws give the King in Point of Supremacy, which only his
steadiness to the Principles of Justice, Honor and Generosity, hinders him to
make use of. Now it is well known, that as Sheriffs, Mayors, and Bailiffs are
the King's Secular Officers to publish his Civil Mandates; so Parsons, Vicars,
and Curates are, under your Lordships, the King's Ecclesiastical Officers, to
publish, according to the Rubric, what is sent to them by the King or their
Ordinary; and as in the One so in the Other the Law inflicts a Punishment upon
the Disobeyers: And it has not fallen under my Reading, that any Bishops have
refused to obey the King's Command, when by any Act of Council the King
enjoined the Clergy to publish any matter in their Churches or Chapels; but
upon Refusal a severe Punishment followed, unless Pardoned.

But I foresee your Lordships will offer in excuse for your selves, That this
Declaration is against the Being of the Church of England as Established by
Law; a Toleration being inconsistent with a National Church Government.

To this I reply, First, That if it had been only for the Gracious Expressions
in the Declaration relating to the Church of England, it might have been
advisable to have published it: Therefore, lest the Import of them should be
forgot, I shall insert the words.

In the first place We do declare, That We will Protect and Maintain Our
Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all other Our Subjects of the Church of
England, in the free Exercise of their Religion as by Law Established, and in
the quiet and full Enjoyment of all their Possessions, without any Molestation
or Disturbance whatsoever.

This was a fresh Assurance of the King's Protection, and His Majesty's first
Care; but being joined with Liberty of Conscience in the Exercise of Religion,
and the suspending of the Execution of all manner of Penal Laws in matters
Ecclesiastical, this is the Mors in Olla. But some it seems must be flattered
with hopes that they shall be Indulged, because Protestants; but the Scourge
must still be reserved for Roman Catholics: Therefore, since They, as well as
all other Dissenters, are to be Partakers of the King's Royal Clemency, the
Declaration must not be published. This, I humbly conceive, is the true Ground
of the Refusal, whatever is pretended: However, from this partiality to
Protestant Dissenters the Arguments for the Inconsistency of a Toleration with
the Being of a National Church wholly vanishes; for your Lordships do well
know, that this Indulgence neither deprives your Lordships of your Dignities,
nor robs You or the Inferior Clergy of their Possessions; nor does it hinder
the free Exercise of your Religion, but only abridgeth some Branches of
Visitations, and restrains the inflicting Penal Laws upon Absenters from the
Churches, and impairs the Severity of Compulsion, and by experience already it
is found that the Congregations of the Church of England are not visibly
thinner for it; for Preaching, public Prayer, and the Administration of the
Sacraments (the Essentials of Religion) remain untouched now that it is put in
Execution.

I now beg that your Lordships will consider, Whether this disobeying the King
be a likelier means to preserve your Lordships in your Places and Dignities,
and the Church of England in its Luster, than your Obedience would have been?
You are not ignorant how Dissenters have pressed you, that the Loyalty of the
Church of England was not much to be boasted of; because since the Reformation
(except in Queen Mary's Reign, and about the Indulgence in King Charles the
Second's time) it was never put to the Trial by their Lawful Sovereigns
commanding any thing contrary to its Establishment; and how the Members of the
Church deported themselves in that Queens Reign, is too notorious to be denied,
when they first endeavored the Excluding her from the Crown, and after by
Wyat's Rebellion to have torn the Scepter out of her hand; and to what Straits
they would have reduced King Charles the Second till he quit the Indulgence, is
very evident: Therefore it has been frequently objected, That if any King of
England should abridge the Church of any of its Liberties and Privileges, it
would instantly appear how long-lived its Loyalty would remain.

It is, my Lords, by this your Act you have confirmed all their Suggestions,
and that in a matter wherein your Consciences were not concerned in the
approving or disapproving the matter contained in the Declaration; for you were
only enjoined to publish it as the King's Declaration, not your own. And can
your Lordships, upon sedate thoughts, think the publishing this was a Crime of
that Nature, that it necessitated you to choose (as in such Cases is generally
alleged) to please God rather than your King? Surely if the King had commanded
any single Person of you to have read it, you would not have scrupled to have
done it; but now, it seems, Nos numeri Sumus came into your Heads, and so you
were resolved to try who should be Supreme Governor over the Church of England.

Methinks I hear the sad and loud Groans of Thousands of those who are desirous
to preserve their Religion, and the King's Clemency to the Church, and
demonstrate their Loyalty to His Majesty, bemoaning your Zeal, that in a matter
of no greater moment you should, as much as in you lay, dishonor the King
before his People, bid Defiance to his Authority, Libel his Judges, forfeit all
Pretenses to his Gracious Protection of your selves or the Church of England,
render your selves obnoxious to the Punishments which the Laws have provided
for such as disobey the King, and not only involved your selves in this danger,
but all the Clergy of your Diocese: So that all Considerate Men tremble to
think what fatal Consequences this obstinate Act may produce; especially when
they consider what great Sums the Clergy paid in King Henry the Eighth's time
to buy off the Praemunire incurred by submitting to Cardinal Woolsey's Legatine
Power without the King's express Allowance under the Great Seal; and yet your
Lordships have been so hardy as to refuse to submit to the King's Commands in a
matter next of any thing to a Passive Obedience.

By this Act, as much as in you lies, you have endeavored to represent the
Church of England in general as Disobedient, and consequently Disloyal; and if
the King's Clemency and Mercy transcend not your Deserts, have absolved him
from his Promise of Protecting this Church, when, at least, so great a part of
the English Hierarchy have led the Van of Disobedience, and loudly proclaimed
you are none of his Dutifullest Subjects.

But the Mischief to the Church of England is not like to fall only upon your
Heads: You have lifted up your Voice like a loud Speaking Trumpet, to raise a
Disobedient, if not a Rebellious Spirit of Opposition against the King through
all his Dominions; You have enflamed the Minds of the Multitude, to oppose the
King's Desires, since they find you have been so hardy to dispute the Justice
and Legality of this Act of State in his own Closet.

Your Lordships have divided your selves from a Loyal, Judicious and Religious
part of the Church you profess your selves Members of; and we shall hereafter
hear of the Distinction of a Fanatical and Loyal Party of that Church: for I
hope you will find there is a Sound, Peaceable, and numerous part of that
Church, that will Obey the King in this Matter, and own it their Duty to obey
for Conscience sake, and be willing to live Charitably with their
Fellow Subjects of different Persuasions in Matters of Religion.

You have divided your selves from the whole Body of Dissenters, toward whom
though you express some tenderness, when the Matter comes to be Debated in a
Parliament; yet they cannot but see how unwillingly you are drawn to any
Compliance with them: whereas you find our Gracious King can forget and forgive
his greatest Enemies, for no other End, but to show his Innate Compassion of
them, and demonstrate to all the World, that it is his Principle, That
Conscience is not to be forced.

As to your fear that Popery will be propagated more effectually by taking off
the Test and Penal Laws, by this Act, I do not see you have made any great
Blockade to it: For by this Undertaking you have declared your selves Enemies
to the King and his Religion, and to all sorts of Dissenters, and so have
lessened your Interest with the King, and great numbers of the People; and by
the joining of both Powers against you, because they may justly suspect you hug
the Darling Persecuting Spirit, what can you expect will be the upshot, but
that both Parties will set themselves more than ever to keep you all under, and
your Lordships wanting the King for your Head, and the Dissenting Protestants
for your Assistant Brethren? If the taking off the Test and Penal Laws be
carried against you, it will be very late to fly to the King's Mercy for your
enjoyment of the Honors and Profits you now possess, and how your Deservings,
and your Power to defend your selves may be weakened in the Interval of Time
betwixt Now and a Protestant Successor, I will not undertake to divine. But
that Popery can advance many Steps more, though his Majesty's Gracious
Declaration had been Published or such a Toleration as by it is granted, and
now put in execution, were Established by Act of Parliament, than it does now,
I think few unbiassed Persons will be induced to believe; since it will be
contrary to the very Fundamental Grounds of the Declaration, that any other
Force can be used but that of Argument and Persuasion, and by the Progress has
been made these four years in Reconciling Persons to the Church; that now we
may make a very probable Computation how much may be effected in this Age, upon
Persons so averse and resolved against the entertaining Doctrins and
Ceremonies, their Education and other Motives have so prejudiced them against.

FINIS.

