THE CHRISTIANS Daily Sacrifice, Duly Offered. OR A Practical Discourse
Teaching the Right Performance of Prayer. By LANCELOT ADDISON, D. D. Dean of
Lichfield.

S. James IV. 3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock at the West end of S. Paul's.
School.

To the Honorable Sir BENJAMIN BATHURST.
SIR,
IN setting so Eminent a Name before so mean a Work, shows that I have as
little skill in Dedication, as they have in Architecture, who erect a Stately
Entrance to a House of no Competent Reception. To which Indecorum I was carried
by a Zeal I have ever had to own to the World the Honor and Advantage that for
many, many Years I have received from Your steady Friendship. Which was begun
in a Foreign Nation, where You added no small Credit and Reputation to Your Own.

I therefore Address You, (SIR) as a Friend, the Noblest Title upon Earth, and
come not merely to crave Your Patronage, but to pay You a Debt. A Debt of
Gratitude, which as it will always be Due, so it shall always be Paid.

But I know Time, and Business, is precious to You, and therefore I will not
farther trespass upon either, than to beg Your Pious Acceptance of this Small
Treatise, and that You would look upon it as a Pledge of my Grateful Sense of
Your Favors, and of the great Zeal I have for Your Eternal Welfare.

And now, SIR, being no Friend to the Common matter of Letters Dedicatory,
pardon me that instead of enlarging upon Your Merits I apply my self to Prayer
(the Subject of the ensuing Discourse) That You, and Your Lady, and Children,
may long, long Enjoy Health and Prosperity; and that the God of Blessings may
Bless You with all Divine Graces on Earth, and in Heaven Crown You with Glory.

Lichfield, July 8. School. Your most Obliged, and Humble Servant L. Addison

INTRODUCTION.
TWO very different Opinions, and both sufficiently erroneous, concerning the
Holy Exercise of Prayer, got very early footing among the Judaizing Christians,
(to whom St. James, the pious Bishop of Jerusalem, wrote his circular Epistle.)
Some there were among them in whose esteem Prayer was sunk so low, that they
thought it either wholly unnecessary, or at most but a thing of Choice and not
Duty, and of that Indifference that they might use or let it alone as they
pleased, without any Offense to God, or hindrance to themselves. And of this
Opinion were those who coveted and had not, who killed, and desired to have,
and could not obtain; Who Fought and Warred, yet they had not, because they
asked not. S. James 4.2.

All their Coveting, Envying, Contending and Fighting, brought them in no
advantage, because they neglected Prayer, the only means of rendering their
honest Endeavors Prosperous and Successful.

And as these were apt to neglect and set too small an Esteem upon Prayer, so
there were others who had a notion of Prayer as much bending to the other
Extreme. For they laid so much stress upon it, and thought it so efficacious,
as to expect that every thing must of course be granted them, if they sought
for it in Prayer. The former made Prayer in a manner useless as to the
obtaining of any thing; the latter thought it able to obtain all things. Being
of opinion that the mere Exercise thereof had such a power with God, as to
prevail with him even for such things as they designed to consume upon their
Lusts, and to support their Envy, Malice, Covetousness and Ambition.

How far the Present Age (guilty of all sorts of vile Opinions and Practices)
is gone in this distemper, I leave every one to make his own observations; my
purpose being to return at least an Honest, if not a Satisfactory answer to the
Request made to me, namely, To give a familiar account of the Holy Duty of
Prayer. So that without further Preface I shall begin with the true Notion
thereof, as that which will more easily lead to the knowledge of its Nature and
Importance.

CHAP. I. Of the true Notion of Prayer.
NOT to spend time about the Grammatical meaning of the Words by which Prayer
in all Languages is signified, I shall briefly set down what Prayer is, and
what it does imply.

Now Prayer, according to S. Austin (in Psalm. 85.) is, A speaking to God; When
you read the Scripture, says the Father, God speaks to you, but when you Pray,
you speak to him. From which words Drexelius took occasion to define Prayer,
The Conversation and Discourse of the soul with God. Which is agreeable to the
Notion of this Duty in Job 15.4. for (as Drusius observes) the Hebrew Word
there used for Prayer, signifies to have a Familiar Converse with the Almighty.
And the Greek Fathers speak of it in the same sense, when they call it (...), a
familiar talking with, or, unto God. For in it you unbosom your self, and open
your heart and mind unto him, as a man would do unto his Friend in whom he most
confides.

Some of the Ancients, speaking Rhetorically of Prayer, call it a Chain of gold
hanging down from heaven to draw men up thither, and to bring them into the
more immediate presence of God, and to an intimate access to the Fountain of
all Goodness. And it is supposed to make such a Change in us, as if it placed
us on Mount Tabor, to enjoy a kind of Transfiguration of the Soul; which by the
means of Prayer, as in a Glass, beholds the glory of the Lord, and is changed
into the same Image from glory to glory.

The eye of the Soul by the help of Prayer (as truly as the eye of the Body
feeds it self with the beauty of the fields) does refresh and recreate it self
with the Excellencies of God, and the Perfections of the Holy Jesus. From whom
it receives whatever it can desire, and through whom it avoids whatever it has
cause to fear. In Prayer (says Albertus Magnus) the soul is carried to the
source and spring of all help and comfort, bounty and goodness It brings a man
(says he) to know God, and knowing to love him; and loving, to seek him; and
in seeking to take pains; and in taking pains, to find him.

But these and the like sayings of the Ancients, concerning Prayer, serve
rather to express the Worth and the Effects of it, than to declare its Nature
any farther than that from such like expressions we may reasonably infer that,
Prayer implies a great deal more than telling over a few Beads (as is the way
of some) or, the bare reciting so many words or sentences formed and composed
into that which we call a Prayer (which is to be feared is the case of many.) A
man may say a thousand of these, and that too with great outward seriousness
and composure, and yet be far from that which is truly and properly to be
called Praying. For nothing deservedly bears that name wherein there is not an
elevation of the soul, and a lifting up of the heart to God, as to the Original
of our being; with a fervent desire to be made like unto him. So that you
cannot be truly said to pray, unless the Soul so far gets loose from the
entanglements of the world and the body, as not only to look up to the place
from whence it came, but to make some sort of approaches toward it, and to him
who dwells there, and who is the Author of its being, and the proper Object
of its love. There must be an earnest endeavor to be united to God, to become
one with him, to partake of his Divine nature, or at least to bear as much of
his image and likeness, with respect to holiness and purity, as we can. In the
Act of Praying (if we do it as we ought) we make an oblation of our souls and
bodies to the Eternal Being, and declare our dependence upon his infinite
Goodness, and an entire subjection to his Infinite Power. We so place our
selves to advantage before the throne of his Divine Majesty, as to have the
dimness of our Understandings enlightened by the brightness of heavenly light,
and our minds (cold and dead as they are) made warm and enlivened by the beams
of the Everlasting Sun. Our actions in the mean time are hereby to be so
influenced as for the future to be conformed to the excellent model and pattern
set us by Christ himself, so as to become fit objects of Divine Love and
Compassion. It is to him, to the Holy Jesus, and to the treading in his
footsteps, we are so closely to apply our selves, as that it may beget in us a
strong desire to be joined unto him, and to be one with him, not enduring the
thoughts of ever being separated from him. This is what either Prayer should
produce in every pious soul, or what we ought to wish it might, and which it
will, when it is in its due perfection, and when we have been sufficiently
exercised in its practice.

It Is true, such flights and raptures, such fervours and transports, (as some
may be supposed to have in their Devotion) such a near intercourse with God, as
prayer in its perfection implies, ought not to be looked upon as the only sign
of praying as we ought, or praying to any purpose. The want of this indeed is
to be imputed to the weight of those Corruptions wherewith the soul is clogged
and pressed down, and kept from being elevated to the contemplation of the
transcendent beauty and adorable excellencies of the Divine Nature. But then a
great deal of this (so long as we continue clothed with Flesh) is what we
cannot help. And seeing wandering of thoughts, coolness of affection, want of
attention, and sometimes no small defects in outward behavior (arguing too
much inward sloth and negligence) may in a great measure be owing to Infirmity,
or Inadvertency, God will no doubt accept of our sincere endeavor and desire
that the soul should keep upon the wing, and do its part in all respects whilst
we are upon our knees, our hands lift up to heaven, and our mouths uttering our
Petitions in the most decent Expressions we can think of, and with profound
humility and resignation to the will of God to grant what he thinks fit:
showing all the dependence upon his goodness and favor that we are able to
express. If there be thus much observed by us toward praying as we ought, we
need not despair of being heard for want of more, that is, for want of praying
like a Saint, or feeling in our selves the Holy Ardours which are peculiar to
some men. But still a sincere desire and endeavor to come up to the height and
perfection of this Heavenly exercise, is no more than what is of the very
essence of Prayer, and without which we cannot promise to our selves any great
benefit from our performance of it.

And thus much being said in general of the nature of Prayer (whereof more may
be met with in the sequel of this Discourse) it may not be amiss to enforce the
Duty by acquainting you with the necessity of Prayer; and to show that it is
what God has at all times expected, and which has accordingly been paid him in
all Ages of the World, and the consequence has shown God's approbation thereof.

CHAP. II. Of the Necessity of Prayer in General.
IN matters of Religion things become necessary to be done, either as they are
enjoined by God in the way of Service due to him; or, as a means of bringing
some considerable advantage to his Creatures. Now, Prayer is necessary in both
respects. And first as a Duty in the way of Service to be paid to God, which
needs no other proof but this, That it is an eminent part of his Worship. Now
Worship is that by which in an especial manner we acknowledge the Godhead, and
therefore is to be looked upon as that which is indispensibly required at our
hands.

In the Sacred History of the Antediluvian World we read, That men began to
call upon the Name of the Lord, Genesis 4.26. which words (though they will bear
another interpretation) do according to the most natural construction of them,
demonstrate, That Prayer is an Act of homage which from the beginning was paid
unto the Almighty. It Is true we find no positive Law for doing this: there was
not then (as there is now) any command enjoining or requiring men to Pray. Nor
indeed was there need of any. For the Common light of Nature sufficiently
directed all men to this performance. And as we find no Nation was ever so
barbarous as to deny the existence of a God, so none was ever heard of who did
not own themselves obliged to Pray to that which they acknowledged for their
God.

In the first age of the World, Religion was mightily suppressed by wicked men,
till the time of Enosh, but then God was pleased to move the hearts of the good
and pious to restore Religion, and to call upon his Name. And afterward when
the Heathen World fell into wild and extravagant opinions about the Godhead,
ascribing it to such things as were wholly destitute of the excellencies, which
were supposed to go along with it, (betraying therein a great infatuation and
stupidity;) yet they still invoked whatsoever they called their Deity. And though
nothing could be more senseless and absurd than to fancy that to be a God which
they could make and destroy at their pleasure; though it was a deep degree of
infatuation to pray to a Snake or Crocodile for protection (which were ready
every hour to devour them:) and though it was a most sottish, unmanly conceit to
beg health of a Fever, and to seek for recovery at the Altar of the Plague
(which things sound so odd that one would not imagine such Deities could ever
have been thought of) and though (I say) nothing could be more unreasonable and
unmanly than to worship such inferior Beings, nor more contradictory to the
Nature of God, yet amidst these absurdities (apparent in the Idolatry of the
Gentiles) and erroneous choice of their God, they were still truly Orthodox in
concluding it was their duty to worship whatever they esteemed to be so. They
were persuaded there was in that to which they ascribed Divinity all the
Attributes that rendered it fit for their Adoration: namely, such as Power,
Wisdom, Goodness, and All Sufficiency. For they must needs think it
unreasonable to seek to that for help, which could not be supposed was able to
give it. And this they knew must be the case of every thing that was destitute
of Power, Wisdom, etc. And though the gods of the Heathens were of this sort, yet
whilst they believed them to be Gods, they believed also that they were bound
to worship them. Of which Worship Prayer or Invocation was ever thought so
eminent a branch, that it was wont to be put for the whole system of Divine
Adoration.

But if the Common light of Nature should not clearly enough discover, That
Prayer is a chief and Principal part of that worship and homage, which is
indispensibly due to the All-wise Creator of the World, yet the Scriptures make
it undoubtably evident. And the many Texts wherein God promises to hear your
Prayers plainly imply a Command to make them. Call upon me, says the Lord, and
I will answer thee. Jer. 33.3. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord,
shall be delivered, Joel 3.32. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name,
says our Savior, he shall give it you: ask and ye shall receive, that your
joy may be full. S. John 16.23, 24. Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks,
receives, and he that seeks, finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened.
S. Matthew. 7.7, 8, 9. In all which and the like passages of Holy Writ, there is
implied both a command to pray, and promise to be heard. Psalm. 65.2. Thou that
hear the prayer unto thee (says the Psalmist) shall all flesh come:
meaning. That every man ought to betake himself to God's service, and that none
who has any care of Piety or sense of Religion, will be negligent and remiss in
imploring the divine goodness, and making his requests known unto God.

If you seriously consider God's dealings with men, you will see that they are
made up of abundant Mercy, Compassion, and Bounty. All which you devoutly
acknowledge and praise, when you rightly address him with your Prayers. And by
if a steady obedience you keep fast to his Law, patiently waiting his good time
and pleasure, persevering in sincere applications to him, relying solely upon
him without resorting to any other, or using any Indirect means for your
support; he then will seasonably grant your petitions, succor you in your
greatest necessities, and deliver you in the most imminent dangers. Psalm.
145.17, 18, 19. For the Lord is nigh unto all that call upon him faithfully. He
will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he will hear their cry, and will
save them. He is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

Holiness and Veracity are his two great inseparable Attributes. His Holiness
is visible in all his actions and works of Providence: in which he is so far
from being the least occasion of men's sinning, that he does all that can be
done to rational and free Agents to keep them from it. He enlightens their
minds, and sanctifies their hearts, intending by this means either to preserve
their innocence, or, as far as possible, to restore it, after they have lost
it. But if you, or any one, be so unhappy as not to be wrought upon by this
method, then he lets such know that he means to punish them according to their
works.

And next as to God's Veracity, this is apparent in all his words; for he never
affirms what is not most true, nor promises what he does not fully intend to
perform. And therefore seeing he has said, Call upon me, and I will answer
thee, and, Ask, and ye shall receive. Since he is nigh to all that call upon
him; that is, willing and ready to grant their requests, he will not fail of
his word. And tho you find your self wavering, light and unconstant, and apt to
be turned with every blast, diverted by every allurement, and to deal with your
best and chiefest vows, as Sampson with his new cords which he broke at the
naming of a Philistin; yet with God there is no unfaithfulness, He is the Lord,
and changes not; he is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: whatsoever
then he has said shall certainly come to pass. For he is righteous in all his
ways, and never fails of making good his Title of being the Hearer of Prayers.
When Rebecka was childless, Isaac entreated the Lord for her, and she
conceived. Moses besought the Lord to remove the Plague he had brought upon
Egypt, and his Prayer was granted. Hannah laboring under the reproach of
barrenness, poured out her soul unto God, and he gave her a son. Ezra and his
Countrymen, prayed that God would safely guard them home out of their
Babylonian bondage, and he was entreated by them, and his hand was upon them
for good. When the Israelites in the first battle with the Philistines were
defeated, their Judges slain, and the Ark of God taken Prisoner; yet Samuel
cried to the Lord to give them better success, the Lord heard him, and fought
from heaven in their behalf; discomfiting the enemy with thunder and lightning.
And when ever the Jews were in affliction, they no sooner made their unfeigned
supplications unto God, but he sent them relief, he delivered them from their
oppressors; and by his all-wise and gracious Providence directed them to some
auspicious, successful means of redressing their grievances, and either
restored them to their former condition, or gave them one that was better.

I mention these Examples of God's granting the Prayers of his Servants, with
no other intent but to confirm your assurance of his never failing to fulfill
his promise of hearing those who duly call upon him. And he seems so ready to
do this, that he will rather work miracles, than faithful prayers shall return
empty: as it happened in the case of Joshua, at whose request God made the Sun
stand still upon Gibeon, and the moon in the valley of Ajalon, Josh. 10.12. And
when many have been brought to the lowest ebb of misery and want, even then has
God been ready at hand to hear the groanings of the Prisoners, and to loose
those who were appointed to die, Psalm. 86. signally displaying his power and
providence in ordering the affairs of this lower World; hearing the prayers of
the Poor in misery, being merciful to those who call daily upon him; rejoicing
the souls of his Servants, and saving all such as put their trust in him. And
David perhaps having an eye to this, concludes his Psalter with this
affectionate Exhortation; let every thing that has breath praise the Lord: And
none can be thought worthy to live, or to enjoy the breath of life, who does
not cheerfully exercise himself in praying to, and praising the Almighty.

Which shows the Universality, as well as Necessity, of Prayer, and that it is
the Duty not only of this or that sort of men, but of all. For if any should
vainly pretend to be excused from paying this homage to God, it must be either
because they are too holy or too great, either they are so good as not to need
to pray, or so great that it is below them.

But no man by reason of his holiness can be free from this duty; for those who
have been most eminent for this divine quality, have been also most eminent for
Devotion. And of this you have an unquestionable instance in our Savior, who
was superlatively eminent for all heavenly perfections, and immaculate both by
nature and conversation. For he was both born and lived without sin. And yet it
is recorded of this most heavenly, divine person. That in the days of his
flesh, whilst he was yet in the world, in the course of his obedience and
humiliation, and not arrived to the glorious and spiritual state of the
celestial life, Heb. 5.7. He did offer up prayers and supplications with strong
crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard
in that he feared, or as it is in the Greek, (...) for his piety. Here the
Eternal Son, becoming Man, made his submissive Petition to his Eternal Father,
either to free him from that direful passage to death, or to strengthen and
bear him up in the horrible terrors, conflicts and agonies, that therein he met
with; and that being dead, he would restore him to life, and not to let him
continue in the grave, but to raise him thence, and send back his spirit into
his body. And God heard and granted his desire. For the third day after his
burial, Christ rose from the dead, and God gave him back that spirit which on
the Cross he so affectionately recommended into his hands, Luke 23.46.

And as by this plain example of Christ's praying, you may clearly see that no
man's sanctity can excuse him from doing doing the like, so in the next place no
man is freed from praying upon the score of his grandeur or secular Greatness.
This was evident in David, who at the same time he wore the Royal Diadem, did
not neglect the hallowed Censor, but constantly offered unto God the Incense of
Prayer. And for his diligence and assiduity in this sacred office, he gained,
as some think, the glorious character of being a Man after God's own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14. And indeed all good men have ever thought it their duty, and made
it their practice, to worship God by Prayer. And even bad men too have been of
the same judgment. For they likewise have owned it to be their obligation thus
to serve God. And whenever they performed Prayer as a Duty to him, without
doubt they were accepted of him. Saul prayed for a decision by lots, and God
granted his request, but it had like to have cost him the life of his Son, and
the revolt of his Subjects, 1 Samuel 14.41, 42. Which shows That God does
sometimes hear the prayers of the wicked, but then it is in justice, and not in
mercy, as will appear in due place.

And now seeing Prayer is a special and principal part of God's worship, you
must own it to be indispensibly required of you, so long as you think it your
duty to worship God. He commands, and you must discharge it: your obedience
herein is above all things most acceptable to God, and will be best rewarded by
him.

CHAP. III. The necessity of Prayer, as it is made to be the means of obtaining
what we want, and of conveying a blessing on what we enjoy.
WAnt is commonly said to be the Mother of Prayer, so that if you want nothing,
you need use prayer no otherwise than as it is an expression of your Duty, and
a discharge of the worship you owe to God. But if you stand in need of any
thing, you can never solidly hope to receive it, but by the mediation of
Prayer; For God has appointed it as the proper means to obtain his blessings.
And all those Texts which require Prayer as a Duty and homage belonging to God,
do at the same time propound it as a means to gain his favor in the relief of
your wants, and blessing what you have.

But here I expect to find you objecting, That though Prayer be undeniably a part
of religious Worship which none ought to neglect, yet you think it needless to
the obtaining a supply of your necessities; because God needs not your prayers
to inform him of your wants, nor to move him to relieve them.

It Is true, God needs not your prayers to inform him of your wants; For
according to our Savior, Matthew. 6.8. He knows what things you have need of
before you ask him: which words show, that Prayer is not needful in order to
inform God, who by reason of his infinite knowledge, can be ignorant of
nothing; but they respect those who at our Savior's being upon Earth, were
wont to lengthen out their Prayers with vain repetitions and idle Tautologies,
thinking they should have their petitions the sooner granted for the sake of
the multitude of words used therein: whereas Our Lord assures them, that our
heavenly Father was not to be wrought upon by their long prayers, and their
much speaking, and that such were altogether useless in order to inform him of
men's minds and wants, as fully knowing them without being told. Christ was so
far from abolishing, that he establishes the use of prayer, when he taught his
Disciples how they might pray aright. To which end he gave them a most absolute
comprehensive Form of Prayer: which he enjoined them both to use and imitate.
Which form bears his Name, and from him is called the Lord's-Prayer. Whereof I
shall have occasion to mind you in another place.

As to the other branch of your Objection which makes Prayers unnecessary to
move God to relieve your wants, because of his being ready to do it without
them, there needs no more to be said to it, but only to desire you to consider,
That though God is naturally inclined to be gracious, and ready to give more than
either you desire or deserve, yet he has been pleased to declare, That he will
not give without asking. And it sufficiently demonstrates his goodness and
bounty to give to them that ask, and to open to them that knock. And though
goodness is essential to God, and that it is his nature and property to open
his hand and fill his creatures, yet still he expects you should address your
requests to him, if not to move his goodness to relieve your wants, yet to show
you are sensible of them: and that you believe he alone is able to give supply.
Besides, in every prayer you acknowledge your dependence on God, that you are
his Beads-man, live upon his alms, and expect to receive nothing at his hands,
but what you seek for by humble and diligent prayer.

But then again, suppose Want, (as has been already observed) is the Mother of
Prayer, and prayer the means to have our wants supplied; suppose at the same
time you had no want to be supplied, and that you could truly say, I am rich
and increased with goods and have need of nothing, Rev. 3.17. suppose you were
able to stretch your fancy as far as to imagine an All Sufficiency in your
self, and that you were set above the reach of indigence; yet still you have
need to pray, that God would sanctify the things you possess. For every
creature of God is sanctified by the word and prayer, 1 Timothy: 4.5. These two are
required to make all the creatures lawful for your use, and to render you happy
in their enjoyment. For first, the Word permits you a freedom in the use of all
the Creatures: God therein having removed the distinction, and taken down the
old partition wall which stood between clean and unclean beasts, and repealed
the Law concerning forbidden meats. To the repeal of which Law Christ had an
eye, when he said, That which goes into the man (that which is eaten and drunk)
is not that which defiles a man. And in S. Peter's Vision, Christians are
taught to call nothing Common or unclean.

And as the Word allows you an unrestrained use of all the creatures, so Prayer
sanctifies them to your use, by obtaining the divine Blessing upon them. For
whatsoever by the means of prayer you receive from the bountiful hand of
heaven, by the same means you receive Grace rightly to employ them, which is
that I call a blessing.

But Prayer does not only obtain a blessing upon your daily food, and the
things of this present life, but likewise on the things relating to the life to
come. For the Divine Ordinances which are the means of salvation, will never
answer their end, unless God water them from above, and make them prosperous
and successful. And yet you have no reason to expect this blessing, unless you
seek it by prayer from him, who alone has power to give it. You must seek this
blessing I say only from God, exclusively of all others: which to make out
(because the practice of some is very much to the contrary) shall be the
Subject of the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Prayer is to be made only unto God.
YOU are not ignorant who they are that mantain and practice the worship of
Saints, and pretend to excuse it by saying, That the worship they give the
Saints is of another kind than that which they give unto God. But since the
Apostle forbids us to call upon any in whom we do not believe, Romans 10.14. that
is, not to pray to any who is not fit to be the object of our Faith and Trust;
and God alone being fit for this, to him alone you ought to make your prayers.
But if you will give that honor to another which belongs only to God, you
transfer his worship to the Creature, which is a most aggravating Sacrilege and
Injustice.

It is a general received doctrine, That no sensible or material sacrifices,
such as were under the Law, are now to be offered unto God under the Gospel,
yet all grant that the spiritual sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, is
still to be offered to him, and that to offer this to any other is a derogation
from his Glory; and quite contrary to his doctrine, who said, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Indeed some of the Fathers are thought to have favored the Worship and
Invocation of Saints, because they desired the Holy Men, whose memories they
celebrated, to join with them in their prayers: Yet the expressions used by
them on such occasions may by any impartial Reader be plainly found to be
rather flights of fancy, and Wishes, than Prayers, and savor more of
luxuriancy of Style and Harangue than Devotion.

It is notorious that the Church of Rome requires her Members to make Vows and
offer Incense to the Saints: To worship their Relics and Images: To believe
that through their help and assistance God's benefits are obtained; and that
for the sake of their Intercession, Grace and Merit, he bestows many favors on
mankind. But grant that this were true, and that by reason of the benefits you
receive by the Saints, you ought to pray to them; yet before you do this, you
ought to be well assured, that those are really and infallibly Saints, to whom
you are to pray: and that they already enjoy the presence of God; both which
are necessary (even according to the Romanists themselves) to warrant your
Invocation of them.

Before you invoke the Saints, you are likewise to be well assured that they
can and will hear you, that they know the Wants and State of men upon earth,
and are mindful of them; and at leisure to obtain the things that are prayed
for. Now, to say the Saints know all men's Necessities, and are ready in all
places, and at all times, to supply them, is to equal them with God, and to
make them as Almighty, Omniscient, Omnipresent, etc. as himself. Which is a
Conclusion the Papists would be loath to grant, though they hold Premises
naturally tending to it.

But let the Papist's Opinions be in this case what they please, it is your
happiness to be of that Communion which teaches you to direct your Prayers only
to God; who you are well ascertained, knows all your Wants, and is willing and
able to relieve them. The Scripture says expressly, that Christ is the only
mediator with God, and that he gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.5.6. The
office of Savior and Mediator are two things which must necessarily be joined
together; so that he who is the one, is the other also. Now seeing there is but
one Savior, there is also but one Mediator: and that is Christ. There is but
one God, and he is the Creator of all, and wills and designs the good of all;
and there is but one Peacemaker God and Man, namely Christ, who has taken upon
him our Common Nature, and in it dyed for all whose Nature he took. He laid
down his Life, and poured out his Blood, to rescue Mankind out of an evil
State, and commands all that communicate with him in humane Nature, to come
unto God only through him. God having no where appointed any other intercessors
besides him. Which consideration moved the Church, ever since it was called
Christian, to offer up her Prayers only in the name of Christ, and to conclude
them in this Form, Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Keep therefore to the
Doctrine of the Church to which you belong, and which obliges you to pray only
to God, and in her 22d. Article censures all praying to any else, To be a
foolish thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but
rather contrary thereunto.

CHAP. V. Some uncommon Considerations to stir you up to the Holy exercise of
Prayer.
THere is not any one part of Religious Worship, which is more strictly
commanded by the Laws of God, or more highly recommended by the practice of
Holy Men, than that of Prayer. This carries with it the greater Beauty and
Luster, and in all respects is of greatest use and benefit. And yet
notwithstanding all this, there are not many things wherein (perhaps) you may
find your self more indifferent, cool and unactive, than in Prayer. And
therefore the better to quicken you up to this Sacred Office, I here present
you with some less obvious Considerations to that purpose.

And (1.) Consider that by your diligence in Prayer and constant calling upon
God, you become his Remembrancer, and suffer him not to be unmindful of you.
And indeed he can no more be forgetful of such as importune him with their
Prayers, than a Mother can forget her sucking Child. But if a Mother should be
so unnatural as to stop her ears to the Infants cry, yet God will hearken unto
the cry of his Children, and give them, if not what they particularly desire,
yet what he knows to be most for their good. It is not safe for you to conclude
of his kindness toward you, by his not speedily granting your Requests. For
they that are dearest to him, may oftentimes with great difficulty work out
those blessings, which fall into the Mouths of the Careless. And the Wise
disposer of all things, knows it fit to hold his best Servants short of those
Favors which they sue for: but then it is for the trial of their Faith, or the
exercise of their Patience, or the increase of their Importunity, or the
doubling of their Obligation. And when he withholds his Benefits for a while
from his humblest Suppliants, yet he does not forget them. However, if he were
capable of forgetting any one, as he is not (and especially of those that pray
unto him) yet frequent application is of the like nature with the importunity
we use to one another, when we want to be reminded and have our Memory
refreshed. It is holding such a continual converse with God, as humbly to let
him know, as Jacob did the Angel with whom he strove, that we will not suffer
him to leave till he is graciously pleased to bless us.

(2.) All pious Christians, according to S. Paul, have their conversation in
Heaven: Phil. 3.20. Matthew. 6.20, 21. it is their Property and Glory to live
here below as if they were above: they bend all their Thoughts and Desires
principally to Heaven, and though their Bodies are on Earth, yet their Affections
are where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Now, there is no readier way
for you to have your Conversation in Heaven, than by continually sending up
your Soul thither in fervent Prayer. For by this you pierce the Clouds, and
have access to the throne of Divine Mercy, and hold correspondence with the
Almighty Maker and Governor of the Universe. When your Soul is not pressed down
with earthly, heavy Affections, but by a pure and holy Life becomes light and
Ethereal, then it nimbly mounts up to the things on high, and may be said to
soar above the low, creeping Concerns of this impure World, and to have its
Conversation in Heaven. And by the force of pious Desires it ascends to the
blessed Mansions above, whence you look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.
And if this be fully considered, 'twill be enough to endear Devotion to your
choice, and to oblige your care of so Seraphic a performance.

In the Third place, Consider that at the last general Judgment your Prayers
shall come up for a memorial before God, and be both acknowledged and rewarded
by him. Then will the Judge of the whole Earth own all devout Souls for his,
and in the most literal sense make good what ought, as far as in us lies, to be
daily verified in this World, That he is greatly to be feared in the Assembly
of the Saints, and to be had in Reverence of all those that are round about him.

In the Sacred History of the Acts of the Apostles, you read of Cornelius a
Proselyte of the Jews; one who worshipped the true God, though uncircumsised,
That he gave much alms to the poor, and prayed to God always: Acts 10. He was
charitable and bountiful to the indigent, and a constant observer of the set
times of Prayer. And his Alms and Prayers were so pleasing to God, that they
brought down no ordinary blessing upon him: for of a Jewish Proselyte God made
him a Christian Convert. By which single instance you may discern the
particular regard Heaven has for those who conscientiously observe slated Times
of Prayer, and join Works of Charity with Devotion. That such are blessed of
the Lord, and shall not fail of reaping the Fruit thereof in due season, if
they faint not.

Consider in the last place the singular satisfaction which from Prayer accrews
to the best and worthiest Powers of your Soul. All thinking men observe, That
the Understanding and Will (which are your principal Faculties) meet with a
sensible Pleasure and Content, when they are employed about the noblest of
their proper Objects. Now, Truth is the most proper object of the
Understanding, and God is the noblest Truth, and seeing that in Prayer the Mind
is employed in the Contemplation of him, it cannot miss of Delight and
Pleasure, nor fares it otherwise with the Will, the proper Object whereof is
what we call Good (either real or in appearance.) Now in Prayer the Will is
supposed to be fixed upon God who is Goodness it self; (all those Excellencies
which are scattered among the Creatures and denominate them to be good, and all
which put together are but few and small in comparison of the supreme Good) do
all concentre in a superlative degree in him to whom we pray; so that the mind
must needs receive a sensible delight, as being thereby conversant about the
most excellent of the things that properly belong to them. But besides all
this, there is a great satisfaction accrewing to the Soul through the means of
Prayer, by reason of that pious Familiarity which therein it enjoys with God.
Can there be a greater satisfaction to your Rational part, than to have the
liberty of unloading all your Perplexities and Fears, Scruples and Doubts, into
the bosom of the Almighty? Is it possible that any thing should bring more ease
to a pained Mind, than freely to make known unto the Lord, not only your
Frailties, but even your worst wilful Sins, and that too with assurance of
their Remission, if they are truly repented of and entirely forsaken? That God,
the only Maker, Preserver, and Universal Monarch of the World, should admit
sinful Dust and Ashes to approach him, and in Prayer to converse with him, is
not only the highest Satisfaction and Contentment, but the greatest Dignity and
Vouchsafement whereof a Mortal can be capable.

When Gods Wrath was so incensed against Israel, that he resolved to consume
them, he could not do it whilst Moses Prayed for them, and therefore he bad him
give over his Praying, and to let him alone, that he might execute the
Displeasure he had against that stiffnecked People, which by Moses's
intercession was restrained. And though Moses grants that there were great
Reasons and Causes for God to destroy them, yet he shows also that there were
greater for God to spare them. By their Sins they deserved Destruction, but yet
God's Glory was concerned in their Preservation, lest otherwise the Egyptians
should say; For mischief did he bring them out to slay them in the Mountains
and to consume them from the face of the earth, Exodus 32.12.14. And Moses's
intercession for Israel was so prevailing, that God repented of the Evil which
he thought to do unto his People. Not that there could be in God a proper
Repentance, as it signifies a sorrow for a Fault committed, and an alteration
of his Mind toward the same subject: but by this word (repenting) taken from
Men, is signified an alienation of God's will and liking toward a thing which
of Good is become Evil. But that which is chiefly here to be remarked, is, the
force Prayer has with the Alwise Creator, in that by it Moses moved God to
avert his Judgments, and to appease the Anger he had justly conceived against
his People. It was Prayer that hindered Israel's Ruin, and it is still the best
Instrument to fetch down the greatest Blessings: for it pierces the clouds
says Ben-Sirach, and will not turn away till the highest regard it, Ecclus.
35.17.

You would think your self an happy Man if you could get one certain means of
helping you to whatever you wanted, though it cost you never so much pains and
labor to get it. Prayer is this certain means, which never fails of bringing
you, if not all that you think you want, yet all that you really want, or all
that God sees fit for you. And considering in what continual want you are of
receiving something or other from that bountiful hand which only is able to
supply all Wants, it were an unaccountable carriage to neglect that which alone
can procure it.

Nor is there any such uneasiness in the exercise of Prayer, as may dishearten
you from its performance. For if there be any uneasiness therein, it arises not
from the nature of the Duty, but the untowardness of your own Heart. If you
would refine and purge that from all Earthly and Carnal Thoughts, and endeavor
to put it into an Heavenly, Spiritual frame, and accustom it to Prayer, all
uneasiness therein would wear off, and for Pain you would find a singular
Delight and Pleasure. For not only your best Faculties are employed about the
noblest of their proper Objects in Prayer (as was said) but it also brings you
near to him who is the Source and Spring of all Felicity; which must needs
yield a great Delight to Hearts which are not distempered, and like a sick
Palate cannot relish the most pleasant Food. But Prayer being a Spiritual Duty,
is not to be tasted by a Mind that is Carnal, therefore if your Affections be
set either on the Delights of the Flesh, or the Dross of the World, no wonder
if the divine Pleasures of Devotion are insipid, and that like Israel, you
prefer Fleshpots before Milk and Honey, and leave the Quails and Manna, for
Onions and Garlic.

You will not, I hope, account these things unworthy of your Thoughts, nor
wilfully make your self comfortless, by suffering either Employments or
Pleasures to thrust them out of your Mind: But rather make use of them to
season your Delights, and sweeten your Troubles, and interpose themselves
betwixt you and the World; that so your Life may be happy, and your Death
welcome.

I know you have better Monitors, and carry the best about you, in your bosom.
And if what I write be needless, yet it argues my Affection, and discharges the
Duty of Friendship. My Prayers are better than my Counsels, and both are hearty
and unfeigned for your good. God prosper your perusal, and make you happy in the
practice of what you now receive.

O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully to hear us, and grant that we, to whom thou
have given an hearty desire to Pray, may by thy Mighty Aid be Defended and
Comforted in all Dangers and Adversities, through Jesus Christ Our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. VI. Of Preparation to Prayer.
HAving giving you an account of the Nature of Prayer, I come next to show what
is required to render your Prayers acceptable, and so prevent the praying
amiss: And the first thing requifite to this end is the Preparing and Fitting
of your self for so excellent a Performance. That there is such Preparation
expected at your hands, you may learn both from Reason and Scripture, from
whence all that is Solid and truly Argumentative is to be had for the proof of
any Position.

And First, Reason, or the Light which is Natural and Common to all Men,
clearly shows you, That matters of moment and importance ought not to be
undertaken, till they be thoroughly weighed; and it be considered, how they may
be best managed and effected. He that intends to build a house, or to make war,
ought first to sit down and consider whether he has sufficient to carry on the
work before he begins it, lest having begun and wanting abilities to finish, he
be forced to give it over with shame and reproach, Luke 14.28, 29, 30, 31, etc
Few things succeed well which are not first well considered. Every thing you
undertake requires a Preparation suitable to the Undertaking. And in the
business of Prayer you may fetch Arguments enough from within your self for an
humble Preparation to discharge it. For when you seriously reflect upon your
own Vileness, the dreadful Majesty of Heaven to which you are to Pray, and the
fearful effects of not Praying aright, you must be far gone in stupidity and
senselesness, if you apprehend not the necessity of preparing your self for
this Duty.

No man will solicit a favor at the hands of one of like Passion with himself,
without using the due forms of Application. Would you not esteem it a piece of
egregious rudeness to address an Earthly Potentate in a Style and Mode, which
is contrary to the Custom, and not done with that Grace as is usual on such
occasions. Common Sense directs you to approach those who are your Superiors
either in Condition, or Power, or both, in such a sort as becomes their Station
and yours. Reason is a Law against Indecency, as well as against grosser
Immoralities. So that you need no clearer Light then that within, to show you
with what careful preparedness you are to speak unto God by Prayer, and hold an
holy Converse with him, in that best of Religious Duties.

Will any man of either Modesty or Discretion venture to utter himself
extempore concerning Matters of highest importance in a grave and learned
Assembly? Will he not rather (if he may) choose to come prepared, and compose,
and weigh every Word and Period, before he ventures to speak, lest he expose
himself by any rude and indigested Expression; this would be but a becoming
Piece of Respect at least, and the want of it be condemned as no small
Presumption; Now in the case before us, the reason of the thing is only so much
stronger than it can be put in any worldly Concerns, as there is so much more
of awe due to the Person we are to speak to, and the Business we come upon is
of far greater Moment than any thing that is merely Temporal can pretend to.
You that Fray are but a Worm, Dust, a Shadow, a Bubble, Nothing, nay worse,
sinful, polluted and abominable: He to whom you Pray is the Lord of Heaven and
Earth, who is able eternally to destroy your Soul and Body in Hell. The things
you may Pray for are not of an inferior, but of the greatest Moment, even the
Salvation of your Soul: Grace in this Life and Glory in the next.

And when you have maturely considered these things, I leave you to make your
own Conclusion as to the Preparation now spoken of; And whether Reason does not
convince you of its Necessity.

But if your great Oracle, Reason, were Dumb in this case, yet the Scriptures
are plain and express to the purpose.

They teach you not to come before God without having first fitted your self
for so dreadful a Presence. And this you may collect from God's Command to
Aaron; which was, that neither he nor his Sons should Enter upon Divine
Service, till they had washed their hands and feet in the Laver appointed for
that end, Exodus 4. A Ceremony that among other things, did certainly imply,
that all ought Piously to compose and order themselves for the Celebration of
Religious Doubts, and to put away all Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, e're
they did enter upon so Momentous a Solemnity. You read in Esaias 1. that God
would not look upon Israel when they spread out their hands unto him, (which
was an ancient manner of Praying) nor hearken when they made many Prayers,
because their Hands were full of Blood, and their Actions full of Injustice.
But if they would wash and make themselves clean, and put away the evil of
their doings, and retract their faults, then he would incline his Ear to their
Supplications, and be found of them when they sought unto him. But till this
was done, all their Sacrifices, Prayers, and Oblations, were to no purpose.

Whilst Israel loved to wander and would not refrain their feet; whilst they
continued in their Vices and would not give over their wicked Courses, God did
not only reject their own Prayers, but also the Prayers that others made in
their behalf. For he positively forbad the Prophet to pray for them, Jer. 7.16.
and 14.12, 11. Declaring, that he would not hear their Cry when they Fasted,
nor accept them when they offered Burnt Offerings and Oblations. And those
Cruel Princes that plucked the Skin of the People, and the Flesh from their
Bones; who chopped them in pieces for the Pot, and as flesh for the Caldron, when
they cried unto the Lord, he would not hear them, because they were wicked in
their doings: Mich. 3.2, 3, 4. Though they cry in mine ears, says the Lord,
with a loud voice, yet I will not hear them, Ezekiel. 8.18. Mine eye shall not
spare, neither will I have pity: You have then no hope that God should accept
your Services, whilst you continue Impenitent. Your Heart must be furnished
with sincere Piety, if you expect your Prayers should be regarded in God's
sight, or that any other part of Worship should be seasonable and welcome to
him. Without Repentance all the Religious Acts you can possibly execute, are
but Illusion and Hypocrisy; inward Wickedness hidden under the Cloak and
Visard of outward Sanctity. Till therefore you give Glory to God by a free
Confession of your Sins, and by a lively Conversion fly to his Mercy, you can
neither feel the effects of Pardon, nor the acceptance of your Prayers. Whilst
your Silver is Dross and your Wine mixed with Water; whilst your Life and
Actions (that should be Pure) continue Corrupt and Degenerate, all you do in
Religion in stead of Appeasing, will incense the Divine Displeasure.

CHAP. VII. Preparation to Prayer practiced by the Jews, etc.
AND what is now spoken concerning this Preparation, is no novel or upstart
Doctrine, but an ancient Orthodox Truth, Taught and Practiced by Men of all
Religions, and rejected by none but the Lewd and Miscreant.

And first, as to the Ancient Jews, Aristaeus reports, that it was their Custom
to Wash before they Prayed, Hist. 72. And the modern Jews, (living in the
Eastern Countries) observe the same custom of Washing, as a Preparative to
Prayer and reading the Shemaah. And no doubt they do this in imitation of the
Priests, who entered not upon performing any Religious Office in the Sanctuary,
unless they had first Washed. And it was with respect to this Custom, that
David would not come to the Altar, till he had washed his Hands in Innocence;
that is, till he had prepared himself to Worship God: being well assured that
he was not worthy to receive the Divine Protection, or any gracious Answer to
the Prayers, wherein he did not join Purity to Devotion, and had a Heart as
clean as the Hands he had washed: And that his Thoughts and Actions were as
purified as his Body. And though it was common with the Jews in any solemn
Business to wash their Hands in protestation of their Innocence, yet this
Ceremony was especially used before they said their Prayers: Which showed the
great esteem they had for that Duty, and that they thought it of such Holiness
and Purity, as that it could not be rightly performed, without a Preparation
answerable thereunto. And this you may further collect from the several Rules
prescribed by the Rabbis, to be observed by the Jews, when they come to Pray.
And,

1. The Masters forbad any to enter the Temple with Shoes on their Feet. Which
Prohibition they founded on those Words of God to Moses, Exodus 3.5. Put thy
shoes off thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground; which
command was also given to Joshua (5.15.) by the captain of the Lords host. God
does not bid them to put off their Shoes as if the Ground whereon they stood
were Holy, by an internal or perpetual Quality, but because of God's Presence,
which he was pleased at that time, in that place, in a more especial manner to
exhibit. And from this injunction given to these two Worthies, Solomon likely
gave that General Rule, namely, that every one should take heed to his Feet
when he entered the House of God. Which Text the Targum explains thus, Thou Son
of Man, take heed to thy Feet, when thou entrest into the Sanctuary to Pray,
and go not thither full of thy Sins unrepented of. And be not as Fools who
offer Sacrifices for their Sins, and yet turn not from them. Only Penitents
then are fit to come to the House of Prayer, and to be Suppliants at the Throne
of Grace. Every one is to put off his Shoes, to abandon his Sins when he comes
unto God; to take heed to his Feet and approach him with all possible
Reverence. Under the Law no man had liberty to come into the Congregation, who
had touched any Unclean thing, till he was sprinkled with Water by the Priest.
And under the Gospel there is no coming unto God, without having your heart
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and your body washed with pure water, Heb.
10.22.

2. The Masters forbad any to enter the Temple with Dust on their Feet; meaning
thereby, That all Earthly and Worldly Affections, Thoughts and Passions, were
to be shaken off and discharged by them, who come to offer Spiritual Holy
Services unto God. The Jews were also enjoined not to bring with them into the
Sanctuary any of those Tools and Instruments used by them in their Civil Trades
and Employments: by which they were also minded to leave behind them whatsoever
might in the least suggest any Earthly Concern, Worldly Notion, or Encumbrance,
whilst they were at God's House; lest they should be disturbed or diverted in
Devotion.

Nor were the Jews singular in this particular, or the only People that were
careful thus to Prepare themselves for Prayer. For the Mahumedans (who took
many of their Rites from the Jews) are very precise in Preparing themselves for
the Moschs or Giamma's, the places of their Public Worship. For they never
repair to these till they have first Washed at home; nor do they enter those
Solemn Places with their Shoes on. And they are of Opinion, That if they come
Unprepared to Prayers, or behave themselves Indecently at them, that they lose
the benefit of their coming. Cleanliness according to Mahumed is the Key of
Prayer, and that it is not regarded without it. Under the name of Cleanliness,
all the Preparatives to Prayer are understood. And by Prayer is meant the whole
System of Religious Worship. Now, this Cleanliness does not only respect the
Body, but also regards the Mind and Conversation: and it implies the putting
away of all unlawful Actions, the purging of the Heart from all vicious and
unworthy Thoughts and Affections: And they hold that Filthiness in these is a
thing most offensive to God; who according to their Alcoran, as well as our
Bible, is of Purer Eyes than to behold the least Defilement.

And it may well be supposed that Christians will not come behind Jews and
Mahumedans in this particular: Nor boldly and inconsiderately rush upon those
holy Duties, which these Infidels approach with so great Preparedness. The
Apostle advises all of his Religion, to lift up holy and pure hands in Prayer;
1 Timothy 2.8. By his Apostolical Authority, he appointed that not only at the
Temple at Jerusalem, but every where else Christians should Pray with that
Ceremony of holding up the hands, joined with Purity of Conscience and Good
Works: And that they should take care, that no doubts or irresolutions of Mind
should hinder the exercise or benefit of Prayer. You do but burn Incense to
Vanity, and lift up your hands to Heaven to no purpose, whilst you regard
Iniquity in your Heart, and your Actions are unjust. God will cast back your
Prayers, like dung upon your face, and reject both them and your Person, when
you tread his Courts, and at the same time hate to be reformed. God hears not
sinners, but if any man be his worshipper, him he hears, S. John 9.31. His
eyes are over the righteous and his ears are open to their Prayers: but his
face is against them that do evil; Psalm. 34.15. 1 Pet. 3.12. God looks kindly
on his obedient servants, but he sets himself as an enemy against the
obstinately wicked. He is nigh to good men and hears their Prayers, but their
Prayer is an abomination unto him who turn their ears from hearing the Law.
Prove. 28.9.15.29. The humble dutiful Soul imploring God's assistance, is sure
to receive it, in kind or in equivalence.

But the Texts of Scripture declaring the Prayers of Sinners to be ineffectual,
are to be understood of none but Impenitent sinners, who stubbornly walk in the
Ways of their own Hearts, and do that which is Right in their own Eyes: who
either wilfully continue in their Impieties, or retain a kindness for them. It
is not then your having committed Sin, and your sense of some Guilt being upon
you, that ought to hinder your Praying. For you must Pray the rather that God
may remit and pardon the sins you have committed. For if you are humbly minded,
and sincerely changed from Bad to Good; if you loath and forsake your evil
Ways, and with a broken and contrite Heart grieve for your Offenses, you then
are one whose cry God will hear, and whose tears he will put into his bottle,
and not suffer a Drop falling from the eye of a Penitent to be as Water spilt
upon the ground: He will hear your cry, and deliver your soul from death. He
will recover your feet from falling, that you may walk before him in the light
of the living: Psalm. 116.8, 9.13. He will give you space and opportunity to
live, and acceptably to serve him. He will hear your Prayers when you come unto
him without the love of your Sins about you, or purposes to continue in them.

When Noah came out of the Ark, in which, says one, he had long been Buried
not Dead, his first Care was to Build an Altar unto the Lord, and to take of
every Clean Beast, and of every Clean Fowl to offer in Burnt-Offerings. And the
Lord smelt a sweet Savor; he took notice of the Purity of Noah's heart, and
accepted of his Actions, and showed himself pleased with his Holy Intentions.
But that which herein seems to be most observable, and to our purpose, was
Noah's great Industry and Care for the right offering of this Sacrifice; And
this was seen in his Building an Altar, and making Choice of such Beasts and
Birds as were fit thereon to be Offered. Now, Prayer is your best Sacrifice,
which in Imitation of Noah, you are to offer unto the Lord with great
Preparedness. For the want of this will betray in you a Profane temper of
Spirit, and a lack of a just Esteem and Reverence for God and his Service. And
therefore according to Siracides, Before thou prayest prepare thy self, and be
not as one that tempts the Lord: Ecclus, 18.23.

Let the Clean Beasts and Birds offered by Noah, mind you of keeping your Soul
Clean and Pure from all wicked Resolutions and Affections; and to appear before
the Lord empty of all Sinful Habits and Intentions. And let no Envy, Hatred,
Malice, or any Uncharitableness, lodge in your Heart. For no Lusts of Carnal
Uncleanness, no Filthiness of Spirit, no unsatiable and inordinate Love of the
World, must possess your Soul when you lift it up to God. For you can never
perform aright the great Duty of Prayer, unless your Heart be Penitent, and
your Affections Pure. The Holiness of your Person makes the Prayer Holy, and
the savor of your Sacrifice sweet in God's Nostrils. But if any wilful Sin
lies at the Door, it stops the passage of Prayer, and hinders it from being
graciously heard. Put away then the evil of your Doings, and remove your inward
Impurity, and be wholly Consecrated to God's Service, And then shall your
Prayer be set forth in his sight, as the incense, and the lifting up of your
hands, shall be as the Evening sacrifice. Psalm. 141.1.2. For though you should
outwardly appear never so Pure, and so carry your self that no Spot can be seen
upon the Surface of your Actions, Yet if you regard iniquity in your heart, the
Lord will not hear you; Psalm. 66.18. So that in short, your Preparation to
Prayer consists in your Repentance for all the Sins whereof (upon the most
diligent Scrutiny) you find your self to be Guilty; for every Sin whereof you
do not Repent, will hinder the Power and Efficacy of your Prayer. And it will
be with you as it was with Joshua, whose Prayer for Israel God utterly refused,
Because they had taken of the thing which was devoted unto him, and which had
brought a curse upon them; Josh. 7.10.11.

CHAP. VIII. Graces necessary to Prayer.
AND when you have thus swept the House, and cast all the Filth and Rubbish out
of Doors, your next business is to see it Decently Furnished: For you are not
only to Cleanse your Heart from noysom Lusts and Passions, but get it
Replenish't with such Graces and Virtues, Qualities and Dispositions, as are
required to Prayer. Now, Faith is the first of these Graces, and the Foundation
of all the rest.

Of the use of Faith in Prayer.
Worship, you have heard, is that Great Duty which you owe to God, and by which
in an especial manner you acknowledge his Godhead. And this Worship you are to
perform both in Soul and Body. For both are his, and in both he will be
Glorified and Worshipped. Now, Prayer is the Soul's part of this Worship, and is
to be made in Faith, or otherwise it will not please God. He that comes or
prays to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. Which Text implies, That you are not only to acknowledge
the Essence of God, (which is done by the Infernal Fiends,) but also to believe
that he will give what you duly beg of him, and bountifully recompense your
diligence in the Search and Performance of his Will. And believing this, you
can find nothing fit to Tempt you to neglect God's Service. And although your
Sincerity and Faithfulness therein should cost you dear, yet you are assured,
that whatsoever Pains or Expenses you bestow in his Service, it will be
abundantly rewarded by your Gracious Master. And your Belief of this is the
Ground of your Entrance on God's Worship, and Perseverance in it. And as you
may best show your Faith by your observance of Prayer, so you may be thought to
have little or no Faith, if you are seldom or never at your Devotion. But if
once your come steadfastly to believe the Power, Wisdom, Justice and Goodness of
the Almighty, you can want no motives to Pray to him. There is no Promise
annexed to any Prayer, but what is made in Faith: and for this you have the
Authority of our Great Master, who told his Disciples, That they should receive
all things whatsoever they asked in Prayer, if they believed; Matthew. 21, 22.
Not that Christ by those words gave you Toleration to ask whatsoever shall come
in your fancy; for Prayer must be regulated by Faith, and Faith must not go
beyond the bounds of the Word. But our Lord forbids you to trust and confide in
your Self, and to rely on your own Strength and Abilities for the getting of
what you want; he would have you by Prayer to apply your self to God the Father
in the Name of God the Son; and firmly to believe that what you beg in Christ's
Name, will be granted you according to his Word, in S. Mark 11.24. I say unto
you what things soever ye desire, when ye Pray, believe that ye receive them,
and ye shall have them. Believing in this place, has respect to the Promise
Christ made to all who call upon God in his Name. And it signifies your being
thoroughly persuaded that God will grant the thing you beg of him in the Name of
Christ, through whom alone your Prayers are Effectual and Prevailing. If any of
you lack wisdom, let himask of God that gives to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him: but let him ask in faith, nothing
wavering. Jam. 1.5, 6. If any man pray, let him pray with Confidence to be
heard, and with a Mind resolved to stick fast to God, and steadfastly to adhere
to the Doctrine and Practice to Christianity. And doing thus he has no reason
to be Doubtful of the Divine Care and Protection. The Prayer of Faith shall
save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sins,
they shall be forgiven him; Jam. 5.15.

Here are Displayed two wonderful Effects of those Prayers which proceed from
Faith in Christ; First, they prevail with God for the Recovery, and Restoring
of the Sick to his former Health; unless God has purposed to dispose of it
otherwise for the Good of the Infirm, and his own Glory. Next, they shall
prevail for the Pardon of the Sins, for which he is chastised of God with
Sickness, if upon his Recovery he amend his Life. But still in granting your
Prayers God has respect to his own Glory and your Benefit. And when the
Granting what you Pray for is Inconsistent with either of these, he mercifully
withholds his Hand from giving it. And seeing this Faith whereof we now speak,
is the Gift of God, humbly beseech him to pour this most Excellent Gift into
your Heart, and to work in you such a Faith as may be as an Hand to receive all
his Favors: Be careful not to acquiesce in a dead, ineffectual effectual
Faith, but in such a Faith as shows its self in good Works; and which inables
you to overcome the World, and to conform to his Will in whom you believe,

To the end that you may Pray aright, take care when you enter upon this
Service, to entertain your Mind with the serious Thoughts of God's Excellencies
and Perfections: That his Mercy is over all his Works and endures for ever;
That he is Faithful, and without all Variableness or shadow of Change; That his
Promises are Yea and Amen; That he is nigh to all that call upon him
faithfully; and that he will (one way or other) fulfill the Desires of them that
Fear him. With these and the like considerations, you may vigorate and enliven
your Devotions with an Active Faith; and draw near and fall low at his
Footstool, in full Assurance that his Ear is open, and his Hand stretched out,
to give you the things you long for, or some thing else, which in his Infinite
Wisdom he knows to be better for you. You are not always to believe, you shall
certainly receive every particular thing you Pray for: you cannot with any just
confidence expect what God has no where promised. And though he has absolutely
promised you all things pertaining to Eternal Life, and Godliness; yet as to
the things appertaining to this present Life, he has limited his promise of
them; so that he will give or withhold them, as he sees them Necessary,
Profitable, or Convenient for you. Seeing then that all the Promises of God are
not of equal Extent, and seeing your Faith can go no farther than the Promises;
you cannot firmly believe, that you shall have every particular thing granted
you, because you cannot certainly tell, whether this or that will be
Beneficial, or Proper for you. For whatever you may imagine or conceive in your
own Thoughts, it is God alone that knows that Infallibly, and therefore you
cannot be assured that God will bestow it on you.

CHAP. IX. Charity required in Prayer.
AND as you are to pray in Faith, so likewise in Charity. This is a diffusive
Grace, ready to do good, and extend it self to all. It takes the whole Race of
Mankind into your Litany, and obliges you to pray according to our Savior's
Form, which teaches you to beg all the same Blessings for others, that you beg
for you self. All your business in this Life, next to serving God, is to do all
the Good you can to your self and others. And seeing by reason of the narrow
and weak condition of your Nature, it is not in your Power to do all that is
needful, you must therefore apply your self to him from whom comes every good
and perfect Gift; praying, that he out of his own infinite and inexhaustible
Treasures, would supply the Wants of all Men. And seeing every one is in some
Want or other, every one must have a share in your Prayers.

The forgiveness of your Trespasses, is that which above all things you have
absolute need to desire of God; for without this all other Blessings would be
insignificant. But you have no reason to expect God should forgive you your
Trespasses, unless you forgive Men their Trespasses. In the Petition you make
for Pardon of your own Sins, you solicit your own Ruin, if you pardon not
others their Sins: For in saying, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us, you pray God would never pardon you, if you do not
pardon others. How can you rationally desire Forgiveness from God, when you
deny it to your Neighbor? The great Man in the Gospel who forgave his Servant
a considerable Sum, when he desired it, charged the same anew upon him, when he
refused to forgive his Fellow Servants a small Debt. Matthew. 18.23. His doing
this so far provoked his Lords indignation against him, that he gave him up to
the Tormentors. And thus will God deal with you, if you deal thus with your
Fellow Christians; who can never so far trespass against you, as you do against
God: Who will assuredly handle you as you do them. If you forgive not men their
trespasses, your heavenly father will not forgive you yours; Matthew. 6.15. And
as the Goodness of God can in nothing be more Evident and Illustrious than in
readily Forgiving those who beg his Pardon: So there is not any thing in which
his Justice can be more Equal, than in dealing Severely with those, who deal
Severely with their Brethren.

It Is observable, that our Savior took hold of frequent occasions to inculcate
the Necessity of Mutual Charity, and that he made it the Badge whereby his
Followers were to be distinguished from men of all other Religions. And to the
end you might continually remember it, he inserted it into the Prayer which you
are to use daily; Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us; -- And with what Face can you look up to the Father of Mercies with
this Petition in your Mouth, if you want Compassion and Charity? How can you
hope to prevail with your Cries and Importunities on God, as long as you have no
Bowels your self toward your Neighbor. Remember it is the Rule of Gods
Proceedings, That he shall have Judgment without Mercy, who has showed no
Mercy; Jam. 2.13.

And though Prayer be the best Sacrifice and the best Gift, you can bring to
God's Altar, yet it will not be accepted at your hands, if your Heart be
malicious, when you come to offer it. There were many things which under the
Law would render the best of Sacrifices rather Offensive to Almighty God, than
be of any Avail to him that offered them; and in like manner there is nothing
which more effectually at once destroys the whole design of what is the True
and Proper Christian Sacrifice, than Uncharitableness. If therefore you have
any Pique, or Uncharitable Variance with your Neighbor, do all that in you
lies to be reconciled to him, before you present God with your Supplications.
For Christ taught you this when he bad him, who brought his Gift to the Priest
to be offered in Atonement for his Sins, that if he remembered he had injured
any man, he should leave his offering unpresented, and repair to the person he
had wronged, and to use Means to make him Friends with him, and then to come
and complete his intended Atonement.

Every wilful Sin is a Cloud interposing betwixt you and Heaven, and hinders
the Ascension of your Prayers: but no cloud is so thick as Uncharitableness:
This darkens the whole Heaven of Religious Exercises, rendering them void of
all Efficacy and Advantage, for Whatsoever you do without Charity, profits
nothing; 1 Cor. 13.3.

God has made of one Blood, and Redeemed by one Ransom, all Nations of Men, so
that you are not to harden your Bowels against any that partake with you of the
same Common Nature and Redemption. And therefore, if you want Tenderness of
Heart, you are humbly to importune the Father of Compassions, to give it you,
that you may be deeply affected with the Miseries and Calamities of all Men,
and employ your Abilities for their Succor and Relief Beg the Holy Spirit of
Love to dwell in your Heart, and to cast out thence Malice, Hatred, and
Uncharitableness, and to beget in you that Pious, Generous Temper of Mind,
which seeks not only to please your self, but also your Neighbor for his Good
to Edification. And seeing that all your doings without Charity are nothing
worth, beseech God to pour into your Heart that most excellent Gift of Charity,
without which whosoever lives is counted dead before him.

What was it that provoked God to animadvert so severely upon Corah and his
Accomplices, when they came to offer? Was their Incense unsavory? Or, were
their Censers unhallowed? Was their Altar profane? Or did they offer with
Strange Fire? No, but the fault was in themselves, their Hearts were Proud and
Stubborn, leven'd with Envy and Malice, and this was what kindled Gods Wrath,
and provoked him to an unheard of Method of Destruction. For they did not dye
the common death, or as every one dies, but the Lord made a new thing, and the
earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and they went down quick into the
pit; Numb. 16.29, 30. Malice made the offering of these Wretches unwelcome, and
it still corrupts not only Prayer, but makes all other Solemn Acts of Religion
to lose their Acceptance with the Almighty. For he has no Pleasure in
Wickedness, neither can any evil dwell with him. Such as be foolish shall not
stand in his sight, and he hates all them that work vanity; Psalm. 5.4, 5. Such
as run eagerly upon Sin, and are as 'twere mad to commit it, shall perish
through their own imagination, and the Lord shall cast them out in the
Multitude of their Transgressions. Their own Malicious, Uncharitable Designs of
Mischief shall betray them to Ruin, and their very Prayers shall become an
Abomination unto the Lord, and be no more acceptable than was of Old the
Presenting unto God what they had no Value for themselves, such as Unclean
things, or the Refuse of their Flock.

God is obliged by Promise to prosper and crown your Fidelity in his Service,
and to Defend, and with his Favor, to compass you as with a Shield. He will
open his Ear to your Petitions, and hearken to the Voice of your Prayer, which
you make in Faith and Charity; only have this always in Mind; That as there is
a great Benefit in Prayer, so there is some Difficulty to discharge it aright:
And that it is Impossible to do this without due Preparedness. Which being
maturely considered by the Primitive Christians, they never began their Public
Prayers, till the Priest had raised their Minds with a Preparatory
Introduction. To which Pious Custom our own Church had an Eye, when She Ordered
him that ministers to Prepare the Congregation for Prayers with the Reading
some select Sentences of Scripture, and after that is done, with a short
Affectionate Exhortation. That by this means the People might be Stirred up and
Excited to a devout and reverent Deportment; and to Draw nigh unto God with
their Hearts, as well as their Lips.

And from what has now been said you will be easily able to conclude, That
there is a Moral Impossibility your Prayers should prevail, while you remain
Impenitent. And though one main Branch of your Prayer is, for the Remission of
your Faults, yet you cannot expect this, till you resolve to forsake them. To
confess and bewail with your Tongue the Sin you approve and cherish in your
Heart, will make all your Prayers but an Heap of Indignities against God, and
of Imprecations upon your self.

When therefore you come to Adore, Worship and Serve the Lord, your inward
Thoughts and External Actions, are to be Purified from Sin by Sincere
Repentance. For God hears not the impenitent, nor those who regard iniquity
in their heart; John 9.31. Psalm. 66.18. In a Word; all the same Things that are
required of you, when you come to the Lord's Supper, are required of you, when
you come to Prayer: Namely, To examine your self whether you repent you truly
of your former sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new life; have a lively
faith in God's mercy through Christ, a thankful remembrance of his death, and
to be in charity with all men. And when you are thus rightly prepared to offer
Prayers unto God, and rightly qualified, he will hear in Heaven, and from
thence bless you in Christ Jesus.

Twenty First Sunday after Trinity.
GRant unto Us, we beseech thee Merciful Lord, (and to all thy Faithful People)
Pardon and Peace, that we may be cleansed from all our Sins, and serve Thee
with a quiet Mind, through Jesus Christ Our Lord. Amen.

Twenty Fourth Sunday after Trinity.
O Lord, We beseech Thee, absolve us from our Offenses; That through Thy
bountiful Goodness we may all be delivered from the bands of those Sins, which
by our Frailty we have Committed. Grant this, O Heavenly Father, for Jesus
Christ's sake, Our Blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

CHAP. X. Circumspection at Prayer.
HAving already given you an Account of that Preparation which is required when
you come to Prayer, and shown the Necessity thereof, and wherein it consists: I
am now to acquaint you with the Circumspection you are to use at the
performance of this Great and Solemn Act of Religion.

By Circumspection I understand your care and diligence to deep your Soul
Devout, and your Body Reverent during the time of Prayer.

And First, as for the Circumspection which regards the keeping of your Soul
Devout, it does in a great measure consist in avoiding as far as possible,
whatever may occasion the Wandering of your Thoughts in Prayer; which are
chiefly such as now follow.

I. Inconstancy and Unsettledness of Mind; by reason whereof your Thoughts are
distracted and divided contrary ways: an Emblem of this unhappy State of Man,
with respect to the wandering of his Thoughts, has been ingeniously enough drawn
out in the way of a Picture, wherein Christ is supposed to be hanging on the
Cross, and the Votaries upon their knees looking up to him, and breathing out
the different aspirings of their Souls, according to the expression in the
Gospel, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Out of the mouth
of the one flows a Label directing itself in a strait line to to the Wounds of
a Bleeding Savior, Praying to be made Partaker of the Merits of the Blood that
he shed: from the Mouth of the other are seen to proceed several Labels waving
to and fro, some pointing one way and some another; some to the Fields and
Rural Sports, and Diversions; others to the Sea, to Trade and Business; some
are made up of corrupt Passions and Appetites, others are filled with unlawful
Desires or the recital of sinful Pleasures past, and many other things of the
like Nature. The first Man would not suffer any thing to interrupt or divert
him in the Prayers he offered, but like a Beam of Light they swiftly, and
directly made their way to their proper Object; the other did not mind what he
was about, but gave his thoughts the Reins, and left them at liberty to ramble
where they list. And though he may seem to look the same way as the other did,
yet his mind is roving all the while, verifying the expression of the Prophet
(quoted by our Savior; Matthew. 15.8.) such a one may seem to draw nigh with his
mouth and honor God with his lips, but his heart is far from him.

II. Carking immoderate Worldly Thoughts are the next thing which discompose
your Mind, and beget in you diffidence and distrust in God, on whom you ought
to cast all your Cares, as being well assured that he cares for you. And this,
I conceive, was meant by S. Paul when he exhorted the Phillippians, that in
their Devotions they should be careful for nothing, but in every thing by
prayer and supplications, with thanksgiving, to make their requests known unto
God; Phil. 4.6.

The Soul of it self is nimble and active, and in an instant can mount up to
Heaven in Prayer, which is therefore called an Elevation of the Soul; Psalm.
25.1. But Earthly-mindedness keeps it fluttering below, and fastens its
Affections to the Dust, which does so clog them, that they cannot aspire to the
things above. You are therefore to take off the Weights which the World hangs
upon your Thoughts, and which distract them in your Supplications. For whilst
you cherish immoderate Desires of the World, they will either hinder you from
Praying at all, or from Praying as you ought.

III. Idleness and Sloth may be another occasion of the wandering of your
Thoughts in Prayer. For perhaps you will not take pains to suppress and correct
the Extravagances of your Thoughts, and to keep them within due Bounds and
Measures. By which neglect your Soul becomes like the field of the slothful,
and the vineyard of the man void of understanding, which was all grown over
with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone-wall
thereof was broken down.

But to whatever occasion the wandering of your Thoughts in Prayer may be
imputed, it highly concerns you industriously to avoid them. And in a great
measure you may be able to do this, if you use that due attention and zeal in
Prayer, which you must own to be wholly requisite and needful.

And first, you must use all due Attention; for by it you fix your Thoughts
upon God, and frame to your self a strong and lively Idea of his Presence, and
possess your heart with awful apprehensions of his Majesty: Ever having in mind
that your Prayer is to him, in whom you live, move, and have your being.

When the Jews enter the Synagogue, they for a while stand silently in the
posture of Prayer, before they begin it; in which time they labor to affect
their minds with his Glorious Attributes, Buxtorf. Syn. Jud. l. 5.
whom they are come to Worship; that the Consideration thereof may help the
better to keep them from being vain and trifling. And one of their Masters
taught his Scholars that before they began their Prayers, They should think a
while on him to whom they make them. And it would doubtless much contribute to
the restraint and amendment of that wandering in Prayer, to which you will find
your self wonderfully prone, to consider in whose Presence you are, and the
infinite disproportion that there is betwixt God and you. For you can no sooner
consider that it is God to whom you speak in Prayer, but the Thought thereof
will quicken your Attention, and render you apprehensive, and make you in a
dread and surprise, if you find your self heedless and unconcerned in so
Important a Business, and in so Great a Presence.

Secondly, Attention is a proper cure for wandering in Prayer, because it keeps
your Mind and Thoughts to every sentence and word thereof. For that Attention
which is to accompany Prayer, is a settled and composed Temper of Mind, which
gathers all your Thoughts together, and fixes them upon the Solemn Business you
are about.

And though Idle, Impertinent, Wandering Thoughts, will be ever ready to thrust
themselves upon you, and intrude into your Holy Offices, so that you cannot be
always totally free from them, yet by Attention you may much hinder and keep
them from making any stay, or getting the Dominion over you so far as to
corrupt or captivate the Will. So that, notwithstanding that this Wandering, to
which you are liable, may be your Unhappiness, yet it can never be your Sin, as
long as you strive against it, and deny it your Approbation and Consent. And
though you can never entirely conquer this Wandering of your Thoughts in Prayer,
yet you may restrain and deal with it as Abraham with the ravenous Birds, which
he continually Drove away, when they came to devour his Sacrifice; Genesis 15.11,

Causinus, (who was no contemptible Director of Devotion) advises his Suppliant
to stay upon every Sentence in Vocal Prayer, the space of a breathing, and in
that time to ponder the Words he pronounces, and to consider the Person to whom
he speaks, and his own Unworthiness. He would likewise have him so to apply the
Prayer, as if it had been made for his own particular use; and to espouse all
the Affections which the Composer of the Prayer had when the Holy Ghost moved
him to compose it, and assisted him in the Composition.

But your want of Attention will hinder you from the observation of this
advice, and will also hinder God from regarding your Prayers. For can you
expect God should attend to the Prayers, to which you do not attend your self?
Can you hope that he with a Paternal kindness and affection should open his
Ears to those, who are not serious before him? If at the same time you call to
Heaven, your Thoughts are so set upon Earthly concerns, so that when you have
done Praying, you scarce know what you have been doing; is not this to offer
the sacrifice of Fools? Who are rash with their mouth and hasty in their heart
to utter any thing before God; not considering that he is in the heavens, and
they on the earth: Eccles. 5.2. You are not then to run over your Prayers by
Rote, but with recollected Thoughts to Weigh, and be Attentive to what you say
unto him, with whom is Terrible Majesty, and who is a consuming Fire.

Thirdly, 'Twould not a little conduce to your exercise of Attention, in
Prayer, if you would consider that the Perfection of your Prayers is according
to the degrees of your Attention, and that the more Attentive you are in
Prayer, the greater benefit you receive by it. And here one way to mend your
Attention, is, to repeat the Prayer again wherein you have found it defective,
and to continue this course till you find your heedlesness worn off and
removed. For by this means you will defeat the Devil, who occasions your
unattentiveness by injecting wicked Thoughts into your mind, and presenting you
with amusing objects. But it would be Satan's interest to give over tempting you
thus to Wander in Prayer, if once he finds your sense of it arming you against
such Wandering, and quickening your Attention, and rendering you more circumspect.

Now, this Repetition comes not within the compass of that which our Lord
censured for vain and idle. Matthew. 6.7. For in this case you do not repeat your
Prayers over and over, out of a conceit that God will the sooner be moved to
hear you; or that by your Repetition he better understands your meaning (which
was the Opinion of those Heathens, whose Repetition of their Prayers was
condemned by our Savior:) but the Repetition now spoken of is to mend your
Incogitancy, and Thoughtlesness of the Business you are about. For it is not
the tumbling out of so many words, or of the same words over and over again, or
the Length and Multitude of them, that is pleasing unto God, any farther than
as they express the fervency of your Spirit, the Importunity of your Zeal, and
the greatness of your Wants. But if you affect Length and Repetition in Prayer,
either out of Hypocrisy or Vainglory, it will be so far from pleasing God, and
prevailing with him, that it will have a quite contrary effect. And this you
may conclude from our Saviors carriage in this Particular, who disliking the
Heathens Length and Vociferation in Prayer, gave his Disciples a short,
comprehensive Form, which they were to use and imitate in their calling upon
God.

Fourthly, When you find out the Wandering of your Thoughts, and that you are
ready to mind any thing rather than that you should, there is no such Cure for
this as Attention. For by it you instantly recall your self to your Business,
and to a serious minding of what you are about. And you will soon perceive your
obligation to do this, when you consider that without doing it, you slight one
of the most Eminent Parts of God's Worship, By drawing nigh unto him with your
lips, when your heart is far from him. Besides, if you exactly weigh your lack
of Attention, you will find it has in it a great degree of Atheism. For not to
Attend to what you say, when you speak unto God, betrays in you a low esteem of
his Majesty, and that you have mean, unworthy Thoughts of the Godhead; which
has ever been accounted a piece of the vilest Atheism. Call home then your
roving Thoughts, and employ them in what you are about. Get as near Heaven as
you can, and have your mind there, and there only. For unless this be your care
and practice when you offer to God the Sacrifice of Prayer, you will be but
like the Cheat in Plutarch; Who brought unto the Altar of his Idol the Skeleton
of an Ox covered with a fair hide, pretending that he offered a goodly
Sacrifice of Flesh and Entrails, when indeed there was nothing but a skin full
of bones. You would count him a vain Thoughtless Person, worthy of Ridicule and
Contempt, who coming to beg his Life of his Prince, should give over his Suit
to run after a Butterfly. And yet this is your figure, when in Prayer you
suffer your mind to be carried away to impertinent objects, and fasten your
Thoughts to the things which you ought to avoid thinking on. Can you hope (as
was but now intimated) God should incline His ears to the Prayers, to which you
will not incline your own? That he should regard your Petitions, when you do
not regard them your self? You may easily observe your aptness to heedlesness
at Devotion; and how many things, all foreign to what you are about, do
interpose when you fall down upon your Knees; you may find to your sorrow, the
Common Enemy tampering with your Heart, at the same time your tongue is
speaking unto God. It Is therefore necessary to recollect your self, to fix your
mind when you come before the Almighty, and to affect your Soul with this
consideration; That you are not sure of another opportunity to solicit him with
your Prayers.

But if through the frailty of humane Nature you cannot always exercise that
Attention, which is necessary to restrain your wandering in Prayer; then beg of
God to assist your frailty, and to establish your Attention against all
avocations. And (though they may steal upon you at Devotion) that he would enable
you by his Grace to reject them. And if after all you cannot be rid thereof, be
sure to give them no encouragement, but to deny them your approbation and
consent. For when you do sincerely strive against them, God will either crown
your endeavor with conquest over them, or pardon them if they prove
invincible. But if the want of attention in Prayer be the fruit of your own
wilful Negligence, you can hope neither for God's assistance nor his pardon,
whilst this negligence is continued.

CHAP. XI. Zeal in Prayer.
ZEal is another help against the wandering of your thoughts in Prayer. Now Zeal
is a sacred warmth and fervor of Mind, and an affectionate earnestness to have
your Prayers heard. For it is not enough that you keep your Thoughts to what is
uttered by him that ministers in the public Service, and to ponder and mind
every word he speaks, but you must do it with intention and fervency. For both
all wandering, and all deadness in Prayer must be driven away. True Zeal will
melt and dissolve your heart, and make you cry unto God with the utmost
strength of Spirit: and it will move you to be wholly bent to obtain what you
crave. A cold indifferent Suitor seldom prevails with Men. For if a beggar
should ask relief at your hands, and do it in so loose a manner, as that he
seemed indifferent whether he had it or no, you would think he had either
little Want, or great Pride; and so have no heart to relieve him. Now, the
things you beg of God are so much above the rate of any ordinary Alms, that you
can never expect they should be given you, if you are slight and heavy in
asking them. When you apprehend, and fully consider, the matter of your Prayer,
and add to it a devout earnestness of desire, then may your Devotion be truly
said to be Zealous. And though this quality chiefly resides in the Soul, yet it
often appears in the gestures of the Body. As was seen in Moses; who when he
made intercession for Israel, Fell down before the Lord, forty days, and forty
nights, and did neither eat bread nor drink water, because of all the sins that
Israel had sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight of the Lord to provoke him to
anger. Deuteronomy. 9.18. And the Zeal of this meekest of Men, was more than ordinary,
when he desired God rather to blot him out of his BOOK, than that he should
execute his menaces against Israel. Elias cast himself upon the earth to
express his Earnestness in praying for Rain. And the ever Blessed Jesus
continued all night in Prayer, and offered up his supplications with strong
crying and tears; Luke 6.12. Heb. 5.7. And prayed with such Ardour and
Affectionateness, that the sweat fell from him to the ground, as if it had been
great drops of blood; Luke 22.44. And this zeal and earnestness seems to have
been meant by S. Paul, when he exhorted Believers to be instant in Prayer: Romans
12.12. To strive in prayer: Romans 15.30. To labor frequently in prayer: Col.
4.12. Night and day to pray exceedingly: To pray always with all prayer:
praying earnestly. 1 These. 3.10. Ephesians. 6.18. 1 Pet. 4.7. Jam. 6.7. By all which
sacred Texts, that Zeal and Vehemence seems to be enjoined, which I now
recommend as an excellent help against the wandering of your thoughts in Prayer.

Which is a fault whereof you can not be guilty, when you pray with spiritual
Affection, with ardent Desire, with a fervent Mind, and with a Heart inflamed
with that Zeal which the Holy Ghost kindles in it. God regards not the Prayers
which you offer, when you do not stir up your Affections, and chafe your
desires, and move your mind into a warmth. The Great Ruler of the world will
not listen to cold, lukewarm Devotions. Such Prayers can never reach Heaven
which want Zeal and Love, the only Wings that should carry them thither.

Be careful then when you approach God, to raise up your Soul to the highest
pitch of Zeal and Earnestness that you are able: And because that of your self
you are not able to do this, beseech the Divine Omnipotence to inflame your
Heart with the heavenly fire of Devotion; and when it is obtained, beware of
quenching it with wilful sin, or letting it go out again for want of fuel, or
stirring up and employing it.

And there want no Motives to beget in you this Fervency in Prayer, when you
consider God's wonderful kindness, and carry the thoughts thereof through your
whole Devotion. For, to think that he is not only good by Nature, but also in
communicating his Benefits: That he is ready upon your Repentance, to blot out
your transgressions and to be merciful to your Sins. Such Thoughts as these are
good inward motives to raise your heart into Zeal, When you lift up your voice,
and call upon the Lord, either in his house, or your own.

And First, when you come to the Lord's house, to join in public Prayers, you
have a good opportunity to show your Earnestness and Zeal. God has Promised a
special blessing to the joint Requests which the Faithful make in his House,
and that He will be in the midst of them, and bestow his Mercies, and set marks
of Favor on them, when they meet together in the unity of the spirit, and in
the bond of peace. And your absence from the Public Prayers cannot be excused
without an important occasion; for if it be wilful and deliberate, you cut your
self off from the Church and from the partaking of those Prayers, wherein all
are in common concerned. And by this means you inflict a punishment upon your
self (even a sort of Excommunication) which is never inflicted by the Church,
but in case of the most heinous offenses.

The same Zeal and Attention are also requisite in the Prayers made in your
Family, which are a sort of Common Prayers, because all the Members of the
Household join therein. And it belongs to the Master of the Family carefully to
provide for this office; and to see nothing be wanting for the welfare of their
Souls, who are under his Government. For the Family is Heathenish where God is
not worshipped; and where the Master does not resolve with Joshua, That he, and
his house will serve the Lord. Josh. 24.15.

And as to the Prayers you make apart, when you are solus cum solo, and have no
witness of what you do, but only God and your Conscience; yet because that even
here you are subject to Wandering and Distraction, as well, as you are in
company, you have need of the same Zeal and Attention to correct it.

In your private Devotions you may be more particular, according to your
personal Necessities, and you may use therein a greater freedom both in words
and gestures, than you can in public. But still the Devotion of the Heart is
therein required, as being that which God principally regards. And as it is
your duty to perform all these sorts of Prayers, so it is likewise your duty to
be Zealous and Attentive at them all. Prayer in your Family and Closet, will
not excuse your Prayer at Church; all are required, all are necessary, and one
must not be taken in exchange for the other, And whosoever is diligent in
public Prayer, and yet negligent in private, it is to be feared he rather
seeks to approve himself to men than to God. Which is contrary to the mind of
our Savior, who commands you to Pray to God in secret; and from him alone to
expect your Reward, and not from the vain praises of Men. You have been often
told That Prayer is that part of divine worship, which the Soul is to pay unto
the Lord; and you have also been told, with what Circumspection it ought to be
performed. Give me leave to conclude this particular with observing, that though
Prayer be a spiritual duty, and the proper business of the Soul, yet the Body
has its share and part therein. For both being God's workmanship and purchase,
both ought to give him homage and observance. Now, the observance the Body
ought to pay unto God in Prayer, consists in such lowly, decent, and reverent
gestures, as may testify the humility and reverence of the Soul. Bowing,
prostration, and the like external acts of Religious Worship, are a particular
right belonging to God; before whom you are to fall down and kneel, for he is
your maker, your shepherd, your protector. The Royal Author of the 95. Psalm,
does affectionately call upon every one jointly to adore, worship, and pray
unto God; and to make the members of the Body, the partners and witnesses of
the real devotion of the Heart, and to join inward and outward reverence
together: That the submissive and lowly gestures of the Body may serve to
express and signify the sincere humility of the Soul. For though the humblest
external bodily gestures are the least considerable thing in Prayer, as having
little or no proportion to the necessary dispositions of the Soul; yet they are
of such moment, that if you pray, without them, it looks as if you did not
consider or know what a weighty business you are about, nor had a sense of
God's Dignity, or of your own Vileness. But in these bodily Gestures you are
carefully to avoid whatsoever is vain, fantastical, and superstitious; and to
keep within the bounds of decency and prudence. And your gestures being thus
conducted, they will help to heighten inward Devotion in your self, and be an
happy means to raise the Devotion of others. But I leave the farther
prosecution of this particular, to consider of the Frequency you ought to use
in Prayer.

CHAP. XII. Of Frequency in Prayer.
THough Prayer be a Duty, which you are never to neglect, yet there is not any
Text in Scripture that determines how often you are to use it. The Inspired
Word positively commands you to call upon God, but it has left it to your
Conscience how frequently you are to do it. The Scripture that is most
peremptory in this particular, is, 1 These. 5.17. where S. Paul exhorts to Pray
without ceasing. By which Text you are certainly obliged to these two things,
viz.

1. Not to grow restive in Prayer, but therein to be constant and persevering,
it being an homage you are to pay continually to God, and that without which
you can never hope to be safe and prosperous. For Praying gives you a title to
God's safeguard and preservation, and it must be as lasting as your own wants,
and obligation to worship God. And therefore till you find you have no need of
God's Mercies, nor any tie upon you to adore him, you must Pray without
ceasing. Which words imply,

Secondly, That your Prayers under the Gospel, must bear proportion with the
Daily Sacrifices under the Law, which were constantly offered Morning and
Evening. And you cannot sink your Prayers to a lesser proportion, or pray
seldomer than Morning and Evening. It being highly reasonable and necessary
that you should begin all your works with calling upon God for his direction
and blessing; and end them with praise and thanks for his protection and
assistance.

Some have interpreted the Apostles words (Pray without ceasing,) of spending
every moment of their life in Prayer; which can be no error, if it be
understood of such an excellent frame of Spirit, and pious disposition of Mind,
as is always in readiness to call upon God. This religious temper and habitual
devoutness of Soul, is like the Holy fire of the Sanctuary, which never went
out: For it is always ready to flame in pious ejaculations and affectionate
breathings after God. And when for want of meet circumstances your Prayers
cannot be Vocal, yet they may be Mental. And in this sense you may be said to
pray without ceasing, which according to Diodati, is to be understood rather of
the heart and affection, than of the tongue and words.

And though you have not always leisure and opportunity to be upon your knees,
yet you never want either to bow your heart before God, and by a pious temper
of mind, and spirit of Devotion, to lift it up to the Lord. And notwithstanding
the Scripture has left the frequency of Prayer undetermined, yet you may take
your measures as to public Prayers, from the Rules of the Church; and in your
private Devotions from the examples of Holy Men.

And first, the Rules of the Church acquaint you with the stated times of
Public Prayer, from which you are not to be absent, when you can possibly be
at them. And it must be a matter of considerable moment that can justify your
absence from the Lords House at the set times of Prayer. Now according to some
Expositors you may be said to Pray without ceasing, when you observe the hours
or times of Prayer, appointed by the Church But if you were not enjoined to
observe such stated times of Prayer, yet the very Light of Nature, and the Law
of Piety, would oblige you to observe them. For both these teach you to omit no
occasion to express your Duty to God: Which consists in worshipping him, giving
him thanks, calling upon him, honoring his holy Name and his word, and serving
him truly all the days of our life.

And as to Frequency in your Private Devotion, you have the Examples of Holy
men in Scripture for your Guide. And first of David, Who, evening, morning and
at noon, did cry unto the Lord and he heard his voice; Psalm. 55.17. With his
constant importunity he re-inforc'd an impression of his Prayers upon God, the
better to move him to grant them. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O
Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up; Psalm.
5.3. This religious Prince made the first fruits, and prime of the day to
present his supplications before God; and after the manner of earnest
Petitioners he fixed his eyes on heaven, resolving to wait and never to move,
till the Lord hearkened unto the voice of his Prayer; nay, from thrice, David
increased his praying to seven times a day, Psalm. 119.164. rightly concluding,
that he could never sufficiently admire and magnify the Divine Excellencies;
and that if he had had nothing else to be the matter of his praises, yet he
thought himself bound continually to extol them. It Is true, the phrase (seven
times) may be taken in a larger sense, and not merely to signify that number,
but be looked upon as a mode of speech, denoting a great frequency in Prayer,
and showing that David was daily very often employed therein; which custom to
pray often was not peculiar to David only, but was also used by God's people
many hundred years after he saw corruption. As was seen in Daniel, who when he
knew the Dead-warrant was signed for his execution, Went into his house, and
his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his
knees three times a day, and prayed and gave thanks before his God, as he did
aforetime; Dan. 6.10. The last words show, that it was not an emergent zeal, or
an extraordinary fit of Devotion, but that it was his constant and usual
practice, to pray thrice a day, which was the common custom of the Jews; who
made Morning, noon, and evening the three times of prayer; Acts 3.1. and 10.4.
and 9.31. which custom was observed also by the Apostles, and some Devouter
Christians went farther, and prayed six times a day, taking in the Compline, or
the Prayer made by good men at nine at night.

But if you should imagine these examples to be imitable, and that it would
exhaust too much of your time to be so often on your knees; then revolve with
your self;

1. That you are never so far to immerse and bury your self in worldly
business, as not to allow space to begin and end the day with Prayer. And you
cannot justly complain you want time to be thus often in Devotion, when you
consider how much time you can find to cast away, if not upon that which is
vicious, yet upon that which is wholly impertinent to your Station. If you
would prudently retrench your Recreations, and employ in Piety the hours you
spend in Vanities, you would never be straightened for time to bestow in Devotion.
The true reason of your having so little time to give to this is, because you
lavish so much away in things of so little moment, if not worse, that when it
is past you cannot but condemn your self for it.

But seeing you must one day give an account of the spending of your time, it
behooves you to be wary how you spend it. And the more time you have wastfully
misspent already, the more signally careful you ought to be of that which yet
remains. And to redeem the hours you have thrown away upon Impieties, by a
virtuous and religious employment of those God shall yet please to vouchsafe
you.

Consider, Secondly, how reasonable and just a thing it is, that you allow a
liberal portion of your time to his service, who is graciously pleased to allow
so much to your own. God does not grudge you space enough for your lawful
Business, and necessary Diversions; but then he expects you would not encroach
upon those minutes which are appointed to Religious Exercises. It is very
observable, That men of Highest Stations, and Weightiest Employments, have been
the most frequent and diligent in their Devotions. And of this truth you have
two known, famous examples of David and Daniel, the one a King, the other a
prime Minister of State, yet the one prays seven, and the other three times a
day.

Consider, thirdly, how disingenuous and unthankful it would be in you, to
repine at the allowance of a small parcel of your time to the service of the
Great Master of Heaven and Earth; if you believe it to be just and reasonable
to require so many hours service every day from those that stand in the same
relation to your self. But as to the parcels of time you are to allow to
private Devotion, they must be proportioned to the nature of your Station and
necessary Business; and to be no more, or longer, than will consist with your
urgent Affairs and be no prejudice to them. And that you have time enough to do
this, without hindering the due discharge of the Duties of your calling, or
even your necessary, honest Diversions, will be evident, if you consider, the
nature of Devotion in general, and in particular, wherein the private consists.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Nature of Devotion, etc.
AND First, as to the nature of Devotion in general, it is such an exercise of
the Soul, as may for the greatest part be transacted without interrupting the
actions of the Body. So that you need not always closet your self, and lay
aside your honest Affairs, to be Devout.

Devotion is the entertaining of pious, useful and wise Thoughts in your Mind:
it puts you upon weighing every thing you do, and reflecting on whatever you
have done amiss. It moves you to look forward to the temptation that approaches
you, and puts you upon arming your self against it with serious thoughts of
Heaven and Hell. And when your Mind is really devout, it moves you to look up
to the former with earnest desires and endeavors to gain it, and down to the
latter, with incessant care to escape it.

Now, you may do all this in the greatest throng of your worldly Concernments.
For Devotion is an act of the Soul, whose motions are so nimble and sprightly,
that they have but little dependence on the Body: which latter can scarce be
ever so taken up, as to keep the former from being devout. For what bodily
Employment can hinder you from lifting up your heart, even lifting it up unto
the Lord? what Business can restrain your Soul from sending up its affectionate
Ejaculations, holy Wishes, and devout Vows unto God? If you have an implicit
desire upon all opportunities to advance the Glory of God, if you Eat, and
Drink, and Sleep and recreate your self moderately to this end, to enable you
to serve God the better, and so incorporate, and interweave such religious
Thoughts and Ejaculations, among your Natural, Moral, and Civil Employments (so
they be lawful and necessary, and not sordid and servile) you make your common
actions to become works of Piety, and exercises of Religion. What office of
your Calling can keep you from considering every morning the Temptations to
which that day you may be liable, and how you may best strengthen and fore-arm
your self against them? What business can be so urgent and hasty, as not to
give you time every morning to recommend your self to God, in some short,
devout and zealous Prayer?

And what great pains or time will it cost you, to take every evening an
account of your Actions of the past day, and with humble importunity to beg God
to pardon such as have been evil, and to render him thanks that he has enabled
you to do any that are otherwise; and that he has delivered you from any evil
of Sin or Danger? And having thus begun and concluded the day, you may
comfortably commit your self to God's Mercy and Protection; whose only guard is
abundantly sufficient to keep you secure: And then close your meditations with
that of the Psalmist, I will lay me down in peace, and sleep, for thou Lord
only make me dwell in safety.

And this plain constant course of private Devotion, is that which was enjoined
by our Blessed Lord, Matthew. 6. when he bad you go to your Closet, and there to
shut the doors after you. And there is at least a great convenience, if not a
necessity, of doing thus: First, because you may have many Sins to beg pardon
for, and many particular Mercies to implore, and many Wants to be supplied, and
many Graces to be obtained, which are not so fit for you to pray for in
Public. And therefore you are to go to him who is in Secret, and to whom you
may unbosom your self without fear of Discovery or Reproach.

Secondly, This constant, daily course of Private Devotion, will beget in your
mind both an Awe, and Affection to God, and also make you in love with this
Duty, because it brings you to a familiarity with him. Besides this Custom in
Private Devotion will wear off all the surmised difficulties thereof, and make
it become easy and pleasant. And when it is duly managed you will find it so
far from interfering either with your lawful Employment, or your necessary
Recreation; that it will pleasantly mingle and associate with both.

You read how the unjust Judge, in the Parable, granted the Widow's Suit, not
out of love to Justice, but for his own Ease, Lest by her continual coming she
should weary him; Luke 18.5. The design of the Parable, is first to instruct
frequency and perseverance in Prayer, and that therein you are neither to be
negligent nor tired. Next, it shows the efficacy and force of constant
Devotion, and importunate Prayer, and how mightily therewith God is wrought
upon; and another illustration hereof you have in the Man that went to borrow
Bread of his Neighbor. Though his Neighbor had locked his doors, and himself
and all his Family were gone to bed, and when the respect of friendship would
not work upon him, yet the Borrower showing his real Want by coming at that
time of night, his confidence in the Man to whom he came, prevailed with him to
rise, and to lend him as many Loaves as he needed. Luke 11.

But you have not only Parables, but Instances of the power that persevering
importunate Prayer has with the Almighty. For Moses by it so far prevailed as
to put a sort of force upon God, a kind of necessity of sparing Israel, when
they had provoked him to destroy them, Exodus 32. And by it also Jacob wrestled
with God so long till he got the better, and came off with a new name, which
declared him Victor. For God said unto him, Thy name shall be called no more
Jacob, but Israel: for as a Prince have thou power with God and men, and have
prevailed, Genesis 32.28.

And both these Parables and Examples recommend to your practice, earnestness
and perseverance in Prayer. Wherein you need not fear being too instant and
pressing, especially in those supplications which you make to God for a
virtuous and holy life, while you live here, and for an happy and glorious
Immortality when you go hence. For these are the things for which you may pray
absolutely, and which God will certainly grant through Jesus Christ the
Righteous. To whom, etc.

ALmighty and everlasting God, who do Govern all things in Heaven and Earth;
Mercifully hear the Supplications of thy People, and grant us thy Peace all the
days of our Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

GRant to us, Lord, we beseech thee, the Spirit to think and do always such
things as be rightful; that we who cannot do any thing that is good without
Thee may by Thee be enabled to live according to Thy Will, through Christ our
Lord. Amen.

CHAP. XIV. The Things to be Prayed for.
I Am now come to the last Thing I proposed, to present you with, viz. an
Account of the Matter of Prayer, or the Things you are to beg of God; which are
only such as he has in his Word promised to give: and which for substance are
all comprised in the Sacred Form, emphatically styled The Lord's Prayer. Now,
this Prayer is of like use with the Decalogue, and is to be the Rule of your
Petitions, as that is of your Actions. And as you need do no more than what is
set down in the Decalogue, so you need desire no more than what is contained in
the Lord's Prayer. To the Heads of which all your Prayers are to be restrained,
and you are to use in them the like Simplicity and sober Brevity, that is used
in this.

And both the Decalogue and Lord's Prayer are of the same extent, both teaching
you your Duty to God, your Neighbor, and your Self. The Decalogue teaches you
what you are to do, to each of these, and the Lord's Prayer teaches you how you
may beg of God to do them as you ought. And as the Ten Commandments were twice
given by God the Father, so was the Lord's Prayer twice given by God the Son:
once at the request of his Disciples. S. Luke 11.1, 2. and a Second time of his
own accord, S. Matthew. 6.9. And when our Lord gave this Prayer he intended it to
be the true Sum of all Christian Prayers; and that none were to ask any thing
of God but what was therein comprehended.

For (1.) There is not any thing that you need desire, respecting your Duty to
God, which is not with wonderful plainness (considering the brevity) summed up
in the three first Petitions of this Prayer. The first whereof regards your
glorifying of God's Name; The second the establishing of his Authority and
Dominion, in your heart; and the last, your Submission and Obedience to his
Will. Which comprise all that you need desire of God in order to the right
performance of your Duty toward him.

And in the first place it teaches you to pray for the hallowing and glorifying
of God's Name. By his Name you are to understand in General God Himself; and in
particular his Glorious Titles and Perfections, together with every thing that
has a peculiar relation to him; as his Word, his Day, his House, etc. For as
you owe to all these an awful, humble Reverence and Devotion, so you are to beg
of God to stir up your heart, and to assist you to pay it as you should. That
he would enable you so to carry your self toward all Things belonging to his
Being and Service, as that all may see you sincerely Honor and Worship his
Adorable Essence and Excellencies: For seeing God, who is the Sovereign
Holiness, has been pleased to reveal himself as it were by a proper Name, and
to take unto him the endearing Title of Father, honoring all Believers with
the relation of his Children; it is your Duty to beg, that he would give you
Grace, to Glorify him both in Word and Deed, and that you may be an instrument
of causing him to be Honored by all men; and that neither by you, nor by your
means, his Sacred Name may at any time be profaned.

And this Hallowing of God's Name is the first thing you are taught to pray
for, and the foundation of all the rest. For unless you Glorify God, and
Magnify him above all Things; unless you acknowledge his Supreme Majesty, and
Superlative Goodness; you are not fit to Pray for the coming of his Kingdom.
Which Kingdom is threefold, viz. one of Power, whereby he rules over all
Creatures: another of Grace, whereby he rules in the hearts of Believers, by
his Word and Spirit: and a third of Glory, which in a more Eminent manner shall
begin at the last Judgment: when Christ as man, shall deliver up the Kingdom to
God the Father; and when all the Saints shall be taken in to Reign with him.
And the coming of all these Kingdoms makes up the Second request of the Lord's
Prayer; for therein you desire that God would exercise his Power in subduing,
and his Justice in punishing his Enemies; that by this means the World may be
freed from that Impiety and Confusion, wherewith it abounds; and that every one
may say, Verily there is a God that judges in the Earth: Psalm. 58.11. and
plainly discern that this World is not governed by Chance, but administered and
managed by an Almighty, All-wise, and most Just Providence. And as it is your
Interest and Happiness, so it ought to be your Prayer, that God's Kingdom may
be visible and his Authority exercised, to the end, that his Faithful Servants
may be safe from their Adversaries, and have their Necessities relieved, and
their Desires accomplished.

Next, you are to pray for the coming of God's Kingdom of Grace; that he would
mercifully establish his Throne and Dominion in yours and in the hearts of all
men; That the Gospel may be Universally Embraced; and that they who are now
slaves to Satan, and their own vile affections, may be converted, and renounce
the Devil, and profess themselves Subjects of Jesus; doing his Works, observing
his Precepts and paying him Tribute, Homage and Subjection, as their Liege
Lord. And whereas you daily see that God's Laws are broken, his Messengers
despised, his Word and Sacraments neglected, and every thing belonging to his
Solemn Worship set at naught by some, and ridiculed by others; you are in
Charity obliged to pray for a better face of Affairs, And that he who is the
giver of all Goodness would send his Grace unto you and to all People, that you
may Worship him, Serve him and Obey him, as you ought to do. And that your
unruly Passions may be tamed, your rebellious Lusts mortified, your naughty
Desires extinguish't, and every opposing Thought subdued. So that Christ may
have an absolute Command over your whole Man, Body and Soul, and that you may
be happy in his Government.

And as for God's Kingdom of Glory, or the Glorious Manifestation of Christ's
coming to dispense a final Pardon to his Faithful Subjects, and to admit them
to the Participation of his Joy and Authority: and to pronounce a direful
Sentence upon his obstinate Enemies; sending them to be Tormented with the
Devil and his Angels; even for the Coming of this Kingdom you are also to pray,
saying with the Holy ones under the Altar, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

CHAP. XV. A farther Account of the Things to be Prayed for.
AND having Prayed God thus to rule in your heart by Grace, that you may be fit
for his coming in Glory to Crown his Servants, and Torment his Enemies; you are
to Pray again that God would enable you to do both his secret and revealed
Will, and that you may patiently and contentedly submit to the former; and
readily and cheerfully perform the latter, as far as it is set down in his Holy
Word. Now Obedience to God's Law and Submission to his Providence, are both
required to the doing of his Will. For you are not only to observe what he
enjoins or prohibits, but also to submit to whatever happens to you according
to his Good Will and Pleasure, whether it be Misery or Happiness. And he who
taught you to do thus did illustrate it with his own Example, when with an
admirable Resignation he Prayed, Not mine, O Father, but thy Will be done.

Now the manner of your Doing God's Will, is taken from the Pattern of the Holy
Angels, who are God's ministering Spirits, executing his Commandments with
readiness, fidelity and perseverance; flying upon his errand with the wings of
Love and Zeal. But seeing you find (perhaps) in your self a reluctance to do
thus, and that your Duty herein is often delayed through Idleness, or
interrupted through Vanity, so that your Obedience moves heavily and is clogged
with fears, and broken off by temptations; you are to supplicate the Father of
all Mercies, that he would bestow upon you that Zeal and Affection for his
Service, wherewith the Holy Angels are Inspired: to the intent that you may as
they, do his Will with Fervency and Cheerfulness. And that following the
Examples of their Obedience, whilst you are on Earth, you may be joined with
them, and your blessed Brethren in Glory, to sing eternal Praises in Heaven.

And as our Lord in the three first Petitions of his Prayer comprised all
things respecting God and his Glory, for which you are to Pray: So in the next
three Petitions he has sum'd up whatsoever you have need to desire, respecting
your own or your Neighbors Wants and Necessities. And you may observe that the
things relating to God's Glory, are by our Savior's Prescription first to be
solicited, and if this be rightly done, you can scarce miss of the rest. For
all other things shall be given to them, Who first seek the Kingdom of God and
his righteousness; Matthew. 6.33. And seeing God's Glory is of greater moment
than yours or any man's Wants, therefore you are to Pray for the first. And yet
seeing you are neither all Flesh, nor all Spirit, but a compound of both, and
that both have Needs to be supplied, you are to Pray for the relief of both.

And first you are to beg a supply for your Bodily Necessities, all which our
Lord comprehended under the name of Bread. Which Word signifies outward
comforts. And in Praying God to give you this, you declare your sole dependence
to be on him for this present life, and for all things that support it. And the
begging them of God, declares likewise your abhorrence of all unjust and
indirect ways to obtain them.

Next, by the adjunct (Daily) added to Bread, you evidence your contentedness
with present necessaries, and your purpose to Pray continually for them. Which
likewise declares your trust in God; and that you cast your Cares upon him;
acknowledging that all you have or expect, are from his bounteous Hand, and
sanctified by his Blessing.

And this Petition for Daily Bread was no doubt taken from that Prayer of the
Jews, which was thus; The necessities of thy People Israel are many, and their
knowledge small (so that they know not how to disclose their Necessities) let
it be thy good Pleasure to give to every man what suffices for food, etc.

And the Petition for Daily Bread is by some thus paraphrased, Provide for us
to morrows Bread, and give it us to day, that we be not solicitous for to
morrow: for sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

All things needful for this present life come from God, and the Petition for
Daily Bread, shows that you are not to desire them all at once, but that he
would distribute them by little and little, according as you need them. That by
this means you may never be destitute of, nor desist in Praying for them. For
if you should possess them in too great abundance, and as it were in a heap,
you might be in danger to rest contented within your self, and forget to call
upon the Lord; Prove. 30.8, 9. Christ in this Petition for (Daily Bread) seems
to have reflected upon the sending of the Manna and as that was daily gathered,
so this might be daily begged and given.

Some of the Fathers have Allegoriz'd this Petition, and understood it of
Christ the Bread of Life, and the partaking of him in the Blessed Eucharist:
which does nourish the Soul unto Life Eternal, as material Bread does the
temporal Life of the Body. And though I could wish that in this sense the Request
for (Daily Bread) were both understood and practiced, and that now, as in the
Primitive Times the Sacrament of Christ's Death were daily celebrated; yet I
think the Petition is best interpreted, of all manner of Food, that is
necessary for the preservation of human Life, and of whatever is required to
support Man's frail Nature; which could not be particularly expressed in so
short a Form.

But if you look not farther than to your Bodily needs, even to that of your
Soul, the supply of the first may prove a Misery and not a Happiness, if the
other be neglected. Now the first thing you are to beg for your Soul is the
forgiveness of your Sins, and that God would not exact their penalty, but that
for the sake of the satisfaction Christ made to his Divine Justice, he would
mercifully acquit you from their Guilt and Punishment.

And to the end that you may not forfeit God's Pardon to you, by Denying yours
to your Brethren, you are humbly to beseech the Almighty to give you those
bowels of Compassion toward others, when they trespass against you; which you
stand in need of when you trespass against them; and if you who, through the
corruption of Humane Nature, are prone to revenge, can through God's Grace
forgive others, you need not doubt but your Heavenly Father, whose Goodness is
infinite, will forgive you; For it is certainly true: That if you forgive Men,
you shall be forgiven of God. Not that you are to give Law to God, or to ground
your Prayers on the merits of your own Works; but that you subscribe to God's
order to Pardon, if you purpose to be Pardoned. And here take notice, that
(according to Diodati) the Forgiveness of Trespasses, for which you Pray,
cannot be understood of the general remission of Sins, in respect of the
everlasting Judgment; which has no other cause or ground before God, but
Christ's satisfaction and intercession, but of the pardon of particular faults
of Believers, in regard of punishments in this life. It was a rule of the Wise
Men among the Jews, That our pardoning of those who have injured us, is
rewarded by God with hearing our Prayers for Forgiveness. And to this purpose
are the words of Siracides, Ecclus 28.1, 2, etc. He that revengeth shall find
vengeance from the Lord, and he will surely keep his sins in remembrance.
Forgive thy Neighbor the hurt he has done unto thee so shall thy Sins also be
forgiven when thou prayest. One man bears hatred against another, and does he
seek pardon from the Lord? He shows no mercy to a man which is like himself:
and does he ask forgiveness of his own Sins? If he that is but Flesh and Blood
nourish hatred, who will entreat for pardon of his Sins?

But you are not to conclude from hence that Pardon from God depends only on
your pardoning of others, or that it is merited by it, but that it is most
reasonable, that you who request forgiveness of your Offenses against God,
should forgive the Offenses of your Brethren; whose Offenses are less in number
and value, and not committed perhaps without your provocation. Take heed
therefore lest by your Malice and want of Charity to others, you bring not
God's wrath and indignation on your self.

Deliverance from the power of Sin, and all temptations to commit it, is the
next thing respecting your Soul, that you are to seek for, at the hands of your
Creator. Now, of your self you are unable to withstand those multitudes of
temptations which daily assault you; so that you have need continually to have
recourse to the Divine assistance, and to implore God either wholly to remove
all temptations, or so to restrain their power and malice, that they do not
overcome you. The former is not to be hoped, and so not to be prayed for. For
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, will never give over soliciting, alluring,
and tempting you to Sin. Satan (as his name signifies) is to the Tempter, who
being miserable by Sin, labors to make all like himself: And that he spares
none, was seen in his hardiness to set upon our Savior; whom he would have
tempted to the most horrid iniquity, the worship of himself. And as this shows
that none can escape his temptations, so it likewise shows that it is no Sin to
be tempted, but that all the fault lies in yielding to the temptation: and this
arises from (that great Impostor) your own Heart, which is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked.

It ought then to be your earnest and incessant supplication to him, who can
restrain the powers of darkness, and infatuate the mischievous devices of Hell
and all its Agents, that he would keep you from all evil circumstances, and
dangerous occasions leading to Sin: that he would suppress in you all
inclinations to evil, and not leave you to your self, nor to be tempted, and
carried away of your own lusts, and enticed: That he would not unchain, and let
loose, the infernal foes to assail and over-master you by their accursed
seducements; but that you may resist unto Blood, and be crowned with conquest
over them.

But if your Heavenly Father for great purposes leads you into any signal
trials and temptations, then do you resign your self to his absolute pleasure;
humbly beseeching his paternal tenderness, to limit and control the Tempter,
and to restrain your consent. And though it ought to be your great grief to be at
any time enticed to offend God, yet it cannot be any great discomfort, so long
as God is pleased to relieve you from doing the evil to which you are tempted,
and together with the temptation, to make you a way to escape.

The Jews have a Form, which they call the short Prayer, which is an Epitome or
Abridgment of their longer Prayers; and it was a rule among them, That he who
had a promptness in Prayer, was to pray the eighteen Prayers, but he who wanted
this promptness, was to use the short Prayer, which was a Recollection out of
the other, and is as follows:

OUR Father which art in Heaven, be gracious unto us. O Lord our God hallowed
be thy Name, and let the remembrance of thee be Glorified in Heaven above, and
upon earth here below. Let thy Kingdom reign over us now and for ever, Remit
and forgive unto all whatsoever they have done against us. And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from the evil thing. For thine is the Kingdom and
thou shall reign in Glory (or Power) for ever and ever, vid. Mr. John Gregory,
Page 168.

CHAP. XVI. Prayer to be made in the plural number. Amen.
AND both this Summary, and the larger Prayer, were used by the Jews in the
days of our Savior: who out of them collected the Form, which he taught his
Disciples, and which is now used by all Christians. But when our Lord gave this
Prayer, he did not null or make void the other Prayers used by the Jews, nor
did he intend that his Followers should use his Prayer and none other: but he
gave it as an absolute, perfect Form by which our imperfect Prayers are to be
regulated, and to be an abstract of all we are to Pray for. So that if any
thing be wanting in our Prayers, it is to be supplied by adding unto them the
Lord's Prayer. Which Christ (I say) gave not to extinguish but to regulate our
Prayers; and to be added unto them, and to render them perfect and consummate.
For it contains the heads of all things that you can either want or desire to
have.

And our Lord in his Heavenly Wisdom so ordered the composure of his Prayer,
that it might differ as little as possible from the Jewish Form, and that it
might likewise be fit to be said by all. And I think there is none (of what
Religion soever) who own God to be the Father, or Maker of Heaven and Earth,
who may not pertinently make use of the Lords Prayer, and desire every thing
that therein is set down.

It is observable, that the Jews appointed all their Prayers to be said in the
Plural Number, though he that said them was alone by himself, and they did it for
this reason, That it might never seem as though a man were cut off from the
congregation. And they have this commendable Canon, viz. He that prays ought
always when he prays, to join with the Church. Which Canon they do not strictly
understand only of Prayers said in the Synagogue, but wheresoever they are made
in the world. And when a Jew is most alone he is to say Prayers in the plural
and not in the singular number. In which number our Savior also has taught us
to pray. So that when you are in the greatest solitude and separation from
company you are to own your union with the Church, and Communion with all true
Believers, for whose happiness you ought to pray as well as for your own.

The Jewish Church Ordained that all their Public Prayers should be concluded
with (Amen.) I say Public Prayers, for, in their Private or Phylacterical
Prayers it was omitted. And it was a sign those Prayers were Public to which
Amen was added, and a sign they were otherwise when it was not used. And the
Christian Church retains the same Custom, adding Amen to all her Prayers. Which
is a word of that weight and moment, that it ought never to be omitted. For by
saying Amen you declare your trust and assurance that God will grant the things
you ask according to his Will. It being one special branch of your confidence
in God; that if you ask any thing according to his Will, and not your own
fancy, he hears you. By saying Amen to the Public Prayers you express your
approbation of them, that you agree with the Congregation, and present but one
common vote unto God. And when there is a happy harmony and consent of heart
and voice in praying for things lawful and expedient, you may be assured that
he who has promised to grant the Requests of two or three gathered together in
his Name, will much more incline his ear to a pious multitude, to a numerous
Congregation, met solemnly to beg his Blessings.

But besides all this your humble, hearty, and zealous saying Amen, shows your
attentiveness to the Public Prayers, and that you are neither asleep nor
inadvertent when they are made.

And indeed one way to quicken your attention, is to consider that you are to
say an hearty Amen to every Prayer, and as it were to set your seal unto it by
so doing. And by saying Amen, you also let the Hearer of Prayers know that you
hope and believe to have your share in the good things that are desired: and
that on the contrary you do not expect any benefit by the Petitions which you
do not sign and confirm by your Amen. In which single word all your own Wants
are sum'd up, and theirs also for whom you pray. And we read that the Primitive
Christians thought the saying an hearty Amen to be of so great importance, that
they pronounced it with a sort of vociferation and affectionate earnestness;
which is enough to shame and awaken their negligence, who either regard not at
all to say Amen, or do it with so provoking a drowsiness and indifferency, as
if it were all one to them whether God would grant or deny their Request;
whether he did hearken to their Prayers, or stop his ears against them: which
being considered, will (I hope) have the happy influence to make you so
attentive to Prayer, as to close it with such a sensible Amen, as that the Lord
God may say so too; 1 Kings 1.36.

CHAP. XVII. Of our Lord's Doxology.
AND having now given you this plain familiar account of the Things you are to
desire of God, as they are set down in the Divine Summary left us by our Lord;
give me leave for (a conclusion) to present you with a short account of the
drift and design, of the scope and end of Prayer; which is none other than
God's Glory, and your own Benefit.

That God's Glory ought to be the first and principal end and drift of Prayer,
is naturally to be concluded from the Doxology, wherewith both Jews and
Christians have ever closed their Supplications. That Doxology was used by the
Hebrews in David's time, is plain from his own practice; who praised the Lord
before all the People, and said, Blessed be thou, Lord God of Israel our
Father, for ever and ever. Thine O Lord, is the Greatness, and the Power, and
the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty, for all that is in the Heaven and
in the Earth, is thine; thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as
Head above all. Both Riches and Honor come from thee, and thou Reignest over
all, and in thy Hand is Power and Might, and in thine Hand it is to make Great,
and to give Strength unto all. Now therefore our God, we thank thee, and praise
thy glorious Name. Chron. 29, 10, 11, etc.

And we find a Doxology added to all the Public Prayers of the Jews, which was
followed by our Savior in his Compendious Form. And though some both in the
Greek and Latin Church, have looked upon the Doxology at the end of the Lord's
Prayer, to be a Spurious Addition put in by some well-meaning man, who did not
well know what he did; yet I see no ground for this saying. For since it is
granted by all, That our Savior took every Petition of his Prayer out of the
Jewish Euchologues, it may justly be thought that he thence also took the
Doxology, and added it to his Prayer, as the Jews to theirs.

Now, the Doxology is not only a Form of Praise and Thanksgiving, fit and
proper to be the closing up of all Devotions, in token that they are directed
to God's Honor, but it also contains the fundamental grounds of making your
Addresses unto God. For in saying, Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the
Glory, for ever and ever: You acknowledge all those excellencies to be in God,
which are the true and chief motives of Prayer, and which give life and spirit
to that Heavenly Duty, and to all the Graces therein to be exercised.

And first, your Faith is greatly supported in the expectation of the good
things you pray for, when you maturely revolve that you beg them of him, who is
the only universal, absolute, Independent Lord and Sovereign of the World. And
that he is easily entreated of his Subjects, and takes pleasure in their
Protection and Happiness. Only remember that at the same time you acknowledge
God's Kingdom, you own your self to be his Subject, and that it is your duty to
obey his Laws, and to submit entirely to his Government, and not to countenance
any one rebel Lust against him.

And when (Secondly) you ascribe Power unto God, you profess your belief of his
All Sufficiency, and that you present your Petition to one, who is able and
willing to grant it. For if he wanted either Will or Power to give what you
beg, it were enough utterly to discourage your Application. But seeing that God
has the bowels of a Father, and the arm of a King, and a Sovereign right to
dispose of every thing as he pleases, he is in all respects fitly qualified to
grant the request you make unto him. And although your own unworthiness might
justly hinder you from receiving any favor at his hand, yet he will not
withhold what you rightly sue for: That his free Grace may have that Glory from
you which he has from all to whom he has been formerly bountiful.

There is an excellent Honor arising unto God from his own infinite
perfections, and the effects thereof; and he expects it should be paid him by
all his Creatures both in Heaven and Earth. And though all solemn Acts of
Religion should aim at his honor, and be directed to it, as their genuine end;
yet in a more eminent manner this honor is designed him in Prayer. For were it
otherwise, Our Lord would not have begun his Prayer with, Hallowed be thy Name,
nor have concluded it with, Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory. And
if the glory of what you have, and are, be not ascribed to that Omnipotent
Being from whom you receive them; If you sacrifice unto your Net, and burn
incense unto your Drag; if you attribute any acquisition or endowment to your
self, you rob God of his Honor (of which he is most tender) and can be truly
said neither to Hallow Gods Name, nor to give him Glory.

And here it will be natural for you to consider that the Kingdom, Power, and
Glory of God, are not fading and transitory, but permanent, eternal, and for
ever and ever. For if it were otherwise, and that you were to make your Prayers
to a mortal, mutable God, one subject to change of mind and death, it would
lessen the vigor of your Devotion. But seeing the object thereof is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever: and that his Kingdom, Power, and Glory, are
from everlasting to everlasting; seeing God is a merciful Father and still
ready to hear the cry of his Penitent Children; and seeing he is for ever a
King, loving and helpful to his Subjects; and for ever one, for whose Glory it
is to grant your Addresses; these considerations give you spirit to call upon
him with comfort and assurance, and prevent your doubting of his gracious
Audience for the things you crave of him for the sake of his Kingdom, Power and
Glory.

All communications of Goodness flow from God, and it is but just that they
should return to him again in Sacrifices of Praise and Adoration. And therefore
let it be your care to ascribe unto him the honor of all you have, and do. For
this will keep you from that ostentation and vainglory, to which man's proud
nature is not a little inclinable, especially in matters of Religion, which
being observed by our Savior, he strictly cautioned all men against it,
bidding them by all means to avoid Vanity and Pride in the duties of Religion;
and particularly in Alms, and Prayers. In Alms he requires such a Secrecy, as
that if the left hand had eyes and ears, yet it should neither see nor hear
what the right hand did, that by this means the Alms-giver might utterly be
freed from all suspicion of Vainglory.

The Scribes indeed gave their Alms with sound of trumpet, they called the Poor
together from every quarter, not that they should all partake of their Alms,
but to have the more Spectators. All they aimed at was the empty rumor and
vogue of being Bountiful. For which they were so far from deserving any reward
from God, that they deserved a punishment, for their Folly, Dissimulation, and
Injustice. For their Folly, in preferring Humane things to Divine; for their
Dissimulation, in imposing upon the world, by their counterfeit Piety; and for
their Injustice, in assuming that Praise to themselves which was due only unto
God.

CHAP. XVIII. The End and Drift of Prayer, etc.
AND as our Lord cautioned all men against Vainglory in giving Alms, so he
likewise cautioned them against the same in Prayer. In which he would have all
carefully to eschew the fashion and mode of Hypocrites, Personators and Actors
in Religion, who (among the Jews) were wont to pray standing in the Synagogues,
and corners of the streets, places of public concourse, where they were sure
to have many to see them. But, instead of affecting any such popularity, he
would have you studiously to avoid it, by going in your closet, and shutting
the doors, and with all possible privacy to pray to your Father which is in
secret, and your Father which sees in secret shall reward you openly. Not that
our Lord condemns Public Prayer, which the Church has practiced ever since she
had a being upon Earth, but rather than that you should be thought to pray for
Ostentation, he would have you retire from all worldly company, as Jacob did
when he wrestled with the Angel, Genesis 32.24. And in your private Prayers (of
which Christ Jesus speaks S. Matthew. 6.) to be as private as you can; to go into
the most secret Apartment, and there unbosom your self to God. For though he
himself be invisible, yet he sees you, how secret soever you are, and all that
you do in secret. And he that is thus the beholder of Private Devotions shall
reward you before men and Angels. Be content therefore that God looks upon and
esteems you, that he is a witness of what you do, seeing it is from him alone
that you expect your reward. But if in a duty wherein God's Glory is so nearly
concerned, you take in so poor an accession as the praise of men, it is but
just that that should be your reward, and that you receive none other from God;
to whom nothing can be more displeasing than to see Ostentation interpose in
your Devotion, and that therein you seek the applause of men more than his
Glory. Whereas in all your worship of God, private or public, your eye should
be still on his Honor, regarding nothing so much as to have him approve your
doings, because he only is able to reward them.

And tho God's Glory is to be the first and principal end of your Prayers, yet
in subordination to this, you may also design your own benefit, and that of
others. For these are very consistent and need not be separate. For at the same
time that you use Prayer as an Act of Worship solely due unto God, you may also
use it as a means appointed by him to obtain his Blessings; which are either
Spiritual or Secular, belonging to your Soul, or Body. The first are Grace,
Holiness, and Pardon of Sins; in praying for which you may be peremtory and
absolute. But in praying for temporal Blessings, you are to be conditional, and
to use resignation and submission, and in craving them never to design any
thing that is mean and sordid.

And (1.) if you desire, and God gives you, Secular Power and Authority, do not
abuse or prostitute it to wicked, unmanly purposes, such as the gratifying of
your spleen, and revenge, and the oppression of those you hate. But employ your
Authority in undoing the heavy burdens; in protecting the impetent, and him
that has no helper: in breaking the jaws of the wicked, and plucking the Spoil
out of their teeth; in delivering the poor that cry, and the fatherless, and
him that has none to help: In short, use the authority God gives you, in
executing Justice, and maintaining Truth, in being a Terror to evil doers, and
a Praise and encouragement to them that do well.

And for worldly Riches, do not desire them for such low regards as the
maintaining of Pride, Pomp, Luxury, or the like; but that you may have
wherewith to maintain good Works, and to be in your prosperity (what Job was in
his) Eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame. That the blessing of him who is
ready to perish may come upon you, and that by your means the heart of the
needy may sing for joy, Job. 29.

(2.) Let your Prayers and Endeavors go hand in hand; for the former without
the latter is trifling and mockery; and the latter without the former, vanity
and presumption: you can never rightly desire what you do not by all good means
labor to obtain. To pray for that which you do not endeavor after, is to be
the moral of the Clown in the Apologue, who called to Hercules to help him out
with his mir'd Cart, without setting his own shoulder to the wheel; The eye to
Heaven, and the hand to the Helm, is the old rule; Supplications and Endeavors
are never to be disjoined, no good is to be expected from either of them when
alone.

(3.) Observe what answer God makes, and what returns you receive to your
Prayers: And in particular consider that his gracious Providence may often deny
you some temporal Blessings as seeing them less fit for you to receive. But
then he gives you others in their stead, which his infinite Goodness and Wisdom
sees are more for your advantage. And though God has promised to give to them
that ask, yet it is with these limitations, viz. That he sees it good for you:
and that he has not by some particular Decree determined the contrary. As for
example, If God has determined to destroy an impenitent Nation, it is not all
the Prayers of the holiest men on Earth, can prevail with God to preserve it.
And of this you have a dreadful instance in Ezekiel 14. where it is evident
that when God has resolved to punish a Land with any kind of Scourge, he will
not forbear to do it for any manner of intercession.

Finally, whether God grants or denies your requests, it is your duty to resign
your will to his, and to affect your mind with a profound sense of his infinite
goodness, in that, without difficulty of Access, he admits you to pray unto
him, and that you need not doubt of acceptance, if you pray as you ought. And
to show how you are to do this, has been my care in what I now present you. God
prosper what has been said, and make it to be for his own Glory, and your
eternal Happiness, through Jesus Christ. To whom with God the Father and God
the Holy Ghost, be Praise, Glory, Adoration, and Thanksgiving, for ever and for
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Books Written by the Reverend L.A. D. D. Dean of Lichfield.
WEst Barbary, or an Account of the Customs and Revolutions of that Country.

The Present State of the Jews in Barbary.

The First State of Mahomedism.

The Primitive Institution, or a Discourse of Catechizing.

A Modest Plea for the Clergy.

An Introduction of the Sacrament.

The Catechumen.

An Account of the Millennium.

The Genuine use of the two Sacraments, viz. Baptism, and the Lord's Supper,
with the Christians Obligation frequently to receive the Latter.

The History of the Heresy denying the Divinity of Christ.

The Christians daily Sacrifice duly offered, being a practical Discourse of
the right Performance of Prayer.

An Account of Tangier during the Earl of Tiviot 's Government: in a Letter to
a Person of Quality.


