The Main PRINCIPLES OF Christian Religion IN An 107 short Articles or
Aphorisms, generally received, as being proved from Sripture.

Now further cleared and confirmed by the Consonant Doctrine recorded in the
Articles and Homilies of the Church of England; under Four Heads, VIZ.

Of things to be I. Believed, comprehended in the CREED. II. Done, in the TEN
COMMANDMENTS. III. Practiced, in the GOSPEL, particularly TWO SACRAMENTS. IV.
Prayed for, in the LORDS PRAYER.

EXPLAINED.

By Tho. Adams, M.A. sometime Fellow of Brazen-Nose College in Oxon, and late
Chaplain to the Right Honorable Countess Dowager of Clare.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1675.

To the Inhabitants of Wood-Church in Wirral-Hundred in Cheshire.
Dear Countrymen and Friends!
WHiles in my retired condition, I was lately devising, how I might do some
good to the place of my Nativity, I had a strong apprehension, from the
affections many of you have expressed to my Fathers Family, that some of the
Labors of my dear Brother Mr. Thomas Adams, now with God, would be very
acceptable to you, for the edification of your souls; and thereupon as most
generally useful for you: I resolved to be at the charge of Printing this
Catechetical Explanation of His. It Is well known amongst you, that my
Grandfather Mr. Richard Adams was Rector of your Church, and then by his
purchase Patron of the perpetual Advowson, Six of his Line and Name since all
devoted to the Ministry of the Gospel, viz. Mine honored Father Mr. Charles
Adams, and Uncle Mr. Randal Adams (yet I hope alive in Ireland), my self, and
three Brothers, Peter, Thomas, and Charles Adams were born in the
Personage-house Psalm. 87.5, 6.
. My dear Mother (who also bore two other of my Brothers, viz. James and John
there too) the Daughter of a worthy Gentleman was likewise born in your Parish.
My Reverend Father and Uncle did some short part of their time exercise their
Ministry amongst you; and all of us Brethren in the Ministry, have preached an
occasional Sermon or more to you, though none of us could be settled with you,
to spend our selves and be spent amongst you. However, we that are alive and at
a distance from you, do often bear you upon our hearts, and earnestly desire
that you may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Some of you cannot
but remember, whiles my dear Father had the charge of your Souls, he did preach
the Gospel to you, both in season and out of season, beseeching you to be
reconciled to God, who soon took him off from that work with you, to his
eternal rest. And I do assure you, my Brother (whose sound and wholesome fruit
you may here taste) was very solicitous, and so are those who yet survive, that
you may be acquainted with the truth as it is in Jesus. In order whereunto, I
do now present and heartily recommend to you, this short Manual of Christian
Doctrine. I pray you be pleased to receive it kindly, and entertain it
friendly; not only out of love to the Author or Donor, but to the Truth. It is
proverbially said amongst you [ Cheshire Chief of Men], there having anciently
been valiant ones born and bred there: Let not now any Prophet of the Lord have
occasion to complain of you, that none are valiant for the truth Ier. 9 3.
; which none can be as they ought, unless well-trained, instructed, or
Cateehised (as Abraham's brave ones Genesis 14.14.
were for the war) in the mysteries of the Gospel; for lack of knowledge
wherein, a professing people will be destroyed Hos. 4.6.
Being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart Ephesians. 4.18.
. He that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will
show them no favor Isa. 27.11.
. To prevent this mischievous ignorance, and help your understandings that you
may rightly know God and do his will. Such as I have, give I you. Let none then
despise this small token of my love, which I do in the name of Jesus Christ
send to you. Others of their plenty have formerly given to the meaner sort of
you Milk and Bread for the body, and lately Means for the instructing the Minds
of your Children in the Rudiments of Learning; now I do offer a Mite out of my
penury, to establish your hearts in Religion; Act. 3.6.
spiritual milk 1 Cor. 3.2. Heb. 5.12.
, and bread Mat. 4.4. Amos 8.11.
, which I know you have need of. It comes not to eat your Bread, but to
distribute something of the bread of life to every Family. I expect you should
bid it welcome, and not distaste it, as the Gaderens for the sake of their
Hogs, did the company of Christ himself, wishing him to leave their Coasts Luk
8.26, 37. -- 9, 5. -- 10, 11, 12.
. Lest coming in kindness to you all at this day, it should be a Testimony
against any of you at the great day Mat. 10.14, 40, etc.
. Believe me! I would not have it as the Flying Roll in the Prophets Vision, to
consume any House whereinto it does enter Zach. 5.
; but to warn every person and every family of you, in this crooked generation,
to flee from the wrath to come, and meet God by repentance. I confess it would
trouble me to come into any of your Houses (or have tidings thereof) and find
this little Book, designed for your good, to be carelessly thrown up and down,
and given to little ones to play with, and tear in pieces; or the leaves cut
out with a knife, and burnt, as the Book Ier. 36: 23.
that Baruch wrote from the mouth of the Prophet Jeremiah was misused; and
mostly for the sake of those careless and untoward ones. Yet if one sinner be
reclaimed by it from the error of his ways, built up in faith, and love, and
brought really to obey the Gospel, that will answer all my cost, and be
abundant matter of much joy. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
are lost 2 Cor. 4.3:
. However I may in some sort say with the Apostle for his Countrymen, Brethren,
my hearts desire and prayer to God for you, is, that you may be saved. Romans
10.1.
I shall therefore take the freedom upon this occasion to enlarge something
under these three following heads, viz.

1. Concerning the necessity of instructing, and being instructed in the
Doctrine which is according to godliness. 2. The import and advantage of this
Book before you, and how you may particularly use and improve it. 3. Some
general Rules consonant to Scriptures, and the Materials of this Book grourded
thereon, to help you all in your Practice.
I. The necessity of instructing, or Catechizing, both as it respects those who
Teach, and those who are Taught Gal. 6.6.
, is evident from the Injunction of the supreme Lawgiver, who does frequently
charge Superiors to teach, and Inferiors to learn Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19, etc. --
6.6, 7, 8. -- 4.9. Ephesians. 6.4. Isa. 28.10. Ex. 13.8. Psalm. 78.5. Prove. 22.6. --
29* 3. -- 10.1. -- 1.10. -- 4.1, 2. Col. 3.11, 12. Genesis 18.18, 19. 2 Timothy 1.5.
with 3.15, etc.
. Which strongly obliges those who have others under their authority, to do it
as they are able; and (if they cannot read themselves) to put those who have
learned to read upon the work, and see them do it to the utmost of their power
for edification. To strengthen this charge of so great and useful importance,
the Spirit of God does highly commend the practice according to it, as that
wherein he much delights; and therefore makes it necessary to us, who should
be solicitous to please him; yea in the Families wherein we live, as well as in
the Congregation; as a part of that solemn service he has appointed in his
word, with Prayers and Praises. Unless persons learn the Principles of
Christian Doctrine 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5. Ioh. 8.29.
, they will not be able to hear Sermons with profit, nor understand clearly and
distinctly the nature of Faith, Repentance, Justification, etc. nor to give a
reason of the hope that is in them, which they are required to do. And the
rather that they may withstand fundamental errors, as well as resist evil
practices; which was memorably seen in the very Children of Merindol, who made
a solemn Confession of their Faith from Scripture, amazing and confounding
their persecuting adversaries. That shining Star Luther, in the dawning of the
Reformation, used to say his Catechism was parva Biblia, the little Bible,
meaning a short sum of that heavenly Doctrine which the very Son of God did
publish from the bosom of his eternal Father, and which the Holy Spirit did
reveal by the Prophets and Apostles for the salvation of our souls. This might
move him, reforming the Church from the dregs of Idolatry and Superstition, to
carry his Catechism always along with him, to read and peruse it almost every
day, as he did; affirming seriously, that he always learned something from it,
which he did not (at least so practically) know before. Agreeable whereunto, in
our age, said laborious, holy, and zealous Mr. Joseph Alleine concerning
Catechism, If any think themselves above it, it is from their pride or
ignorance, for my part I account my self a learner. And therefore a Sum of
Christian Principles, methodically digested and explained, ought to be sought
after and embraced by us, as a precious treasure, yea for the elder to have
recourse to; but more especially for the younger, who almost from their very
Cradles may learn something of it as the Apostle speaks 1 Timothy 3.5.
, that as newborn Babes they may receive the sincere milk 1 Pet. 2.2. Isa.
55.1, 2.
of the word, that they may grow thereby Sir Edwyn Sands observed Eighty years
ago, that this was a notable means for the growth of the Reformed Religion.
. Upon this account I earnestly entreat you who can justly claim a superiority
in your own houses, that you would bethink your selves what an authority you
are entrusted with from God, who requires you to exercise it with an holy zeal,
and maintain it with all Christian prudence, without Lordliness and rigor,
endeavor to be well skilled in the Scripture Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19.
; consult the several tempers of those within your doors; allot fit and stated
seasons for the getting of these Principles by heart; and watch over them daily
with care, both as to their set task, and practice answerable to these
Principles; keeping them seriously to mind both the business of Religion in
their general Calling, and of their distinct worldly employments in their
particular Callings. Suffer not your selves and houses to go hurrying to Hell,
by opposing Gods most wise government of the world, which he carries on orderly
for the safety and comfort of his Servants, by well-instructed Families (such
as Abraham's was) who became instrumental to carry down the knowledge of God in
all peaceableness to posterity; so as to leave an expectation of Gods blessing
upon them, whose welfare Nature it self does move us to promote. The truth is,
My Friends, if we did but remember our selves, as we are Christians, dedicated
to God by Baptism, expecting benefit by the purchase of Christ, we should
consider we are not our own, but bought with a price, under the greatest
obligation to live to him that has bought us; and should take all possible
care that we and ours might be His. Do then I beseech you, all you can to save
your selves and others. Oh! pity their poor souls defiled by sin, and exposed
to misery. Oh! let them not perish through your carelessness, lest any of them
say in Hell, as Cyprian brings in Children saying, their Parents were their
Murderers; It Is long of you that we lie in easeless torments. Bewail the
corrupted sad estate of your Children, as descending and deriving pollution
from you. Let them timely know the only remedy; bring them to reverence the
holy God, and read his word with greatest awe; showing them the danger of
breaking his Commandments, the benefit of ordering their lives according to his
mind, that they may truly glorify and enjoy him. Charge them to take heed they
be not carried away with an inordinate love to the profits, pleasures, and
honors of this life; but learn the great lessons of self-denial and cleaving
to the Lord Jesus with full purpose of heart, bearing patiently whatever he is
pleased to try them with. And be sure you neglect not seasonably and duly, to
admonish and correct them Prove. 29.15, 17. with 4. 1 Samuel 2.23, etc. -- 3.13.
Luke 12.47, 48. Prove. 1.24, 25, etc.
, that their iniquities be not their ruin. Do you who are Inferiors willingly
submit. Oh! take heed of refusing instruction, or opposing the means which is
used to bring you acquainted with God and your selves; lest you be found guilty
of shutting out the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of
God, that it may not shine into your hearts.

II. Concerning the import and usefulness of this small Book I do here put into
your hands and houses; praying the spiritual matter of it may reach to, and
abide in your hearts. You see here be under four chief Heads or Chapters an 107
short Articles (which also are Answers to the Questions in the Margin) now
generally received. These A.'s are as so many entire Sentences, or distinct
Propositions and Aphorisms (the Commandments are Ten of them) without depending
for their sense upon any Question; containing the fundamentals of Christian
knowledge and practice; so that the Learner may by committing them to memory,
lay up in his heart the Sum of Christianity; and make a profession, confession,
or repetition of it when called, in a continued speech, or else answer to any
part of it, particularly when the Questions in the Margin are used by another,
making enquiry into his knowledge. These several Articles you find have plain
proofs from Scripture at large, to show that these necessary matters of Faith
and Obedience are surely founded upon the never-failing word of God; whose
supreme authority should be of force to awe our consciences, and engage our
hearts to the practice of those things which do appear to be our indispensable
duties. Unto Divine warrant, for further illustration and confirmation, here
are the Testimonies brought from the authentic Records of Reformed Religion
amongst us, I mean the Articles and Homilies of the Church of England, as
agreeing with, and clearing or strengthening of the several Propositions; yea
and very consonant to the main body of the materials in the short Catechism
which is in the Common Prayer Book, to be learned by every Child, before he be
confirmed, or admitted to receive the Holy Communion. For the four chief heads
there, are the Creed, or things to be believed; the Ten Commandments, showing
our duty to God and our Neighbors; the Doctrine of the Sacraments; the things
contained in the Lords Prayer. And there they who present Children at Baptism,
are charged to call upon them to hear Sermons, and chiefly provide that they
may learn the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments in the English
tongue, and all other things which a Christian man ought to know and believe to
his Souls health. All which are (as in so short a room can be well expected)
methodically presented to you in this Book. Wherein lastly you have our
departed Friend's endeavors in a short and easy Explanation, to make the
Principles plain to be understood. Now for the use and improvement of it, and
the advantage you may have by it (supposing you will first read this Epistle of
mine to you), I would advise you who have the charge of Families especially,
and can read, or have those in your house or neighborhood who will do it for
you; unless your own prudence dictate somewhat better for any of you in your
circumstances: (1) Distinctly and treatably to read over, the Articles or
Answers, without taking any notice then of the Questions; and require those
under your charge to attend diligently thereunto. I suppose you may go over (if
not all) one half of the A. s (which are printed in a large letter) at one
solemn reading; then the next time the rest, beginning where you left. But if
any of you think the Task too large for once or twice, divide it into four or
three Readings. If according to Chapters, you may read each day (that you set
apart for this purpose) one; if into three, according to Chapters, or chief
heads, for distinction of matter, you may the first one day, the second
another, and the two last on the third. If according to Articles for five days,
on the first day read Nineteen Articles, on the second Nineteen more, ending
with the Thirty-Eighth Article, on the third twenty A. s more, ending with
Article Sixty-two, on the fourth Twenty-two A. s more, ending with A.
Eighty-five, on the fifth Twenty-two A. s more, to the end. (2) Your next
reading of these Principles or Articles over, should be with the Texts of
Scripture that prove them, and the Testimonies of the Reformed Church of
England, attesting and in a sort opening, or some way clearing each
Proposition. (3) The last reading (if not dispatched at once with the second)
should be the Explanations of the Author, enlarging more upon each Article, and
so making it more plain and clear, even to the meanest understanding, who will
be attentive and considerate. To which purpose, those who govern in each
Family, should be always watchful to see there be an attendance to it without
noise. But you should at the beginning, after the first Reading, set in with
those under your charge to get the Articles or Answers without book; (and if by
Friends I understand the poorer sort will in good earnest learn them by heart,
likely I may procure the A. s printed in one sheet by themselves to give to
them; those who are more able will I suppose buy them). Then you may hear them
repeat what they have learned; and proceed those days you Catechize them,
especially every Lord's Day (you who have not better helps) to read some portion
of the Explanation, so much at least as was learned the week before, engaging
them by small rewards and punishments, to hearken with all seriousness, and to
do that with all their might which is evidently proved to be their duty. This
conscientiously and constantly performed, will I hope through Gods blessing
turn to a good account for you and me. It Is only for the sakes of some I am
thus minute. Give me leave then particularly to mind those who have not yet
exercised themselves to Prayer (as they should have done), how this Book may be
helpful, and improved to a solemn performance of that duty, and an attainment
of a gift therein; by having variety of orderly and fit matter upon all
occasions, from a distinct knowledge of our sins and wants. As for instance, A.
98. you have the nature of Prayer described, which you will do well to read,
pause upon, and consider how it is proved by Scripture-Testimony, and how
attested by our Forefathers; then read our Authors Explanation of it, whereby
you will come to understand the parts of Prayer; and in whose name it is to be
offered to God, for which see also A. 21, 25. Now for you who are a Learner, to
frame your self to pray orderly and pertinently, you may look into, and
meditate upon A. 4. compared with A. 100, 101. for a Preface. Then pass on to
confess your original sin, by considering (and if you will you may take your
Pen and write out particulars prayer-wise) A. 14, 15, 16. compared with A. 13.
Then you may particularize your actual transgressions, by considering what is
forbidden in every Commandment of the Law, and acknowledging those sins, which
by looking into that glass you find your hearts to upbraid you with, A. 47, 51,
55, 61, 65, 69, 72, 75, 78, 81. Then you may see their aggravations, A. 83, 84.
with their Explanations. Then the consequents or punishments due to
transgressors, A. 17, 18, 19. Hereupon consider the Gospel requires Faith and
Repentance, A. 86, 87. Then come to the next part of Prayer, viz. Petition.
Here you may have directions to pray for the Spirit, working in Effectual
Calling, A. 29, 30, 31. Pleading Christ's mediation, A. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
and seeking particularly, that God would give what he requires in his holy
Commandments, A. 46, 50, 54, 57, 64, 68, 71, 74, 77, 80. compared with A. 101,
102, 103, 104, 105, 106, and A. 33, 34, 35, 36. still collecting and compacting
such materials out of these Articles, and the Scriptures proving of them, with
what follows (where it is needful) in the Explanation more briefly or largely,
as every ones present condition and circumstances require. Now for the
remaining part of Prayer, which is Thanksgiving, you will better know what you
are to give thanks for, by seeing what sins or evils God has kept you from;
and what good things he has bestowed upon you. And this you will materially
discern, by considering well what you have confessed and petitioned; then it
will be further helpful to meditate upon A. 9, 10, 12, 20, 21, 22, 31, 32, 85,
88, 89. For Conclusion read A. 107. with the Scriptures and Explanation. Turn
to these Articles, as you see them noted here thus minutely for the sake of you
(who need such direction) and yours, some of whom possibly you may engage to
write what you show them in this order, or when you read to them, for the
teaching of them to be more methodical, in learning to pray, and that longer or
shorter, as occasion requires, for their own and others edification. But still
remember, It is the Spirit likewise that helps our infirmities, Romans 8.26. So
that our prayers through Christ may be truly acceptable to God, and a means of
our sanctification. I do not urge you in every prayer to insist on every head
here, or restrain you to these, only show you a way how to use these; neither
would I tie you to this way, but advise you to exercise your spiritual senses
to discern, and have regard to your own occasions, and the enlargement of your
own hearts, that out of the abundrnce of them, in faith and humility you may
express your minds to God in Scripture Language, from a feeling of our own
wants. Thus I have took the freedom to suggest something of help in this kind,
to those who may either desire or need it. But I impose nothing upon any one,
which God has left free. I hope none that know me well, will judge me to be so
narrow-spirited. I have only offered a guide to the weaker, for to bring to
their mind needful matter, under the three main parts of Prayer, viz.
Confession, Petition, Thanksgiving. It may be some will begin with Petition or
Thanksgiving, and then Confession, or vary and use them interchangeably, as in
prudence they think best for that season, or are moved by the holy Spirit to
omit, or but touch on one, or the other part, and slay most on the third, which
may do well. The great care to be took, is that the party praying perform this
necessary duty with hearty and sincere devotion. But I humbly conceive, it were
of great advantage, for one or more serious persons in a Neighborhood, who
have better understanding (after the reading this I now write to you) to show
unto those of meaner abilities, the import of this advise for the use and
improvement of this small token for their knowledge and practice. Perhaps the
Schoolmaster may think it expedient to do it for some of his Scholars in the
highest Form. However I could persuade my self some unexperienced in praying
(especially towardly young ones) will rejoice to be directed. I have latele
known some who have been much changed and wrought upon by the serious reading
of such a Book as this, given and heartily recommended to them. It would do
well in your Family-reading of it, if some of the House would turn to the
Bible, and find out the Texts, that you may with your own eyes see them there
as cited. I doubt not but you will find them, unless possibly by the error of
the Printer (which yet I know not) there may be somewhere a failure; but then
you having the words, a little searching of the Scripture will soon amend that
(if it should be so). But I fear in being thus particular for your profit
(which I aim at) I shall run my self beyond my projected bounds. It remains I
should subjoin something of,

III dly, Some short general Rules, consonant to Scripture, and grounded mostly
upon these cited in this little Book which may be of concernment to all; to
help both superiors, inferiors, and equals, in the practice of godliness.
Wherefore that you may by this Mannual grow better, which I humbly beg of our
good God.

(1) Keep your end in your eye, and think much on the means prescribed to
attain it, and how you may best use them. You must make Religion your business;
and that requires you to aim at the glorifying of God, and the enjoying of him,
the saving of your own souls, according to the Rule God has given you in his
word. In all your employments, whether in your general or particular Calling;
and all your enjoyments, whether spiritual or temporal, magnify the Name of
God, extol his excellency and perfection in thought, word, and deed. Endeavor
to carry your selves so agreeable to his mind, that you may please him, and be
accepted of him. It Is a small matter then how you are censured in man's judgment.

1 Cor. 6.20. Mat. 16.26. Romans 11.36. Psalm. 50.23. Mat. 5.16. Psalm. 144.15. 1
Cor. 13.12. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. 2 Cor. 5.9. 1 Cor. 4.3.

(2) Bethink your selves, who God is, and that you your selves are dependants
upon him. Oh! labor to have right notions of him who is wholly a spiritual,
invisible, independent being of himself infinite in all perfection, as none
else is or can be, a most gracious and merciful rewarder of all those that
diligently seek him. Who is but one, yet distinguished into three persons, or
subsistents, all equal in power and glory; and doing all things most wisely and
powerfully. Remember by him you were made and are governed; in him you live,
move, and have your beings; and can do nothing without him, who is everywhere,
and will everywhere be worshipped in spirit and truth.

Job. 4.24. Job 10.4. Exodus 3.14. Ioh. 11.7, 8, 9. Heb. 11.6. 1 Timothy 2.6. 1
Job. 5.7. Psalm. 104.24. Job 1.3. Act. 17.28. Neh. 9.6. Ioh. 15.5. Luke 12.26. 2
Cor. 3.5. 1 Chronicles. 28 9, 10. Ier. 23 23, 24. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.

(3) Consider well what an happy state man was in, when he came first out of
Gods hands; and into what a sad plight of sin and misery you and all other mere
men and women are fallen. Be sure no blessing can be expected, but a curse, so
long as you abide in a state of corrupt nature, unregenerate; tribulation and
anguish do attend every mothers child of you, both here and hereafter. Yet,

Psalm. 8.4, 5. Genesis 2.7. Job 35.10, 11. Mat. 10.28. Eccles. 12.7. -- 7.29. Romans
3.9, etc. -- 5.19. Genesis 3.6. -- 6.5. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Ier. 4.22. Tit. 3.3. Gal.
3.10. Ioh 3.3. Lam. 3.39. Romans 2.9.

(4) Hearken attentively to what is done and and offered by our gracious
Redeemer for your restoration. What offices he has of Priest, Prophet, and
King, both in his estate of Humiliation and Exaltation. Oh be affected with the
glad tidings he brings, who came to save his people from their sins; and is the
great Peacemaker, and only Mediator betwixt God and man, ready to save to the
uttermost all poor sinners that come unto God by him, in that new and living
way which he has consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say his
flesh.

Mat. 1.21. Act. 4.12. Ioh. 1.14, 48. Ephesians. 2.14, 15. 1 Timothy 2.5. Mat. 11.28,
etc. Ioh. 6.37. Heb. 10.20.

(5) Ponder thoroughly upon, and readily receive what help the Holy Spirit is
pleased to afford in working of effectual grace, and see the necessity of it.
He is a most free agent, and stands ready to enlighten the mind, and convince
of sin, righteousness, and judgment, to incline the will, soften the heart, and
put a principle of grace within it, or else it would remain strong under all
the rebukes and exhortations of the word.

Ioh. 3.5, 6. Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 2.12. Ioh. 16.8. Act. 16.14. Heb. 4.12. 1 Cor.
6.17. Romans 8.28. 2 These. 2.13, 14. Ezekiel. 36.26. 2 Cor. 3.3, 6.

(6) Look your selves often in the glass of Gods holy Law, and therein take
notice of your own deformities. See how much you fall short of what God calls
for, and how much you do of that which he forbids. This will be a means to come
to a distinct sight of your own vileness and sinfulness; as also if you are
renewed, how you ought to walk; but that you can never merit Gods favor by the
best works of the Law. Yet you ought mightily to oppose the first motions and
risings of any corruption in your hearts, and carefully to avoid all such
occasions as are likely to give advantages to those corruptions, and betray you
into their hands.

Mal. 4.4. Iam. 1.23. Romans 7.7. Gal. 3.10, 22. Iam. 2.10. -- 3.2. 1.25. Mat.
5.18, 19. 1 Timothy 1.8. Romans 4.2. Gal. 2.16. Luke 17.10. Iam. 1.14. -- 4.7. 1
These. 5.22. Mat. 13.37. Mat. 26.41.

(7) Hereupon, Enter into your Closets, be convinced of, sigh and mourn over
your own impotency, inability, and unwillingness to come to Christ, till you
are effectually drawn. Alas! you find by comparing your selves with the Law,
that you are neither able nor willing of your selves to keep the Commandments,
but do daily break them in thought, word, and deed; yea and with aggravating
circumstances in the sight of God, deserving his wrath and curse both in this
and the future world: Which may make you sit down and bemoan your low estate,
and cry out, What shall we do to be saved? Then,

Ioh. 6.44, 45, 65. -- 5.40. 1 King. 8.46. Ecclss. 7.20. Prove. 20.9. Col. 1.21.
Gal. 5.17. 2 Cor. 10.5. Isa. 46.8. Act. 2.37. -- 16.30.

(8) Look up to Christ by an eye of faith, trust to him alone, and repent of
your sinfulness, which keeps you from God. Consider him who has satisfied
Divine Justice, as he is offered in the promises; and give credit unto them,
which are in him Yea and Amen. Put your affiance in him alone, who is the
Savior, for acceptance of your persons, remission of your sins, and obtaining
of eternal life. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; your
great great concern then is, to receive him who saves his people from their
sins; resign up your selves unto him as Mediator, and through him unto God. Be
sorrowful after a godly sort, for all that which offends him, which is not only
an outward forbearance of sin, but a particular inward loathing and hatred of
all sin as sin, striving against it, and endeavoring to mortify it.

Act. 6.31. -- 2.38. -- 3.19. 1 Ioh. 5.13. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. Ioh. 3.14, 15. --
6.29, 47. Act. 13.38, 39. Isa. 28.12. Prove. 3.5. 2 Cor. 5.19. Ioh. 1.12. Romans
5.11, 17. Mat. 1.21. Zach. 12.10, etc. Act. 5.31. Psalm. 119.104. -- 97.10. Iam.
4.8, 9, 10. Act. 8.22. Col. 3.5.

(9) Be careful to observe the institutions of Christ, and all his Ordinances
as he has prescribed. Hear, Read, Receive the Sacraments as he has appointed,
waiting for the Spirit, who makes all means effectual. Oh! delight to meet God
in public Ordinances, and give up your selves to be ruled and directed by him
therein. And therefore take a very especial care for the due observance of the
Lord's Day, which is appointed for the more solemn worshipping of God, and the
benefit of man to refresh him with heavenly things. This you should spend in
the Lords-work, and not in worldly pleasures or profits. I can assure you, the
Author of this Explanation did make great conscience hereof, and expressed much
distaste of those who did slight or profane it. The last Sermons he preached
were to urge a due observance of the Lord's Day. And on the Lords-day-morning
Decemb^r, 1670.
a little before he departed hence, He told us, He was going to keep a Sabbath
in heaven, and here strangers did not intermeddle with his joy.

Mat. 28. ult. Isa. 63.5. Psalm. 19.8. Ioh. 5.39. Act. 26.18. Romans 10.13. 1 Cor.
3.7. -- 12.13. Ier. 31.31, etc. Col. 3.16. Mark 16.16. Luke 22.19, 20. Mark
2.27. Isa. 56.6. -- 58.13.

(10) And lastly, Be much in prayer to God, through Christ, in the Spirit;
which indeed should go before, accompany, and follow after daily mercies, other
duties and enjoyments. You should constantly perform this Duty with all
intention of mind, and heartiness both in public, and your Families at all
praying-seasons, and more especially in secret; which if you rightly do, from a
pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned, according to the Rule to
measure our requests by, to the honor of God, in the Name of his beloved Son;
will keep up the life of Religion, and be prevalent for a blessing upon all you
take in hand and enjoy.

Mat. 26.41, 42. Col. 4.1. Phil. 4.6. Mat. 6.6. Ioh. 15.16. -- 16.23, 26. Psalm.
66.18. 1 Ioh. 5.14. Heb. 4.16. Romans 8.26, 27. Psalm. 92.1, 2. -- 50.15.

Thus, My Friends! I have as briefly as I could, laid before you these Ten
Directions, to help you in your Christian practice, agreeable to the materials
more largely spoken to in the Book it self. I earnestly entreat you, to work
them upon your hearts, and set in heartily to practice by the prudent use of
these Helps. I have unto them affixed Texts of Scripture, which do abundantly
prove them. It may be some of you will not only turn to them in your Bibles,
and read therein the proofs confirming each direction, (grounded for the main
upon the Articles, as these are upon Scripture), but will take the pains to
write out the Scriptures at large in a Paper-book, as they fall under the
general heads, which would be a notable means to imprint them in your minds,
and deeply affect your hearts with the things, and engage you to do as God in
his word requires That you may all consent to wholesome words, even the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6.3. Eccl. 12.13. Joh. 13.17. Phil. 4.13. 1
Cor. 9.23, 27. Mat. 10.13, 14,-40. Luke 10.16 1 These. 4.8 Joh 12.25, 48.
and to the Doctrine which is according to godliness. Fear God and keep his
Commandments. Be happy in knowing and doing of these things is that I aim at.
And believe it, Friends! If I my self do not in some measure endeavor, through
Christ enstrengthening me, to live agreeable to these Directions I have now
given to you, I must expect the wrath of God should abide upon me. And if you
remain heedless and careless after you have received or rejected this Token of
my love to your Souls, it will be a Witness against you. But Beloved! I am
persuaded better things of you. That the God of Heaven may make you all wise
unto salvation, and bless these and all other endeavors for your spiritual,
temporal, and eternal welfare, is the unfeigned Prayer of

Your Friend and Remembrancer from, and unto God, Ri. Adams.
Aug. 3. 1675.
To the Reader.
Christian Reader!
TO promote that knowledge without which the mind is not good, Prove. 19.2. Heb.
12.13.
and holiness without which no man shall see the Lord, I acknowledge my self to
lie under the greatest obligations. In order whereunto, considering the
necessity and usefulness of instructing souls distinctly, in the Principles of
Christian Doctrine, i. e. those fundamental Truths on which life or death does
depend, and wherein the very essentials and vitals of Christianity do consist;
and having by me this short and easy Explanation of those Catechetical
Articles of Religion most generally received amongst us, I thought good to
publish it. More especially for the sakes of some in a remote Corner (whose
souls welfare I greatly desire) where they want those helps some others enjoy;
many are poor, others unacquainted with, or loath to buy good books; and where
this particularly for the sake of the Author (who drew his first breath there)
may likely be received with greater kindness, and read with better care. I am
not ignorant that others have done well before, both formerly and lately, in
o^e and another way, for the explication of these common, but greatest matters,
collected out of Holy Scripture, and laid together in a small room by men of
skill in the truest method, that the weak may soon understand and remember
them, which I heartily rejoice in: Yet had I been more timely considerate
enough, this might have appeared abroad e're some of those larger and much
commended, were published. However now it cannot be unseasonable in this
debauching age, to contribute a further aid, for the sound principling of
hopeful youth. Here likely will be some advantage either for matter or manner
suggested, which others have not took notice of, for the opening or evidencing
of Truth, and recommending particulars as at one sight to our prospect.
Besides, some may receive satisfaction, and take pleasure to see here the
Harmony and fair agreement of these Principles with those our Forefathers
zealously professed to hold at the beginning of our Reformation from Popery in
King Edward the Sixths and Queen Elizabeth's days. 1552. 1562. Artic. XXXV.
It Is plain, from a view of what is here annexed, and presented to us, as
attesting these several Aphorisms or Propositions; that the Articles and
Homilies of the English Church under the particulars speak the same things.
These then are such Institutions of a Christian man, as are consonant to Holy
Writ, the sober and wholesome Doctrines of those Protestants who lived in these
Kingdoms before us, and I hope will find entertainment with our posterity when
we go to rest with our Fathers. For I suppose it is easy to discern through
all disingenuous aspersions; that whoever drew them up in our age, and by what
warrant, they are so far from being Novelties to Reformed English men, that
they materially had in the former age the Authority of a Convocation and an Act
of Parliament. 13 Eliz. c. 5.
Be sure the most learned and godly Primate Usher soon after their first
publication did highly value them thus digested by several learned Divines in
the order they be here explained. And another very reverend and holy person yet
alive, 1655.
in the Confession of his Faith, printed twenty years ago, cap. 2. S. 3. did
declare, He heartily approved of this Form of sound words, and of all therein
contained; affirming, that He took it for the best Catechism that ever he saw,
and the A. s contained for a most excellent sum of the Christian Faith and
Doctrine, and a fit Test to try the Orthodoxness even of Teachers themselves.
Such Testimonies might perhaps occasion this labor in the Explanation of them.
Which I do here present to you, as the Author lest it penned for his own
private use in his Catechetical teaching of those committed to him. I liked not
to make any addition or alteration; though had he lived, and ever thought of
publishing it, (as it is not unlikely he might have done, for the same
charitable use it is now designed) no question but it would have been all
better proportioned, enlarged, and altered, yea and (if needful) put into a
more comely dress. This I conceive was the only draught of it; which I the
rather intimate, that if any defects or mistakes be found in this Explanatory
Comment, there may be no unkind reflection made upon him who went to Heaven
some time since. Dec. 11. 1670.
And whiles upon Earth showed himself, both in the University and elsewhere, to
be one of good learning, and true holiness, a fervent preacher and real
practiser of the Duties herein explained, and particularly of so sweet and
peaceful temper that his moderation was known unto all those who did familiarly
converse with him. There be other Notes of his (with these, left to my
disposal) and some of those practical Sermons upon some Texts of Scripture, on
which I find not any in the late printed Catalogues, or but few to have
treated; which as they are desired earnestly by some, so if they are by more
thought useful, may in time come abroad. This, such as it is, will I hope be no
disparagement to him that is gone, but give us to understand, he had clear
Notions of the main points of Religion, which he made his own business, and
which if they (peculiarly young ones) into whose hands it shall come, be
inclined cordially to embrace, by the heedful reading and perusing hereof, it
will help to perpetuate the memory of the just deceased; and be matter of
rejoicing to his surviving Brother, who is really desirous to serve you in love,

R. A.
Aug. 2. 1675.
In the Principles of Religion are considerable, the I. End, Gods glory, and
man's happiness, A. 1. C. I. II. Means, or Rule Scripture, A. 2. requiring, A.
3. I. Faith concerning God in his Essence, A. 4, 5. Subsistence, A. 6.
Operations, which are his Decrees, or purposes, A. 7. the execution of them, by
Creation respecting All, A. 9, 11. Providence respecting Man, A. 10, 12.


Man Created by God, A. 13. Fallen by sin, described in general, A. 14. special,
from its act, A, 15. subject, A. 16. effects, sinfulness, A. 17, 18. misery, A.
19.


Restored by Grace where of the Covenant of Grace, A. 20. Redeemer, who is
described, A. 21. who became man, A. 22. who executes offices, A. 23.
of Priest, A. 24. of Prophet, A. 25. of King, A. 26.
both in his state of Humiliation, A. 27. and both in his state of Exaltation,
A. 28.
Participation of the benefits of Redemption, by the Spirit, A. 29. in
effectual Calling, A. 30. where of the Nature of it, A. 31. Benefits, A. 32. in
this life primarily, Justification, A. 33. Adoption, A. 34. Sanctification, A.
35.
secondarily, Assurance, etc. A. 36.
at death, A. 37. resurrection, A. 38.





II. Obedience to Gods revealed Will, A. 39. C II. In the Law, summed up in the
Ten Commandments, A. 40, 41, 42. wherein of The Preface, A. 43, 44. The
Precepts I. A. 45, 46, 47. II. A. 48, 49, 50, 51, 52. III. A. 53, 54, 55, 56.
IV. A. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62. V. A. 63, 64, 65, 66. VI. A. 67, 68, 69. VII. A.
70, 71, 72. VIII. A. 73, 74, 75. IX. A. 76, 77, 78. X. A. 79, 80, 81.
Man's impotency to perform this Duty, A. 82, 83, 84.
Gospel, requiring and enjoining C. III. Graces, A. 85. Faith, A. 86.
Repentance, A. 87.
Ordinances, A. 88. Word, How effectual, A. 89. read, heard, A. 90.
Sacraments, How effectual, A. 91. Described, A. 92. Divided, A. 93. Baptism,
What, A. 94. To whom, A. 95.
Lords Supper What, A. 96. How received, A. 97.


Prayer, described, A. 98. C. IV. ruled by the Lords Prayer, where in the
Preface, A. 100. Petitions, I. A. 101. II. A. 102. III. A. 103. IV. A. 104. V.
A. 105. VI. A. 106.
Conclusion, A. 107.








Principles of Christian Religion, in an 107 Articles, with a short and easy
Explanation.
CHAP. I. Of things to be believed, comprehended in the Apostles Creed: Or a
brief Sum of Christian Doctrine, which ought to be received or believed.
Articles of Religion, 1562. Artic. 8. For they may be proved by most certain
warrant of Holy Scripture.
A. 1. What is the chief End of Man?
Man's chief End, is to glorify God 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat, or
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.
, and to enjoy him for ever Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. 26. My flesh and my heart
saileth, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
.

Homil. 3. Of Salvation. -- Above all things, and in all things to advance the
glory of God, of whom only we have our sanctification, justification,
salvation, and redemption.

Expl. 1. In which A. there are these four things to be explained: (1.) What we
are to understand by a man's end. And the Answer is, That by a man's end we mean
that which a man does intend or aim at in all his actions; or that which he
does propose to himself as the reason of what he does; ex. gr. when you see a
man bu^lding a House, if you ask him the reason why he builds a House, or what
he intends in so doing; his answer will be, to dwell in it: And here, his
dwelling in his House, when he has built it, is his end in building his House.
So again, when you see a man going to Church, if you ask him what he goes to
Church for; he will presently tell you, to hear a Sermon: Now this being that
which he does design in going to Church, sc. to hear a Sermon, it may very well
be called his end in going to Church. But then 2 dly, It is next to be
explained, what is meant by a man's chief end: Now a man's chief end, is that
which he does principally aim at in all his actions. As to keep to the last
instance, though it be a man's end (in going to Church) to hear a Sermon; yet
that is but a lower end, and that which he does only design in order to his
chief end, which is to glorify God, and to enjoy Communion with God, by
hearing his word: This Question therefore ( What is the chief end of man?) is
(q. d.) what is man's chief errand into the world? or what did God make man for?
or what is the great business that should take up the greatest part of a man's
time, thoughts, cares, affections, and endeavors, whilst he lives in the
world? or what is it that a man is principally to drive at in all his words,
thoughts, and actions, in all his duties both to God and man, and in all his
dealings with the world? Now this is that which should be his general drift in
all, sc. To glorify God, and to enjoy God both in this world and a better. And
this is the plain meaning of those Scriptures which are here made use of as
proofs. But (alas) is it not sadly to be lamented, that the corrupt generality
of people, have quite forgotten what errand they were sent about into the
world; whilst some make worldly honors and preferments their chief end, as the
ambitious; others make worldly gain and profit their chief end, and that which
they mainly drive at, as the covetous; and others do make their carnal
pleasures, delights, sports, and pastimes their chief end, as if God had put
them into the world, as the Psalmist reports of the Leviathans being put into
water, to play therein: and this is the case of the younger sort generally of
vain and wicked people, who either do not know, or will not consider, that the
end of their Creation was to honor and enjoy their Creator, both here and
hereafter. 3 dly, What it is to glorify God, may be thus explained; namely, it
is to live according to his will revealed in his word; or, it is to think,
speak, and do according to the Rule of his word. (1.) We glorify God in our
thoughts, or in our hearts, when we dare not allow our selves to think any
thing that is not stamped with Gods authority and allowance; and more
particularly, when our thoughts of God, of his works, words, and all that
relates to him, are such as do become his excellent Greatness. So when we fear,
love, admire, trust, and desire him above all. (2.) We glorify him in our
words, when our speech is not corrupt, vain, and idle, but seasoned with grace.
(3.) In our actions, when we make his word our rule, and his glory our great
and general end in all our actions. 4 thly, What it is to enjoy God; we may
best conceive of it, by what it is to enjoy a friend: Now this is, we know, to
have his presence, company, and converse, and to take delight in his society.
So to enjoy God, it is to converse with God, to be well-pleased with his
gracious presence, and not only to have him to be our Friend, or Father, but to
entertain this King of glory in our hearts and affections. Or as wicked men do
look upon the greatest part of their enjoyment to consist in (that which they
miscall) good-fellowship; so the Christians enjoying of God, is to have
fellowship with him: Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ. And to maintain and keep up this fellowship with God for ever, it
is to enjoy him for ever; which in reference to a Christians enjoyment of God
in glory, is called a being for ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17.

A 2. What Rule has God given to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him?
The Word of God (which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament Ephesians. 2.20. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone.
), is the only Rule to direct us how we may glorify 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture
is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness.
, and enjoy him 1 John 1.3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto
you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
.

Artic. vi. In the name of the Holy Scripture we do understand those Canonical
Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose Authority was never any doubt in
the Church. Homil. 1. Unto a Christian man there can be nothing either more
necessary or profitable, than the knowledge of holy Scripture; for as much as in
it is contained Gods true Word, setting forth his glory, and also man's duty. --
As many as be desirous to enter into the right and perfect way unto God, must
apply their minds to know holy Scripture, without the which they can neither
sufficiently know God and his Will, neither their office and duty. -- Let us
willingly search for the well of life in the Books of the Old and New
Testament, and not run to the stinking Puddles of men's Traditions, (devised by
men's imagination) for our justification and salvation.

Expl. 2. When the written Word of God is here called a Rule, we may understand
it thus; That as an Artificer, suppose a Mason or Bricklayer, in raising a
Wall, or a Carpenter in squaring a piece of Timber, makes use of his Rule, and
by applying this to his work, comes to know whether it be straight or crooked:
So the Christian, who would order his spiritual Building or Conversation
aright, so as to glorify and enjoy God, he must lay every stone in this
spiritual Building by this Rule; he must square all his thoughts, words, and
actions by this Line and Level, and thereby he may come to know what is right
and what is wrong, what is sin and what is duty, what is true and what is
false; and so accordingly may cease to do evil, and learn to do well; believe
that which is true, and reject that which is false; nor is the Old Testament
alone this Rule, nor the new Testament alone, but both together; and both
together they are the only Rule of Christianity; neither is there any other
ordinary, sufficient Rule to direct a Christian, either how he may serve God
acceptably, or enjoy God eternally, but this written Word. (1.) The Pagans
Rule, or Light of Nature, or what may be known of God by the things which are
made, is not sufficient to this end, because it cannot discover Christ to us,
which is the only means of salvation. (2.) The Papists Rule of Tradition is no
good Rule, because fallible and contradictory in many things to the Rule of
Scripture. And (3.) for the very same reason, the Quakers Rule is no good Rule,
I mean their Light within, because opposite to the light of the Word without;
and therefore it remains that the written Word is the only Rule.

A. 3. What do the Scriptures principally teach?
The Scriptures principally teach, what man is to believe concerning God, and
what duty God requires of man 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words,
which thou have heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
.

Artic. vi. Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation; so that
whatever is not read therein, or proved thereby, is not to be required of any
man that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought necessary
or requisite to salvation.

Homil. 1. In holy Scripture is fully contained what we ought to do, and what
to eschew; what to believe, what to love, and what to look for at Gods hand at
length.

Expl. 3. There are two things principally which man is to believe concerning
God, and they are the two main foundations of the Christian Religion, in the
practice of it: (1.) That God is, or that there is such a being who is in and
of himself absolutely perfect, and who gives Being to all his Creatures. (2.)
That he is a rewarder of those that diligently seek him, namely, in and through
Christ, Heb. 11.6. or that it is not in vain to love, serve, and obey this God.
And there is but one thing, in the general, which God requires of man, namely,
a free and full compliance with his will, whether in the doing or suffering
part of Religion.

A. 4. What is God?
God is a Spirit Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must
worship him in spirit, and in truth.
, Infinite Job 11.7. Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out
the Almighty unto perfection?
, Eternal Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God.
, and unchangeable Jam. 1.17. The Father of lights, with whom there is no
variableness, neither shadow of turning.
, in his Being Exodus 3.14. And God said unto Moses, I am that I am; and he
said, thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto
you*
, Wisdom Psalm. 147.5. Great is our Lord, and of great power, his understanding
is infinite.
, Power, Holiness Rev. 4.8. Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was* and
is, and is to come.
, Justice, Goodness, and Truth Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth: 7. Keeping mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and that will by
no means clear the guilty.
.

Homil. xvij. It passes far the dark understanding and wisdom of a mortal man
to speak sufficiently of that Divine Majesty which the Angels cannot
understand. Considering the unsearchable nature of Almighty God, -- to
reverence and dread his Majesty, -- excellent Power, -- incomparable, Wisdom,
-- inestimable Goodness, -- to take him for God Omnipotent, Invisible.

Expl. 4. Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship
him in spirit, and in truth.
A Spirit] ( i. e.) A Being which has not flesh and bones as we have, Luke
24.39. has not hands, or feet, or any bodily parts, no nor any bodily
properties neither, as length, breadth, height, depth, thickness, shape, or
color; such a Being as is not, cannot be (as God) the object of any of the
Five Senses; for no man has seen God at any time, etc. but is invisible, and
absolutely perfect, because he does not depend upon any thing else, either for
what he is, or for what he does. Job 11.7. Can thou by searching find out
God? Can thou find out the Almighty unto perfection?
Infinite] i. e. without any limits or bounds to his perfection, an unconfined
Essence, absolutely free from all measure or determination of time, place, or
degrees. Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God.
Eternal] i. e. without beginning or end of days, or succession of duration;
always the same, before and after time, ever present, infinitely above all
circumscription of motion, according to former and latter. Jam. 1.17. The
Father of lights, with whom there is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.
Vnchangeable] ( i. e.) he can never cease to be what he is, (the true God) nor
can he alter at all, so as to be more or less God than he is, nor more or less
perfect; for says he, I am God, I change not. Exodus 3.14. And God said unto
Moses, I am that I am; and he said, thus shall thou say unto the children of
Israel, I AM has sent me unto you,
In his Being] for when the Son of God, who is very God, became man, he did not
cease to be God. Psalm. 147.5. Great is our Lord, and of great power, his
understanding is infinite.
In his Power] for this being infinite, it is not capable of an alteration,
either by adding to it, or taking from it. And the same may be said concerning
his Wisdom, for the very same reason; for how can he be more or less wise than
he is, who is infinite in Wisdom and Knowledge? Rev. 4.8. Holy, holy, holy Lord
God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.
In his Holiness] i. e. he cannot be more or less holy than he is; or be more
or less inclined or obliged to act suitably to the perfection of his own
nature, than he is already. Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth: 7. Keeping mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and that will by
no means clear the guilty.
In Justice, Goodness, and Truth) i. e. he cannot be more just, good, and true
than he is, nor less just, good, and true than he is, because he is Justice,
Goodness, and Truth it self; and is all these, and has all these in infinite
and absolute perfection, and therefore he is unchangeable in these.

A. 5. Are there more Gods than one?
There is but one only Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord.
, the living and true God Jer. 10.10. But the Lord he is the true God, he is
the living God, and an everlasting King.
.

Artic. I. There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without Body,
Parts, or Passions; of infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, the Maker and
Preserver of all things, both visible and invisible.

Expl. 5. (i. e.) There is but one only absolutely supreme and perfect Being,
who is the Maker and Governor of all things; for as for Magistrates, though
they be called gods, I have said ye are gods, Psalm. 82.6. yet they are so only
by way of representation, only because they do represent God in his Authority
and Government: And for Idols, though they be called gods, as there be of this
sort gods many, yet these gods of the Heathen they are false gods, and upon
that account are everywhere disparaged in Scripture. And though the Devil
himself be called the god of this world; yet it is only because he is Gods Ape,
ruling and working in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. (but by Gods
permission) as God does in his own children. So that it still holds good, that
to us there is but one God, of whom, and by whom are all things, 1 Cor. 8.6.

A. 6. How many persons are there in the Godhead?
There are three persons in the Godhead, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
, and these three are one God, the same in substance, equal in power and glory
1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.
.

Artic. I. And in unity of this Godhead there be three persons, of one
substance, power, and eternity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Expl. 6. In this A. there are three things to be explained; as, (1.) The
meaning or nature of a Divine person. (2.) How they are said to be three
persons. (3.) How distinguished from each other. For the understanding of the
first, we are to know, that by a person in the general we mean a substantial
complete Being (whether visible or invisible), having understanding, will, and
subsistence by it self, and distinguished from any thing else by some peculiar
property that belongs to it, and to nothing else besides it self; as there is
something peculiar in every one man to distinguish him from another; this for a
person in general: But now for a Divine person, (or a person in the Godhead),
It Is a substance that is undivided, and absolutely perfect in Being,
Understanding, Will, and manner of Subsistence; yet actually, really, and
eternally distinguished from any other person, by some relative property that
belongs to it, and not to that person. (2.) For the number of the persons in
the Godhead, they are three; not only in the reckoning of man, or according to
humane apprehension, but also in reality, and in Gods account; whether men
should reckon them so or no, and are therefore called a Trinity of Persons. Yet
(3.) though they be so distinguished one from another, as that the Father is
not the Son, and the Son not the Father, and the Holy Ghost neither Father nor
Son; yet they are not, cannot be divided or separated one from another, because
the whole and single Godhead is wholly, coequally, and coessentially in all
three, by virtue whereof it is said, these three are one, (i. e.) one God.

A. 7. What are the Decrees of God?
The Decrees of God, are his eternal purpose, according to the counsel of his
own will, whereby for his own glory, he has foreordained whatsoever comes to
pass Ephesians. 1.11. Being predestined, according to the purpose of him who
works all things after the counsel of his own will. 12. That we should be to
the praise of his glory.
.

Artic. xvij. -- Everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the foundations of
the world were laid) he has constantly decreed by his counsel, secret to us,
etc.

Expl. 7. In this A. we have (1.) the nature and properties of Gods Decrees,
they are like Himself from everlasting; whatever God did purpose and determine
to do, or permit to be done, he did thus purpose from eternity. (2.) Here is
the Rule of Gods Decree, the counsel of his own Will; and yet nothing that he
decrees can be any other than reasonable and good, because by reason of the
infinite perfection of his Nature, his Will is essentially just and holy, and
cannot be otherwise. (3.) The matter of his Decrees, is, whatsoever comes to
pass, though there be never so much of that which we call hap-hazard in them.
(4.) The end of his Decrees, for his glory; for God neither does nor designs
any thing but for the highest end, and that is his own glory.

A. 8. How does God execute his Decrees?
God executes his Decrees, in the Work of Creation Rev. 4.11. Thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.
, and Providence Dan. 4.35. He does according to his will, in the army of
heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth.
.

Homil. xvij. -- Praise of Almighty God, -- in the consideration of the
marvelous Creation of this world, or -- Conservation and Government thereof,
wherein his great Power and Wisdom might excellently appear, to move us to
dread and honor him.

Expl. 8. Here is showed, how God does bring to pass, what he has purposed.
(1.) In the work of Creation; by which we are to understand, not only Gods
making the world and all things therein in six days, but also Gods producing or
bringing into Being every thing else that came into Being since that time to
the worlds end, whether it became a Being in an ordinary way, and by means, as
in the natural generation of things; or in an extraordinary way, by the
immediate or miraculous power of God. (2.) In the work of Providence, which is
not only to be restrained to what is naturally good, as every creature of God
is, but also reaches to what is naturally evil, as affliction, and to what is
morally evil, as sin.

A. 9. What is the work of Creation?
The work of Creation, is Gods making all things Gen 1.1. In the beginning God
created the Heaven and the Earth.
, of nothing, by the word of his power Heb. 11.3. Through faith we understand
that the worlds were framed by the word of God; so that things which were seen,
were not made of things that do appear.
, in the space of six days, and all very good Genesis 1.31. And God saw every
thing that he had made, and behold it was very good, and the evening and the
morning were the sixth day.
.

To. 2. Hom. viij. God through his Almighty power, wisdom, and goodness,
created in the beginning Heaven and Earth, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the
Fowls of the Air, the Beasts of the Earth, the Fishes in the Sea, and all other
Creatures for the benefit and use of man. Hom. xij. Among all the Creatures
that God made in the beginning of the World, most excellent and wonderful in
their kind, there was none (as the Scripture bears witness) to be compared in
any point almost unto Man, who in Body and Soul exceeded.

Expl. 9. By the work of Creation, we are to understand Gods making of the
world in time (or in the beginning) according as he had purposed from eternity,
or before all beginning of time: and here it is observable, (1.) That this work
is ascribed only to God, the true God, in opposition to Idols; yet is not so to
be ascribed to any one person in the Godhead as to exclude the other; for all
the three persons, sc. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being one in Essence or
Godhead, they must necessarily be one in working, or as it were join hand in
hand in all external works, whether of Creation or Providence. And therefore
when the Creation is ascribed (in the Apostles Creed) to the Father Almighty,
it does not exclude the Son or Holy Ghost from being Almighty, or from joining
with the Father in the work of Creation; but only because the Father is the
first in order of the three persons when we conceive of them, and because there
might be in the Church an outward distinction made (but no real separation)
among the three persons, in those works which are more eminently and peculiarly
affirmed of each person, as that the Father creates, the Son redeems, and the
Spirit sanctifies. (2.) That he did not, as an Artificer, begin his work upon
or out of materials, which is beyond the skill of art and power of nature. (3.)
Without any instrument or help; for (1.) There was nothing then in Being when
he began his work, therefore no instrument. (2.) He needed none, being infinite
in power. (3.) To have used any, would not have been so consistent with the
glory of his Wisdom and Power. (4. Obs.) That he did his work in six days, that
we might see it was a work of Wisdom and Counsel, and not of Chance; and to set
us an example, to work six days, and rest the seventh. (5 ly,) That he made all
very good, in their nature, in their order and in their end.

A. 10. How did God create man?
God created man, male and female, after his own image Genesis 1.27. So God
created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him, male and
female created he them.
, in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness Col. 3.10. And have put on the new
man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him.
Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness, and true holiness.
, with dominion over the creatures Genesis 1.28. And God blessed them, and God
said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue
it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air,
and over every living thing that moves upon the earth.
.

Homil. xij. He was made after the similitude and image of God, endued with all
kind of heavenly gifts; he had no spot of uncleanness in him, was sound and
perfect in all parts, both inwardly and outwardly, his reason was incorrupt,
his understanding was pure and good, his will was obedient and godly; he was
made altogether like unto God, in righteousness and holiness, in wisdom and
truth; to be short, in all kind of perfection. -- God made him Lord and Ruler
over all the works of his hands. -- Homil. viij. Whom also he had created to
his own image and likeness, and given him the use and government over them all,
to the end he should use them in such sort as he had given them in charge and
commandment, and also that he should declare himself thankful, etc.

Expl. 10. God created man male and female ( i. e.), in both Sexes; man out of
the dust of the earth, and the woman of the Rib that he took out of the man's
Side; which creation is to be understood concerning the bodies of both, not of
the soul of either of them, for the soul was not made of any materials at all,
but the reasonable soul was immediately infused into their bodies when God
breathed into them the breath of life; so that the soul is, q.d. the breath of
God. There is a twofold image of God, (1.) That which is in God, and so Christ
the Second person in the Trinity is said to be the express image of the person
of God the Father, because in him the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily.
(2.) There is the image of God which is out of God, or external to him; and
such an image of God was man in his first Creation. (1 st,) In respect of his
soul, and that more generally, in the nature of it, God is a Spirit, and so is
man's soul; God's immortal, so that: But more particularly, (1.) In knowledge of
what was necessary to be known by him in order to Gods glory or his own
happiness. (2.) In righteousness or uprightness, ( i. e.) his will did freely
and fully comply with the will of God, the Law of God being written in his
heart. (3.) In holiness, or with a power to do Gods will perfectly. (2 dly,) In
respect of his body, wherein he did resemble the majesty (not the spirituality
of God) for there was so much of majesty especially in man's countenance, that
the inferior creatures did stand in awe of him. (3.) In respect of the whole
man, because in his dominion over the creatures, he did resemble his Creator in
his dominion over the world.

A. 11. What are Gods works of Providence?
Gods works of Providence, are his most holy Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.
, wise Isa. 28.29. This also comes forth from the Lord of hosts, which is
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working.
, and powerful preserving Heb. 1.3. Upholding all things by the word of his
power.
, and governing all his creatures, and all their actions Psalm. 103.19. His
kingdom rules over all. Mat. 10.29. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing?
and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your Father.
.

Homil. xvij. -- Conservation and governance of the world, -- of liberal
goodness, which he daily bestows on us his reasonable creatures, for whose
sake he made the whole universal world, with all the commodities and goods
therein. -- Take him for God omnipotent, invisible, having rule in Heaven and
Earth, having all things in subjection, and will have none in counsel with him,
nor any to ask the reason of his doing; for he may do what likes him, and none
can resist him, Dan. 11. For he works all things in his secret judgment to
his own pleasure, yea even the wicked to damnation, says Solomon, Prove. 16. --
God has not so created the world that he is careless of it, but he still
preserves it by his goodness; he still stays it in his creation. -- To make
our humble suits in prayers to his fatherly Providence.

Expl. 11. By Gods actual Providence we are to understand his ordering of all
things in time, according to his eternal purpose, or the counsel of his own
will; or in plain English, it is his doing what he will in the world, whether it
be in Heaven or Earth. For further explanation of this matter, we are to know,
(1 st,) That (according to our apprehension) there are these distinctions and
kinds of Providence, (1.) We have his eternal Providence, or his decreeing,
purposing, designing Providence, which is nothing else but that frame, method,
or order of government which was in the mind of God from everlasting, before
there was a world, or any creature in it to be governed, (and of this was
spoken before). (2.) His actual Providence, which he has exercised ever since
he made the world; as, (1.) In the conservation of things in their beings, so
that of all the species or kinds of creatures which he made he has lost none.
Individuals indeed do dye and perish, and return to their dust, but the species
or kinds of creatures do not; men dye, (this and that and the other individual
person) in reference to their bodies; but man does not, or rather mankind does
not. (2.) In the actual government of all things by his wisdom, which he does
preserve by his infinite power; for God does not do by the World as the
Ship-Carpenter by the Ship, build and leave it, and never look after it more;
but he does look after the preservation of it as the Owner, and the government
of it as the Pilot. Other distinctions there are of Providence; as, (2.) That
it is either mediate and ordinary, as where God makes use of means and second
causes, and therein does observe the order which he has set in nature, as Hos.
2.22. and this order in nature is called the Law of nature: Or else immediate
and extraordinary, when in the works of Providence, as well as of Creation, he
works without means, as in the preserving of Daniel in the Lions Den. (2 dly,)
For the matter and extent of Providence, it reaches to all creatures, even to
the Sparrows, and to the hair of the head. (3 dly,) For the manner; and this
(1.) Holy, or most perfect, or in a way suitable to the perfection of his
nature. (2.) Wise, for he does not only do all in the best way, but for the
highest end. (3.) Powerful, for he brings to pass what he will have done with
an almighty easiness, and without any difficulty to himself.

A. 12. What special act of Providence did God exercise toward man, in the
estate wherein he was created?
When God had created man, he entered into a Covenant of life with him, upon
condition of perfect obedience Gal. 3.12. And the law is not of faith, but the
man that does them shall live in them.
, forbidding him to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, upon pain
of death Genesis 2.17. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall
not eat of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
.

To. 2. Homil. xxi. God, as soon as he had created man, gave unto him a certain
Precept and Law, which he (being yet in the state of innocence, and remaining
in Paradise) should observe as a pledge and token of his due and bounden
obedience, with denunciation of death, if he did transgress and break the said
Law and Commandment. -- In the which obedience if man had continued still,
there had been no poverty, no diseases, no sickness, no death, etc.

Expl. 12. The wise and gracious Creator having made man a reasonable creature,
and having also stamped his own image upon him, and thereby rendered him fit for
and capable of happiness in the enjoyment of himself; and there being no other
way to this enjoyment, but by union and communion with himself, he was most
graciously pleased in order thereunto, to make a Covenant with man, (giving a
Law to him as soon as he had made him,) and in him with all his posterity;
wherein he promised life to him, and in him to all mankind, upon condition of
perfect and personal obedience. And that God might try him, how he would carry
it, being now brought within the bounds of this Covenant, he was pleased to lay
this particular positive Precept upon him, That he should not eat of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, etc. upon pain of death; which Precept he having
broken, became liable unto death, or to the curse of the Law. This Covenant
which God entered into with the first Adam was in Paradise, a Covenant or Law
of Works, Do this and live: But that Covenant which God has established in
Christ the second Adam with all Believers (since the Fall) whether in the Old
or New Testament, it is a Covenant of Grace; and the grand Condition of this
Covenant on man's part, or the qualification whereby he is fitted and
capacitated to receive the benefit of this Covenant, it is the righteousness of
Faith; for it runs thus, Believe and live; not that the Covenant of Grace
(whether in the Old or New Testament) does not require new obedience, but that
it does not require this in order to justification; for this new obedience, or
this obedience of Faith, it is rather the fruit or effect, than the
instrumental cause, means, or condition of justification. But more distinctly,
amongst those many differences which are wont to be assigned by Divines betwixt
the Covenant of Works and the Covenant of Grace, we may take notice of these:
(1.) The Covenant of Works was made with man before the Fall, before he had
sinned against God; the Covenant of Grace, afterward. (2.) The Covenant of
Works did not promise pardon upon repentance; the Covenant of Grace does,
because Christ the Mediator of this Covenant has purchased pardon for all
penitent sinners, who have but a hand of Faith to receive it. (3.) The Covenant
of Works was without a Mediator, for till man had sinned he needed none to
mediate peace betwixt God and him; but the Covenant of Grace is established in
the hands of a Mediator, sc. Christ Jesus, perfect God and perfect man, that he
might make a reconciliation betwixt God and Man. (4.) In the Covenant of Nature
(or Works) Adam was only the Son of God by Creation; but in the Covenant of
Grace, those who were children of wrath, do through Faith become the Children
of God by Grace and Adoption. (5.) The Covenant of Works had for its Seals of
confirmation, or for the Sacraments of it, the Tree of life, so called because
it did sacramentally confirm the promise of life upon condition of perfect
obedience; and the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, which was so called from
the event, because man having sinned in eating the forbidden fruit, he
presently came to know by a sad experiment, what an infinite good he had lost
in losing Gods favor, and what misery and mischief he had brought upon
himself. But now the Seals or Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace were under
the Old Testament Circumcision and the Paschal Lamb, and now under the New
Testament, Baptism and the Lords Supper. (6.) In the Covenant of Works there
was no place at all for Gods further exercising of his patience, grace and
mercy; but in the Covenant of Grace his mercy most is signally displayed; yea
and that which is a mystery as well as a miracle of Divine Wisdom, here we may
see mercy and justice kiss each other, in the satisfaction that Christ has
made. And as the Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Works do differ in the
foregoing particulars; so does the Covenant of Grace under the Old Testament
differ from the Covenant of Grace under the New Testament (though these are not
two but one Covenant in substance) in clearness; for till the Law, or from Adam
to Moses, the Promise of Grace was more obscure; under Moses more clear; from
Moses to the Prophets, yet more clear; from them to John the Baptist, yet more
clear; and from him to Christ, yet more clear; and under the preaching of
Christ, whilst he was fulfilling the Promises, yet abundantly more clear than
under John; but most clear of all when Christ had finished the work of
Redemption by price, and was ascended into Heaven, and had sent down his Spirit
upon his Apostles, in that plentiful effusion of the Spirit at the time of
Pentecost, Act. 2.

A. 13. Did our first Parents continue in the estate wherein they were created?
Our first Parents being left to the freedom of their own will, fell from the
state wherein they were created, by sinning against God Eccl. 7.29. God has
made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions.


To. 2. Hom. xiij. Par. 2. When our great Grandfather Adam had broken Gods
Commandment, in eating the Apple forbidden him in Paradise, at the motion and
suggestion of his wife, he purchased thereby not only to himself, but also to
his posterity for ever, the just wrath and indignation of God, who according to
his former Sentence pronounced at the giving of the Commandment, condemned both
him and all his to everlasting death, both of body and soul.

Expl. 13. Here, for explanation sake, we may observe: (1.) That our first
Parents were created with freedom of will; (i. e.) if they would have continued
in their obedience they might, for they had a power to obey God perfectly; and
if they would sin they might, God left them (and that very justly) to
themselves, he being not bound to hinder them (though he could) from sinning
against him. (2.) That by their sinning against God they lost this freedom, and
with it all that happiness which did belong to a state of innocence and
integrity; for by their fall they were so bruised in all their powers and
faculties, that they became unable to serve God; and so bemired with the guilt
and pollution of sin, that they were altogether unfit to enjoy God.

A. 14. What is sin?
Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of the Law of God.

1 John 3.4. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the law; for sin is
the transgression of the law.
Expl. 14. This description of sin does agree to sins of all sorts, original or
actual; and these whether in thought, word, or deed, whether of omission or
commission, of ignorance or of knowledge, of infirmity or presumption; and to
sins of all degrees and sizes, whether great or small; for in all sin
whatsoever (whether it be of men or Devils) there is a want of conformity to
the Law of God, and a violation of his just will, as well as a repugnancy to
the holiness of his nature. Neither is it improper to place the nature of sin
in a privation or want of conformity; for it is that which does deprive and rob
the rational creature of the rectitude or moral perfection of his own nature,
which does consist in his being like to God, and in being conformable to his
will.

A. 15. What was the sin whereby our first Parents sell from the estate wherein
they were created?
The sin whereby our first Parents fell from the estate wherein they were
created, was their eating the forbidden fruit Genesis 3.6. And when the woman saw
that the Tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a
tree to be desired to make one wise; she took of the fruit thereof and did eat,
and gave also to her husband and he did eat. 7. And the eyes of them both were
opened, and they knew that they were naked. 8. And Adam and his wife hid
themselves from the presence of the Lord, among the trees of the garden.
.

Homil. xij. This first man Adam, who having but one Commandment at Gods hand,
namely, that he should not eat of the fruit of knowledge of good and evil, did
notwithstanding most unmindfully, or rather most wilfully break it, in
forgetting the strait charge of his Maker, and giving ear to the crafty
suggestion of that wicked Serpent the Devil.

Expl. 15. In this A. there are two things remarkable, (1.) That our Parents by
sinning lost that state of perfection which they had in Paradise; and (Christ
only excepted, whatever some Quakers dream) there was never any man perfectly
innocent, or free from sin, since the fall. Now that state of perfection which
our first Parents lost (and we in them) did consist; (1.) In their conformity
to God, or in having his image stamped upon them, in knowledge, righteousness,
and holiness. (2.) In their perfect capacity and fitness to enjoy God their
Creator. (2 dly,) That the sin whereby they fell was direct disobedience, in
eating the forbidden fruit (whether an Apple, or whatever else), and that
against a particular positive express Precept, thou shall not eat of it; which
sin of theirs was a big-belly'd sin, and carried in it, (1.) Pride and
Ambition, to be as Gods in the Devils sense, (i. e.) in knowledge, or know as
much as God himself. (2.) Ingratitude, for their privilege and liberty to eat
of all other trees of the Garden. (3.) Infidelity, not giving that credit and
belief to God which he did to Satan. (4.) This forbidden tree was the Seal of
the Covenant of life, and therefore to eat of it was to tear off the Seal.

A. 16. Did all mankind fall in Adams first transgression?
The Covenant being made with Adam not only for himself, but for his Posterity
Genesis 1.28. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the Earth. Genesis 2.16. And the Lord God commanded the
man, saying, Of every Tree in the Garden thou may freely eat. 17. But of the
Tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day
thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.
, all mankind, descending from him by ordinary generation, sinned in him, and
fell with him in his first transgression Romans 5.18. By the offense of one,
judgment came upon all to condemnation.
.

Homil. xij. The judgment of everlasting death, -- fell not only on him, but
also on his posterity and children for ever; so that the whole brood of Adams
flesh should sustain the self-same fall and punishment which their fore-father
by his offense most fully had deserved.

Exp. 16. We have here two things to be considered: (1) That Adam was not only
the root of all mankind descending from him by ordinary generation, he being
the first that God created of that species; but also the representative of
mankind, and did as a public person stand for all his posterity in that
Covenant of life which God made personally with him; hence that common phrase,
that we were all in his loins, ( i. e.) naturally, as descending from him; and
legally, as represented by him. Not but that we were also in the loins of Eve*
but that man being first created, and of the more noble Sex, is principally
taken notice of both in the Covenant and in the Transgression. For (2 dly,) we
are here to observe, that all mankind (Christ the Son of God only excepted) did
sin in Adam; By one sin entered into the world upon all, for as much as all have
sinned. Some explain this by the example of Levi, who is said to pay tithes in
Abraham, though Levi was not born some hundred years after Abraham did thus pay
tithes: So all Adams posterity (which proceed from him in the ordinary course
of nature) may be said as well to sin in Adam, though some of them might not be
born some hundreds or thousands of years after him. We know that the bonds and
compacts of Parents may reach the Children; else they could not be liable nor
capable of enjoying their estates, to pay their debts; and the treason of the
Parent does legally taint the Son, till it please the Prince to take it off.
And then further, as the righteousness of Christ the second Adam, and his
obedience, is imputed to all that believe; so the disobedience of the first
Adam is reckoned to the score of all his posterity, because they were legally
in him, and one with him when he sinned.

A. 17. Into what estate did the fall bring mankind?
The fall brought mankind into an estate of sin and misery Romans 5.12. By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all
men, for that all have sinned.
.

Homil. ii. p. 1. Job having in himself great experience of the miserable and
sinful estate of man, does open the same to the world, Chap. 14.

Expl. 17. In this A. it is observable, that the fall did not only put our first
Parents actually under misery, but it did instate all his posterity in misery,
and did entail sin upon them, as Ancestors do entail their Lands upon their
posterity; and if the second Adam had not by an act of infinite grace and
wisdom cut off this entail in the behalf of believers, all mankind must for
ever have continued not only heirs and children of wrath (as we are all by
nature,) but also actually under the wrath of God for ever. For this was all
the estate that our first Parents left to their posterity, sc. sin and misery.

A. 18. Wherein consists the sinfulness of that estate whereunto man fell?
The sinfulness of that estate whereunto man fell, consists in the guilt of
Adams first sin Romans 5.19. By one man's disobedience many were made sinners.
, the want of original righteousness Romans 3.10. There is none righteous, no not
one.
, and the corruption of his whole nature, which is commonly called original sin
Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins. Psalm.
51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me?
, together with all actual transgressions, which proceed from it Mat. 15.19.
For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, false-witness, blaspemies. 20. These are the things which defile a man.
.

Artic. IX. Original or birth-sin is the fault and corruption of the nature of
every man, that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man
is very far gone from original Righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined
to evil.

Expl. 18. There are four Particulars in this A. (which do all suppose that
Adam sinned as a common Representative of all Mankind.) As, (1.) That the guilt
of that single act of disobedience which Adam was guilty of, is very justly
imputed to all the degenerate and sinful race of Adam; for that Covenant which
was made with him being made with us also in him, when he transgressed by
eating the forbidden fruit, we his posterity are to be looked upon as
Accessaries, and consenting to the fact; and when he thus sinned, it was as
much as if all his posterity had sinned in their own persons. (2) The want of
original righteousness, or the want of power and ability to do the will of God
which man had by Creation; for God made man upright, that is, in a capacity and
with ability to do the whole will of God; which ability was not taken away from
man till he had foolishly and wilfully thrown it away. (3.) The corruption of
the whole nature of man, and that in every mothers child of us (the Child Jesus
only excepted). For every one of us may truly say with David, one by one,
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me: It being
impossible that a clean thing should come out of an unclean. Now because this
corruption of nature is the fountain of all manner of sin, both in thought,
word, and deed, therefore it is called original sin. And then, (4.) All those
corrupt streams which do proceed from this corrupt fountain, are called actual
sins; by which I understand any action of a man, whether it be an internal
action of the mind and soul; or external, of the body, which is not conformable
to the Law of God; as also the neglect and omission of any action (whether
internal or external) which the Law requires.

A. 19. What is the misery of that estate whereunto man fell?
All mankind by their fall, lost communion with God Genesis 3.8* Adam and his wife
hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God, amongst the Trees of the
Garden. 24. So he drove out the man.
, are under his wrath and curse Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature, children of
wrath, even as others. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every man that continues not in
all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them.
, and so made liable to all miseries in this life, to death it self, and to the
pains of hell for ever Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. Mat. 25.41. Then
shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels.
.

Homil. xij. As in Adam all men universally sinned; so in Adam all men
universally received the reward of their sin, i. e. they became mortal, and
subject unto death, having in themselves nothing but everlasting damnation both
of body and soul. -- O what a miserable and woeful state was this, that the sin
of one man should destroy and condemn all men, that nothing in all the world
might be looked for, but only pangs of death, and pains of Hell.

Expl. 19. Concerning this A. it is observable in the general, That man's losses
by the sall, do reach as far as the guilt of that first disobedience whereby he
fell, namely, to all mankind; yet more particularly, (1 st,) Adam lost (and we
in him, and with him) communion with God; and the loss of this is a treble
loss, (1.) Of Gods sweet and gracious presence and company, and that in a most
immediate manner, as one friend is personally present with another. (2.) Of
converse with God; for whilst God and man were together in Paradise, and man
continued innocent, their society was not like that of the Quakers in their
Silent-Meetings, but there would have continued such familiarity betwixt them,
as is betwixt two loving friends, they would have walked together, and talked
together; for if God did use that familiarity with Moses, Exodus 33.11. since
the fall, much more would he have continued it with Adam and his posterity, if
they had never fallen. (3.) From this sweet company and converse would have
sprung up in the heart, a continual satisfaction and delight to the soul of
man; for man yet continuing like God, he could not but love him, and delight
himself in this sweet intercourse. (2 dly,) The sinful posterity of Adam (till
interested in Christ) are actually under the wrath of God, for God is angry
with the wicked every day; and actually under the curse, because under the Law,
not under Grace. (3 dly,) Man in this state is continually liable to have the
curse executed upon him every moment, and has no protection at all either
against the miseries of this life, or the pains of hell.

A. 20. Did God leave all mankind to perish in the estate of sin and misery?
God having out of his mere good pleasure, from all eternity, elected some to
everlasting life Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him, before the
foundation of the world.
, did enter into a Covenant of Grace, to deliver them out of the estate of sin
and misery, and to bring them into an estate of salvation by a Redeemer Romans
3.21. But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. 22: Even the righteousness of God, which
is of Faith by Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe.
.

Artic. xvij. Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby
(before the foundations of the world were laid) he has constantly decreed by
his counsel secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he
has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them to everlasting
salvation, as vessels made unto honor. Homil. xij. Behold the goodness and
tender mercy of God, -- he ordained a new Covenant, and made a sure promise
thereof, namely, that he would send a Messiah or a Mediator into the world,
which should make intercession, and put himself as a stay between both Parties;
to pacify the wrath and indignation conceived against sin, and to deliver man
out of the miserable curse, and cursed misery whereinto he was fallen headlong,
by disobeying the will and commandment of the only Lord and Maker.

Expl. 20. In which A. we have (1 st,) Gods eternal purpose, and absolute
decree, whereby he has singled out or chosen some of mankind, upon whom he is
resolved to bestow eternal life, and that out of his mere free grace, without
any foresight of faith, obedience, perseverance, or any other condition, as a
cause or motive inducing him to make this choice; nay, the decree it self is
not founded in the merits of Christ, but purely in the love of God; though as
for all the blessed effects of this decree (as reconciliation, pardon,
justification, adoption, sanctification, salvation, etc.) are actually received
and enjoyed, by the elect, only upon the consideration of the merits,
righteousness, and satisfaction of Christ. Yet more distinctly, and for order
sake, we may conceive of these two things in Gods decree of Election, (1.) Gods
most wise design, to advance the glory of his free grace, in bringing many sons
to glory. (2.) That God of his free grace had singled and culled out a certain
distinct number of persons for the enjoyment of this glory. Now this very act
of Gods picking and culling out those particular persons whom he designed to
save, is that we call very properly Election. Neither did this grace of God
only appear in making this choice, and then in leaving his chosen ones to get
eternal life and heaven as they could; but (2 dly,) He did also pitch upon an
effectual means, or contrive a way whereby his chosen people should effectually
and infallibly obtain eternal life; and this was by entering into a Covenant of
Grace, with Christ the second Adam, and the Mediator of the new Covenant; and
in Christ with all believers, that whosoever should believe on the Son of God,
he would give unto them eternal life; and that they should never enter into
condemnation. Hence I infer, (1.) That it is the free grace of God, and not the
free will of man that makes one man to differ from another, Paul from Judas.
(2.) That the praise and glory of this difference is to be ascribed not unto
man, but unto God, Not unto us, O Lord, etc.

A. 21. Who is the Redeemer of Gods Elect?
The only Redeemer of Gods Elect is the Lord Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 2.5. For there
is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.
, who being the eternal Son of God, became man Joh. 1.14. And the word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us.
, and so was, and continues to be God and man, in two distinct natures, and
one person Romans 9.5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the
flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever.
, for ever Heb. 7.24. But this man, because he continues ever, has an
unchangeable priesthood.
.

Artic. xviij. They also are to be had accursed, who presume to say that every
man shall be saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be
diligent to frame his life according to that Law and the light of Nature. For
the holy Scripture does set out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby
men must be saved. Hom. x. p. 2. -- Reprobates perish through their own default
-- Christ Jesus as he is a rising up to none other than those who are Gods
Children by Adoption; so is his word, yea the holy Scripture, the power of God
to salvation to them only that do believe it.

Expl. 21. There are three things to be noted in this A. (1.) That the Redeemer
of Gods Elect is God as well as Man. (2.) Man as well as God. (3.) Both God and
Man in one person. (1.) He is God, for he is the Son of God, not by Creation;
as Adam was; nor by natural generation, as we are all the Children of Adam; but
by eternal generation, so as that God the Father, who begat him, was not before
him in time: And he was God, that his Godhead might keep his humane nature from
sinking under infinite wrath when he suffered for our sins, that he might have
power to raise himself from the grave, and rescue himself out of the jaws of
death, that the dignity of his person might render his sufferings, obedience,
intercession, and satisfaction of infinite value and efficacy, for the
procuring of eternal life for his people, and that he might be in a capacity to
bestow his Spirit upon them, and to conquer all their enemies for them. (2.) He
must be Man as well as God, that he might perform obedience, suffer, satisfy,
and intercede for us in our nature; that he might be a merciful High Priest,
and have a fellow-feeling of our infirmities. (3.) Both God and Man in one
person, that he might be a fit Mediator betwixt God and man, to make up the
difference betwixt them, which sin had made. For as sin is the only makebate,
so Christ having taken our nature into union with the Godhead, is the only
person that is in a capacity to make peace betwixt an offended God and
offending man; and that he might perform (in the great work of Redemption)
whatever was requirable of both natures jointly in one person; or whatever he
was to do as head of the Church.

A. 22. How did Christ being the Son of God, become man?
Christ the Son of God became man, by taking to himself a true body Heb. 2.14.
For as much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part in the same.
, and a reasonable soul Mat. 26.38. Then says he unto them, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death.
, being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin
Mary, and born of her Luke 1.31. Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, and
bring forth a Son, and shall call his Name Jesus. 35. The holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the highest shall over-shadow thee.
, yet without sin Heb. 7.25. Such a High Priest became us, who is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.
.

Artic. xv. Christ in the truth of our nature was made like unto us in all
things, sin only except, from which he was clear void, both in his flesh and in
his spirit. Artic. II. The Son, which is the Word of the Father, begotten from
everlasting of the Father, the very and eternal God, of one substance with the
Father, took man's nature in the womb of the Virgin Mary, of her substance: So
that two whole and perfect natures* that is to say, the Godhead and Manhood,
were joined together in one person, never to be divided; whereof is one Christ,
very God and very man, who truly suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, to
reconcile his Father to us, and to be a Sacrifice not only for original guilt,
but also for actual sins of men. Homil. xij. As truly as God lives, so truly
was Jesus Christ the true Messiah and Savior of the world, even the same Jesus
which was born of the Virgin Mary, without all help of man, only by the power
and operation of the Holy Ghost.

Expl. 22. When it is here said, that Christ the Son of God became man, we are
not to imagine that Christ did then lay down his Godhead, or that he did cease
to be God, when he honored man's nature so far as to take that upon him: for
though he then began to be what he was not before, man; yet he did not cease to
be at his Incarnation what he was before, namely, God; it being impossible
altogether that the Godhead should admit of any change, because of its infinite
perfection; for every change is either for the better or for the worse, but the
Godhead was infinitely (as well as independently) perfect, and consequently
without all variableness or shadow of changing; so that all the change which
was in Christ at his Incarnation, it was in his humane nature only; and that
change was indeed for the better, for it was for the highest advancement,
honor, and perfection that our nature was capable of. But Christ, though the
Son of God, and therefore truly God, became man, (1.) Not by being like unto
man only in outward appearance, and to the outward senses, as a Phantasm, an
Apparition, or a Ghost that does appear in man's shape, as those Heretics of
old called the Marcionites did fancy: No, he became man, (2.) By taking the
real body of man, or by taking flesh, blood, bones, nerves, sinews, hands,
feet, and all other integral parts of the very same kind with those of man's
body. His body was such, that it did grow in stature from that of a child to
that of a man, and was subject to the touch or feeling. (3.) By taking a
reasonable soul, or a soul furnished with the very same powers and faculties
that ours have, for the kind, as understanding, will, affections, memory, etc.
and was capable of the improvement of these, as of growing in wisdom and
knowledge, according to his humane nature. (4.) By being conceived of the Holy
Ghost, i. e. in a manner supernatural, or above nature, and not in an ordinary
way of natural generation, but by the immediate and omnipotent operation of the
Spirit the third person in the Trinity, who did in a way altogether
unexpressible by man, and without the help of man, frame the body of the holy
Child Jesus in the Virgin Mary's womb, wherein this blessed Babe continued the
space of Nine Months, as other children do in their mothers womb, and then was
born into the world in fullness of time, as they are; but yet without sin, as
they are not.

A. 23. What Offices does Christ execute as our Redeemer?
Christ as our Redeemer, executes the offices of a Prophet Act. 3.20. Moses
truly said unto the fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto
you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever
he shall say unto you.
, of a Priest Heb. 5.6. Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedec.
, and of a King Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.
, both in his estate of Humiliation and Exaltation.

Expl. 23. By this word Redeemer, we are to understand the same with Mediator,
and by both the second Person in the Trinity, as he was (upon Covenant and
Contract made with the Father) to mediate peace betwixt God and man, and to
manage the whole work of Redemption, in order to the justification,
sanctification, and salvation of the Elect; and that not only whilst he was
here upon earth to be our King, Priest, and Prophet; but now that he is in
heaven, he ever lives to make intercession for us, and does still guide, and
teach, and govern his Church by his Word and Spirit.

A. 24. How does Christ execute the office of a Prophet?
Christ executes the office of a Prophet, in revealing to us Joh. 1.18. No man
has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him.
, by his Word Joh. 20.31. These things are written, that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life
through his Name.
, and Spirit Joh. 14.26. The Comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things.
, the Will of God for our Salvation.

Hom. xvij. By this our heavenly Mediator do we know the favor and mercy of
God the Father, by him know we his will and pleasure toward us, for he is the
brightness of his Fathers glory, and a very clear image and pattern of his
substance. It is he whom the Father in heaven delights to have for his
beloved Son, authorized to be our Teacher, whom he charged us to hear, saying,
Hear him.

Expl. 24. When Christ is here called a Prophet, we are not to restrain this
part of his Office only to his foretelling all such things as should befall his
Church, or the enemies thereof, though this he has done in Prophetical
Scriptures, so far as he thought necessary for the good of his Church: But he
is principally called a Prophet (and that Prophet) because of that power,
commission, and ability which he has, and does exercise, in revealing and
declaring (both outwardly by his Word, and inwardly by his Spirit) the whole
mind and will of God, which was necessary to be known by man in order to
salvation. And for this reason he is called in Scripture the Word ( and the
Word was made flesh), and his name is [ the Word of God], because that as a man
does make known what his mind and will is by his words, either written or
spoken; so God the Father does make known unto man by Christ what he would have
men to believe and do in order to salvation; and that either mediately, by
committing the word of Christ unto writings, as in the Scripture; or
immediately, by the Spirit of Truth, as he did communicate and speak his mind
to Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles.

A. 25. How does Christ execute the office of a Priest?
Christ executes the office of a Priest, in his once offering up of himself a
Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to bear
the sins of many.
, and to reconcile us to God Heb. 2.17. In all things it behoved him to be made
like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest,
in things pertaining to God to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.
, and in making continual intercession for us Heb. 7.25. He is able to save
them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them.
.

Homil. xx. p. 1. We having nothing of our selves to present us to God, have
need of a Mediator for to bring and reconcile us unto him, who for our sins is
angry with us. The same is Jesus Christ, -- to pacify his wrath. -- For he
alone did with the Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, make satisfaction unto the
Justice of God for our sins. To. 1. Hom. III. p. 2. We must trust only in Gods
mercy, and that Sacrifice which our High Priest and Savior Christ Jesus the
Son of God once offered for us upon the Cross, to obtain thereby Gods grace,
and remission as well of our original sin, as of all a ^^^al sin, -- if we
truly repent and turn unfeignedly unto him. To. 11. Hom. xi. Reconciled to Gods
favor, we are taught to know what Christ by his intercession and mediation
obtains for us of his Father, when we be obedient to his will; yea,
attributes that unto us and to our doings, that he by his Spirit works in
us, and through his grace procures for us.

Expl. 25. In this A. we have both the parts of Christ's Priestly Office, as, (1
st,) Satisfaction, and this twofold, (1.) To the whole Law, in fulfilling all
righteousness, in the perfect performance of what the Law required from him.
(2.) To the Justice of God, in undergoing the Curse of the Law, for the Elect;
and this he did by his sufferings, but especially when his Soul was made an
offering for sin, or when he was sacrificed for sinners. In which Offering he
was, (1.) The Priest, for he offered up himself, or he laid down his life of
himself; and he was the Priest as God-man. (2.) He was the Altar, principally
according to his Divine nature, because the Altar was to sanctify the gift
offered, and therefore was to be more excellent than the Sacrifice it self.
(3.) He was also the Sacrifice, for he offered the Sacrifice of himself, ( i.
e.) according to the humane nature properly, and this therefore is called the
Sacrifice of his Body and of his Blood; and all this, that there might be some
kind of compensation made, or satisfaction given to God, for that wrong which
we had done to him. (2 dly,) We have the intercession of Christ, which is the
other part of Christ's Priestly Office, whereby Christ does present himself
continually before the Father, pleading his blood and merit for the
satisfaction that he has made to Divine Justice, and for the reconciliation of
God to the sinner. And his intercession is rather by way of plea at the Bar of
Justice, than by way of prayer and supplication at a Throne of Grace; and
therefore it is that he is called our Advocate.

A. 26. How does Christ execute the office of a King?
Christ executes the office of a King, in subduing us to himself Psalm. 110.3.
Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power.
, in ruling and defending us Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us.
, and in restraining and conquering all his and our Enemies 1 Cor. 15.25. For
he must reign, till he has put all his Enemies under his feet.
.

To. 2. Homil. xiv. He sits on the right hand of his heavenly Father, having
the rule of heaven and earth; reigning as the Prophet says, Psalm. 17. from Sea
to Sea, -- he has overcome the Devil, Death, and Hell, and has victoriously
gotten the better hand of them all, to make us free and safe from them. Homil.
xvij. p. 3. To this our Savior and Mediator has God the Father given the
power of heaven and earth, and the whole jurisdiction and authority to
distribute his gifts committed to him, -- and thereupon to execute his
authority committed, after that he had brought sin and the Devil to captivity,
to be no more hurtful to his members, he ascended up into heaven again, and
from thence sent liberal gifts to his well-beloved Servants, and has still the
power to the worlds end, to distribute his Fathers gifts continually in his
Church, to the establishment and comfort thereof.

Expl. 26. Yet more fully Christ does execute his Kingly Office, (1 st,) By his
authority, in setting up a government in his Church, which in the outward form
or administration thereof is to be managed by such Officers, and according to
such Laws, Ordinances, and Censures as he has appointed in his word. (2 dly,)
By his Power, as (1.) That of his Almightiness, whereby he is able to subdue
all things to himself, and to make his very enemies his footstool. (2.) Of his
Grace, whereby he does subdue the hearts of his chosen people to himself, and
makes them a willing people in the day of his power. (3.) Of his Spirit,
whereby he does sanctify his people, and fit them for heaven, as also support,
guide, and comfort them under all the afflictions they meet with on earth. (4.)
By his Justice, in punishing his and his Churches adversaries.

A. 27. Wherein did Christ's Humiliation consist?
Christ's Humiliation consisted in his being born, and that in a low condition
Luke 2.7. And she brought forth her first born Son, and wrapped him in
Swadling-clothes, and laid him in a manger.
, made under the Law Gal. 4.4. God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made
under the Law.
, undergoing the miseries of this life Isa. 53.3. He is despised and rejected
of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief.
, the wrath of God Mat. 27.46. And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a
loud voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
, and the cursed death of the the Cross Phil. 2.4. He humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
, in being buried, and continuing under the power of death for a time Mat.
14.40. As Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall
the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
.

Hom. III. p. 3. -- Has given his own natural Son' being God eternal,
immortal, and equal unto himself in power and glory, to be incarnated, and take
our mortal nature upon him, with the infirmities of the same, and in the same
nature to suffer most painful and shameful death for our offenses, to the
intent to justify us, and restore us to life everlasting. Hom. xij. He did
hunger and thirst, eat and drink, sleep and wake, -- preach his Gospel, -- weep
and sorrow for Jerusalem, pay tribute for himself and Peter, suffer death.

Expl. 27. In the general, Christ's Humiliation does consist, in all that which
did befall him from the first moment of his conception in the Virgins womb, to
the very time of his resurrection from the grave: (1.) He was humbled in his
conception; that he who was God equal with the Father, should according to his
humane nature have a body framed for him in the womb of a Virgin, and should
continue ^^ose Prisoner there for the space of about nine months, whom the
heaven of heavens cannot contain. (2.) Humbled in his birth, in that he was
born of a woman, and that not an Empress or Princess, but a woman of a mean
rank and low estate, though a Virgin; that he who was the Son of God, and the
Father of eternity, or himself the everlasting Father, should in fullness of
time be born in the form of a servant, made under the Law, not only in a state
of subjection to the commands of it, but also liable, to the curse of it, which
was due only to us, and not to him, but only as he was our Surety, and all this
that we might receive the adoption of Sons, who deserved not to be called
Servants. That he who was Heir of all things, and made this great house the
World, should be so unfurnisht with household goods, as to have no better Cradle
than a Manger. (3.) In his life he humbled himself to the infirmities of our
nature, as hunger, cold, nakedness, poverty, etc. to undergo with admirable
patience, the unkindnesses and forsakings of his friends, the reproaches,
indignities, and persecutions of his enemies; yea and to be tempted by that
great enemy of mankind the Devil. (4.) In his death, that he should dye at all,
who is the Author of natural, spiritual, and eternal life; and besides, could
he not, if he would, have translated himself from earth to heaven (as Enoch was
translated) without dying at all; but then that the King of Glory should dye
the ^ost shameful death, that of the Cross, and in the basest company, betwixt
two Thieves. (5) After death, in having his body laid in the earth, who had
before made the heavens, and laid the foundation of the earth. And last of all,
that he should continue under the power of death and the grave for three days,
who could (if he would) within less than three moments, yea in less time than a
moment have raised his body from the grave. O incomprehensible humiliation! and
that which should fill us all with grateful and astonishing admiration at it,
that all this was for sinful man!

A. 28. Wherein consists Christ's Exaltation?
Christ's Exaltation consists in his rising again from the dead on the third
day 1 Cor. 15.4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day,
according to the Scriptures.
, in ascending up into heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God the Father
Mark 16.19. So then, after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up
into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.
, and in coming to judge the world at the last day Act. 17.31. He has appointed
a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he
has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has
raised him from the dead.
.

Artic. IV. Christ did truly rise again from death, and took again his body,
with flesh, bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's
nature, wherewith he ascended into heaven, and there sits until he return to
judge all men at the last day. To. 2. Hom. xiv. After this world Judge as well of
the living as of the dead, to give reward to the good, and judgment to the
evil. Hom. xvij. p. 3. By him has Almighty God decreed to dissolve the world,
to call all before him, to judge both the quick and the dead; and finally, by
him shall he condemn the wicked to eternal fire in hell, and give the good
eternal life, and set them assuredly in presence with him in heaven for ever
more.

Expl. 28. Christ is here exalted, (1 st,) In his resurrection; and here (1.)
The glory of his power was exalted, for he raised himself by his own Almighty
power, and thereby declared himself to be the Son of God. (2.) The glory of his
truth, for he raised himself, as he had foretold, within three days. (3.) The
glory of his authority, for he rose as a public person, and thereby declared
himself Head of the Church. (4.) The glory of his mercy, for he rose again for
our justification; for if he had not received a discharge from his Father, and
had he not been released from the prison of the grave, it would have been an
evidence against us, that our debt was not paid. (2 dly,) He was exalted by his
ascension, (1.) If we consider the manner of it, it was with glorious triumph
over hell and death. (2.) His ascension was into heaven, namely, into the
heaven of heavens, that which is called Paradise and the third Heaven, whether
Enoch and Elias went. (3.) In his bounty and grace, he ascended that he might
give gifts to men. (3 dly,) Exalted in his sitting, etc. for his Session at the
right hand of the Father, does declare him to be supreme Head of the Church. (4
thly,) In judging the world, he will be exalted, (1.) In his authority. (2.) In
his righteousness.

A. 29. How are we made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ?
We are made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ, by the effectual
application of it to us Joh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the Sons of God.
, by his holy Spirit Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus
Christ our Savior.
.

Artic. xvij. -- They which be endued with so excellent a benefit of God ( viz.
Election) be called according to Gods purpose, working in due season; they
through grace obey the calling; be freely justified, etc.

Expl. 29. In this A. is plainly laid before us the manner how, and means
whereby all that Christ has done and suffered for sinners (as Mediator), and
all that he is now doing in heaven for them, does become effectual to the
complete redemption, and eternal salvation of all true Christians, sc. by the
real and actual application of all this unto them. For though Christ, the great
Physician of value, has made the healing Plaster of his Blood sufficiently
broad enough both to cover and to cure all the wounds that sin has made in all
the men in the world; yet the far greater part of the world do dye and perish
of their wounds, because they will not suffer this sovereign Plaster to be
applied to them, in the sound preaching of the Gospel, neither will they abide
to have their wounds searched in order to cure: Now for the manner how, and the
means whereby this Plaster is applied; I answer, (1.) It is outwardly, by the
Ministers of the Gospel, unto all those that do believe, as when they preach
this Doctrine, that whosoever believes shall be saved. (2.) Inwardly, by the
Holy Spirit, who does not only lay on the Plaster in a work of conviction, but
does make it become effectually healing in a work of conversion and
sanctification. For the means, see the next A.

A. 30. How does the Spirit apply to us the Redemption purchased Christ?
The Spirit applies to us the Redemption purchased by Christ, by working faith
in us Ephesians. 9.8. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God.
; and thereby uniting us to Christ in our Effectual Calling Ephesians. 3.17. That
Christ may dwell in your hearts by says. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom
ye were called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ.
.

Homil. II. Of the Passion. As it profits a man nothing to have S^lve, unless
it be well-applied to the part infected; so the death of Christ shall stand us
in no force, unless we apply it to our selves, as God has appointed. Almighty
God commonly works by means; and in this thing he has also ordained a
certain mean, whereby we may take fruit and profit to our Souls health. Homil.
xvi. p. 2. The Holy Ghost is a Spiritual and Divine Substance, the Third person
in the Trinity, distinct from the Father and the Son, and yet proceeding from
them both, -- does regenerate; which the more it is hid from our understanding,
the more it ought to move all men to wonder at the secret and mighty working of
Gods holy Spirit which is within us: For it is the Holy Ghost, and no other
thing, that does quicken the minds of men, stirring up good and godly motions
in their hearts, which are agreeable to the will and commandment of God, such
as otherwise of their crooked and perverse nature they should never have. --
Who is the only worker of our sanctification, and makes us new in Christ.

Expl. 30. Here we have the particular means or instrument which the Holy
Spirit makes use of for the applying of the Redemption purchased by Christ, to
all those whom he has redeemed by his blood. Not that the Spirit may be said to
believe in the elect, but that he does work that faith in them whereby they (as
Members) are united to Christ their Head, and so do mystically and spiritually
(but really) become one with him, for they that are thus joined to the Lord,
are one spirit; and so being one with Christ, what was done for them by Christ
as their Mediator, Head, and Husband, is accounted as done by themselves; he
having paid their debt as their Surety, they receive their discharge, and
shall never come into condemnation, or be cast into Prison, after they are once
thus one with Christ, and effectually called by the Spirit.

A. 31. What is Effectual Calling?
Effectual Calling is the work of Gods Spirit 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us,
and called us with an holy calling.
, whereby convincing us of our sin and misery Act. 2.37. Now when they heard
this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and to the rest
of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?
, enlightening our minds in the knowledge of Christ Act. 26.18. To open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God.
, and renewing our wills Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh.
, he does persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ freely offered to us
in the Gospel Joh. 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the Father which has
sent me, draw him. 45. Every man that has heard, and has learned of the
Father, comes unto me.
.

Artic. X. The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, that he cannot
turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works to faith,
and calling upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will. Hom. II.
Of Alms, p. 2. The good deeds of man are not the cause of making him good, but
he is first made good by the Spirit and grace of God, that effectually works
in him, and afterward he brings forth good fruit. -- God of his mercy and
special favor toward them whom he has appointed to everlasting salvation,
has so offered his grace especially, and they have so received it fruitfully,
that though by reason of their sinful living outwardly, they seemed before to
have been the children of wrath and perdition, yet now the Spirit of God
mightily working in them, unto obedience to Gods will and commandments, they
declare by their outward deeds and life, in the showing of mercy and charity,
which cannot come but of the Spirit of God, and his especial grace, that they
are the undoubted children of God, appointed to everlasting life.

Expl. 31. That we may the better know what effectual Calling is, we are to
consider of a double Call, which does many times prove ineffectual; as, (1.)
Outward, in the preaching of the Word, and the voice of the Rod, or any
Providence whatsoever, which does call men to repentance, faith, and holiness;
but notwithstanding all these outward Calls, there are Millions in the world
who turn the deaf ear to God, and will not return to him by repentance, nor
come to Christ by faith. (2 dly,) There is an inward Call, which is no less
ineffectual than the former, and it is the Spirits Call, as when he proceeds no
further than that which Divines call a common work; as (1.) Common
illumination, or some kind of floating knowledge in the head, concerning the
word of God, and spiritual matters; and no doubt but many men who have wicked
hearts, and lead bad lives, may be well stored with gifts of this kind; as
Judas for one. (2.) Some kind of flashy affections excited and stirred up in the
Soul toward good things, called foretasts of the powers of the world to come;
and such was in Herod and Balaam. (3.) Some kind of faint languishing
inclinations in the will to obedience, such as Herod had when he did many
things. (4.) Some kind of sense of sin, both in its guilt and horror, such as
Judas had; and yet notwithstanding all this inward work of the Spirit, his Call
may be ineffectual. And if all this may be without success, then no wonder if
the Arminians Call, that of moral suasion, or of arguments, do prove no better.
But then (2 dly,) There is another inward Call of the Spirit, which is
effectual to the Elect; sc. that whereby the Spirit does not only call, but
enable them to come at his call, as when he does renew the mind, and change the
will, sanctify the heart, purify the conscience and affections; and does work
a lively faith in such persons, and repentance from dead works.

A. 32. What benefits do they, that are effectually called, partake of in this
life?
They that are Effectually called, do in this life partake of Justistification
Romans 8.30. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
, Adoption Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us to the adoption of children by
Jesus Christ unto himself.
, Sanctification, and the several benefits which in this life do either
accompany, or flow from them 1 Cor. 1.30. Of him ye are in Christ Jesus, who of
God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption.
.

Artic. xvij. -- They through grace obey the Calling; they be justified freely,
they be made Sons of God by Adoption; they be made like the image of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ; they walk religiously in good works, and at length
by Gods mercy they attain to everlasting felicity.

Expl. 32. Into the nature of these particular Benefits of Effectual Calling,
there will be occasion to enquire hereafter; but as to the certainty of the
thing, that all that are effectually called shall partake of these, is evident
from these grounds: (1.) In that Christ did purchase these benefits, not for
himself, but for them; nay, he had never laid down such a price in his Fathers
hands, but for the sake of Believers. (2.) The tenor of the Covenant of Grace
does ascertain this, for when God the Father and Son did treat together
concerning the redemption of the Elect, it was upon these terms, sc. That upon
the Sons undertaking to satisfy both the Law and Justice of God, and upon the
full performance of this undertaking, all those that do believe in Christ
(though by nature they had been children of wrath as well as others) should
upon their believing, be justified, adopted, sanctified, and saved. (3.) Upon
their believing they do receive Christ, and he gives himself freely to them;
and how shall they not with him, have all things else they stand in need of.

A. 33. What is Justification?
Justification is an Act of Gods free grace, wherein he pardons all our sins
Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace.
, and accepts us as righteous in his fight 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has made him
sin for us that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him.
, only for the righteousness of Christ imputed to us Romans 5.19. As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous.
, and received by faith alone Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not justified by
the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ.
.

Artic. II. We are accounted righteous before God only for the merit of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own works or
deservings. To. I. Hom. III. Because all men be sinners and offen-ders, and
breakers of his Law and Commandments, therefore can no man by his own acts,
works, and deeds (seem they never so good) be justified and made righteous
before God; but every one is constrained to see for another righteousness --
and this which we so receive of Gods mercy and Christ's merits embraced by
faith, is taken, accepted, and allowed of God for our perfect and full
justification. Part 3. Our works do not merit or deserve remission of our sins,
and make us of unjust, just before God: but God of his own mercy, through the
only merits and deservings of his Son Jesus Christ, does justify us.
Nevertheless, because Faith does directly send us to Christ for remission of
our sins, and that by faith given us of God, we embrace the promise of Gods
mercy, and of the remission of our sins (which thing none other of our virtues
or works properly does) therefore the Scripture uses to say, that faith
without works does justify; or only faith does justify. -- Not through the
merit of any virtue that we have within us, or of any work that comes from us;
therefore in that respect, -- we forsake (as it were) altogether again faith,
works, and all other virtues. For our own imperfection is so great, through the
corruption of Original sin, that all is imperfect that is within us, faith,
charity, hope, dread, thoughts, words, and works, and therefore not apt to
merit and deserve any part of our justification for us. Tom. 2. Hom. IV. It is
of the free grace and mercy of God, by the mediation of the blood of his Son
Jesus Christ, without merit or deserving on our part, that our sins are
forgiven us, that we are reconciled and brought again into his favor, and are
made heirs of his heavenly Kingdom.

Expl. 33. This word [ justification] does signify, not only to make just or
righteous, but also to make a man appear so; (yet not by infusing or working
grace or righteousness in the Soul, for this is the meaning of that word
sanctification), or it signifies the believing sinners being reputed or
accounted righteous in the sight of God, in and through the righteousness of
Christ imputed to the sinner, or accounted as his own; for as condemnation does
suppose a man guilty, because the just God does not condemn men for nothing; so
justification does suppose a man discharged from guilt, and so not obnoxious to
the penalty or curse of the Law; now because the sinner cannot expect to
receive this discharge by virtue of his own personal righteousness, because all
his righteousness is imperfect, or as a menstrous rag; therefore he must be
found not having on his own righteousness for his justification, but the
righteousness of Christ. But more particularly in this A. we have (1.) The
principal Author, or prime efficient cause of justification, and this is God;
Who is he that condemns? it is God that justifies. God the Father, as
accepting of what Christ has done for sinners; and God the Son, as procuring
our discharge; and God the Holy Ghost, as applying the merits of Christ to us,
and working faith in us, whereby we receive so great a benefit. (2.) The inward
moving cause, free grace; and not any foresight of faith or obedience in the
sinner, to move him to it. (3.) The matter of justification, or in reference to
what the sinner is justified; namely, the guilt of sin and curse of the Law.
(4.) The manner, which consists in a legal discharge of the sinner from his
former obligation to punishment, here called the pardon of his sins, and
accepting of him as righteous. (5.) The meritorious cause, only for the
righteousness of Christ imputed to the believing sinner. (6.) The instrumental
cause, or condition, sc. faith; for the sinner through the means of his faith,
or upon the condition of his believing, is thus justified.

A. 34. What is Adoption?
Adoption is an Act of Gods free grace 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love
the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God!
, whereby we are received into the number, and have right to all the
privileges of the Sons of God Joh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave
he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. Romans
8.17. And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ.
.

Tom. 1. Hom. III. p. 3. -- So making us also his dear children, brethren unto
his only Son, our Savior Christ, and inheritors for ever with him of his
eternal Kingdom of Heaven. Hom. X. p. 2. He is a rising up to none other than
those which are Gods children by adoption. Hom. xi. p. 2. By their obedience
they declare openly unto to the sight of men, that they are Sons of God, and
elect of him unto Salvation.

Expl. 34. More plainly, Adoption, it is Gods taking of those into his care and
Family, as his children by grace, who were by nature the children of wrath, and
by practice the children of disobedience; and all that they may enjoy the
honor, advantages, and privileges of his children; as (1.) They bear their
Fathers Name and likeness, or his badg and cognizance, whereby they are known
to belong to him, and that is their holiness. So that those who are afraid to
be accounted godly, they are afraid to be God-like, and so disown their Father,
as if ashamed of him. (2.) They are all heirs of God, and joint-heirs with
Christ their elder Brother, to an heavenly Inheritance. (3.) They have the
Spirit of his Son given to them, whereby they are enabled to call God Father,
and to come to a throne of grace with the boldness of children. (4.) They are
under Gods fatherly protection, so that nothing can harm them. (5.) They are
provided for by him, and therefore can want no good thing. (6.) They have a
sanctified use of the creatures, and of all temporal good things, yea
afflictions themselves are for their good.

A. 35. What is Sanctification?
Sanctification is the work of Gods free grace 2 These. 2.13. God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit.
, whereby we are renewed in the whole man, after the Image of God Ephesians. 4.24.
And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness,
and true holiness.
, and are enabled more and more to dye unto sin, and live unto righteousness
Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
.

Hom. II. p. 2. The holy Apostle calls us Saints, because we are sanctified
and made holy by the blood of Christ through the Holy Ghost. Hom. xvi. p. 1. --
It is he which inwardly works the regeneration and new birth. -- The more it
is hid from the understanding, the more it ought to move all men to wonder at
the secret and mighty working of Gods holy Spirit which is within us. For it is
the Holy Ghost, and no other thing, that does quicken the minds of men,
stirring up good and godly motions in their hearts, which are agreeable to the
will and commandment of God; such as otherwise of their own crooked and
perverse nature, they should never have. That which is born of the spirit is
spirit. As who should say, man of his own nature is fleshly and carnal, corrupt
and naught, sinful and disobedient to God, without any spark of goodness in
him, without any virtuous or godly motion, only given to evil thoughts and
wicked deeds As for the works of the Spirit, the fruits of Faith, charitable
and godly motions, if he have any at all in him, they proceed only of the Holy
Ghost, who is the only worker of our sanctification, and makes us new men in
Christ Jesus. -- Such is the power of the Holy Ghost to regenerate men, and as
it were to bring forth anew, that they shall be nothing like the men they were
before.

Expl. 35. As for sanctification, it is no less a work of free grace than
justification and adoption; and in Scripture Phrase it is the new man, new
creature, and a man's being created anew in Christ Jesus unto good works; in
which and the like expressions is plainly set before us, the large compass,
extent, and comprehension of this work; for herein all things must become new;
the nature renewed, or changed from its corrupt and carnal state, to a state of
real and true holiness, though imperfect in this life; the mind renewed in
saving-knowledg; the will renewed, by being subdued and made pliable to the
will of God; the affections renewed, by being spiritualized, or fixed upon
spiritual good objects; and so the memory, conscience, fancy, etc. as also the
life, because in this change a man becomes a new man. The particular parts of
which sanctification are, (1.) Mortification, or a Believers being dead unto
sin, ( i. e.) in his inclinations, thoughts, cares, affections, endeavors, all
which were before lively and strong toward sin. (2.) Vivification, or a living
unto righteousness, (i. e.) being holy in all manner of conversation.

A. 36. What are the benefits which in this life do accompany or flow from
Justification, Adoption, and Sanctification?
The benefits which in this life do accompany or flow from Justification,
Adoption and Sanctification, are assurance of Gods love, peace of conscience,
joy in the Holy Ghost Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. By whom also we have access by faith into
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. 5. And
hope mak^^^ not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts
through the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.
, increase of grace Prove. 4.18. The path of the just is as the shining light,
that shines more and more unto the perfect day.
, and perseverance therein unto the end 1 John 5.13. These things have I
written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know
that ye have eternal life.
.

To. 1. Hom. ix. p. 2. All those therefore have great cause to be full of joy,
that be joined to Christ with true faith, steadfast hope, and perfect charity,
and not to fear death nor everlasting damnation. -- But rather contrariwise,
their godly conversation in this life, and belief in Christ, cleaving
continually to his mercies, should make them so long sore after that life that
remains for them undoubtedly after this bodily death. To. 2. Hom. xij.
Released from the burden of sin, justified through faith in his blood, and
finally received up into everlasting glory, there to reign with him for ever.

Expl. 36. By this [first privilege of assurance] we are to understand, not
merely a believers probable guess or conjecture, or his hope and expectation to
be saved; but an infallible certainty, or that which is called in Scripture the
full assurance of faith, concerning the love of God, and the believers eternal
salvation; which certainty is built, (1.) Upon the infallible certainty of Gods
promise to save those who do believe or accept of Christ, as he is tendered in
the Gospel. (2.) Upon the unquestionable evidence of the truth and reality of
those graces unto which the promise of salvation is made. (3.) Upon the
necessary connection which there is betwixt the means and the end, betwixt true
and saving-grace and salvation it self. (4.) And upon the sure testimony of the
Spirit of Adoption, witnessing with the spirit or conscience of this or that
particular believer by name, that he is a Child of God. Concerning which
assurance these three things are to be noted, (1.) That there may be a true
saving-faith, where there is not the full assurance of faith. It does belong to
a believer only, but not to every believer. (2.) That it is every believers
duty to look after this assurance, to use his utmost endeavors to make his
Calling and Election sure. (3.) Though this assurance may be darkened,
diminished, and interrupted through sin or temptation, yet it is ever
accompanied with so much secret support to the soul, as that it does keep the
soul from total and final despair. And so there is room left still for [the
second benefit, sc.] peace of conscience; in which there is, (1.) Something
privative, sc. a very comfortable freedom (not perfect and universal) from that
which Divines call trouble of mind, arising from the apprehension of guilt and
of the wrath of God; and though in one who has this assurance, the peace of his
mind may be disturbed, yet it is but disturbed, and not absolutely lost; as the
peace of a State is not lost by every tumult whereby it is disturbed. (2.)
There is something positive in this peace, sc. that sweet calm and satisfaction
which there is in the mind upon the attaining of this assurance. [Third
benefit, sc.] Joy in the Holy Ghost, sc. a joy springing up in the soul from
the comfort and certainty of his testimony, and for the sweetness of his
presence. [Fourthly, growth of grace] If not so observably in the leaf and
fruit, yet in the root, like a plant in winter. [ Perseverance in grace] Not
depending upon the mutability of man's will, but upon the immutability of Gods
decree and purpose to save the believer, upon the unchangeableness of the
Fathers love; upon the purchase, merit, and intercession of the Son; upon the
abiding presence of the Holy Ghost, together with the victorious efficacy of
his grace in the soul; and upon the stability of the Covenant of grace, which
is ordered in all things and sure.

A. 37. What benefits do Believers receive from Christ at their resurrection?
The Souls of Believers are at their death made perfect in holiness Heb. 12.23.
And to the spirits of just men made perfect.
, and do immediately pass into glory Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ.
, and their bodies being still united to Christ 1 These. 4.14. Them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.
, do rest in their Graves Isa. 52.7. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest
in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.
, till the Resurrection Job 19.26. And though after my skin, worms destroy this
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.
.

Artic. xxij. The Romish Doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons, -- is vainly
feigned, and grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the
word of God. Hom. vij. Of Prayer, p. 3. The soul of man passing out of the
Body, goes straightways either to Heaven or else to Hell; whereof the one
needs no prayer, and the other is without redemption. -- The Scripture does
acknowledge but two places after this life; the one proper to the elect and
blessed of God, the other the reprobate and damned souls.

Expl. 37. At death Believers are made perfect in holiness, (1.) Negatively, i.
e. they sin no more from that very moment, but are freed from sin for ever.
(2.) Positively, (1.) The image of God is then perfect in the believers soul;
and the full bent of his will is to do the will of God as the Angels do it in
heaven, perfectly, and without all reluctance. (2.) It does immediately enter
into eternal life, when it leaves the body, and not into any middle state, as
that of Purgatory. (3.) Their bodies, though separated from their souls for a
time, yet they do still remain unseparated from Christ, and therefore do remain
under his care whilst they sleep in the grave, so that he will not lose any one
member of them.

A. 38. What benefits do Believers receive from Christ at the Resurrection?
At the Resurrection, Believers being raised up in Glory 1 Cor. 15.43. It is
sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory.
, shall be openly acknowledged and acquitted in the day of judgment Mat. 10.32.
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before my Father
which is in Heaven.
, and made perfectly blessed in full enjoying of God 1 John 3.2. When he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.
, to all Eternity 1 These. 4.17. And so shall we ever be with the Lord.


To. 2. Hom. xiv. The truth of this most Christian Article (of the
resurrection) which is the ground and foundation of our whole Religion. -- O
most comfortable word, evermore to be born in remembrance; he dyed (says St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 15.) to put away sin, he rose again to endow us with
righteousness, -- by his resurrection has he purchased life and victory for
us, -- opened the gates of heaven, to enter into life everlasting, -- to enjoy
an inheritance immortal, that never shall perish, which is laid up in heaven
for them that are kept by the power of God through faith, -- set with himself
among the heavenly Citizens above. -- If thou have received Christ in true
faith, with repentance of heart, and full purpose of amendment, thou have
received him for an everlasting gage, or pledge of thy salvation. -- Rising with
him by our faith, we shall have our bodies likewise raised again from death, to
have them glorified in immortality, and joined to his glorious body, having in
the mean while his holy Spirit in our hearts, as a seal and pledge of our
everlasting inheritance.

Expl. 38. At the resurrection of a Believer, (1.) There is a reunion of a
soul which is free from corruption or sin, to a glorified body that is
incorruptible. (2.) These two parts being thus reunited, in the very same
individual person to whom they did belong before death, will be actually
capable, at the resurrection, of all that eternal bliss which Christ has
purchased and prepared for them. (3.) Then Christ will openly acknowledge, own,
and approve every true Christian to be a part of his body mystical, and that
before his Father and all the holy Angels. (4.) The Believer then shall receive
his general discharge and acquitment in a most solemn, public, and triumphant
manner, from all manner of guilt whatsoever, so as that none shall be able to
lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect. For though a Believer does receive
his private discharge from all his sins at his death, and as it were under the
privy Seal; yet his discharge is ratified, confirmed, and as it were entered
into the public Records at the day of Judgment.

CHAP. II. Of things to be done in the Ten Commandments; with a short
Explanation of 46 A. from 38 to 85.
A. 39. What is the duty which God requires of man?
THE duty which God requires of man, is obedience to his revealed Will. Mic.
6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.?


To. 1. Hom. V. The good works God has commanded his people to walk in, are
such as he has commanded in the holy Scripture; and not such works as men have
studied out of their own brain, of a blind zeal and devotion without the word
of God: And by mistaking the nature of good works, man has most highly
displeased God, and has gone from his Will and Commandments. To. 2. Hom. X. p.
3. Mark diligently what his Will is you should do, and with all your endeavor
apply your selves to follow the same.

Expl. 39. By obedience to the revealed Will of God, we are in the general to
understand, the conformity of our wills, affections, words, and actions to the
preceptive or commanding Will of God; for all this is comprehended in that one
Scripture, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of
man. It is the will of Gods command which does declare and require what is our
duty; but as for the secret will of Gods eternal purpose, though it be a rule
to himself, whereby he acts, yet it neither is nor can be the rule of our
actions, because not known to us, nor indeed curiously to be enquired after;
nor is it barely the revelation of Gods will that makes it our duty to observe
it, but the revelation of it to this very end and purpose, that man do
willingly conform to it.

A. 40. What did God at first reveal unto man for the rule of his obedience?
The Rule which God at first revealed to man for his obedience, was the Moral
Law Romans 2.14. For when the Gentiles which have not the the Law, do by nature
the things contained in the Law; these having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves. 15. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts.
.

To. 2. Hom. X. Let us esteem the holy Table of Gods Word, -- appointed by him,
to instruct us in all necessary works, so that we may be perfect before him in
the whole course of our life. To. 1. Hom. 1. p. 3. Such has been the corrupt
inclination of man, ever superstitiously given to make new honoring of God of
his own head, and then to have more affection and devotion to keep that, than
to search out Gods holy Commandments and to keep them. -- Which we should know,
to separate or sever Gods Commandments from the commandments of men. -- In
keeping the Commandments of God, stands the pure, principal, right honor of
God, and which wrought in faith, God has ordained to be the right trade and
pathway to heaven.

Expl. 40. When it is here said, that the Moral Law was at first, i. e. in a
state of innocence, revealed to man, i. e. to our first Parents in Paradise; we
are not to understand, that this revelation was visible to the eye, as
afterward the writing of it was in two Tables of Stone; nor to be heard by the
ear, as when it was first given by God in Mount Sinai: But it was at first
revealed inwardly. i. e. it was imprinted in the hearts and minds of our first
Parents, ( except that positive prohibition of eating the forbidden fruit); yet
being in a great part blotted out, was afterward written in two Tables of
Stone.

A. 41. Where is the Moral Law summarily comprehended?
The Moral Law is summarily comprehended in the Ten Commandments Deuteronomy. 10.4.
And he wrote on the Tables according to the first writing, the Ten
Commandments. Mat 19.17. If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments.
.

Ham. V. Christ rehearsing the Commandments, declared, that the Laws of God be
the very way that does lead to everlasting life, and not the Traditions and
Laws of men. So that the works of the Moral Commandments of God, be the very
true works of Faith, which lead to the blessed life to come. To. 2. Hom. II. --
Containing the immutable Law and Ordinances of God, in no age or time to be
altered, nor of any persons, of any Nation, of any age to be disobeyed.

Expl. 41. By a Law in the general, we are to understand, the Will of the
Lawgiver requiring duty: But here by the Moral Law we are to understand, (1.)
More generally, the revealed Will of God, of what man is to believe and do in
order to salvation. (2.) More particularly, the Decalogue, which is the sum of
all Moral Laws, which are scattered up and down in the Scripture. And this
Decalogue (or Ten Words, or Ten Commandments) may be called Moral, (1.) Because
of the universality of it; for the Decalogue does oblige all mankind, it being
that very Law, for substance, which was written in very legible Characters in
the heart of Adam, and is not quite blotted out of the minds of the veryest
Gentiles in the world. (2.) It does oblige at all times. (3.) The whole man,
for it requires as well the internal obedience of the soul, and all its powers
and faculties, as outward obedience of the body.

A. 42. What is the sum of the Ten Commandments?
The sum of the Ten Commandments, is to love the Lord our God with all our
heart, with all our soul, with all our strength, and with all our mind, and our
neighbor as our selves Mat. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. 38. This is the first
and great Commandment. 39. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. 40. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the
Prophets.
.

Hom. 5. p. 3. Mark diligently what Gods will is that you should do, and with
all your endeavor apply your selves to follow the same. (...), You must have
assured faith in God, and give your selves wholly unto him, love him in
prosperity and adversity, and dread to offend him ever more. Then for his sake
love all men, -- Cast in your mind, how you may do good unto all men to your
power, and hurt no man.

Expl. 42. The sum of these Ten Commandments, or Ten Words, we may take in one
Word, and it is Love, for Love is the fulfilling of the Law; and this Love is
threefold, (1.) To God, and this must be in the highest degree, or more than we
are to love either our selves or neighbors; yea this later love, in comparison
of that we ought to have unto God, should be as no love at all comparatively,
for he is to have all our heart, soul, strength, mind; yet (2.) Our love to our
selves must have the next place; for though our love of charity to others must
be real, yet this charity must begin at home: However (3.) We are to love our
neighbor as our selves, not for the degree, but for the kind of our love, it
must be real and hearty, and without dissimulation.

A. 43. What is the Preface to the Ten Commandments?
The Preface to the Ten Commandments is in these words, I am the Lord thy God,
which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage
Exodus 20.2.
.

To. 2. Hom. II. -- Before he came to the matter that he would specially warn
them of, and as it were for a Preface to make them to take the better heed unto
it. Hom. xxi. p. 6. -- The Bishop of Rome, -- left the poor people should know
too much, he would not let them have as much of Gods word, as the Ten
Commandments wholly and perfectly, withdrawing from the Second Commandment,
that bewrays his impiety by a subtle Sacriledg.

Expl. 43. Whereas in this Preface, God makes use of rational motives to the
obedience of his Commands, this does discover, (1.) The infinite condescension
of God, who is pleased to inform our judgments of the reasonableness of his
Commands, before he lays his Commands upon our persons. (2.) That men should
not be unreasonable in their Commands (as suppose Parents or other Governors),
since God is here pleased to add Reason to his Sovereignty.

A. 44. What does the Preface to the Ten Commandments teach us?
The Preface to the Ten Commandments teaches us, That because God is the Lord,
and our God and Redeemer, therefore we are bound to keep all his Commandments
Deuteronomy. 11.1. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and keep his charge, and his
statutes, and his judgments, and his Commandments always. Luke 1.74. That we
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear.
75. In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our lives.
.

To. 1. Hom. V. p. 2. Christ, -- reproved the Laws and Traditions made by the
Scribes and Pharisees, which were not only for good order of the people (as the
Civil Laws were), but they were set up so high, that they were made to be right
and pure worshipping of God, as they had been equal with Gods Laws, or above
them; for many of Gods Laws could not be kept, but were fain to give way unto
them. This arrogance God detested, that man should so advance his Laws to make
them equal with Gods Laws, wherein the true honoring and right worshipping of
God stands, to make his Laws for them to be left off. God has appointed his
Laws, whereby his pleasure is to be honored. -- They were not content to have
them called by the name of other Temporal Laws; but called them holy and godly
Traditions; and would have them not only esteemed for a right and true
worshipping of God (as Gods Laws be indeed), but also for the most high
honoring of God, to which the Commandments of God should give place. And for
this cause did Christ so vehemently speak against them.

Expl. 44. In the matter of the Preface we have these things observable, (1.)
That God is therefore the supreme Lawgiver, because he is the supreme Lord of
the whole Creation. As God by virtue of his Sovereignty may himself do with his
Creatures what he will, by the same right he may command them to do what he
will. (2.) That God can easily enable men to do what he commands them; for that
very power that commands his creatures into being, can also command them into
action. (3) That the bonds of the Covenant should be as the cords of love, and
the bands of a man, sweetly to draw men to obedience; when once we are listed
into the number of Gods people by Baptism, we are under a more special
obligation to obey God not only as our Creator, but as our Father. (4.) That
deliverances call for duties; and if a corporal deliverance of the Israelites
was an obligation upon them to obey the God of Israel, much more should that
spiritual deliverance from the Egyptian slavery of sin be an obligation upon
them to obey God.

Rules to be observed for the understanding of the Moral Law, or the Ten
Commandments.
1 Rule, That Christ the Lawgiver is the best Interpreter of Moses; or that the
Gospel is the fullest and clearest Interpreter of the Law. The Writings of the
Prophets are many times good Expositions of the Law of Moses. But the Writings
of Christ and his Apostles are far more clear and full. In reference to Christ
we have a known instance in the 5 th of Mat. passim. And the Apostles
frequently in their Epistles, as when we are commanded to shun all occasions of
evil, to love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, and our neighbor without
dissimulation, and not to defraud him any way, etc. 2 Rule, That the Law is
perfect, Psalm. 19.7. as (1.) In it self, not admitting of any additional
Precepts in the Gospel, which are generally obliging to all Christians which
were not obliging before that Christ came in the flesh. For as for those three
Precepts of the Gospel, for a man, (1.) To deny himself. (2.) To take up his
Cross; and (3.) To follow Christ; they are rather interpretations and instances
of that honor and love we are to have for Christ as God, which is required in
the First Command, than any additions obliging, which did not oblige before;
nay David himself did in some respect deny himself, take up his Cross, and
follow Christ; the middle of these had place when he said, The reproaches of
those who reproached thee are fallen upon me; and so Moses denied himself, and
Caleb and Ioshuah followed the Lord fully. (2.) The Law is perfect in its
extent and comprehension, in regard of the subject, for it does command the
whole Soul in all its powers and faculties; for it does require the
understanding to know, the judgment to approve that which is good; the will to
choose it, the memory to retain it, and the affections to pursue and enjoy it;
and upon this account it is said, that the Law is spiritual. 3 Rule, Whatever
the Law commands, it does forbid the contrary; as when it commands us to honor
our Parents, it does forbid us to dishonor them; and whatever the Law forbids
it commands the contrary; as when it forbids us to take the name of God in
vain, it requires us to use any of the names, or titles, or ordinances of God
with reverence. 4 Rule, When the Law commands a duty, (as suppose to worship
God) it does require us to make use of means, occasions, motives and
encouragements to it: and when the Law forbids ( ex. gr. worshipping of
Images), it does also forbid the occasions, appearances and inducements of any
evil. 5 Rule, Where a promise is annexed ( ex. gr. that the days may be long in
the Land, etc.) there the contrary threatening is included; and where a
threatening is annexed, there the contrary promise is included. 6 Rule, That the
duties of the second table must give place to the indispensable and necessary
duties of the first table, when they cannot both be performed together, as the
love of Parents must yield to the love of God; but in things ceremonial, the
duties of the first table must yield to the moral duties of the second; as
sacrificing to works of mercy toward man.
A. 45. What is the first Commandment?
The first Commandment is, Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

Expl. 45. These words are the first command, and not those, I am the Lord thy
God, (as some would have them) in which there is nothing commanded, but only a
declaration, who and what that God is who does command.

A. 46. What is required in the first Commandment?
The first Commandment requires us to know 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon my
Son, Know thou the God of thy Father.
, and acknowledge God to be the only true God, and our God Deuteronomy. 26.16. Thou
have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to
keep his statutes, and his Commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken to
his voice.
, and to worship and glorify him accordingly Mat. 4.10. Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.


Homil. II. p. 3. Let us take heed and be wise, O ye beloved of the Lord, and
let us have no strange Gods, but one only God, who made us when we were
nothing, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who redeemed us when we were
lost, and with his Holy Spirit does sanctify us. Homil. V. p. 3. Have an
assured Faith in God, and give your selves wholly unto him, love him in
prosperity and adversity, and dread to offend him ever-more. To. II. Hom. xvij.
What avails it the wisemen of the world to have knowledge of the Power and
Divinity of God -- where they did not honor and glorify him in their
knowledges as God? Hom. VI. whom we are to love with all our heart, i. e. that
our heart, mind, and study be set to believe his Word, to trust in him, and to
love him above all other things that we love best in Heaven or on Earth.

Expl. 46. In the first Commandment there are these 4 things required, (1.)
Knowledge of God, as namely, that he is the Creator and Governor of the world,
being the supreme Lord and Law giver; as also, that he is infinitely perfect in
his Nature, Attributes, Word, and Works. (2.) Faith, which does consist in our
owning and acknowledging him to be such a God as he is held forth in his Word,
and in a relyance upon him as such. (3.) Obedience, (which in reference to this
command, does principally consist in the conformity of Man's will to the Will
of God. (4.) Love to God employed in these words [before me].

A. 47. What is forbidden in the first Commandment?
The first Commandment forbids the denying Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in
his heart there is no God.
, or not worshipping and glorifying the true God as God Romans 1.20. So that they
are without excuse. 21. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not
as God.
and our God Psalm. 81.11. But my people would not hearken unto my voice, and
Israel would none of me.
, and the giving that worship and glory to any other which is due to him alone
Romans 1.25. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served
the creatures more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever.
.

To. 1. Hom. VIII. Whoever in time of reading Gods Word, studieth for the glory
and honor of this World, is turned from God, -- and has not a special mind to
that which is commanded and taught of God; is turned from God, although he does
things of his own devotion and mind, which to him seem better and more to Gods
honor. To. 2. Hom. xvi. p. 2. It may be boldly and with a safe conscience
pronounced of the Bishops of Rome, namely, that they have forsaken and daily do
forsake the Commandments of God, to erect and set up their own Constitutions.

Expl. 47. More particular, this Commandment does forbid these and the like
sins; as (1.) Ignorance of God, when men either do not know, or will not
consider who God is, and what he would have them do. (2.) Atheism, both in
judgment, when men are wavering and doubting about the Being of God, and
therefore disputing against it; and in practice, when men live as if there were
no God. (3.) Idolatry, which consists either in the worship of a false God, or
in worshipping the true God in a false manner, by mingling the corrupt
traditions or fancies of men in the worship of God; or in worshipping more Gods
than that one God who made the world, and is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, God
blessed for ever. (4.) Men's being ashamed of, or being negligent in the
profession of the true Religion. (5.) The wilful omission of any known duties
of Religion, as prayer, meditation, praising God, etc. (6.) Wilful infidelity,
when men do not believe God, or take him upon his word, or do reject and
contemn his commands, promises, or threatenings. (7.) All blasphemous and
misbecoming thoughts of God whatsoever; as also all errors and misapprehensions
concerning God, or any of those revelations he has given of himself. (8.) All
disobedience to his revealed Will. (9.) All unsuitable affections to himself,
or any thing that bears his stamp, as his Ordinances, Day, Providence, and
People. (10.) All unmindfulness and forgetfulness of God. (11.) All carnal
presumption, pride, tempting of God, relyance upon and seeking to unlawful
means for help in any distress, this being accompanied with the forsaking of
and apostasy from the true God. (12.) All impatience and discontent under any
evil; as also men's ascribing that which is good to any thing besides himself,
who is the fountain of all good.

A. 48. What are we especially taught by these words [before me] in the first
Commandment?
These words [ before me] in the first Commandment teach us, that God who sees
all things, takes notice of, and is much displeased with the sin of having any
other God Psalm. 44.20. If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched
out our hands to a strange God. 21. Shall not God search out this?


To. 2. Hom. I. The eternal and incomprehensible Maiesly of God, the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, whose seat is in Heaven, and the Earth is his footstool, --
calls upon his people, to mark, and take heed, and that upon the peril of
their souls, to the charge which he gives them, -- Thou shall worship the Lord
God, and him only shall thou serve. Adjoining penalty to the transgressors, and
reward to the obedient, -- to move to obedience and observing this the Lords
great Law, -- which might engender fear in our hearts of disobedience herein,
being in the Lords sight so great an offense and abomination.

Expl. 48. Here is further clearly intimated, (1.) That God would have the
first room in our estimation. (2.) In our affections, i. e. that we prize and
love him above all.

A. 49. What is the second Commandment?
The second Commandment is, Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or
any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; thou shall not bow down thy
self unto them, nor serve them: For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God,
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and
fourth generation, of them that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of
them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

To. 2. Hom. I. The Scriptures use the two words (Idols and Images)
indifferently for one thing always. They be words of diverse things ( Gr. and
Lat.), but one in sense and signification in the Scriptures, and matters of of
Religion. -- Wherefore our Images, if publicly suffered in Temples and
Churches, be indeed none other but Idols, as unto which Idolatry has been, is,
and ever will be committed. -- Has it not been preached unto you since the
beginning, etc. How by the Creation of the World, and the greatness of the
work, they might understand the Majesty of God, the Creator and Maker of all,
to be greater than that it should be expressed or set forth in any Image or
bodily Similitude. And that in the First Table, and the beginning thereof, --
is this Doctrine aforesaid (not briefly touched, but) at large set forth, and
that with denunciation of destruction to the contemners and breakers of this
Law, and their posterity after them.

Expl. 49. We have here principally observable, (1.) The order; (2.) The matter
of the Commandment. From the order, we are to observe, that God does prefer the
inward worship of the heart, which is required in the first Command, to the
outward worship of the body, which is here principally directed, that the
later, or that of the body, without the former is but hypocritical; and the
former without the later but partial; so that God is to be worshipped with all
our bodies and spirits. Those therefore who do present their bodies in
Idol-worship (as that of the Mass) and yet plead they keep their hearts for
God, are here condemned. (2.) The matter, or argument and scope of the Command,
i. e. to prevent all miscarriages and abuses in bodily worship, and to instruct
men how they may present their bodies as well as their souls a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. Yet to prevent mistakes about what is
forbidden in this Command, we are to note these two things. (1.) That not all
making of Images or Pictures, or likenesses of the creatures is here forbidden;
for then it would follow, that a man might not so much as frame an Idea in his
own fancy of one man's being like another, contrary to the very notion of truth,
which is nothing else but a conformity betwixt the mind and the object. (2.)
Nor is all civil use, or historical representations of things to the eye (which
is so helpful to the understanding and memory) here forbidden.

A. 50. What is required in the second Commandment?
The second Commandment requires the receiving, observing Deuteronomy. 32.46. Set
your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye
shall command your children to observe, to do all the words of this Law. Mat.
28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.
, and keeping pure and entire all such religious Worship and Ordinances, as God
has appointed in his Word Deuteronomy. 12.32. What thing soever I command you,
observe to do it; thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.
.

Hom. II. p. 3. Let us honor and worship for Religions sake none but God; and
him let us worship and honor as he will himself, and has declared by his
word, that he will be worshipped and honored, not in, nor by Images or Idols,
which he has most straightly forbidden; neither in kneeling, lighting of
Candles, burning of Incense, -- to believe that we should please him for all
these be abomination before God; but let us honor and worship God in spirit
and in truth, fearing and loving him above all things, trusting in him only,
calling upon him, and praying to him only, praising and lauding of him only,
and all other in him. Hom. XX. He requires a sincere and pure love of
godliness, and of the true worshipping and serving of God, i. e. that forsaking
all manner of things that are repugnant and contrary to Gods will, we do give
our hearts unto him.

Expl. 50. In the general, is here required that the bodily worshipping of God
be performed only in such a manner, both for substance and circumstances, as
God does require or allow, or at least is not expressly and consequentially
contradicted in his word. More particularly* (1.) It does require our utmost
and constant care and endeavor, to observe and preserve all holy Ordinances,
and external Church Priviledges in their purity and freedom from all manner of
corrupt mixtures in any kind, whereby God is provoked; fasting, prayer,
thanksgiving, hearing, reading the Word, singing of Psalms, administration and
participation of Gospel-Institutions, as the Sacraments, Swearing, the
Discipline and Censures of the Church, Maintenance of Gospel Ministers, etc.
(2.) All outward decency in such external Rites and Ceremonies as are
warrantably used in Religion, especially in public. (3.) All outward reverence
in gesture, speech, and behavior, in the worship of God. (4) All disapproving,
detesting, and loathing all manner of Idolatries, Will Worship, superstition,
together with all the monuments, and occasions, and appearances thereof.

A. 51. What is forbidden in the second Commandment?
The second Commandment forbids the worshipping of God by Images Deuteronomy. 4.15.
Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves; for ye saw no manner of
similitude in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Hor^^. 16. Lest you
corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image.
, or any other way not appointed in his Word Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you
of your reward in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding
into those things which he has not seen, vainly puss't up by his fleshly mind.
.

To. 2. Hom II. p. 1. Lest the Doctrine against Images should not be marked or
remarked, the same is written and required not in one but in sundry places of
the word of God, -- Neither could the notableness of the place, being the very
beginning of the very loving Lords Law, make us to mark it. -- So that if
either the multitude or plainness of the places might make us to understand, or
the earnest charge that God gives in these places move us to regard; or the
horrible plagues, punishment, and dreadful destruction, threatened to such
worshippers of Images or Idols, setters up or maintainers of them, might
engender any fear in our hearts, we would once leave and forsake this
wickedness, being in the Lords light so great an offense and abomination. -- p.
3. Images and Image-worshipping were in the primitive Church (which was most
pure and incorrupt) abhorred and detested as abominable, and contrary to true
Christian Religion. -- p. 3. Idolatry cannot be separated from Images any long
time, but as an unseparable accident, or as a shadow follows the body when the
Sun shines, so Idolatry follows and cleaves to the public having of Images
in Temples and Churches. -- It is not possible to keep men from Idolatry, if
Images be suffered publicly; -- the Images of God, our Savior, the Virgin,
the Apostles, Martyrs, and others of notable holiness, of all others most
dangerous.

Expl. 51. More particularly this command forbids (1.) absolutely and
altogether the making of any kind of Images of God, or of any person in the
Trinity (at least) as God. (2.) It forbids all making of Images in order to
the worshipping of God in them or by them, or any way abusing them in the true
Religion, as conceiting the presence of God to be in or with an Image in a more
especial manner than elsewhere. (3.) All the means and direct occasions of
Idolatry, all inventions, traditions, and corruptions of men in Gods worship,
or about the worship of God. (4.) All manner of witchcraft, or consulting those
that have familiar Spirits. (5.) All worshipping of Images, as well as of God
before them, together with all that religious respect that is given to them, as
in shrining, clothing them, etc. (6.) All profaning, neglecting, opposing, or
contemning of the worship and Ordinances of Christ; as also all kind of Simony
and Sacriledg.

A. 52. What are the Reasons annexed to the second Commandment?
The Reasons annexed to the second Commandment, are Gods Sovereignty over us
Psalm. 95.2. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a
joyful noise unto him with Psalms. 3. For the Lord is a great God, and a great
King above all Gods.
, his propriety in us Psalm. 45.11. He is thy Lord, and worship thou him.
, and the zeal he has to his own Worship Exodus 34.14. Thou shall worship no
other God; for the Lord whose name is jealous, is a jealous God.
.

Hom. II. p. 1. Concerning none other matter did God give more, or more earnest
and express Laws to his people than those that concern the true worshipping of
him, and the avoiding and fleeing of Idols, and Images, and Idolatry, for that
both the said Idolatry is most repugnant to the right worshipping of him, and
his true glory, above all other vices, and that he knew the proneness and
inclination of man's corrupt kind and nature, to that most odious and abominable
Vice.

Expl. 52. The reasons here annexed are such as are attempered and suited to
those two affections in man; namely, [ fear and hope] which are the two hinges
upon which all Religion does turn; for (1.) here is a severe threatening to move
and stir up that passion of fear which may prevent or restrain our disobedience
to this command, or at least to scare us from continuing in any kind of
Idolatry, Superstition, etc. which it does forbid. And in this threatening, we
have (1.) The hainousness of the Sin forbidden; for it is here intimated
spiritual Whoredom, because God is here represented as jealous over his people
that are entered into a marriage-Covenant with him; under the notion of a
Husband that is enraged with jealousy in reference to the unchaste behavior of
his Wife. (2.) In the punishment threatened, the grievousness of the sin is
intimated; when God does threaten to punish this Sin to the third and fourth
Generation. (3.) It Is here employed, that this Sin is a hating of God, when it is
said (of them that hate me) in reference to Idolaters. (2 dly,) We have here a
gracious promise for the encouraging of hope to the careful observers of this
command; and in this promise there is observable, (1.) Gods love to them in
showing mercy to thousands of them. (2.) Their love to God in keeping his
commands; and consequently the love of the world or any thing more than God is
flat Idolatry, and the Apostle does call covetousness by that name.

A. 53. Which is the third Commandment?
The third Commandment is, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

Hom. VII. Almighty God, to the intent his holy Name should be had in honor,
and evermore be magnified of the people, commands that no man should take his
name vainly in his mouth, threatening punishment unto him that irreverently
abuses it by swearing, forswearing, and blasphemy.

Expl. 53. The infinitely wise God very well knowing that if any seem to be
Religious and bridleth not his tongue, that man's Religion is vain; he does
therefore in this command lay a restraint upon man's tongue, that it may not
any way break forth to the dishonor of his great name; for although God does
give a particular command for the direction of the tongue in reference to our
neighbor, sc. the ninth Command, yet he does provide for his own honor first
in this third command.

A. 54. What is required in the third Commandment?
The third Commandment requires the holy and reverent use of Gods Names Psalm.
92.2. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name.
, Titles, Attributes Rev. 15.3. Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints. 4. Who shall not fear
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name?
, Ordinances Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy feet when thou go to the house of God,
and be more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools.
, Word Psalm. 38.2. I will worship toward the holy Temple, and praise thy Name
for thy loving kindness, and for thy Truth's for thou have magnified thy Word
above all thy Name.
, and Works Job 36.24. Remember that thou magnify his work which men behold.
.

Artic. 39. As we confess vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men by
our Lord Jesus Christ and James his Apostle: So we judge, that Christian
Religion does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate
requires in a cause of Faith and Charity, so it be done according to the
Prophets teaching, in justice, judgment, and truth. -- Thus an Oath (if it have
with it these three conditions) is a part of Gods glory, which we are bound by
his Commandments to give unto him.

Expl. 54. In this it is observable, that when the abuse of Gods name in any
kind whatsoever, is here forbidden; the Religious and reverent use of it is
thereby commanded. Now by Gods Name we are in the general to understand that
whereby he is in a peculiar manner made known to us, and distinguished from all
false Gods whatsoever, just as a man is made known by his name, and
distinguished from all other men; not but that more men may have the same name,
but that there does belong some peculiar property to a man of such a particular
name, whereby he is known from every body else: and so though there be Gods
many, and Lords many in name; yet to us there is but one God, who by something
or other in his Titles, attributes, words and works is distinguished from all
other Gods: ex. gr. when we call God (wise) we are to understand that he is
infinitely so; and consequently distinct from all his creatures hereby. Then
next for his Ordinances, Word, and Works; they must be holily and reverently
used (that is, with a serious sense of his Divine Majesty) whether these be
used in our thoughts, words or actions; but most especially this command
requires, that when we take Oaths or make lawful vows, we do it from such
principles, in such a religious manner, and to such right ends, as that the
Name of God be thereby honored.

A. 55. What is forbidden in the third Commandment?
The third Commandment forbids all profaning, or abusing of any thing
whereby God makes himself known Mal. 2.2. If ye will not hear, and if you will
not lay it to heart, to give glory unto thy Name, says the Lord of Hosts, I
will even send a curse upon you.


Hom. VII. He forbids all vain swearing and forswearing, both by God and by
his creatures, as the common use of swearing, in buying, selling, and our daily
communication. -- When men do swear of custom, in reasoning, buying, and
selling, or other daily communications (as many be common and great swearers),
such kind of swearing is ungodly, unlawful, and forbidden by the Commandment of
God, for such swearing is nothing else but taking of Gods holy Name in vain.
To. 2. Hom. X. p. 2. Let us not be scorners, jesters, and deriders of the
Scripture, for that is the uttermost token and show of a Reprobate, of a plain
enemy to God his Wisdom.

Expl. 55. Here is forbidden in the general, all manner of profanation, or
abuse of any name of God, as any of his Titles, as wise, good, holy, etc. any
of his works, as those of Creation or Providence; his Word written or preached;
any of his Ordinances, as Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments; as when we make any
unhandsom reflection upon any of these in our words or carriage; or do not use
them at all when we should, and when we do not as we ought: more particularly
here are forbid; (1.) All rash Oaths, whether before a Magistrate, or in a man's
private passion. (2.) All horrid and profane Oaths, as when men swear Wounds,
Blood, etc. and use their Dammees and Sinkmees. (3.) All blasphemous Oaths, ex.
gr. All such wherein the name of God, or Christ are profanely abused. (4.) All
mincing or contracting of Oaths; and here some tell us, that I marry, is but
the contracting of I by St. Mary, though some use it only as an expletive. (5.)
All mock-Oaths, or apeing of them. (6.) All injurious and perjurious Oaths.
(7.) All cursing, etc. (8.) All violation of lawful Oaths, Vows, Covenants.
(9.) All wilful forbearing of Oaths in necessary cases. (10.) All profane
scoffing, etc.

A. 56. What is the reason annexed to the third Commandment?
The reason annexed to the third Commandment is, that however the breakers of
this Commandment may escape punishment from men, yet the Lord our God will not
suffer them to escape his righteous judgment Deuteronomy. 28.58. If thou will not
observe to do all the words of this Law, that thou may fear this glorious
and fearful Name, the Lord thy God. 59. Then the Lord will make thy plagues
wonderful.
.

To. 1. Hom. VII. The most holy Name of God being commonly used and abused,
vainly and unreverently talked of, sworn by, and forsworn to the breaking of
Gods Commandment, is the procurement of his indignation. P. 2. And though such
perjured men's falsehood he now kept secret, yet it shall be opened at the last
day, when the secrets of all men's hearts shall be opened to all the world. --
Almighty God will be a swift witness against them, -- and the curse shall enter
into the house of the false and perjured man.

Expl. 56. In the reason of the command it is intimated. (1.) That God in a
special manner is the avenger of those that abuse his name. (2.) The certainly
of this vengeance. (3.) That men are apt to be remiss in punishing this Sin.

A. 57. Which is the fourth Commandment?
The fourth Commandment is, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy. Six days
shall thou labor, and do all thy work; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God; in it thou shall not do any work thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor the
stranger that is within thy gate. For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore
the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day, and hallowed it.

Expl. 57. This command being the fourth in order, is the last of the first
Table, or of those commands which do concern piety toward God, and in the
amplification of it, does require charity and mercy toward man, especially
toward inferiors, (as Son, Daughter, Servant, etc.) and therefore in
requiring both duties of piety and mercy, it does as it were glue both the
Tables of the Law together. As to the matter of the Command, (1.) Here is a
Preface to be noted, Remember; as if God should have said, though you should
forget all the other Nine Commands (which I would not have you to do neither),
yet be sure you forget not this. In which [ Remember] there is implied, (1.)
The importance of the Command, that it does import no less than the whole
Religion and duty of man toward God, and therefore to be remembered. (2.) The
aptness of men to forget this Command, both because the doctrine of it is not
to be learnt from the light of nature (at least not so clearly as the other
Commands), and because the duties of it do much cross the grain with corrupt
nature. (2 dly,) The thing to be remembered is the Sabbath Day, or that day of
Rest (which God has appointed) from all manner of employment and business,
except works of duty to God, charity to man, and of absolute necessity, relief,
or mercy toward the inferior creatures. How it is to be remembered, we have in
the next A.

A. 58. What is required in the fourth Commandment?
The fourth Commandment requires the keeping holy to God such settimes as he
has appointed in his Word, expressly one whole day in seven, to be a holy
Sabbath unto himself Deuteronomy 19.30. Ye shall keep my Sabbath, and reverence my
Sanctuary. I am the Lord. Deuteronomy. 5.12. Keep the Sabbath Day to sanctify it, as
the Lord thy God has commanded thee.


To. 2. Hom. VIII. It appears to be Gods good will and pleasure, that we
should at special times, and in special places, gather our selves together, to
the intent his name might be renowned, and his glory set forth in the
Congregation and Assembly of his Saints. -- And therefore by this Commandment,
we ought to have time, as one day in the week, wherein we ought to rest, yea
from our lawful and needful works.

Expl. 58. It Is in this A. expressed in the general, how the Sabbath is to be
kept holy, as also any other day (as suppose) of Fasting or Thanksgiving, which
man does appoint according to Gods will. Now to sanctify a day (and
particularly the Sabbath) is to employ it wholly and solely to that use for
which it is sanctified, or set apart by God, whether it be in reference to the
public or private exercises of Religion. And it must be the whole Sabbath Day
(yet with a merciful respect to nature and the constitution of men's bodies, for
God will have mercy and not sacrifice) beginning at the dawning of the day,
because Christ the Sun of Righteousness then rose, and it is to continue till
midnight, for so long was Paul engaged in Sabbath-exercises, Act. 20. 7, -- 10.
This is the time required by this Law, but if men have not strength of body to
continue so long, so there be in them a willing mind, God will accept of what
strength they have, and not what they have not.

A. 59. Which day of the seven has God appointed to be the weekly Sabbath?
From the beginning of the world to the Resurrection of Christ, God appointed
the seventh day of the week to be the weekly Sabbath Genesis 2.3. And God blessed
the seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all
his work, which God created and made.
, and the first day of the week ever since to continue to the end of the World,
which is the Christian Sabbath Act. 20.7. And upon the first day of the Week,
when the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them. Rev.
1.10. I was in the Spirit upon the Lords day.


To. 2. Hom. VIII. Remember says God, that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day,
upon which day, as it is plain in Act. 13. the people accustomably resorted
together, and heard diligently the Law and the Prophets read among them. And
albeit this Commandment does not bind Christian people, as touching the precise
keeping the seventh day, after the manner of the Jews; for we keep now the
first day, which is our Sunday ( Dominical or Lord's Day) and make that our
Sabbath, i. e. our day of rest, in honor of our Savior Christ, who as upon
that day rose from death, conquering it triumphantly; yet notwithstanding,
whatsoever is found in the Commandment appertaining to the Law of Nature, as a
thing most godly, most just, and needful, for the setting forth of Gods glory,
it ought to be retained and kept of all good Christian people. -- If we will be
children of our heavenly Father, we must be careful to keep the Christian
Sabbath, which is the Sunday, (i. e. Dominical or Lord's Day), not only for that
it is Gods express Commandment, but also to declare our selves to be loving
children, in following the example of our gracious Lord and Father, -- This
Example and Commandment of God, the godly Christian people began to follow
immediately after the ascension of our Lord Christ, -- choosing a standing day,
not the Seventh, which the Jews kept; but the Lord's Day, the day of the Lords
Resurrection, the day after the Seventh day, which is the First day of the week.

Expl. 59. The old Sabbath (as we see by this A. was the seventh day of the
week in order, that is, the Jews did observe our Saturday; for their
Seventh-day Sabbath, and the reason of it is expressed in the command; sc. God
rested from Creation-work that day. But the morality, or indispensable and
perpetual obligation of this command does not necessarily require the seventh
in order, for that is Ceremonious and abrogated together with the Jewish
Sabbath: but it does necessarily require the keeping holy of a seventh day for
number, or a seventh part of the week to be spent in Sabbath-duties, which
seventh part is now by the Resurrection of Christ upon the first day, and by
his own immediate authority (or by that which he gave to his Apostles) fixed
upon that first day, (now commonly called our Sunday, or Dominical, i. e.
Lord's Day) and no other even to the end of the world. Though there be no
express mention made of this change from the last to the first day in
Scripture, there being no question moved about it that we read of in the
Apostles time, yet by consequence the matter of fact is clear.

A. 60. How is the Sabbath to be sanctified?
The Sabbath is to be sanctified by an holy resting all that day, even from
such worldly employments and recreations as are lawful on other days Lev. 23.3.
Six days shall work be done, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of rest, an
holy convocation; ye shall do no work therein.
, and spending the whole time in public and private exercises of Gods Worship
Psalm. 92.1. A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath Day. It is a good thing to give
thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy Name, O most High. 2. To
show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night.
, except so much as is to be taken up in the works of necessity and mercy Mat.
12.11. What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it
fall into a pit on the Sabbath Day, will not he lay hold on it, and list it
out? 12. How much then is a man better than a sheep? wherefore it is lawful to
do well on the Sabbath Day.
.

To. 2. Hom. VIII. God has given express charge to all men, that upon the
Sabbath Day, which is now our Sunday ( i. e. Lord's Day) they should cease from
all weekly and work-day labor, that like as God himself rested and consecrated
it to quietness and rest from labor, so Gods obedient people should use the
Sunday ( i. e. Lord's Day) holily, and rest from their common and daily
business, and also give themselves wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true
Religion and service. -- Thus it may plainly appear, that Gods will and
Commandment was to have a solemn time, and standing day in the week, wherein
the people should come together, and have in remembrance his wonderful
benefits, and to render him thanks for them, as appertains to loving, kind,
and obedient people. -- St. John says, Rev. 1. I was in the spirit on the
Lord's Day. Since which time Gods people has always, in all Ages, without any
gainsaying, used to come together upon the Sunday, to celebrate and honor the
Lords blessed name, and carefully to keep that day in holy rest and quietness,
both man, woman, child, servant, and stranger.

Expl. 60. As to the particular manner of the Sanctification of the Sabbath it
is there expressed to be (1) by an holy rest, by which we are not to understand
that brutal and sluggish rest whereby men do indulge themselves in sloth and
laziness, (as if their bodies were not to move though it be to the Church) upon
this day; but this rest must be from all kind of employment, whether it be of
body or mind which does any way indispose a man for or distract him in the
service of God; whether such actions, thoughts or words be in themselves
sinful, which men ought to forbear and rest from at all times; or in themselves
lawful, as the cares, thoughts, and business of a man's honest calling, they are
to be forborne this day, and much more all kind of recreations, whether lawful
or no. (2) By exercising our selves unto godliness, not only in those duties of
Religion which we perform on other days either alone, or with others, as
Prayer, reading Scripture, and other good Books, holy Conference, but in those
duties also which are more peculiar to this day, as Hearing, Meditation,
receiving of the Sacraments, Singing of Psalms, etc. and thus the whole day is
to be spent, except so much of it as is to be taken up in works of such eminent
necessity as is brought upon men by the Providence of God, and not such
necessity as men make for their own gain or pleasure, and in works of mercy.

A. 61. What is forbidden in the fourth Commandment?
The fourth Commandment forbids the omission or careless performance of the
Duties required Mal. 1.13. Ye said also, behold what a weariness is it? and ye
have snuffed at it, says the Lord of Hosts; and ye brought that which was
torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus you brought an offering, should I accept
this at your hands, says the Lord?
, and the profaning the day by Idleness, or doing that which is in it self
sinful Ezekiel 23.38. They have defiled my Sanctuary in the same day, and have
profaned my Sabbaths.
, or by unnecessary thoughts, words, or works, about worldly employments or
recreations Isa. 58.13. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing
thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding
thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words.
.

To. 2. Hom. VIII. For the transgression and breach of the Sabbath Day, God
has declared himself much to be grieved, as Number. 15. but alas! the wicked
boldness of those that will be accounted Gods people, who pass nothing at all
of keeping and hallowing the Sunday ( i. e. Lord's Day) -- They, though there be
no extreme need, must drive and carry, -- row and ferry, -- buy and sell on the
Sunday ( i. e. Lord's Day), they use all days alike. The other, though they will
not travel, nor labor, as on the weekday, yet they will not rest in holiness,
as God commands; but they rest in ungodliness and filthiness, prancing in
their pride, pranking and pricking, pointing and painting themselves to be
gorgeous and gay; they rest in excess and superfluity, in gluttony and
drunkenness, like Rats and Swine; they rest in brawling and railing, in
quarrelling and fighting; they rest in wantonness, in toyish talking, in filthy
fleshliness: So that it does evidently appear, that God is more dishonored,
and the Devil better served on the Sunday ( i. e. Lord's Day) than upon all the
days in the week beside. -- The Beasts which are commanded to rest on the
Sunday ( i. e. Lord's Day) honor God better than this kind of people; for they
offend not God, they break not their holy days.

Expl. 61. More particularly this command forbids (1) all unpreparedness for
the Sanctification of the Sabbath. (2) All forgetfulness of the day or duties
of it, and both these in that one word [ Remember.] (3) All negligent omission
or performance of any Sabbath-exercise, as Prayer, hearing the Word,
Meditation, etc. (4) All direct profaning of the Sabbath by doing nothing, or
by bodily sloth; for on this day we are in an especial manner to glorify God
with our bodies and spirits which are Gods. (5) All manner of words, thoughts,
affections, cares, designs, and actions which do directly tend to: (1) Worldly
profit and gain, as journeys, fairs, markets, and all manner of buying and
selling, except of that of which there is a real and present necessity toward
the sustenance of man's life. (2) To sensual pleasure, as all manner of gaming,
bowling, idle talking and walking, and all such kind of visits as have more of
Complement than of real necessity in them, more of recreation in them to the
body or carnal mind, than of Religion toward God, or of charity toward our
neghbour. (6) All manner of servile works, not only in reference to Supeperiors
and Governors, but also in reference to those that are under their care and
charge, for that all excuses for worldly or sinful employment may be taken away
from all persons: It Is said neither, thou, nor thou, etc.

A. 62. What are the Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment?
The Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment are, Gods allowing us six days
of the week for our own employments Exodus 31.15. Six days may work be done, but
in the seventh is the Sabbath of rest. 16. Wherefore the children of Israel
shall keep the Sabbath.
, his challenging special propriety in the seventh Lev. 23.3. Ye shall do no
work therein, it is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings.
, his own example Exodus 31.17. It is a sign between me and the children of
Israel for ever; for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the
seventh day he rested and was refreshed.
, and his blessing the Sabbath Day Genesis 2.3. And God blessed the seventh day,
and sanctified it.
.

To. 2. Hom. VIII. Like as it appears by this Commandment, that no man in the
six days ought to be slothful or idle, but diligently to labor in that state
wherein God has set him. -- So God does not only command the observation of
this holy day, but also by his own example does stir and provoke us to the
keeping of it. Wherefore, O ye people of God! lay your hands upon your hearts,
repent and amend this grievous and dangerous wickedness, stand in awe of the
Commandments of God, gladly follow the example of God himself, be not
disobedient to the godly order of Christ's Church, used and kept from the
Apostles time to this day. Fear the displeasure and just plagues of almighty
God, if ye be negligent, and forbear not laboring and traveling on the
Sabbath Day or Sunday ( i. e. Lord's Day), and do not resort together, to
celebrate and magnify Gods blessed Name, in quiet, holiness, and godly
reverence.

Expl 62. The reasons are here ranked under three heads, (1) the equity of the
thing commanded, God allowing us six days for our honest and ordinary
employments we may well give him one in seven, and be content to spend that
cheerfully in his service, (Six days shall thou labor, etc.) (2) From Gods
Propriety in this day, this is the day which the Lord has made, or instituted
and appointed, Psalm. 118.23. And may he not do what he will with his own, may
he not enjoy it to be spent in his service if he please. (3) From Gods example
in resting the seventh day; not that we are therefore to rest on the seventh
day in order, because God did so after he had created the world and all things
therein; but that we are to spend (according to the tenor of this Command, a
seventh day which is now our Dominical, or Sunday, in an holy rest unto the
Lord. (4) From Gods end in blessing, and sanctifying this day, or in setting it
apart to holy uses, namely that we should so use it, and thereby receive the
blessing of the Sabbath from the Lord of the Sabbath.

A. 63. Which is the fifth Commandment?
The fifth Commandment is, Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may
be long in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Expl. 63. This command which is here called the fifth, is by the Apostle
called the first Commandment with promise, Ephesians. 6.1, 2. ( i. e.) to which
this promise of long life is expressly made, it being also the first command of
the second Table.

A. 64. What is required in the fifth Commandment?
The fifth Commandment requires the preserving the honor, and performing the
duties belonging to every one in their several places and relations, as
Superiors Ephesians. 5.21. Submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God.
22. Wives submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord. Ephesians.
6.1. Children, obey your Parents in the Lord. 5. Servants, be obedient to them
that are your Masters according to the flesh. Romans 13.1. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers. Ephesians 6.9. And ye Masters do the same things unto
them, knowing that your Master also is in heaven.
, Inferiors i, or Equals Romans 12.10. Be kindly affectioned one to another with
brotherly love, in honor preferring one another.
.

To. 1. Hom. V. p. 3. Obey all your Superiors and Governors, serve your
Masters faithfully and diligently* as well in their absence as in their
presence, not for dread of punishment only, but for conscience sake, knowing
that you are bound so to do by Gods Commandments. Hom. X. p. 2. Every degree of
people in their vocation, calling, and office, has appointed them their duty
and order; some are in high degree, some in low; some Kings and Princes, some
Inferiors and Subjects, Ministers and People, Masters and Servants, Fathers and
Children, Husbands and Wives, etc.

Expl. 64. Here is required (1) something in general of all, that they give to
all that honor which is due unto them in their different places and relations,
whether they be Superiors in age, parts, gifts, or authority, who are there so
called by that obliging name of parents, that men may yield what is due unto
such with all child-like and filial respect, and because in the beginning
Parents were Magistrates; or Supeperiors in power; or whether they be equal to
us or our Inferiors image, power, etc. for in both these capacities there is
due to them love, gratitude, and such offices of Christianity, civility, or
friendship which are suitable and proper to them. (2) Something in special is
required from Children to be given to their natural Parents; and it is all
expressed in this one word (honor). And it is observable that the command is
laid on all Children, of both sexes, and of what age, or rank soever though
they be Children of Princes and Nobles; and the honor due unto natural father
and mother, or to those who are in their stead, as father and mother-in-law,
grandfather or Grandmother, Uncle or Aunt, Guardian, Tutor, etc. It is (1)
the honor of respect or love, both in heart, words and behavior; for this law
on Children is a law of love, and as it requires that they love one another, so
also that they love their Parents. (2) The honor of Reverence, (i. e.)
Children must fear as well as love their Parents, they must stand in awe of
them as being under their authority, and that thereby they may be kept from
offending their Parents. (3) The honor of Obedience which proceeds from both
the other; it is love or fear that makes Children obey. Now in order to this
Obedience the rod of correction is a scepter so needful in Parents hands, that
Solomon reckons that Parent to hate his child that does not use it, Prove.
13.24. (4) The honor of help or recompense, (i. e.) As Parents need help, and
the child is able or has opportunity to do it, he or she must thankfully
requite thereby their labor of love.

A. 65. What is forbidden in the fifth Commandment?
The fifth Commandment forbids the neglecting, or doing any thing against
the honor and duty which belongs to every one in their several places and
relations Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom
tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom
honor. 8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another.
.

To. 1. Hom. V. p. 3. Disobey not your Fathers and Mothers, but honor them,
help them, and please them to your power. Hom. X. St. Paul threatens no less
pain than everlasting damnation to all disobedient persons, to all resisters.
-- p. 2. Yet let us believe undoubtedly (good Christian people) that we may not
obey Kings, Magistrates, or any other (though they be our own Fathers), if they
would command us to do any thing contrary to Gods Commandments. p. 3. And here
let us take heed, that we understand not these, or such other like places
(which so straightly command obedience to superiors, and so straightly punished
rebellion and disobedience to the same) to be meant in any condition of the
pretended and colored power of the Bishop of Rome. For truly the Scripture of
God allows no such usurped power, full of enormities, abusions, and
blasphemies. -- He ought therefore rather to be called Antichrist, and the
Successor of the Scribes and Pharisees, than Christ's Vicar, or St. Peter's
Successor.

Expl. 65. But more particularly in reference to natural Parents (or those who
stand in their room) these miscarriages are forbidden to Children. (1) All
manner of contempt of the persons of Parents, especially when by reason of old
age, sickness, or natural infirmities, they are not able to manage their
Parental authority either as they ought, or have done, or when by the
Providence of God their repute or estate is low in the world. (2) All slighting
of their good instructions, example, counsel, directions, reproof and
correction. As God would not have his own chastening and instruction despised,
so neither that of Parents, and therefore he calls that child a fool, (by the
mouth of Solomon) a scorner, and brutish, who is guilty hereof. (3) All
slighting of Parents commands, and of their pleasure whether in reference to
duty to be performed by them, whether in matters civil or religious; or in
reference to the disposal of themselves in Marriage, or in any calling, place
and employment. (4) All slighting of the tenderness and watchfulness of
Parents, by doing that on purpose which does either disturb their passions, or
disquiet their minds. (5) All mocking, deriding, or imitating their weaknesses
and misbehaviour, or any way disgracing them, as Absalom did his fathers
government, and as Cham did in discovering his fathers nakedness. Much more (6)
here are forbidden all cursing of them, and bitter railing at them. (7) All
such carriage in Children as does not redound by way of reflection, as well as
what does not tend directly to the Parents honor.

A. 66. What is the Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment?
The Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment is, a promise of long life and
prosperity (as far as it shall serve for Gods glory, and their own good) to all
such as keep this Commandment Ephesians. 6.2. Honor thy Father and thy Mother (which
is the first Commandment with promise). 3. That it might be well with thee, and
that thou may live long on the earth.
.

To. 1. Hom. X. p. 3. By obedience to our superiors, shall we please God, and
have the exceeding benefit, peace of conscience, rest and quietness here in
this world, and after this life enjoy a better life. To. 2. Hom. XXI. p. 3.
Good and obedient Subjects are in Gods favor, and be partakers of peace,
quietness, and security, with other God's manifold blessings in this world, and
by his mercies through our Savior Christ, of life everlasting also in the
world to come.

Expl. 66. In the general, we have one great reason from the promise of
prosperity and long life, particularly annexed to this Command; in which
promise there are two things, (1) The peculiarity of the blessing promised to
the obedience of this Command, for obedient children may be sure of the
blessing promised, when it may be a blessing. (2) The greatness of the
blessing, for of all temporal blessings it is the greatest, sc. life; and then
here is that which is so sweet to nature in this life, it is long life and
prosperous withal, otherwise it would not be a blessing. Yet more particularly,
obedience to Parents is indispensable, because (1) God requires it in the next
place to that which he claims for himself; and has therefore placed this Law
next to the Commands of the first Table. (2) The Law of Nature does in a
peculiar manner require this in all Nations, even the most blind and barbarous;
yea instinct of Nature in the brute creatures does teach them some kind of
respect to their Sires and Damms.

A. 67. Which is the sixth Commandment?
The sixth Commandment is, Thou shall not kill.

Expl. 67. The fifth Command did concern special duties to special persons, sc.
the obedience of Children toward their Parents; but this Command does reach
all persons in general; and the end of it is not only to preserve man's life,
but humanity it self, and therefore this [ Thou] in the prohibition does forbid
murder to all persons.

A. 68. What is required in the sixth Commandment?
The sixth Commandment requires all lawful endeavors to preserve our own life
Ephesians. 5.28. So ought men to love their Wives, even as their own bodies. 29. For
no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it.
, and the life of others Psalm. 82.3. Defend the poor and fatherless. 4. Deliver
the poor and needy. Job. 9.13* The blessing of him that was ready to perish,
came upon me.
.

Hom. V. p. 3. Cast in your minds, how you may do good unto all men, unto your
power, and hurt no man. -- Oppress not, beat not, neither hate a(...); but help
and succor every man as you may* yea, even your enemies that hate you, that
speak evil of you, and that do hurt you. Hom. VI. Cherish good and harmless
men, -- and encourage with rewards to do well.

Expl. 68. Now in order to this end, these things may be very helpful, (1)
Humanity, or a general respect of kindness toward all, whether in offices of
love or of pity. (2) A slowness to anger, after the example of God, whom we so
much provoke; and this is called lenity, or meekness of spirit, for which Moses
was so eminent. (3) A study to be quiet, both outwardly from all brawling and
contention; and inwardly from all revengeful thoughts, purposes, passions; as
also a diligent care in outward demeanor, to avoid all occasions, temptations,
and practices which do tend to stir up wrath. (4) Placableness, or an easiness
to be reconciled, and to forget and to forgive injuries and affronts. (5) A
readiness to use all lawful and proper means to defend our own or neighbors
life, as we are called to it by the Law of Nature, Humanity, and Religion, as
we are in a capacity to do it. (6) Such a cheerfulness of spirit as tends to
the health of the body. (7) Christian temperance and moderation in the use of
the creatures, in bodily labor, and lawful recreations. (8) A conscientious
care to use such Physic (as is prescribed by those who are skilful therein)
which is either for the preservation or recovery of health. (9) Care to save
our own and others souls.

A. 69. What is forbidden in the sixth Commandment?
The sixth Commandment forbids the taking away of our own life Act: 16.28.
Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thy self no harm.
, or the life of our neighbor unjustly Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed.
, and whatsoever tends thereunto Prove. 24.11. If thou forbear to deliver them
that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain. 12. If thou
say, Behold we know it not, does not he that pondereth the heart, consider
it?
.

To. 2. Hom. XXI. p. 3. Robberies and murders of all sins are most loathed of
most men, being against the second Table of Gods Law. To. 1. Hom. VI. Delay not
rebukes and punshments of those that offend, but give them in due time, lest
they fall headlong.

Expl. 69. Here (1) Negatively, This Command forbids not (1) All kind of war,
for some is lawful. (2) Nor the execution of public justice in capital
punishments upon capital offenders. (3) Nor self-defence, against violence in
some cases. (4) Nor moderate anger, where there is just cause, as ex. gr. in
the case of reproof, and upon the like warrantable occasions. But (2)
Positively, Here is forbidden, (1) Self-murder, both direct, as a man's
hanging, drowning, stabbing, etc. himself; indirect, as surfeiting,
drunkenness, and the neglect of any lawful means for the preservation or repair
of health; as of meat, drink, physic* etc. (2) Murder of our neighbor, (1)
Directly, when wittingly and out of hatred (and without a just call) a man does
either by himself, or by means of another, take away the life of his neighbor.
(2) Murtherous thoughts, and hatred of him without a cause. (3) All inhumanity
and unmercifulness, or want of compassion. (4) All neglect of, or the
withdrawing of our lawful defense. (5) All quarrelsom broyls and brawlings. (6)
All Duels, because in this case men wrest the Sword of Justice out of the
Magistrates hand, that they may carve out justice (or rather revenge) for
themselves. (7) All provoking speeches and behavior.

A. 70. Which is the seventh Commandment?
The seventh Commandment is, Thou shall not commit adultery.

Hom. XI. By the which [ Adultery], although it be properly understood of the
unlawful commixtion or joining together of a married man with any woman beside
his wife, or of a wife with any man beside her husband; yet thereby is
signified also all unlawful use of those parts which be ordained for generation.

Expl. 70. As the former precept did concern the life, so this does concern the
chastity of our neighbor. And as natural and regular selflove should be the
rule and standard of our love to our neighbor, according to which we are to
act in the preservation of his life; so that love we ought to have to our
selves, and that care we ought to have for the preservation of our own
chastity, we ought also to have for the preservation of our neighbors
chastity, otherwise we do not love our neighbor as our selves.

A. 71. What is required in the seventh Commandment?
The seventh Commandment requires the preservation of our own 1 These. 4.4.
That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification
and honor.
, and our neighbors chastity Ephesians. 5.11. And have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them rather. 12. For it is a shame
even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret.
, in heart 1 Timothy 2.22. Flee also youthful lusts, but follow righteousness,
faith, charity.
, speech Col. 4.6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt.
, and behavior 1 Pet. 3.2. While they behold your chaste conversation with fear.
.

To. 1. Hom. XI. Christ does not only establish the Law against Adultery, and
make it of full force; but teaches us an exact and full perfection of purity
and cleanness of life, both to keep our bodies undefiled, and our hearts pure
and free from all evil thoughts, carnal desires, and fleshly consents.

Expl. 71. Here is (1) something required in the general, and that is the
utmost endeavors to preserve chastity amongst all persons, and that honorable
state of marriage from all the lusts of uncleanness, for as well the bodies of
others as our own, are, or should be, the consecrated Temples of the Holy
Ghost, and therefore are not to be defiled by the sacrilegious and abominable
lusts of filthiness. (2) In particular, for this chastity is required (1) In
heart, or soul, as it comprehends all the powers and faculties thereof, with
all the inward actings of these; as, (1) That in the understanding the thoughts
be pure, chaste, and clean; and that whatever things are honest, in order to the
preservation of chastity, we think on these things. (2) That the will do make
its choice accordingly. (3) That the memory be a faithful Register only of the
rules, and laws, and examples of modesty and chastity, and not to keep the
Records of lust, nor to be Master of the Rowls to the spirit of uncleanness.
(4) That nothing be represented upon the stage of fancy, but what does become
godliness and honesty. (5) That the affections do hug and embrace nothing that
is defiled with the impurity of lust. (2 dly,) Here is required chastity in
speech, that men's discourse and communication be such as does tend to promote
and preserve good manners, to credit the Gospel, and to give good example to
others (especially the younger sort of people), as the Holy Ghost (that Spirit
of purity) has left us an example of purity in speech, when he speaks only of
that (which considered in it self) has nothing of guilt, but only something of
that natural shame upon it which was bequeathed to us by our first Parents; ex.
gr. he knew her, he covered his feet, etc. Judge. 3.24. 1 Samuel 1.19. (3 dly,) In
behavior, that our gestures, postures, garb, apparel, company, diet, and whole
demeanor be such both before God and men, as becomes the purity of that Gospel
which does not only teach to deny worldly, but also to abstain from all fleshly
lusts, to avoid the appearance of them, and to hate the very garment spotted
with the flesh.

A. 72. What is forbidden in the seventh Commandment?
The seventh Commandment forbids all unchaste thoughts Mat. 5.28. Whosoever
looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already
in his heart.
, words Ephesians. 5.4. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which
are not convenient.
, and actions Ephesians. 5.3. Fornication and all uncleanness, let it not be once
named amongst you.
.

To. 1. Hom. V. p. 2. Commit no manner of adultery, fornication, or other
unchastness, in will, nor in deed, with any other man's wife, widow, or maid.
Hom. XI. Here is whoredom, fornication, and all other uncleanness forbidden,
to all kinds of people, all degrees, and all ages without exception.

Expl. 72. (1) By unchaste thoughts, we are to understand all impure and unchaste
motions of the Soul in any of its faculties, as also all the cherishing and
indulging of these inwardly and secretly, as by consent, allowance, keeping
them in mind with delight, and acting them in the fancy. (2) In unchaste words
is here forbidden, all kind of Ribaldry, Bawdry, Balladry, Romances, and
Love-songs, and all such wanton discourses as are either plainly unchaste, or at
least immodest, and such as do not become the tongues or pens of those who
profess godliness; or at the best are such as have a direct tendency to the
violation of modesty, if not of chastity. (3) By actions we are to understand
not only all acts of uncleanness, as adultery, fornication, sodomy, bestiality,
self-pollution, etc. but also all that which does open a gap to any lusts of
uncleanness, as polygamy, unlawful marriages, divorces, and dispensations; all
stews and naughty houses; all undue delays of marriage where there is not the
gift of continence; all wanton dalliance, dancings, plays, and all such
painting of the face, or pampering of the body, which have a natural tendency
to inflame, or provoke filthy lust.

A. 73. Which is the eighth Commandment?
The eighth Commandment is, Thou shall not steal.

Expl. 73. This command concerns the goods as the next does the good name of
our neighbor.

A. 74. What is required in the eighth Commandment?
The eighth Commandment requires the lawful procuring and furthering the
wealth and outward estate of our selves Romans 12.17. Provide things honest in
the sight of all men. Prove. 15.23. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy
flocks, and look well to thy herds.
, and others Lev. 25.35. If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with
thee, then thou shall relieve him. Phil. 2.4. Look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others.
.

Hom. V. Bestow your own goods charitably, which you get duly, as need and case
requires. Hom. VI. Bear good will and heart unto every man, to use our selves
well unto them, as well in words and countenances, as in all our outward acts
and deeds.

Expl. 74. As in all the commands which concern our neighbor, the grand
principle is to be love to him; so in all (but especially here) the rule of our
duty must be that golden rule of righteousness, do as you would be done by. Now
next to the promoting of our own estate or welfare in the world, we must
endeavor our neighbors welfare, we must not only love him as our selves, but
we must in the general be careful to promote or preserve his estate as our own
by all honest and lawful means; more particularly here is required, (1.)
Personal cared about a man's own estate or goods, for charity begins at home.
(2.) Truth and faithfulness about what is committed to our charge by others.
(3.) Commutative justice between man and man, in bargaining contracting, buying
and selling, and in rendering to every one his due, and in due time; as also in
borrowing, bartering, chaffering and changing. (4.) Restitution of what we
wrongfully detain of another goods, either to the person from whom they are
detained, or to his heirs and executors if we be able, or else to acknowledge
our fault to them, and to beg their pardon. (5.) Lending freely and not looking
for any thing again, especially where interest is to the impoverishing of our
neighbor. *6* Charity to the relief of the poor. (7.) Hospitality to
strangers. (8.) Diligence and faithfulness in an honest, calling not only that
a man may provide for himself or his friends or family, but that he may have to
give to him that needs, (9.) That all this be done with singleness of heart
as to the Lord Christ, and with love to others as to our selves.

A. 75. What is forbidden in the eighth Commandment?
The eighth Commandment forbids whatsoever does, or may unjustly hinder our
own 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his
own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel. Prove. 28.19.
He that follows after vain persons, shall have poverty enough.
, or our neighbors wealth, and outward estate Prove. 21.6. The getting of
Treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek
death. Job 20.19. Because he has oppressed, and has forsaken the poor:
because he has violently taken away a house which he builded not. 29. Surely
he shall not feel quietness in his belly.
.

To. 2. Hom. XXI. Thefts and robberies are most pernicious to society. Hom.
XVII. p. 2. So many as increase themselves by usury, by extortion, by perjury,
by stealth, by deceits and craft, they have their goods of the Devils gift.

Expl. 75. This Command in the general does forbid all that does hinder the end
of this Command, which is the preservation of Livelihood, in order to the
sustentation of life, whether our own or others, and consequently all that
which does hinder the performance of the forementioned duties does directly
tend to the neglect of them. Particularly it does forbid (1.) inwardly; and
that (1.) all covetous desires of what is not our own, heart-deceit, cheating
contrivance, though never executed. (2.) All overvaluing worldly things. (3.)
Envy at the prosperity of another, because he is richer than we. (4.) All
over-eager pursuit of worldly things, confidence in them, distracting cares
about them, and inordinate grief for the loss of them. (5.) All
discontentedness with our present lot and condition. (2.) Outwardly; (1.) all
kind of robbery and stealth whether by force or fraud; and hither may be
referred, (1.) That common practice amongst some of men-stealing, as also the
enticing away of Servants from their Masters. (2.) The receiving and buying of
stolen goods; the receiver is worse and the buyer little better than a thief,
when he knows or suspects them to be stolen. (3) False weights, measures,
lights, removing of landmarks etc. (4.) All monopolies to raise the price.
(5.) All kind of cheating by game, and here many times the sin is double, sc.
the game it self and cheating by it, or any such like juggling by sleight of
hand. (6.) All cosenage in words. (7.) All acts of unfaithfulness in contracts,
bargains, or in matters of trust public or private. (8.) Sacriledg, or the
taking away of that which is devoted to pious uses, together with all unjust
alienations. (9) Needless protracting of Lawsuits. (10.) All such engagements
as (by suretiship, etc.) are to a man's own prejudice. (11.) All forestalling of
markets, and hoarding up against a dearth to the prejudice of the public.
(12.) All injustice in any kind, whether by griping, usury, oppression, or any
other unlawful way.

A. 76. Which is the ninth Commandment?
The ninth Commandment is, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor?

Expl. 76. For the government of the tongue in reference to God we have the
third Commandment, and for the guidance of it in reference to our selves and
others we have this Commandment, for though our neighbor here be only
mentioned yet our selves must not be exclued, and therefore regular self-care
for our own good name is to be the rule of our care to preserve his good name.

A. 77. What is required in the ninth Commandment*
The ninth Commandment requires the maintaining and promoting of truth between
man and man Zech. 8.16. Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor.
, and of our own 1 Pet. 3.16. Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak
evil of you, as of evildoers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good
conversation in Christ. Act. 25.10. Then Paul said, I stand at Cesars judgment
seat; to the Jews have I done no wrong.
* and our neighbors good name 3 John 12. Demetrius has a good report of all
men, and of the truth it self; yea, and we also bear record.
, especially in witness bearing Prove. 14.5. A faithful witness will not lie.
25. A true witness delivers souls.
.

To. 1. Hom. XII. p. 3. If we be good and quiet Christian men, let it appear in
our tongues. If we have forsaken the devil, let us use no more devilish tongues.

Expl. 77. The scope and drift of this Commandment most directly and expressly
is the preservation of truth, but in subordination to the preservation of love
to our neighbor, there being nothing that does tend more to the violation of
this affection, than the belying of him. The general duty therefore which this
Commandment requires in reference to our neighbor is to speak the truth in
love, yet more particularly as this Command is broken, so it is to be kept both
inwardly and outwardly: (1.) Inwardly, and then it does require (1) love, both
to the truth and to our neighbor; because this twofold love is a good means
for the preservation of our neighbors good name. (2.) An high and just value
and esteem of our neighbors credit and reputation. (3.) Charitable thoughts
concerning him, 'till we have grounds to the contrary. (4.) Willingness to hear
well, and unwillingness to hear ill of him. (5.) A hearty rejoicing at good,
and sorrowing for evil reports of him. (2 dly,) Outwardly, is required, (1)
Silence concerning our neighbor, or the not revealing of secrets, when either
his good name, or a man's own good conscience is in danger to be prejudiced
thereby; for to reveal a secret (where the concealing of it is not either much
to the damage of others, or of the party who would have it kept a secret) would
be a violation both of Christian fidelity, and of humane society, and of the
laws of friendship. (2.) Here is outwardly required our just defense of our
neighbor, by speaking well of him, (1) so far as the truth of the matter will
bear it. (2) As we have a fit opportunity. And (3) a due call to speak on his
behalf, but especially in witness bearing before a Magistrate; for in such a
case a man is to say the whole truth, or all that is material (even in
circumstances themselves) for the just vindication of his neighbors good name;
and nothing but the truth, not that which is partly true and partly false. (2.)
To do (as well as speak) what we can according to our place and capacity, and
to use our utmost interest for his defense, though there might be something of
pains, charge, or hazard in such Christian and neighbourly endeavors. (3.)
That a man do discourage and rebuke tale-bearers, flatterers, slanderers, and
false accusers, especially when we observe that what they say is from malice,
prejudice, and bitterness, and has very little of probability in the matter.

A. 78. What is forbidden in the ninth Commandment?
The ninth Commandment forbids whatsoever is prejudicial to truth Romans 3.13.
With their tongues they have used deceit.
, or injurious to our own Job 27.5. God forbid that I should justify you; till
I dye, I will not remove my integrity from me.
, or our neighbors good name Psalm. 15.3. He that backbiteth not with his
tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his
neighbor.
.

To. 1. Hom. XII. p. 3. He that has been a malicious slanderer, now let him be
a loving comforter. -- He that has abused his tongue in evil speaking, now let
him use it in speaking well. All bitterness, anger, railing, and blasphemy, let
it be avoided from you.

Expl. 78. More particularly, here is forbidden something (1 st,) Inwardly, as
(1) All uncharitable and censorious thoughts concerning our neighbor; for we
are to love our neighbor, and charity thinks no evil. (2) All supercilious
and disdainful thoughts, as of the meanness of his person, the weakness of his
parts, gifts, etc. (3) All ungrounded suspicions and over-credulousness, or a
readiness to open the ear to any body that shall but open his mouth against
him. (4) All such inordinate passions as (hatred, wrath, etc.) are suitable to
such a bad and unchristian temper of mind. (2 dly,) Outwardly, is here
forbidden, (1) False testimony against him, whether privately unto some private
person in our discourse, or publicly before a Magistrate, when a man is to
speak or to swear in truth, judgment, and righteousness. (2) The suborning or
procuring of others to be false witnesses against him. (3) Pleading for an evil
cause, for this is to defend injustice, and to be the Devils advocate. (4)
Uncharitable censures. (5) Unjust verdicts and sentences. (6) Any kind of
endeavors to suppress or hinder the course of justice and truth by undue
silence. (7) Speaking the truth unseasonably, especially when it tends to
detraction, reproach, and slander; for to report the sins of others without
just cause, is really a reproach, as from the reporter, though the matter be
true; if it be done without malice, and in order to his reformation, such
report is not sinful, because here only a less good is neglected for procuring
a greater. Yet is it no defamation to speak of another man's failings, when
they are the common talk of public fame, or marked out by the sentence of the
Judge, or the notoriety of the fact. (8) Forgeries, whether of writing or tales.
(9) Harsh misconstructions and interpretations of other men's words, intentions,
or actions. (10) Flattering, and undervaluing of others. (11) All malicious
aggravations, or unjust excuses and extenuations of others faults. (12) All
such whisperings, reviling, and rash speaking, whereby either truth, charity,
or the good name of others is wronged. (13) All raising and receiving false
reports, and the rejoicing in the disgrace of another. (14) All mental
reservations, and Jesuitical equivocations, or any other way whereby our own
good name, or credit and conscience, and the good name of others, as well as
truth it self and Religion, is wronged*

A. 79. Which is the tenth Commandment?
The tenth Commandment is, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou
shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant,
nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbors.

Expl. 79. This Command does concern the frame and temper of the inward man,
whether it be in reference to God, to our selves, or to others; and the main
scope of it is to preserve heart-purity, yea to bring fallen man (if it were
possible on this side the heavenly Paradise) to that primitive rectitude and
original righteousness wherewith he was created, and which was not only the
perfection but the glory of man's nature.

A. 80. What is required in the tenth Commandment?
The tenth Commandment requires full contentment with our own condition Heb.
13.5. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such
things as ye have:
, with a right and charitable frame of spirit toward our neighbor, and all
that is his Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them
that weep. 1 Cor. 13.4. Charity suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth
not; charity vaunteth not it self, is not passed up. 5. Does not behave it self
unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil. 6.
Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth*
.

To. 1. Hom. V. p. 3. Covet not wrongfully, but content your selves with that
which you get truly, and also bestow your own goods charitably, as need and
case requires.

Expl. 80. This Command requires in the general, yet in a more direct and
express manner internal obedience to all the other nine Commands; or a
universal regularity in man's nature, principles, inclinations, inward motions
and affections toward God and man. Obj. But will some say, this Command
therefore seems to be needless, or supernumerary, because every other Command
does require that holy and regular frame of heart which is suitable to it self,
and the duties which it requires from the outward man. Answ. This Command is
added not only as a universal declaration, but also as an universal
confirmation of what God requires (as to the rectitude or due temper of soul)
in all the other Commands together, and therefore 'twas necessary to be added
to all the rest; so that this Command is of a further reach than all the
former, being it requires universal rectitude, or original righteousness
toward God and man. Obj. But then this Law would require that which is
impossible. Answ. The Law must not cease to be perfect, because man is
impotent, or not able to perform. Man has wilfully lost this power; yet the Law
must not therefore lose its purity or perfection. Yet (2) this frame of soul is
not impossible to man's rational nature, though to corrupted nature. (3) Though
the rigor of the Law does still require perfection, yet the grace of the
Gospel does accept of sincerity in and through Christ. But more particularly,
(1) This Command requires distinction of propriety, or that a man should know
what belongs to him as his own. (2) Contentedness of mind with a man's present
condition and lot, till God is pleased in his good providence to make his way
plain before us, for the alteration or bettering of our condition; now Gods way
of providence is known by this, that it never contradicts his revealed will in
his word, and in that it never destroys the eternal principles of righteousness
and justice betwixt men. (3) It requires a charitable frame, i. e. that we be
so far from envying him, or coveting what is his, that we rather wish and pray
heartily, that both he and his may prosper, as well as we, or what belongs to
us.

A. 81. What is forbidden in the tenth Commandment?
The tenth Commandment forbids all coffeehouse with our own estate 1 Cor.
10.10. Neither murmur ye as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of
the destroyer.
, envying or grieving at the good of our neighbor Gal. 5.5. Let us not be
desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another.
, and all inordinate motions and affections to any thing that is his Col. 3.5.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth; fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which
is Idolatry.
.

To. 2. Hom. XXI. p. 3. Coveting or desiring of other men's Wives, Houses,
Lands, Goods and Servants, willing to leave unto no man any thing of his own.

Expl. 81. This Command forbids all manner of lust or concupiscence, whereby
the nature or heart of men is polluted and defiled, so that original lust or
concupiscence which Paul had not known to be sin but by this Law, is plainly
forbidden by this Law, Thou shall not covet, Romans 7.7. Neither is only the
fountain-lust, or the depraved inclination of corrupt nature here forbidden,
but also all the streams that proceed from it; as the lusts of the flesh, as
luxury, or the lust of the eye as gain, or the pride of life as glory, scil.
vainglory. Yet further, here is forbidden (1 st,) Discontentedness of mind,
when men repine and murmr at Gods providence, as if he did wrong, those
complainers, when he gives either more or better of this worlds goods to others
than he does to them; which wicked temper does arise, (1) From men's
covetousness. (2) From pride, which would pull down other men's estates to a
man's own level; but these two levelling principles being destructive to
propriety as well as society, are here forbidden. (3) From a double mistake: As
(1) concerning the nature of these things, as if a man's happiness did consist
in the abundance of these things. (2) Concerning Gods government of the World,
as if he did not govern the World in wisdom and righteousness. Qu. But may not
a man lawfully desire more of this Worlds goods than he has already? Answ. Yes;
Provided (1) his desire of what he wants be without murmuring and repining. (2)
With cheerful submission to the will of God. And (3) with subordination to Gods
glory; neither is contentment of mind, at all inconsistent with such regular
desires. (2 dly,) Envying at the prosperity of others is here forbidden: For
(1) This is against charity, which requires we should love our Neighbors as
our selves, and which should rather rejoice than grieve at the good of others.
(2) And that golden Rule of Righteousness, Do as you would be done unto. (3)
Against the example of God himself, who rejoiceth in the prosperity of his
servants. (3 dly,) Here is forbidden all inordinate motions and affections
toward worldly objects; as love, delight, zeal, etc. in or for the enjoyment;
and impatience, vexation, immoderate grief for loss or disappointments.

A. 82. Is any man able perfectly to keep the Commandments of God?
No mere man since the Fall, is able in this life perfectly to keep the
Commandments of God Eccles. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon earth, that
does good, and sins not.
, but daily does break them in thought Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's heart
is evil from his youth.
, word Jam. 3.8. The tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil, full of
deadly poison.
, and deed Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all.
.

Artic. XIII. Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his
spirit, are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus
Christ; neither do they make men meet to receive grace, or (as the
School-Authors say) deserve grace of congruity; yea, rather for that they are
not done as God has willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but
they have the nature of sin. Hom. III. p. 2. We have neither faith, charity,
hope, patience, chastity, nor any thing else that good is, but of God, and
therefore those virtues be called the fruits of the Holy Ghost, and not the
fruits of man. -- Truly there be imperfections in our best works. -- Let us
therefore not be ashamed to confess plainly our state of imperfection; yea, let
us not be ashamed to confess imperfection, even in all our best works. To. 2.
Hom. XVII. The holy company (of Saints in heaven) confesses constantly, that
all the goods and graces wherewith they were endued in soul, came of the
goodness of God only. It is meet therefore to think, that all spiritual
goodness comes from God only.

Expl. 82. When it is said no mere man since the fall, etc. It Is clearly implied
that before the fall man had power to keep the Law of God perfectly; but now
since the fall he has not this power in this life, neither (1) in his corrupt
estate before conversion, nor (2) in his regenerate after conversion. (1 st,)
Not in his corrupt estate, for though men unconverted either to Christianity
(as the Gentiles) or to Christ (as all profane Christians) may by the power of
nature, and freewill; or by the help of common grace, be able to do some things
contained in the Law, which in themselves considered are good for the matter*
yet not in a right manner, because not from a right principle, true grace; and
not to a right end, Gods Glory, nor by a right rule, the Law of God in the
spiritual meaning of it. Nor (2 dly,) in his regenerate state here in this
life; for (1) his knowledge of his duty is but in part, And how can he do it
perfectly when he does not know perfectly? (2) His grace imperfect, Ex. gr.
faith, love, etc. because mingled with more or less of the opposite corruption.

A. 83. Are all the transgressions of the Law equally heinous?
Some sins in themselves, and by reason of several aggravations, are more
heinous in the sight of God, than others Joh. 19.11. He that delivered me unto
thee, has the greater sin.
.

Hom. V. p. 3. Christ says, Woe be unto you, for you devour widows houses under
color of long prayers, therefore your damnation shall be greater. -- You make
them children of hell worse than your selves be. Hom. VIII. p. 2. Children of
unbelief of two sorts, who despair and presume; and both these sorts of men be
in a damnable state; as the one should believe the promises, so the other the
threatenings; not over-boldly presume of Gods mercy, and live dissolutely.

Expl. 83. If we consider sin only with reference to the Infiniteness of Gods
majesty who is thereby provoked, in this respect all sins are equally heinous,
because all against an Infinite Majesty; but if we consider them either in
their own nature as transgressions or in their several circumstances, then some
sins are greater, or more heinous than others; for though every sin be a
transgression of the Law of God, yet every Law of God, does not equally, and so
directly and immediately concern the Glory of God and the salvation of man;
neither is every Law so clearly promulgated, or made known: Besides, there are
some aggravations in the sin it self, as when it is not only in the heart, but
in word and deed; so the greater the scandal, the greater the means to prevent
it, the greater the person by whom, and against whom, the greater the sin; as
also it may receive its aggravations from many circumstances, as time; when a
man is drunk upon the Lords day; place, as to cut a purse in the Church, or at
the Bar before the Judge; Company, as to be debauched in Civil, or profane in
Religious company.

A. 84. What does every sin deserve?
Every sin deserves Gods wrath and curse, both in this life, and that which is
to come Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that
are written in the book of the Law, to do them. Mat. 25.41. Then shall he say
unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.


Hom. XX. p. 1. We do daily and hourly by our wickedness and stubborn
disobedience, horribly fall away from God, thereby purchasing unto our selves
(if he should deal with us according to his justice) eternal damnation.

Expl. 84. Every sin being a breach of the Law deserves the curse of the Law,
or the penalty which is due to the sinner upon every the least sin, and that
penalty is death; not only temporal, but spiritual and eternal; or the wrath of
God to be inflicted upon the sinner both here and hereafter. Obj. But if every
sin deserve hell, then this would seem to take away the difference in
punishments? Answ. No, for this does not ly in the duration of the punishment,
for that will be eternal to all who come into that state where the worm never
dies, and the fire never goes out; but it will be in the degrees of the
punishment; some belike shall lose more good, and endure more evil or torment
than others.

CHAP. III. Of things to be practiced, according to the Gospel: Or the
Ordinances of the Gospel, particularly of the two Sacraments, in 13 Articles,
with their Explanation. From A. 85. to 98.
A. 85. What does God require of us, that we may escape the wrath and curse due
unto us for sin?
TO escape the wrath and curse of God due to us for sin, God requires of us
Faith in Jesus Christ, repentance unto life Act. 20.21. Testifying both to the
Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ.
, with the diligent use of all outward means whereby Christ communicates to us
the benefits of Redemption. Prove. 2.1. My Son, if thou will receive my words,
and hide my Commandment with thee. 2. So that thou incline thine ear unto
wisdom, and apply thine heart to understanding. 3. Yea, if thou cryest after
knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding. 4. If thou seek for
her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasure. 5. Then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.


Hom. XX. p. 1. -- We have here a perpetual Rule appointed unto us, which ought
to be kept at all times; and that there is no other way whereby the wrath of
God may be pacified, and his anger assuaged, -- which no man is able to abide,
but is moved by repentance to obtain mercy. -- And with a full purpose of
amendment of life, fleeing to the mercy of God, taking sure hold thereupon,
through faith in his Son Jesus Christ, there is an assured and infallible hope
of pardon and remission, -- and that we shall be received into the favor of
our heavenly Father. To. 1. Hom. VIII. p. 2. If we turn to him with an humble
and a very penitent heart he will receive us to his favor and grace, for his
name sake, for his promise sake, for his truth and mercies sake, promised to
all faithful believers in Jesus Christ his only natural Son.

Expl. 85. There were never any more than these two ways prescribed by God unto
man, for his keeping or obtaining of that happiness which does consist in the
favor of God. (1) Perfect and sinless obedience to the whole will of his
Creator, and this was prescribed in innocence, for his keeping in favor with
God. (2) Faith in Jesus Christ; which was prescribed immediately after the
Fall, for the recovery of the favor of God which he had lost; for we are to
look upon God not only as the party offended by transgression, but also as the
supreme Lawgiver, and great Governor of the world; and therefore God as the
supreme Governor was bound (by virtue of the perfection of his own Government,
and for the preservation of the honor of his Law and Justice) not to treat
with man, in order to his being received into favor again, but only in and
through a Mediator; and because infinite wisdom could not find out a fitter
than he who was God-man, God was therefore pleased in the riches of his grace
and mercy, to pitch upon this way of recovering lost man, sc. by faith in
Christ, who is mediator between God and man: And although the Law of works did
not accept of repentance upon the breach thereof, yet the Law of faith does, or
the Covenant of Grace does as well require repentance toward God, as faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ. But then this, repentance must be qualified (as is
expressed in the A.) sc. It must be repentance unto life, not a dead repentance,
but such as brings forth suitable fruit, namely, that which is unto holiness,
and the end everlasting life: And then, in the next place God requires a
diligent use of all the means of grace, these being the conduit-pipes whereby
Christ, and Grace, and the Spirit, and all the spiritual benefits of our
redemption are ordinarily communicated unto us; for though the want of these
may not damn any (but other sins) where those that want them are not in the
fault that they want them; as those that want the means of grace, and have only
the Light of nature, will not be condemned for what they want, but for not
glorifying God according to what light they have, though it be but from the dim
candle of nature; so those that have these means and neglect them, will have
the greater damnation; for, This is the condemnation, that light is come into
the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, Io. 3.14. From all which
may be inferred, (1) That the light of nature, or the dim candle of corrupt
reason is not sufficient to guide a man to Heaven; for if it were, faith would
have been superfluous, and Gospel-revelation concerning our redemption by
Christ needless. (2) That in order to salvation, it is not enough for a man to
believe the truth of the Gospel; but he must also accept of the terms of the
Gospel, or Christ in the Gospel* sc. faith and repentance. i. e. He must accept
of Christ in all his Offices, and accordingly yield subjection to him; and he
must repent of all his sins, so as to bring forth fruit meet for repentance;
for a fruitless or a dead repentance will never carry a man to heaven. (3) That
Christ is communicative of his Grace, for therefore has he appointed means of
Grace for the conveying of Grace to his members; he is not a fountain sealed,
but a fountain opened. (4) That it is the duty of Christians to attend
diligently upon the Ordinances of Christ, for not only the necessity of the end
requires it, there being no other ordinary way for the obtaining of the end,
but by these means, but also the obligatory power of Gods Command. (5) That
those therefore are enemies to their own salvation and redemption by Christ,
that do wilfully neglect the use, or deny the necessity of Christ's Ordinances.
(6) That if Christians be never the better for Christ, and by what he has done
for sinners, they may thank themselves, for God has prescribed means whereby
they may reap benefit from the undertaking of Christ; if then they do miss of
life and salvation, it is because they will not come to him that they may have
life. (7) That Christians had need to beg of God, that his good Spirit may move
upon the waters of the Sanctuary, that in and through Christ they may prove
effectual for healing.

A. 86. What is faith in Jesus Christ?
Faith in Jesus Christ is a saving-grace Heb. 10.39. We are not of them who
draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe, to the saving of the soul.
, whereby we receive Joh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave he power
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.
, and rest upon him alone for salvation Phil. 3.9. And be found in him, not
having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by says.
, as he is offered to us in the Gospel Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the
Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us.
.

Hom. IV. p. 1. Of Faith. It consists not only in believing that the word of
God is true. -- But it is also a true trust and confidence of the mercy of God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, -- hanging only upon him, and calling upon him,
ready to obey and love him. -- It being the first coming unto God whereby we
are justified. P. 2. By faith only, not that the said justifying faith is alone
in man, without true repentance, hope, charity, dread, and the fear of God, at
any time or season. -- But to take away clearly all merit of our works, -- and
wholly to ascribe the merit and deserving of our justification unto Christ
only, and his most precious bloodshedding. This faith the holy Scripture
teaches us; this is the strong rock and foundation of the Christian Religion;
this Doctrine all old and ancient Authors of Christ's Church do approve. This
Doctrine advances and sets forth the true glory of Christ, and beats down
the vainglory of man. This whosoever denies, is not to be accounted for a
Christian man, nor for a setter forth of Gods glory, but for an adversary to
Christ and his Gospel, and a setter forth of vainglory. -- Not that this our
own act, to believe in Christ which is within us, does justify us. (For this
were to count our selves to be justified by some act or virtue that is within
our selves) But we must renounce the merit of faith, etc. and trust only in
Gods mercy, and that sacrifice which our high Priest and Savior, Christ Jesus
the Son of God, once offered. To. 2. Hom. XI. Unfeigned faith is the only mean
and instrument of salvation required on our parts.

Expl. 86. In this description of faith there are several things observable, as
(1) concerning the object of it; and this is Jesus Christ, not only as God,
though therefore he is to be believed because Truth it self; nor only as
God-man, though the Word being made flesh he is to be believed because he is
the Revealer of his Fathers will concerning man's Salvation, but as being
God-man he is constituted Mediator betwixt God and man, and by virtue of his
Mediatorship does execute the office of a King, of a Priest, and of a Prophet,
in order to the Salvation of all those who do believe in him, or do heartily
receive and embrace him for their alsufficient Savior upon the terms of the
Gospel; and thus considered he is proposed as the object of saving Faith; yet
because without shedding of blood there is no remission, and because we are
said to have redemption through his blood, therefore Christ crucified is the
most peculiar object of this faith. (2) Concerning the act of this faith it is
to be noted, that does not barely exert or put forth it self in a firm assent
only to the truth of the Gospel, nor yet in a particular full persuasion that I
shall be undoubtedly saved in and through Christ, for true saving faith may be
without this full assurance, but it is exercised in a free consent of the will
that this Savior shall be our Savior upon those terms he is offered; namely,
cheerful submission both to his Scepter and to his Cross, and hereupon the
affections those everlasting gates of the Soul, as love, joy, delight, etc. are
set open that this King of glory may enter in and find entertainment there.

A. 87. What is repentance unto life?
Repentance unto life is a saving grace Act. 11.18. Then has God also to the
Gentiles granted ^epentance unto life.
, whereby a sinner out of the true sense of his sin Act. 2.37. When they heard
this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and to the rest
of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do?
, and apprehension of the mercy of God in Christ Joel 2.13. Rent your hearts,
and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.
, does with grief and hatred of his sin turn from it unto God Jer. 31.18. Turn
thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. 19. Surely after
I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my
thigh, I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of
my youth.
, with full purpose of, and endeavors after new obedience Psalm. 119.59. I
thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
.

Hom. XX. Of Repentance. Which is a returning again of the whole man unto God,
from whom we be fallen away by sin. -- We must return from those things whereby
we have been withdrawn, plucked, and led away from God. -- Unto whom alone we
must return, -- not to the creatures, or the inventions of men, or our own
mercies, -- by Jesus Christ, -- who has made satisfaction to the Justice of
God, -- with our whole heart, -- forsaking all that is contrary to Gods will,
-- out of a sincere love of godliness, -- a purpose of our selves by Gods grace
to renounce our former wicked life; and a full conversion to God in a new life
to glorify his name, etc. We must beware and take heed, that we do in no wise
think in our hearts, imagine or believe, that we are able to repent aright, or
turn effectually unto the Lord, by our own might and strength, for this must be
verified in all men, Without me ye can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5. Again, of our
selves we are not able as much as to think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5.

Expl. 87. This repentance is called repentance unto life, because the fruit
thereof is unto holiness, and the end everlasting life, and concerning this
repentance several things are to be noted (1 st,) concerning the nature of it
that (as well as faith) it is a saving-grace, because it is a part of
Sanctification, and not a common work of the spirit which is reckoned up
amongst those things which do not accompany Salvation, as every part of
Sanctification does. (2 dly,) Concerning the immediate spring of this
repentance, and that is a true sense of sin, ( i. e.) such a sense of sin as
does break the heart for sin, and that in a kindly manner with grief, or godly
sorrow not with despair; this latter sense of sin may be found in a Judas, but
only the former in a Paul; for whether it be in reference to the guilt of sin,
a true penitent does not despair of pardoning mercy; or whether it be in
reference to the punishment of sin, he hopes to be delivered from the wrath to
come; and therefore this true sense of sin, and a lively apprehension of the
mercy of God in Christ are here joined together. (3 dly,) We have here the
inward acts of repentance, as (1) grief of heart for sin, called therefore a
being pricked at the heart, and a being contrite, and broken in spirit; which
is when a man's heart is ready to bleed and melt, and tremble within him because
he has broken the holy Law of God, and has thereby foolishly exposed himself to
the curse and penalty of the Law. (2) Hatred of sin whereby a man does
disrellish, and dislike sin, and can roll it as a sweet morsel under his tongue
no longer; when he does not only not love sin, but he abhors it, the very
thoughts of it are grievous and ungrateful to him; and therefore (3) he turns
from it, not only does as one who turns away his face that cannot endure to
behold it, but his feet, for he hastens as far from it as he can, and that he
may secure himself from the danger of it he turns from it to God. (4) With
resolution not to return to his old beloved any more. (4 thly,) we have here
the outward effects of repentance (called its fruits) active, constant,
universal endeavors to lead a new life.

A. 88. What are the outward and ordinary means, whereby Christ communicates
to us the benefits of Redemption?
The outward and ordinary means whereby Christ communicates to us the benefits
of Redemption, are his Ordinances, especially the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer
Act. 2.41. Then they that gladly received his word were baptized. 42. And they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking
of bread, and in prayer.
, all which are made effectual to the Elect for salvation.

Hom. 5. p. 3. Apply your selves chiefly, and above all things, to read and
hear Gods word; mark diligently therein what his will is you should do, and
with all your endeavors apply your selves to follow the same.

Expl. 88. It Is here supposed in the A. that there are inward and extraordinary
means whereby Christ can and sometimes probably does communicate the benefits
of Redemption, there being Salvation in no other name than that of Jesus, where
persons are not made capable of this Salvation in an ordinary way, and in the
use of means, there is no other way left but that which is extraordinary; and
so we read of those that have been sanctified from the womb. But the ordinary
means are the standing Ordinances of the Gospel, sc. the Word, Sacraments and
Prayer; the Word to inform and reform us, Sacraments to confirm our faith, and
Prayer to beg a divine and effectual blessing upon both; and all these three
are included in that one great ordinance of the Gospel, a Gospel Ministry, unto
which Christ has promised his presence unto the end of the world, because till
then the mystical body of Christ will stand in need of being edified in its
most holy faith, for if the Unction of the Spirit had taken away the use of
preaching why then did the Apostles use to preach?

A. 89. How is the Word made effectual to salvation?
The Spirit of God makes the reading, but especially the preaching of the
Word, an effectual means of convincing and converting sinners Psalm. 19.7. The
Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the (...); the testimony of the Lord is
sure, making wise the simple.
, and of building them up in holiness and comfort 1 These. 1.6. And ye become
followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction,
with joy of the Holy Ghost.
, through faith unto salvation Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes.
.

Hom. I. p. 2. If we lack a learned man to instruct and teach us, yet God
himself from above will give light to our minds, and teach us those things
which are necessary for us, and wherein we are ignorant. -- Man's humane and
worldly wisdom, or science, is not needful to the understanding of Scripture;
but the revelation of the Holy Ghost, who inspireth the true meaning into them,
that with humility and diligence do search therefore. To. 2. Hom. XVII. p. 1.
Let us in faith and charity call upon the Father of mercy, by the mediation of
his well-beloved Son our Savior, that we may be assisted with the presence of
his holy Spirit, and profitably on our parts, demean our selves in speaking and
harkening to the salvation of our souls. Hom. XVI. p. 2. And he of his great
mercy so work in all men's hearts, by the mighty power of the Holy Ghost, that
the comfortable Gospel of his Son Christ may be truly preached, truly received,
and truly followed in all places, to the bearing down of sin, death, the Pope,
the Devil, and all the Kingdom of Antichrist. Hom. XVII. p. 3. We should not be
able to believe and know these great mysteries that be opened to us by Christ,
but by the Holy Ghost. St. Paul says, that no man can know what is of God, but
by the Spirit of God; as for us (says he) we have received, not the spirit of
the world, but the Spirit which is of God, for this purpose, that in that holy
Spirit we might know the things that be given us by Christ.

Expl. 89. In this A. there is (1) something supposed; (2) something asserted:
Here it is supposed (1) that sometime the reading of the Word does prove
effectual for the spiritual and eternal good of the Soul, and hence it is that
Christ commands us to search and read the Scripture, and does charge men's
ignorance and error about Soul-matters, upon their negligence herein. (2) That
reading of Scripture at home does not at all excuse people from hearing the
Word in the solemn Assemblies where it is preached, for there is an especially
here fixed on the word Preached as to the efficacy of it, either for
conviction, conversion or comfort. (3) That the Word whether read or preached
(except the Spirit, go along with it) is but a dead letter, till the Angel ( i.
e.) the Spirit of God move upon this water of the Sanctuary no healing is to be
expected from it. And therefore (2 ly,) it is here asserted (1) concerning the
Word read, (2) concerning the Word preached that the Spirit of God does make it
effectual (1) for the opening of blind eyes, so as to discover to men the
things that concern their peace and their duty. (2) For the turning of sinners
unto God from the error and evil of their ways, from darkness unto light. (3)
For the building of men up in their most holy faith, because hereby is laid the
first stone, for faith comes by hearing; hereby is laid the last, for it is by
the Ministry of the Word that the Christian is made an habitation of God
through the Spirit, or a temple of the Holy Ghost. (4) For the perfecting of
holiness in the fear of God. (5) For comfort, for this is that brook in the way
of which the Christian traveller drinks, and so is able to run the ways of
Gods commands and not be weary, to walk and not to faint.

A. 90. How is the Word to be read and heard, that it may become effectual to
salvation?
That the Word may become effectual to salvation, we must attend thereunto with
diligence Prove. 8.34. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my
gates, waiting daily at the posts of my doors.
, preparation 1 Pet. 2.1. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and
hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings. 2. As new born babes desire the
sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby.
, and prayer Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may see wonderful things
out of thy Law.
, receive it with faith Heb. 4.2. The word preached did not profit them, being
not mixed with faith in them that heard it.
, and love 2 These. 2.10. They received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved.
, lay it up in our hearts Psalm. 119.11. Thy Word have I hid in mine heart, that
I might not sin against thee.
, and practice it in our lives Jam. 1.25. But whosoever looks into the perfect
Law of liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a
doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed.
.

Hom. I. p. 1. The Scriptures have power to turn through Gods promise, and they
be effectual through Gods assistance; and being received in a faithful heart,
they have ever an heavenly spiritual working in them. -- In reading Gods will
he profits most, that is most turned into it, that is most inspired with the
Holy Ghost, most in heart and life changed into that thing which he reads. --
Read it humbly with a meek and lowly heart, to the intent you may glorify God,
and not your self, with the knowledge of it; and read it not without daily
praying to God, that he would direct your reading to a good effect. -- Let us
hear, read, and know these holy rules, instructions, and statutes of our
Christian Religion, and upon that we have made profession to God at our
Baptism. Let us fear and reverence, lay up (in the chest of our hearts) these
necessary and fruitful lessons. Let us night and day muse, and have meditation
and contemplation in them.

Expl. 90. This A. does inform us of the right manner of using and managing the
word (whether read or preached) with profit as (1 st,) our attendance upon the
Word must be with diligence, now this does imply (2) things, (1) the intention
of the mind, that when a man is reading Scripture, or hearing a Sermon, he do
seriously mind what he is about, do not suffer his mind and thoughts to be
roving upon other things; and the reason of this intention of mind is because
he knows that the eye of God is intent upon him. (2) An holy solicitude, or a
man's being concerned in the issue of the duty, he being sensible that he is now
engaged in the use of that means for eternal life that God has prescribed, he
now reads every Chapter, and hears every Sermon, as if it were (as indeed it
is) for his life; so in this diligent attendance there is something wherein the
outward man is concerned, sc. a devout, reverent and serious composure of the
outward man to the work. (2 dly,) Preparation, and this does imply (1) a man's
laying aside all worldly cares, affairs and business, sports or recreations
which might any way hinder him in such holy and heavenly employment, that so he
may attend upon it without distraction. (2) A man's laying aside all worldly
affections, as love of the world, etc. or his putting away all superfluity of
naughtiness. (3) A man's putting himself into the presence of God, or a pressing
upon himself the sense of Gods authority, majesty and holiness, as well as of
the truth and importance of his word. (3 dly,) Prayer, that Gods word may do us
good; and here we are to pray (1) for the Minister, that he may preach as
becomes the word of God, and an Ambassador of Christ. (2) For our selves, that
we may receive it as the ingrafted word which is able to save our Souls; yet
more particularly (1) that we may mingle it with faith, it being that which
deserves the most firm or the highest degree of assent that we are able to give
to any thing. (2) That we may receive it with love (1) to God the author of it,
and because it is his word. (2) To the Preacher as sent by God; (3) to the word
it self, because for the matter it is that which does so highly import our
happiness. (4) We are to give reception and entertainment not only in the porch
of our ear, but in the best room of our hearts; yea it being a precious
treasure, better than gold and silver, it must be our care, (1) to lay it up as
treasure in our hearts, to hide it there as David did. (2) As treasure to be
improved, to lay it out, now this cannot be done any other or better way than
by a man's taking heed to his ways, according to Gods word, for he that thus
orders his conversation aright shall see the salvation of God.

A. 91. How do the Sacraments become effectual means of salvation?
The Sacraments become effectual means of salvation, not from any virtue in
them, or in him that does administer them 1 Cor. 3.7. So then neither is he
that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the
increase.
, but only by the blessing of Christ, and the working of his Spirit in them
that by Faith receive them 1 Pet. 3.21. The like figure whereunto, even
Baptism, does also now save us (not the putting away the filth of the flesh,
but the answer of a good conscience toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ.
.

Artic. XXVI. The effect of Christ's Ordinance is not taken away by the
Ministers wickedness, neither the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such as
by faith and rightly do receive the Sacraments ministered to them, which be
effectual because of Christ's institution and promise, although they be
ministered by evil men. Nevertheless it appertains to the discipline of the
Church, that enquiry be made of evil Ministers, and that they be accused by
those that have knowledge of their offenses; and finally, being found guilty by
just judgment be deposed.

Expl. 91. Here we have it expressed, (1) negatively, how the Sacraments do not
become effectual, etc. as (1) not from any virtue in themselves; for as the
word is a dead letter of it self, so the Sacraments are dead signs; for can it
be imagined in reason, that the soul which must live for ever, can be feasted,
fed, and nourished to eternal life by a morsel of bread and a sup of wine?
(perishing elements), or that the spiritual defilement of the soul can be
washed off by a few drops of water sprinkled upon the face. (2) Not from any
virtue in the Minister, as neither (1) his piety, because this can be no
meritorious or procuring cause of a blessing in the Minister; (2) nor his good
intention, for then the blessing would not only depend upon the power, but also
upon the will of man; but the efficacy of Sacraments depends (2 dly,)
affirmatively, (1 st,) Upon Christ's blessing grounded on his own institution
and appointment, for he will not be wanting to his own Ordinances. (2 dly,)
Upon the working of the Spirit, or his application of them to the soul in a
spiritual manner, and thereby bringing to the mind of the receiver, (1) the
Author of Sacraments, Christ; (2) the impulsive cause, his love; (3) by
representing and sealing the righteousness of Christ to the soul; (4) by
objective excitation of suitable affections, as love, gratitude. (3 dly,) Their
efficacy does depend on the receivers faith, not as a meritorious cause, but as
a necessary condition, without which Christ will not bless them.

A. 92. What is a Sacrament?
A Sacrament is an holy Ordinance, instituted of Christ, wherein by sensible
signs, Christ and the benefits of the new Covenant are represented Genesis 17.10.
This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after
thee, Every man-child among you shall be circumcised.
, sealed, and applied to believers Romans 4.11. And he received the sign of
Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the Faith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised.
.

Expl. 92. In the general, all sound Divines do agree, that a Sacrament has
these two parts, (1) an outward sign, such as are the objects of sense, and
especially of seeing; for though bread and wine be objected or presented to the
taste, as well as to the eye; and water to the touch, yet the representation or
the resemblance of Christ's body broken and his blood shed, is in seeing the
bread broken and the wine poured out; and the spiritual washing of the soul
represented to the eye of faith, by that washing of the filth of the flesh
which is visibly done before the eye of the body. (2) Invisible grace; for the
internal application of Christ's benefits to the soul being of a spiritual
nature, cannot be seen by the eye of the body; yet more particularly, in this
A. we have the nature and quality of a Sacrament, it is a holy Ordinance, (1) it
has holiness to the Lord stamped upon it, and so is spiritual in its nature. (2)
It is instituted by Christ the holy one; it is not his Holiness at Rome, or
rather that man of sin, that can institute a Sacrament, though he has taken
the boldness to add five Sacraments to those two which Christ has appointed.
The holiest man upon earth cannot appoint a Sacrament; it is privilege enough
in man to celebrate it when it is instituted by God. (3) It is a means for the
promoting of sanctification and holiness, for it is an obligation upon a
Christian to holiness, and though it be not a means to work conversion
(ordinarily at least), yet it does excite, quicken, and confirm grace. (4) It
is the seal of a holy Covenant, wherein (as by a Deed of free-gift) all the
benefits of Christ's Redemption are made over and applied to believers, and
wherein all the promises are Yea and Amen through Christ unto such. (5) It is
an Ordinance that in a most eminent manner is accompanied with the assistance,
influence, and comforts of the Holy Ghost, because at such a time the Spirit in
a most remarkable manner is concerned to execute his office, as the Spirit of
Adoption witnessing together with the spirits of believing Receivers, that they
are the children of God. And does not all this holiness wherewith this
Sacrament is attended, require on the Communicants part a holy and solemn
preparation?

A. 93. What are the Sacraments of the new Testament?
The Sacraments of the new Testament are Baptism Mark 16.16. He that believes,
and is baptized, shall be saved.
, and the Lords Supper 1 Cor. 11.23. For I have received of the Lord, that
which I also delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus in the same night in the
which he was betrayed, took bread, etc.
.

Artic. XXV. There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the
Gospel, i. e. Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. -- Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, and extreme Unction are not to be counted for Sacraments of
the Gospel. To. 2. Hom. IX. Sacraments instituted by our Savior Christ to be
received and continued of every true Christian in due time and order, for such
purpose as He willed them to be received, as visible signs expressly commanded
in the New Testament, whereunto is annexed the promise of free forgiveness of
our sins, and of our holiness, and joining in Christ, there be but two, namely,
Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Expl. 93. There are but these two, not only as generally necessary, but as
only necessary to salvation, for who was fitter to judge of the necessity, or to
appoint the number of Sacraments, then he alone who had the sole power to
appoint any Sacrament at all; now (1) in the New Testament we find only these
two of Christ's appointment. (2) These two are sufficient to the end to which
they are appointed. sc. to seal the Covenant of Grace. (3) Though there were
more extraordinary, yet there were but two ordinary Sacraments under the Old
Testament, sc. Circumcision and the Passover. (4) Only these two forementioned
do correspond to these two of the Old Testament; and so do not Penance,
Matrimony, Orders, etc. (5) Only these two are directed as to the manner of
participation in the New Testament. (6) Christ's Ministers have only these two,
and no more in their Commission to administer and to celebrate as Sacraments,
sc. Baptism and the Lords Supper.

A. 94. What is Baptism?
Baptism is a Sacrament, wherein the washing with water in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost.
, does signify and seal our ingrafting into Christ, and partaking of the
benefits of the Covenant of Grace Romans 6.3. Know ye not, that so many of us as
were baptized unto Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death.
, and our engagement to be the Lords Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him
by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the Father, even so also we should walk in newness of life.
.

Artic. XXVII. It is a sign of regeneration or new birth, whereby (as by an
instrument) they that receive Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church; the
promises of forgiveness of sin, of our adoption to be the Sons of God by the
Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed.

Expl. 94. In this A. we have (1) the general notion of Baptism; It is a
Sacrament ( i. e.) a seal of the righteousness of faith, and so is every other
Sacrament which is a seal of the Covenant of Grace, whether under the legal or
evangelical dispensation. (2) We have here the description of Baptism, and
therein the difference of Baptism from the Lord's Supper. (1) In the outward
signs or elements in that water in this Bread and Wine, and God having been so
particular and distinct in appointing these, we should be as strict and careful
in the use of them; not adding to them the corrupt inventions of men, as the
Papists do add to Water, Cream, Salt, Oil and Spittle, etc. Nor diminishing
from the other, As they do when they deprive the people of the Cup. (2) They
differ in their order, for Baptism is the first Sacrament of the Gospel,
because it is to be administered when a Christian (or the Infant of one or both
believing Parents) is solemnly to be admitted a member of Christ's visible
Church, but the Lord's Supper is to follow this. (3) In frequency, Baptism is
to be administered but once, because a man can be born but once spiritually (as
well as naturally) and this Sacrament is a seal of this spiritual birth, when
the inward Baptism of the Holy Ghost, is accompanied with the outward of Water,
which by the way being both inward and outward, may be called the Doctrine of
Baptisms; but the Supper being to represent and exhibit Christ as spiritual
nourishment to the soul, may and must be often, because we often stand in need
of it. (4) In the form of administration, Baptism being in the Name of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; because we are to be baptized into all the three persons
in the Godhead; but the Supper in these words, take, eat, this is my body, etc.
(5) In Baptism is sealed to us and represented our dying unto sin, and living
unto righteousness (especially in those of years-that are baptized) but in the
other Sacrament, Christ dying for our sin is represented and confirmed to us.
(6) Baptism does seal us a title to all visible Church privileges and
ordinances of the Gospel, and the Lord's Supper does suppose this title both to
these and all the benefits and advantages of the Covenant of Grace. (7) In
Baptism we solemnly engage to be the Lords, and to be entirely his; and in the
Supper we renew this engagement, and not only our renewal of our vow, but our
Baptismal vow should be frequently and seriously considered, especially in a
time of Temptation and Apostasy.

A. 95. To whom is Baptism to be administered?
Baptism is not to be administered to any out of the visible Church, till they
profess their faith in Christ, and obedience to him Act. 2.41. Then they that
gladly received his word, were baptized.
, but the Infants of such as are members of the visible Church are to be
baptized Genesis 17.7. And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. 10. This is my Covenant which ye
shall keep, between me and you, and thy seed after thee, Every man-child among
you shall be circumcised. Act. 2.38. And Peter said unto them, Repent and be
baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins,
and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. 39. For the promise is to you,
and to your Children, and to all that an afar off, even as many as the Lord our
God shall call.
.

Engl. Artic. XXII. The Baptism of young Children, is in any wise to be
retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the institution of Christ.

Expl. 95. It Is here observeable that Baptism is not to be administered (1 st)
to Infidels or unbelievers (whilst such) as Jews, Turks, and Pagans; for those
are not to be solemnly admitted into the visible Church, who have no precedent
right by virtue of the Covenant of Grace to such admission, but (2 dly,) It Is
to be administered to these two sorts of persons. (1) Those who have not yet
been baptized, and do make a credible profession of their faith in Christ, and
obedience to his Gospel: which was required of converted Gentiles in order to
their Baptism, and will be of converted Jews when they are to be re-ingrafted
into the true olive; yet is this no plea for the practice of Anabaptists, who
defer the Baptism of their Children till they can make a profession of their
faith, where one or both the Parents is a visible member of the Church. For (2)
Infants of visible professors are to be looked upon as members of the Church
visible, and there are to enjoy this Church privilege; else such Infants would
be in a worse condition now than formerly.

A. 96. What is the Lords Supper?
The Lords Supper is a Sacrament, wherein by giving and receiving Bread and
Wine, according to Gods appointment, his death is showed forth Luke 22.19. And
he took Bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, this
is my body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me. 20. Likewise
also the Cup after Supper, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood,
which is shed for you*
, and the worthy receivers are not after a corporal and carnal manner, but by
faith made partakers of his body and blood, with all his benefits to their
spiritual nourishment and growth in grace 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The Bread which
we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ?
.

Artic. XXVIII. It is a Sacrament of our Redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch
that to such as rightly, worthily, and with faith receive the same, the bread
which we break is partaking of the body of Christ; and likewise the Cup of
blessing is a partaking of the blood of Christ. Transubstantiation (or the
change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be
proved by holy Writ; but it is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture,
overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has given occasion to many
superstitions.

Expl. 96. When it is here said the Lord's Supper is a Sacrament, we are to
understand no more by a Sacrament, then that it is a seal of the righteousness
of faith; so that those persons who do run to the righteousness of works, or or
of the Law in order to justification, they run out of the tenor of the
Covenant of Grace, in which only the righteousn^ss of faith is sealed to the
believer. More particularly in this great Gospel-ordinance of the N. T. We have
(1) the Sacramental signs, Bread and Wine; not Bread only, or Wine only, but
both, hereby noting that we have in Christ whatever is needful (whether for
support or comfort) to life everlasting. (2) The thing outwardly represented by
these two elements, sc. Christ's body and blood; by the Bread his body; so that
the Papists who stick so close to the letter, might with as much show of reason
conclude that Christ's body was turned into Bread, as that the Bread was turned
into his body. And by the Bread broken, is signified his body being wounded and
broken; and by the Wine his blood, and by the pouring forth of the Wine, the
shedding forth of his blood, without which no remission. (3) The Sacramental
actions, sc. giving and receiving, whereby is noted not only that he gave
himself for sinners, but that he gives himself to believers; and that as by the
bodily hand they receive the Bread and Wine, so by a hand of says they receive
and accept of Christ as he offers himself in the Gospel. (4) The spiritual
signification of the whole, sc. the righteousness of Christ, and all the
benefits of his Mediatory undertaking, made over and sealed to them in the
Covenant of Grace, who do by faith apply these to themselves; so that every
worthy Communicant may say, Christ dyed for me, etc. (5) The authoritative
design of all this to this very end and purpose by Christ himself, who alone
can appoint Gospel Sacraments; because he alone can bestow that Grace of which
Sacraments are but the Conduit pipes. (6) That worthy Receivers are partakers
of Christ's body and blood, not in a gross and corporal, but in a spiritual
manner, for if the Bread were the real body or flesh of Christ which we eat in
this Sacrament, then it would be no Sacrament at all; because the sign and
thing signified would be really the same. (7) The advantages hereof, are the
pardon of sin sealed, assurance of God's love, spiritual joy, comfort,
refreshment, nourishment and growth in Grace.

A. 97. What is required in the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper?
It is required of them that would worthily partake of the Lords Supper, that
they examine themselves of their knowledge, to discern the Lords body 1 Cor.
11.28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and
drink of this Cup. 29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.
, of their faith to feed upon him 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye
be in the Faith.
, of their repentance 1 Cor. 11.31. If we would judge our selves, we should not
be judged.
, love 1 Cor. 11.18. When you come together in the Church, I hear there be
divisions among you. 20. When ye come together therefore in one place, this is
not to eat the Lords Supper.
, and new obedience 1 Cor. 5.8. Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old
leven, neither with the leven of malice and wickedness, but with the unlevened
bread of sincerity and truth.
, lest coming unworthily, they eat and drink judgment to themselves 1 Cor.
11.27. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this Cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
.

Artic. XXVIII. The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper
only after an heavenly and spiritual manner; and the mean whereby the body of
Christ is received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith. To. 2. Hom. XV. We must
certainly know, that three things be requisite in him which would seemly, as
becomes such high mysteries, resort to the Lords Table, i. e. first, a right
and worthy estimation and understanding of this mystery. Secondly, To come in a
sure faith. Thirdly, To have newness or pureness of life to succeed the
receiving of the same. p. 2. Newness of life, and godliness of conversation, as
fruits of faith, are required in the partakers of this Table. We may learn by
eating of the typical Lamb, whereunto no man was admitted but he that was a
Jew, and was circumcised, and was before sanctified.

Expl. 97. By worthiness we are only to understand fitness; for in order to a
Christian's practice of this Ordinance, he must examine himself in these two
things. (1) As to his Right and Title, for if a man has no right to or interest
in the righteousness of Christ, when he receives this seal, he has it only to a
blank. (2) As to fitness, called in Scripture the wedding garment, for he is no
more fit to be a guest at Christ's table who wants this garment, than he is to
feast with a Prince at his royal table, who is clothed with nothing but rags
and nastiness; yet more distinctly he must examine himself, (1 st,) in point of
knowledge, whether or no he be competently acquainted with the terms of the
Covenant of Grace, of which this Sacrament is a seal, and with the necessary
principles of Religion, and with the indispensable duties of the Gospel* and
with the greatness of the love of Christ in dying for sinners; for he who is
grossly ignorant of these things, as also of the difference between the
Sacramental elements, and actions, and what is spiritually intended by them,
can never be able to discern the Lord's body; but above all he must be sure to
know practically and experimentally Christ crucified in this Sacrament. (2
dly,) He must examine his faith, as, (1) Whether he be in a state of faith, (a
believer) which he may know by his being a new Creature. (2) Whether he do upon
this particular occasion exercise the Grace of faith; but especially whether he
does heartily assent to the truth of the Gospel; and whether he does heartily
close with Christ in the Gospel. (3) His repentance, whether it be such as does
break his heart as well from sin as for sin, which has broken and crucified
the body of his dear Redeemer. (4) His love whether this does fill him (1) with
admiring thoughts of the love of Christ in dying for him, greater love than
this has no man seen. (2) With readiness and resolution to suffer, yea dye for
Christ if called to it. (5) New obedience, which may be known to be such. (1)
By the spring from whence it does flow, the Grace of God; or the new nature.
(2) By the manner of its being performed, sc. in a spiritually-natural way with
delight and zeal. (3) By the rule of it, the Law spiritually interpreted. (4)
By the end of it, the glory of God; and that person who finds himself thus
qualified, may come and welcome to the Lord's table; so let him eat of that
bread and drink of that cup.

CHAP. IV. Of things to be prayed for, in the Lords-Prayer, in 10 Articles,
with their Explanation. From A. 98. to the end.
A. 98. What is Prayer?
PRayer is an offering up of our desires to God Psalm. 62.8. Trust in him at all
times, ye people; pour out your hearts before him, God is a refuge for us.
, for things agreeable to his will Romans 8.27. And he that searches the hearts,
knows the mind of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints,
according to the will of God.
, in the name of Christ Joh. 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
Name, he will give it you.
, with confession of our sins Dan. 9.4. And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and
made my confession.
, and thankful acknowledgment of his mercies Phil. 4.6. Be careful in nothing,
but for every thing, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your
requests be made known to God.
.

To. 2. Hom. VII. p. 1. -- Prayer is necessary for all men, at all times, and
in all places. -- Be fervent in prayer, assuring our selves, that whatsoever we
ask of God the Father in the Name of his Son Christ, and according to his will,
he will undoubtedly grant it. p. 2. In all our necessities, direct our prayers
to him, call upon his holy Name, desire help at his hands, and at none others.
-- He is able, -- will help us, -- hears, understands better than our selves,
what we lack, and how far we have need of help. Hom. IX. -- Be sure that in all
prayer your minds be devoutly lifted up to God, else your prayers are to no
purpose. Hom. XVII. All good things came down to us from the Father of light.
-- Jesus Christ his Son and our Savior, is the mean, by whom we receive his
liberal goodness, -- in the power and virtue of the Holy Ghost we be made able
to receive his gifts and graces.

Expl. 98. Concerning Prayer there are two things to be noted, (1) the name,
(2) the thing it self. The name of that which is here described is Prayer, a
term more comprehensive than invocation, which is only vocal Prayer, for it
does comprehend in it, Invocation, Petition, Confession, Thanksgiving,
Supplications, and Intercessions, whether expressed in words or only pent up in
a devout breast. (2) For the thing it self, we have (1) the necessary
Requisites of Prayer. (2) The ordinary sorts and kinds of it. Necessary
Requisites are (1 st) that it be an offering up of our desires to God, and this
is essential to all Prayer, that there be a holy motion of the will toward God
in pious and devout desires though these should never be framed into words;
Internal or heart-Prayer in some cases is all that God requires, and therefore
he will graciously accept of it: But this spiritual Sacrifice must be presented
only to God; for (1) He only knows, and can supply our wants. (2) Faith and
Prayer must go together, and faith is only to be in God. (3) The Lords Prayer
does only send us to God and no other. But then, etc. [ See Expl. 99.]

A. 99. What Rule has God given us, for our Direction in Prayer?
The whole Word of God is of use to direct us in Prayer 1 John 5.14. And this
is the considence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to
his will, he hears us.
, but the special Rule of Direction, is that Form of Prayer, which Christ
taught his Disciples Mat. 9.6. After this manner therefore pray ye; Our Father
which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, etc.
, commonly called the Lords Prayer.

To. 2. Hom. VII. p. 3. What better example can we desire to have than of
Christ himself, who taught his Disciples and other Christian men, first to pray
for heavenly things, and afterward for earthly things, as is to be seen in
that Prayer which he left unto his Church, commonly called the Lords-Prayer.

Expl. 99. (2 dly,) It Is essentially necessary to Prayer that it be only for
things agreeable to Gods will. (1) The whole Will of God in general; As men
must not make their lust their end, in begging any thing of God (for those who
ask that they may consume what they ask upon their lust, do ask amiss for the
end;) so neither their fancy their rule, for then they ask amiss for the manner
and matter both. (2) And more particularly, the Lords Prayer; for this may be
used not only as a Prayer it self, Luke 11.2. but also as a pattern for all
other Prayers, not so much for method and order, for we are not so strictly
tied to that; as for matter in which we are not to deviate from this so
comprehensive directory in the matter of Prayer, Mat. 6.9. (3 dly,) In the name
of Christ, (i. e) (1) By virtue of his warrant and authority, because he does
command us to pray. What is done by his authority, is in his Name. (2) Making
use of him as our Mediator or Intercessor, or great Master of Requests in
Heaven; for we are strangers to God and enemies to him naturally, and so must
make use of the Name of Christ, and not of our own. (2 dly.) The ordinary kinds
or parts of Prayer, are (1) Confession of sin, either expressed or employed, for
when we beg or petition for any mercy, we are to own our unworthiness of it,
which we cannot well do without confession of sin. (2) Thanksgiving, for there
is something of the nature of Prayer in such acknowledgments, scit. our desire
that God would accept of our Sacrifices of Praise, and Christ has taught us in
our Prayer to praise God, For thine is the Kingdom, etc.

A. 100. What does the Preface of the Lords Prayer teach us?
The Preface of the Lords Prayer, which is, Our Father which art in heaven;
teaches us, to draw near to God with all holy reverence Isa. 64.9. Be not
wrath very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever; behold, see we
beseech thee, we are all thy people.
, and confidence Romans 8.15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage
again to fear, but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba Father.
, as children to a Father, able and ready to help Luke 11.13. If ye then being
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him?
, and that we should pray with, and for others Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with
all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance and supplication for all Saints.
.

Hom. XVII. Consider his great power to make us dread and fear; -- high wisdom,
-- inestimable goodness, to take good heart again to trust well unto him, --
being assured to take him for our refuge, our hope and comfort, our merciful
Father, in all the cases of our lives.

Expl. 100. The Preface teaches many lessons. (1) Solemn Preparation, that we
come not rashly to pray, but bethink our selves beforehand to whom we are to
pray. (2) Reverence, as the name Father does import. (3) Access with boldness,
that we may go to God as freely in and through Christ, as Children can go to
their natural Parents. (4) Confidence of speeding all the while we ask aright
for the matter, and manner, and end; for when men do not speed, it is because
they ask amiss, i. e either what they should not, or as they should not, or
wherefore they should not. (5) Gods readiness to hear and help, therefore
called our Father; none more ready to help a Child than the Father of ^t. (6)
Gods pity and compassion toward his children, which does move him to help
them; As a father pities his children, etc. (7) That great Article of our
Creed, Communion of Saints; for all true Christian supplicants have one common
union in that one common relation of children unto God, and therefore called
our Father. (8) Compassion, that we do pity and pray one for another, being all
of us children of the same common Father. (9) That though God is present in all
places, yet Heaven is in a more especial manner the habitation of his holiness;
because he does there more immediately, gloriously, and fully communicate of
himself to the Angels and Spirits of just men made perfect. (10) That man
(being a sinful supplicant) should know his distance from the great God, and
with all humble and thankful admiration acknowledge Gods condescension toward
him, in that he is willing to receive any petition from him.

A. 101. What do we pray for in the first Petition?
In the first Petition, which is, Hallowed be thy Name; We pray, that God would
enable us and others to glorify him in all that whereby he makes himself known
Psalm. 67.1. God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine
upon us. 2. That thy way may be known upon the earth, and thy saving health
among all Nations. 3. Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people
praise thee.
, and that he would dispose all things to his own glory Romans 11.36. For of him,
and through him, and to him are all things, to him be glory for ever. Amen.
.

To. 2. Hom. VII. p. 3. -- We are taught whenever we make our prayers unto
God, chiefly to respect the honor and glory of his Name.

Expl. 101. This is not only the first Petition in this Prayer, but the first
of those Petitions wherein we are taught to beg good things; for the two last
Petitions in this Prayer are deprecatory against evil. Now from the shortness
of all these Petitions in general, we may observe, that the efficacy of Prayer
does not consist in the multitude of words, but does most show it self in a
holy fervency and ardour of affections. In this Petition there is, (1 st,)
Something supposed, as the ground of this Petition, as (1) That man ought to
make the glory of God his chief end in all his designs. (2) That by his natural
power, and without the grace of God, he is not able to glorify God. (2 dly,)
We have the matter of the Petition ( Hallowed be thy name). In which words we
do pray in the general, that all the Attributes, Titles, Ordinances, Words, and
Works of God (whereby he is made known) may be heartily and highly valued, and
esteemed, and magnified in the world. More particularly, we beg. (1) That God
would give us hearts. (2) Grace, to show forth his glory in all our words,
thoughts, actions, and capacities. (3) That he would prevent or remove all that
sin especially whereby the luster of his glory in the world is most eclipsed,
as Atheism, Ignorance, Idolatry, Oppression, etc. (4) That he would so lay the
scene of his Providence in the government of the world, that he may still get
to himself a glorious name, whether it be in works of power, wisdom, justice,
or mercy; for though he will do this whether we beg it or no, yet (1) it is our
duty, because commanded. (2) Hereby we show our love to God, by this zeal for
his glory. (3) To our own souls, for his glory and our happiness are twisted
together.

A. 102. What do we pray for in the second Petition?
In the second Petition, which is, Thy Kingdom come; We pray, that Satan's
Kingdom may be destroyed Psalm. 68.1. Let God arise, and let his enemies be
scattered; let them also that hate him, flee before him.
, that the Kingdom of Grace may be advanced Psalm. 51.18. Do good in thy good
pleasure unto Sion; build thou the walls of Jerusalem.
, our selves and others brought into it, and kept in it 2 These. 3.1. Finally
Brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free course, and be
glorified, even as it is with you. Romans 10.1. Brethren, my hearts desire and
prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved.
, and that the Kingdom of Glory may be hastened Rev. 22.20. He which
testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly, Amen. Even so come Lord
Jesus.
.

To. 2. Hom. XVI. p. 2. He of his great mercy so works in all men's hearts, by
the mighty power of the Holy Ghost, that the comfortable Gospel of his Son
Christ may be truly preached, truly received, and truly followed in all places,
to the beating down of sin, death, the Pope, the Devil, and all the Kingdom of
Antichrist; that like scattered and dispersed sheep, being at length gathered
into one fold, we may in the end rest altogether in the bosom of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, there to be partakers of eternal and everlasting life,
through the merits and death of Jesus Christ our Savior.

Expl. 102. By kingdom we are to understand in the general, Gods rule and
dominion and power, that he exercises in the world, both over all his
creatures, and particularly over men. Now in reference to the wicked, God does
exercise the kingdom of his power and justice in restraining or punishing them;
and thus to pray that this kingdom may come amongst wicked men, is to pray,
that the interest, power, and dominion of Sin, Satan, and Antichrist in the
world may be destroyed; for in this Petition we do acknowledge our selves to be
by nature subjects of the Prince of darkness, and therefore we are to pray,
that this iron-yoke may be taken off* and that we may take upon us the easy
yoke of Christ. But in reference to the elect, Gods kingdom is either, (1 st,)
A kingdom of Grace in this world, and then we pray, the Scepter of this kingdom
may rule in the hearts and lives of Gods elect: Now this Scepter being the
Gospel, we are to pray, (1) That this may be dispersed all the world over, in
order to the gathering of the dispersed Jews which do belong to the election of
Grace, and to the fullness of the Gentiles. (2) That where the means of grace
and knowledge are enjoyed (together with all Gospel Ordinances and Gospel Order)
they may prove effectual for the begetting and growth of grace and
saving-knowledg, and for the spiritual comfort and support of weak Christians.
(3) That to this end and purpose God would bestow his Holy Spirit upon his
people, as the Spirit of Truth to lead them into all necessary truth, as a
Spirit of Holiness to sanctify them, and as he is the comforter. (4) That the
power of the Civil Magistrate may be laid out for the good of the Church; and
that God would still furnish his Church with such Officers, both Spiritual and
Civil, as may most promote the interest of Christ's spiritual kingdom; and all
this we are to beg of God alone, (1) because he alone can check and restrain
whatever does oppose his kingdom. (2) Because he alone can effectually grant
what we beg herein. (2 dly,) And for the kingdom of Glory, we are to beg the
hastening of it for the elects sake, by Christ's second coming, because hereby,
(1) God will be most glorified. (2) The kingdom of Grace will be perfected,
when Christ's loyal Subjects shall reign with him in glory. Even so come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

A. 103. What do we pray for in the third Petition?
In the third Petition, which is, Thy will be done on Earth, as it is in
Heaven; We pray, that God by his grace would make us able and willing to know,
obey Psalm. 119.34. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law, yea, I will
observe it with my whole heart. 35. Make me to go in the path of thy
Commandments, for therein do I delight. 36. Incline my heart unto thy
testimonies.
, and submit to his will in all things Act. 21.14. And when he would not be
persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done.
, as the Angels do in Heaven Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord ye his Angels, which
excel in strength, that do his Commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his
Word. 22. Bless the Lord all his works, in all places of his Dominion. Bless
the Lord, O my soul.


To. 2. Hom. XXIII. As God the Creator and Lord of all things, appointed his
Angels and heavenly Creatures, in all obedience to serve and honor his
Majesty; so was it his will, that man his chief Creature upon the earth, should
live under the obedience of his Creator and Lord.

Expl. 103. In this Petition we have two things observable, (1) The matter of
our obedience, it must be what God requires. (2) The manner, it must be
according to the pattern in the Mount, sc. as it is done in heaven. For the
matter, it is only Gods Will which must be the Rule of man's duty; not the wills,
or fancies, or traditions, or corrupt customs of men; we owe obedience no
further to men in what they require from us, than it is agreeable to the Will
of God, and especially in the duties of Religion, because God alone, who is the
searcher of the heart, is Lord of the conscience, whenever therefore what is
required of us as matter of duty comes accompanied with a thus says the Lord,
either in the plain words, or in the plain sense of Scripture, we must not
dispute, but obey. Yet to prevent mistake, we are to know, (1) There is the
secret will of God, called the will of his counsel and purpose; but though this
be the Rule he himself walks by, yet it is not the Rule of our obedience, and we
are no further to pray that this will may be done, than as it seems good to his
infinite wisdom; and that we may with patience submit to it, and in all events
(though they may cross our wills never so much) acknowledge the holiness and
rectitude of it, and nothing may displease us that pleases him. But (2 dly,)
there is his revealed will, as (1) in his promises, and here we are to pray,
that they may be fulfilled. (2) In his threatenings toward the implacable
enemies of his Church, that these may be executed, and this in subserviency to
the former Petition, that his Kingdom may come. (3) In his prophesies, that
they may be accomplished. (4) And principally in his Commands, that these may
be obeyed and performed above and before any thing else, or that these be done
whatever else be left undone; and that (2 dly,) For the manner, as it is done
in heaven by Angels and the Spirits of just men made perfect, i. e. perfectly;
not that we can be perfect in holiness here on earth, but that we should be
aiming at it, and be perfecting holiness in the fear of God; in which are these
two things, (1) The renouncing our own wills, as they do oppose the will of
God. (2) Actual, real, constant, cheerful, universal compliance with the holy
will of God.

A. 104. What do we pray for in the fourth Petition?
In the fourth Petition which is, Give us this day our daily Bread; We pray,
that of Gods free gift we may receive a competent portion of the good things of
this life Prove. 30.8. Remove far from me vanity, and lies; give me neither
poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me.
, and enjoy his blessings with them Psalm. 90.17. And let the beauty of the Lord
our God be upon us, and establish thou the work of our hands upon us, yea the
work of our hands establish thou it.


To. 2. Hom. VI. [Our daily bread] i. e. all things necessary for this our
needy life. Hom. VII. p. 3. When we have sufficiently prayed for things
belonging to the soul, then may we lawfully and with safe conscience pray also
for our bodily necessities, as meat, drink, clothing health of body,
deliverance out of prison, good luck ( i. e. success) in our daily affairs,
etc. according as we shall have need.

Expl. 104. The former Petitions did respect God; and this is the first of
those which does concern our selves. In which Petition (1) Somewhat is implied,
as (1) That we depend upon God for the necessities of life. (2) That these are
only to be desired so far as they may help us in the doing of his will. (3)
That the frailty of our natures is such, that they stand in need of daily
supplies of these necessaries. (4) That our care in reference to these things
is neither to be immoderate, for we are to ask but for bread, i. e. necessity;
nor to look far, as is implied in that word day. (5) That having food and
raiment we be therewith content. (6) That however men in their honest Callings
do take pains for necessaries, yet they are the free gift of God. (2) In the
Petition we are to ask, (1) necessaries of life, called in Scripture food and
raiment, and here bread. (2) All means and helps to obtain these. (3) A
blessing upon them; for these three things are included in this one word [
bread].

A. 105. What do we pray for in the fifth Petition?
In the fifth Petition, which is, And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
debtors; We pray, that God for Christ's sake would freely pardon all our sins
Psalm. 51.1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness,
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions.
, which we are the rather encouraged to ask, because by his grace we are
enabled from the heart to forgive others Mat. 6.14 For if ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.


To. 2. Hom. IX. Dissension and discord interrupt prayer. -- For the Lords
Prayer has not only a respect to particular persons, but to the whole
universal, in the which we openly pronounce, that we will forgive them which
have offended against us, even as we ask forgiveness of our sins of God. Hom.
VII. p. 2. What if we be sinners, shall we not therefore pray unto God? or
shall we despair to obtain any thing at his hands? Why did Christ then teach us
to ask forgiveness of our sins, etc.

Expl. 105. In reference to the petition about forgiveness, there is (1)
something implied. (2) The matter of the Petition, and (3) the illustration of
it. It Is implied, (1) That man is naturally a guilty creature, and under the
condemnation, and consequently obnoxious to the curse of the Law, both by
reason of Original and Actual sin. (2) That of himself he cannot make
satisfaction to Divine Justice, nor any other for him (Christ only excepted,
who is God as well as man). For if man, or any other creature for him, could
satisfy Gods justice, he might then stick to that plea, and stand at the bar
of Justice; whereas he is now forced to the throne of Grace. (3) That God only
can forgive sin, for man is here directed only to God. (4) That confession of
sin, and petition unto God for pardon, is the way to obtain this pardon in and
through Christ. (2 dly,) The matter of the petition, or that we pray for, it is
directly and expressly remission (or forgiveness) of sins, and then consequently
the imputation of Christ's righteousness to us, by virtue whereof we may find
acceptance with God the Father, in and by and through the merit of the
righteousness of his Son Christ. For as by bread in the former Petition we do
by a Synecdoche understand all the necessaries of this corporal life; so in
this Petition, by forgiveness we may understand that which is so necessary to
eternal life, Christ's righteousness to be imputed to us; or in one word, in
this Petition we beg justification of our persons, as in the next we beg
sanctification of our natures, hearts, and lives. In short, since there is
forgiveness with God that he may be feared, we who are so many condemned
Malefactors must make our application and our supplication to him, and to him
alone for pardon; for sin is such a burden, and of such intolerable weight,
that it is only omnipotent mercy that can remove the guilt of it from the
consciences of men, it being an opposition to the holiness of Gods nature, who
is infinite; as well as a violation of that Law which is exceeding broad; and
therefore, by the way, sin may very well pass for the greatest of evils, since
(1) only the righteousness of Christ is broad enough to cover it, that the
shame of the sinners nakedness may not appear; (2) only the mercy of an
infinite God could pardon it; (3) since it is a downright defacing of the image
of God in man, and instead thereof drawing the black lines or image of Satan
upon man's soul; (4) and is consequently the greatest enemy to man's happiness
and perfection; (5) It does procure for the impenitent unpardoned sinner, the
eternal wrath of God and flames of hell. Q. But it may be here demanded, why
our sins are called debts? For an Answer we are to know in the general, that
they are not so properly, but metaphorically, with allusion to those debts that
are contracted between man and man; for God is not to be considered properly as
a Creditor, but as a Governor; so that in strict sense our obedience (rather
than our sin) is our debt to God, and such a debt as we owe to him by the Law
of our Creation; so that our sins are called our debts only because sin does
make punishment to become a debt which we owe unto God, and it is our just debt,
and of the two it is punishment which man does suffer for sin that comes nearer
to the nature and notion of a debt than sin it self, this being a due debt to
Gods Justice, as obedience is to his Authority, however we cannot pray that
this debt of punishment be remitted, except we beg that guilt (which is an
obligation to punishment) be first removed. (3ly) We have the illustration of
the matter of this Petition, by an apt similitude or resemblance, sc. as we
forgive our debtors), which words with reference to God, are not to be
considered either as a rule that God should proceed in the same manner, to
forgive us as we do others, or as a standard that God should measure out so
many pardons to us as we give to those who do offend us, but (1) as an
argument, (2) as an evidence. The argument proceeds from the Jess to the
greater; that if we who have (but as it were) a drop of mercy, can forgive
others, how much more will God (who is an Ocean of free grace and love it self)
forgive us; not that our forgiving others is meritorious of Gods forgiving us.
(2) Our forgiving others, when it is done freely and heartily and universally,
it is a fruit of the love and mercy of God shed abroad in our hearts, an
evidence of true grace in the soul, or of sanctification, and those whom he has
sanctified he has also justified.

A. 106. What do we pray for in the sixth Petition?
In the sixth Petition, which is, And lead us not into temptation, but deliver
us from evil; We pray, that God would either keep us from being tempted to sin
Mat. 26.41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. Psalm. 19.13.
Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion
over me.
, or support and deliver us when we are tempted Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a
clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. 12. Restore unto me joy
of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit.


To. 2. Hom. IX. -- Must crave continually of god the help of his holy Spirit,
so to rule their hearts, left hatred and debate do arise, -- brawlings,
tauntings, -- cursings and fightings. Which are from the ghostly enemy, who
takes great delight therein. -- They are compassed by the Devil, whose
temptation if followed must needs begin and weave the web of all miseries and
sorrows. -- They will not consider the crafty trains of the Devil, and
therefore give not their thoughts to pray to God, that he would vouchsafe to
repress his power.

Expl. 106. In this Petition there are two things necessarily supposed, as (1)
The wickedness or perverseness of man's nature to sin, for when we beg that God
would not lead us into temptation, we do own a proneness to fall into it. (2)
The weakness of man's nature to resist temptations, or to come off without any
final damage when we are tempred, for therefore do we pray to God to deliver us
from evil; that if the wise God, in his wise and just providence, for holy and
just ends, do so order things, that we be assaulted by the Devil, the World, or
the Flesh, yet that God would so powerfully support and assist us by his Grace
and Spirit that we be not overcome, but that we may recover as a Bird out of
the snare of the Fowler. We do not absolutely pray against afflictions (though
these are also tentations) and lead us not, etc. but we do absolutely pray to
be delivered from the evil of sin, and this by God alone, who can bring good
out of evil.

A. 107. What does the Conclusion of the Lords Prayer teach us?
The Conclusion of the Lords-Prayer, which is, For thine is the Kingdom, and
the Power, and the Glory, for ever, Amen; teaches us, to take our
encouragement in prayer from God only Dan. 9.18. We do not present our
supplications before thee for our righteousness, but for thy great mercies. 19.
O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do, defer not for thine own
sake, O my God.
, and in our prayers to praise him, ascribing Kingdom, power, and glory to him
1 Chronicles. 29.11. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory,
and the victory, and the Majesty; for all that is in the Heaven, and in the
Earth, is thine. 13. Now therefore our God, we thank thee, and praise thy
glorious Name.
and in testimony of our desire and assurance to be heard, we say, Amen Rev.
22.20. Amen, Even so come Lord Jesus.


To. 2. Hom. IX. [ Amen] which word is as much as to say, as truth, that the
blessing or thanksgiving may be confirmed.

Expl. 107. In this Conclusion we are taught, (1) Self-denial, and the
renouncing of all worth and merit in our selves; for we are not to say, Lord do
thus and thus, for I am worthy, for whom thou should do so and so, but for
thine is the Kingdom, etc. i. e. Thou who have commanded us to pray for what we
need, have Power to give us what we beg, though in our selves never so
unworthy. From that word therefore [ Lord] we may note, (1) That answering of
prayers is a special part of Gods providence in governing the world, which he
will have every supplicant to own and acknowledge. The belief of a providence is
very necessary to the offering up unto God the sacrifice of prayer. (2) From
those words [ and the Power] we may note, sc. That what God may do as Governor
of the world, in answering prayers by virtue of his supreme Authority, that he
has strength and ability to execute and perform. (3) From those words [ and
the Glory] observe, (1) That God looks upon it as one of his Titles of Honor,
to be a God hearing prayers; (2) That therefore in our prayers (as well as in
any other part of Divine worship) we should principally aim at the honor of
God; and it is one of the greatest arguments we can have of hope to speed, when
our design is rather to gloririfie God than to gratify our selves. (3) That
the Kingdom and Power of God, and that honor which does redound to him from
both these are everlasting. (4) That Praise should accompany Prayer. (5) That
whatever we ask of God in the name of Christ, according to his will, believing
we shall receive, for that is the meaning of that word which does seal up this
Prayer, Amen; because so it is, or so be it, or (in the words of Christ) be it
unto thee even as thou will; a greater encouragement than which unto prayer no
rational supplicant can desire, for it is no more than ask and have, that your
joy may be full.

FINIS.

