THE ADDRESS Of diverse Tradesmen, Apprentices, and others, To the RIGHT
HONORABLE Sir John Chapman, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of London.
MY LORD,
WE your Citizens, together with the Apprentices of the City of London, having
true and undoubted Information of the horrid Contrivances of diverse Papists,
for the destruction of this Famous City and the Inhabitants thereof, together
with all the good Protestants, and the utter subversion of our Religion and
Liberties, and to introduce Tyranny, Slavery and Popery; do in the behalf of
our selves, and diverse other Citizens and Inhabitants of this City, address our
selves unto you (whom we take to be our Patron) desiring your Aid and
Assistance, as you are bound by the Laws of God and this Nation, to defend and
protect us in this our good Design, to defend this Renowned City and the
Inhabitants thereof, together with the Liberties of England and the Protestant
Religion, from the vile Attempts of wicked Men: And we do here declare, That we
will venture our Lives and Fortunes to defend the King and the Protestant
Religion, as by Law established; which through the assistance of God we will
never dissert, though we are exercised with the most exquisite Tortures
imaginable; desiring your Lordships leave to search all Papists Houses within
this City, for Arms, Ammunition, etc. according to Act of Parliament; and we
desire the Aid and Assistance of your Self, together with the Trained-Bands of
this City, to keep Garrison within this said City, and not in the least
doubting of your Lordships Concurrence, for the Defense of whose Person we will
not flinch, though we all immediately lose our Lives. This being our resolute
Purpose, we leave it to your serious Consideration, and remain

Your Lordships most humble Servants and Citizens.


