A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL ON Sunday, September 8. 1695. BEING The Day of
Thanksgiving for the taking of Namur, and the Safety of His MAJESTY'S Person.

BY J. Adams, A. M. Rector of St. Alban Woodstreet.

Published by Order of the Lords Justices.

London: Printed for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1695.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL, etc. ON PSALM xxxiii 1. Rejoice in the Lord O
ye Righteous! for Praise is Comely for the Upright.
PRaise is so easy, so pleasant, and so profitable a Duty; so readily
acknowledged by Reason, and-so justly claimed by Revelation, that there has
never been much pains required to persuade men to the performance of it.

But as all the Passions are difficultly governed, when they rise to Excess: so
Joy, which is the ground of this Duty, is not only unruly in its own Nature but
men are apt to Encourage it so much, and give it such a loose upon any Public
Occasion, that they seldom stay to consider the great Object of their Praise,
or what are the proper Qualifications to make it Acceptable:

But the Psalmist leads us to both these in this Excellent Psalm; and whoever
peruses it with attention will find that He had Considered well the adorable
perfections of God, before He presumed to Rejoice in Him; and that He could
never have been so Great a Master of Thanksgiving, had not His Piety qualified
Him for being a Prophet, and the uprightness of His Heart made it worthy of
Inspiration: and from hence it is that He breaks out into this Holy Rapture;
Rejoice in the Lord O ye Righteous! for Praise is Comely for the Upright.

The Persons which the Psalmist calls upon here in particular are the
Righteous, and accordingly I shall endeavor to show.

1. That Good and Righteous Men are most Obliged to the Duty of Praise, and
most fit to perform it.

2. What is the True and Proper Object of Praise and the Reasonableness of it.
Applying Each particular to the present Occasion.

1. That Good and Righteous Men are most Obliged to the Duty of Praise, etc.

There are many of God's Blessings that are Universal, in Regard to these the
Duty of Thanksgiving should be of as large Extent. But since some Men partake
more particularly of His Favor, since it is with regard to the Righteous, and
sometimes for their sakes only, that Whole Kingdoms and Nations Enjoy Public
Benefits; They are in a more particular manner obliged to Gratitude and
Thanksgiving: They ought to be the most Early and most Active in their Praise;
and that too in Order to the spreading and promoting of God's Glory.

The Example of Good Men will always have an Influence upon the Worst part of
Mankind: for those Who deride Piety and Virtue in Private, are Glad to imitate
them in Public. There is such a Natural Beauty in Goodness, as Commands,
Esteem and Veneration, therefore People Readily join with those who are
Righteous, and out of an Opinion of their understanding and integrity, take
their Actions upon trust without farther Examination.

Whatever then can any ways Contribute to God's Glory, What outward respect
soever ought to be paid to Him in any part of Devotion; This should be
undertaken Chiefly by the Righteous, not only in Consideration of What they owe
to Their God; but also of what they owe to their Neighbor. Especially in
matters of Praise and Thanksgiving; Which are so pleasing and delightful in
themselves, that Every Body will readily join in the Offering of them.

But the Righteous are not only more Obliged to this Excellent Duty upon these
Accounts, but they are also most fit to Perform it, and that for these Reasons.

1. Because such Men are always Humble, and Ready to Acknowledge their
Unworthiness of God's Gooodness.

2. Because They have a Quick and Lively Sense of it, and are apt to be
tenderly and passionately affected with it.

3. Because They have always a Solid Foundation of True Joy in a Good
Conscience.

4. Because of that fitness and Congruity which there is between Praise and
other Virtues.

I. The Righteous are most fit to perform the Duty of Praise; because they are
always Humble and ready to acknowledge their unworthiness of God's Goodness.

Humility is the chief ground of Gratitude and Praise; and Nothing makes men
wanting in these Virtues so much as Pride: But where is Humility to be found to
that Degree as in the Righteous? The Sum of All Religion is the Knowledge of
God and the Knowledge of our selves. The more We know of God, the more perfect
and Excellent we find Him, the more we Know of our selves, we discover the more
Weakness and Misery; But no one can be so sensible How Wide these Extremes are,
as the Righteous man: and Therefore no one can be so Humble, so ready to
acknowledge His Unworthiness of God's Goodness, whenever it is manifested
toward Him.

There are too many men, that look upon Gods Benefits as their Due: there are
others that think the designs they have Compassed, the Estates they have
Raised, their Success in Peace or War, is all through their Own Prudence and
Industry, and therefore are more ready to Sacrifice to their Net, as the
Prophet speaks to themselves, than to their God. This kind of Pride Moses
foresaw in the Israelites, and therefore he warns them Deuteronomy. viii. 14.17. That
after God had shown such Great Wonders for them, they should beware, least they
should forget the Lord, and say in their Hearts, my Power, and the might of my
Hands has done this. How much more Reasonable is that of Holy Jacob, when he
reflected from how many Dangers God had delivered him: I am not worthy of the
least of all thy mercies, nor of all the truth which thou have showed unto me.

Alas! If we Consider what God has done for us, and yet the Stubborness and
Ingratitude of a great part of this sinful Nation. That neither the long
Experience of God's Goodness, nor the terrors of his Justice, have been able
to move us to Repentance; but that old Heresies in our Faith are again revived
with the greatest Confidence, that instead of mending in our Practice we have
plainly grown worse, and added the Vices of War to those of Peace. If we
Consider this, how much more justly ought we to acknowledge, that we are not
worthy of the least of God's temporal mercies, nor of that truth, that saving
Truth of the Gospel, which He has showed unto Us, in a more Excellent manner
than to any other Nation: and Humble our selves into Praise and thanksgiving
accordingly.

II. The Righteous have a quick and lively sense of God's Goodness, and are apt
to be Tenderly and Passionately affected with it, and therefore are most fit to
praise Him. Good men are Acquainted with the Ways of God, their thoughts are
always taken up and Possessed By Him; nor are their Understandings, Corrupted by
prejudice, or Weakened By intemperance: so that they perceive Him immediately in
His Works of mercy; and gladly acknowledge and adore His Goodness.

Whereas Wicked men very slowly discover it, or very slowly Confess it; They
are taken up so Entirely, with the World and themselves, that they regard not
the works of the Lord, nor Consider the Operation of His Hands. But attribute
Every Extraordinary Event, to Chance, or to Necessity; or else look upon it as
the Natural Effect of Human Force or Prudence, and Consequently undervalue it
and despise it.

And tho an Ill man may possibly discern God's Goodness in some Public and
remarkable Blessing; Yet this Will not move Him much. He is too wise to admire
any thing long, and therefore takes no notice of it, or forgets it immediately.
And indeed Praise is so Spiritual and so Heavenly a Duty, that it is no wonder
if it can take no Hold upon Such a mind, as is weighed down by Sensual Desires,
and besotted in its Vices.

But on the other side; as the Righteous discover God's benefits quickly, so
they are touched with them sensibly. They are Entirely, absolutely, taken up,
with the Contemplation of His Love; and the Gracious Evidences of it, Break out
so delightfully upon them, that they are Continually falling into Raptures of
praise and thanksgiving. Such a Condition as this Holy David seems to be in
frequently. The Sense of God's Benefits make such a Lively impression upon Him,
that He cannot mention them without Ecstasy, and He seems to labor With Holy
Joy, and to be in Pain How to Express it. O God thou art my God, early will I
seek Thee, my Soul thirsts for Thee, my flesh longs for Thee, Because thy
Loving Kindness is better than life my lips shall praise Thee. My Soul shall be
satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall Praise Thee with
joyful Lips. Thou art my God and I will praise Thee, Thou art my God and I will
exalt Thee. O Give Thanks unto the Lord for He is good and His Mercy Endures
for Ever.

There are many other Passages in the Psalms of this Kind, But These may show
sufficiently How fit the Righteous are to offer Praise: and that particularly,
Because They soonest discern the Effects of God's Goodness, and When they do so
are touched with a more tender sense of it.

III. Another Reason why the Righteous are most proper to perform this Duty,
is, because they have always a solid foundation of True Joy in a Good
Conscience. Joy is Essential to Thanksgiving, it is impossible to be grateful
without we are pleased first. But the sense of Guilt will never suffer this.
Innocence is the Only Ground of lasting Joy: this is that Happy Spring of good
Humor and Vivacity, which gives a pleasing Air to all our Words and Actions.
This is that which brings down Heaven to Us or at least begins it here; While
God Himself vouchsafes to dwell in the pure and Spotless Heart. O the
unspeakable Happiness of a Good Conscience! This makes us at the same Time,
Easy to our selves; delightful to our Friends; and Dear to our God.

It Is True Wicked men will often make some show of Satisfaction and Joy, But in
this They are the greatest Hypocrites in the World. Alas to be pleased with a
Well told story, to be delighted with witty and malicious Censure, to be
Exalted with the spirits of strong liquors, is not to be joyful, Sen. Ep. 23.
mihi Creed Res severa est verum gaudium. True joy does not Consist in Wild and
thoughtless Gayety, but is a Sober and Severe thing; Because it is the Effect of
our Having Moderated our Passions and Appetites, of our Having absolutely
Conquered our Vices, and not the Act of Indulging them.

Besides tho God's Blessings are never so Great or so Public, the Wicked
cannot have the Confidence to think that they were bestowed for their sakes, or
belong to them in the least, but the thoughts of their Guilt must strike them
with shame and sorrow when they behold the joy of the Righteous, and Consider
that they Have nothing to do with the Cause of it.

But the Righteous may apply Gods mercies without presumption to themselves.
They may reflect with pleasure upon their former Prayers and Humiliations, and
look upon themselves without Vanity as Benefactors to their Country; for the
Goodness of one Private man brings down blessings upon the Public; and
prevails more at Home than the Strength and Policy of many in the Field.

And as these Arguments of God's Goodness must cause Joy and Satisfaction in a
Righteous Man; so His Heart, by Being Kept still in order, by a Constant Course
of Virtue, is always Ready, and as it were in Tune, to Sound forth the Praise
of God.

IV. The Righteous are most Proper to Praise Him; Because of the fitness and
Congruity which there is between Praise and other Virtues. This is that Reason
which the Psalmist gives Here in Particular, included in those Words Praise is
Comely for the Upright.

As the Beauty of the Body Consists in the Exact Dimensions of Every part, and
the Symmetry and Proportion of the whole: So does the Beauty of the Soul
Consist in the Exercise of All Christian Virtues, and in the mutual Relation
which they have to each other: and if any one be Wanting it is a plain
Deformity, and will be perceived immediately.

Thus should those who are Righteous in other Respects be Negligent in their
Praise, they themselves Hold the light by which they are discovered, and those
Virtues which they have will show the Deformity of their Ingratitude, and make
it the more inexcusable.

But when the Upright join Thanksgiving to their other Works of Righteousness,
all is complete and uniform; this is Agreeable to their other Actions, it bears
proportion with them, and receives a peculiar Grace from them, and in this
Consists that Comeliness of Praise, and that Beauty of Thanksgiving which makes
it pleasing and Acceptable in the Sight of God and Man.

On the other side, What should Praise do alone without any other Virtue! What
Absurdity and Hypocrisy is it for ill men to Pretend to it! As a Well Shaped
Garment would not become a Crooked Body; so the Praise of God can never become
a Wicked Heart: therefore (as St. Basil says upon this place) it is probable
that our Savior Rebuked the Devils, and would not Suffer them to Confess Him;
Because Such Mouths were not fit to Pronounce such a Name.

To this purpose is that of the Psalmist, Psalm. l. 16. upon the Wicked God
says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take
my Covenant in thy mouth, Seeing thou Hate Instruction, and Castest my words
behind thee.

What indeed has He to do to Pronounce the Name of God, under pretense of
showing forth His Glory, Who has been used to pollute it Every moment by His
Oaths and Blasphemies. Or how can He pretend to praise the bounteous giver of
all things, Who has been a Disgrace to His Goodness, and Turned His own
Benefits Against Him, by making them the means of Committing greater Wickedness.

The Ignorant God may Pardon and accept, notwithstanding the Errors and
imperfections of their Praise, but not the wicked; because it is mere Confidence
and Presumption in them, and so far are such people from setting forth God's
Glory, that they rather lessen it; for the Praise of Ill Men is Scandal: and as
it would call a Good Man's Name in Question, to have a Wicked Man Commend Him;
so the Thanksgiving of the Unrighteous, (making God as it were on their side,)
would be some Kind of Detraction, Even from Infinite Goodness and Holiness it
self.

But the Praise of the Righteous is Comely in the Sight of all men, and greatly
advances God's Glory: For Praise is an Act of Justice, and every act of Justice
is beautiful in it self, much more when set off by the Luster of other Virtues.

The Natural Notions which all men have of what is fit and just, makes them
pleased when they see good men Act accordingly, When they see those Who have
received most from God, most careful to Praise Him for it, and that
particularly because they think that this is no light humor no sudden fancy,
which seizes them for a moment: but built upon a Solid Foundation, and
therefore likely to Continue and to have an Influence upon the Remaining part
of their Lives.

If then the Righteous are most Humble, most ready to acknowledge their
Unworthiness of God's Goodness; If they have a more quickly and lively Sense of
it, and are more tenderly affected with it. If they have always a Solid
Foundation of True Joy in a Good Conscience; and if there is a peculiar Fitness
and Congruity between Praise and other Christian Virtues, then it follows that
the Righteous are most proper to perform the Duty of Thanksgiving: And this was
the first Thing which I proposed. I proceed now to the second.

II. To Enforce this Duty by the Consideration of its great Object: and the
Benefits which we receive from Him. The Proper Object of our Praise, the
Psalmist leads us to, in the first words of the Text. Rejoice in the Lord --.
in Him, that is in the Knowledge that we have of His Divine Excellencies, and
in the Experience that we have, that those Excellencies are beneficial to Us.
Some take the Word in to Limit our Praise to God's Essential Goodness, but this
undoubtedly Restrains it too much. For tho God is so perfect in Himself that
the Contemplation of Him Heightened by a lively Faith, may afford great Joy and
Delight to some good Men, yet His Essential Goodness is seldom apprehended
sufficiently by all People to produce Public Praise. But it is necessary that
mankind should feel the Beneficial Effects of it for this purpose. Thus tho the
beauty of the Sun Considered in it self may justly cause admiration, yet it
would never be magnified so universally but that Men Enjoy the Light and the
Warmth of it.

But above all, this is Confirmed by the Psalmist in the following part of this
Psalm, for He does not tie Himself up strictly to the Contemplation of the
Divine Nature, as to its Essential Excellencies only, but Considers 'em as they
relate to His Works, and are Beneficial to His Creatures, and that particularly
as to His Godness, His Wisdom and Power. I shall follow Him exactly in the same
Method.

1. Rejoice in the Lord in regard of His Goodness: For great, nay infinite is
His Goodness. And because nothing can be more lovely than supreme Goodness the
Prophet cries out, How great is His Goodness and How great is His Beauty.
Whatever is pleasing to Us below, is so, because we take it to be good; that
is, suppose it to partake of this Fountain of Everflowing Goodness. How then
should we be surprised and transported with Joy! if we lifted up our thought to
Him Who is Goodness it self, and through His vast abundance pours it upon Every
Creature! But yet this would not be sufficient for His Universal Praise, unless
we consider His Goodness in His Works. Thus our Psalmist, v. 5. of this Psalm,
The Earth is full of the Goodness of the Lord; full indeed on Every side, for
which way soever we turn, with what Sweet Variety do New Wonders and New
Blessings meet Us. How do the Seasons succeed in beauteous Order, and Carry
Health and Plenty round the World. Thou crownest the Year with thy Goodness,
and thy Paths drop Fatness: They drop upon the Pastures in the Wilderness, and
the little Hills rejoice on every side, the Pastures are Clothed with Flocks,
the Valleys also are covered over with Corn, (one would think the Prophet
described our own Country) they Shout for Joy, they also Sing.

And whence proceeds this Joy, what is it they Sing but Their Creator's Praise.
Shall inanimate Creatures be so Just? Shall not only the Heavens but inferior
Parts of the Creation declare their Maker's Glory, by observing that Order in
which He first put them. And shall man only be unthankful? And that, Because He
is at Liberty, and God expects a more noble Offering from His Free Will, Praise
and Gratitude of Choice, and not of Necessity.

This would be unpardonable in any Wretch in the whole World; but much more in
any one of this Nation: for what instance of God's Goodness toward Us shall I
name First. The many Deliverances which we have Had from Open Violence, but
more from Secret Treachery, or the Incredible Wealth that has floated into Us
from so many distant Nations, and the Plenty, Healthfulness and Security of
this Happy Island; Happy indeed in all these Respects, but much more Happy in
being instructed so soon in the Saving Knowledge of Jesus Christ; and when this
began to be obscured by Ignorance and Superstition, in being blessed so soon
with so Judicious and Impartial a Reformation.

If we look abroad into the Rest of the World, How many Countries are at
Present the Seats of War, and Exposed to the Bloody Incursions of their
Enemies, as well as the Necessities of their Friends. And yet even War it self
cannot be Worse than the miserable Peace of those other Countries which groan
under Idolatrous Superstition, and are impoverished by its Avarice or
dispeopled by its Cruelty: While all the While we Enjoy our Liberties and our
Laws, under a Wise and Gracious Administration, and need fear no Disturbance
under our Vines and Fig Trees, unless we force it upon our selves by our own
Dissentions:

2. Rejoice in Him because of His Wisdom; it is by this He governs and disposes
of all things as in Wisdom He made 'em all. Some have thought it did not
consist with the Honor of so Great a Being to trouble Himself with the
Government of the World: as if He were Endowed with Infinite Knowledge and
Almighty Power, only to Sleep away Eternity; as if there were no Grandeur but
in Sloth, no Majesty but in Stupidity. It cannot be doubted but the same God
who gave all things their being, does give 'em also their manner of being; nor
can it be thought any Hindrance to His Happiness, or Detraction from His Glory
to Support and Govern what He first Created, and therefore the Psalmist says
Excellently 13, 15. ver. of this Psalm. The Lord looks from Heaven and
beholds all the Sons of Men. He fashioneth their Hearts alike and Considers
all their Works. Alas! How vain without him are all the Undertakings of
Wretched Man? We poor Creatures hurried about by our Lusts and Passions are
Striving and Contending together perpetually, and yet are not able to do the
least good to our selves, or hurt to others, without His Permission: Let us
fancy to our selves in one place a Company of People met together Enraged with
Malice and Revenge, Binding themselves with dreadful Oaths and Solemnities to
Execute some Conspiracy. Let us imagine another Number debating anxiously
concerning Peace or War; Let us suppose again two Fleets or Armies hotly
Engaged: What is all this! but the uncertain Motion of so much Dust and Ashes,
uncertain; till Determined by Divine Wisdom: Whatever cautious Age advises or
Eager Youth undertakes. How busy or vainglorious soever we are, we only
Execute the Orders of our Great Master, and are the Instruments of His
Providence.

How greatly then should we Rejoice when we discover plainly this Wisdom to be
working in our Behalf: With what pleasure ought we to look Back and Consider
the several Steps by which His Providence has proceeded, and acknowledge with
Humility and Shame the Folly of our former Doubts and Fears: How Rash is Man in
his Wishes? and how ungrateful in his Impatience? We can scarce be persuaded to
wait even for our Safety from the Slow Motion of second Causes, but like the
Israelites heretofore, are always for a Miracle; any little want in our
Necessities, any small disappointment in our Undertakings, makes us immediately
at a Stand, mistrust Heaven, and repine against God; while all the while His
Wisdom is acting in such a manner, as may make the Effects of His Goodness more
sure and lasting to Us, and the Effects of His Power toward others more
Remarkable.

Great and Public Evils are seldom cured in a moment, yet that Health which
Returns slowly, when once settled, is most lasting. Through how many Difficulties
were the Israelites led to their Canaan, and how many defeats and delays did
their own murmurs Cost them; and yet at length, how many Victories did they
Gain in a Short Time; when the Iniquity of the Amorites was full.

God often makes use of the Ambition and Pride of ill men (as Malefactors are
frequently chosen for Executioners) to punish those that are better, in order
to their fuller Repentance; and when they have done so, and their own
Iniquities are grown Ripe for Punishment, they become the more Remarkable
Examples of His Justice.

Calamities may happen to Private Men or to Small Governments, without being
much Regarded; But when a Nation has long Insulted over the Rest of Her
Neighbors, when a Prince has Used His own Subjects with the Utmost Cruelty,
and is lifted up far above the ordinary Condition of Humane Greatness. When
after all Such a one is cast Down, the Noise of His ruin draws all Men's Eyes
upon it, and forces the Inhabitants of the Earth to Learn Righteousness.

3. Rejoice in the Lord in Regard of his Power. Tho this Attribute must be very
terrible to those whose Guilt may make 'em fear it should be turned against
them, notwithstanding this, the Righteous shall be glad and trust in the Lord
and all the Upright in Heart shall Glory. That very Power which is so dreadful
to His Enemies, at which the Whole Creation Trembles at which the Everlasting
Mountains are scattered the perpetual Hills do Bow; when He marches Through a Land
in Indignation and threshes the Heathen in his Anger, as the Prophet: That very
Power can do as much for the Righteous. So that this Attribute cannot be
dreadful to good men, but on the contrary, must be most pleasant and delightful
to them. For tho He is the Lord of Hosts the God to Whom Vengeance belongs;
He is also the Lord Mighty to Save, Mighty to Save His Faithful Servants, and
those Who put their Trust in Him.

How much then ought we to Rejoice in Him at all Times upon this Consideration!
What a Comfort in Affliction, what a Support to our Faith must it be, when we
Remember that whatever His Goodness moves Him to do, His Power is ready to Put
in Execution; whatever He promises as an Indulgent Father He is able to perform
as an Almighty God.

But more Especially How should We Rejoice in Him, when We find this Power
acting in our Behalf in so glorious a manner. Men are apt indeed to attribute
their Success in War to Themselves, and impute much to Their Own Strength and
Wisdom; But since there are so many instances of the Weaker sides prevailing,
since so many Victories have depended upon Strange and Unexpected Accidents,
this must proceed from a Superior Power: And Indeed if God's Providence is
allowed to be Engaged at any time about things on Earth, it must be so
certainly When the Lives of so many Thousands of His Noblest Creatures, of
those for Whom the World it self Was made, are Concerned. Therefore the
Psalmist again in this same Psalm 16.18. There is no King saved by the
multitude of an Host, a mighty Man is not delivered by much strength; Behold
the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear Him, upon them that Hope in His
mercy, to deliver their Soul from Death. If this then is so, we ought to Praise
God for the Watchfulness of His Providence, and the Assistance of His Almighty
Power; and that Particularly, because the Evils That are Avoided by Success in
War are really greater and more Universal than we Escape by being freed from
any other Calamity: For Plagues, or Famine, spare at least the Liberties, the
Laws, the Religion of Countries: but Conquest! Conquest tramples insolently
upon all, Especially when Whetted by Superstition and Revenge.

And Thus have I Endeavored to show what persons are properly Qualified for
Praise, the Object of it, and upon what Considerations chiefly it ought to be
Paid, namely the Goodness, Wisdom, and Power of God: And how Conspicuous have
all these Appeared together in the Blessings that We Celebrate this day! And
therefore what Sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving ought Every grateful Heart
to Offer! At length We find that Torrent which has overrun Europe for so many
Years with so much Noise and Devastation, Shrinking back again into its own
Channel. At length we have Asserted our Ancient Dominion over the Seas, and
Every Element has Contributed to our Glory; while both our Fleets and Armies
(especially the latter) have been Successful in Spite of the greatest
Advantages of Nature, Art, or Humane Power.

And to add to all These Mercies; That Great Prince, Whose Life is Sought for,
not only by all open Attempts, but treacherous Practices: And yet, Who Exposes
it Continually by so many Journies and Voyages; nay, in so many Battles. Is
still preserved by Divine Providence, Remains still untouched by the Arrow that
flies by day, and secure from the Malice that walks in Darkness.

Let others boast of Victories which they never saw, make Luxurious Persian
Campaigns, be skillful in Corrupting others Faith, and always Ready to break
their own; and after such glorious Achievements Raise Triumphal Arches, dawb
their City Gates with Trophies and Inscriptions, Pick and Bribe their own
Historians.

No Place can be ignorant of our Conquerours Great Actions; and He may trust
His Greatest Enemies to Record His Virtues. How Unshaken in Resolution! How
unwearied in Labor! and How Undaunted in Danger! -- But I forbear --

Next to the Performing great Actions it is the Hardest Thing to Commend them
Worthily, and tho There may not perhaps be so much danger of Flattery upon this
Subject as any other, yet this Holy Place ought to be free from the least
Suspicion of it.

To Conclude then, let us Endeavor to Continue these Blessings to Us by the
Sincerity of our Praise and Thanksgiving, and let the Consideration of God's
Goodness prevail upon Us by the Sweet Motives of Gratitude and Love to a Union
and Constancy in our Obedience. That we may with one Mind, and with one Mouth
Glorify God, Even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, To Whom with the Holy
Ghost be ascribed all Honor and Glory, Praise, Power, Dominion, and
Thanksgiving, This Day and for Evermore.

FINIS.

