THE Christian's Manual.

In Three Parts.

1. The CATECHUMEN Or, an Account given by the Young Person of his Knowledge in
Religion, before his Admission to the LORD's SUPPER, as a Groundwork for his
right understanding the Sacrament.

2. An INTRODUCTION to a plain and safe way to the COMMUNION TABLE, with
Prayers fitted for the Communicant, before, at, and after Receiving.

3. The Primitive Institution; Showing the great Benefit and Necessity of
Catechizing, to save the Souls of particular Persons, and heal the present
Distempers of the Church.

By L. Addison D. D. and Dean of Lichfield.

London: Printed for W. Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar. 1691.

THE CATECHUMEN, OR AN ACCOUNT Given by the Young Person to the Minister, Of
his Knowledge in RELIGION, Upon his first Admission to the LORD'S-TABLE.

But sanctify the Lord in your Hearts: and be ready to give [(...)] an Account
to every Man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness
and fear, 1 St. Pet. 3.15. With the Epistles of Two Eminent Divines of the
Church of England.

Licensed, Dec. 2. 1689. Z. Isham.

The Second Edition.

London, Printed for W. Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, 1690.

TO THE AUTHOR.
SIR,
I Have ever had a peculiar esteem for all such Discourses, as Peaceably tend
to beget in Men's Hearts a right knowledge of the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper. Which I look upon as the highest Mystery in Religion, and the best
Instrument to convey Virtue, and promote it in a Christians Soul.

And seeing the small Piece you sent to be perused by me, is designed to
instruct the younger sort (who are the hopes of the Church) in such Principles
of Christianity, as are necessary to be known by them, before they be admitted
to the Holy Communion, you may well presume not only of my Approbation, but
earnest Desire, to have it made Public.

Yours, etc. L. A.

TO THE BOOKSELLER.
SIR,
I Have carefully perused these Papers, and though I know not the Author of
them, yet seeing you desire my Opinion, I think my self obliged to do them this
Right: As for the Matter contained in them, I think it very Orthodox, and fully
agreeable with the Doctrine of our Church; and as for the Composure, I think it
very Regular and Clear, Judicious and Instructive; and as for the whole, I
think it of very great use for all that have honest and teachable Minds, and do
sincerely inquire after the Truth, as it is in Jesus, but more especially for
such as have gone through their Catechize, whose Understandings I doubt not
will be very much opened and enlarged by a careful and diligent perusal of it:
That God Almighty may prosper the Design of it, and make it a Blessing to the
Souls of Men, is the hearty Prayer of,

Sir, Your truly Affectionate Friend, JO. SCOTT.
From my House in Broadstreet.
THE CATECHUMEN: OR, The Young Person's Account of his Knowledge in Religion,
etc.
THE following Account being only a Taste of the Proficiency I have made under
your pious Diligence in Catechizing, I have no apprehension it will be
unwelcome to you. Many things I know might be said in disfavour of it; but the
Piety of the Design is all I offer in excuse. Besides, I understand not the Use
or Benefit of Apologies, and therefore I will begin this Account without them.

It was my singular Happiness, not only to be born of Christian Parents, but of
such as were true Members of the Church of England, whose Piety took care to
make choice of fit Persons to present me to Holy Baptism the first Sunday after
my Birth, according to the Rule and laudable Practice of this National Church.

The Persons, I say, who presented me to Holy Baptism, were Canonically
qualified for that Charitable Office, being of good Report, and such as had
received the Holy Communion.

These I call my Godfathers and Godmother, whom I bear a Reverence suitable to
that Appellation. And by my Parents approbation, these gave me that Name, which
puts me in mind of the Christian Faith, in which I was baptized, and by which I
was listed under Christ, and became his Soldier and Servant. And it is called
my Christian Name, because by it I stand related unto Christ, and distinguished
from Men of all other Religions, as Jews, Pagans, and Mahumetans.

This Name was given me at Baptism, whereby being made a Christian, I was
entitled to all the Privileges appertaining to those who truly bear that Name.
So that I who by Nature did not belong unto the Church of Christ, which is his
Mystical Body, being baptized, became a Member of the same. And being a Member
thereof, I am no more, as I was by Nature, a Child of Wrath, but a Child of God
by Adoption, through Christ, who is the Son of God by Nature. And being thus a
Child, I am also an Heir of God, and Joint-Heir with Christ, to a Kingdom of
Glory.

But these Privileges were conferred upon me in Baptism not absolutely, but on
Condition that I would perform what my Godfathers and Godmother did vow and
promise in my behalf, when I was baptized. For notwithstanding that both mine
and all Parents are expressly commanded to be diligent in teaching their
Children God's Holy Word, and to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord; yet because Parents may die, and so be incapable to do this; or they
may be negligent, and so either not do it at all, or not as they ought; the
Church, as 'twere, took Bond or Security of my Godfathers and Godmother for my
pious Education: Who are therefore called my Sureties, and who were encharged
to have a Religious Care to teach me, as soon as I was able to learn, what a
solemn Vow, Promise and Profession I made by them in Baptism.

Now, the things which these Sureties avouched to be performed by me, are
Three, (answerable to the Three Benefits assured to me when I was baptized.)
The first was an utter renouncing of all those Spiritual Enemies that
incessantly war against my Soul; namely, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.

So that the first Spiritual Enemy I am to renounce, forsake, and fight
against, is the Devil, that evil Spirit, that lost Angel, whose malignity
against me appears in his continual soliciting and tempting me to Sin, and
accusing me when I have sinned; and resisting and hindering me when I am about
to do good. Whom, according to my Sureties Bond, I stand obliged to renounce,
together with all his Works; which, in general, are all Sins committed by his
instigation; and, in particular, all Sins committed after his Example, or which
bear his Image; such as Murder, Lying, Pride, Malice, and the like.

I am also bound (by virtue of the Bond my Sureties gave in my Name) to
renounce this present evil World. By which I understand those wicked Men who
are Enemies to Godliness, and all those other Creatures which the Devil, the
Prince of this World, uses as Baits and Snares to seduce me to Sin. But
besides my renouncing the World thus understood, I am also to forsake and
withstand its Pomps and Vanities, that is, all Pleasures, Pride and Wealth,
when they become injurious to Religion, and divert or stop me in my Exercise of
Piety: Which they will certainly do, if my Affections toward them are
inordinate, immoderate, or unseasonable.

And because Worldly Vanities only gratify my Carnal Part, and Sensitive
Appetite, I am also bound to renounce that which they gratify: I mean, the
Flesh, or my unmortified Corruption, which is Enmity against God, and does not
only hinder me from doing Good, but does also incline and spur me on to do Evil.

For I find, that from this unmortified Corruption there springs up in me many
inordinate Affections, and evil Concupiscences, which are called the Lusts of
the Flesh: By means whereof (until they are mortified) I am brought to
entertain the Temptations of the Devil, and to abuse the good things of the
World to Sin. And though the renouncing of these Lusts of the Flesh, together
with the Devil and the World, be made an Article of my Christianity, and a
Condition upon which the Privileges of Baptism are bestowed upon me; yet
seeing they are my sorest Enemies, and continually endeavoring not only my
present, but my eternal Ruin, (without any other tie) Self-preservation
prompts me to withstand them.

The Second thing promised in my behalf, when I was baptized, is my Belief of
the Doctrine of Christianity, summed up in the Apostles Creed: My Faith of
which, if it be not more than either barely Historical and Temporary, I shall
not surpass the very Devil, and wicked hypocritical Men in believing; for the
one believes always Historically, and the other only hypocritically for a time.

But the Faith I vowed in Baptism is a firm and constant Assent unto the Word
of God, and Gospel of Man's Salvation, and an unshaken Reliance upon the same:
So that the whole Scripture is the General, and the Articles of the Christian
Faith, summed up in the Creed, is the Particular Object of my Belief.

And I look upon this Faith to be so necessary for me, and every Christian,
that I forfeit that Title without it: For a Believer is but another Word for
Christian. But still I know, that how necessary soever Faith is to the
Salvation of my Soul, yet it is not to be got by my own Power; for it is the
Gift of God, and the Gracious Work of the Holy Ghost, which does enable me to
assent unto, and rely upon the Holy Scriptures.

But because Faith will not profit to my Justification, without Works of
Obedience to the Commands of Christ; therefore my Sureties undertook that I
should keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days
of my Life. So that I do acknowledge my self bound to pay Obedience to the
whole Will of God, revealed in his word. And I cannot think my self fit to come
to the Lord's Table, unless I am resolved to keep God's Law, and have regard
unto all his Precepts; and that too with my whole Heart, or sincerely; and
always, without intermission or discontinuance.

But when I profess this to be my Duty, it is not as if I thought I were to be
saved by the Tenor of the First Covenant, the Condition whereof was perfect
Obedience; for this I am no way able to perform. But because I hope to be saved
by the Second Covenant, called the Covenant of Grace, I think my self bound to
perform the Condition thereof, namely, Obedience, or Faith fruitful in good
Works; which good Works are the genuine Offspring of my Faith, and do flow as
naturally from it, as Fruits from their Tree; and without which, my Faith is
dead. And you have ever taught me to set a peculiar value upon good Works,
because through means thereof I glorify God, edify my Neighbor, and justify
and declare my Faith before Men. And according to my present Sentiments of
Religion, I look upon Faith and good Works to make up my whole Duty, as a
Christian: And these, I hold, are not to be separated in my Practice, because
Faith without Works is dead, and Works without Faith cannot please God.

And though it is my firm Resolution to observe them both, and to believe and do
as my Sureties have promised for me; yet I know, I cannot do so, but by the
assistance and help of God; and therefore I will by diligent and humble Prayer
beg a continual supply of Grace, to enable me to believe and do all things
which at Baptism were stipulated an^ promised in my Name. And will also daily
offer up my unfeigned Thanks unto God, that h^^ has called me to the knowledge
of the Truth; that he hat^ brought me out of my natural State of Sin; that he
has admitted me into the Church; and that there he does vouchsafe me the
appointed Means of Holines^ and Salvation. And I humbly pray God by his
preventing Grace to incline my Will; by his assisting Grace to give me
Strength* and by his consummating Grace to bring me actually to perform all
those Duties which in Holy Baptism my Godfathers and God-mother under ook in
my stead.

And as you ever minded and made me sensible how greatly I was bound to my
Sureties, for what they did for me at Baptism; so you likewise have let me know
the Obligation I had to take up their Bond as soon as I was able, and so to
discharge them. And this I did at Confirmation, when I solemnly took upon my
self to believe and do all that my Baptismal Sureties had vowed and promised I
should believe and do. But now, alas! being conscious to my self that I have
broken my Baptismal Covenant, it is my earnest desire to be admitted to the
Lord's Table, on purpose to renew it.

But before my admission to that Heavenly Entertainment, I am of opinion that I
ought to have a competent Understanding of the more eminent Parts of
Christianity which you have taught me; and they are these Four, namely, Faith,
Obedience, Prayer, and the Sacraments. And to you who are to admit me, I think
my self bound to give an Account of my Knowledge in each of these, and to
desire your Judgment whether or no it be sufficient in order to my Admission.

I begin with Faith (as the without which all the rest are no only
insignificant, but sinful which being considered as my A^ of Believing, I have
already said that it signifies my Assent unto and relying upon the Word o^
God's Truth, and Gospel of Man Salvation: So that I take the Scriptures to be
the general Object o^ my Faith, and the Creed to contai^ the main Particulars
to be believed by me. I mean, that Creed which bears the Name of the Apostles,
as its Compilers; and which, I suppose to be that Form of sound Words to the
Profession whereof Paul exhorts Timothy to keep constant and teach others.

And because before my Admission to the Holy Communion, I think I ought to be
able to recite the Words of the Creed, to have a competent Knowledge of their
meaning, and of the influence each Article ought to have upon my Coversation: I
will therefore first rehearse the Words thereof, and then give you such an
Account of their Sense and Influence, as I have been taught by you.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth:

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord: Who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried; He descended into Hell: The third day he rose again from the
dead: He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty: From thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead.

I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints, the Forgiveness of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life
everlasting. Amen.

Having thus rehearsed the wor^ of the Creed, my next Task is ^ give a short
plain Declaration ^ what I believe in every Article.

ARTICLE I. I believe in God the Father A^mighty, Maker of Heaven an^ Earth.
In this Article I have bee^ taught to believe that there is God, and that he
is an Eternal Spirit, whose Being is of himself and not from any other; and
tha^ from him all things have their Being. And I further believe, Tha^ this God
is but One, because he is the Infinite, Independent, and Omnipotent Cause,
which can be but One.

I believe also, That this God is the Eternal Father of Christ, and that for
his sake he is also my Heavenly Father; and that being Almighty, he can do for
me whatsoever he will.

I likewise believe, That in Six days this God created all things of Nothing by
his Word, for his Glory; and that he still preserves all things by the same
Word of his Power.

ARTICLE II. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.
In this Second Article of the Creed I have been taught to believe in Jesus
Christ, and that he is the only Son of God, and of the same Divine Essence with
him: That he is called Jesus, because he is the only Savior of Mankind: and
that he is called Christ, or Messiah, which signifies Anointed, because he was
anointed to the Three Offices of a Prophet, Priest, and King; which Three,
under the Law, were in an especial manner Anointed.

And I believe, That all these Three met in Christ; and that as a Prophet he
does instruct his Church, outwardly by his Word, and inwardly by his Spirit.
And I believe, That as a Priest he made satisfaction unto God for the Sins of
Mankind, when he once offered up himself upon the Cross; and that by the
Sacrifice of himself, he reconciled God and Man. And further I believe, That as
a Priest he continually makes Intercession for me, and all true Christians, at
the right Hand of his Father in Heaven, and does bless me in turning me from my
Iniquities.

In like manner, I believe, That Jesus was not only Christ, that is, Anointed
to be a Prophet and a Priest in the sense now declared; but that he was also
Anointed to be a King: And that, as such, he does govern and preserve his
Church: he erects and sets up his Throne in the Hearts of Believers: He gives
them Grace to subdue every rebellious Lust, and habit of Sin, that it reign not
in them: He conquers Satan, and restrains his Power: He overcomes Death; and
having received all Authority in Heaven and Earth, he rules over all Men, and
all Creatures; and that of his Kingdom there shall be no end. So that to him
belongs absolute Dominion over all, and Obedience is due to him from all.

ARTICLE III. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.
In this Article I profess to believe, That when Christ was made of the Seed of
David according to the Flesh, he was made in all things like to my self,
excepting Sin: For that could affect neither his Humane Soul nor Body, because
in both he was most Holy, as being conceived only by the Operation of the Holy
Ghost, and born of a spotless Virgin. For Christ, that he might be our Kinsman,
and capable to redeem us, by paying our Debts in the same Humane Nature in
which they were contracted, it was necessasary he should be the Seed of the
Woman. And that he might plainly appear to be that Seed of the Woman which was
promised, it was likewise necessary he should be born of a Virgin, who was of
the Lineage and House of David. All which I believe from God's Word was
accomplished in the Blessed Mother of Christ.

ARTICLE IV. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, etc.
This is an Article that you have often told me I ought well to understand; for
it respects Christ's Death, upon which the whole Hinge of my Salvation turns. I
find the History of it to be clearly and fully set forth by the Evangelists;
and as to the knowledge of it, St. Paul valued it so highly, that he desired to
know nothing else but Jesus Christ crucified. Now by my believing of the
Crucifixion, I confess, that according to the Prophecies Christ suffered in his
Humane Nature. both in Soul and Body; his Divine Nature being incapable of
suffering. And that this happened at the time when Pontius Pilate was the Roman
Governor of Judaea; who being addicted to Cruelty and sinful compliance,
condemned Christ to be crucified: And as Moses lifted up the Serpent on the
Pole in the Wilderness, so was Christ lifted up on the Cross; and by a painful,
ignominious, and accursed Death, did expiate my sin, and redeemed me from all
vain Conversation, and from the Curse of the Law, and gave me an Entrance into
Heaven. All which unspeakable Benefits are justly to be ascribed to the Blood
of Christ, because it was of infinite value, as being the Blood of that Person
who was God as well as Man.

And as I believe Christ voluntarily laid down his Life, and that his Soul was
really separated from his Body; so I likewise believe, that as a dead Man he
was buried, after the manner of the Jewish Nation; namely, that he was bound in
Grave-clothes with Spices, and laid the Grave, with an heavy Stone rolled to
the mouth of the Sepulcher. All which were certain Tokens of his Death, as
being the usual known Rites of a Jewish Funeral. I also believe, That Christ
being dead, his Soul and Body remained in a separate condition, under the Power
of Death; and that his Soul was reunited to the Body before it did putrify in
the Grave. But as to the various Opinions about his Descent into Hell, I think
them either too high, or too unprofitable for my research.

And as you have taught me, so I believe, that Christ's Birth, Death, and
Burial, or being under the Dominion of Death, were the Three Degrees of his
Humiliation; answerable to which were the Three Degrees of his Exaltation,
namely, Resurrection, Ascension, and Glorification in Heaven.

ARTICLE V. The third day he rose again from the dead.
Though, being a Christian, I need no Proof of Christ's rising from the Dead; yet
to confirm my belief of so eminent an Article, God has given me the Testimony
of Angels, of the Men that guarded the Sepulcher, the many Apparitions of
Christ after he was risen, the Effusion of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles,
the Miracles done by them in his Name. So that I have just ground to believe
and profess, That the Body of Christ saw no Corruption, as did the Bodies of
the Patriarchs. And because it was impossible he should be holden of the Power
of Death, I do believe that he did really rise again, and that the very same
Body and Soul of our Savior, which were separated by Death, were by his own
Divine Power reunited in his Resurrection.

And as to the time when he arose, I have been taught, and do believe, That it
was the Third day after his Death, which happened to be the First day of the
Week: Which Day we celebrate in memory of his Resurrection, and which has
immemorially been called The Lord's Day.

ARTICLE VI. He ascended into Heaven, and sits, etc.
I believe, That Christ ascended by the same Power he rose: And that this was
no other Power than that of his own Divinity; by which, as an High Priest of
good things to come, he once ascended visibly and locally into the Heaven of
Heavens, as the High Priest once every Year entered into the Holy of Holies. And
the End of his Ascension was, I believe, to prepare a place for Believers, and
to receive them to it; that where he is, they might be also.

After Christ's Ascension into Heaven, he took his Place at the Right Hand of
God. Not that I think God, who is a most absolute Spirit, has either Right or
Left Hand; but that this is spoken after the manner of Men who place those whom
they will most honor upon their Right Hand. And from Christ's being thus
placed in Heaven, I collect, That he there took up his Abode in a State of
Majesty and Power, to show that he was above all Creatures in Heaven and Earth,
and that he is exalted to be the King of Saints, and Judge of Sinners; the
Prince of our Salvation, and High Priest of our Profession: and that in him
there was an Union of the Regal Power and Priestly Office, when he sat down at
the Right Hand of the Father Almighty. So that by the former he is perfectly
able to subdue all his Enemies; and by the latter he does ever intercede for,
and eternally save those that are his.

ARTICLE VII. From thence he shall come to judge, etc.
As I believe that Christ redeemed me by his death and passion, and that by his
Ascension he is become my Advocate and Intercessor with God; so I believe that
he shall come the second time from Heaven, with great Glory, to judge the World.

For besides the particular Judgment that passes upon every Man immediately
upon his Death, when the departed Soul is set at God's Tribunal, and examined
of all its Thoughts, Words, and Actions; I say, besides this particular
Judgment, I believe their shall be a general Judgment, when all shall be
judged, as well the Quick that shall be alive at that day, as the Dead, who
shall then be raised up. And that this last Judgment Christ himself, as a
Supreme Judge, shall pass the final Sentence, and that the Saints, as
Assessors, shall pass their Sentence of Approbation.

I believe too, That I and all Men shall be judged of all things done in the
Body, whether Good or Evil: And that upon the pronouncing of the Sentence, the
truly penitent shall pass to an Estate of Eternal Happiness; and finally, the
Impenitent to an Estate of Eternal Misery.

ARTICLE VIII. I believe in the Holy Ghost.
Having briefly declared what my Faith is in God the Father, and God the Son; I
am next to declare what I believe concerning God the Holy Ghost. And first, I
believe, That without Faith in the Holy Ghost, I cannot believe in God the
Father, nor in his Son, as my Lord. For no Man can call God Father, but by the
Holy Ghost; nor can any Man say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost:
Whom I believe to be the Third Person in the Divine Being, and therefore True
God: And that as he proceeds from the Father and the Son, (which I believe he
does) he is a Person distinct from both.

The Spirit in whom I believe is called Holy, because in himself he is without
all Pollution and sin; and because he is the Author of all Holiness in me, and
all who truly believe in him: So that all my Holiness is but a Ray or Effusion
of the Holy Ghost, which does furnish my Heart with spiritual and saving
Graces, by the Work of Sanctification.

ARTICLE IX. I believe the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.
After this plain Account given by me of the Articles which concern the Blessed
Trinity, I will now give the like Account of those that follow; which respect
such only as truly believe in, and obey and Worship the Trinity in Unity; and
who are here called the Church. Which I plainly take to signify all those whom
Christ has called out of the World, to be his peculiar People: Over whom he
has a Sovereign Authority, in regard of which they willingly and cheerfully
pay him Homage, and obey his Law and Ordinances.

For by Church I have been taught to understand the Corporation and General
Family of all true Believers, which Family truly deserves to be called Holy, in
respect of its Head, which is Christ, who is Holy in himself, and whose
Holiness is imputed to all sincere Believers: And who through the Grace given
to them, do labor, study, and endeavor to be Holy.

And the Church, in this familiar acception, I believe is Universal, as well as
Holy; and that there are in all the Quarters of the World those who by Baptism
are admitted into it, and so made Members of Christ's Mystical Body, who are
guided by his Spirit, nourished by the Word and Sacrament; and who are obedient
to the Rule and Government of the Bishops and Pastors, lawfully called to their
Offices.

And of this Society of Believers, which constitute the Church, some are in a
state of War, continually fighting against their own and Christ's Enemies; but
yet in daily expectation of Triumph, and a Crown: And these are called the
Church Militant, which is on Earth. And some are in a state of Peace; for
having fought the good Fight of Faith, and finished their Warfare, they are
entered into their Master's Joy: And these make the Church Triumphant, which is
crowned in Heaven. Now, these I hold are not two diverse Churches, but the same
Church under a different State and Condition: For I believe the Church to be
essentially but one.

And as Christ's Mystical Body the Church has an Union with Him, as being the
Head of it; so I believe there is a Common Union among the Members; both those
that are glorified in Heaven, and those that in some degree are sanctified on
Earth. And this is called the Communion of Saints; and is the first Privilege
of the Christian Church. And by virtue of this all true Christians communicate
in all Offices of Piety and Charity; in doing good to one another Bodies and
Souls. And this they do upon the account that they have in common One God, one
Christ, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one Hope.

ARTICLE X. The Forgiveness of Sins.
As the Communion of Saints genuinely arises from the Nature of the Universal
Church; so Pardon of Sins follows from both. For none shall have their Sins
forgiven, but those who live and die in the Communion of the Church: For unless
I abide in this Ark, I shall certainly perish.

Now Sin, as I have been instructed, is of two sorts; the one Original, which
is the sin of my Nature; the other Actual, which is the sin of my Conversation.
The former I brought with me into the World, the latter I commit while I live
therein. And both these sorts of sin deserve Eternal Death and can only be
pardoned by the Merits of Christ. (For sin being a Transgression of the Law of
God, it can only be forgiven by him whose Law it transgresses.) For Remission
of sins is the second Privilege of the Church, which is preached to all in the
Name of Christ, and sealed in Baptism; wherein I believe my Original Sin is
presently pardoned, and that my Actual Sins committed after Baptism, shall be
pardoned, if I truly repent me of the same.

Now, this my Belief of the Forgiveness of Sins, supposes that I believe, That
God graciously and freely, without any Desert on Man's part, gave his Son to
die for the World; and, That for the sake of his meritorious Death, he remits
the Fault, absolves from the Guilt, and acquits from Punishment, all truly
penitent and believing Sinners.

And I do further believe, That he imputes to them the Obedience of his own
Son, and his Righteousness, and by means thereof accounts them just in his
sight.

I believe, That all who are justified, and thus acquitted, have Holiness in
some degree, according to the Condition of this Life. Which Holiness, though it
cannot altogether discharge them from sin, yet it does not suffer it to reign
over them: So that a justified Person is not under its Dominion, nor yields
himself a Vassal to it; but resists its Commands, and makes it die daily.

And for the greater security of the Forgiveness of sins, God has committed to
his Ministers an indispensible Power and Charge to preach Faith and Repentance
as the Condition of this Forgiveness: He has likewise appointed them to pray
and intercede, and also to baptize for the Forgiveness of sins; and to
administer the Lord's Supper in memory of that Blood which was shed for the
Remission of Sins. And indeed all that God has left in the Hand and Power of
his Ministers, especially tends to make Men capable of receiving what they
believe, namely, the Remission of sins.

ARTICLE XI. The Resurrection of the Body.
It was the Hope of the Fathers under the Old Testament, as well as it is of
Christians under the New, That there shall be a Resurrection both of the Just
and Unjust: And if it were otherwise, Christians of all Men would be most
miserable; and all that I have learned, and you have taught me, concerning
Christianity, would be in vain. But I firmly and truly believe, That my Mortal
Body shall be raised from the Corruption of the Grave by Virtue of the
Resurrection of Christ. And this my Belief is founded upon the Power and good
Pleasure of God, who both can and will raise from the dead the very same Body
that died.

ARTICLE XII. The Life everlasting.
The Enjoyment of Everlasting Life is the last Christian Privilege, and that
which crowns the rest: And I have learned to understand by this Life the
Enjoyment of all true Happiness in Soul and Body. For I believe that the
Faculties of the Souls of just Persons shall be perfectly enlightened and
sanctified, and that their Bodies shall live after the manner of Spirits, and
be exceedingly glorified.

And opposite to this Life everlasting, I believe there is an everlasting
Death, which is the Portion of the Wicked. And that as Life everlasting
consists in the Fruition, so I believe everlasting Death consists in the Loss
of God's Presence, and all other Comforts; and is the enduring of the sting of
Conscience and Torments of Hell for ever.

But as my believing all the Articles of the Christian Faith, as they are
summed up in that which is called the Apostles Creed, supposes that I am to
learn not only the Words, but likewise the Sense of the Creed; so it also
implies, that I should live like them that do believe; for otherwise my
consenting to the Truth of the Articles will stand me in no stead. And
therefore, not meddling with remote and learned Inferences, I will draw such
from each Article, as are near and familiar, short and edifying.

As for Example: From my believing that God created me, I infer, I am bound to
be obedient and subject to him. By my believing that Christ redeemed me, I
think it my Duty to yield up my self to him as his Purchase, and to be wholly
disposed by him, and employed only in his Service. My believing Christ's
Conception by the Holy Ghost, and his Birth of the Virgin, should make me
diligent to fit my Heart for the Holy Ghost to overshadow, and for Christ to be
born in it. My belief of Christ's Crucifixion, should teach me to crucify the
Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts, and to destroy the Body of sin. My belief
of his Death and Burial should make me content to die for the sake of Truth,
being assured, that if I suffer for Christ, I shall also reign with him. It
should also keep me from being disheartened by Death, seeing that Christ by
dying has taken away the Stin^ of Death, which is Sin, and man it an Entrance
into Life. My b^lieving the Resurrection of Christ should make me actually rise
from Sin to a New Life; and utterl^ to forsake my Sins, as Christ di^ the
Grave, to which (after ^ was once risen from it) he returned no more. My
believin^ Christ's Ascension, and sitting ^ the Right Hand of God, should teach
me to set my Affections o^ things above, and not on thing on the Earth. The
believing Judgment to come, should mak^ me careful so to walk, as that may not
be condemned in i^ My believing the Holy Catholic Church and Communion o^
Saints, should render me might^ circumspect to preserve Charity which is the
Bond of Peace, and to avoid all things destructive o^ Catholic Unity.

The Remission of sins, which I believe, should make me highly to esteem all
those Ways and Means which God has ordained in his Church to convey unto me
this Remission, and to perform the Condition on which it is promised.

My believing the Rising again of my Body, should make me watchful against all
things that may keep it from being in a fit condition to rise to Glory; and to
practice all such Virtues as may prepare it for that Heavenly Condition to
which I expect it should be raised. And my believing the Life Everlasting,
should make me diligent to employ my short moment of Time here, that my
Everlasting Life hereafter may be a Life of Joy, and not of Misery.

And thus from all the Articles of the Creed, I am to draw Motives to
strengthen me in all Christian Practice; to which end my learning and believing
of them is designed. And till I do this, I cannot rationally pretend to make
good what I promised when I was baptized, namely, To believe all the Articles
of the Christian Faith. And without this, I think my self unfit to partake of
the Lord's Supper.

I now proceed to Obedience, which you have frequently taught me, is the second
Head of my Christian Profession, and that it has the Ten Commandments for its
Rule; and of these, as well as of the Creed, I ought to have a convenient
Knowledge, both as to the Words and Meaning, before I come to the Lord's Table:
Because the keeping of God's Commandments is one part of that Vow which I have
broken, and come thither to renew.

And first, I have been Catechized, That in ea^h Commandment there is something
required, and something forbidden; so that I may be guilty of transgressing it,
either by doing what I ought not to do, or by leaving undone what I ought to do.

As to the things forbidden by the First Commandment, I have learned, that they
are chiefly Atheism, or the Denial of God's Being, and the multiplying and
serving of false Gods; as also the not serving the only true God aright. And of
this last I look upon my self to become egregiously guilty, when I suffer any
thing to share with God in my Worship of him; and when I am guilty of
Hypocrisy, Irreligion, Indevotion, Lukewarmness, Heresy, Schism, Apostasy,
Infidelity, Presumption, Despair, Carnal Security, Pride, Disobedience,
Impatience and Murmuring, and wilful Ignorance of his Word.

And I have been taught, That by this same Commandment it is required of me to
acknowledge but One God, and to have him for my God, and to love, fear, obey,
and trust in him above all others, and to serve him truly all the days of my
life.

And as to the things forbidden in the Second Commandment, I doubt not but they
are, The appointing of any kind of Image for Religious Worship; the
representing of God by a visible likeness of any thing; the worshipping of
Creatures; the neglect of the Worship of the True God, or the worshipping him
after a false manner.

And the Duties enjoined in this Commandment, are, to worship the only True
God, according to his own Prescription; to worship him both in my Body and
Spirit; to bear a due regard to all the Parts of his Worship, as Prayer, the
Word, and Sacraments; to come to them with suitable Preparation, and to yield a
due Veneration to all Places, Times, Persons, and Things, rightly set apart for
God's Worship. And to such as thus worship him, he has promised Mercy and
Kindness; but has threatened to be a severe Punisher of them that do otherwise.

In the Third Commandment I am forbidden all irreverent Thoughts of God; all
Blasphemy, or dishonorable mention of his Name; all Perjury, or Breach of
lawful Oaths; all occasioning the Name of God and True Religion to be
blasphemed.

And, on the other side, I am enjoined, to think and speak reverently of God's
Name and Attributes; to glorify him in his Holy Word and Ordinances; to use
his Name with Reverence in taking Religious Oaths; to ob^^^^^ such Oaths with
an holy Care and Conscience; and to glorify his Name by a pious Conversation.

The Fourth Commandment requires me to keep holy, or to sanctify all such
days, which are separated from a Common to a Religious use.

After God had in six days finished the Works of the first Creation, he
sanctified the Seventh Day, and commanded his People to sanctify it. But after
the Resurrection of Christ, instead of the Seventh Day from the beginning of
the Creation, the First Day of the Week was hallowed, and called emphatically,
the Lord's Day. And the Observation of it has been the universal practice of the
Christian Church. And I think my self bound to spend this day in an especial
attendance on God's Service; such as Prayer, Preaching Participation of the
Sacrament: Relieving the Poor, Meditating upon the Works of Creation and
Redemption, etc.

And on this day I have been taught, that I am forbidden all Worldly
Undertakings and Employments, vain Sports and Recreations, and all actions but
those of Piety, Mercy, Necessity and Decency.

Now these four first Commandments respect my Duty toward God; and the six that
follow regard my Neighbor and my self.

And the first of these six (which is the Fifth of the Ten) Commandments, may be
called the Commandment of Relations; For it teaches me first my Duty to my
Natural Parents, and that I am to honor them. Which implies, that I am to
fear, reverence, succor, and obey them. It secondly teaches me my Duty to my
Political Parents, namely, the King, and all in lawful Authorit^ under him:
Whom also I am to honor and obey. It (thirdly) teaches me my Duty to my
Ecclesiastical Parents, Spiritual Pastor and Teachers. And it likewise binds me
to carry my self lowly and reverently to all my betters. In short, I have been
taught, that this Commandment does concern all the mutual Duties among all
sorts and degrees of Inferiors and Superiors, from the King to the Master of
a Cottage. And there is an especial Promise annexed to this Precept, to
encourage all to obey it, in performing their respective Duties one to another.

In the Sixth Commandment, which concerns Man's life, all those things are
forbidden me which any way tend to the injury of the same; as Hatred, causless
and revengeful Anger, contrivance of Man's Death, occasions of, and actual and
wilful Murder. And at the same time this Commandment requires me, as far as I
am able, to preserve the life of Man; and that I sustain it with Food and
Raiment, that I prudently avoid all Dangers, and conscientiously fly from all
such Vices, whereby Humane Life is hazarded; and which are destructive both of
the Body and Soul of him that commits them. Such as Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
etc.

In the Seventh Commandment, which concerns a chaste Conservation, I am
forbidden all acts of Adultery, and Fornication, together with unlawful
Marriage. And likewise all such Thoughts, Looks, Attire, and Words, as prompt
and inveigle to Uncleanness. I have further been taught that by this
Commandment all such things are forbidden as may occasion any of these, as
Idleness, Excess in Eating and Drinking. So that on the contrary I am enjoined
to keep my Body in Temperance, Soberness, and Chastity: to preserve Modesty in
Thought, Behavior, and Apparel.

In the Eighth Commandment, which concerns Man's Estate, I am, as I have been
taught, forbidden all defraudation, or deceitful Stealth, Oppression, and
violent Robbery, Sacrilege, or pillaging of God; all Bribery and withholding
other men's dues, with all covetous desires.

And on the contrary, I am bound by virtue of this Command, to give to all
their Dues, to live in some lawful Calling, and therein to be diligent: to
restore that which has been stolen, to give Alms to the Poor, and to avoid the
Company of all such as would entice me to break this Law.

The Ninth Commandment, concerns Man's Good Name, and forbids me to lie, to
raise or receive, or to divulge any false or malicious Reports against my
Neighbor. It likewise forbids all groundless Suspicions, together with
suborning and encouraging of false Witnesses.

And on the other hand, it enjoins me to love and speak the Truth; to preserve
my own Reputation, and when it is seasonable to vindicate my own Innocence, and
the Innocence of my Neighbor, when I know either to be unjustly aspersed.

In the Last Commandment, which especially respects Man's Desires, I am
forbidden to covet my Neighbors Goods, of what nature or sort soever: And I am
required, to regulate my Affections: to restrain all sinful Desires; to be
content with my present Condition, to learn and labor truly to get mine own
living, and to do my Duty in that state of life unto which it has pleased God
to call me.

And now having given this account of the Ten Commandments, I leave it to your
upright Consideration, whether my knowledge of them be fufficient to qualify
me for the Holy Communion.

The Obedience I owe to these Precepts, is the next thing that importantly
concerns me. And here I openly confess, that it is not in my power to obey
God's Commandments, without his special Grace, but that if this be once shed in
my heart, it will enable me to obey them. And when my Obedience is true,
faithful, and sincere, though mixed with much weakness, imperfection, and many
sins, yet, (if therein I live not wilfully impenitent) I do unfeignedly believe
God will accept and Crown it.

But I have been often taught, that this special Grace of God cannot be
obtained but by diligent Prayer. Which you have told me is the Third General
Branch of my Christianity, and that it has for its Rule that Divine Form Christ
composed, and which from him is called The Lord's Prayer. And this consists of
a Preface, six Petitions, and a Conclusion: Of each of which I will now give
such an account as I have learned from you, beginning with the Preface, namely,
Our Father which art in Heaven:

Wherein I am taught to direct my Prayers to God, as to a Father whom I ought
to approach with holy Reverence, and with humble Confidence that he will hear
and grant what I pray for.

And to him only Prayers ought to be made, because he only is every where
present to receive them, and every way able to grant what is prayed for.

The Six Petitions now follow, whereof the Three first concern God's Glory: and
the Three last concern Man's Wants.

PETITION I. Hallowed be thy Name.
In this Petition I am taught to desire, and chiefly to endeavor the
glorification of God's Holy Name, which Name in general signifies God himself:
and in particular all his Titles, as Lord, Jehovah, etc. next, all his glorious
Attributes or Excellencies, together with every thing that has a peculiar
relation unto him, as his Word, his House, his Day, etc.

So that in this Petition I pray, That God would strike my heart with such an
Heavenly awe, that I may humbly reverence his great Name, and carry such a
respect to all things that relate unto him, and his Worship, as may manifest my
honor to his great Majesty: that my holy Profession be not blasphemed, but
glorified by my self and others.

PETITION II. Thy Kingdom come.
Divines tell me, and I heartily believe, That God has a Threefold Kingdom.

1. A Kingdom of Power, whereby he rules over all Creatures, even his
professed Enemies.

2. A Kingdom of Grace, whereby he rules in the hearts of his Children, by his
Word and Spirit.

3. A Kingdom of Glory, which is in Heaven. And in a more eminent manner shall
begin at the last Judgment, when Christ (as Man) shall deliver up the Kingdom
to God his Father: When all the Saints shall be taken in to Reign with him: And
o^ this Kingdom there shall be no end.

And in praying that God's Kingdom may come, I desire, that God would stablish
his Throne, and Rule for ever in my Heart: And by the Power of his Grace subdue
all those Rebellious Corruptions that exalt themselves against him: That the
Gospel may be settled where it is not received, that all the Ends of the Earth
may see the Salvation of Christ: That he would hasten the coming of his Kingdom
of Glory, and so consummate and accomplish the Kingdom of Grace.

PETITION III. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
I have been constantly Catechized to believe, That the Will of God is either
secret or revealed: and that I am to pay Obedience to them both: patiently
submitting to God's secret Will: and cheerfully performing, as far as I am
able, his Revealed Will; as it is set down in his Word.

And as the doing of God's Will, and not my own, is the matter of my Obedience,
so the manner of my Obedience is the Example of the Holy Angels in Heaven, who
execute the Commands of God with readiness, speed, faithfulness, and constancy.

So that in praying Thy Will be done, etc. I desire God to enable me by his
Grace chearfull^ to suffer God's Will in all hi^ Afflictions, and readily to
perform it in all his Commands And that God would give m^ of that Heavenly Zeal
to his Service, wherewith the blessed Angels are inspired: that I may obey his
Will, with the lik^ Warmth and Cheerfulness: and that following them in their
Obedience, while I am on Earth, I may be joined with them to sing Eternal
Praises in Heaven.

PETITION IV. Give us this Day our daily bread.
This is the first of the Three Petitions that concerns Man's Wants, in which I
am taught to profess my dependence upon God for this present life, and every
thing that supports it. For by Bread I have been taught ^o understand all
outward Com^orts necessary for this life, and that I am to pray that by direct
and honest means I may enjoy ^o much of this Worlds good, as ^s convenient and
agreeable for my present Condition and just Occasions. And by saying [daily] I
intimate my Contentedness with present necessaries, and my purpose to continue
daily Prayer for them. And by thus Praying, I cast my Cares upon God: and
declare that only from his Fatherly hand I expect the good things I want, and
have the good things I enjoy; and that by his Blessings the Creatures aare
sanctified to my moderate and thankful use.

I likewise under the term of daily Bread pray, That God would give me that
continual supply of his Grace, which may sustain and nourish my Soul unto
Eternal life.

PETITION V. And forgive us our Trespases, etc.
By Trespasses, or Debts, an^ meant my Sins, for which I a^ daily to beg
Pardon, and to be seech God, not to exact of m^ the Penalty of them; but to
accept of Christ's satisfaction fo^me, and for his sake to discharge me from
the Debt, which I owe to his Justice. And that I may not forfeit God's Pardon,
by denying mine to my Brethren; ^ pray for those Bowels of Compassion to
others, which I stand in so much need of from God. My forgiving others their
Trespasses, being here used as an Argument to move God to forgive me mine. And
if I who am prone to revenge, can by God's Grace forgive others: How much more
will God, who is infinite in Mercy, forgive me! But if I ^o not forgive, I
shall not be for^iven.

PETITION VI. And lead us not into Temp^^tion, but deliver us from E^^ll.
As in the former Petition I ^m taught to pray for delive^ance from the guilt
and condem^ation of sin, so in this I pray ^o be delivered from the power ^f
sin. And seeing I am unable ^o withstand those multitudes of Temptations that
daily assault me, ^ beg of God either to restrain them, or in his faithfulness
not to ^ffer me to be tempted above that I am able, but in all my Temptations
to make me a way ^o escape, that I be not overcome by them. And because ^^tan
is that Evil One which always tempting me to sin, I beseech God to deliver me
from him, and from being taken his Sn^^es.

The CONCLUSION. For thine is the Kingdom, Power, and the Glory, for e^ and
ever. Amen.
Some tell me that these Wo^ are no Essential Part of Prayer, but an addition
wh^ I may use or omit, without a Injury to this Sacred Form.

But for my own part, I the these words ought to concla^ this and all my
Prayers; ^^cause they contain an Acknoledgment of God's Majesty, Po^er, Glory,
and Eternity, wh^ are chief Motives to pray, a which give life and spirit the
Duty. For these Excell^^cies being all in Him to wh^ I pray, they are as so
many pro^ to my Faith, and assurances t^ I shall be heard.

For it is a principal Reason for my Praying to God, That his is the Kingdom,
and that he Rules over all the World; and that as a good and loving King, he is
easy to be entreated by his Subjects; ready to protect and supply them amidst
all their Wants and Adventures. And by my acknowledgment of God's Kingdom, I
oblige my self to obey his Laws, and submit to his Government: So that while I
retain any one Rebel-lust out of his Obedience, I cannot be thought to be in
earnest, when I say, Thy Kingdom come, and Thine is the Kingdom.

The Power.
The Belief of God's Power and All Sufficiency, is a second Reason to pray unto
him. It were to no purpose to make a Petition to One who is not able to bestow
what I desire. For be the Will never so ready, yo^ where Ability is wanting,
the Petitioner is never the nearer t^ obtain his Request. But seein^ God is my
Father, he cannon want Will; and seeing he is a so my King, he cannot wan^
Power to give what I ask him Now seeing that the Bowels of Father, and the Arm
of a Kin^ are both in him to whom my Supplication is directed; I not onl^ may,
but justly ought, to rel^ upon him for all things necessar^ for this Life, and
the Life t^ come. And when I fail t^ place my whole and final Dependence on
God, instead o^ honoring, I reproach him, when I acknowledge his Power.

The Glory.
The Glory of God, as it encourages my Prayers to him, so it is that of which
himself is most tender: My Glory I will not give to another. This is the aim of
all his own Dispensations, and ought to be the end of all my Faith and
Practice. And when I tell God, that his granting my Prayers is for his Glory, I
lay so strong an Obligation upon him, as methinks he cannot resist. But if the
Honor of all I have or am, be not as it ought to be, ascribed unto God, from
whom I receive all; If I impute any thing to my self, or my own Procurement, I
cannot say as I should, Thine is the Glory.

For Ever and Ever.
This is my acknowledgment of God's Eternity, that he is the same yesterday, to
day, and for Ever. His Kingdom shall have no End, and his Power and Glory is
not like that of Earthly Princes, fading and transitory; but Eternal without
Beginning and End. Were I to make my Requests to a mutable and a mortal God,
one subject to Change or Ending, I should want one of the most concluding
Arguments for Prayer. But seeing he, whom I Petition, is for Ever and Ever the
same merciful God, who has always heard, and does still hear the Prayers of
Poor Penitent Sinners: For ever a King, and so obliged to help his Subjects;
for ever a Potentate, and so able to do them good; and one, for whose Glory it
is to grant my Requests; I may with comfort conclude, that this Almighty, most
Merciful and Everlasting Father, will hear, and do for me, though not always
according to my wish and desire, yet always as he shall see most convenient for
me.

Amen.
With this I am told the Jews used to close all their Prayers; and that the
Christian Church enjoined the People in their Liturgies to conclude all their
Prayers with this also. And it was thought of so great importance, that it was
called the Seal of Prayer. And by my hearty and zealous saying Amen to what is
prayed for, I express --

1. My faithful assurance and reliance upon God, that he will hear me as he has
promised. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee: Ask and ye
shall have.

2. I express by my saying [Amen] with the Congregation, that I agree with
them, and that we all do present but one common Vote: that with one Heart and
one Voice we all petition God. And I have this to encourage me in this Harmony
and Consent, That if God will grant the Requests of Two or Three gathered
together in his Name, he will much more lend his Ear to a pious Multitude, to a
whole Congregation.

3. My humble and zealous saying Amen, does testify my Attention to the
Prayers: that I am not asleep, or have my Thoughts wandering. And indeed one way
to keep out drowsiness, and distracted, idle, and impertinent Thoughts at the
hearing of Prayers, is the Consideration that at the end thereof I am to say
Amen; that is, I am, as it were, to set my Seal to what has been prayed for,
and that by so doing I challenge a share therein. And indeed if I neglect this,
I can scarce expect any part or interest in the Prayers that are made.

To conclude, In this word [Amen] all the Prayer is summed up and abridg'd: and
it was, as I have been taught, of such singular importance with the Primitive
Christians, that they spoke it with so great Zeal, as that he who heard their
Voice would have thought it had been a roaring Sea, or Thunder; which should
awaken my drowsiness, and move me with Vigor and Warmth, to declare my fervent
desires to have those Prayers heard of God, to which I say such an earnest,
hearty, humble, and zealous Amen.

The Doctrine of the Sacraments.
In the Creed I have been taught that God by his Son has redeemed me and all
Mankind; and in the Doctrine of the Sacraments (which makes the last part of my
Catechism) I have been taught, how that by them God does exhibit and seal unto
Believers, that Redemption which Christ purchased for them.

And as to the Number of these Sacraments, I have learned they are but Two, and
only Two, namely, Baptism and the Lord's Supper. And I am convinced, that all
Men ought to receive these Two, who desired to be saved: Which I do not so
understand, as if God could not save without them; but that they are the
Instrumental Means, and ordinary Seals, by which God has promised to convey
and assure Christ's Merits to me, and commanded me this way to receive them; so
that wilfully to neglect, or to want the Sacraments when they may be had, is to
cast aside God's Ordinance, which every Christian is bound to obey. And as I
have been taught, so I look upon the Sacraments, as the Conditional Means which
God requires to be observed of them unto whom he imparts his Grace: Not as if
this Grace, whereof a Worthy Receiver partakes, were a Natural or Supernatural
Quality in the Sacrament, but that it is from God himself, which is the Author
of the Sacrament; so that Grace is received from God by means of the Sacraments.

And this I have learned not only from you who are our Parish-Divine, but also
from Mr. Hooker, whose Judgment I have heard much praised by many of our best
Clergy. This (says he) is the Necessity of Sacraments: That saving Grace,
which Christ Originally is, or has for the General Good of his whole Church,
by Sacraments he severally derives into every Member thereof. Sacraments serve
as the Instruments of God to that End and Purpose. Moral Instruments, the Use
whereof is in our Hands, the Effect in his: For the Use we have his express
Commandment; for the Effect his Conditional Promise: So that without our
Obedience to the one there is no apparent assurance of the other: As
contrariwise where the Signs and Sacrament of his Grace, are not either through
Contempt unreceiv'd or not received with Contempt We are not to doubt, but they
really give what they promise and are what they signify.

I fully acquiesce (as to this Point) in the Judgment of this Considerable
Author. The Sacraments of the Christian Church, are, as I said, Two; namely,
Baptism and the Lord's Supper. By Baptism I have my Admission and Entrance into
the Church; and it is the washing of Regeneration, by which I am new born: And
by the Lord's Supper (to which I now earnestly desire to be admitted) I believe
I shall be nourished, preserved, and grow up in Christ. And these Two
Sacraments I am sure were of Christ's own appointment. And seeing that by the
one I am entered into the Christian Profession, and by the other I am therein
strengthened and made perfect; I see no neep of any more.

And not to trouble my self with the secular use of the Word Sacrament, it
serves my turn to understand it in the Sense of the Church; which tells me it
is an outward and visible Sign of an inward and spiritual Grace, Ordained by
Christ himself, and a means whereby we receive the same Grace, and a Pledge to
assure us thereof. Now, this Description of a Sacrament I have been often told,
is the uneasiest Point in all my Catechism: I will therefore, in order to be
better informed, set down my sense of this Description.

And first, By an Outward and Visible Sign, I understand that which presents
its self to my Eye, and represents somewhat else to my Understanding. As for
Example, in Baptism the Outward and Visible Sign is Water, wherein the Person
is dipped or sprinkled. And the inward and spiritual Grace which is thereby
signified, is a Death unto Sin, and a New Birth unto Righteousness, both which
by the means of Baptism are conveyed to the Baptized.

I have heard you, Catechizing upon this Point, declare that it was the ancient
manner of Baptism, to put the Person baptized under Water, and then to take him
out again; and that this was done to signify his dying unto Sin, and rising
again to Newness of Life.

The first declared the weakening, the deading, and putting off of sin: The
latter showed the performance of those Actions of Men, who being quickened by
the Spirit, endeavor to serve God all their days in Righteousness and true
Holiness.

And in the Lord's Supper there is also an Outward and Visible sign, namely,
Bread and Wine, and an inward Part or Thing signified, to wit, the Body and
Blood of Christ, which are spiritually received by all Worthy Communicants, and
which being so received, their Souls are strengthened and refreshed; and the
same Effect is wrought in the Inner Man, by the Holy Mysteries which is in the
Outward by these Elements. And as strength is from Bread, and cheerfulness from
Wine; so I hope, and expect, that when I am admitted to the Lord's Supper, my
Heart will be established by Grace, and my Soul strengthened, and my Conscience
made cheerful and light with the Blessings and Benefits that the Sacrament will
exhibit, seal, and convey unto me; still supposing that I am in some competent
measure fit to communicate. And in order to be so, I have learned from my
Catechism, that these following Duties are required of me, namely,
Self-Examination, Repentance, Faith, Thankfulness and Charity.

And for my assistance in the Knowledge and Examination of these Graces, I have
chosen The Introduction to the Sacrament, written by Doctor Addison, Dean of
Lit^^field, on purpose for such if Capacities as my own: And after this
familiar account of my knowledge in Religion, you (to whom I commit the care of
my Soul) shall judge me competent to be admitted to the Lord's Table, I shall
esteem my Condition happy, as being persuaded, that I have no other means to
repair my Vow of Baptism, which by numerous ways I have broken, and to renew
the Covenant I made with God when I was Christened; and to be restored to all
the Benefits of Baptism, forfeited by the sins I have committed since I was
baptized; I say, I am persuaded that I cannot obtain these things by any other
Appointed means, but by a due receiving the Holy Communion.

The Young Persons Devotions upon his first Admission to the LORD'S TABLE.
Expostulation.
Will thou then, O God, vouchsafe me to partake of that which my Soul has so
long thirsted after! Shall I this day be admitted a Guest at that Divine
Banquet, from which my own unworthiness ought for ever to exclude me! Will thou
be so gracious to a miserable sinner, as to accept of a renewing of the
Covenant I made in Baptism, after that by numerous ways I have violated and
broken it! Then, Lord, I will not absent my self, but draw near, hoping to be
found in the number of those whom thou do invite, even of those who truly and
earnestly repent of their sins, who are in Love and Charity with their
Neighbors; who intend to lead a New Life, to follow thy Commandments, and to
walk from henceforth in thy Holy Ways. For upon these, and no Terms else, do I
come to the Holy Sacrament; which yet I dare not receive, till with all
Humility of Soul and Body, I have prostrated my self, and made Confession of my
sins.

The Confession.
ALmighty God, Father o^ our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of
al^ Men; I acknowledge and bewail my manifold Sins and Wickedness, which I from
time to time most grievously have committed by Thought, Word and Deed, against
thy Divine Majesty, provoking most justly thy Wrath and Indignation against me.
I do earnestly repent, and am heartily sorry for these my Misdoings, the
Remembrance of them is grievous to me; the burden of them is intolerable. Have
mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, most merciful Father; for thy Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, forgive me all that is past, and grant that I may ever
hereafter serve and please thee in Newness of Life, to the Honor and Glory of
thy Name through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Prayer for Pardon.
FOrgive me, O Lord, whatsoever I have transgrest against thee, from the time
of my Baptism, even to this very Moment, whether against Knowledge, or through
Ignorance, at home or abroad, sleeping or waking, in Thoughts, Words, or Deeds:
Whether occasioned through the fiery Darts of my Ghostly Enemy, or by the
unclean Desires of my own Heart; Have Mercy upon me, and grant me pardon
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Remember not the sins of my Youth, nor my Transgressions: According to thy
Mercy remember me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord.

Lord, the sins of these my Younger Days are many, the Breaches innumerable,
wherewi^^ I have ignorantly or foolishl^ for want of Knowledge or
Consideration, offended against thee* Lay them not, I beseech thee, t^ my
Charge, but of thy ow^ free Mercy and Compassion to (...) wretched sinner, be
thou pleased to be reconciled unto me, an^ seal the same to my Soul by thi^
blessed Sacrament.

For thy Name sake, O Lord pardon my iniquity, for it is great*

I have many ways greatly sinned against thee, and have no ground of hope for
Mercy, but only from thy free abundant Pardon, which I know exceeds my Sins,
and for which I am the more abundantly qualified, by how much my state is more
truly Miserable. On the account therefore of thy Free Pardon to the greatest
sinners, so they be truly penitent, I beseech thee be reconciled unto me, who
this day unfeignedly repent, and turn to thee.

For Purifying the Heart.
ALmighty God, unto whom all Hearts be open, all Desires known, and from whom
no Secrets are hid; Cleanse the Thoughts of my Heart by the inspiration of thy
Holy Spirit, that I may sincerely love thee, and worthily magnify thy Holy
Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, give me Grace this day to receive the blessed Body and Blood of thy
Son, my most blessed Savior, into a Clean, Charitable and Thankful Heart, that
it may perfectly cleanse me from all Dregs of sin; that being made clean, it
may nourish me in Faith, Hope, Charity, and Obedience, with all other Fruits of
spiritual life and growth in thee: That in all the future Course of my Life, I
may show my self such an engrafted Member into the Body of thy Son, that I may
nev^^ be drawn to do any thing the may dishonor his Name Gran^ this, O Lord, I
beseech the^ eve^ for his Merit and Mercy sake. Amen

For Self-Examination.
ALmighty God, and most merciful Father, give me, I beseech thee, that Grace,
that I may duly examine the inmost of my heart, and my most secret thoughts
that I may know how I stand before thee. Lord, I confess all my sins, and my
unworthiness to present my self at thine Altar. But thou, and thou only can
forgive sin, and give true Repentance; do both, gracious Father, and them
behold I am clean to come unto thee. Lord, make me a worthy Receiver of that
for which I come, even Christ, and Forgiveness of sin in Christ; and that for
his own Mercy-sake and thine. Amen.

For belief of Christ's Presence without disputing the manner.
O Lord God, hear my Prayers. And while others dispute, grant that I may
steadfastly believe, behold I quarrel not the Words of thy Son my Savior's
blessed Institution: I know his Words are no gross unnatural Conceit, but they
are Spirit and Life, and supernatural. He has promised me, if I come worthily,
that I shall receive his most precious Body and Blood, with all the benefits of
his Passion, without amusing my self then about the manner of receiving Him.
Lord, make me able, make me worthy to receive Him: For grant me this Favor,
and I know I can no more die Eternally, then his Body and Blood can again die
and be shed. Lord, so wash and cleanse my Soul, that I may now and at all times
else come prepared by hearty Prayers and Devotion, and be made worthy by the
Grace of this blessed Sacramen^ the Pledge and Earnest of Etern^^ Life, in the
Merits of the same Holy Jesus, who gave his Body an^ Blood for me. Amen.

Immediately before the sight of t^^ Bread.
O Lord God, how I receive the Body and Blood of my mo^ blessed Savior, the
price of m^ Redemption, is the very wonde^ of my Soul: Yet that I do receiv^
them, is my firm and constant belief. At this time they are graciously tendered
to me and my Faith Lord, make me a worthy Receive^ and be it unto me according
to m^ Savior's Word. Amen.

Looking upon the Bread and Win^ say,
O Thou that sit on high with the Father, and art here invisibly present
with us; come and sanctify these thy Creatures of Bread and Wine, and those by
whom ^hey are to be received. Amen.

As the Bread is coming to you, say,
LEt thy Body, I beseech thee, O Lord Jesu Christ, which was given for me,
preserve my Bo^y and Soul unto Everlasting Life; and grant that I may take and
eat ^n Remembrance that thou have died for me, and feed on thee in my Heart by
Faith with Thanksgiving. Amen.

As the Wine is brought, say,
LEt thy Blood, I beseech thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for me,
preserve my Body and Soul unto Everlasting life: And grant I may drink this in
Remembrance thy Blood was shed for me, and be Thankful. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THe Author of this Disco^^ being certified, that m^ Young Persons have made
choice The Introduction to the Sac^^ment, Written by the Reverend D^ Addison,
Dean of Litchfield, ((...) now Published with Devotions) their Guide to the
Communion-Tal^ as being best suited to their Cap^cities. He thought it conveni^
that this small Piece be Printed a Volume fit to be bound up with (...) said
Introduction, because it m^ serve as a Prelude or Preparate^ Discourse to the
same. And I ha^^ taken care to Print it accordingly.

Farewell. W. C.

The Introduction to the Sacrament.

Engraving of church sermon Engraving of prayer London Printed for W: Crook at
ye Green Dragon without Temple Bar.

F. H. Van. Houe. Sa^



An Introduction TO THE SACRAMENT: OR, A Short, Plain, and Safe way to the
Communion Table.

BEING An Instruction for the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper.

Collected for, and familiarly addressed to every particular Communicant.

By L. Addison, D. D. Dean of Lichfield.

To which is added, The Communicants Assistant: BEING A Collection of Devotions
to that purpose.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar,
near Devereux-Court, 1686.

IMPRIMATUR,

Jo. Battely, Reverendissimo P. ac Dno. Dno. Willielmo Archi-Ep. Cantuar. a
sacris domesticis.
Ex aedib. Lambeth. Apr. 1. 1686.
TO THE Right Worshipful. ROB. HYDE, Esquire My Truly Worthy, And much Honored
Patron.
SIR,
THE following Papers were at first only designed for the Help and Service of
my own Parishioners, (your Tenants;) and being resolved to expose them to
public Censure, I needed not deliberate to whom they were due; nor did any
Thought interpose, but this one, That they were not worth your eye or owning.
However, I conceived they might serve as a Witness of my deep apprehension of
your Generous and Friendly Patronage.

And therefore, with all heartiness and height of Gratitude, I put these.
Papers into your hands, hoping that when you read them over, you may meet with
something besides my Frailties, even those Truths which will make you for ever
happy.

And now, Sir, being no great Friend to the common Vanity of Letters
Dedicatory, pardon me, that for making Court to you, I humbly apply my self to
your gracious Maker, That you may enjoy Health and Prosperity, and be long,
long happy in the inviolable Affection of that Honorable Lady, your truly
Noble and Pious Consort: and that the God of Blessings may daily bless you both.

Your most obliged and most humble Servant.

An Advertisement OF THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
HAving twice printed the following Introduction with Success; I now, purely
for the Public Good, commit it the third time to the Press. In which Edition,
I have earnestly solicited the Author for Enlargements, but found him wholly
deaf to any such Proposal; Assuring himself he had in this small Book made good
its Title, and he hopes God will make good the Design.

However, I have prevailed with him to add a Collection of Devotions, inferior
perhaps to none of this kind; which, with the Reader, he humbly recommends to
Gods blessing.

As it was before, without the Devotions, it was so well liked by a great many
Ministers, that they gave them by dozens at a^ time to their poor Parishioners,
being found to be the fittest and the most plain to the meanest Capacities; yet
very useful to all who desire worthily to be partakers of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, I hope it will now prove more beneficial to thee.

W. C.

Books Printed for W. Crook, at the Sign of the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar near Devereux Court.
DIVINITY.
1. SIxty one Sermons, preached mostly upon public occasions, by Adam
Littleton, D. D. Folio, Price 16 s.

2. Brevis demonstratio, being the truth of the Christian Religion, proved by
Reason, 12o. price bd. 10. d.

3. The Primitive Institution, showing the antiquity and usefulness of
Catechizing, together with its suitableness to heal the distempers of the
Church, by L. Addison, D. D. price 1 s. 6 d.

4. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a sober religious man, found drowned in
a Pit, in octavo, price bound 1 s.

5. Mr. Howel's Visitation Sermon before the Bishop of Chichester, 4o. price 6
d.

6. Dr. Hascard's three Sermons in quarto.

7. Mr. Manningams four Sermons in quarto.

8. A Sermon preached at the Savoy in French, and since printed i^ French and
English, twelves, price bound, 8 d.

9. A modest Plea for the Clergy, wherein is considered the reason why the
Clergy are so contemned and neglected, by L. A. D. D. and Dean of Lichfeild,
price 1 s. 6 d.

10. Hugo Grotius, his Catechism, Greek, Latin, and English, with a Praxis of
all the Greek words therein contained, in 8o. price bd. 2 s.

11 The Spirit of Prophecy, proving that Christ and his Apostle were Prophets:
written by the directions of, and recommended to the Press by the right
reverend Father in God, Peter, Lord Bishop o^ Ely, in 8o. price 3 s.

12. The King-killing Doctrine o^ the Jesuits, in a sincere Discourse to the
French King; written by a Roman Catholic, in 40. price 1 s.

13. Justifying Faith; or, the Faith by which the Just do live, together with
the excellency of the Common Prayer Book, in 8o. price bound 1 s.

14. Mercy Triumphant, or the Kingdom of Christ enlarged beyond the narrow
bounds which have been wont to be set to it. By Ed. Lane.

15. Du Moulin's Reflections reverberated, being a full Answer to the damning
Doctrine of Dr. Lewis Du Moulin: also, a Confutation of Edmund Hickeringill's
railing against the Ecclesiastical Courts. By E. Lane, in quarto, 1 s. 6 d.

16. Responsio Valedictoria ad secundam Sandii Epistolam, etc. per Sam.
Gardener, S. T. D. in 8o. price 1 s. 6 d.

17. An Introduction to the Sacrament, or, a most plain and easy way to the
Communion Table, in 24. by L. A. D. D. Dean of Lichfeild, price bound 6 d.

18. Chillingworth's Protestant Religion, a safe way to Salvation. Fol.

19. A Discourse about Conscience, relating to the present Differences among
us, in opposition to both extremes of Popery and Fanatism, in quarto, price 6 d.

20. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience, delivered on the 30. of January, by Jo.
Ellesby, Vicar of Chiswick, quarto.

21. Praise and Adoration, a Sermon preached on Trinity Sunday, 4o.

22. A short view of the most gracious Providence of God, in the Restoration
and Succession. May 29. 4o.

23. A solemn Humiliation for the Murder of King Charles the First. January
30. quarto.

24. A Sermon preached at Hantshire Feast on Shrove Tuesday. 4o.

25. Two Discourses, the one of Truth, the other showing Popery the Cause of
Atheism. In 8o.

All these five last by Mr. Thomas Maningham, late Fellow of New College
Oxford, now Preacher at the Rolls.

AN Introduction TO THE. SACRAMENT.
I.
BEing in your behalf to enquire into the Duties you are to discharge, when you
come to the Holy Sacrament; before I de^cend to a distinct handling ^hereof,
give me leave first to ^ind you of the end of your ^oming thither: which I take
(...) be none other, than chiefly to renew the Covenant yo^ made with God in
Baptism, who is pleased in great mercy to admit you to the Lords Table, in
order to repair you^ Vow of Baptism, after that by numerous ways you have
broken it. And when it shall b^ your care worthily to Comm^nicate, God will
vouchsafe graciously to accept you, and i^ the Lords Supper to restore yo^ to
all the forfeited benefits o^ your Baptism.

II.
Seeing then that the renewing of your Covenant is the great business of your
coming to the Blessed Communion, it is highly reasonable, that you have a fu^^
and clear understanding of the nature of that Covenant which you are to renew.
And in o^der hereunto, you are to kno^ i^ general, that the Covenant to ^e
renewed by you, is that into which you entered at Baptism: ^here the Covenant
God at first ^ade with Mankind (which is ^e foundation of all Christia^^ty) is
applied to every par^^cular person, who at Baptism ^^lemnly give up their Names
^^to Christ, and enter upon ^^e profession of his most Holy ^eligion. And to
the end you ^ay more clearly comprehend ^is important Truth, it is con^enient
that you a little reflect upon that double Covenant God ^ade with Adam, as he
was ^ot only the Patriarch, but ^^presentative of all Mankind.

III.
Where you may find that the ^^^st Covenant was made with ^dam immediately upon
his ^eation, when he was in his flourishing Integrity, and indue not barely
with a perfect kno^ledge of his Duty, but with sufficient power of performin^
it. When Adam (I say) was in most excellent State and C^^dition, God made an
Agreeme^^ with him to this purpose; v^ That if he took care to con^^nue in
Obedience to his Mak^ then his Knowledge and Streng^ should remain; and after a
lo^^ and pleasant life upon Earth, last he should either put off Body, or have
it together w^ his Soul, taken up into Heaven and therein both be happy a^
glorious to all Eternity: ^ if he disobeyed, and so br^ this Covenant, he was
to the perfect knowledge of Duty, and his strength of ^^fectly discharging it;
and ^ also to be subject to temp^ death, which is a separation the Soul from
the Body ^ time; and to death eternal, which is a banishment from God's
gracious presence for ever. And as upon his breach ^f Covenant Adam was liable
(...) the first sort of Death, and (...) the appointed time suffered (...); so
had he likewise under^one the second kind of Death, God in his unspeakable
mer^^ had not come to new Agree^ent with him. Now all that ^u need to know
concerning ^e first Covenant, is, (1.) That ^e Condition thereof was won^^rful
easy for Adam to have served, seeing no more was ^^uired of him than an
absti^^^ce from one Tree only in (...) Garden where God had ^ced him; which
Restraint ^ld not be grievous, seeing was allowed a freedom of the rest. (2.)
That A^, at his Wife's instigation, of the forbidden Tree, and by eating
thereof, broke (...) first Covenant; the effe^^ whereof were no milder the the
loss both of the Knowled^ and Ability of doing what G^^ required of him. For
imme^ately upon his transgress^ God's Commandment, the li^^ that was in Adam
became d^ and his Strength (like Sa^sons upon the cutting off of Locks) was
extremely we^ned; so that he became feeble and defective, and ^^serably
crippled both in his ^^derstanding and Will, that could neither clearly disce^
nor exactly execute his D^^ (3.) You are to know, t^^ all men being in the
loins Adam, were infected with sin, and like him, became ^^^stitute of a right
understa^^ing of their Duty, and Abi^ to discharge it; backward Good, and prone
to Evil: ^^mane Nature upon Adam 's Fall becoming like a sick Stomach, which
does not only loath what is wholesome, but lust after that which ^s quite
otherwise.

IV.
But when Adam by Disobedi^nce had forfeited the benefits ^f the first, God was
pleased to make with him a second Covenant; and therein to accept of another,
to pay the Debts and ^erform the Duties in his stead, ^or which he had made
himself ^together unable and insolvent. and this is that Covenant which only
now concerns you, and which at the Communion ^ou are to renew, and whereof ^ou
ought to have a full and ^ear understanding: for it ^ould sound very oddly for
a ^an to pretend a most solemn ^newing of he knows not what!

V.
Now in tracing out the ^^ture of this Covenant, you w^ find it was made with
all Mankind in Adam immediately (...) on his Fall: I say, immediat^^ upon his
Fall; for consider^ the great love God ever b^ Man, you may imagine (...) would
not suffer our Great ^ rent to lie long under the ^^^turing reflections and
hellish pa^^ with which his Conscience^ laden by the consideration his sin,
and which have e^ been found to be the most ^^tural effects of doing vitious^
but that he presently relie^ his afflicted mind, by entr^ into a gracious
Compact w^ him, and showing him how and his Offspring were to saved from that
destruction had brought upon both. ^ the first revelation of this Covenant is
met with in Genesis 3.15. which with greater plainness is repeated, Genesis 22.17,
18. compared with Genesis 12.3. and Genesis 18.18. The contents of which Texts, the
Son of Sirach calls the Blessing of all Men and the Covenant, Ecclesiasticus
44.22.

VI.
And seeing, as has been said, that the great business of your coming to the
Lords Table, is to renew the Covenant of your Baptism, which you have broken;
(which Covenant of Baptism is no other than the second Covenant made with
Mankind in general, applied to you in particular) you are to understand, that a
Covenant (as we now consider it) is a mutual Agreement betwixt God and Man,
consisting of Mercies ^ God's part made over to Man and of Duties (or
Conditions on Man's part, required by Go^ So that it is necessary for yo^ to
know,

1. What the Mercies are which on God's part are mad^ over to Man.

2. What the Conditions are which on Man's part are required by God.

VII.
And first, as to the Mercies which on God's part are made over to Man in the
second Covenant, the sum thereof is the Seed of the Woman, or the sending
Christ to take upon him the nature of Man, and to be as a second Adam to supply
what was wanting in the first, and to perform that sinless Obedience which was
the Condition of the first Covenant; he being both in Birth and Conversation
absolutely innocent. And though the thus sending of Christ (the second Person
of the ineffable Trinity) be the abridgement of all the Mercies of the second
Covenant; yet under this Title many Benefits are contained. For you are not to
imagine that the Son of God came only to gaze upon the Miseries, and to condole
the Wretchedness of that Nature he had taken, or to pass by us as the Priest
and Levite did the wounded Traveller: but with the good Samaritan, he bound up
our Sores, and provided us of all those means of recovery whereof we were
utterly destitute, and put us in a right way of being and continuing healthy.
And this he did,

VIII.
First, By making known unto you, and as many as believe on him, the whole Will
of God* assuring all such as fail not to do it, that they shall meet with ^
most gracious acceptance, and bountiful reward. During the time of Christ's
troublesome Pilgrimage upon Earth, you know it was one chief part of his
Employment to give such Commands and Counsels, as by their own inward goodness
were sufficient to approve themselves to man's rational nature. His Doctrine
wore no Veil, nor was it wrapped up in Types and Shadows; but both in its
Perspicuity and Justice, Christ showed himself to be the Son of Righteousness,
Mal. 4.2. He would not suffer his Gospel, like Moses Law, to consist in Carnal,
but Spiritual Observances; not in cleansing the Pollutions of the Body, but in
purifying the Affections of the Soul. And by giving a Law proper to this end,
he proved himself to be a true Prophet, whose work is not only to foretell what
shall be hereafter (though in this strictest sense of the word, Christ was so
far forth a Prophet as was needful for his Church) but to instruct what men are
to do; to expound, signify, and make known the mind and good pleasure of God.
And this he did in his Sermons, especially in that on the Mount; wherein he
has shown upon what terms eternal Blessedness is to be had under the Gospel.
He also revealed some Commands of God, which were not before so expressly
revealed; and expounding such as were so obscurely revealed in the Old
Testament, that men thought not themselves fully obliged to obey them.

IX.
And as a Prophet too, or sovereign Institutor of the Church, Christ appointed
Ceremonies and Discipline, or Sacraments and Ecclesiastical Censures: All which
he delivered either in Parables, or plain Propositions. To which you are to
give a willing and full Assent, a cheerful and ready Obedience; not despising
or neglecting the use of whatever he has thought fit to prescribe. And if you
cannot at first sight so clearly comprehend some Mysteries of the Gospel, your
Reason (which in it self is proud and carnal) must be subject to Faith, which
can easily wade through those depths, which to Reason are unpassable. Above
all, give diligent attention to Christ as your great Prophet, being ready and
desirous to be duly informed of that Will of God which he came to reveal.

X.
And as the first Mercy of the second Covenant was to have Christ to be a
Prophet in the sense now mentioned, so another benefit thereof was to have him
to be your Priest. You meet in Scripture with two Orders of Priesthood, viz.
one of Aaron, and another of Melchizedeck. The Office of the Aaronical
Priesthood consisted chiefly in Sacrificing, not Excluding Blessing of the
People. Genesis 14.18.
But the Office of the Melchizedechian Priesthood, was principally to bless;
not denying but that it had also a liberty to sacrifice. Christ was a Priest
according to both these Orders.

XI.
And first, he was a Priest according to the Order of Aaron; by virtue whereof,
he offered up himself upon the Cross; and by that Sacrifice of himself once
offered, he completed the whole Work of Satisfaction for Sin, and put an end
to all the old legal Sacrifices; (which had indeed an Eye to this Satisfaction,
but were not able to accomplish it.) To satisfy God for our sins, not only
that one of Adam, but all the sins of all Mankind that truly repent and amend;
and by this means to obtain for man Forgiveness of sins, the Favor of God, and
Redemption from Hell and eternal Damnation; which was the punishment due to
sin. And all this he did by his death. So that if you truly and heartily repent
of, and forsake your sins, you shall receive the benefits of that Sacrifice of
Christ, which he offered as a Priest; and your sins, though never so many and
heinous, shall be forgiven you, and you shall be saved from those everlasting
Punishments which are due for them.

XII.
Secondly, Christ is a Priest according to the Order of Melchizedeck: and
though he did not enter upon this till after he was risen from the dead, yet it
shall not end until the Consummation of all things. His Aaronical Preisthood
expired with himself upon the Cross; but he remains a Priest for ever after the
Order of Melchizedeck. And as the Office of this Priesthood consisted in
Blessing and praying for the People, (as you may collect from Genesis 14.18.) it
belongs also unto Christ* God having sent him to bless you, as St. Peter
speaks, Acts 3.26. And the following words declare, that this Blessing consists
in turning every one from his iniquity. And those excellent means used by
Christ for this end (which ought to be reckoned for the greatest Blessings) are
(1.) A Succession of Priests, (an Holy Order of men) whom he continually
employs by their Ministry to work in men's hearts a sincere Obedience to the
Gospel. (2.) A giving to all humble Christians strength to enable them to
overcome sin. (3.) His interceding with God for his Servants, that they may
continue in well doing. And as he did this last while he was upon Earth,
praying that his Disciples Faith might not fail: so he still pursues the same
Office of praying for the Church, now that he is ascended up into Heaven;
where, sitting at the right hand of God, he makes request for us, Romans 8.34.
And it is your duty, as a Christian, to comply with Christ herein, and to be
willing to be thus blessed by him, in being turned from your sins: and not to
resist his Prayers and Intercessions, not to render all his Blessings, the
means of Repentance, void and fruitless, by your wilful continuance in
iniquity. But when you shall use these Blessings to the end they are designed
by your Savior, and shall cease to do evil, and learn to do good, not
expecting Forgiveness, or Salvation, upon other terms than Christ has
propounded them; when you shall be careful to run diligently the Race Jesus has
set before you; then may you expect to receive the Prize, even a Crown that
fades not, which God the righteous Judge shall set upon your Temples; not for
your own, but the Merits of your High Priest: who according to the Order of
Aaron offered himself a Sacrifice; and according to the Order of Melchizedeck,
blesses and prays for you.

XIII.
And as the second Mercy of the second Covenant is, thus to have Christ for
your Priest; so the third is, to have him for your King. And he exercises this
Supreme Office by reigning in your heart by his Holy Spirit, (if you do not
resist and quench it) which gives you strength to overcome Temptations to sin;
and enables you to do what God requires of you. And that you might have no
pretense to refuse the Kingly Government of Christ, as too heavy and difficult,
he has made his Yoke easy, and Burden light; having taken off from the
hardness of the Law first given to Adam, and instead of that sinless Obedience,
or the never committing the least sin upon pain of death (which was required of
him) he now looks for no more than your honest and hearty Endeavor to do what
you are able, and accepts of sincere Repentance where you fail or miscarry. And
it being the gracious nature of Christ's Kingly Office thus to govern and rule
you, and to subdue your Enemies, it would be something worse, if possible, than
disingenuity and ingratitude, to disobey, and hold out any disloyal passion or
rebel-lust against him; not to vow and pay unto him perfect Loyalty and entire
Allegiance, not to entrust him with your Protection; not to have Peace or War
with any but his Friends and Enemies; not to pay him your Homage and Reverence;
not to give him a tribute of your Substance, by Relieving his necessitous
Members, etc. Now to keep you from flattering in these particulars, and to
oblige you to a cheerful discharge thereof, Christ, as your King, has
promised, and will not fail, to prefer you in his Celestial Court to an eternal
weight of Glory, and to make you coheir with himself of that Kingdom of
Heaven, which he went to take possession of at his Ascension, and which he will
give to all who by their impenitent continuance in ini^uity make not themselves
unfit ^o receive it. Your duty herein ^s, to be exceeding careful not ^o
forfeit your share in that ^ingdom which Christ has pur^hased for all that
faithfully o^ey him; which certainly you ^o, if you continue impenitent ^n any
sin.

XIV.
And when you have thus ^lainly considered the Mercies which in the second
Covenant ^re on Gods part made over to Man, you are next to consider that those
Conditions are which on Man's part are requi^ed by God; and which you ^re to
observe, if ever you hope ^o be partaker of the Benefits of ^e second Covenant.
And ^ese you will find to be not ^1.) a perfect, absolute, exact Obedience, so
as never to ^^fend in any kind; this was t^ Condition of the first Covenan^
Nor, (2.) never to have fo^merly committed any delib^rate sin. Nor, (3.) never
(...) have gone on in any habitu^ or customary sin for the tim^ past; though
this be be mo^ heinous and provoking, an^ may justly throw you into the fearful
apprehension of the Divine displeasure: But it is the New Creature, or a
renewe^ sincere, honest, faithful Ob^dience to the whole Gospe^ giving up the
whole heart un^ Christ; the ready performin^ of that which God enables yo^ to
perform, and bewailing yo^ frailties; and cordially sorrowin^ for the iniquity
both of yo^ past and present life, and beseching Gods pardon in Christ i^ all
that you have done amis^ sincerely laboring to morti^ every sin, and perform
Uniform Obedience unto God; and from every Fall, rising again by Repentance and
Reformation. In short, the Condition required to make you capable of the
Benefits of the second Covenant, is first by Faith to accept of Christ as your
Priest to Save, your Prophet to Teach, and your King to Rule you: Next, to have
all those Graces, Faith, Hope, Charity, Self-denial, Repentance, etc.
(mentioned in the Gospel) united, and truly and sincerely rooted in your heart;
though mixed with much weakness and imperfection, and perhaps with many sins:
which if not wilfully and impenitently lived and died in, cannot debar you of
the Benefits of the second Covenant. But if you neglect these things, your
condition will be worse than if no second Covenant had been made: for you shall
the^ be to answer, not for the breach of the Law only, but for the abuse of
Mercy; which is of all sins the most provoking.

XV.
Now if your guilty mind tells you, that you have broken these Conditions, and
therefore forfeited the Mercies of the second Covenant; then know, that it
cannot be renewed but by a worthy receiving of the Secrament; and worthily you
cannot recieve it, till you repent o^ your sins: and all those thing are to be
accounted sins an^ transgressions of the Covenant which are disagreeable to you
Vow of Baptism, in which the general parts of your Duty an^ contained; and it
is a competent Rule, by which all you actions ought to be measur'^ Knowing then
what in Baptism you have vowed to do, by applying your actions unto that Vow,
you may easily conclude wherein you have done amiss. Only take heed you deal
not partially with your Soul, by looking upon your sins in gross; but do your
utmost endeavor to discover the particulars: Recall, as far as you can, all the
passages of your life: Consider all the instances wherein your Vow has been
transgressed; as, wherein you have yielded to the Temptations of Satan and the
World, to gratify the sinful lusts of the flesh: How you have failed of that
holy Conversation to which you solemnly bound your self when you promised to
believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith; every one of which Articles is
a Pledge of good living: And how you have wandered from those Commandments in
which you vowed to walk all the days of your life.

XVI.
And you will find this part^cular search of your sins, bot^ proper and
necessary in orde^ to their Forgiveness; which cannot be expected without
confessing and forsaking them But how either of those can b^ done, without a
distinct knowledge of your sins; or how yo^ can distinctly know them, without
this particular search, I a^ not yet so far under the power of Fancy, as to
imagine. An^ albeit that by no possible di^^gence you can discover or ca^ to
mind every sin committe^ since Baptism; and albeit to^ there is no particular
confe^sion required of the sins when of you are insuperably ignoran^ yet
ignorance of your sins will be no Plea, when it is supine, and occasioned
through neglect, and proceeds from a want of timely considering what you have
done.

XVII.
In drawing up a List of your sins, take heed of setting down such only as hang
scandalously in the Eye of the World, and ^re so notorious, as that the Sun
bears witness of their commission: But you are to search your Soul to the
bottom, to ^ifle every corner of your heart; as knowing you have ^o deal with
God, whose Law ^n nothing more declares its pe^uliar excellency, than in
reach^ng man's thoughts and desires; and forbidding him no less to ^ovet, than
to steal his Neigh^ours goods; and no less to lust after another man's Wife than
to commit adultery with her. And this consideration is argument enough to
incline^ you to an accurate search an^ enquiry, first, into all the several
sorts of sins whereof yo^ may justly suspect your self t^ be guilty; carefully
looking into such, which by reason of their abstruser nature, are not so soo^
taken notice of, either by you^ self or others: and researchin^ into the sorts
and kinds of sin^ you will find them all reducib^ to those of Thoughts, Speec^
and Action.

XVIII.
The first sort of these sin those of Thoughts, you m^ learn from Gods own
Observ^tion, Genesis 6.5. when he saw the every Imagination of man heart was only
evil contin^ally. To which our Savior had respect (St. Mat. 15.19.) when he
said, that out of the heart proceed evil thoughts And though the (...) there
spoken of, may reach further than Reasonings and bare Thoughts, even to some
subsequent Actions, because they are said to come out of the heart, and Mark
7.20. to come out of the man; yet this excludes not ordinary evil thoughts
thereby to be signified. For these are doubtless the seeds and beginnings of
all those wicked Contrivances, Designs, and Machinations which men act, and are
guilty of in the world.

XIX.
Thoughts indeed are of so vanishing and transient a nature, so easily escaping
your ob^ervation, and so apt to leave ^ou ignorant how therein you have
offended, that you have great cause to be signally diligent in their search.
Besides men are apt to imagine, thoughts are not so evil, as indeed the^ are,
because Custom has taugh^ them to say, Thoughts are free^ Whence they vulgarly
conclud^ they may think as they please without offense. And had yo^ only to do
with Creature^ short-sighted like your self, ther^ might be some ground for s^
saying: But being to deal wit^ God, whose Law reaches you^ Thoughts, and
forbids them t^ be wicked, you want no Reasons moving you to search ho^ far
therein you have offended and to repent thereof e're yo^ come to the Holy
Table. Evil thoughts are the more immediate defilers of the heart they pollute
the very spring (...) all your Words and Actions and till the thoughts of you
heart be cleansed by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, it will be no more fit
to receive Christ in the Sacrament, than the Manger was to lodge him at his
birth.

XX.
The second sort of sins you are to seach into, are those of your Words; which
being spoken in earnest, are Testifications of what is in your heart, and
nothing else but your thoughts made audible. And though the inconsiderate make
little account of their words, deceiving themselves by fancying they are but
wind; yet seeing there is a day coming, when all such as are idle, that is,
wicked, shall be accounted for by God, in bestowing Rewards and Punishments
upon men, you have all imaginable reason to examine how you have sinned in your
Tongue.

XXI.
Among the several way^ whereby your Words become sinful, I shall reckon up a
few leaving the rest to your own observation.

XXII.
And first, your Words are wicked, when they are filthy. All filthiness is so
abominable to God, as that he will not admit it in your very Tongue; having by
his Apostle, commanded you to let no corrupt communion proceed out of your
mouth, Ephesians. 4.29. That you avoid all unclean discourse, as you would putrid
and rotten Meats, which turn to contagion; and instead thereof, to use such
Language as is wholesome, profitable, and instructive both for your self and
them who hear you. Otherwise your Speech will be so noisome, that it will drive
from you the Holy Spirit of God, and leave you without the Soul and Mark of a
Christian.

XXIII.
Next, Words become sinful, when they are scoffing and reproachful, tending to
the vilifying and disparagement of others. To which the most Holy Jesus had
respect, when under the abusive and scurrilous words of Fool and Racha, he
forbad Division, Scoffing, with all such Language as might impair the Credit;
which wise men generally prize next to Life, and often above it. And when
Christ forbad Reproach as well as Killing, and requ^red of all professing his
Religion, to be no less tender of the good Names, than Persons of their
Brethren, he displayed t^ excellency of his Doctrine showing how far it
surpassed bo^ the Law of Moses and the Hithen Theology. For though M^ses in the
Law to the Jews stric^ly commanded they should (...) no Murder, and that he who
d^ so, was to be tried for his life b^ the Court of twenty three, o^ lesser
Sanhedrim (to whom belonged the Cognizance of cap^tal and greater matters) ye^
by what Christ superadds t^ that precept in Mat. 5.22. i^ may seem Moses had
made n^ provision against vilifying an^ deriding Language. And as to the
Heathen Theology, thoug^ in many instances it forba^ Murder, yet it did not so
to Calumny: For when Minerva (one of their Deities) counseled Achilles not to
draw the Sword against Agamemnon, she gave him leave to rail against and revile
him, ( Hom. Iliad. 1.) But Christ will have your Tongue as free from
contemptuous Language, as your Hands from Violence; and that you carry your
self as harmlessly toward the Reputation, as the life of your fellow Christian.

XXIV.
Words are (thirdly) egregiously wicked, when they are false: for Truth gives
them all their substance and solidity, making the Tongue answer the end for
which it was given man, namely, to speak the truth in his heart; and not to
have one thing upon the Lip, and another in the Mind: which deceitful carriage
(though never so usual) was ever thought so abominable, that Agur earnestly
prayed God to remove it far from him, Prove. 30.8. And the Apostle declared
against it, when he said. Lie not one to another: Making it a principal part of
that Heathen course renounced by the Colossians, to suggest or say any false
thing to the injury of others, Col. 3.9. or to use craftiness, or any of the
evil Arts of deceiving. And the Divine Revel. 22.15. excludes all who love and
make a Lie, all hypocritical treacherous persons, from being any more than
Equivocal Members of Christ's Church; which instead of having any part of the
benefits of Christians, shall have their part in the Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8.

XXV.
Words are (fourthly) eminently wicked, when they run out into Oaths and
Execrations; which were utterly prohibited by Christ, when he confined all
Discourse among his Proselytes, to Yea, yea, and Nay nay; to serious and
earnest affirmations and denials; asserting, that what else is used in ordinary
conversation, proceeds from an evil principle, or that evil One, the Devil; who
has variety of Snares wherewith to catch Souls, and entrap them in Idolatry,
Error, and Unbelief: Such as is swearing by Heaven, Earth, etc. as Christ
instanceth, St. Mat. 4.34. where all needless promissory Oaths are wholly
forbidden. When you therefore hear vain men replenishing their Discourse with
Oaths, 'twill be no breach of Charity for you to conclude, that this ill Custom
proceeds either from a vain glorious humor, delighting in big and swelling
Language, out of an idle conceit that it is an argument of a great Spirit; or,
that it comes of a want of Reverence to the holy Name of God; or, that men
using such Oaths, think others are like themselves; namely, so faithless, as
not to be believed without them. And as to Execrations and Cursings of your
self or others, consider, I beseech you, what David has said, not barely by
way of wish, but also of prophecy, in Psalm. 109.18, 19, etc. I shall mention no
other ways whereby you may sin in your Speech, (1.) because all the fault
thereof may be reduced to these four; and (2.) because men are more eminently
liable to offend by speaking filthily, reproachfully, falsely, or profanely.

XXVI.
And having thus brought your Thoughts and Words to the Test, you are in like
manner to deal with your Actions, in order to find out their obliquity and
pollution. And because every Christian is no less accountable for the good he
has omitted when it was in his power, than for the evil he has committed when
he might have prevented it: You are therefore, in the search of your Actions,
to begin with the things you have left undone, which you ought to have done;
and then to proceed to consider the things that you have done, which you ought
not to have done. The former are usually called sins of Omission; the latter,
sins of Commission. And here give me leave to tell you, that besides a search
into the sorts, you are also to seek into the degrees of your sins: For though
sins considered naked in themselves, and as bare transgressions of a Rule, may
seem to be all equal; yet looked upon in the circumstances wherewith they are
clothed, some will manifestly appear greater than other. And though no sin
whatsoever, can be said to be little, every one being a transgression of that
Law which God has appointed to be the Instrument of his own Glory, and man's
Salvation; yet there are circumstances which raise even little sins into high
provocations.

XXVII.
And you need no other Star to guide you in taking the degrees of your sins
against God, than the consideration of the circumstances by which you are to
measure the injuries done to your self. And I need not tell you, how the harm a
man does you is the more heinous, if he do it knowingly and willingly, than if
he did it ignorantly and against his mind: Next, when he does it purposely and
with deliberation, than when he does it suddenly and at unawares; when he does
it in the heat of Passion and blindness of Zeal, and according to his present
sentiments, than when he does it contrary to the checks and resistances of his
Conscience, and the cool dictates of his Reason. You likewise judge the injury
more grievous and provoking, the oftener it is repeated: and you can with less
trouble forgive a few, than many faults. You also find your self more sensible
of the wrong done by him you often pardoned and long spared; whom by many
benefits you have obliged, and who has vowed and promised to do so no more. And
in the last place, it makes the wrong intolerable, that it is become customary;
and that he that does it, can by no reproof, threatening, exhortation, advice,
or punishment, be diverted; but that notwithstanding all means used to the
contrary, he goes on, and takes pleasure to trespass against you.

XXVIII.
But these and the like circumstances, you find the injury aggravated that is
done against your self; and by application, you may also conclude how your sins
against God become aggravated: Whom you may find you have too often offended,
knowingly, deliberately, against the checks and motions of your own Conscience;
after vows and promises of amendment; after the private admonitions of Friends,
the public exhortations of the Ministry, the menaces and promises of the Word.

XXIX.
And when you have thus proceeded in the search both of the kinds and degrees
of your sins, you are to know, that the end of all this unpleasing travel, is
to bring you to Repentance. To which you can want no motives, when you
apprehend that by your sins you have incurred his displeasure, who is a
consuming fire, and as an impartial Judge, will render to every man according
to his deeds. And were your heart never so hardened, it will melt at the
apprehensions of those misdoings by which you may (perhaps) have incensed Gods
Mercy as well a^ Justice; and set his bowels n^ less than his hand against you
Sins in Scripture (you know) are called debts; which you ar^ altogether unable
by any other way to discharge, but by Repentance: A Duty, though a^ all times,
yet now in an especia^ manner required of you, when you come to the Sacramen^
And Repentance being the sur^ and abridgement of all the Duties to be
discharged by you a^ your coming thither, I sha^ briefly mind you what it is,
(...) wherein it consists.

XXX.
And not to trouble you wit^ the Opinions of Schools, Father^ Doctors, and
Divines, you may find out the nature of Repentance toward God, by considering
what the Repentance is which is required by one man from another. Where from
him that has injured you, you expect no less than that he should confess how he
has offended you: Next, that he be sorry for having done so: And thirdly, that
he make reparation, and resolve to do so no more. So that that which in
Religion is properly called Repentance, consists in Confession, Sorrow,
Reparation, and Resolution.

XXXI.
And first, as to Confession of sins, it is upon the account of common
Ingenuity to be expected from every one who knows himself to be guilty. Now
that Confession which is valuable with the Almighty, arises from an abhorrence
of the iniquities you confess, tha^ thereby you have displeased God, and
worthily deserved his Vengeance. And it runs through all the sorts of sins
whereof yo^ know your self to be conscious Aggravating them with a^ their
heightning circumstances and comprizing your unknow^ sins in David's penitent
form Who can tell how often he offends Cleanse me, O Lord, from my se^cret
sins. But if in Confession of sins, you should be never (...) particular, yet
if it be done wit^ any milder purpose towar^ them, than their utter
destr^ction, it will look rather like (...) Inventory than a Confession a
counting up the goods ye^ have a mind to preserve, rath^^ than an
acknowledgment (...) the sins you resolve to abando^ God forbid you should be
ev^^ so infatuated and befooled b^ your own fancy, as to imagin^ the pure Eyes
of God should be taken with the sight of your filthiness and obliquity! or that
you should think he is delighted in the Narrative of those iniquities, whose
committing he has so strictly forbidden, and does so greatly abhor! When you
open your Ulcers unto God with any other intent than to have them healed, their
view will excite his indignation, and not his pity. When therefore you do not
really intend to forsake the sins you confess, you do ^n truth defend them, how
loud^y soever your Tongue may accuse them. He only who confesses and
forsakes, shall find mercy. If you thus forsake your sins, God is faithful and
^ust to forgive you your sins, and cleanse you from all unrighteousness, 1 John
1.9. He ^s bound in Fidelity and Justice ^o fulfill that promise of Pardon to
you, which he has made to all Penitents, upon their humble Confession of sins,
and sincere Reformation. This being the only course whereby you may free your
self from all punishment of sins, and become capable of Mercy.

XXXII.
But besides this Confession thus to be made to God, the^ is also a Confession
to be mad^ unto the Guide of Souls, in case of a troubled and doubting
Conscience; and to the Church, (...) point of public Offense and Sca^dal.
Which sorts of Confession as to their conduct, profitablene^ and necessity, I
shall not now handle, having designed them a d^stinct Treatise.

XXXIII.
The second branch or ingredient of Repentance, is Sorrow; which naturally
results from Confession. For when by this you (as you must needs) have informed
your self how you are guilty of many and heinous sins, and the miseries to
which they have exposed you; it were strange if the sight thereof should not
make you sorrowful.

XXXIV.
But seeing sorrow for sin has vulgarly engrost the whole Notion of Repentance,
and that men are prone to think they have quite extinguished the wrath kindled
by sin, when they have dropped a few tears upon it; I shall here mind you of the
nature of that sorrow which accompanies true Repentance. And first, you will
find it to have a double spring; the one a fear of danger, the other a dislike
of sin. And first,

XXXV.
That sorrow which arises only from a sense of the danger to which your sins
have betrayed you, it does not, say the Schools, break the heart, but only fret
it. So that this sense or fear of present danger being blown over, the sorrow
caused by it does also vanish, not leaving any mark of amendment behind it. And
yet to this sorrow that we shall be punished (called Attrition) though never so
empty of reformation by the absolution of the Priest is turned into Contrition,
say the Roman Casuists. Which is a^ most unkind deceit of Souls; the Scripture
having made no^ promise, that flying from the wrath to come, shall be
sufficient to obtain pardon, without bringing forth meet fruits of Repentance.

XXXVI.
Secondly, There is a sorrow arising from a dislike to sin, and conscientious
thoughts, that thereby you have undutifully grieved and provoked so good a God,
so compassionate a Father, so gracious a Redeemer, and so blessed a Sanctifier.
And this never misses of producing the effect of true sorrow; which is, to sin
no more. For, for a man to be sorrowful out of an apprehension of the
punishments God has annexed to sin, rather than that hereby his Law has been
transgressed, and the Conscience polluted; this is to grieve rather that God is
just, than you are guilty.

XXXVII.
Sorrow for sin, is very prope^ to turn your stomach against it and you must
have less sense than the Brute you ride on, i^ you shun not that has caused you
to smart, and put you to pain. But yet there are other fruits of Repentance,
that mus^ deliver you from the wrath to come: for mere fear of dange^ can be no
further reasonable, o^ useful, than as it disposes you to forsake the sins
that cause^ it. But if you should be so fa^ bewitched, through the
deceitfulness of sin, that you will no^ leave it, though you die in it arms; or
if you grieve tha^ you have sinned, and yet still go on to sin; if knowing the
malignity, and having poised and found the weight of sin to be as a talent of
Lead upon your Soul, and notwithstanding all this, you still venture on to
commit it; this will leave you unpardoned, because unreform'd, and make all
your tears as water spilt upon the ground.

XXXVIII.
Sorrow for having offended God, the greater it is, the more acceptable it is
to him, and profitable for your self. For it being a sort of punishment, the
more afflictive it is, the more surely it will accomplish the intent of all
punishments, even the amendment of the Offender: And if you once have felt the
pain and trouble of a wounded Conscience, you will have no great mind to
venture afresh upon the sins that caused it. In short, sorrow arising out of
fear of danger, proceeds from love to your self, and therefo^^ can never avail
you for pardon But godly sorrow, working ^pentance to salvation, arise^ from a
love to God, whom (...) more you love, the more yo^ will grieve to have
offende^ him. Sorrow arising from se^ of Gods vengeance, usually te^minates and
ends in a sullen d^spondency, and desperate d^jection of Spirit; but sorrow
(...) having provoked God, change^ the mind, turns you from (...) to holiness,
and the consta^^ practice of all those Christi^^ Duties which the Gospel
r^quires at your hands. But you find your self herein to ^^lumpish and heavy,
and the you cannot grieve to that d^gree you ought; then the wa^ to quicken up
your penitenti^ sorrow, is to quicken up yo^ love to God, to which his
continual favors do most powerfully oblige you. Wicked men love those that
love them: and if you were sensible (which is impossible) of no other of Gods
kindnesses but his sparing you when you deserved punishment, and his giving you
space to repent, when he might have cut you off in your sins; this were enough
to engage you to love him with all the kinds and degrees of the purest
affection. Imagine how many have been snatched hence in a moment, whose offenses
have (perchance) not been so provoking as your own. Consider what could move
God to spare you in a continued course of many years disobedience against him,
but his own unspeakable goodness, and because he was loath to have you perish.
Let pure thoughts of Gods love dwell in your heart, and they will melt it down
into an humble and contrite sadness, that you have dealt so unkindly as to
forsake the Lord.

XXXIX.
And if the sole consideration of Gods long-suffering, be so ingenuous an
Engagement, to make you grieve for having sinned against him; you will find the
multitude of his other mercies to cause Rivers of waters to run down your eyes
for having broken his Laws. And if your heart be so hard, that it will not
relent upon these considerations, then have you great reason to importune God
with humble prayer, that he would smite that Rock, your heart, that it may flow
with the tears o^ true repentance, the waters o^ a second Baptism; that he
would give you such a clear sight of your sins, as may at once cause you to
sorrow for, and abandon them.

XL.
Reparation is a third branch of true Repentance; and is due to God, to Man.
First, to God, who in all injuries is the first party injured: For though you
may offend both against your self and Neighbor, yet the Law is God's which
thereby is transgressed; and therefore Reparation in the first place is to be
made to him. And seeing sins have both the nature and name of Trespasses and
Debts, Justice requires they be satisfied and paid: and all that you can do in
order hereunto, is Repentance. In which God receives a sort of Reparation,
because he requires no other satisfaction for your faults, but that you truly
bewail and amend them; which is the sum of Repentance toward God, Acts 20.21.

XLI.
But for Trespasses done against your Neighbor, there is another-guess
satisfaction required. For to those from whom you have exacted more than is
due, you are bound to make restitution. Which was esteemed such a principle of
common Equity, that it was acknowledged by those whom the Jews esteemed the
worst sort of men: For the Publican (in St. Luke 19.8.) finding himself bound;
freely offered to make fourfold restitution (according to the Law for Thieves)
of whatever he had falsely taken from any man. And though this may have a harsh
and unpleasing sound, yet if you consult Divines, ancient and modern, in this
paticular, you will find them all concluding Repentance without Restitution, to
be like an arm of flesh without strength and service; or as a City wanting
walls, unfit to secure the Inhabitants. And therefore fail not to make
satisfaction to those you have wronged, if it be in your power: but if wholly
unable, then let your desire of so doing be so express, manifest, and plain,
that good men, no less than God, may be moved to accept the will for the deed.
But to tell him whom you have injured, You are sorry for what you have done,
and yet offer him no further amends, when you are able, I leave it to common
construction, whether this can be deemed satisfactory.

XLII.
Minds truly Christian, cannot be at ease, till they have repaired the wrongs
they have done: for it is a burden upon the Conscience, of which you cannot be
rid, but by satisfying your self in making satisfaction to him you have
injured. If you wrong your Neighbor, it is your fault; and you, and not he,
ought to repent and be grieved for it: but if the injury be done to you, either
quite forget it, being content that God, to whom Vengeance belongs, keeps it in
memory; or if the injury be of that nature that you are obliged to take notice
of it, then implore God to direct you to such ways of satisfaction, as are
agreeable to Peace and Honor, free from Blood and Cruelty. Ever remembering,
that Charity and Meekness are more noble and worthy, than Impatience, or even
Valor it self. The tops of those Mountains which are above the Clouds, are not
beaten with Hail and Rain: and Spirits truly high and generous, are above the
insolences of unadvised persons, and enjoy serenity and a calm during such
tempests. It is in your power to falsify the Italian Maxim, Chi offend non
perdona Mas: He that offends never pardons. In a word, if Jesus our great
Master, forgave those who put him to death, and was careful to heal the wound
his Disciple had given Malchus; you can never refuse to cure the wounds you
have either given or received.

XLIII.
The last branch of Repentance, is a resolution to sin no more; or a steadfast
purpose to lead a new life, to follow the Commandments of God, and to walk in
his most holy ways. For without this, all other parts of Repentance will be to
no more purpose, than it is to pump in a Ship without stopping the leak. In the
Law, if a man held the unclean thing in his hand, he was unclean, though he
washed his hands never so often. Which is easily applicable to those persons,
who confess and sorrow for their sins, but take no care to avoid them. Whereas
the very Heathen, according to A. Gellius (Noct. Attic. lib. 17. cap. 1.) never
thought that a man repented, till he was displeased with the things he had
done, and changed his mind concerning them, and became another man. Your
Repentance then is imperfect, till you resolve against all sorts and degrees of
sin for the time to come.

XLIV.
And because your Duty consists in Obedience to Gods Commandments, your
Resolution must have a respect unto them all. And being each sin is a
trnsgression of some one Command in particular, and that you, as all men, are
proner to some than other sins; you are to enquire what the sins are to which
you are pronest, and to have the Commandment continually in your eye, which you
are so apt to violate; and so to watch more especially against the violation of
that particular Commandment.

XLV.
And having resolved upon every branch of Duty, and entire observance to every
Commandment apart, you are then to make trial of the sincerity of your
Resolutions, whether they be not only formal and customary, such as people
usually put on when they come to the Sacrament; or, but only politic and
carnal, to keep up your credit with the World, to further some design you have
on foot; or to quiet some present troubles of mind. For if your Resolutions are
of this sort, they will soon vanish; but if they are sincere, and truly
religious, then will they prove lasting, and you will use all possible
endeavors to continue them unto the end, and to bring all your good purposes
to good effect.

XLVI.
Nothing is more certain, than that you cannot worthily receive the holy
Sacrament, without a perfect hatred of every sin: and it is also most certain,
that your hatred of sin is not perfect, if you are not fully resolved to
forsake and avoid it: For who can imagine you hate what you ever embrace and
pursue? Resolutions, though never so good, are seldom durable, if they are
sudden and vehement: He that makes a Resolution, without due consideration,
will in like manner break and reverse it. And though you need not consult
whether you are to turn from Satan unto God, and to forsake Wickedness and
follow after Virtue; yet the means of keeping such a holy purpose, ought to
fall under your most sober and serious thoughts. And you ha^ need herein to be
careful ho^ you advise with flesh and blood for these will counsel you t^ take
part with your ease, an^ seduce you to reject even the fittest means of keeping
you Resolutions, when they becom^ difficult and unpleasing. An^ therefore as
you resolve upon the end, so you must also upon the way thither, though never
so irksome to the flesh; considering that even the recover^ of bodily health
seldom is procured, without the use of disgustful Medicines.

XLVII.
And as you are thus to resolve upon the use of the likel^est means to further
and complete your holy purposes, so likewise to avoid all things tha^ may
divert and hinder them* And amongst the fatal Impediments of your religious
inten^ions, all things are to be reckoned which any way lead, ^empt, and invite
to sin. And you may here do wisely to call to mind, by what occasions, and with
what baits you have been and still are apt to be drawn away and enticed; to the
end you may with greater vigilance and courage avoid and resist them. For
common Prudence will teach you to strengthen the Fence where the Beast uses to
break in; and to reinforce that Avenue, where the Enemy is wont to make and
prevail in his Attack.

XLVIII.
The last thing I shall mention concerning your Religious Resolutions, is their
speedy execution: for delay therein, has ever been thought dangerous, a^ having
a throat wide enough t^ swallow the biggest opportun^ty. And you cannot be su^^
till you practice what you pu^pose: for seeing your life continually walks (to
and fro) ^ a breath, and that you have (...) warrant of being able to do the
the next hour, which this yo^ neglect and put off; this throug^ly concludes for
the present d^ing of what you purpose. An^ if holy Resolutions might safe^^ be
delayed, yet they can be delayed no longer than your com^ing to the Scarament;
becau^ you cannot safely approach the Ordinance, without stedfast^ purposing to
lead a new lif^ for till you are a new Creatur^ or begin to lead a new life,
yo^ are, in sense of Scripture, dea^ And how absurd a thing is it (...) put
Bread and Wine into a dea^ man's mouth, none so stupid a^ not to imagine. You
may indeed naturally eat and drink the Bread and Wine, receive into your
stomach the elements of the Sacrament; but if you live in the liking, much more
in the commission, of any thing you know to be sin, you can receive no more
spiritual nourishment in the Sacrament, than a dead Carcass at the best
Entertainment.

XLIX.
And this is another consideration that lays upon you a necessity presently to
renounce your sins, to give them a Bill of Divorce, and to withdraw from them
all degrees of kindness and respect: For without this, you can be in no fit
disposition to be married to Christ, and to embrace all the Graces flowing from
him. In short, that Resolution which I call a branch of Repentance, and which
is indispensible required of you when you come to the Lords Table, is made up
of these two things. First, Renouncing of all sin: Secondly, Embracing of all
Christian Virtues. The first without the second, is but sweeping the house
without furnishing it: And therefore when you have cleansed your Soul of the
nastiness and dirt of sin, you are not to let it lie empty; but to furnish it
with all those Graces commanded you in the Gospel, such especially as are
required in every one coming to the Supper of the Lord. And those are chiefly
three; namely, Faith, Charity, and Devotion.

L.
The necessity of Faith is expressly taught you by your first Catechism; where
it says, That a lively Faith in Gods Mercies through Christ, is required of
every Communicant: and that the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and indeed
taken and received by the faithful in the Lords Supper. For it is by Faith that
you there look upon him, whom God has set forth to be the Propitiation for
your Sins, even Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the
World, Romans 3.25. John 1.29. You easily perceive the necessity of Faith, when
you mind that in receiving the Holy Sacrament, you are to believe that Jesus is
the true Seed of the Woman, which was promised in the beginning, and was sent
in the fullness of time, that in hi^ all the Nations of the Earth (i^ they will)
may be blessed; he being the Universal and Mighty Savior, who both will and
can save all that come unto him, there being no other in whom Salvation is to
be expected. Yo^ are likewise to believe, that he was crucified, or died an
ignominious or cursed death; and that the Merits of his death are sufficient to
save all Sinners; and that all those Merits are conveyed to you in the
Sacrament, when it is worthily received.

LI.
But as to the clear Nature o^ that Faith now required of you the Church fairly
intimates wha^ it is, when she calls it, a lively Faith in Gods Mercy through
Christ.

LII.
And Faith is said to be lively, when it works through Love, showing it self in
well doing: for where Life is, there will be Action. And the Life of Faith,
like that of Nature, will show it self in the Heart, Tongue, and Hands. In the
first, by sincereness of Devotion and holy Thoughts: in the second, by wholesome
and gracious Communication: And in the last, by works of Justice and Charity.

LIII.
The Object of this lively Faith, is God's Mercy; upon which it reflects, as
the Fountain whence the Scriptures have proceeded; in which Gods Covenant for
Man's Redemption is established; and his Promises to believing penitent Sinners,
are contained. And if you shall inquire into the reason of all this, you will
find that nothing but his mere Mercy moved God to make known his Will; and in
the Holy Scriptures to reveal the Means of Salvation, and make the way to
Heaven plain and easy. It was only to show the great love wherewith he loved
you, and the exceeding Riches of his Grace, that prevailed with God to be thus
kind unto you.

LIVE.
But all this is through Christ; he is the Conduit of all these Blessings,
being of God made unto all Believers, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
Redemption. He is the Author o^ all true Knowledge, the cause o^ your
Justification, your Sanctification, and will be also of your Deliverance and
rescue from all Calamities that you are subject to in this Life, and at last
from Death it self, by raising you again, 1 Cor. 1.30. And as by a voice from
Heaven God declaed with Solemnity, that he was well pleased with Christ: so he
has likewise declared, that he is well pleased with Believers only for his
sake. By Christ you are predestined, adopted, accepted, and pardoned, and
shall be glorified. So that in your own Person you may speak as the Apostle did
in the Name of all Christians, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, etc. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed me with all spiritual
Blessings in heavenly things in Christ; according as he has chosen me in him,
that I should be holy, and without blame before him in Love.

LV.
In whom I have Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of Sins,
according to the riches of his Grace, etc.

It is impossible in any Duty, without Faith, to please God, or to be accepted
of him; because whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. But in the matter of the
Holy Sacrament, Faith has a more appropriate Office: for by it, as by a Hand,
Mouth, and Stomach, you receive, eat, and digest the spiritual Food and
heavenly Sustenance by which your Soul is nourished to eternal Life. And in the
sense of the Spirit, to eat and drink the Body and Blood of Christ, is properly
to believe on him in the Sacrament: which does not only represent unto you the
manner of Christ's Death, and in visible Actions set before you what he suffered
on the Cross: Nor does the Sacrament only convey unto you that Grace which
flows from Christ's Death; but it does seal and confirm unto every worthy
Communicant all the Benefits of Christ's Passion. For God, to magnify his Mercy
and Goodness toward Believers, was not content to give them only a general
offer of his Promises in Christ; but thought sit to seal them to every
particular penitent Christian, and in the Sacrament actually to deliver him
them. Faith apprehending and applying the benefits of Christ, which are all
comprised in the Forgiveness of Sins, and Salvation; the sum of all the
Happiness of this World, and of that which is to come.

LVI.
And having tried and found your Faith toward God to be such, as he has
promised not to be displeased with; your next business is to examine your
Charity toward your Neighbor: for it is required of them who come to the Lords
Supper, to be in Charity with all Men. If thou bring thy Gift to the Altar,
and there rememberest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave there thy
Gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and
then come and offer thy Gift. This was our Savior's advice to the Jews, and
may thus be translated to your self and every Christian: If at any time you are
coming to the Lords Table, and there call to mind that you have done any man
any Injury, do you repair first to that Person whom you have injured, use means
to reconcile him to you, repair the wrong, and if you cannot, let him know your
willingness, and request his Pardon; and having done thus, return to complete
your intention, and receive the Sacrament in testimony of your Peace with God
and your Neighbor. This reconcilement with your Brethren, is absolutely
necessary, not only to make your participation of the Sacrament, but all other
performances acceptable to God. And you see it consists in a confession of your
wrong, and repairing it; it being reasonable, that in order to obtain his
pardon whom you have injured, you acknowledge your fault to him, and to the
utmost of your Ability make him amends.

LVII.
And as to this Charity here spoken of, the very Elements of the Lords Supper
figure and enforce it: for the many grains made up into one Loaf, and the many
Grapes pressed into one Cup, signify, how we being many, are made one Bread
and one Body. And nothing can make all Christians to be affectionately one, but
Charity; or mystically and spiritually one, except Charity, the Bond of Peace
and Union. And this is that heavenly temper of Mind, to which Christians are
obliged, upon the account of the nearness of that relation which is amongst
them: for they have all but one Father, one Savior, one Sanctifier; they all
profess one Faith, have all received one and the same Baptism, and all expect
one and the same Inheritance. But if in spite of all this you trample Charity
under Feet, and instead of being reconciled to your Neighbor, you malice and
hate him: you are no more fit for the Sacrament than a Murderer: for such are
all those who hate their fellow Christians; according to St. John, in the third
and fourth Chapters of his first Epistle.

LVIII.
And as Charity binds you to seek to be reconciled to those whom you have
injured, and to obtain their Pardon; so it likewise engages you to forgive
those by whom you have been wronged. And indeed the forgiving others their
Trespasses, is the condition of obtaining the forgiveness of your own: for if
you forgive Men their Trespasses, your heavenly Father will forgive you; but if
you forgive not men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
Trespasses. This was our Saviors own Doctrine (Mat. 18. from verse 23. to the
end) and also his Practice, when he prayed for the forgiveness of his
Crucifiers, and that at a time too when his own most grievous Agonies and Pains
might justly have diverted all respect to others, especially to those who were
then actually putting him to death. How dismal then is your Condition, if
instead of having your Heart replenished with Charity, it be full of Malice! if
instead of obeying the Doctrine, and following the Example of Christ, you act
quite contrary! If you find your breast barren of this kindness to your
Fellow Christians, pretend not to any real respect to the blessed Author of
that Name. 1 John 4.20.
For if a man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar: for he
that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he
never saw? You never beheld God with any Eye but that of Faith; and therefore
could never have Opportunity (if he needed it) to show any kindness to his
Person. So that all you can do to testify you love him, is your Obedience to
his Commands; whereof this is the sum, That he who loves God, loves his
Brother also, 1 John 4.21.

LIX.
And if this love be without dissimulation, such as Scripture and common Equity
requires at your hands, it will not only appear in a merciful forgiveness of
Offenders, but also in a liberal relief of the needy. And I mention this latter
Act of Charity, because I find that something was ever given to the Corban of
the Poor by those who came to the Sacrament. If you consult the practice of the
Primitive (the best Guide for the present) Church, you will hardly find that
the Lords Supper was ever administered without an Offertory. In Acts 2.45, 46.
you have mention made of selling Possessions and Goods, and parting them to all
as every man had need. And that this was done at the solemn times of public
Prayers, and receiving of the Sacrament, there is light enough in the Text to
clear it. You read likewise of a Command, That upon the first day of the Week,
every man should lay by him in store, as God has prospered him. The first day
of the Week was that we now call Sunday, and the Lords day, whereon the Lords
Supper was constantly received; 1. Cor. 16.2.
unto which they never came empty, but according as God had increased their
Goods, the Communicants gave to the relief of the Poor. And if you look into
the ancient Liturgies, you will find them generally taking notice of this
Religious Custom. And that this was intended by our own Church, is concludible
from her placing Texts to persuade to this sort of Charity, and desiring God to
accept our Alms and Oblations in the Communion-office. Apol. 2.
In Justin Martyr, a Father of the second Age, we read how the Christians
brought forth some of the good Fruits of the Earth, and offered them at Gods
Table; and the Bishop, or in his absence the Presbyter, received them as an
Abel's Offering, and blessed God for the Fruits of the Season. After the
Sacrament was celebrated, there was one common Table for Rich and Poor, whereat
they did eat promiscuously; and what was left was given to those in want. And
this I take was the Agape, or Feast of Love mentioned by St. Jude, and
described by Tertullian. Apol. c. 38.


LX.
And in proportion to this Custom, when you come to the Sacrament, you are to
bestow something on the Poor, that you appear not before the Lord empty, and
serve him of that which cost you nothing. And though you are, as to the
quantity of your Alms, left at liberty, yet you had best to be merciful
according to your Power. If you have much, give plenteously; if you have
little, do your diligence gladly to give of that little: for so you gather your
self a good Reward in the day of Necessity.

In the Sacrament, by a joint communicating in the same divine Mysteries, you
attest to the World your being united to Christ your Head, and to every true
Christian as a fellow-member of the same Body. And as Faith unites you to
Christ, so Charity also to his Members; and by virtue of these two Graces, the
Sacrament seals the Communion of the Members with the Head, and of the Members
one with another. But when you come to the Sacrament with Malice in your Soul,
you can have no true Communion with either; but are guilty of the vilest
Hypocrisy, by making profession of that Christian or Brotherly Charity,
whereof your Heart is void and empty. In this case I refer you once more to the
counsel of our Savior, St. Matthew. 5.23, 24. where two things appear for your
Instruction; viz. (1.) That though the Gift be already at the Altar, it must be
left there rather unoffer'd, than be offered by one who is not at perfect Peace
with his Neighbor. (2.) That he is not to neglect or quite put off the
Offering of his Gift, Tobit. 4.8.
but presently to remove the occasion of his not offering it aright.

LXI.
And when you find your Heart duly furnished with Faith toward God, and (the
proper effect thereof) Charity toward man, you must once more go down into your
Soul, to see if it have that holy and heavenly temper called Devotion; which is
a Grace so suitable to the receiving of the Sacrament, that it seems to make up
the whole Office. And if Devotion be not so warm and vigorous in your Soul as
it ought, and you would have it to be, you must enquire into the Impediments
thereof, in order to their speedy removal. Now amongst the fatal hindrances of
Devotion, the Cares of the World are with too great Justice chiefly to be
reckoned: for they naturally fasten your Thoughts to the Earth, and set your
Affections on things below; and are as so many depressing weights upon the
Soul, which unluckily keep her from those Transports of Devotion, by which the
would soar to Heaven. And therefore upon your coming to the Sacrament, you had
need to allow your self some time wherein to withdraw from worldly Business,
and to cast off earthly Thoughts, and by holy Meditation to lift up your Heart
unto the Lord, and to give your self unto Prayer; which is indeed the principal
instance of that Devotion now spoken of. And your Prayer must at this time be
chiefly for Pardon of bypast Sins, for strength against them for the future,
and that God would grant you all those Graces which he now requires at your
hands when you come to the Sacrament. Be sure then to be diligent in this Duty:
for should your other Endeavors be never so vigorous and constant, regular and
uniform; yet without Prayer for Gods blessing and assistance, you appear to
trust to your own arm, and to rely upon your own strength; not considering that
all your sufficiency is from God, that he gives you the Will and Power to do
well: and therefore unto him direct your Prayer with Humility, Sincerity, and
Zeal, to assist you with his Spirit, that you may come so prepared to the Holy
Table, as that you may partake of the Benefits there reached out to every worthy
Receiver.

LXII.
Thus you see with what Graces your Soul must be furnished when you come to the
Communion: And if you find them to be but weak and feeble, and in a low degree,
it must be your care to quicken and stir them up, begging the assistance of
Gods Spirit to that end. And you may much quicken your Faith, by due meditation
on the many gracious Promises God has been pleased to make to the truly
Penitent. You may likewise instance your Love to God, by considering his
manifold Mercies, those especially whose remembrance you celebrate in the
Sacrament, sum'd up in the death of his Son for your sake, even when you, in
the Loins of your Forefathers, were his Enemy. And this last consideration is
both proper and powerful to move you to that Charity we have above treated of.
For coming to the Lords Supper, you are in a more especial manner to follow the
Example of Christ; first, in a perfect forgiveness of all that have done you
wrong; and next, in manifesting your kindness to them in all Offices of
Christian Love and Friendship. And when you thus labor to stir up and increase
these Graces in your Soul, they become her Wedding Garment, wherein she is fit
to appear at this great Feast. But if this be wanting, she cannot expect to be
otherwise entertained than an Intruder. And what this is, you have it
illustrated in the Parable of him, who coming to the Marriage without a Wedding
Garment, was cast out into a place of extreme misery. And though this Judgment
may not fall suddenly, (nor straight upon your communicating) yet you know not
how soon that he that will come may come; and who may abide the day of his
coming? For who can dwell with everlasting burning? Ep. 33.14.
Who can endure an unquenchable Fire?

LXIII.
But if after all your care in the Duties already mentioned, you still doubt of
your Condition, and suspect the insufficiency of your Preparation for so holy a
Performance; if you find, that notwithstanding your Resolution and Labor to
the contrary, you are ready to fall back into those Sins which you have
confessed and lamented, and abjured: then you must confess Sorrow, and resolve
afresh; resist and fight against both your Sins and their Occasions. And if
they still return, you must still strive they get not the Victory; which be
sure they cannot, while you labor in good earnest to have them subdued and
mortified. But if you still find the Law of your Members continually to war,
and often to prevail against the Law of your Mind, and the Affections to prove
too strong for your Reason, and that this causes you to be jealous you are not
worthy to communicate; Then be pleased to consider,

LXIV.
First, That the end of your coming to the Lords Table, is not to make
protestation of your Righteousness and Perfection, but to seek for both in
Christ; that you now seek to be at peace with God, and to have your Sins
cleansed with the Blood of that Spotless Holy Lamb, which takes away the Sins
of the World.

LXV.
You are (secondly) to look upon the Sacrament as a Medicine and Cordial for
sick and weak Souls; and that our Lord is pleased to invite none to his Supper,
but those who are weary and heavy laden with the burden of their Sins. He calls
you, not because of your Merits, but of his Goodness; not that you are a worthy
Guest, but that he is a gracious Entertainer. And though you are not prepared
according to the Holiness of the Mystery, yet God in Christ will accept of the
good intentions of your Heart: He will make this blessed Sacrament a means to
quiet your Conscience, to increase your Faith, to enliven your Charity, to
amend your Life, and to assure you, that you are in the number of those, who at
the last shall be called to the Table of the Lamb.

LXVI.
You are (thirdly) to consider, that when reconciled and converted unto God,
you still remain a man; and that there is no Repentance so great, as that it
entirely destroys all sin. And therefore in the greatest assurance of your
condition, have always in mind that advice of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.12.
Let him that thinks be stands, take heed lest he fall. And when you find you
are fallen, presently raise up your self again by faithful Repentance. The more
you are advanced and confirmed in Holiness, the more you will distrust your
self, and be watchful against Temptations. After holy resolutions and
transports of Zeal and Devotion, it often happens that men commit great sins;
because the Conscience is apt to be less wary, as thinking it self secure: like
the besieged, who after a brave Sally, grow negligent; and by contemning the
Enemy they have repulsed, are surprised through their own carelessness.
Conscience may, but Satan can never sleep, nor fail to take advantage of your
Security.

LXVII.
Some Sins are quickly felt; like a Scorpion, they leave a sting behind them,
which inevitably would prove mortal, if not speedily cured by Repentance. And
there are other sins which are not so soon felt, growing upon us unperceived;
but they leave a weight upon the Soul, which makes it move slowly to Piety and
good Works, lessening the sentiments of Religion, and withdrawing the Heart
from God. You ought therefore often to visit the state of your Conscience, and
to call your self to an account, to the end you may find out, and cleanse that
filthiness which sticks to it through the Corruption of the World, and your
own: For the Conscience resembles Iron, tha^ grows cankered and rusty, if i^ be
not frequently dressed. The unclean Spirit will not dwell in a man, if the
house be not swept, that is, empty and garnished; much less will the Spirit of
Purity stay in the heart which is not neat from the ordure of Iniquity, and
furnished with Religion. If you then are studious to purge your Heart by
Repentance, God will delight to dwell there, and take pleasure in the lodging.

LXVIII.
And your Repentance must return daily, because it will then take your sins in
their fresh circumstances, and so the better correspond to their aggravations.
It will also keep you from running too far in Arrears, which ever makes the
payment both difficult and unpleasant. Above all, your daily repenting will
render this Duty easy to be performed, when you come to the Lords Table.

LXIX.
No man, says our Church, ought to come to the Holy Communion, but with a full
trust in Gods mercy, and with a quiet Conscience. And if you cannot quiet your
Conscience with those excellent Rules there laid down by the Church, but that
you require farther counsel and comfort; then she advises you to repair to
some discreet and learned Minister of Gods Holy Word, that you may receive the
benefit of Absolution, together with Ghostly counsel and advice, to the
quieting of your Conscience, and avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulness.

LXX.
And this Advice you have good reason to embrace, not only when you come to
the Sacrament, but at all other times, when you have any material doubting
concerning the state of your Soul: for through a neglect thereof, Time may
either cause your doubts to fester, or, what is worse, you may be tempted to
make use of deceitful Remedies, and give up your self to those idle and
desperate courses, which may not only stifle your present doubts, but harden
you against all doubting for the future.

LXXI.
In the resolution and satisfying of your doubts, both upon your coming to the
Sacrament, and at all other times, I would advise you not to become your own
Casuist, nor to rely upon your own Judgment: for your Soul, if truly humbled,
will be apt to deal severely, and to pass a very hard Sentence upon its
Condition: And if it be not truly humbled, it will be ready to handle your
Scruple too softly, and to give too favorable a Construction of your state;
and so instead of searching, skin over the Wound.

LXXII.
Be your Scruples what they will, they ought to be satisfied before you come to
the Supper of the Lord; or else you will plunge your self into more Scruples,
by your Negligence to have those satisfied which you have already. Beware too
you suffer not Scruples to keep you from the Sacrament: for if a groundless
Scruple occasion your absence from the Communion, then is your absence also
groundless, and consequently sinful. But if your Scruple be material and
weighty, you ought to be the more diligent to have it satisfied: for though it
may indeed justly stay you from the Sacrament till it be satisfied, yet so long
as you suffer it to keep you thence, you deprive your Soul of the benefits of
that heavenly Ordinance. Delay not then to have your Scruples solidly satisfied
by some discreet Minister: To whom you are to make your case plain, without
disguise or reservation; that the Guide of Souls having a full discovery of it,
may be the better able to help you to a satisfactory Resolution.

LXXIII.
And because boldness herein may prove as dangerous as distrust, the Confident
have need to advise with the holy Guide as well as the Doubting; and both had
best to rely upon more equal and impartial Judgments than their own. For men
are generally inclined to side with a too good Opinion of themselves; which
makes it dangerous to trust our own Verdict in the great concernment of our
Soul, and even necessary more than once to consult with a Spiritual Guide; to
the end we may receive from him such directions as may, through God, keep us
from splitting upon either of those opposite Rocks, too great Confidence, or
too great Distrust.

LXXIV.
Nor can I imagine ought should render you backward to make known your Doubts,
unless it be an improvident surmise that the ripping up of them will discover
your Nakedness, and expose you to shame with others, and beget a discountenance
in your self. But there will be no ground left for this surmise, when it is
duly considered, that the Person to whom you are thus to reveal your self, is
a pious and discreet Minister of Gods Word; one who will be as faithful to
conceal, as you are to discover your infirmities; and as ready to heal your
sores, as you are to rip them up: one too, who will be so far from insulting
over your Weaknesses, or thinking ill of you for discovering them, that he will
love and encourage your ingenuous and Christian dealing, and restore you in the
Spirit of meekness, and help to set things at rights between God and your Soul.
But suppose the discovery of your Scruples should indeed turn to your shame,
which is the worst you can fear; yet to abstain from doing it upon this
account, is to betray in you a less care of your Soul than of your Body. For
the foulest and most shameful Diseases of the Body, you can, without blushing,
lay open to your Physician; and will you then be coy and squeamish to confess
the sickness of your Soul! of which your care ought to be infinitely greater
than of your Body, as no less excelling it, than the heavenly Manna did the
Earthen Pot that contained it. So that neither fear of shame, nor any thing
else, ought to keep you from using such means as any way tend to its Salvation.

LXXV.
And thus having, with what brevity and plainness I was able, run through the
several Duties to be performed at your coming to the Communion, and brought you
as it were to the Rails of the Holy Table; before I leave you, I will take the
freedom to mind you how you are there to carry your self. Where two things are
now required of you; namely, a Devout frame of Mind, and a decent gesture of
Body.

LXXVI.
As to that Devout frame of Mind required of you at the time of receiving, it
chiefly consists in thoughts of your own unworthiness of being a Guest at so
Divine a Banquet. And in order to raise in, and to humble you under a due sense
of this Unworthiness, call to mind the sins you have committed since you were
last at the Sacrament; because you are now come again to repeat and renew that
Covenant which thereby you have broken.

LXXVII.
Be attentive to the actions of the Minister; and when you see him breaking the
Bread, and pouring out the Wine, meditate, How Christ's Body was broken, and his
Blood shed upon the Cross. And above all, think with your self, that it was
your Sins that drove the Nails into his Hands and Feet, and pierced his blessed
Side with the Spear: That it was your sins, with the sins of others, occasioned
all his Sufferings, the pains of his Body and Soul; and that if he had not
suffered once upon the Cross, you had been tormented to everlasting Ages. And
upon these sober Thoughts, you will even abhor your self, and with indignation
behold your cruel dealing with your Gracious Lord. Consider too, how nothing
but the Blood of Christ can cleanse your sins; and that it does not, like
Abel's, speak for Vengeance, but loudly calls for Mercy upon them who spilt it,
if they repent and reform; and still draws down Blessing upon all who worthily
receive it in the Sacrament. Consider too, how Christ by those Sufferings,
which are represented and commemorated in the Sacrament, has made an Atonement
for your sins, appeased the Wrath, and satisfied the Justice of God, which you
have provoked and incensed against your Soul. And this will raise up your
hopes, and make you come with an humble and religious boldness to the
Communion; being assured, God will not only there seal unto you, but put you
in possession of the benefits of Christ's Sufferings; namely, Reconciliation
with God, and Pardon of your Sins.

LXXVIII.
Let your Tongue and Heart join with the Minister in that excellent Prayer
wherewith he delivers the Bread and Wine: The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which was given, etc. The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed, etc.
Lift up your Heart unto the Lord. Let your Thoughts be wholly set upon Christ's
death and its benefits: for the remembrance of Christ's death, as it was one
main end of the Institution, so is it of your receiving of the Sacrament. And
look not upon the Bread and Wine being consecrate and blessed, as ordinary
things, but as they are after a spiritual manner the Body and Blood of Christ.

LXXIX.
And as these and the like considerations may serve to render your Soul devout,
so will they also make your Body humble: For though Humility properly belongs
to the Heart, yet it cannot be outwardly expressed, but by gestures of the
Body. And you are to manifest your Reverence at the Lords Supper, by using such
gestures as the custom of the place where you receive it account most decent,
humble, and reverend. Kneeling is the posture appointed by our National Church,
as fittest to signify your humble and grateful acknowledgment of the benefits
of Christ therein sealed to every worthy Receiver; and for the avoiding of such
profanation and disorder in the Holy Communion, as might otherwise ensue.

LXXX.
If you look to the first Institution of the Sacrament, you will find Christ
employing therein such a singular care, that nothing low or mean appears about
it. And in all times, where Schism and Faction were excluded, nothing but
solemnity and expressions of greatest reverence appeared at the receiving it.
But to proceed:

LXXXI.
Besides Humility and Reverence, there is required of them who come to the
Lords Supper, a thankful remembrance of Christ's death. And this you cannot
want, when you reflect upon what he suffered for you, both in credit and Body,
when he underwent the most painful and ignominious sort of dying; and in those
sharp and fearful Agonies of his Soul, which forced him to cry out, His God had
forsaken him. And seeing all this was to save you from perishing, this must
needs awaken you to an holy ambition of making your Thankfulness, if possible,
as unspeakable as his Sufferings. And how can you but praise and magnify his
Goodness, who has redeemed you at so dear a rate! especially when you come to
the Sacrament to make solemn Commemoration of Gods mercies, in sending his Son
to die for you, and appointing the Sacrament to be a continual Pledge of your
Thankfulness for the same. With Angels therefore, and Archangels, and all the
Company of Heaven, laud and magnify his glorious Name, praising him, and
saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy
Glory: Glory be to thee, O Lord most high. Thanksgiving or praising of God, was
the devout practice of the first Christians at the receiving of the Lords
Supper, Acts 2.46, 47. And in after-Ages Thanksgiving was thought so necessary
at its celebration, that the Sacrament it self thence got the name of
Eucharist: A word, though it be not found in Scripture in this sense, yet
Casaubon doubts not but it was derived from the time of the Apostles. Exercit.
16. ad Annal. Baron. cap. 33.

LXXXII.
No man can express greater love to his dearest Friends, than to adventure to
die for them. And yet Christ's love was of a higher degree: for he died for you
when you were his Enemy; and that death too which was all full of reproach and
pain, John 15.13. And this love of Christ obliges you to love him again; and
if not, you come short of the Publicans (whom the Jews esteemed the worst sort
of men) for even they love those that love them, St. Matt. 5.46. And if your
love to Christ be without dissimulation, it will admit of no Rival, nor hold
any intelligence with his Enemies; but you will be glad of the happy occasion
(you now have at the Sacrament) of sacrificing all vile affections, and
mortifying every lust; as the best Testimony of your own love, and requital of
his, who delivered himself unto death, to redeem you from all iniquity and
vicious living, and to oblige you to advance toward the highest pitch of all
Virtue. And when your love to Christ is in some due measure proportionable to
his love to you, it will make you (with St. Paul) ready not to be bound only,
but also to dye for his Name, when his Command shall bring you to such an
expression of your Obedience.

LXXXIII.
And the few things now mentioned, may, through God, help you to such a pious
government of your self at the time of receiving the Sacrament, as may make it
turn to your great and endless comfort. What now remains to finish these
abrupt, but well-intended Meditations, respects your deportment after you have
been at the Communion.

LXXXIV.
And first, being that at the Sacrament your Covenant is renewed, give all
diligence not to break it for the future; because this will make all you have
done, to little purpose: For he (says Ben Sirach) that washes himself after
the touching of ^ dead Body, if he touch it again, what avails his washing?
So it is with a man that fasteth ^or his sins, and goes again and ^oth the
same: who will hear his Prayer? or what does his humbling profit him,
Ecclesiasticus 34.25, 26. An impious falling back into your former Vices, is
signified by a Dog and Swine, two Creatures held to be so profane and unclean,
that the Jews were neither to offer them in Sacrifice, nor to eat them; and
both are proverbially observed for this quality: That the Dog licks up what he
has vomited; and the Swine, though never so clean washed, takes pleasure to
tumble again in the next Mire i^ comes to.

LXXXV.
Those who after their Con^version to the Christian Fait^ did again return to
the sins o^ their former unconverted Lif^ they made their Christian He^thenism
worse than their b^^ Heathenism was at first. (...) that it had been more for
t^^ advantage of such, never to have been taught the Doctrine of Christ and
Christian Practice, than when they had been taught and undertaken to obey it,
to fall back again into their heathen and vicious courses, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. And
you know what happened to the man in St. Mat. 12.43. who (after the evil Guests
were cast out of his Soul) kept it empty of those that were good: Which is
easily applicable to all those who wilfully and knowingly run again to those
evil ways which at their coming to the Sacrament they pretend to repent of and
abandon.

LXXXVI.
Secondly, Keep continually in your mind all those Resolutions that you now put
on, to the end you may have them always ready to oppose against the things that
would tempt you to break them, and to relapse into the evils you have taken
leave of. And it will be seasonable, that you here think with your self, with
what face you can commit that sin which you but no^ have solemnly vowed
against. Think too, what an affront you offer unto God, in breaking that League
of Friendship you entered into with him at the Sacrament. Think likewise, that
if to keep Gods favor be your only happiness and safety, then to lose it will
prove your extremest danger and misery. And then finish your other Thoughts
herein with this: That every sin you wilfully commit, after your being at the
Sacrament, breaks that Covenant yo^ there renewed; and may justly make God, of
your best Friend, become your sorest Enemy. And ^ God be once against you, no
matter who is on your side.

LXXXVII.
Thirdly, Consider how that to fall back willingly into your old Iniquities, as
it sets God against you, so it likewise makes your own Conscience fly in your
face; and to upbraid, arraign, accuse, condemn, and punish you for breaking
Covenant with him. And it does not only fill you with present Pain and Agony,
but also with a fearful Expectation of Wrath to come. For what can you expect
but extreme Misery, when you break League with him who is a consuming Fire, and
who will render Indignation, Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish to every Soul that
thus does evil? Romans 2.9. These are the Considerations whereby you may confront
all Enticements to break the Covenant you have renewed. And when you maturely
look into the nature and design of Temptations, you will find the most taking
to be but as so many cheats, which, under the Visor of some delight or profit,
would rob you of your Integrity, and betray you to Enmity both with God and
your self. And therefore, when you entertain any Temptation to Sin, you do as
wisely as he who takes those into his House, whom he knows are come on purpose
to spoil him of what he esteems most precious.

LXXXVIII.
Some have drunk in such a preposterous Opinion of Gods long-suffering, that
instead of being led thereby unto Repentance, as God would have them they are
carried on unto a horrid presumptuous offending. But no Wickedness can be
greater, nor Ingratitude more provoking, than to sin against God, because he is
long-suffering: And yet this is such common Logic, and of so great Antiquity
that Solomon observed it, Ecclesiasticus 8.11. But to sin upon hopes, or rather
presumption of finding Mercy, and to break your Govenant with God afresh,
because you have done so, and yet he has spared you, is so absurd, vile, and
disingenious a way of arguing, that it carries with it its own Confutation. Why
should you not rather conclude, that God will forbear your breach of Covenant
no longer, because he has forborne it so long already?

LXXXIX.
Fourthly, The last part of your Baptismal Vow, binds you to keep Gods holy
Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of your Life. And as
to the breach hereof, it matters not whether it be at the Morning, Noon, or
Evening of your Life; sooner or later makes no difference in the neglect of
that, which you are bound to do continually. It may indeed add to your
reproach, to break that Vow at last, which you have kept so long: for this
speaks it your want of Will, and not of Power; and that it was not your
Weakness, but something else, that moved you to leave the Road, wherein you had
walked so long a time with ease and safety.

XC.
Use makes hard things easy: the chief, if not only difficulty in Holiness,
is want of practice, and a being accustomed to the contrary. The ways of Gods
Commandments neither waste the Spirits, nor gall the Feet of those who use
constantly to walk in them. Let the like serious and holy Thoughts possess your
Soul for the future, that you have the day of receiving; and continue to
cooperate with that Grace God gives you at the Sacrament, and I see not why
your whole Life may not be all of the same piece, and your Conversation
continue as virtuous and well-governed after, as it was at the time you came to
the Holy Communion: from which I will no longer stay you, than with this hearty
Wish, That when you come thither to renew your Covenant in Vows and Purposes of
better Obedience, God may vouchsafe to assist you with his Grace, and to
strengthen you with his Power, that you may pay the Vows you then make unto
him; and that by Virtue of the heavenly Nourishment you there receive, you may
grow up in Grace and Holiness, till at last you come to be a perfect man in
Christ. Amen.

THE Communicants Assistant. BEING A COLLECTION OF DEVOTIONS To that purpose.
A Prayer before communicating.
WHY should I, O God, who by innumerable ways have offended thee, why should I
dare to come to thy Table, which none ought to approach but obedient Children,
and faithful Servants! But seeing thy fatherly Goodness this day does invite me
to receive the blessed Pledges of my Peace and Reconciliation with thee; and
seeing thy well-beloved Son, whose Death I now with all Thankfulness
commemorate, does call unto him those, and only those, who travail and are
heavy laden; to whom the remembrance of their Sins is grievous, and the burden
of them is intolerable. Finding my self in this number, I know thou will not
reject me. Raise, O raise up my Heart and Spirit unto thee. Strengthen my
Faith, and help my Infirmities. Grant me power to perform and to persevere in
all those good things thou now requirest at my hands; and grant that the whole
course of my Life may be answerable to the present purposes of my Heart: and
bring me at last to the enjoyment of those Blessings which at this thy holy
Table thou art pleased to propound unto me. Amen.

O My God raise up my Thoughts unto thee, increase my Faith, Hope and Charity;
warm my Heart with the divine Fire of thy Love, purify my Conscience with the
Spirit of Sanctification. Grant this day I may with full affiance in thee
receive the Pledges of thy Goodness, and the Seals of that Covenant, which thou
have graciously contracted with me by the Mediation of thy Son my Savior.

O My God, save and deliver me from all my Offenses, and at the end of my Life
receive me into thy heavenly Kingdom; to the accomplishment of all those things
which are represented at thy holy Table: Let my future Conversation be as one
of thy Sheep, living in thy Church an Example of Peaceableness, Charity,
Humility, Patience and Justice. Give me a firm reliance upon thy Promises, a
holy zeal for thy Worship, and a sincere obedience to all thy Commands. Fill my
Heart with spiritual Joy, keep me from the immoderate Cares of the World, and
among all disquiets here, give me that Peace which the World can neither give
nor take away from me.

For forgiveness of Sins.
FOrgive me my Sins, O Lord, forgive me the Sins of my Youth, and the Sins of
mine Age, the Sins of my Soul, and the Sins of my Body, my secret and my
whispering Sins, my presumptuous and my crying Sins, the Sins that I have done
to please my self, and the Sins that I have done to please others. Forgive me
my wanton and idle Sins, forgive me my serious and deliberate Sins, forgive me
those Sins I know, and those Sins which I know not; the Sins which I have
striven so long to hide from others, that at last they are even hid from mine
own Memory: Forgive them, O Lord, forgive them all, and of thy great Goodness
let me be absolved from all mine Offenses. Amen.

PRAYERS FOR The several things required of those who come to the Lords Supper.
1. To repent them truly of their former Sins. A Prayer for true Repentance.
TO thee, O God, all Hearts are open, all desires known, and from thee no
Secrets are hid; so that if I would, I cannot conceal my Sins from thee. And
now that I confess my Sins unto thee, it is not to inform thy infinite
Knowledge, but to obey thy gracious Pleasure; and to make me capable of that
forgiveness promised to all who confess their Sins. With a sorrowful Heart
therefore I confess my Sins unto thee, I accuse my self here before thee of
innumerable wicked thoughts and desires, which I have conceived, formed, and
fostered in my Heart; of infinite corrupt and evil Words that I have uttered
with my Tongue, of many naughty and ungodly Deeds, which I have wrought with my
Hands, by all which I have provoked most justly thy Wrath and Indignation
against me; but it is thy Nature and Property always to have mercy and to
forgive the Sins of them that are penitent. Grant me therefore, Holy Father,
the Grace of true repentance; create in me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a
right Spirit within me: Grant I may truly lament my Sins, whose burden is
intolerable, and whose remembrance is so grievous unto me. And for the future
enable me to cease from evil, and learn to do well; to cast away the Works of
Darkness, and to put on the Armor of Light: and to bring forth Fruits of
Repentance in amendment of Life, to the Praise and Glory of thy Grace in Jesus
Christ my blessed Redeemer.

2. Steadfastly purposing to lead a new Life. A Prayer for Perseverance in good
Purposes.
GRant, O God, that I may bring the good Purposes with which this day I come to
thy Holy Table, Grant I may bring them to good effect; I know I am light and
unconstant, turned with every blast, diverted by every allurement, and ready to
yield to every Temptation: But do thou, O God, who art the same Yesterday, to
Day, and for ever, do thou graciously impart some of thy unchangeableness to
establish my Understanding in Truth, and to keep it from the Snares of all
seducing Spirits, that I may not be led away with the Errors of those who are
cunning to deceive. Fix my irresolute and wavering Will, and cause it
faithfully to adhere unto that which is good; Let neither the Flatteries of the
World, nor of my own Heart, so far work upon my Affections, as to draw me from
that entire Obedience which I resolve from this day forward to yield unto thy
Word. But grant that I may continue steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the Work of the Lord, and by patient continuing in well doing, seek for, and in
the end obtain eternal Life. Suffer not my own weakness, nor the number or
strength of Temptations, to turn me from that holy course upon which I have now
resolved to enter. But grant that I may ever hereafter serve and please thee in
newness of Life, to the Honor and Glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ.
Amen.

3. To have a lively Faith in Gods Mercy through Christ. A Prayer for the same.
SEeing, O God, that it is impossible without Faith to please thee, and that
whatever I do without Faith, is Sin; Pour into my Heart this most excellent
Grace of Faith, for it is thy Gift, and not my procurement. Let thy Spirit work
in my Heart such a Faith as may be acceptable in thy sight, and which at this
time may be as a Hand to receive, a Mouth to eat, and a Stomach to digest and
turn the Elements of this blessed Sacrament into the Food and Nourishment of my
Soul.

O let me not rest in a dead ineffectual Faith, but grant it may be such as may
show it self in good Works, inabling me to overcome the World, and to conform
to the Image of that Christ on whom I believe; that so at the last I may
receive the end of my Faith, even the Salvation of my Soul, by the same Jesus
Christ. Amen.

4. With a Thankful remembrance of his Death.
THou, O God, expectest no other return for all thy Mercies but Praise and
Thanksgiving; let me, O Lord, never defraud thee of that so easy tribute, but
let my Heart be ever filled with the Sense, and my Mouth with the
Acknowledgment of thy Mercies. It is a joyful and pleasant thing to be
thankful; O suffer me not I beseech thee, to lose my part in that Divine
Pleasure, especially grant that with humble and sincere Devotion I may now and
after, with all imaginable Thankfulness celebrate the Memorial which thy Son
has commanded to be made in remembrance of his most blessed Passion and
Sacrifice: that by the Power thereof, now represented before thy Divine
Majesty, I, and all thy whole Church, may obtain remission of our Sins, and be
made Partakers of all other benefits of his most precious Death and Passion.
Grant that as often as thou vouchsafest me this blessing, so often I may
thankfully receive it, and with an affectionate and devout Heart offer up
thanks to thee for the same. And grant that I may not only with my Lips, but
with my Life show forth thy Praise, by consecrating my self to thy Service, and
walking in Righteousness and Holiness before thee all the days of my Life. Amen.

5. And to be in Charity with all Men. A Prayer for the same.
O Merciful Lord, who have made of one Blood, and redeemed by one ransom all
Nations of Men, let me never harden my Bowels against any tha^ partake of the
same Nature an^ Redemption with me, but gran^ me an universal Charity toward a^
Men. Give me, O thou Father o^ Compassions, such a tenderness o^ Heart, that I
may be deeply a^fected with all the Miseries and Calamities, outward, or inward
of my Brethren, and diligently employ all my Abilities for their succor and
relief. Let thy Spirit of Love enter and dwell in my Heart, and cast out thence
Malice, Envy, Hatred, and all Uncharitableness; make me seek not to please my
self, but my Neighbor, for his good to Edification, even as Christ pleased not
himself. Thou have taught me, O Lord, that all my doings without Charity are
nothing worth, pour into my Heart that most excellent Gift of Charity: without
which whosoever lives is counted dead before thee. Grant this for thine only
Son Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

A SHORT OFFICE OF Private Devotions, To be used, 1. Before, 2. At, and 3.
After the receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
1. Before Receiving.
When you enter into the Church.
I.
LOrd, I have loved the Habitation of thine House, and the place where thine
Honor dwells.

II.
I will wash mine Hands in Innocence, O Lord, and so will go to thine Altar.

When you are kneeling before the Communion Table.
I.
THou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, for thou
have created all things, and for thy Wills sake they are and were created.

II.
Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanks, and Honor, and Power, and Might,
be unto our God for evermore. Amen.

III.
Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come, receive
my Prayer.

I.
ALmighty Lord, who have of thine infinite Mercy vouchsafed to ordain this
dreadful Sacrament for a perpetual memory of that blessed Sacrifice, which once
thou made for us upon the Cross; grant me with such diligent remembrance, and
such due reverence, to assist at the holy Celebration of so heavenly and
wonderful a Mystery, that I may be made worthy of thy Grace to obtain the
Virtue and Fruits of the same, with all the Benefits of thy precious Death and
Passion, even the remission of all my Sins, and the fullness of all thy Graces;
which I beg for thy only Merits, who art my only Savior, God from everlasting,
World without end, Amen.

II.
O Lord, our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, regard, I beseech
thee, the Devotion of thy humble Servant, who does now celebrate the memorial
which thy Son our Savior has commanded to be made in remembrance of his most
blessed Passion and Sacrifice; that by the Merits and Power thereof, I, and all
thy whole Church may obtain remission of our Sins, and be made Partakers of all
other the Benefits of his most precious Death and Passion, together with his
mighty Resurrection from the Earth and his glorious Ascension into Heaven, who
lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, ever one God, World without
end, Amen.

III.
BE pleased, O God, to accept this our bounden Duty and Service, and vouchsafe
that the Prayers and Supplications, together with the remembrance of Christ's
Passion which we now offer up unto thee, may be received into thy heavenly
Tabernacle, and that thou not weighing our own Merits, but looking upon the
blessed Sacrifice of our Savior, which was once fully and perfectly made for
us all, may pardon our Offenses, and replenish us with thy Grace and
heavenly Benediction, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord.

Devout Thoughts immediately before the receiving of the blessed Sacrament.
I.
I Will go to the Altar of God, even to the God of my Joy and Gladness.

II.
I will offer thanksgiving unto my God, and pay my Vows unto the most highest.

III.
O Lamb of God, that take aw^y the Sins of the World, have mercy upon me.

IV.
O Lamb of God that take away the Sins of the World, grant me thy Peace.

V.
Grant me, gracious Lord, so to eat the Flesh of thy dear Son, and to drink his
Blood, that my sinful Body may be made clean by his Body, and my Soul washed
through his most precious Blood.

At the receiving of the Bread.
LOrd, I am not worthy tha^ thou should come under my Roof, but speak the
Word, and my Soul shall be healed.

Adding with the Priest.
THE Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for me, preserve my Body
and So^ unto everlasting Life. Amen.

At the receiving of the Cup.
WHat Reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the Benefits that he has done
unto me? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

Adding with the Priest.
THE Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for me, preserve my Body and
Soul unto Everlasting Life. Amen.

Immediately after your receiving of the Sacrament, say,
OH, my God, thou art true and holy; Oh my Soul, thou art blessed and happy.

Oh, the depth of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how incomprehensible are his
Judgments, and his ways past finding out.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name;
which saves thy Life from Destruction, and feeds thee with the Bread of
Heaven.

Glory be to God on high, and in Earth Peace, good Will toward men. I praise
thee, I worship thee, O Lord, and I magnify thy Name for ever; who have
vouchsafed to fill my Soul with Gladness, and to feed me with the heavenly
Mysteries of Christ's sacred Body and Blood. I humbly beseech thee, that from
henceforth I may walk in all good Works, and serve thee in holiness and
pureness of living* to the Honor of thy Name Amen.

Meditations whilst others are Communicating.
HAppy are those Servants, whom when their Lord comes, he shall find thus
doing.

Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you? If any one defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy.

Behold thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee.

Be ye followers of God, as dear Children, and walk in love, even as Christ
loved us, and gave himself an Offering and a Sacrifice of a sweet savor unto
God for us.

As you go from before the Communion Table, this Doxology.
TO thee, O King eternal, the immortal, invisible, and only wise God, be all
Honor and Glory now and for evermore. Amen.

A Thanksgiving after the receiving of the Communion, to be said at Home.
THou, O my God, have comforted my Soul, thou have strengthened and refreshed me
with thy Blessings, and rejoiced my Heart with the tokens of thy Love. O how
sweet are thy comforts, how ravishing are the Effects of thy Goodness toward
them that fear thee! Wonderfu^ vouchsafement! Thou have treated a vile wretched
Sinner at the own Table, and fed me with the Bread that came down from Heaven.
Wherein am I better than those to whom thou do not grant this Favor? It is
not, it is not for my Merits, but because thou will be glorified in doing good
to the most unworthy; thou have this day made me a happy Example of this thy
free Grace and Bounty. Vouchsafe me this favor also, O my God, that through
the whole course of my Life I may give thee Praise and Glory; and that the due
sense of thy Mercies may make me unfeignedly thankful: and that my thankfulness
may appear in my care to walk before thee in Holiness, Sobriety, and
Righteousness, all the days of my Life. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for W. Crook, at the Sign of the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar, near Devereux Court.
HISTORY.
1. AN Institution of general History, or, the History of the World; being a
complete Body thereof, in two Volumes, by W. Howel, late Chancellor of
Lincoln, in folio. price 2 l. 10 s. 6 d.

2. Clelia, the whole Work, in five parts, written in French, now put into
English, in folio, price 1 l. 5 s. 6 d.

3. Scarron's Comical Romance, being an Historical account of a company of
Stage Players, full of variety of Novels, rare Adventures, amorous Intreagues,
etc. being both witty and pleasant. in fol. price 6 s.

4. Popish Cruelties, being an account of the Treasons of Dr. Parry against Qu.
Elizabeth; with his Confession of it at his Trial, and his Denial at his
Execution. Folio, price 1 s.

5. The Life of Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury, written by himself in Latin, since
translated into English, in folio, price 6 d.

6. An Historical Narration of Heresy, with an account of the Punishments
thereof, by Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury, in folio, price 6 d.

7. Megalopsichy, being a particular and exact account of the last 17 years of
Qu. Elizabeth's Reign, both Military and Civil; the first written by Sir W.
Monson, one of the said Queens Admirals; the second written by H. Townsend Esquire
a Member of her last Parliament. Wherein is a true and faithful Relation of all
the Expeditions, Attempts, Designs, Successes, and Errors, both of the English
and Spanish, in the Wars from the year 1585, to the said Queens Death. With a
full account of the eminent Speeches and Debates, etc. in the said time. To
which is added Dr. Parry's Trial in the year 1584. All written at the time of
the Actions by Persons that were eminently acting therein, folio, price bound
10 s.

8. A Description of Candia, with an exact account of the last Seige and
Surrender of it to the Turks, in octavo, price bound 1 s.

9. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, containing the Original, Antiquity,
etc. of that Dukedom, in 40. price 6 d.

10. The Travels of Ulysses, how he went to Hell, and came back again, etc. by
Tho. Hobbs, price 1 s.

11. The present state of London, containing the Antiquity, Fame, Walls,
Rivers, Gates, Churches, Bridge, with the Customs and Infranchizements, by J.
Bridal, Esquire price 1 s.

12. The Life and Death of Mahomet, being the first estate of Mahometism,
showing all the Designs that that Impostor Mahomet had to carry on and settle
the Turkish Religion. Written by L. Addison, D. D. and Dean of Lichfield, price
1 s. 6 d.

Engraving of priest

The Primitive Institution: OR, A Seasonable DISCOURSE OF CATECHIZING.

Wherein is shown, The ANTIQUITY, BENEFITS and NECESSITY thereof: TOGETHER With
its Suitableness to heal the Present Distempers of this National CHURCH.

By LANCELOT ADDISON, D. D. Dean of Litchfield.

The Second Edition:

LONDON: Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar,
near Devereux-Court, 1690.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, SETH, Lord Bishop of SARUM.
My LORD,
YOur Name is here prefixed to the Ensuing Discourse, neither for Charm nor
Amu^ to save it from the Rude and Censorious; for it does not at all ^gard what
Entertainment it meets ^ith at such hands. But it assumes ^is Honor upon the
Account of ^s Author, who having the Happi^ess to be one of your Diocesan
Clergy, thinks all he can perform in that Relation, ought to be devoted to your
Lordship, as a sincere Testimony of his bounden acknowledging your Paternal
Government.

I need not represent to your Lordship the many and great Evils which are
befaln this Church, through a want of duly observing what this Discourse
commends. For as your Singular Prudence labors to redress, and your Pious Soul
deeply resents them; so your Great Discernment plainly sees that they are
scarce (now) to be removed by any other Method, but a timely, diligent and
Regular Catechizing. And that the most likely means to establish Truth and
Holiness with Posterity, is firmly and early to imprint the Younger Minds, who
are the hopes of Religion, with that Catechism which our Church out of her
singular prudence and affection has provided for them.

But I may not pursue this, lest I should too much faulter in the Laws of
Dedication; which oblige me to admire and praise that Apostolical Care,
Prudence, Candor, and Severity, which are Eminent in your Lordship's
Government; and which I dare scarce name, for fear I should offend that Heroic
Modesty and Lowliness so conspicuous in your Great Conduct. Besides, I am so
averse to the usual Modes of Dedication, that I cannot comply with them in any
thing, unless in my hearty Prayers for your Lordship's Good Health, and Long
Life; and in testifying to the World that I am,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble and most Devoted Servant, LANC. ADDISON.

TO THE READER.
THE Condition of this small Treatise is so little agreeable to the present
Genius of the Age, that there needs no great Sagacity to foretell its
Entertainment. But those who value Books not by their Dress and Fashion, but
Matter and Usefulness; and who look not so much upon what will take with a
corrupt Generation, as help to amend it; when they maturely weigh the Subject
and Design of the Ensuing Papers, instead of censuring will be ready to resent
the weak mana^^ment of so concerning a Theme, and pity to see it fallen into the
hands of (...) un^kilful an Artificer.

For which this is the only Apology, (...) what is here written, was not (...)
for Perfection, but Essay; and that it had never left its retirement, had it
not been forced thence by impulse of the present Necessity. For it is too
evident, that this is a Season which not only warrants, but exacts our greatest
endeavors to persuade to such things as may beget, restore, and establish
Truth and Union among us. And that Catechizing by a more peculiar Energy is
thereunto subservient, appears upon this account, that the Church in all Ages
has used it to that purpose.

The raising up of which Institution (so disastrously fallen in our Borders) in
hopes of the great edification which thereby will accrue unto this Church, as
it was the first motive of this Essay, so it is the last Design; for which I
shall think my self largely recompensed, if by this contributed Mite, I may
provoke the more able to cast richer gifts into the same Corban.

If what I now write of were to be backed with the Example either of professed
Infidels or Romanists, I could from a long Conversation with both produce their
unwearied care in Catechizing; to which I ever thought the paucity of Converts
both from Infidelity and Romanism ought chiefly to be imputed.

The Mahumetans (as in another Discourse I have observed) have their
Mustadarif, out of which the younger sort are trained up in the Principles of a
Mussulman. And the Jews Sepher Chinnuck, and Sepher Ikkarim yield sufficient
attestation that they are no Truands in this School.

The Romanists from being our Rivals in this particular, are become our
Masters; for not only the Jesuits, but also other Religious, glory to have made
Catechizing their Profession; only with this difference, That the Jesuits
Catechize the Rich and Ingenious, and other Orders the Poor and Dull. But their
Diligence herein herein first sprang from an imitation of ours. For till on
Sundays and Holy Days we both preached in the Morning and Catechis'd in the
Afternoon, the Papists did neither. And it was undeniably happy with the
Protestant Religion, when diligent Catechizing was the chief Engine employed to
supplant Popery, and give deeper Roots to the Reformation.

But Catechizing (as all things else, whereof human weakness has the Custody
and Government) is greatly fallen from that Observation which it had once in this
Church; yet methinks if nothing else, this alone should provoke us to a little
more diligence in this excellent Institution, to see our Adversaries manage it
to our reproach and damage.

But, Reader, in Mercy to your Patience, I will only add, That the Author is
none of those who impose upon others what they will not do themselves; for he
is a constant Labourer in that Vineyard, wherein he desires his Brethren to
take a little more pains.

Next, That he is really of Opinion, the Minister may sleep with a good
Conscience of having well discharged his Duty, when every Lord's Day, he
observes (as he is bound) the Churches 59. Canon. And as for those who do
otherwise, he leaves them to the Reflections of their own Breasts.

ADVERTISEMENT.
1. THE Catechumen, or an Account given by a Young Person to the Minister of
his Knowledge in Religion, upon his first Admission to the Lords Table; with
the Prefaces of Dr. Addison, and Dr. Scot. Price stitched 6 d.

2. The Case of Resistance of Supreme Powers Stated and Resolved, according to
Doctrines of the Holy Scriptures; by W. Sherlock, D. D. Master of the Temple.
Price 2 s. bound.

3. The Righteous the best Subjects to the King: Or Godliness no Friend to
Rebellion, or Enemy to Civil Government, 40. P ice 6 d.

THE Primitive Institution.
The INTRODUCTION.
THat in the same Church and Nation, there should be no less Ostentation and
Noise of Religion and Holiness among some, than of Profaneness and Impiety
among others, will prove a matter of no great wonder to such as duly enquire
into the causes of both: Especially when it is considered, that as Ignorance
may be the Mother of blind Devotion, so it may be likewise of desperate
Presumption; because all Iniquity among Men, proceeds from the want of a right
knowledge of God. And as the Foundation of all true Happiness, and of all true
Religion, which is the proper means of attaining it, grows from a right Opinion
touching things Divine; so the misapprehension thereof is the ground of all
Misery, and of all those Vices by which it is occasioned.

But that which may justly awaken in us a greater wonder, is, to see all those
Methods proving ineffectual which have been so powerfully managed for the
removal of this pernicious misapprehension; and that we should be still as much
under the same Distempers both in Judgment and Manners, as if nothing had been
administered for the cure of either. That our own Church in this Age (which for
its wickedness seems to be the last) does make careful Provision, both for the
present and future welfare of her Children, is a truth apparent to all that
with unprejudiced Minds peruse her holy Offices, Catechism, Articles, Homilies,
Rubricks, and Canons. For how meanly soever some may think hereof, yet if they
were once thoroughly considered in their circumstances, we shall find that such
a p^udent and affectionate care is taken therein, that both our Opinions and
Lives may be duly informed and regulated, as in no Church of a particula^
Denomination can be paralleled. So that it cannot but be admired, how any of
this Church should be either Vicious or Erroneous; considering tha^ there is
nothing wanting on the Churches part, that may keep our Actions Virtuous, and
Sentiments Orthodox.

But as in matters of the Civil State, many Evils arise from a neglect, or
remiss execution of those Laws which are appointed to prevent and suppress
them: So in the Church, a lack of seeing her Institutions duly observed, when
there wanted no circumstances to exact it, may claim a large share in her
present Disorders. For, the letting of Discipline be too loose, emboldened not
a few to break it. However, leaving the mischiefs that accrue from this, and
the unhandsom and cold Celebration of the Divine-Service; the neglect of
guiding Sermons by the Articles; the almost utter disusage of the Homilies; the
lame observance of the Rubricks, and slight execution of the Canons of the
Church: leaving, I say, these for the Animadversion of others, I shall only
take notice that the omission, or lazy and lukewarm use of Catechizing, ought
to be blamed, for much of that Visciousness and Error, which is so sadly
visible both in Conversation and Judgment. And I am deeply engaged in this
Persuasion, that till public Catechizing fall under a diligent, constant, and
unanimous Practice, there is but little likelihood of ever seeing that Union
and Holiness, Peace and Truth, flourish in this Church, for which she was once
so famous.

Now that those to whom the great charge of Souls is consigned, may be awakened
to a little more vigor and diligence in Catechizing, and that they would shake
off that Supineness, which in this case they cannot retain, but to the
aggravation of their own Guilt, and the increase of the Churches Misery: And
that every Station of Men, moved with the Sense of Duty and Emolument, may
contribute to the raising up of the fallen Practice of Catechizing, is the Design
and Aim of the ensuing Discourse: wherein no Method at all was projected, but
every thing spoken to as ^t ^^eely offered it self. And as for Ends, the
Searcher of Hearts knows, there was none other purposed in the Publication
hereof, but Gods Glory, and the Edification of his Church.

CHAP. I. Of Catechizing. Its Name, Use Secular and Religious.
AND the first thing that comes to be spoken of concerning Catechizing, is its
Name. And ^the rather ^^use to begin here; because that the true notice of the
Name, will help us ^o that of the thing. Now that there ^s a peculiar Force and
Significancy, in Words, and that we cannot thereof be safely ignorant, is but
too evident by those many Errors, that have in all Ages risen from mere Verbal
Mistakes. And therefore if we could once be so ^appy as to find out the true
Impor^ance of Words, and to hit upon such an agreement between them and things,
^s not to cloud in Speech, what is clear in Nature, but plainly to express
things as they are in themselves; that then ^^e great cause of Error, in all
sorts of Learning, would be removed: For it is an Observation that will not
quickly be ^ntiquated, That the confounding those things in Language, which in
their Nature are distinct, and the expressing of different Matters by the same,
or Words of near affinity and likeness, has in all Sciences been a fruitful
Mother of Erroneous Apprehensions.

And this is also plain in the Affairs of Religion; in which not only a
perverse mistake in old Words, but a liberty of introducing new, has ever
proved fatal, and destructive: For out of new words, New Opinions insensibly
creep into the Church, and with Age grow too strong for her Discipline: which
being foreseen by the Holy Nicene Fathers, it moved them to decree against the
use of such Words in matters of Faith, as were not easily to be deduced from,
or directly found in Sacred Scripture. And upon the same account Tertullian
would not have our Ears accustomed to New words. Socrat. lib. 1. c. 6.
Advers. Haeret. Cap. 16. And for the like reason St. Basil could not be
induced to forego one Iota in the old Form, when he was solicited by the
Arians. A cautiousness which we may conceive, was wisely made use of by those
Reverend Persons, through whose means, by Gods Blessing, we enjoy our Religion
in its present Reformation: For we find that they had an especial care not to
innovate in Words or Forms, when they could with due security retain the old.
And ^o instance in what has nearest affinity with our present Subject, we see
that they have styled that Breviary of Religion, which they compiled, or rather
collected out of the best and most ancient Models of that kind, by the name of
Catechism: Which in its general notice signifies a familiar and easy Method of
instilling the rudiments of any Art, Science or Faculty. Which being done by a
frequent repetition of the same thing, Catechizing is derived from a Word
importing the reciprocation of the Voice, after the manner of an Echo. And in
this Sense it is often to be met with in Secular Authors, from whom it was
adopted into Religion, and there retains the same Notion and Office. For by
Catechizing, the Church has always taught the Fundaments and chief Principles
of Religion viva voce. And those that were thus taught, the Greek Writers
usually call Catechumens, and the Latin Hearers; which might as well respect
the manner of their Instruction, as their Fellowship and Communion with the
Church: in which they went no further than to be admitted to hear the
Principles of Christian Faith, made plain unto them. And to Catechizing, thus
understood, there will be no inconvenience to affirm, that St. Paul alluded,
Romans 10.17. the Ear being as properly the Door of Religion, as of any other
Science. That Catechizing was a way of Instruction, not to be restrained to
those Catechumens so frequently mentioned in Church History, and the Ancient
Canons; but that all Believers did therein Communicate, will be made good in
another Place of this Discourse.

But if it be doubted whether this be the native meaning of Catechizing, it
then follows that we have recourse unto the occasion whence it arose. For if
Words are notes of that which the Speaker conceives, and Conceptions are Signs
representing that which is spoken of; it is necessary that he who would rightly
understand Words, should have recourse unto the things whence they come. Now
the Church (which is Gods School) has ever used Catechizing as a Term of Art;
and we are therefore to understand it with restraint to such matters as the
Church is accustomed thereby to instruct. Following herein the Rule of Thomas,
that in Words we must not so much respect their original, exact, and precise
signification and derivation, as whereunto by use of Speech they are applied.
2. 2. q. 92. Art. 1. Now seeing that the Church, which is Gods School, has
still by Catechizing taught the first notices of Religion, we may safely cloth
it with this Definition: Catechism is a short and easy Instruction, which
explains the Mysteries of Faith, and the whole Body of Christian Doctrine, in
^uch a manner as may be plainly understood ^y the lowest Capacities. And if
there be any thing cloudy in this definition, it will receive sufficient light
from what is spoken of in the following Chapter.

CHAP. II. The Age of Catechism. The Institution of Adam's and Abraham's
Family. The Schools of the Prophets. The continual use of Catchising among the
Jews, particularly after the Erection of Synagogues. Their Benefit thereby.
HAving found that Catechism is but Greek for a peculiar manner of Instruction,
and that since it was received into the Church, does signify a brief and plain
Institution of the first and chief grounds of Religion; we may by the Laws of
concluding, infer that Catechizing is as ancient as the Principles which are
thereby instructed; and these are as old as the first Man. For Religion began
when God was Adam's Catechist, and gave and instructed him in that Law; in
whose observation consisted the main Articles of his continuing in a state of
excellent Felicity. In which if he had tarried till he had had an Offspring
grown up to a Capacity of a Religious Education, he would, no doubt, have
taught them to observe that Law, which his Maker for that end had assigned him.
For we need not be scrupulous to suppose that Adam would have been as careful
of his Childrens Instruction before the Fall, as he was after it. Some traces
of whose care are to be perceived in his Sons Deportment, when they brought
their Offerings to Gods Altar as Testimonies of Gratitude and Devotion: Which
could not be the effect of mere Natural Instinct, but of Adam's Pious Diligence
to bring them up Religiously. And though mere Natural Reason may teach Man a
Belief and Worship of God, yet to do it with the circumstances of the two first
Brethren exceeds, its Power.

The Understanding and Practice of ^ne Primordial Law, of not eating the
forbidden Fruit, would have been sufficient for Adam and all his Posterity; as
having in its Womb (to use Tertullian) all those Moral Precepts which were
afterward delivered by Moses, Exodus 20. and by our great Lawgiver reduced to
Two Heads: Love to God; Love to our Neighbor, St. Mark 12.30, 31. For if they
had observed the first, they would not have broken Gods Commandment; and if
they had done the like to the Second, they would not by yielding to the
persuasion of the Serpent, have destroyed themselves; but by love to both, have
fulfilled the whole Law. As Tertullian argues, advers. Judaeos, Cap. 2. That it
was needful for Adam's first Issue to be instructed in this Primordial Law,
wherein the whole Morality consisted, none I think will gainsay: That Adam (for
there was none else to do it) did therein instruct them, we may conclude, not
only from the necessity of the thing, which so Wise a Man as the first could
not but perceive; but also from Adams Justice, to make some amends to his
Children in their Education, for what he had damaged them by his own
Dis^bedience. And if the manner of the Instruct^on be demanded, I shall content
my self with the Opinion of that Rabbin, who ventured (discoursing him upon
this Subject) to derive their [Leback] or present Catechism from Adam, whom
they rationally imagine to have taught his Sons a short and plain Description
of the necessary Principles of Holiness and Honesty: which are the Sum of all
Catechism.

But that which yet affords us a more evident attestation of Catechizing, or
delivering and instructing the Rudiments of Religion, viva voce, in the First
Ages of the World, is the unquestionable Tradition of those Precepts which pass
under the name of Noah: Into which if we look attentively, they will easily be
discerned to have been the Universal Catechism of all Mankind, and to contain a
complete Scheme of Duties toward God and the Neighbor.

Now among these Precepts some were greater and more Famous, others of an
Inferior and Obscurer rank. Those of the former condition are here spoken of,
and usually set down after this manner.

1. Against strange Worship or Idolatry. 2. Against Blasphemy, or the Cursing
of the most Holy Name. 3. Against Effusion of Blood, or Murder. 4. Against
Revealing of Nakedness, or Adultery. 5. Against Theft and Rapine. 6. concerning
Civil Justice, and Odience. 7. Against Eating the Limb of a living Creature.
Whereof the two first respect our Demeanor toward God; the next Four belong
to the Carriage of one Man toward another; and the last forbids all outrageous
cruelty to other living Creatures.

But how this last should be reckoned in the number of those Precepts of
Natural Right, common to the whole Human Race, is not so easily to be
apprehended; especially when it is considered that it was not heard of till
after the Flood, when God said unto Noah, coming out of the Ark, Flesh with the
Life, thereof, which is the Blood thereof, shall ye not eat, Genesis 9.4. Where
the eating of Flesh is not simply prohibited, but the abscinding and Eating the
Limbs of living Creatures. And a late Author gives an Instance hereof in Lambs
stones.

The Reasons usually rendered of this Seventh Precept, are the avoidance first
of Cruelty; and next, of Communicating in the Customs of Idolatrous Nations:
Which at once protest both against its Age and Morality. And upon this account
it is, that learned Persons have excluded it the number of Natural Precepts,
and set it in Noah's Ritual of Ceremonies. But there is a general Agreement
among the Jewish Masters, that the first Six Precepts were given to Adam from
the very beginning of things, and were the common Law of all Nations under
Heaven.

But no such matter can be found concerning the Seventh: Which is so totally
passed over in silence by Job: who yet takes notice of all the rest, and
justifies his integrity by their observance. And because this perhaps is not
obvious to every Reader, it may be no way impertinent, to note the Texts, where
the Idumaean makes his profession.

1. Against Idolatry, Job 31.26. 2. Against Blasphemy, Job 1.5. 3. Against
Homicide, Chap. 31.29. 4. Against Adultery, Chap. 31.9. 5. Against Theft, Chap.
31.7. 6. Against Injustice, Chap. 29.7. etc.
And though these six Precepts, without any remote Collection, may be deduced
from the abovesaid Texts; yet in his whole Book, Job has not left the least
intimation of the seventh: which could not have escaped the observation of so
wise a Prince, if therein a Natural Equity had been concerned. St. Augustine,
in his Eighteenth Book and Fourtyseventh Chapter of the City of God, affirms
that Job was neither Native, Israelite, nor a Proselite adopted by their Law;
but born and bred in Idumaea: And therefore professed not the six Precepts upon
the account of a Jewish Tradition, but because they were the common Religion of
Mankind.

Before the Law, says Tertullian, was written in Tables of Stone, there was an
unwritten Law, which was given neither in Horeb, nor Sinai, nor in the Desert;
but in Paradise. And was naturally both known and kept by the Fathers; who from
the observing of the Equity and Justice of this Natural Law, received Titles of
Approbation and Honor; as Noah was called a just man, and Abraham the friend
of God: Tertul. c. 2. adversus Judeos.

And that this unwritten Law given in Paradise, was the six Precepts, we may
conclude from what Mr. Seldon tells us out of Mosche ben Maimon, who (says he)
peremptorily delivers, that the six Precepts were given to the first Man from
the very beginning of the World. And therefore ought rather to bear the name of
Adam than of Noah; for the latter can be entitled to them no otherwise, than as
in him all Mankind was preserved, as in the former they had been begun. In
which sense all Nations and Kindreds of Men, were called the Sons or Children
of Noah: Among which there was no exterior Badg of distinction, till God gave
Abraham the Sacrament of Circumcision; which did not lessen or abate the extent
and power of the six Precepts: for after Circumcision, the Jews as well as the
rest of Men stood obliged to their observance. Nor indeed was it possible to be
otherwise, seeing that therein was contained the Universal Religion. And at the
coming of Moses, these Precepts were so far from being evacuated, that they
were confi^med, with the addition of others concerning the Sabbath, the
Reverence of Parents, and the very thought of defalking other men's Goods. All
which make up the Ten words or Decalogue. And that was now Engraven in Tables
of Stone, which before was only written in Tables of Flesh. But the six
Precepts were the Catechism of the World from Adam to Noah, who received the
Seventh. In which condition Religion continued till Abraham received the
Precept of Circumcision, upon which came the great distinction of Nations in
respect of Worship. And now the Jews had eight Precepts for the Rule of Duties,
under which they continued until the time that God at Mara gave them a Statute
and an Ordinance; and by spaces filled up their Ritual.

But that which most imports the present Subject, is the manner how the First
six Precepts were instructed: Which without doubt was viva voce, or by an Oral
Institution: for certainly of things unwritten, there can be no other means to
instill and propagate their knowledge: For notwithstanding that these Precepts
contained such an apparent Equity and Right, as could be by none denied, who
therein had once been duly informed, yet there was a necessity of competent
means to procure this Information. For let Characters be never so large and
evident in themselves, yet the fairest Paper cannot exhibit them, till thereon
they be duly placed. And if the Soul of Man be at first as a Book wherein
nothing is, and yet every thing may be written; then either Education or
Instruction, Use or Discipline must of necessity fill up this blank. And the
Rasa Tabula of man's Soul, as it is most susceptive, so is it likewise most
concerned to be first Engraven with those things which indispensibly respect
his Duties toward God and his Neighbor; (the Contents of the six Precepts) And
that the Soul cannot be otherwise furnished therewith, than by Oral Institution
or Catechism, will be granted by all who would not have this Table writ upon
just like those which Moses received in the Mount.

But what in this case may seem but darkly probable in the two Patriarchs of
Mankind, is conceived to be clear and evident in the Father of the Faithful.
For Authors of no contemptible Credit, collect from that Encomium God gave
Abraham, for his foreseen care to instruct his Children and Household [to keep
he way of the Lord, and to do Justice and Judgment] Genesis 18.19. that this
manner of instruction is there spoken of. For albeit that to do Justice and
Judgment is a Principle naturally imprinted upon Man's Soul, in a Character no
Mortal Power can efface; yet it was Morally impossible for Abraham's Family to
keep the [way of the Lord:] That is, to be acquainted with the Purport and
Condition of that Covenant God had made with Abraham; where there was no Divine
Inspiration, nor any Written Word to guide them; unless Abraham by a gentle and
easy Method, introduced them into the knowledge of what so intimately concerned
them. And not to be scrupulous about words or forms of Speech, it is more than
probable, that this Holy Man taught his Family viva voce, or familiarly by word
of mouth, which is the true and genuine Sense of that whereof we now speak.

But not to place any strength in this Instance, nor in what is observed to
this Purpose, either in the Institution of Jehoash by Jehoiada the Priest, nor
what Solomon insinuates concerning himself; nor in what the Rabbis assert of
the many houses of Catechism that were in Jerusalem; nor in what some write
concerning the Schools of the Prophets, how that one part of their employment
was to Catechize: not placing, I say, any strength in these Instances, which
might be urged, as they have been, in favor of the Antiquity of Catechism; I
shall fix upon that which yields both a more obvious and certain Testimony of
its Ancientness, namely; That the Jews have continually had, and to this day
have the practice of Catechism, by which they introduce their Youth into the
knowledge of God, and the Rites of his Worship. It Is true, there is some
difference in the time when this Institution is begun: For the Ancient Jews
began not to Teach their Children the Principles of their Religion, till they
were complete Thirteen years of Age; but the Modern Jews in the Eastern Parts
especially, begin much more early. And this they do, (as Aaron Benetas a Sabio
in Barbary told me) because of their unsettlement, and for fear a sudden
removal should prevent them in this Duty.

It is very remarkable, that no Footsteps of Catechizing appears in the Service
of the Temple; which was indeed so wholly Ceremonious, that it may be doubted
whether ought of Moral Religion (the chief of Catechism) was therein either
thought of or designed. Indeed after the Erection of Synagogues there appear
great indications, that this way of instruction was in no vulgar request: But
then in fixing the certain time when these Religious Edifices were Erected,
there is small agreement among the Learned. That Synagogues were built before
the Jews return from Babylon, is very uncertain. But after they were returned,
it is plain that their Land was full of these Houses dedicated to Gods public
Service: wherein all parts of Divine Worship (except Sacrificing) were
celebrated. And they may be said to have had that Relation to the Temple, which
Parochial Churches have now to the Cathedral. But not to dispute about the
Antiquity and Quality of Jewish Synagogues, that which I would observe therein,
as most agreeable to the thing in hand, is, That Catechizing was (at feast) a
Principal part of that Teaching, which was therein frequented. And to attest
this remark, one known Passage ^ut of Epiphanius, compared with another in Fl.
Josephus, are all the Authorities that are thought needful to be produced.

Epiphanius speaking of the Scribes (who were the chief Masters of the
Synagogues) says that they were (...) (...), Reporters of the Law; and that
they taught (...), a kind of Grammatical knowledge therein. And Josephus writes,
that by virtue of this Teaching the Law, the Jews were as ready to answer any
Question demanded of them concerning it, as to their own Name. And the reason
he renders of this readiness, is very observable, as to the present Theme,
which is this, Because learning the Principles of their Religion as soon as
ever they were come to knowledge, they kept them firmly imprinted (...), in
their Souls or Minds. And how well the Circumstances of this way of instructing
the Law, suits with Catechizing in the most obvious Notion, I leave the
impartial to judge.

Now that the things thus taught were not barely the mere words of the Law, and
their naked Reading (as some have supposed,) may be concluded from the good
effect and influence which this instruction had upon the instructed. For we
find that it preserved them in the true Worship of the true God; which was a
work too high to be accomplished by such low means, as naming, spelling,
joining Letters and Syllables together, and such other Abcedarian and
Grammatical Niceties. And that by this instruction the Jews were preserved in
the true Worship of the true God, is excellently observed in this particular,
namely, That albeit the Hebrew Nation, before their Captivity, had Prophets to
instruct them in the true Worship of God, yet they were always falling into
Idolatry. But when they were returned out of Babylon, though they wanted
Prophets, yet they kept close, and faithfully adhered to the Worship of the
True God. (Though it must not be denied but that many Corruptions and hetrodox
Conceits were therein retained.) And the Reason that hereof is rendered, is,
the instruction used in the Synagogues: Whereby they were so thoroughly grounded
in what they professed, and so firmly and early rooted in the Knowledge and
Service of God, that their defection there from was even Morally impossible.
But when they wanted this plain way of being thus Catechized, they fell into
all those Evils, which are the undeniable Consequences of the want of
Catechizing, even Diversities of Opinions, Sects, and Divisions.

St. Paul Arguing with the Gnostick, and concluding him excuseless in what he
did, uses this Topic: That he had not only the Law in readiness to Teach him
otherwise, but had already therein been a Catechumen: But whether we may hence
infer, That the Old Synagogue had a formal Catechism like the Modern, I shall
not temerariously pronounce. Yet something to this purpose may be collected
from those Commentaries which pass under the name of St. Ambrose: Where we find
the Office of those Doctors mentioned, 1 Cor. 12.28. thus expounded: Illos
dicit Doctores, etc. He calls those Doctors or Teachers, who in the Church
instructed Children in Reading and retaining their Lessons, according to the
Custom of the Synagogue; for their Tradition has passed unto us. If you ask me
what the Lessons were, which the Doctors taught the Children; I answer, The
Principles of Religion. If you demand the manner how they were Taught; I reply,
In a manner suitable to their Capacities. If again you demand what that manner
was; I return, Catechizing, in the native and common acception of the Word. But
if Catechizing should be ill looked upon, as being a Tradition derived from the
Jews; then the greatest part of Christianity may be had under a jealous aspect
upon the same account: for it is most certain, that a large share both of
Christian Rites and Doctrines were derived from Judaism, which was not to be
laid desolate by Christianity, but completed and reformed. The Primitive
Christianity being (according to Mr. Seldom) the ^awful and Prophetic
Offspring of the Old Judaism.

CHAP. III. Catechizing in times of the Apostles. Evidences thereof in St.
Paul's Epistles. The Contents of their Catechism.
BUt how dim soever the traces of this kind of instruction be in the Jewish
Dispensation, yet the Footsteps thereof are more traceable in the Gospel.
Where Catechism is not obscurely intimated, if we may rely any thing on the
Words and Sentences which therein occur to this purpose.

And in the First place, it cannot be denied, but that in the inspired Epistles
we plainly read of two sorts of Christians, namely, such as were newly admitted
into the Church, compared by St. Peter to Newborn Babes, 1 Pet. 2.2. and such
as had been therein a longer time; called by St. Paul the Perfect, in respect
of their greater Progress in Christian Religion; or the wisdom which descends
from above, or which Christ came to Teach and Infuse, St. Jam. 3.17. To the
former or these they gave Milk, and instructed them in the easier Points of
Religion: But strong Meat was ordained for the later. Who having been first
well Catechized in Christianity, were capable of higher Mysteries. And of this
we have a clear illustration in the sixth to the Hebrews, where we first read
of the (...), The Doctrine, or Discourse, of the beginning of Christ! Or (as we
now read it) the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ: That is, a Catechism
which contained a brief Summary of those Principles which were necessary for
every Christian to learn, and to be laid as a Foundation meet for the
Superstructure of higher Mysteries, and matters of a deeper reach; such as the
Priesthood of Melchizedeck, and how he was a Type of Christ, Heb. 7. And of
these later St. Paul would not entreat, till he saw the former so faithfully
received, believed and practiced, as that they might be laid aside for the
present.

Now the (...), or Principles wherein Christians were first instructed, are
thus reckoned by the Apostle: First, Repentance from dead works: Secondly,
Faith toward God: Thirdly, The Doctrine of Baptism: Fourthly, Imposition of
hands, or Confirmation: Fifthly, The Article of the Resurrection from the dead:
And Lastly, The certainty of Eternal Judgment. These were the chief and main
Points of the Apostles Catechism, the first Principles of the Oracles of God,
the Rudiments of Christian Religion, says our Old Marginal Note, or the
Catechism wherein the younger sort of those times were instructed. And these
Articles now mentioned, or some such like, were (no doubt) that Form of
Doctrine, that manner of Catechizing which was delivered to the Romans, Romans
6.17. or as our Margin reads out of the Greek, whereunto ye were deliv^red or
given up: Where the ordinary Phrase is changed by the Apostle. For albeit to
say, To this form of Doctrine you were delivered, is not so agreeable either to
the Latin or English speech, as, This form of Doctrine which was delivered unto
you: Yet the Apostle makes use of the first, to tell us, says Cajetan, That
not so much the form of Religion was delivered to Men, as that Men were
delivered to the form of Religion. That so by this means Religion might be
known to have Authority and Power over Man, and not Man over Religion. But not
to insist upon this; it need not be doubted that this form of Doctrine spoken
of by St. Paul, was a Summary of Christianity, or the Catechism used in those
early and best times of Christianity, which contained the first Principles of
the Oracles of God. By which some understand the Creed, as Cyril of Jerusalem
in his Catech. 4. styled by him the milky Introduction, in allusion to St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 3.2. Heb. 5.12. Others, of the Creed and Lords Prayer, as Bede:
Others, the Creed and Decalogue, as Aquinus: Others, all those Elements which
the Catechumens learned, and professed at Baptism; whereof the Creed was the
Principal. Which with the Lords Prayer the Clergy was enjoined to Teach the
People, Council. Mogunt. cap. 45. And it was a general command of the Church,
that those who were to be Baptized, should have a certain time allotted for the
learning and rehearsing of the Creed. Which the Eastern Christians always
repeated with a clear Voice, when they came to the Holy Communion of Christ's
Body and Blood: As appears in the Twenty second Canon of the Council of Toledo.
But if this seem to restrain Catechizing only to such Catechumens as in the
History and Canons of the Church are frequently mentioned; and that this kind
of instruction was not used toward those whom by Baptism the Church had already
received into her Communion: It then follows, that we show how Catechism was a
plain Institution wherein all Believers did Communicate. And in the first place
it is manifest out of Oecumenius (expounding the (...)) That there were some
Points of Christian Religion wherein the Novices were Catechized before
Baptism, and some after. Those in which they were Catechized before Baptism,
were, The necessity of Repentance: to renounce the Devil and all his works: To
believe in God, etc. And those Points which they learned after Baptism, were
the Mysteries of our Saviors passion and Priesthood, his taking our sins on
himself, and working our Salvation; the Mysteries of our Resurrection, of the
last Judgment, and everlasting reward, or life. And the Catechism of these was
common to all Believers, because necessary.

Secondly, That Catechizing belonged to all within the Church, and was not
confined only to the Novices in Religion, and Candidates of Christianity, we
may confidently infer from the express words of St. Paul. Gal. 6.6. where he
divides the whole Church, to which that Letter was directed, into Catechist and
Catechized. Whereby the later cannot be meant only those who were not yet
admitted to Holy Baptism, Styled by the Church Canons Catechumens: For then we
must conclude that the Catechumen and Believer were all one: contrary to
Tertullian de Paenit. Cap. 6. de Corona Milit. Cap. 2. and all the Fathers: And
that there was a Christian Church in Galatia, consisting of Catechumens or
Unbaptised Persons, i. e. a Church of Christians without Christians. Which
absurd inconveniences cannot be evaded, unless by those Catechized spoken of by
the Apostle, we understand such as had received Baptism already, and were still
to be instructed in that Religion whereinto by that Divine Rite they had been
admitted. So that in St. Paul's time Catechizing in its Native acception was
continued even to those who had attained already to so much knowledge in the
Principles of Christianity, as rendered them, in the Language of the Ancients,
Competentes, or Persons fit for Baptism, and to be admitted to the higher
Mysteries of Religion. The same Apostle told the Corinthians, that he had fed
them with Milk, that is, by the consent of all, with Catechetical Doctrines.
And there is no doubt that those Texts in Heb. 5.12. Act. 18.25.
Heb. 6.1. are pregnant intimations of this truth. The like may be affirmed of
what St. Luke S. Luke 1.4.
has recorded concerning the Introduction of the Eloquent Apollos, and his most
Excellent Theophilus, into the knowledge of Christ. And what has been said,
affords sufficient ground of asserting Catechism to have been in use with the
Apostles, and that it descended from the Synagogue. How it was the Practice
also of the Primitive Church, is the Subject of the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. IV. The Apostles Catechists in several Provinces. The Declension and
Restoration of Catechizing. Catechists Styled Exorcists, etc.
BUt if we imagine that the marks of Catechizing are less apparent in the New
Testament, yet if we look into Ecclesiastical History, we shall there find that
the Apostles had their several Provinces wherein they were Catechists. And that
by means of constant Catechizing, many Kingdoms within Forty years after the
Passion received an alteration in their Pagan Ceremonies. Although it must be
confessed that it was not long till the Malice and Envy of the Devil and Man
brought a decay in this most useful Institution. For in the second Age, we read
that Catechizing was so far declined, that Origin (living in the Two hundred
and thirtieth of Christ) was honored with the Title of its Restorer. But where
this Restoration of Catechizing by Origin was affected, is not so evident.
There is a great probability that Judea was the Scene of so good an Action. For
we read that he was very kindly received there, after he fled out of
Alexandria, upon his falling into disgrace with the Christians of that Country,
because in the time of Decius he had offered Incense to an Idol, to save his
Body (of which his care was not always justifiable) from being defiled by a
filthy Ethiopian.

In Alexandria, Origin could not be said to restore Catechizing, for it is
expressly affirmed, that there he succeeded in Cathedra Catechetica his Master
Clemens, as Clemens had done his Master Pantenus in the same Chair. And of
these two later, we are told, that they made it their Employment to Teach the
Grounds of Religion, not by Sermons or Homilies, but by Catechism, in such
Schoolls and Colleges, as in great likelihood they themselves had founded for
that purpose.

So that we see how in Alexandria (and we may hope that the like was in other
Parts) there was a succession of Catechists; who were also called Exorcists,
not only because (as Isidore explains the word) by Prayer in the Name of Jesus
they cast unclean Spirits out of those who were possessed: Nor merely in regard
of Exorcising the Pagan Catechumens, when they came to be Baptized (as is to be
seen at large in Burchardus Unormatensis) but because that by their diligent
Catechizing the Principles of Christianity, they pulled down Idolatry, and
thereby cast Satan out of his Kingdom, and dispossessed him of that Tenor which
by Idol-worship he had so long usurped. And the first part of the Vow of
Baptism, binds the Baptized to renounce Idolatry under the name of Devil. That
Exorcising was an Office of good repute in the Ancient Church, and not to be
invaded by the Laity, is clear out of Tertullian, who in his Book advers.
Haeret. Cap. 41. tells, how the very Heretical Women were become so shameless
and malepart, that they durst Teach, Dispute, Exorcise, and even Baptize.

Mr. Calvin makes it a probable conjecture, that the Epistle to the Hebrews was
not Penned till some time after the Gospel was, and the Church had erected a
form of Government, and had Constituted among other things, an Order of
Instruction, or Catechism, in which both the Adult Converts, and Children of
Believers were to be Taught: And he further adds, that those Principles
mentioned Heb. 6. had respect unto the usual and established form of Catechism.
Now if this conjecture be argumentative, and referred to its proper place,
there will need no more to prove Catechizing to be of Apostolical Institution
and Practice.

CHAP. V. The Antiquity of Catechism probable upon the account of its
convenience: In respest of the Object; Method of Instruction.
BUt suppose that all which has hitherto been observed be not evident, nay,
that nothing of this way of Teaching was ever in use with the Primitive
Instructors of Christianity, which would be a very uncouth supposal; yet this
does only conclude against the Age, but not the convenience of Catechism. It no
way proves that such a way of instruction had not been highly rational, to
introduce ignorant Infidels into the knowledge of the true Faith. For all those
who by ordinary means were to be converted to Christian Religion, were no less
ignorant of its Principles, than those Infants who are born within the Church;
and therefore to be Catechized therein, was as proper and requisite for them,
as for these: For the ignorance of the one, as well as of the other, was to be
removed by such means as all discreet Teachers have thought suitable to that
end.

Now it is obvious to every Capacity, that no Man's ignorance can be removed by
Rhetoricating Harangues, Pompous Discourses, profound Researches, etc. But by
humble and plain Lessons: Easy and obvious Rules: And such A. b. c. Rudiments,
as fall under the comprehension of the rude and unlearned; and which are proper
to prepare them for higher Lessons. In brief, though the things which are
taught be in themselves sublime and difficult, yet the manner of Teaching them
must be humble and easy. And this way of instruction was (no doubt) pursued by
the Primitive Doctors, who did not only prepare by Catechizing the ruder
Infidel to receive Baptism, but did also by the same course build up and
educate those into a more perfect knowledge of Christianity, whom they had
already Baptized. And therefore (...) and (...), to Catechize and Edify, are
with Grammarians terms expressive of each other.

And this makes Catechizing highly convenient in respect of the true Method of
learning: For therein is observed the natural path of instruction, which ever
begins with short and obvious notions, to the end the Learner may not be
discouraged with a difficult and perplexed entrance. For if the minds of
Novices, or young Disciples, should be laden and puzzled with multitude and
variety, or with obscureness and prolixity of Rules, they would be in danger to
reject the whole Institution, for the irksome painfulness of its first Grounds.
And albeit that all beginnings are attended with Hardships: Yet they ought in
all reason to be reduced to as great an easiness as their Nature will afford;
to the end that they may not dishearten the Undertaker. This we see is the
course of all Arts and Sciences, both Liberal and Mechannick, which have their
Introductive and Initiatory Systems, containing such easy Elements as being
first known, fit the Learner for deeper Documents. And these lower Rudiments
hold some resemblance with that lesser size of Virtues, which some Platonists
call Purgative, because they are first taken into the Soul to cleanse and
prepare her for the reception of Greater. And in Religion it is as requisite as
in human Arts, that the first Lessons be framed according to the weak and
slender Capacities of youngest Beginners.

Now as there is small probability that in Writing he should ever be able to
give the true proportion of Words, who never learned the first draught of
Letters: So there is no great assurance, that any one should make any solid and
firm Progress in the Mysteries of Christianity, who was never acquainted with
the Principles thereof: or, That those should be able to give any good account
of the hope that is in them, who never learned the Articles of Faith, on which
their hope is founded.

And this is a Clue that leads us to the right way of grounding Religion: for
by what is said, it is easy to perceive, that solid Catechizing is to the
orderly Structure of Spiritual Knowledge, what a sure Foundation is to any
material Fabric. And therefore he that would edify himself, or others, in
Christianity, without this Groundwork, build but a Visionary Church, or a
House upon the Sand. As has been sadly visible in those Persons who being not
founded upon this Rock, have been quickly shaken and blown down with every Wind
of Corrupt Doctrine, vented by Men crafty to contrive deceit. It being
impossible that those should be steadfast in such Principles of Religion,
wherein they were never rightly and duly instructed.

CHAP. VI. Catechism necessary in respect of the increase and advancement of
Spiritual Knowledge: To have a distinct Understanding of things necessary to
Salvation, etc.
AND not only the sure grounding, but also the regular and solid advance and
increase in the Knowledge of Things Divine, makes Catechizing a necessary
Introductive. For unless by this means we be firmly principled in Christianity,
our knowledge therein will be both small and unstable: and as a pernicious
consequent thereof, we shall become trifling and affected in that little we
know. For it fares in Divinity as Philosophy, wherein a little smattering
Knowledge makes Men vain and assuming, whom a deeper insight therein would
render composed and settled. And this has been, and is still, miserably
apparent in the Ancient and Modern Sectaries, whom a mere conceit of knowledge
has tempted to assume and usurp the Place and Function of Teachers,
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1.7. And
indeed their ignorance is the Mother of such assuming Knowledge, as is seen in
our great Pretenders to Spiritual Science, who but too exactly prove themselves
descended of those Old Gnostics, who were so pestilential to the Primitive
Church; being notoriously addicted to Blaspheme, rail at, and speak evil of the
things they know not; and in a peculiar manner are gifted with Maliciousness,
Avarice, Schismaticalness, Rebellion, and Contumacy: According to their
description in St. Jude 10.11.12, etc. And the want of having been duly
acquainted with the true grounds of Religion, is one main reason why they are
in that Divine Science such Smatterers and half-witted; whereof there is small
hopes ever to have them cured, but by a full Institution in those Elements
which are undeniably requisite to sound Knowledge.

But Catechizing is not only necessary upon the account of a regular entrance
and increase of Knowledge in Religion, but also to give us a clear intuition of
those particular Truths whereof we cannot be ignoran^ ^ut with the peril of our
eternal Happiness. For notwithstanding that all things necessary to Salvation
are clear and plain in Scripture, yet the Scripture it self is so spacious a
Field, that even a wary Traveller may therein lose himself. And besides this,
the things necessary to be known by us in order to our future Welfare, are in
Sacred Writ so often mingled with things that are otherwise, that it exceeds
the generality of Capacities to find them out, and rightly to sever. Those that
are idle (as the most are in this Study) will not take pains; and those that
are ignorant have not the ability to distinguish, collect, and reduce such
necessary Points to their respective Chapters. And yet till such Points be
plainly digested into several Heads, many, at least the the illiterate
Multitude, will unavoidably want a competent Knowledge of what is necessary
both to their Temporal and Immortal Happiness. Now that the gathering of these
necessary Truths into Sums and Models, is the proper Work of Catchism, is
visible in all those Systems which have ever born that Name. And of this Truth,
our own Church-Catechism yields a sufficient Testimony: In which all things
that concern Faith, Practice, Prayer, and Doctrine; are collected into such
short and plain Sums, that the weakness of no Man's Wit can either hinder
altogether the Knowledge, or excuse the utter ignorance of things necessary to
Salvation. For whosoever, with a mind free from Prejudice, shall impartially
peruse the Church Catechism, he therein may observe all saving Truths, reduced
to such short, but full Heads, that the weak are not left to the hazardous, nor
the slothful to the laborious re-search thereof in Holy Scriptures.

CHAP. VII. Catechizing the most suitable means to heal the Distempers of this
Church. Seveveral Propositions to be supposed. A short digression concerning
our Disorders.
BUT we will yet suppose that all which hitherto has been delivered, ought to
receive no better estimation than mere ordinary Discourse; and that we are to
proceed upon a new Ground, and examine the necessity of Catechizing in respect
of the present Temper and Disposition, or indeed rather Distempers and
Disorders of this Church and People. And in order unto this, it will not be
altogether impertinent and useless, a little to consider what our present
Disorders are.

And in the First Place we cannot but observe, that our Declension both from
the Design and Rule of the Gospel, ^s not conspicuous only in those grand
Debauchees, who grow weary of the Name of Christ, or profess it only to
disgrace it: But also in those who seem strict and severe in performing all the
Formal and Exterior part of Discipleship. Even those I mean, who are zealous
Hearers of Christ's Word, and constant Communicants at his Table, not professing
Devotion to any other. For even these are content (as occasion serves) to
abandon that Purity, Continence, Meekness, Humility, Candor, Mercifulness, and
other instances of a sweet Nature, so vehemently urged by our Divine Lawgiver,
and which are the genuine result of true Christian Principles, for that one Law
of sordid Interest, brutal Passion, and churlish Self-preservation, although
they cannot but acknowledge, that all these are totally opposite to the true
Spirit of Christianity. And besides professed Politicians, there are others who
seem to look upon Religion as a mere Engine of State, and a thing that is as
tractable for Battery as Defense. And who, notwithstanding their contrary
Pretenses, live as if they regarded not what Christ chiefly aimed at by his
Incarnation, Death and Resurrection. And how that he gave himself for us (both
in his Birth and Death) to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify unto
himself a peculiar People zealous of Good Works. And that he rose from the dead
to bless us, in turning every one of us from our Iniquities. And that the main
design of our inspired Christianity, is the entire Reformation of our Lives,
and to make us as good as our Profession.

But besides this sort of Nominal Christians there is another, which are so far
transported with the opinion of that Union which they fancy already to enjoy
with Christ, that they dream to be in present Possession of that Vision which
is peculiar to the future State. And they are so dazzled with the supposititious
Glory of their Spiritual Perfection, that they contemn the means ordained to
make them truly perfect, because they fancy they have arrived at it already.

And with these may be joined all such who are so closely addicted to their own
Opinions, that they think it a matter of Conscience, Piety and Religion to
oppose and condemn whosoever are not of their Mind and Persuasion. Since whose
rise we have been under a sensible decay of Charity, and (as a natural
consequent thereof) an increase of wickedness.

But if these ingross not all the occasions of our Disorders, there is another
sort of People who will fill up their measure: Those I mean who pervert the
plainest Scriptures to such a meaning, as does best help to carry on their
Designs: And what is yet worse, who make it matter of Conscience to assert that
Sense of the Text which they have perversely mista^en. And this deifying our
own Interpretations, and tyrannically enforcing them upon others: This
restraining of the Word of God from that Latitude and Generality, and the
Understandings of Men from that liberty wherein Christ and his Apostles left
them, is, and has been the only Fountain of all the Schisms of the Church, and
that which makes them Immortal: The common Incentaries of Christendom, and that
which ^ears into pieces, not the Coat, but the ^owels and Members of Christ:
Ridente ^urca, nec dolente Judaeo, Take away these Walls of Separation, and all
will quickly be one. Take away the damning of Men for not subscribing to the
Words of Men, as the Words of God; require of Christians only to believe
Christ, and to call no Man Master but him only. Let those leave claiming
Infalibility, who have no Title to it; and let them that in their Words
disclaim it, disclaim it likewise in their Actions. In a word, take away
tyranny in Opinions, by which the Devil withstands the Power of Truth, and
restore Christians to their just and full liberty of captivating their
Understandings to Scripture only, and as Rivers, whose Passage is not
interrupted, run all to the Ocean; so it may well be hoped by Gods Blessing,
that Universal Liberty thus moderated, may quickly reduce us to Truth and
Unity. These thoughts of Peace may come from the God of Peace, to whose
Blessing I recommend them. And that this may not be looked upon for some
singularity in my own Persuasion, I have transcribed the Words out of Mr.
Chillingworth, and he out of another, and enclosed them in a Parenthesis.

But taking no delight to travel further in search of those Distempers which I
am unable to remedy; the only comfort is, that they cannot be looked upon as
the Issues of our Religion, nor any way be charged upon the Principles we
profess. And therefore we must seek elsewhere to lay the Imputation: and I
shall go no further than to what I mentioned in the Introduction, even, the
Omission, or Lukewarm use of Catechizing.

And here in the First place, it cannot be denied, how that the generality of
the People of this Kingdom, have for many Years (at least during the time of
our Intestine Wars) either been destitute of all Catechizing, or have been
Catechized only in such Principles, as were good for nothing but to establish
the Elder in a cursed Schism and Rebellion, and to infect the Younger with the
same Contagion. The sad effects whereof are still visible in the unpeaceable
Tenets of some, and in the want of a due understanding of Religion in most. In
respect of which, we have need to be taught again, which be the first
Principles of the Oracles of God; being become such as have need of Milk, and
not of strong Meat. The greatest part of the common People, being so far unable
to reap any benefit from the handling of abstruser Mysteries in Eloquent and
Elaborate Discourses, (which is so studiously pursued by our Junior and Florid
Theologues) that they want instruction in the plainest parts of Catechistical
Doctrines. For notwithstanding that we boast much of our Knowledge of Christ,
and that our Proficiency is so great in Religion, that we conceive our selves
wiser than our Teachers; yet if the Tree may be judged by its Fruits, we shall
be found shamefully ignorant of what we assume to know, and to have little of
that Wisdom which descends from above, which Christ came to teach and infuse,
and which is Pure, Peaceable, Gentle, easy to be entreated, merciful, without
Hypocrisy and Wavering.

In the Second place, we cannot but with deep Resentments observe, that since
the time God turned again our Captivity, and restored this Church to the free
use of his Ordinances, Catechizing has met but with cold Entertainment, even
from those by whom it ought to have been most lovingly caressed. For in most
places it has been looked upon rather as a Foreigner, than a Native of the
Church; and as Fruits of their Mouth, never in Season but for a few Days in
Lent: And even then too, the Church-Catechism is generally taught, without any
such explanation as is needful, in respect of those slender Capacities to whose
instruction it is chiefly devoted.

And if, in the Third place, we consider who those are, which on the one hand
hinder the progress and settlement of Unity, Peace, and Concord in this Church,
by an undutiful froward resisting of her Laws: Or, who they are that on the
other hand Apostatize and utterly forsake her Communion; it will be found upon
due examination, that we have laid the ground of the Disobedience of the one,
and of the defection of the other, in a want of a timely and diligent
Catechizing.

And as for the First sort, namely, the disobedient and refractory (who are now
known by the very candid Name of Dissenters) they cannot pretend to a more
plausible excuse of their Undutifulness, than that they were never du^y
Catechized to the contrary. For granting them to be Persons not totally
forsaken of all Ingenuity and right Reason, we cannot imagine that they should
so foully violate their bounden Duties both to God and Man, had they ever been
fully taught, or did clearly retain any thing but an imperfect and prejudicate
knowledge of those Duties, as they are plainly set down in the Church-Catechism.

And as for the Latter sort, to wit, those who have Apostatized and fallen from
ours to the Roman Persuasion, they have been so far from having their first
Tinctures and Foundation in Religion according to our public Catechism, that
they might say thereof as those in Acts 19.2. did of the Holy Ghost. But we
must limit this Observation chiefly to those who had the unhappiness to be born
in this Church when she was under the Cross, and wore the Marks of her great
Master. And as for those who had been instructed in our Church Catechism; yet
before they left us, they had so far unlearnt it, as that they had retained of
that System of our Religion, such loose, rambling, and incoherent Notions, as
if it were wholly Enthusiastic, or had been compiled by Persons deeply
Hypochondriacal. And for closure of this Paragraph, I shall only add, That none
could ever be met with, who for Ends truly Spiritual and Religious, did ever
abandon this for the Roman Church, who had been thoroughly grounded in her
Catechism.

And there will want no Reasons to ^upport this Assertion, if it be duly
con^idered, how the very Frame and Con^exture of the Catechism does obviate and
oppose all the main Errors of Po^ery, as they relate either to Faith or
Practice; to Prayer or Doctrine.

And First, he that has been duly Ca^echised in the Apostles Creed, will not
only be armed against a spurious Explication of the Old Articles of our Faith,
but also against a needless addi^ion of New ones. For he will find, that the
first Twelve contain such a perfect Summary of all saving Truths simply
necessary to be believed, that those Articles added thereunto by the Council of
Trent, ought to be rejected upon the account of being Superfluous. And ^t the
same time he will find ground enough to explode that Implicit Faith, so much
relied upon in the Romish Church, who considers the necessity of a personal
Belief, as it is clearly required in the first Word of the Creed, which in
La^ine gives name to the whole.

And in the next place, as to those Errors of Popery that concern our Practice,
they will be certainly discovered and refuted by a right understanding of the
Decalogue, which by all is granted to be a clear and perspicuous Rule of what
we are to do both toward God and our Neighbor.

And a Man that is well grounded in the Doctrine of the First Commandment,
knows, that he must reserve all Divine Honor, Trust, Devotion to God alone,
and that he may bestow no part thereof upon the Creature; and therefore cannot
but avoid and abhor those Romish Doctors that would make him a Client to the
Saints, and a constant Votary to the Blessed Virgin and his Guardian Spirit. He
that is well grounded in the Doctrine of the Second Commandment, will never be
induced to believe, that the Image is to be adored with the same Worship that
is due to what is worshipped: He will be wary of admitting any bodily
representations of the Holy Trinity: and look jealously upon all the Doctrine
of Image worship, which he sees to be vindicated with a few remote and
suspicious Distinctions, devised by the Fathers of that Doctrine on purpose to
maintain its Credit. He that is thoroughly instructed in the Doctrine of the
Third Commandment, and has thence been taught to tremble at, and reverence the
Holy Name of the Almighty, will never be induced to believe, that frequent
Cursing and Swearing, if customary, is Venial, or a Sin which is pardonable in
its own Nature, and for which the Favor of God cannot be forfeited: That
equivocating in Oaths is ^awful: That our most Solemn Oaths may be dispensed
with: That the dreadful Name of God may be used in the unwarrantable
exorcization of the Creatures: That Understanding and Devotion are not
necessarily required to our Invocations upon God. He that has been thoroughly
informed of the mind of its eternal Author in the Fourth Commandment, will
never give up himself to a Religion that prefers a Man's Day before Gods, or a
Saints Day before the Lords: Which would alter the Institution of God himself,
as was designed by Pope Silvester, who decreed that Thursday should be kept for
the Lords Day. He that has well learned the Fifth Commandment, must do great
Violence to his Understanding, before he can choose to be of a Religion that
loves to drink the Blood of princes: That absolves Subjects from their
Allegiance to their Lawful Sovereign: That gives Power to a Vicar to depose
Princes at Pleasure: That Arms Subjects with Power to murder their King. The
like may be said of all the Precepts of the Royal Law of God, which is the most
perfect Rule of our Obedience, and which we are Taught to violate, so soon as
we have given up our selves to Popery, and to the Service of the Roman Moloch.
And though these are Mysteries which the Romish Seducers carefully conceal, and
sometime zealously inveigh against, while they are compassing easy Proselytes,
with whom they deal in the most specious Pretenses; yet they have no sooner
deluded them to give up their Names to Popery, and thereupon to shake Hands
with all liberty of judging for themselves, than by degrees they let them know
what is to be done. And if they startle at doing what is commanded them, this
is presently censured for a Relick of their Old Heresy, and that there was
something wanting in their Conversion, which cannot be supplied, but by acting
thoroughly all the most horrible Injunctions of their New Faith.

And by the same means of being well Catechized in the Lords Prayer, a Man will
be able to apprehend and reject the many Errors Popery would impose upon him in
that high concern. For thereby he will clearly perceive that Prayer ought be
made to God only, and that none to can share with him in that, or any other
part of Divine and Religious Worship. And that for this reason he ought not to
embrace a Religion which enjoins him to pray unto Saints and Angels, and that
too not only to have them intercede to God for him, but also to help him in his
Necessities, and to deliver him both in Bodily and Ghostly Dangers. And that
this may not be thought the fault of Rosaries, Hours, and Books of private
Devotions (for which the Church of Rome is accountable, as having confirmed
them by her Authority) it is also the Tenor of her public Service: as is
plainly to be seen in the Collects, Hymns, and Litanies of that Breviary which
was restored by the Council of Trent, and authorized by several Popes, and
which is at this day in uncontrollable use through all the Papal Dominions.

And we might also observe the like concerning the Doctrine of the Sacraments
in which whosoever is once fully instructed according to the Catechism of this
Church, will quickly discern the Abuses thereinto introduced by Popery. To
mention no more than what belongs to the Author of a Sacrament; which our
Catechism asserts, and which is an undeniablle Truth, to be only Christ. And
therefore all those things are to be excluded the number of Sacraments, that
are not of his immediate and clear appointment. And that Orders, Penance,
Confirmation, Marriage, Extreme Unction (all Romish Sacraments) are not of
Christ's Institution, is easily discernable to Men but slenderly versed in the
Holy Bible; and therefore not to be received for the Sacraments of Christ, but
Inventions of those, who teach for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. Now by
these imperfect intimations we may safely infer, That those who have had their
Foundation in Religion surely laid according to the publicly allowed Catechism
of this Church, must have other Ends to serve than those of Religion, and drive
other projects than Gods Honor, and their own Salvation, who forsake her
Communion for that of Rome.

But to return: What ever has unhappily contributed to our Revolting to the
one hand or the other from the Established Religion of this Church, there is
none that will deny but that the lack of a plain and solid Catechizing has had
therein a very large share. And therefore we may conlude, That the careful
practice of that, will be a chief means to restore Union and Peace, the
Omission whereof has occasioned the contrary: And indeed, Catechizing seems
the only proper way not only to strengthen those that do stand, but to raise up
those that are fallen; if we consider how ineffectual all other ways have proved,
which have been managed to this end. Which now come to be surveyed.

CHAP. VIII. The Methods used for our reclaiming, surveyed, proving
ineffectual, etc.
AND here we need not be told, how Indulgence and Clemency, Acts of Amnesty and
Grace, have been so far unable so much as to work us up to a good Humor, that
like fresh Pastures to unruly Beasts, they have only served to strengthen us
for a sturdier resistance. Nor need we be told of making Converts with the
Churches Patrimony: for though by this means some may be invited to bear the
Ark of God, yet they do it but like the Philistines Kine, who were still lowing
after the Calves they had left behind them. It needs not be demonstrated, that
our frowardness and opiniastre are not to be cured by such Methods: But that
which I would chiefly take notice of, is, that Disputation and Preaching, which
out of an agreeableness that they are generally thought to bear to our
distempers, and the powerfulness of their management, have obtained a Name to
be the only proper remedies. But the continuance of the Malady, is a convincing
Argument that these are not so proper for this purpose, as is so generally
supposed. And give me leave to speak of these two freely; and first of
Disputation, which is a mere empyrick prescription in order to heal our present
distempers. For though Disputation, as it is managed by the Pen, may have got a
great Vogue in the World, yet we can never hope that our Dissenting Judgments
should hereby be reconciled, if with due seriousness we consider; First, the
manner of their conduct: Secondly, the matter to be disputed: Thirdly, the
persons thereby to be wrought upon.

And First, If the conduct of disputes fall under a calm, unprejudiced and
reflexive review, (as they appear in Print) the Penmen thereof seem to have
intended rather the defamation, than conviction of each other; and to have been
of an opinion that men were to be refuted, as Mercury of old was worshipped, by
throwing dirt and stones in their Face. But we have been taught by miserable
experience that the lashing of a Few, has been subservient to no better end
than to exasperate the whole Party: And that our keenest Arguments, if we may
judge by the Event, have only served to alarm the Adversary into a better
provision for future resistance, and to strengthen their opinion in that part
wherein the Attack had discovered it to be the weakest. But grant (as indeed we
must) that the Dissenters (to whom this Paragraph chiefly relates) are not able
to stand in Argument before their Opponents; yet we must also grant, that there
is a want of Decorum in the Victors carriage, while his Argument loses its
efficacy, through the looseness, luxury, or rigor of its expression. For it
is too apparent to conceal, that there are so many unmanly reflections in most
of our late Controversies, that discreet and sober persons loath the reading of
those Pages where they occur. Which gives occasion for doubting that such
arguings so managed, proceed not from that Spirit of meekness wherewith the
overtaken Brother should be restored; nor were designed to procure Unity and
Concord among us, seeing that so little of that Charity can therein be
discerned, which is the bond of Peace, and sure groundwork of all true
Reconcilement. And if the conduct of our Debates were thoroughly considered, we
might find this Church complaining like the Eagle in the Greek Epilogue, which
seeing her Breast wounded with a feathered Dart, cried out with Tears, Alas! my
own kind has destroyed me. But to proceed.

It cannot be doubted, but that some opinions sooner die by being contemned,
than taken notice of. And I am persuaded, that this National Church is now
troubled with many Opinions which long ere this would have found their own
Graves, if they had not been kept alive with opposition. In so much that it may
be said of this particular Church, what was of the Catholic, That if she had
stopped and damned up the Originals and Springs of Controversies, rather than
determining for one part, to give them as it were a Pipe and Conduit to convey
them to Posterity, she had not suffered that Inundation of Opinions with which
at this day she is overrun. A policy still in practice in the Popish
Countries, where those Books of Controversies are scarce to be met with,
wherein their Religion is maintained against Reformed Churches. By which means
they live free from those Dissentions wherewith their Neighbors are afflicted,
to their scandal and ruin: And I hope we may safely imitate their Wisdom, whose
Errors we abhor.

But if Controversies were as necessary, as by some they are pretended to be,
yet their conduct ought so far to be reformed, as that at least there be a
cessation from hostile Expressions, which have hitherto been of no better use
than to exasperate Men into a petulant and peevish vindication of that Name,
under which they conceived themselves to be reviled. Next, that the Disputers
would not vent and foam out their personal Piques and Animosities under the
pretense and cloak of asserting Religion and the Church. Lastly, that they
would aim at Peace and not Revenge. For how seemly soever the present carriage
of Disputes may be accounted in persons of another Character, yet it is very
ill-becoming those who are styled Ambassadors of Reconcilation, and who ought
to express the Emphasis of that Title, in reconciling Men's Wills with their
Duties, and their Understandings with the Truth; in bringing the wicked to
repentance, and the malicious to Charity; and to win all to a holy compliance
with the design and Rule of the Blessed Author of Christianity; which was, to
heighten our Conversation to the most elevated pitch of true Virtue, Peace, and
Holiness; and that our Righteousness should exceed all theirs that ever went
before us.

CHAP. IX. The Just Matter and Subject of Controversy in Religion examined.
How by Catechizing, and not Dispute, we are therein to be reconciled.
AND not only the present conduct of Disputes render them unsuitable Medicines
for our Disease; but also the things concerning Religion, which can with any
Reason be pretended to be the matter thereof. Now whatever in Religion can be
pretended to be disputable, must either respect its Dress and Ornaments, or its
Body and essential Parts; the Exterior Appendages, or the Principles of
Religion. If the Scruple, or the Dispute be about the Dress, outward Rites,
Circumstances, and Fashion of Religion: than no contrivance seems more
rational, or method more probable to assoil and remove it, than a due
Catechizing and instructing the scrupulous in the indispensible Duties of the
Fifth Commandment, and to tender him a plain Scheme of the Obligation that lies
upon his Conscience; To honor and obey the King, and all that are put in
Authority under him; to submit himself to all his Teachers, Spiritual Pastors
and Masters.

How the Supreme Powers have Authority in the Externals of Religion.

How in Religion things indifferent in themselves may pass into a Law, which
ought to be obeyed, as much as any Laws in indifferent things which relate to
the good of the Civil State.

How things of never so low a stature, or indifferent concernment, having once
received the Image and Superscription of a Law, ought to be obeyed, both for
the sake of God and Conscience.

How it can no way comply with the design of Government, to make good their
Institutions by dint of Argument: For if Authority were obliged to satisfy
every meddling and capricious Brain, they would have little or no time left to
be obeyed, etc. And when indiscretion of zeal, or pride of Wit, engage to
vindicate every thing that is lawfully commanded, it is to have a better
opinion of our own, than the Magistrates Prudence; to think our Arguments will
be more prevailing than their Commands; or that the former were requisite to
support the latter, etc.

That these and the like things are proper for Catechism, and thereby the most
gently and indiscernably to be infused, none I presume will gainsay. For they
naturally fall in with those Truths which belong to our duty toward man, of
which we must be duly informed, ere we can therein be exact.

If the Dissenter yield an obedient ear to this Instruction, there will be
little fear of his continuing scrupulous to obey what his Superiors have a just
power and right to enjoin: If he do not hearken, then let him be devoted to the
Civil Power, and leave the Magistrates to vindicate their own Authority; and to
make that be done for Wrath, which would not for Conscience. And I am tempted
to think, that if at the Happy Restoration this way had been pursued, we long
ere this had been sensible of its good Effects. And I will add this moreover,
That if the Orthodox Clergy, ever since God wonderfully restored them, had
devoted the greatest share of their pains to plain Expositions and Paraphrases
of the Church-Catechism, they might long before this have gently gained both
upon their Opinions and Affections, who (by the indiscretion of other Methods)
seem to be now alienated beyond retrieve. Conscience of Obedience will answer
all the Scruples of Minds disposed to Peace; and for the Turbulent let them be
answered with Rods and Axes.

The next thing that can be disputed ^n Religion, besides its dress and
exterior adherencies, are its Body, or Principles; such I mean, as are
absolutely necessary to Salvation; for we need be sollici^ous for no more than
what will save us. Now these are both few and plain. For as for those numerous
places of Scripture, Notices of Oral Tradition, which are da^k and difficult,
they are no further necessary to be understood in their primitive intention and
meaning, than that we sincerely believe, that whatsoever God thereby meant and
intended, is infallibly true.

And things thus truly necessary, are as few as plain: St. Paul has reduced
them to Two Articles: To believe that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of all
them that come unto him. And to whom only thus much is given, it shall not be
damnable that they believe no more. And if this (as it seems to) be the lowest
degree of Faith, God will therewith be pleased, if the means be wanting of
rising higher. Cornelius in Acts 10. who because of his Alms and Prayers was
accepted of God, had not been safe in that State, had he gone no further, after
God had sent St. Peter to inform him what he was to do more. The Charities and
Devotions performed in the time of his Jewish Proselytism, how far they might
have stood him in stead, had he been vouchsafed no farther Illumination, is not
the Question; yet if he had staid there, when means of going farther was
afforded him, or if he had refused to believe in Christ after a sufficient
Revelation, he had then justly incurred the condemnation of loving Darkness
more than Light, when Light was come unto him. These instances are usual in
this matter, and tell us plainly, That as few Articles are of absolute
necessity, yet that their number is not the same unto all, some more, some
less, as God has given to every man, all that is necessary for a Man to
believe, which for that purpose is sufficiently revealed unto him, and which
God requires him to believe and practice. But there is none can set down how
much every man should believe, no more than he can set down how much every man
should eat.

But if notwithstanding this paucity and plainness of the Principles of
Religion, any should therein be still contentious, this Evil is not to be
removed by Disputation, but plain Catechizing; whereby the Mysteries of Faith,
and the Duties of Holy Life are to be explained. For Catechism is a brief and
plain Institution appointed for that end; and it takes care that the Principles
of Religion be made so easy, that the meanest capacity may apprehend them; and
yet in so concise and short a manner, that the weakest Memory may not therefore
be surcharged.

CHAP. X. Disptuation unfit for the capacity of the generality of Dissenters:
Catechizing proper, etc. Reasons against Disputes.
IN the last place, it will not a little import the clearing of the present
subject, to enquire into the nature of Disputes, and their Capacities who
should thereby be wrought upon. As to the former, it will suffice to observe,
that Disputation must be guided by Terms and Rules of Art, which when managed
with the greatest plainness whereof they are capable, fall short of that
obviousness and familiarity, which is natural to Catechism. And as to the
latter, it is very remarkable, 1. That the vulgar and common People make
incomparably the greater number of Dissenters. 2. That the Understandings of
such are usually heavy, gross, and dull, as symbolizing with their Callings and
Conditions; and by consequent, are unable to comprehend any profound and
learned conclusions. And what is yet more considerable, the greatest part of
Dissenters have no clear understanding of the very Errors which a Logical
Disputation would confute. The most of them being ignorant of their own
Opinions, and of the things against which they have imbibed a secret and
spiteful prejudice. For it was, and is still the policy of those who seduce the
Vulgar into Faction and Schism, not to acquaint them further with the Opinions
they were to abet, than to let them see that they were contrary to what they
disliked in the Church. Insomuch that the poor Vulgar being deluded into
Separation, retain but a very confused and imperfect Notion of what with great
impetuousness they strive both for and against. And therefore it must needs be
a very Melancholy Enterprise, to go to confute their Errors with depth of
Argument, who are in a great measure ignorant of the very Errors themselves,
and who do not distinctly know the opinions whereof they are to be convinced.
The case of such people much resembling theirs, whom St. Paul thought to stand
in need of Milk, and not of strong Meat; of a Catechism and not a Controversy;
and to be taught Christianity from the very beginning. And the same Author
being to confute those miscreant Heretics, who said the Resurrection was
already past, and thereupon gave themselves to lewd living; he did it not with
the heat and briskness of a Disputant, but with the gravity and moderation of
an Apostle: and having barely and calmly named the wild Opinions, he positively
and plainly laid down those Truths that confronted them, 2 Timothy 11.18, 19. And
he would have the Gnostick Heretics to be encountered with Ecclesiastic
Censures or Discipline, and not Disputings, whereof comes envy, strife,
railings, evil surmises, 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. Tit. 3.10.

If we were to set down the several Confessions of the Persuasions of all the
Christians in the World, they will be found to agree in more than is purely and
simply necessary to Salvation. And it may seem very vain to dispute and quarrel
about the rest. And therefore the whole business may be resolved into a
diligent, sincere, and plain Instruction, how we ought to practice what we all
acknowledge to be true; and to fall close to doing those duties which are
unquestionable, and of universal acceptance. To perform what in Baptism we
vowed, and live what we profess to believe. To make our selves fit to be
justified, and not waste time in controverting all the particulars that are
made to relate to Justification. There is a knowledge in Religion which many
earnestly pursue, without which thousands have entered into happiness. We need
seek for no more therein, than will perform the great work of Salvation, and
bring us to the end of our Hope. And all this is either most assuredly to be
had in our own Catechism, or we have been most dangerously imposed upon.

But before we dismiss this Topic, there are a few things more, chiefly
relating to the persons to be converted; which methinks ought to give
Catechizing precedence of Controversy in that affair. And the first thing is
the long standing of the Errors: For if the person has sucked them in with his
Milk, and been therewith at the first seasoned, then there is Education in the
case, upon whose account alone not a few stick close both to truth and
falsehood: and if their Ancestors have lived and died, and they have been
brought up in such a persuasion, it is, and indeed ought to be hard to remove
it. One main reason why the Pagans were so backward to entertain Christianity,
was its enjoining them to renounce those Institutions wherein they had been
educated, and their Forefathers had lived, and thought themselves secure and
happy. And Trypho derided Justin Martyr for a man of an easy Persuasion, and
too much Inconstancy, because he forsook Plato and embraced Christ. And
Caecilius in Minutius Felix, would have his Antistes Veritatis, a firm adherent
to the Principles which his Ancestors had delivered him. And they whose Pens
were so excellently employed in confutation of Paganism, have generally
complained that their greatest sweat was to pull down the strong hold of
Education; it being become the last refuge of Gentilism, out of which they
would not be driven: For they resolutely retained what they had received from
their Ancestors. For both Jew and Mahumetan are at this day of the same
Opinion: For the former makes prescription his Religion; and thinks it enough
to outface all Arguments brought against it, because so many Rabbis live and
die therein* and the latter has recourse to his Education, and thinks himself
secure in what he does, because he follows the Footsteps of those many
Cenerations that went before him. Indeed, all men are willing to die in the
Religion wherein they were born. And Caecilius's Prioribus credere goes far
with Christians, as well as others; the first seasoning being incomparably more
prevailing than any second.

Now, if those evil Opinions are to be removed, in which we have been educated;
it can never be so well accomplished by tearing them down with the strength of
Logic, as by instilling such easy Principles, necessary and uncontroverted
points, with simplicity and plainness, as of themselves will subvert the Errors
of the first Instruction, and become the foundation of future Peace and Truth.
And no way of teaching can so naturally be hereunto entitled as Catechizing.
For as to Disputation, it is generally had under a jealous aspect, as being
thought subtle and reaching, and intended rather to celebrate a Tri^mph, than
to effect a Conversion; and ^o advance the Disputer, not the Truth. Besides, it
being so apt to mingle and blend with captious Sophisms, and false, but
specious ways of proving, that men are ready to account it Imposture, not
Conviction, that by such means is effected. And as for Preaching, a new Chapter
will manifestly make it appear not to be so proper for this purpose a^ most
imagine. But in Catechizing there ^s such an honest simplicity, clear and plain
way of procedure, that none can therein suspect any Sophism or artificial
dealing, disguises or shadowings.

In the next place, most men are either so modest in the apprehension of their
own abilities, or so fearful to be ensnared in the great concerns of Religion,
that they are unwilling to depend upon their own judgments in those instances,
especially which they see are most disputed and questioned. And therefore they
think it no sufficient Reason to forsake an Opinion, because they cannot answer
all the Objections, which by the subtle Advocate of a different Persuasion are
brought against it. And so long as a man can really believe that there are
others who can answer what is objected against his Opinion, he will never quit
it, because he cannot answer it himself. For to think an Argument cannot be
answered, because not by me, were to think the Lady must be carried by none,
because neither A. nor B. can win her; as if there were no more men in the
world sufficient for that purpose, but they two.

But if Disputation should be able to force men from these refuges, and to cast
away the groundles, Opinions they embrace; yet if their Opinions twist with
some worldly Interest, and yield any secular advantage; if the Opiniatres can
say, By this craft we get our wealth; then great is Diana, and your Argument is
answered.

And he who considers how many ^omporal ends men serve with their Opinions,
will have little hope to confute them, at least by a way which is so generally
suspected.

If the Opinion please the humor of ^n eating Avarice, or a swelling Ambition;
and bring either Wealth or Honor.

If it make its Abettors notorious for ^ingularity, or get them a Vogue of
being more Holy and Religious than their Neighbors.

If it place them in the pretended num^er of Sufferers and Persecuted.

If it gratify their Spleen, and give them but a more plausible pretense to be
^tubborn, refractory, contradicting of Au^^ority, gainsayers of the established
Region, etc. then the cure must begin with the Affections and not the Judgment;
and therefore a Dispute is no sit Prescription. All that by Argument ^an be
effected, before the Passion be duly chastised, will but bring the Opinionist
^o this: I see and approve the better, but follow the worse; my Passions are
too powerful for my Reason.

We might here also add, how Quarrels in Christian Religion contradict the
Errand whereon it was sent into the World, which was for Love and Peace; to
reconcile men to God, and among themselves. And if it yield contrary Fruits,
they come as the Tares among the Wheat, by the craft and malice of the wicked
One. For Strifes and Controversies are no more the effects of Religion, than of
the Law: Were all men just and honest, we needed not disturb the Ashes of a
moth eaten Statute; and had we no Self Ends and Interests, no base passions and
designs, the itch of Disputation would not disquiet and make us so restless.

Before we close up this Chapter, it will not be much impertinent to observe
how Disputation was at first opening of the Reformation an excellent Engine to
advance it: And we find that the Reformers made importunate suits for public
Audience and Judgment; and the offer of open Disputation greatly assured the
People of the soundness of their Cause, when they saw they were ready to put it
upon public Trial. And more may be supposed to have followed the first Essays
of the Reformation, out of an Opinion that it was good and true, being defended
with such freedom, simplicity and assurance, than by the strength of those
Arguments which were at first brought to assert it. But then it is to be
considered that the Reformers offered this kind of trial to those with whom
they began to be at no less distance, than with members of a distinct and
different Communion; and in places where they were in hope to gain, but in no
danger to lose Proselytes. For they wisely invaded the Adversary in his own
Country, and challenged him to a Dispute in his own Cities, and in the throng
of his Adherents. But upon how different Terms Disputes can now be managed,
either with Dissenters or the common Enemy, I leave the truly considerate to
determine. But since we are resolved to fight, I could wish our valor were
more discreet, than to encounter the Enemy within our own Bowels; to controvert
our Religion in the place where it is legally established. A thing not heard of
in other Countries, where there is a greater Peace and more outward Religion.
But I shall close up this Topic with setting down what is usually observed
upon this Subject, viz.

1. That Religion is like neither to get nor save by Disputes. 2. That Disputes
on this subject may have the illluck to make some suspect the truth of all
Religion, because it is so much controverted. For weaker Heads seeing the Roof
totter, are apt to suspect there is no firmness in the foundation; and to
conclude nothing is certain, if any thing be questioned. 3. That in so great a
mist of Disputes, many may grow halting and lukewarm, and think it their only
safety to stand still, or sit down in Neutrality. 4. That for one sin Disputes
have cured, they have begot innumerable. 5. That the strength and practice of
Religion have been sensibly impaired, since by the distempered heats of Men's
Spirits it has been rarefied into subtle Controversies. 6. That suspense of
Judgment, and exercise of Charity were safer and seemlier for Christian men,
than the hot pursuit of those Controversies, wherein they that are most fervent
to dispute, are not always the most able to determine. But what is more natural
to the present purpose, it should seriously be considered, That the People are
neither to be confuted of their false, nor established in the true Notices of
Religion, by Doubtful Disputes, but plain Catechistical Doctrines. And as to
our selves of this Church, seeing there can come nothing of our Contentions,
but the mutual waste of the parties contending, till a common Enemy dance in
the Ashes of us both; I shall ever wish, and most heartily pray, that the
strict commands of Peace and Unity, so frequent in the Gospel, may at the last
so prevail in this Nation, to the burying and utter oblivion of strife,
together with the causes that have either bred or brought it up: That things of
small moment never disjoyn them, whom one God, one Lord, one Faith, one Spirit,
one Baptism, bands of so great force, have linked together: That a respective
Eye toward things wherewith we should not be disquieted, make us not unable to
speak peaceably one to another. Finally, that no strife may ever be heard of
again, but who shall hate strife most, and pursue peace with the swiftest paces.

CHAP. XI. Preaching, what it is: the several ways thereof used by the Church.
What kind of Preaching among the Old Jews, and Primitive Christians. The
Homilies considered.
HAving in the antecedent Chapter discharged Disputes and Controversies from
being any suitable and proper means of reducing the Dissenters of our own
Church, or winning the Members of the Roman: The next thing pretending to our
healing is Preaching, which I here take to be An open, solemn and Authoritative
publication of Divine Mysteries. And this the Church does two several ways: 1.
As a Witness. 2. As an Expositor.

And first, The Church Preaches as a Witness, by public reading the Sacred
Scriptures, and by relating and testifying the Divine Truths which God in the
inspired Volumes has consigned her. And that this is no spurious sense of
Preaching, we have him to assure us, who well understood the sense and
importance both of the Word and Thing. For in Acts 15.21. the reading of Moses
in the Synagogues every Sabbathday, is by St. Paul in the genuine and native
signification of the Word, styled Preaching. That this Preaching of Moses, was
a naked reading of his Law, we have a whole cloud of Expositors to attest it,
besides the clearness of the thing it self. But I cannot be of their judgment
who assert, That neither the Ancient nor Modern Jews had any such thing as
weekly Preaching upon any part of the Law of Moses, and that upon this ground
solely conclude the preaching of Moses to be mere reading. For we find that the
Old Jews had diverse Men among them, who used to contribute their Talents to the
Exposition of the Lesson that was read: and these in ordinary course were the
Sons or Scholars of the Prophets, who were trained up in learning of the Law,
and at the age of Thirty received the Title of Doctors; and till they obtained
the Grace of immediate Inspiration, or the Spirit of Prophecy, they continued
to expound the Scriptures (not by Revelation, but) according to that knowledge
which the ordinary blessing of God upon their Studies was able to compass.
Answerable whereunto (as some think) was that custom among the Christians,
mentioned 1 Cor. 14.29. And also those Disciples of the Prophets of the New
Testament called Doctors, because they were admitted to teach in the Church.
But for mine own part, I rather understand the Word Doctor in St. Paul, of all
such Presbyters as had abilities of Preaching and Teaching the People in their
Assemblies. And that Presbyters and Doctors were all one, we may conclude from
Tertull. de Prescript. c. 3. Quid ergo si Episcopus, etc. What then if a
Bishop, if a Deacon, if a Widow, a Virgin, if a Doctor, if even a Martyr shall
fall from the Rule? In this Catalogue of principal Ecclesiastic Orders,
Presbyters must be understood by Doctors, unless we will deny them to have any
room among the chief Ranks of the Church; which were both false and absurd. And
that incestuous person, with an Opinion of whom the Corinthians were puffed up,
was (as is observed out of Chrysostom and Theoderet) one of their Doctors, that
is, one of the Presbyters of that Church, that exercised the Office of
Preaching, and by that means bore a great sway among the People,

But to return to the reading of Moses, which began with the Moral Service of
the Synagogue; when we find that the Mosaical Law was distinguished into
Divisions answerable to the number of Weeks in the Year, that the whole Law in
that space might be read over: correspondent to which Lessons out of the Law,
there were others out of the Prophets: one of which the Holy Jesus took for his
Subject at Nazareth, when after the manner of the Jewish Doctors he made his
Exposition, St. Luke 4.16. And he did the like, St. Mat. 9.35. where he is said
to teach [(...)] in the Synagogue; which might be done without any pretension
to such Authority as was supposed in (...), in Preaching; which in the
Christian use of the word in the New Testament differs from Teaching. Christ
did both, St. Mat. 9.35. He taught the Law, and preached the Gospel: At Thirty
years old he expounded Moses, as a Doctor (before which time the ancient Church
made none Presbyters) and at the same time he preached the Gospel of the
Kingdom. But still the matter is plain enough, that the bare reading of Moses
in the Synagogues, is Preaching in the proper meaning: which sort of Preaching
is still practiced in the appointed Lessons of the Church. The former out of
the Old Testament, being derived like many wholesome things from the Synagogue;
and the Second Lesson out of the New Testament, which was appointed, as most
suppose, by the 16th Canon of the Council of Laodicea, celebrated in the year
of Grace 364. Albeit Justin Martyr (who lived in the Second Age) seems to give
the Lessons an elder date. For in his second Apology, he tells us, how all
those who abide in Cities, and the adjacent Countries, meet in one place, on
the day called Sunday; and the (...), the Memoires and Records of the Apostles,
together with the (...), the Writings of the Prophets are read unto them, as
far as the time and occasion serves: And that the Reader ceasing, the President
in a Speech makes an Exhortation that they would imitate those good things
which had been read. From which it is evidently to be concluded, that the
Church in the first and best Ages of Christianity preached as a Witness, when
she read, and thereby attested the truth of the Holy Scriptures. And all men
are in some degree capable thereby to be edified. For there is none understands
the Scriptures so well, but he may improve by hearing them read in the Church.
And if we look into the Efficacy of the Word, it is wonderful that it should be
less as it is read, than as it is expounded; seeing that the one is the Word of
God as it was inspired by the Holy Ghost, and the other can no farther be so
accounted, than as it keeps close to the sense and meaning thereof; which is
not so easy, so long as Men are subject to Errors and Mistakes, and have base
Ends to serve, and carnal Circumstances to be accomplished.

2. But because all men ought to have such a knowledge in God's Word as may be
sufficient to Salvation: and because all will not attain to so much by bare
reading thereof, therefore the Church Preaches as an Expositor, by discovering
and explaining what in Sacred Scripture is mysterious and obscure; and by a
seasonable application of those things which are more obvious and evident. And
in this sense Preaching is an Office in our own Church, which cannot be too
highly magnified, nor too frequently celebrated, if it be agreeable to those
Homilies which were intended, not only to supply those who have not the Gift of
Preaching, sufficiently to instruct the people committed to their Cure; but
also to be a wholesome Rule, by which even those who are able to preach should
guide themselves in that public Ministry.

But if Discourses at this day made in Pulpits ought only so far forth to be
accounted Preaching, as they are agreeable to the Churches Sermons; then all is
not Preaching which bears that name, and takes up the Circumstances thereunto
allowed.

In the pious Sermons of the Church, we find Principles of Christianity solidly
explained, Rules and Motives of honest and holy Life clearly laid down, and
Perorations and Persuasions to continue therein, devoutly and charitably
directed and applied. I shall not draw this into comparison; but only say, That
I hope there is none need think it any diminution or disparagement to his Parts
and Learning, to write after such a Copy. And however the Homilies may be
decried through popular Ignorance, Prejudice, and Passion, yet no doubt but
they are still necessary upon their first design, which was to help the
Inabilities of some, to restrain the Indiscretions of others, and to take away
those strifes about what is fitting to be preached, caused by the variety of
Men's Judgments, the extravgance of their Fancies, and the Byasses of several
Interests.

And as for the Homilies of this Church, they deserve a much better esteem than
generally they receive; and would need no elaborate Vindication, if duly
considered in their circumstances. For in the first place, they are be to
looked upon as popular Sermons, fitted unto the Capacities and Conditions of
the Vulgar; who being more led by Passion than Reason, have need of such
Discourses, as will rather regulate their will, than inform their judgment.
They standing in more need to have their Hearts and Consciences wrought upon
for good Life and Conversation, than their understanding and apprehension with
any curious piece of Learning or Science. And that the greatest share of the
Church-Homilies deals herein, there will need no other proof than their
diligent perusual.

In the Second place, The Church-Homilies are not to be looked upon as her
Dogmatical Resolutions and Positions, but as they contain godly and wholesome
Doctrine [Teaching] and necessary for the times when they were composed. For so
much we are taught in the 35. Article. And therefore I humbly suppose, that
every passage in the Homilies is not to be pressed for the Faith and Doctrine
of the Church, but that the whole ought to be considered as confronting the
evil Opinions and Manners that at their composing were held and practiced: and
if ought of either be remaining, the Homilies may still be needful upon their
Primitive account.

In the last place, the very time in which the Homilies were compiled may
excuse many a Period therein. For our Ancestors were lately come out of Popery,
and conversed daily with Persons of that Persuasion; and therefore severe
dehortations were requisite to preserve them from Apostasy into those Practices
out of which they had so lately been recovered: which makes it no wonder if
Enforcements and Exhortations to that purpose, etc. are sometime too hardly
stretched. And as for mine own part, I am so far from undervaluing the pious
Sermons of the Church, that considering their circumstances, I greatly esteem
them for their own Worth, and respect them above any other for their Authority.

And as to those who reject Homilies upon the account that Apochryphal Writings
are not to be used in the Church, it may suffice briefly to reply,

1. That Apochryphal Writings were publicly read in the Church in Primitive
times: as the Epistle of Clemens in that of Corinth.

2. That Hermes (the same whom St. Paul saluted, Romans 16.14.) his Pastor was
publicly read in the Churches, and used by some of the most ancient Writers,
and thought highly necessary. Vide Eusebius. l. 3. c. 3. What may be said to this
purpose of the (...) of Theophilus B. of Antioch, I leave to the judgment of
others. Vid. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 23.

3. That in the Reformed Churches (not long since) Calvin's Sermons upon Job
were publicly read, by which means (says Beza in his Preface to those
Sermons) the want of Preachers was supplied.

4. That it is all one to the People, whether the Sermon was made and printed
in 1587, or on the last Sunday-Eve; whether it be out of a Book, or ex tempore
of the Brain, if thereby they be truly edified. The Council of Vaus appointed
the Homilies of the Fathers to be read by the Deacons in those Churches, where
the Presbyters through infirmity were absent, Council. Vassu. c. 4. Vid. Mr.
Hooker Eccles. Pol. lib. 5.

5. That there is more security in a Homily than a Lecture; as there is in the
Learning, Piety and discretion of many, than a single person. In short: there
can be no mischief in the word [Homilies] seeing the best Sermons (St.
Chrysostoms) that ever were writ by any but an inspired Pen, bear that Title.
Homileticus and Tractator are often used indifferently: and the latter is
sufficiently known to signify a Preacher, as Tractare to Preach, among the
Writers of the Latin Church. And the Exposition Augustine made upon St. John is
called Tractatus, etc. And the Reason of the Name, was the handling of the
Scriptures that had been read; the custom being to Expound or Preach upon such
Portions of Scripture as were appointed for the Lessons of the Day; as has
been observed out of Justin Martyr's Second Apology. Something of this has been
in use with our own Church, when the Sermon was spent in pressing the intention
of the Gospel for such a day unto the people; which is still the custom of the
Romanists.

But leaving every one to his own Sentiment herein, I cannot perceive why in
stead of villifying the old Homilies, we should not rather desire a supply of
new ones: such as may contain a familiar Orthodox instruction in the whole Body
of Christian Doctrine, and of all the capital Duties therein required; That
thereby an Uniform way of instruction might be maintained as no unlikely means
both to regain and preserve Peace and Unity in this Church.

But without further pursuing the notion of Preaching, we will here understand
it in the most trodden and common acception, namely, as A way of instructing
the people contradistinct to Catechizing; and to which it stands in usual
comparison as strong meat to Milk. Now that Preaching in this obvious sense is
no proper means to recover us of our Dissentions, and to beget in us a sober
and fixed Judgment in the things of Religion (as it is generally supposed)
comes to be made manifest in this following Chapter.

CHAP. XII. Preaching insufficient to restore our Dissentions. Catechizing
proper for that purpose, etc. A Scruple removed.
THat Difference which Divines make of things necessary to Salvation, either as
a Means without which it cannot be had at all, or as Commands without whose
observation those cannot be saved to whom those Commands are given, might have
place here, if we were to speak of Preaching, as by some it is looked upon, for
an Instrument without which not one poor Soul can be delivered from
destruction, nor any Sabbath hallowed either by Priest or People as God
requires. Which was the Opinion of T. C. and is still of his Proselytes. But
it belongs not to the purport of this Discourse, to set down how far Preaching
(in the common Notice) is necessary as a means of Salvation: For then we must
descend to particular Persons, in respect of whom the true value of its
necessity must be taken, seeing that none will say it can be alike necessary to
the Salvation of all.

There is none shall give more to the worth and necessity of Preaching, and be
more frequent therein than my self. But yet I doubt not, but that a man may be
saved without it. For if a person who in his Infancy has received Holy
Baptism, at years of Discernment, shall by Catechism be minded of all that he
then vowed and promised, and be careful to believe and do them, I see not what
such a Person wants of being set in a state of Salvation, that with equal
esteemers can be accounted necessary as a means thereof; though he knew no more
of Preaching, than they in Act. 19. did of the Holy Ghost.

But let Preaching be a means never so necessary to save our Souls; yet that it
is not so suitable and proper to reform and fix our erroneous and inconstant
Judgments (as is conceived) seems clear and evident upon the force and
obviousness of this single instance; namely, That those who have been, and
still are the greatest admirers of popular Preaching, and the most eager
hearers of many Sermons, and the most restless followers of several Lecturers,
have notwithstanding all this, been, and are, 1. The most inconstant, 2. The
most erroneous in their Opinions.

And first, as for their Giddiness and Unconstancy, there needs no other
demonstration thereof, than their rolling from one Opinion to another. For if
they have stuck fast to any one, yet that being evil, their adherence thereunto
ought not to be accounted Constancy, but Perverseness.

Now if we enquire into the cause of this fickleness of judgment so notorious
among the zealous Sermonists, and Vulgar Sectaries, we shall find that it is a
want of Catechizing; and that they were never duly instructed in those Primary
Principles of Religion, which would have rightly informed and established their
Judgments. Through the want whereof, they have proved like unballasted Vessels,
liable to be tossed, torn, and blown about with every gust of contrary
Doctrine, vented by those who were crafty to deceive; and who have proved
themselves to be lineally descended of those great pretenders to Godliness and
Knowledge (mentioned in the Inspired and Ecclesiastic Scriptures) and
egregiously charactered, for creeping into houses, and seducing silly women,
who were ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth.
Vide Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. lib. 3, and 4.

Nor need it create our wonder that such persons are so bad proficients in
Religion, seeing they began to learn it at the wrong end, and ran to the
Lecture before they had been at the Catechism. And indeed it cannot be imagined
that those should make any laudable progress either in Divine or Humane
Knowledge, who in the Rudiments and first grounds thereof, have had either none,
or a very slight Education.

And as the most unsatiable Hearers of Sermons have proved wavering and
unconstant in their judgments, for want of a timely and through Catechizing; so
likewise upon the same ground they have been very erroneous and Opiniative. For
this want of a plain Institution in the Principles of Truth, has left them
destitute of a proper Test, whereby they might be able to explore and try what
is preached, and to separate the precious from the vile. Through the want
whereof, they as greedily imbibe a false as true Doctrine; and are ready to
change their Opinions according to the impression which the affectionate noise
of the last Sermon has made upon their Senses.

Nor are they happier in their reading Holy Scriptures, than in hearing of them
(thus) preached. The Un-catechized run upon the same Rock in both. For albeit
the Divine Word is in it self the pure Fountain of all saving Truths: yet
persons not trained up in a competent apprehension of Catechistical Principles,
make it a sink of pernicious Errors; sucking Contention from the Breasts of
Peace; turning the sincere Milk of Gods Word into the Poison of Asps, and
perverting the Scripture to their own destruction; while they make the Oracles
of God not to speak their own, but such a Sense and Language, as may best
adjust their Designs and Interests.

And as no malice proves more implacable than that which arises out of the
Ashes of an Apostate love: So no Errors are more dangerous than those which
proceed from a wrong interpreting and application of the Word of Truth. And as
those whose fancy has been playing with sounds, think every thing they hear is
tunable to their fancy: So those whose minds are once infected with evil
Opinions, think every Text speaks according to the Opinions wherewith they are
infected. And it is an Hypothesis will meet with few Adversaries, That Men who
are prejudiced and prepossessed with Errors in Religion, cannot be reduced but
by getting them therein rightly principled, which was never yet attempted but
by solid and perspicuous Catechizing; it being by this that Men prove in
Religion like the House in the Gospel founded upon a Rock, which by no force of
storms and winds could be subverted. And therefore if this groundwork be not
surely laid, all superstructures in Religion lie upon the loose Sand, and are
easily washed away by the insinuating suggestions of false Teachers. And what is
yet further to be considered, we see the rest of the Building sink with the
Foundation: if that be shaken, all will go to ruin. And Christians not well
grounded in the Elements of Truth and Holiness, will quickly be persuaded to
give themselves up to any wild Opinion, or loose Practice, and turn Schismatic
or Traitor, to the great hazard and confusion both of Church and State.

But if it be objected that Catechizing is a Plaster too narrow for our Sore,
because it cannot reach those whose Age, or some other Circumstance, excludes
them the number of those for whom this sort of Instruction is appointed,
notwithstanding they have no less need thereof than others: To this it will be
enough to return the succeeding considerations, viz.

1. That the Church obviated this Scruple, when in the last Edition of the
Liturgy, she appointed the Catechism to be learned of every person. And in her
Fifty ninth Canon enjoined the Clergy to instruct all the ignorant Persons of
their Parishes in the public Catechism. And that those who bear the heavy load
of many years might not decline this way of Institution, they may see it
founded in the Apostolical practice; which was to Catechize the adult; as
before was observed.

2. To be duly instructed in the Principles of Christianity, is a duty
incumbent upon all, who by the Knowledge and Practice thereof hope to be
eternally saved. And therefore if the Aged be therein ignorant, they have more
reason to blush at their ignorance, than to be thus instructed; and with
diligence and humility to wait at this Gate of Knowledge, rather than with
scorn to disdain it.

3. If the Elder sort have either not been taught at all, or have forgot the
chief Heads and Catechetical Fundamentals of Christianity, they now meet with a
fair occasion both to learn and call them to mind. For by being present and
attentive in hearing the Younger Catechized, the Ancient (and all) may be
brought to know what they do not understand, to remember what they have forgot,
and to be informed in what they have erred. So that at the same time
Catechizing will instruct the Ignorant, remember the Forgetful, and inform the
Erroneous: and therefore administer a Physic proper and suitable to our several
Maladies: which cannot be pretended to by those other Methods, that have
hitherto been so eagerly pursued.

CHAP. XIII. The Benefits of Catechizing, 1. In respect of the Civil State. 2.
The Clergy. 3. The People. The Mischiefs of private Schools. Objections against
the constant practice of Catechizing removed.
BUt besides what has been discoursed, there are other good Effects of
Catechizing, which at least may be as so many motives to enforce its practice.

And in the first place, Catechizing is in an eminent manner conducive to the
Peace and Welfare of the State; because it takes care that the Younger sort,
who are the hopes of a Nation, be duly educated in those Principles, on whose
practice the safety and happiness of a State depends. For to sow in the pure
minds of Youth the Seeds of Virtue and Truth, before the Tares of Vice and
Error, and the Weeds of the World, have cankered and spoiled the Soil, is by
the consent of all wise men, a point of incomparable force and moment for the
well ordering and Government of all kind of Societies, and for making
Commonwealths ever flourishing and happy. For by the means of Catechizing, the
Younger sort will be planted and grow up in a due Conformity and Obedience to
the Laws in being; which is undeniably a proper expedient to uphold States in
the Terms wherein they are, and to free them from the danger of being so easily
obvious to alteration and change. For the Opinions, of what nature soever,
wherewith we are first seasoned, are of double force to any second Persuasion
and Usages. And this makes the Spanish Nation early and careful in Catechizing
their Children; by which Method (ever since its use) they have not suffered the
least disturbance and alteration in Church or State. That serious people having
largely experienced the Truth of their own saying: No es menos importante el
ser de la Doctrina que el de la Naturaleza. And in confirmation of this remark,
it were easy to load the Margin with a numerous Quotation, and the Line with a
tedious recital of many excellent Passages out of Plato, Aristotle, Socrates,
Seneca, Tacitus, Agell, and almost all the learned Heathen: Plutarch's
Education of Children does abridge them all. But we need not go sharpen our
Tools with the Philistines, seeing an Israelite can do it better. For Solomon
is plain, That the way to have Men Religious and Honest; to be peaceable both
in Church and State; is from their Childhood to train them up (the Margin) to
Catechize them, in the Duties that they owe unto both, Prove. 22.6. And the
Ecclesiastic and Politic Parents, as well as the Natural, will find great
safety in observing the wise advice of Ben Sirach. Bow down his neck while he
is young, and beat on the sides while he is a child; lest he wax stubborn, and
disobedient, and so bring sorrow to thine heart. Ecclus. 30.12. But there needs
hereof neither illustration nor enlargement. And therefore we shall close this
Period with that excellent Spaniard, Son los afetos en la Ninez como el Veneno,
etc. Vices in Youth are as poison, which if it once take seizure of the Heart,
the paleness it introduces no Physic can remove. Saavedra, Idea de un prin.
pol. Christ. p. 8.

Obedience, by a Catholic agreement, is the Crown and Pillar, the Glory and
Strength of all Government. But this Obedience can never be firm and durable,
if it be not founded in Conscience. For according to the information of this,
we shall find the expresses of the other. And notwithstanding that unparalled
Villainies have been every where acted under the pre^ence of Conscience, yet
this is so far from making it reasonable to neglect and deride Conscience, that
it should engage us by all good means to have it so regulated and instructed,
that it may be no less serviceable to Peace and Union than it has been (the
pretense) to carry on Dissension and Schism. And we need not doubt but a right
Conscience will as powerfully oblige to Peace, as an erroneous instigate to
Sedition: And that if Men were once fully Catechized in the Duties of the
Second Table, they would no longer be able to resist the Ecclesiastic or
Secular Power under the Banner of Conscience.

In the second place, an Unanimous use of Catechizing the People in the same
things, will not a little redound to the credit of the Clergy. For by this
means they will testify to the World their Harmony and Consent: That they all
teach the same things; and are not, as for lack hereof some imagine, like the
Naturalists two-headed Serpent, pulling contrary ways, but all looking on the
same Objects as the Seraphims on the Mercy-Seat.

And doubtless one end of a Church-Catechism was to preserve an Uniform
procedure in teaching the Common grounds of Religion. It being requisite and
convenient, that they who profess but one God, one Christ, one Baptism, and one
Gospel, should consent and be trained up in one Catechism. The inconvenience
arising from the use of diverse, being observed by Pope Clemens the Eighth,
caused him to have a Catechism compiled, which, exclusive of all others, should
be taught in all those Countries that call themselves Catholic. Ut sublata
modorum docendi varietate, uniforme, faciliusque instruendi idiotas and
simplices de rebus fidei exercitium reddatur; says the Congregatio
Reformationis, which revised and approved it,

And in the Geneva Liturgy, we find their Pastors limited not only to the same
Catechism, but also to how much thereof they shall teach every Lords day,
without any interpolations of their own. A thing which ought carefully to be
provided for in our own Church: For if the Clergy be either left to a liberty
of using diverse Catechisms, or to use the Churches as they please; and under a
pretense of the legal Instruction, take a more secure occasion to instill into
the minds of the unwary people their own Opinions and Fancies, they may most
maliciously deceive the intention of the Church, and for feeding, poison their
Congregations. They will prove false to their trust, and most perniciously
contradict the name they bear. For the Clergy are Catechists in the most
important sense of their Office, and are bound by that Title not to sound their
own words, but to echo and repeat what the Church has spoken; not only the
Words and Syllables, but the sense and meaning.

But if the Clergy were never so unanimous and diligent both in the
interpretation and practice of the Catechism, the benefit thereof will not be
so visible, while there are those who unteach in private what is taught at
Church. Which is the undermining practice of many of those Petite Schools,
wherewith the Nation is surcharged and abused. The most whereof being
subservient to no better end than to give the Youth an ill seasoning as well in
the Rudiments of Religion as Grammar. And albeit the redressing of this
mischief has been piously recommended by the Sovereign Head of this Church, to
Persons proper for that purpose; yet it is to be feared that the issue will be
rather an Increase of Licenses, than any Abatement of undue School-Teachers,
contrary to the 77 and 79. Canons.

Till Israel wanted Smiths of their own, they never went to the Philistines to
sharpen their Mattocks. It seems no less a want of Policy than Affection in the
Church, while her own Breasts are full to suffer her Children to suck such
Nurses, as with their Milk will infuse Disobedience against her.

The Jesuits usually say, That they never doubt to replant their Religion,
where they have once planted a College; because this being obtained, they will
have opportunity to instruct the Youth (which is an employment they every where
labor to engross to their Society) whereby they fear not but in time to eat
out the Fathers Principles with those they shall instill into the Son. And the
present state of Affairs will easily turn this into no unseasonable Allusion.

But in the last place, the unanimous usage of the same Church-Catechism, and
the modd'ling, ordering, and directing all public Instructions according to
this Form of Sound Words, will bring no less safety to the People, than Honor
to the Clergy. For by this means the people will be delivered from the fear and
peril of hearing contrary Doctrines, and consequently be edified and built up
in such an Uniformity both of Belief and Manners, as may at once secure as well
their Conversations as Judgments from Ungodliness and Error; which yields a
fair probability of closing our present breaches, and preventing future.

And now seeing that the welfare of the State, the credit of the Clergy, and
safety of the People do greatly importune and solicit the practice of
Catechizing; there is nothing on the Clergies part that can retard it, but what
I should be loath to name or imagine. But if it be said in behalf of the Laity,
That Catechizing being a constant repetition of the same thing, will so cloy
the people, that they will grow weary of Gods House; to which we see them
sufficiently backward, even when they are there entertained with variety: Then
I shall only wish all those of the Holy Function maturely to consider,

1. How low they have sunk in their esteem with the people, since their Office
was so much devoted to please their humors.

2. That they ought not so much to respect the Peoples Fancies, as proficiency
in Religion; the informing of their judgments, and directing their Consciences,
and not the humouring of their caprices, ought to be their chief aim and travel.

3. That they cannot deserve the Name of Guides, who are ruled by those whom
they should rule: the issue whereof will be no better than that of the blind
leading, etc.

4. That if Catechizing be a way of Instruction, which will best preserve the
Unity and Peace of the Church, and most solidly and securely advance the
edification of the people; then there is no need to be sollicitous for any
other ends or interests.

5. And as for the constant repetition and audience of the same Truths
necessary to Salvation (as they are the Contents of the Church-Catechism) it
may be justified by that old saying [Nunquam satis docetur, quod nunquam satis
discitur;] Those Lessons can never be too much taught, which can never be too
much learned. For repetition in this case is to make the Catechism, what indeed
it is, the Words of the Wise fastened like Nails by the Masters of Assemblies.
And though in all the blows of the Hammer the act be the same, yet there is no
stroke superfluous, while every one tends to complete the Work. We may bring
the same quarrel against reading Books, and hearing Sermons: for they are but
old matter in new words; and if stripped of Dress and Disguise, they would easily
be discerned to be but so many varied repetitions. In Religion, if any thing be
pretended to be new, we may safely conclude it is false.

6. But to evacuate the whole Objection, a diligent Catechist will find enough
in the Church-Catechism to entertain his Congregation with variety, and to
delight and profit all but itching Ears. For it wants nothing that is requisite
to defend us in our Journey, or to save us when come to our long home. And
those who are therein duly instructed, will find themselves so sufficiently
guarded, that no Machinations of Heresy or Schism will be able to batter or
undermine them. Indeed the diligent use of Catechizing will be its best
Vindication, and most effectually answer all Objections against it. And without
all Controversy, there was never a greater necessity of enforcing what we now
treat of, than the conjuncture wherein we live. For we see Satan is let loose,
and lays hard at the Souls of Christians; not only by such Opinions as disturb
our Peace, but would utterly destroy our Christianity. Insomuch that we have
great need to speak to every one, as that famous Anchorite to his Pillars upon
the approach of an Earthquake, Stand fast, for ye shall be shaken: And stand
fast we cannot, if we want a sure Foundation in Religion; and this cannot be
expected, where it is not laid in a full and timely Catechizing.

CHAP. XIV. The Church-Catechism to be preferred before others, for its
Authority, Usefulness, Accomplishment, Contents, etc.
BUt if after all that has been or can be said concerning the antiquity and
benefits of Catechizing in general, or more particularly in regard of its
necessity and advantages in respect of the present temperament of our own
Nation, it should be disputed what Catechism ought to be of public use: I
shall return, first, that although there are many excellent Catechisms both in
our own and Foreign Languages, composed by private persons, out of the
consideration of the great emolument accrewing to the People from this of
Teaching; yet there is none which with those of this Communion ought to be of
equal esteem with the Catechism of the Church, if we consider, as we ought, its
Authority, Usefulness, and Accomplishment.

And in the first place, as for its Authority, the Church-Catechism has no
less pre-eminence above others, than the Decrees of Councils above the
Instigations of a private Spirit. For the difference betwixt this and
Catechisms penned by particular persons, is like that between the Laws and
Statutes of the Kingdom, and the advice and judgment of private Subjects.

This is not to cast any imputation or disrespect upon those Catechisms penned
by grave and learned Divines; which are good in themselves, and useful in their
station: but to show, that the Church-Catechism commands of us a peculiar
Veneration, by reason of its public Authority.

In the next place, by virtue of its Authority, the Church-Catechism has an
especial Usefulness, in being the common Test by which we may try who are of,
or against our Communion. It is likewise an excellent Form of Religion, whereby
particular persons may examine their own Opinions and Sentiments, and give an
account of their Faith to those who would therein either establish or subvert
them.

In the last place, the Accomplishment of the Church-Catechism greatly
enhaunseth its Commendation. For if its Contents fall under an upright Review,
it will merit no less praise than those Composures, which are so exact, that
they are neither defective nor redundant. For although some have objected its
deficiency, as not taking any notice of the great Points of Faith,
Justification, Sanctification, etc. It may hereunto be truly answered, That
these Points are rather briefly expressed, than totally omitted; and that it is
not the omission, but the short and Orthodox Expression thereof, which is the
ground of the Exception. But if the nature of a Catechism were rightly weighed,
it would be no Objection against the Churches, that some things are therein
either more darkly or more succinctly set down. For if every point of Doctrine
were in a Catechism discussed at length, it would lose and forfeit its Name.
But besides all this, it is easy for a Clerk of ordinary Industry and Letters
to make all those Points plain and obvious out of the Church-Catechism, whose
want is objected against its compleatness. And we have no reason to wonder or
repine, that the Church has left something to exercise the labors and
abilities of her Clergy.

But to conclude: If we maturely examine the Catechism, we shall find therein
such a natural evenness in the Method and Style, and such a consistency and
soundness in the Matter, as is not in any like composition easily to be matched.
As for the Introduction, it naturally carries us to all the circumstances of
our admission into the Church, showing when, by whom, after what manner, and by
what means we became Christians. Next, it acquaints us with the great
Privileges, Benefits and Duties of Christianity, as also how by solemn Vow we
stand obliged to perform them. The Question is plain and short; the Answer full
and pithy. wnd the Compilers thereof have manifested a singular wisdom and
care, in delivering the Rule in the fewest and plainest words. For if they had
laden it with long indicative Periods, they might at once have both puzzled
the understanding, and oppressed the memory of those tender Capacities for whom
chiefly it was designed.

If we look into the principal Chapters of the Catechism, the Church therein
has followed the Copy of the best and ancientest Catechists: For like them, she
has reduced to four general Heads, all that is truly necessary to Salvation.
For retrenching what is but artificially necessary to acquire the Felicity of
the future state, all truly necessary thereunto, is reduceable, 1. To Faith, or
things to be believed. 2. To Obedience, or things to be done. 3. To Prayer, or
things to be received. 4. To Sacraments, or things to admit and establish us in
the Church.

As for the things we are to believe, they are summed in Twelve Articles,
bearing the Name of the Apostles Creed, because it was either of their
composing, or contains the substance of all which they taught to be necessary
for single Belief; and was collected by Apostolical Men, out of their Writings,
into this Form or Breviary that we now profess.

As for Obedience, the Decalogue is its Rule and Object, which compriseth a
pure draught of practical Duties.

Prayer, which makes another Head of the Catechism, is an Auxiliary to the two
former; for unless we beg and obtain the Divine Assistance, we can neither
believe nor obey as we ought. -- Know this, that thou art not able to do these
things of thy self, nor to walk in the Commandments of God without his special
Grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent Prayer. And
the most absolute Form and Pattern of this Duty, is that which Christ collected
when he reformed their Euchologus, out of the Traditions of the Elders, and
recommended to his Church, and which bears his Name, The Lords Prayer.

The Sacraments are the fourth Head of Catechism, which God ordained in
compliance with Man's infirmities and weakness. For being that those things
which concern the Endless Welfare of the Rational Soul, are like it self of
Spiritual and Divine Nature, and therefore not easily to be comprehended by
those who have their Understanding limited by their Senses; it pleased God to
appoint certain Holy Rites called Sacraments; which by outward and visible
Signs represent unto us that inward and Spiritual Grace which he bestows upon
us; and which are also means whereby we are partakers of that Grace, and
Pledges to assure us of that participation.

CHAP. XV. An Account of some Objections usually brought against the
Church-Catechism.
IT has been generally observed, That Zeal, if it be not soberly governed when
it striveth against any thing, that either in reality or but appearance,
opposes Religion, does usually proceed with so great impetuousness, that
Religion it self is in danger. And as it not seldom falls out, That an
over-eager desire to pluck up Weeds, does hazard the extirpation of the good
Grain; so a sinister zeal against what is Superstitious, or but so pretended to
be, does often put both the Truth and Practice of Religion into suspense and
debate. And although this is an Observation which might be easily attested
through all the Periods of the Church, yet we need not look so far back for
Testimony thereof, if we revolve what has happened among our selves within the
Annals of our Memory. For we have seen the malice of the Detracting Spirit of
Faction and Sedition exposing every Institute of the Church to contradiction
and reproach; accounting it Argument enough to abandon every thing used by the
Church, on which there could any way be fastened the odious Names of Popish and
Superstitious.

And though this might be exemplified through the whole Body of the Churches
Liturgy, yet the present Theme obliges me to remark only such Cavils as with
greater speciousness are brought against the Catechism. For as for other
Exceptions, the smalness of their importance renders very needless to return
them any solid answer.

Now the first thing objected against the Catechism, respects its two first
Questions, which are traduced as superfluous and trifling, as being to no more
purpose, than to ask what we know already, and to be informed of that which we
perfectly understood before: Seeing that usually falls out, that the Catechist
is well acquainted with the Catechumens Name, and all the circumstances of its
imposition. Now seeing that Catechism s pretended to be an Abridgement, and
that all know how it is the proper Duty of Abridgements to leave out nothing
necessary, and (...) nothing unnecessary in; the Ch^^ch Cate^hi^^ ^all be far
from deserv^ an Abridgement, if its (...) or any thing therein be (...) and
Redundant.

But this Objection will appear of small force and importance, when it is
considered, that the Church in her Catechism observes the Method which is
natural to Discourses framed by Question and Answer; whose entrance is ever
some familiar Interrogative agreeable to the matter which is to be discoursed.
And seeing that the Church in her Catechism designed to instruct the ignorant
and younger sort the Principles of that Religion which they profess, it was
very proper to begin her Instruction with an enquiry for that Name in which
they first undertook that Profession.

And in this respect our public Catechism is more apposite and genuine, than
either the Roman Catechism established by Pope Clement the Eighth, or that of
Geneva annexed to their Liturgy: for after a long Preamble, the one begins
with, Quidnam Doctrina Christiana? The other with, Quelle est la Principale fin
de la Vie human?

But the entrance of our Church-Catechism will be further vindicated from the
imputation of levity or superfluousness, when it is rightly considered, That it
does naturally guide the Catechized to the knowledge of what most nearly
imports him: For (as 'twere by the hand) it gently carries him to all the
concerning circumstances of his admission into the Church; by whom; at what
time; and after what manner, he was made a Member of Christ, or received into
the Congregation of his Flock, and had a Right conferred upon him to partake of
all the Promises and Privileges of the New Covenant. Baptism being an
inauguration into that Religious Society which Christ founded.

And as we read that the People of God have from the beginning had names of
special signification (as Adam, Chava, Abram, etc.) whereby they were put in
mind of some signal mark of Gods Providence toward them, and of their bounden
duty of being piously thankful: So the Catechized, when he is demanded the Name
in which he became a Christian, it minds him of his obligation: 1. To depart
from Iniquity, and thereby to walk worthy of that Name by which he is called.
2. To perform what in that Name he vowed and promised. 3. To examine his
proficiency in that Religion into which by this name he was first initiate. 4.
To express a thankful remembrance of Christ's singular favor, that he so far
condescended, as to call him after his own Name.

But the Catechumen may upon another account be first called upon for his name,
because it is the badge and cognizance of that Holy Religion in which he is to
be instructed, and of which he must give an account both to God and his Church,
now and at the last. And superseding all other Reasons, those that have been
thus briefly intimated, may (at least) assist to clear the first question and
answer of the Catechism from the guilt of Trivialness, Vanity and Impertinency.

As to what is objected against the Second question and answer, it will be
sufficient to reply, That our Church therein is confo mable to the Primitive.
For Tertullian (a Father of the Third age) says positively, That it was the
custom of the Church in his time, to adm t none to the benefit of the
Scriptures, or to any dispensation concerning sacred and divine things, or to
the scanning and examination of particular Questions of Religion, who could not
first give a clear account of all material circumstances of their Reception
into the Ark of Christ's Church. By whom, at what time, and after what manner
they were received (which are the Ingredients of the second answer in the
Church-Catechism) and whether they did steadfastly believe and maintain all
those general Principles, wherein there ever was an universal an unanimous
agreement among all Christians. And those who could not give an account
thereof, were looked upon as such who had no right to the Communion of Christ's
Church, and the Privileges of his Kingdom. This Testimony of the Churches
practice is to be seen in Tertullian's Praesc. advers. Haeretic. A piece which
was written by him, as I conceive, before the provocations of the Roman Clergy
tempted him to turn a Montanist, and to be led away with the Enthusiastic
delusions of that Sect. He lived in the third age, and was so high in the
esteem of the humble and modest St. Cyprian, that he usually called him his
Master. Hierom. in Cat. Script. Eccles. Abraham Buchol. Chronolog.

The imposition of the Name being confined to the precise time of Baptism, is
by some looked upon as an impertinent Rigor, and tasting highly of
Superstition. But they would be of another mind, if without prejudice they
would have recourse to the Use of the Church, which has always given Names to
those Children she admitted into her Fellowship, at the punctual time of their
admission* And this will be plainly discerned, if we look back unto
Circumcision (the first Characteristical Sacrament) for from the time of its
Institution, to that of its legal abolishment, the Male received his name at
the Celebration of that truly primitive Initiatory.

Nor does it any way evacuat this Assertion, that we read of some who had names
before they were circumcised (after that admissory Rite was appointed) as
Benoni, Gershom, and the Israelites born in the Wilderness; Genesis 35.18. Exodus
2. and 4. Josh. 5.2.
whom we may suppose not to have wanted Names, as they did Circumcision. But as
touching the Example of Benoni, it affords little of Objection, seeing that at
Circumcision his Name was changed. And what happened concerning Gershom, it was
as the instance of the Israelites in the Desert, in this case not at all
argumentative, because it was extraordinary, and when necessity forced them to
dispense with Law. So that notwithstanding all this, we may conclude that
Circumcision was the usual time for the imposition of Names. And the like
custom has always been observed at Christian Baptism; the Church thinking it
most convenient that the Baptized should at the same time receive his Christian
Name, whereat he became a Christian.

But that for which the Church seems least accountable, and which makes the
greatest noise, and which is objected with the fairest plausibility, is that
which concerns Sureties in Baptism, whose Office is decri'd as unwarrantable,
because they undertake what they cannot discharge. And the very name (of
Godfathers and Godmothers) is spoken against, as a profanation of the most
Holy Name, being a Transgression of the Third Commandment. And this is an
Objection which cannot be better assoiled, than by laying down a clear Scheme
of the Antiquity and Reasonableness of Sureties in Baptism.

And in the first place the antiquity of Sureties, at and for the reception of
Persons into the Church, is indisputable. For if we look into the Jewish Church
when she was in her best Purity, we shall find, that ever since the institution
of Circumcision there were still some appointed to be present, and hold out the
Male to the Mohel to be circumcised. And the person allotted for this Office,
was some special Friend of the Fathers, who is called the Master of the
Covenant (but usually in Latin, Initiationis Arbiter, Susceptor, Compater,) who
at the Door of the Synagogue receives the child from the women, who are
permitted to go further; and entering the Synagogue, the Susceptor holds the
child till the Hammohel, Circumciser, has taken away the Foreskin. And how this
custom was primitively observed among the Jews, and in point of Sureties
derived to the Christians, may be collected from what Junius has intimated upon
Esaias 8. compared with Saint Luke 1. from the 57 to the 60 Verse.

Now this custom of Sureties in the Jewish Church, need not at all reflect upon
the like in the Christian. Being it was in the power of the latter to retain
any Rite of the former that was apparently decent, significant, and edifying.
For if every thing used by the Jew were to be rejected by the Christian, then
most of our Religion must be cast out of doors. For it was not the design of
our great Lawgiver to abolish Judaism, but to amend, supply, and heighten it.
Besides, we find not that those who were, or are the greatest Impugners, and
most impetuous gainsayers of Sureties in Baptism, ever did it upon the account
that it was a Rag of Judaism.

But how dark and questionable this custom may seem to some in its derivation
and pedigree, yet its practice is clearly to be found in the first times of
Christianity. As they must needs know who have observed how frequently (...)
and (...) occur in the Greek Fathers; and Susceptores, Sponsores, and Fide
jussores, in the Latin. And how in both, the words signify and refer to
Undertakers at Baptism. Platina ascribes the Institution hereof unto Hygin,
who, says he, ordained, that at the least one Patrimus or Matria should be
present at Baptism, and there hold the Infant till he was baptized. Patrimus
and Matrima are old Words, which by new imposition denoted those who undertook
for the Virtuous and Pious education of the Baptized.

Now if it be granted, that Hygin Bishop of Rome was the Author of Godfathers
and Godmothers, then this custom is of an uncontrollable ancientness; for Hygin
lived in the Second Age, and was a Martyr in the 144 of Salvation. And it is
generally granted, that this good Bishop took occasion from those Persecutions
which were heavy upon the Church, to appoint Sureties in Baptism. That in Case
the Parents should fall into violent restraint, banishment, or death, there
might be some to take care of their childrens instruction in the truth of that
Religion into which they were initiate.

But whatever was the first occasion or ground of this Suretiship, we are
certain that for its great standing in the Church, it may take place among
those Primitive Rites, which were in all descending Ages to be retained. And
this will appear from the very Nature and Reason of the thing it self. And a
custom or Law, though it cannot be elder, yet it may safely be supposed to be
as old as its chief Motive and Reason.

Now the nearest Method to prove the reasonableness of this custom of Baptismal
Sureties is to examine both what they do for the Child at the instant of his
Baptism, and what they undertake for him for the future.

And as to what the Sureties do for the Child at the time he receives this
Sacrament; Platina tells us, that was no more than to hold it in their arms
till it was baptized, and to give it a name according, or at least not contrary
to the Parents Directions. And this is a thing so harmless, that none can have
any color to quarrel or reject it.

And as for what the Sureties undertake in the child's stead for the future, it
can merit no just reprehension; seeing it is no more than to be careful that
the child be virtuously brought up to lead a Godly and a Christian Life, and be
taught such things as are necessary to the attainment of Eternal Happiness:
according to the Exhortation of the Office of Public Baptism. And to the end
that this might not be over-burthensom to the Sureties, the Church provides
that her Curates shall diligently teach whom she has baptized; and so to
instruct them, that they may be fit for confirmation. At which time the
Sureties are discharged of their Bands, because at Confirmation the Baptized
answer and undertake in their own Names, what their Sureties have done in their
stead.

But it may still be replied, That the Parents are fittest to engage for their
Children, and that so weighty a concernment ought not to be transferred unto
Strangers. I must confess, this was once my own Persuasion; out of which I
could not argue my self, till I considered: 1. That by the Law both of God and
Nature, Parents are obliged to instruct their children in the things of God;
and therefore need not to enter into Bonds. 2. That Parents may die before
their Children arrive to a capacity of being instructed; or they may be
ignorant and unable, or negligent and careless to instruct them. 3. That the
Parents may be corrupted with Schism and Heresy, and by reason thereof be
altogether unfit to perform this Office. And indeed, if we reflect upon the
temperament of the Age we live in, the Church may seem never to have had more
need of Sureties for their Orthodox instruction, whom she takes into her
Communion. For so many Parents are infatuated with erroneous Opinions, that
none are more improper to engage for the regular Catechism of their children
than themselves. And if there were none of these Reasons herein argumentative,
yet the thing it self is of so great importance, that the Church has ever
thought it insecure to have none bound but the Parents. And there are, who upon
no contemptible account, esteem it very incongruous, that those should present
the Child to be washed of that pollution which it derived from them. And upon
this score it might be, that the Father was wont not to be admitted to be
present at the Baptism of his Child, but stood at the Church-door while the
Infant was carried in and baptized.

Zanchius, who was well read in the Writings of the ancient Fathers of the
Church, speaking of this custom of Godfathers and Godmothers in his
Commentaries upon the Ephesians, assures of its antiquity; that it opposes no
period of Holy Writ; that it is an Effect of the Parents love and care to their
children thus to make all possible provision for their Religious Institution:
That it is beneficial for the Infant in case of the Parents death, and an
assistance to the Parents if they live: That it is a means to beget and
increase mutual kindness among Neighbors; because hereby a spiritual alliance
is contracted, which may greatly conduce to the propagation and maintenance of
Christian charity. And we may add to all this, that not a few children would
inevitably be debarred of Holy Baptism, if none but their Parents could be
admitted thereunto to present them, and to stipulate in their Names.

But it is in the next place strongly objected against what is vowed by the
Sureties in behalf of the Baptized, as also that it looks very contrary to the
Nature of a Vow for one to make it in behalf of another. And here not to meddle
with the Nature of Vows in General, nor particularly of that of Baptism; it may
sufficiently evacuate all Scruples, plainly to consider, that no more is done
in this Baptismal Suretiship, than is both done and approved in Secular
affairs, in which it is allowed, that Infants act by their Tutors, Proxies and
Guardians, and that too in matters of no smaller concernment than Espousals and
Estates, etc, and at a time when they are as incapable to understand and
perform what is undertaken in their Names, as here at Baptism. It has also been
ever thought both just and reasonable for debtors to procure others to be bound
with them for payment of that for which at present they are insufficient. And
we may safely suppose that God will be as merciful in such cases as our selves;
and that he will as readily accept of Sureties for the Christian Education of
an Innocent Infant, as we for an insufficient Debtor.

But for a more evident comprehension of the whole case, I conceive it may be
thus stated. At the Font when the Infant is brought to Holy Baptism, the
Sureties put on his Person, and substitute themselves into his place: They
represent his Voice, and answer in his stead. [All which is to be seen in the
demands and answers in the administration of Public Baptism of Infants to be
used in the Church.] And the Infant engages under this Personation, That when
he comes to years, he will perform the Vow and Promise thus made by his
Substitutes. He and they being by interpretation but as one person; and
therefore the Infant, when grown up, is as much bound to discharge what at
Baptism was promised in his Name, as if he had done it himself. Now by this
Substitution the Sureties perform a great act of Charity: for they do that for
the child, which by no means he could do for himself; for they get him an early
interest in the privileges of Christianity, which in the ordinary way of
procedure, cannot be had without Baptism: and this cannot be had without making
the Vow thereof; and it is impossible for the Infant to make this Vow, but by
its Proxies; who oblige themselves no further, than to see that the Infant be
taught so soon as he shall be able to learn, what a Solemn Vow, Promise, and
Profession he has made by his Substitutes, or Sureties.

And by this short account of what the Godfathers and Godmothers do for the
Infant in Baptism, it is easy to apprehend, that none need withdraw from this
Pious Work, for the supposed Difficulty of its Discharge. And therefore those
who rightly understand this Suretiship, and yet refuse it, they may be thought
rather to want Charity than Power; and that they are unwilling, and not unable
to perform it.

Nor does it less reflect upon their deportment, who turn this pious Custom
into an idle Ceremony, by privately devolving upon the Parents, what they
publicly undertook for their children; which does at once frustrate and
contradict the intendment of the Ohurch, and delude the Congregation of God's
people.

But it may be further objected, That the Vow of Baptism being made by others,
renders the Performance and Observation thereof by the Child, a thing of
constraint, and not of election: for the baptized, when grown up, does not
follow his own choice, but his Sureties; and allows of what was at Baptism
promised in his behalf, not out of willingness but pre-engagement; all which is
oppposite to the genuine Nature of a Vow.

And in Answer to this Objection, it will be convenient to observe, That the
Vow and Promise made by Sureties in Baptism is not absolute; for in an absolute
sense, no man can undertake for another. But the Vow is conditional; and the
Child when come to age, must either own it, or forfeit the benefits of Baptism.
And as those who are married, being Minors, when come to mature years, may
choose whether the Marriage shall be ratified or rescinded: So it is in the
power of the Baptized at years of discretion, to acknowledge or renounce the
Vow of Baptism. If he allow of, and consent to what at holy Baptism was vowed
in his Name (which is still supposed at the making of the Vow,) then he is
bound actually to believe and do it. But if he disclaim it (which is in his
power) then he disowns all Interest and Privilege in Christ, with all the
benefits of that Society into which by Baptism he became incorporate.

The Catechism teaches us out of the Creed, to believe, That God the Son has
redeemed all mankind; which cannot be true (say many) because he died only for
the Elect. But they would have no reason to impugn the Churches Doctrine in
this particular, if those Scriptures were impartially considered by them, Ezekiel.
18.23, 32. S. Joh. 3.16. Heb. 2.9. Romans 1.4, 5. S. Joh. 4.42. 1 Timothy 4.10. S.
Joh. 1.7. 2 S. Pet. 3.9.
whereon this Position is founded. A few of which are here barely quoted in the
Margin, on purpose to show the ground of the Churches Doctrine, and to guide
those to the Topics of their confutation, who gainsay this, I believe in God
the Son, who has redeemed me and all mankind. That his death was both
sufficient and intentional to save all mankind, but is effectual and
efficacious for none but true Believers, is a distinction which being wisely
and soberly understood, would remove that clashing, which some fancy there is,
betwixt the Catechism and the Seventeenth Article of the Church.

Many other Scruples brought against this excellent Catechism, are purposely
omitted, because they will easily be obviated in its (intended) Exposition.
Besides, I have bound my self to observe the Laws of an Essay; which I must
unavoidably violate, if I should venture upon all such Enlargements as the
Subject would naturally endure. I had rather be censured for having said too
little than too much.

Deus dedit his quoque finem.
THE CONCLUSION.
WE have hitherto examined the Age and Advantages of Catechizing, and found it
to stand above the imputation of being either Novel or Superfluous. So that the
only remaining Enquiry concerns its Practice. And this will exact no long
disquisition, seeing every Station of men are therein so perfunctory and
negligent. Now, as in a common Contagion, no less care must be had of the sound
than infirm; and the cure of single persons is required to the removal of the
Epidemical Disease: So remissness in Catechizing being become a common Malady,
it behooves every one to look after amendment, to the end that the Church may be
healed of all those Distempers fallen upon her through lack of Catechizing, and
which, if not prevented with a timely interposition thereof, will effect that
destruction which they threaten and prognosticate.

And if we look into the persons who are capable herein to be delinquent, they
may be reduced either to such as the Church has ordained to administer, or
receive this Sovereign Medicine. The former are the Clergy in the whole
denomination; for he among them who excepts, deceives both himself and the
Church. And notwithstanding that the Clergy in Sacred Writ, bear diverse
appellations, importing the Dignity, Power, Holiness, Excellency, Care,
Tenderness, Discretion, and Incommunity of their Functions; yet there is no
Title wherein they are more concerned than that of Catechist. For it does
(first) more immediately relate to that Errand on which from the beginning they
were sent into the world -- Go teach, etc. And next, unto the want and supply
of those over whom God has made them Overseers. And while they own themselves
to be the Churches Ministers, they should take care to serve her in her own
way. For since that was left for paths of their own, and more oil and labor
has been spent in arguing, than in teaching the Principles of Christianity, it
is sadly visible how Religion has thriven among us. For from endeavoring to
support Christianity with Buttresses of our own, captious and malicious Enemies
take occasion to conclude that it cannot stand without them. The superstructure
seems to be the proper matter of our care, where we believe the Groundwork
lies immovable. And blessed be the Author and Finisher of our Faith, that he
has founded it upon a Rock; and makes it so strong, that the Gates of Hell,
the strength and subtilty of her greatest Enemies can never be able to prevail
against it. Were we to deal with open Adversaries of the Faith (Jew, Mohammedan,
Pagan) the Ancient Fathers have shown us an excellent way of procedure; but
having to do with Professors, whose evil manners have corrupted their
Understanding, not the proving of the verity of the Christian Religion, but the
enforcement of its Practice, seems to be the only necessary prescription.

But without being decisive, or stinting the spirit of any man, I hope it may
be lawful to wish that the Clergy (out of a true sense of what they are
enjoined and bound to obey, by the 59th Canon) would return to the good old way
of Catechizing: for since this was shouldered out by Sermoning, the people have
been possessed w^^h strange Whimsies in Religion, and hurried on by the Spirit
of Schism and Sedition into all manner of Villainies.

A learned and pious Bishop of this Church does (as I am told) in his own
Person and Cathedral perform this Office. A few such leading Examples would
soon raise the sunk Esteem of Catechizing, and vindicate it from being thought
a Drudgery fit only for children and Curates. And I humbly conjecture, that
there is no Clergyman need think it any lessening of his Greatness and
Learning, to be seen teaching God's People after the manner of the Holy
Apostles and Primitive Bishops.

Our Ancestors (who knew something as well as we) were not ignorant of the
necessity and benefit of what is now most affectionately recommended; when
Queen Elizabeth made it her 44th Injunction, and King James his command, That
afternoon-Lectures should be converted into Explanations of some necessary
Rudiments of the Catechism; out of a prudent foresight that this would be more
advantageous to the People, than some ex tempore irruptions, or enlarging a few
contrived Breviates, upon desultory Texts.

The Laity are the next sort that herein can he faulty, to whose attentive
thoughts I would most earnestly recommend, first, the serious perusal of the
Rubric adjoined to the Catechism, together with the 59th Canon: Next, the
examination of their knowledge in Religion; that by that former they may know
their Duty; and by the latter their want of being catechized: And by both be
induced to embrace what to their own damage and the Churches affliction they
have undutifully neglected.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
The Introduction. Fol. 1. CHAP. I. OF Catechizing. Its Name, Use Secular and
Religious. p. 5. CHAP. II. The Age of Catechism. The Institution of Adam's and
Abraham's Family. The Schools of the Prophets. The continual use of Catchising
among the Jews, particularly after the Erection of the Synagogues. Their
Benefit thereby. p. 9. CHAP. III. Catechizing in times of the Apostles.
Evidences thereof in St. Paul's Epistles. The Contents of their Catechism. p.
25. CHAP. IV. The Apostles Catechists in several Provinces. The Declension and
Restoration of Catechizing. Catechists Styled Exorcists, etc. p. 32. CHAP. V.
The Antiquity of Catechism probable upon the account of its convenience: In
respest of the Object; Method of Instruction. p. 35. CHAP. VI. Catechism
necessary in respect of the increase and advancement of Spiritual Knowledge: To
have a distinct Understanding of things necessary to Salvation, etc. p. 39.
CHAP. VII. Catechizing the most suitable means to heal the Distempers of this
Church. Several Propositions to be supposed. A short digression concerning our
Disorders. p. 42. CHAP. VIII. The Methods used for our reclaiming, surveyed,
proving ineffectual. p. 57. CHAP. IX. The Just Matter and Subject of
Controversy in Religion examined. How by Catechizing, and not Dispute, we are
therein in to be reconciled. p. 62. CHAP. X. Disputation unfit for the capacity
of the generality of Dissenters: Catechizing proper, etc. Reasons against
Disputes. p. 68. CHAP. XI. Preaching, what it is: the several ways thereof used
by the Church. What kind of Preaching among the Old Jews, and Primitive
Christians. The Homilies considered. p. 80. CHAP. XII. Preaching insufficient
to restore our Dissentions. Catechizing proper for that purpose, etc. A Scruple
removed. p. 92. CHAP. XIII. The Benefits of Catechizing, 1. In respect of the
Civil State. 2. The Clergy. 3. The People. The Mischiefs of private Schools.
Objections against the constant practice of Catechizing removed. p. 99. CHAP.
XIV. The Church-Catechism to be preferred before others, for its Authority,
Usefulness, Accomplishment, Contents, etc. p. 102. CHAP. XV. An Account of some
Objections usually brought against the Church-Catechism. 115 The Conclusion. p.
135

