THE HISTORY OF THE Late Conspiracy AGAINST THE KING AND THE NATION. With a
Particular Account of the LANCASHIRE PLOT, AND All the other Attempts and
Machinations of the disaffected Party, since His Majesty's Accession to the
Throne.

Extracted out of the Original Informations of the Witnesses, and other
Authentic Papers.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar, and Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.

M DC XCVI.

THE HISTORY Of the Late Conspiracy, etc.
SInce the late Conspiracy in this Kingdom, has been for some time the
Principal Object of the Curiosity of the Public, and since it may furnish us
with so great a Variety of Important Instructions; it is presumed the History of
it will be equally useful and acceptable to the present Age and to Posterity.

Here future Ages may behold a King, variously Censured and Represented by the
several Parties of Mankind; The People of England t^ank'd His Majest^, ^y their
R^presentatives, for their Great and Miracu^ous Deliverance from P^pery and
Arbitrary Power, of which he was the Instrum^nt. S^e the Parliament's Address,
May 18. 1689. The Parliam^nt of Scotland thanked him also for their Deliv^rance
and Preservation, of which they acknowledged him next to God, to be the great
and only Instrum^nt. S^^ the Answer of the Conv^ntion to His Maje^^ie's L^tter,
in 1689.
loved by some, hated by others, but ^steem'd by all, though in so different a
manner, that some Conspire his Death for the same Reasons that prevail*d with
others to offer him a Crown: A Prin^e to whom his Subjects own themselves
indebted for Immortal Obligations, and whom his En^mies for that very Reason
accu^e as the Author of all their Mis^ortunes: Advanced by the Gratitude of the
one, rendered Illustrious by the Hatred of the others; endu'd with a Generous
Moderation, that raises him above his Fortune, and makes him the absolute
Master of his Passions.

Here the Reader will find Gentlemen and Officers dishono^ing the^r Birth and
Character by acting the unmanly part of Murderers; a barbaro^s Assassination
carried on under the spe^ious pretext of a Military Expedition; a handful of
Traitors cont^^ving the ruin of the publi^ Liberty, and re^dy by one terrible
Blow to execute their pernicious Design; a Secret that had been ex^ctly
conce^l'd for Six Years, discovered by Four Men in Six Days; The King not only
assisted by Providence, but established by the treacherous Malice of his
Enemies* endeared to his Subjects by the Greatness of the Common Danger, and
receiving new Assurances of their Affection and Fidelity; E^gland once more
delivered; The Prince and the People inseparably united by mutual Obligations,
and more than ever in a condition to procure and maintain the Peace and
Happiness of Europe.

This is a general View of what the Reader may expect to meet with in the
following Relation. I have marked every particular step of a Transaction, which
is too important to be forgotten, tho it can never be remembered without
Horror. And that the ^rogress and Management of the D^si^n might appear in ^
clearer ^ight; I have traced it ^^^m it^ dark Original, and have given a
^^ccinct Account of the several Projects and Attempts that prec^^ded, or mad^
way for the Conspirac^.

I have taken care to ^urnish my ^elf ^it^ such Instru^^ions as might enable me
to compose an exac^ History* I have endeavored to write without Heat and
Partiality; nor was there any need of aggravating a Crime that is so black in
its own nature, and so apt to possess the calmest Mind with a Just Abhorrence
and Indignation. But, above all, I have been scrupulously careful to mention
nothing but what is grounded upon Authentic Testimonies.

To give the Reader a just Idea of the Conspiracy, 'twou'd be necessary in the
First place to acquaint him with the importance of his Majesty's Life; if it
were not unreasonable to suppose that any Person can be so much a stranger to
the Transactions of the Age he lives in, as to be ignorant of the interest
which the Nations of Europe have in the preservation of that Sacred Life. 'Twas
on him that Spain founded the first hopes she had the courage to entertain, of
seeing a happy turn of her declining Fortune. It Is to him, next to the blessing
of Heaven, that the Dutch owe the safety of their State, and the English their
Laws, Religion and Liberty. The Former entrusted him with the management of all
their concerns, and the Latter made him their Sovereign to secure their own
Happiness, and to prevent a return of those Miseries from which he had
delivered 'em. The Allies, in general, combined together to erect a kind of
Empire for him in the present Confederacy; being sensible that they could not
defend themselves without his Assistance, and that they might, without any
Jealousy or Apprehension, rely upon his Integrity and Virtue. And, which is yet
a brighter and more surprising part of his Character, it is certain that none of
all these Honors which he enjoys, cost him the trouble of Asking. The great and
important Services, which the World had either received, or might expect to
receive from him, were the only Solicitations he used to obtain these glorious
advantages. This is the only Circumstance of his Life, which shall be
particularly considered in this place, because it is This that will contribute
most to give light to the following History, and This alone which Malice or
Envy durst ever presume to con^radict.

History of the Revolutions in England. Book II. page 437.
It never entered into the Thoughts of any considering Person, says a late
Writer, that the Prince of Orange was so fond of the English Nation, as to
undertake the security of their Liberties, at the expense of so much Treasure,
and so many Fatigues, instead of destroying 'em, as he ought to have done,
being the next Heir to the Crown, after the Prince of Wales.

See the Preface to the Third Time of the History of the Revolutions in England.
I cannot forbear observing on this occasion, that this Author, though chosen
as the fittest Person to write a History of the Revolutions in England,
according to the Instructions; and, as it appears, by the Orders of his Party,
was, at least in this case, a perfect Stranger, both to the Affairs and Temper
of that Monarch. For, 'ti^ certain that his Majesty, in so pressing a Juncture,
could not forget England, without neglecting his own Interest, and that of the
Princess his Consort, and without consenting to the irrecoverable Ruin of
Holland, of the Protestant Religion in general, and of all the Princes and
States in Europe, both Protestants and Roman-Catholics, who were equally
threatened with unavoidable destruction. And besides it will appear that the
Author of that History was less acquainted with his Majesty's Temper, than with
his Interest and Affairs.

When the People stopped his Coach, at Dort, and asked whether he was their
Statholder; he replied that he was satisfied with the Honors that were
conferred upon him. But we are not answered the People, unless we have you for
our Governor.
When that generous Prince was placed at the Head of a potent Republic in the
heat of his youth; and when at the importunate solicitations of all the Members
of that great Body, he was advanced to such a degree of Power and Grandeur as
might have enabled him to execute whatever his Ambition could have prompted him
to undertake; it is known, that he made no other use of so inviting an
opportunity, than to settle a good correspondence betwixt the Magistrates and
the People. It Is known that he refused the An. 1674. The D^puties of the
Nobility and (...) representing the (...) of the Duchy of Guelderland and
County of Zutphen, osser'd him the Sover^ignty of the Province, in the ^^me of
their Maste^s.
Sovereignty of Guelderland, which was offered to him, because he would not
confirm the jealousy of some Persons who seemed to dread the consequences of
such an Innovation. And even when an attempt was made to bribe his Virtue with
the alluring prospect of the Sovereignty of the Netherlands, and a promise to
favor and support his pretensions to England, at a time It Is notoriously known
that these Proposals were made by France.
when he could not expect to maintain his Right without the assistance that was
proposed to him; it is known that he rejected the tempting Offer, and that his
Enemies could not forbear admiring a Moderation that broke all their measures,
and convinced 'em that he would never be prevailed with to accept a Crown on
the inglorious Condition of destroying those who had a Title to his Pro ection.

It Is from such Instances as these that we ought to Form an Idea of his
Majesty's Temper, rather than from the groundless conjectures of a biased
^ancy. And all the actions of h s Life are so many convincing Demonstrations,
that he has always looked upon it, both as his Duty and Interest, to preserve,
rather than to destroy the People.

M. Fage^ wrote on this occa^ion to Mr. Stewart. And when the Court of England
endeavored to persuade the World that thus was a supposititious letter, and
that it did not give a true a^^ur of their Highnesses Sentiments, having
published a Book to that E^e^t called Parlamentum Pacificum; Mr. Fagel
complained openly of the d^singenuity of their Proceedings, and by a second
Letter confirmed the Declaration he had formerly sent in their Highnesses Name.
'Twas in pursuance of this Maxim, that while there was any hope left of
composing the Disorders in England, without having recourse to the last, and
most violent Remedy, he endeavored to prevent the Ruin of his Father in Law,
and the Miseries that threatened the Nation, by tendering an advice which that
Prince had the misfortune to reject. This is undoubted Matter of Fact, and
consequently, ought to make a stronger impression upon us than if it were only
a probability grounded on plausible Presumptions. After the death of Charles
II. he rejected the advice and assistance of the late Elector of Brandenburg;
and when that Prince would have engaged him to go over to England, he replied
that he would never make any Attempt against the King his Father in Law,
without an absolute necessity; but at the same time he protested that if he
could not otherwise prevent the subversion of the Laws and Religion of England,
he would undertake the Voyage, though he should be obliged to Embark in a
Fisher-boat.
Nor was he either soon or easily prevailed with to go over to England; for he
deferred that Expedition till he could delay it no longer, without neglecting
at once his Honor, Conscience and Interest.

These who exclaim against so many Sovereigns for favoring the descent in
England, do at the same tacitly acknowledge, that 'twas then the general
opinion of those Princes, that their common Safety and the Liberty of Europe
depended upon the success of that Expedition: And it is plain from the event
that they were not deceived.

The Prince of Orange's arrival in England filled the World with an impatient
expectation of the approaching Crisis that was to determine the Fate of Europe.
Every Man was an attentive Spectator of a Revolution in which All were so
nearly concerned; and none but such who are incapable of regarding the public
Interest, can be supposed to be unacquainted with the Circumstances of so
important a Transaction: And therefore, instead of entertaining the Reader with
a particular account of his present Majesty's Proceedings on that occasion, I
shall content my self with observing in the general; that 'twas his first and
principal desire, that a Parliament might be called to settle the affairs of
the Nation; That, to secure that great Assembly from the apprehension of any
disturbance or constraint, he offered to retire Threescore Miles from the
Capital City, provided King James's Army would withdraw to an equal distance.
That, when His Enemies could not forbear commending this Effect of his
Moderation. See the History of the Revolutions in Engl. Book II.
the late King fell into his Hands, he suffered him to make his escape, without
considering the dangers to which the Life of an implacable Enemy, would in all
probability expose him. That afterward he ordered See the Act 1 Gulielm. and
Mariae, entitled, An Act declaring the Rights and Privileges of the Subjects to
regulate the Succession to the Crown.
his Forces to March out of the Places, where the Members of the approaching
Convention were to be chosen, that the Elections might be managed with an
absolute Freedom. That at last the Representatives of the Nation, of their own
accord, declared the Throne vacant, and presented him with a Crown which he had
never demanded.

'Twill not I hope be denied, even by our Enemies, that England is too potent a
Nation, and too considerable in all resp^ct^ to be frighted into a servise
complaisance; and too Wife and Provident to make so great an Alteration,
without considering both its Nature and Consequences. And therefore, since the
Representatives of such a Nation looked upon this as the only Expedient to
secure their Liberty; the Prince to whom they made their address could neither
fancy himself wiser than so great a People, who desired his Protection, and
offered him the Crown after long and mature deliberations; nor prefer some
private considerations before the general Good of a whole Nation, or rather of
many Nations, whose Interests were linked together. It Is plain that an Action
of this Nature may be either censured or commended according to the Principle
from which we derive it, and that the Judgment we give in such Cases depends on
the Intention we ascribe to the Actor; and consequently there is nothing but
Prejudice and Ill nature that can hinder us from acquiescing in the Justice of
his Majesty's Proceedings.

Satyr may raise Suspicions, or invent Crimes, and afterward endeavor to
fasten the imaginary Guilt upon those whom she resolves to History of the
Revolutions in Engl. Book II.
attack: But unbiased History judges a Prince's Actions by his Deportment upon
other occasions. Those who fancy it unreasonable to suppose that one may be
King of England, or even Heir to the Crown, without endeavoring to destroy the
Nation, will never be able to comprehend the Motives that should oblige his
Majesty to expose his Person for the preservation of his People: They know not,
or at least do not consider, that a true King may be distinguished by the same
marks by which Solomon distinguished the true Mother. However, it is certain
that all the spiteful Reproaches which are levelled against his Majesty for
accepting the Crown, rebound with greater force upon the Nation that presented
it to him; and that those who are possessed with so Brutish a Fury, as to
imagine that he may be Assassinated without a Crime, because he suffered our
Representatives to place him upon the Throne, do at the same time pronounce a
bloody Sentence against the Parliament, and condemn the whole Kingdom to Havoc
and Desolation. This is the natural Tendency of the Maxims of that Party, and
we must do 'em the Justice to acknowledge that their Actions are suitable to
their Principles; for it will appear that the Conspiracy against the Nation,
and the barbarous Design against the Person and Government of its Deliverer had
the same beginning, and advanced with equal Steps.

1689 The Discovery was made by a French Protestant, who insinuated himself
into the Favor and Confidence of the Conspirators, by pretending to be engaged
in the same design. He was hindered, by several Accidents, from giving such
timely Notice to the Court, that the Assassins might be apprehended. The
Discovery was communicated, in Holland, to some zealous Friends of the
Government; and, in England, to My Lord Sydney.
IMMEDIATELY after His Majesty's Accession to the Crown, he received advice
from Germany and Holland, and even from France, that several Persons were
landed in England with a resolution to Assassinate him: And not long after he
was informed that they had left the Kingdom, because they could not find an
opportunity to execute their Design. It seems that He either did not believe,
or, at least, did not much regard these Informations; but He could not behold,
with (...) the Dangers (...) his Subjects. There was (...) Conspiracy
discovered in (...) here the secret (...) Government had (...) such as (...)
for their (...) to His Majesty, to (...) Edinburgh on Fire in (...) different
places, and (...) retire to the Highlands: (...) were not the main Efforts of
the Disaffected Party, nor the principal Difficulties with which the Government
was obliged to encounter.

The Late King having put himself at the Head of his Party in Ireland, had
reduced the Protestants of that Kingdom to great Extremities. If he had
consulted his Interest, he would never have made so false a step, in a juncture
that would have required all the Caution and Dexterity of the most refined
Politician; but it seems he could not resist the impetuous Motions of a Council
of French and Irish Bigots, who were accustomed to govern him. 'Twill perhaps
be expected, that I should take this occasion to attempt that Prince's
Character; but I must confess, I have not courage enough to venture upon so
nice a Task. For it is certain that, in such a case, the most scrupulous Caution
can hardly preserve an Author from transgressing the narrow Limits that are
prescribed to him, by the respect which is due to those, whose Honor, as well
as their Lives, ought to be Sacred even to their Enemies. Few are capable of
managing a Subject of this Nature with a tender and wary Hand; and even the
modestest Performances in this kind are obnoxious to the unjust Censures of a
biased Reader. And therefore, instead of assuming the Liberty to speak of his
Person, I shall content my self with making some Reflections upon the
Proceedings of his Council, which I could not omit without rendering my Work
obscure and defective.

'Twas the Opinion of every judicious Person, who observed their Maxims and
Conduct, that, even from the beginning, they gave the World too plain a view of
their Designs, and proceeded with too hasty an eagerness in the Execution of
'em.

In this account I have neither magnified nor multiplied the Disorders that
were committed by the Government. They were either corrected by the Late King
himself, upon the News of the Prince's Expedition, or after his Flight, by the
Convention. The Laws that were made upon that occasion by the Parliaments of
England and Scotland, are undoubted Testimonies of the several Attempts that
were made to subvert our Laws and Religion; nor will any reasonable Person
expect any other Arguments to prove the Truth of a matter of Fact of which all
the Inhabitants of these Nations were either Eye or Ear-Witnesses.
Here, under their wonted pretext of dispensing with the Laws, they established
an Ecclesiastical Commission that was equally terrible to the Church and to the
State. The Incorporations were dispossessed of their Charters, the Council was
filled with Roman-Catholics, and the Universities were deprived of their
Privileges. The Temporal Lords were obliged either to quit their Places or
renounce their Religion, the Bishops were imprisoned, and an Irish Army was
brought into the Kingdom in time of Peace.

In Scotland, they were so far from observing any measures, that they looked
upon it as too mean a Condescension to preserve the least regard for the Laws.
They persuaded the King to assume a Despotic Power, and taught him to use a
Language which till then was unknown to the Freeborn People of Great Britain;
for they had the confidence to make him declare that, See his Proclamation
published in that Kingdom.
by virtue of his Sovereign Authority and Absolute Power, he abrogated the Acts
of Parliament that were made against the Roman*Catholics.

The unsuccessfulness of the Attempt was a convincing Argument of the temerity
of the Project, but could not oblige its Contrivers to alter their measures, as
it appears by their Conduct in Ireland; for the Promises that were made in King
James's Name to the Protestant Inhabitants of that Kingdom, both before and
after his arrival among 'em, could not protect 'em from the barefaced violence
of their Tyrannical Oppressors.

Their Effects, Cattle, Wool, Money and Merchandises, were seized and employed
in the maintaining of a War against their Friends in England; Their Lands were
laid waste, their Houses pillaged, and the Benefices bestowed on their ancient
and most implacable Enemies the Priests. The Act of Settlement, which was the
only security they could depend upon, was violated, and the Roman Catholics
were authorized by the Government to take Possession of their Estates. Both the
Protestant Religion and those who professed it were in a manner proscribed, and
exposed as a Prey to those who were equally prompted by interest and
inclination to destroy 'em. The People were persecuted and murdered by their
domineering Enemies, who were rather encouraged than punished for their
Barbarity. They were forced to resign their Churches, and were even denied the
liberty of meeting together to perform their Devotions. At last all the
Protestants in Dublin were secured; and when the Prisons were full, the
Churches were turned to Goals. These disorders are particularly described by
Dr. King, the present Bishop of Londonderry, then Dean of Dublin, in his Book
entitled, The State of the Protestants of Ireland under the Government of the
late King. The whole Book is full of Instances of this Nature, of which I have
not mentioned the Twentieth part.
a Bishop of that Country, who had the misfortune to be a considerable Sharer
in the common Calamity.

The King was so sensibly touched with the deplorable Condition of Ireland,
that he resolved to go thither in Person, though he placed an entire confidence
in the The Duke of Schomberg.
Person whom he had entrusted with the command of his Forces: And that generous
Undertaking was so visibly attended with the Blessing of Heaven, that in the
space of Three Months he reduced Two Third parts of the Kingdom, and gave his
Enemies a Fatal blow which broke all their Measures, and ruined their unjust
Hopes. 'Twas by the wise Direction of that Providence which had so often
delivered him from the Hands of bloody Traitors, and preserved a Life that was
to be exposed to more honorable Dangers, that the Wound he received at the Boyn
gave occasion to a false Report of his Death, which occasioned as public a joy
in France, as the true account of his Victories did in This, and all the other
Nations of Europe.

The Parliament thanked him for exposing that Life to the greatest Dangers, on
which the Fate of Protestants, and the common Liberty of all Europe depended:
And the happy Change that appeared every where in the public Affairs on that
occasion, is a more than sufficient Ground to vindicate that Illustrious Body
from the Imputation of Flattery. People were surpised to find themselves safer
in the midst of a bloody War, than they were in time of Peace: The Switzers
were no longer apprehensive of their incroaching Neighbor: The Protestant
Religion was preserved without any prejudice to the Roman-Catholics: The
Princes 1690.
and States upon the Rhine were either secured from Danger, or in a condition
to defend themselves: An effectual stop was put to the Pretensions and
Conquests of the Chambers of Metz and Brisac; the Electorates of Mentz and
Cologn were reconquer'd; and a King of the Romans was chosen according to the
Inclination and Interest of the Members of the Empire. Three Kingdoms were
delivered from Oppression, and raised to their wonted Glory of protecting their
distressed Neighbors. The Netherlands had the satisfaction to obey a Governor
whom they had long and ardently desired, but could never obtain till now. The
Branches of the Houses of Austria were happily reunited to one another, and to
those whose Interest 'twas to support 'em. England and Holland resolved at last
to pursue their mutual Interest, and to cherish an Union which is absolutely
necessary to their I reservation. France had the mortification to see her self
exhausted by the prodigious efforts she was obliged to make; as the rest of the
World had the satisfaction to perceive that ere long she would either be
confined within her ancient Limits by our Arms, or ruined by her own
dear-bought Victories.

These were the Glorious consequences of his Majesty's Establishment upon the
Throne of England: Every Nation was sensible of its particular Obligations, and
the Eyes of all the World were fixed upon their Great Benefactor. Even We, who
owed all the Happiness we possessed, or could hope to enjoy, to his generous
Assistance, and whom he had lately delivered from the greatest danger that ever
threatened a Nation, could hardly outdo the rest of Europe in expressing our
Gratitude and Affection. For, after he had received the Blessings and Applauses
of his Subjects, when the managing of the Public Interest required his Presence
at the Hague, he was attended by a Court of Sovereigns, who seemed to come
thither on purpose to present him with the Compliments and Acknowledgments of
Europe.

But while so many Illustrious Persons were endeavoring with a kind of
Emulation to express their Esteem for his Person, and the confidence they
placed in his Virtue; and while he was receiving the Testimonies of their
Respect and Affections with a Modesty that secured him from Envy in the midst
of his Triumphs; there was a design set on Foot to rob the World of its Hope
and Delight, by such Ways and Means as are very rarely suspected or foreseen by
Persons of his Courage and Temper.

'Twas about this time that a French Minister of State, whose Name makes an
inglorious Figure in Grandval's 1691.
Examination, engaged one Dumont to Assassinate his Majesty. I dare not charge
that Minister with the first contrivance of so detestable a Project; since we
have so much reason to believe that he acted only in pursuance of the
Instructions he had received from those whom he thought himself obliged to
obey. It Is not without Reluctance that I enter upon a Subject, which carries
Horror in its Idea, and is so inconsistent with the common Principles of
Humanity, that the matter of Fact would appear incredible if it were not
confirmed by unquestionable Evidence. Murder in the general, without the
aggravating circumstance of Assassinating a Sovereign, is equally accompanied
with Guilt and Shame; and even the most hardened Assassins are oftentimes
sensible of the Infamy that attends their Crime. It Is impossible to imagine a
Provocation strong enough to excuse either the Committing or Encouraging of so
barbarous an Action; nor would a Man of Honor be tempted to execute his just
Revenge by so dishonorable a Way. Such unmanly Resentments as these are
peculiar to those mean and degenerous Souls, whose Merit consists in Baseness
and Envy, and who are only able to defend themselves by Villainy and Treason.

But supposing that the French Ministers neither were, nor cared to be reputed,
Men of Honor; they ought never to have formed a Design, which would have left
an indelible stain upon the Gratitude of the Prince whom they pretended to
serve. The Magistrates of Roterdam imprisoned a Villain who offered to kill the
French King. They sent an ac^ount of the project to Mr. Montausier, and offered
to deliver up the Offender.
It Is known, that when some desperate Persons in Holland offered their
detestable Service to Assassinate that Monarch, they were so far from being
encouraged or protected, that an offer was made to put 'em into the Hands of
those whom they had injured. Another Proposal of the same naturewas made to the
King, when he was Prince of Orange. The Person who offered to undertake the
Murder, gave an account of the place where he was to be sound; and the Prince
sent Mr. Dickfelt immediately to acquaint the Count d'Avaux with the whole
Project.
And both the Count d' Auaux and Mr. Dickfelt can testify, that it has been in
the Power of a Prince, whose sacred Life has been so often endangered by the
Treachery of his Enemies, to execute his Vengeance upon 'em by their own
inglorious Methods.

Besides, what could be more injurious to the boasted Glory of Lewis XIV. than
that his own Ministers should contrive a Project which could not be executed
without fiixng so black a scandal either upon his Virtue or Dignity; for he
could not decline condemning it without rendering himself eternally infamous,
nor afterward suffer it to be executed without proclaiming to all the World
that he was not Master in his own Dominions. At least, it might have been
expected that the Project would have expired with its Author, and that the
succeeding Ministers would be either afraid or ashamed to pursue a Design that
left such a Blot upon the Memory of its Contriver. Yet the Reader will find
that it was carried on after his Death; and, I shall have occasion to give a
particular account of its Progress and Success, after I have taken a Succinct
view of the intended Invasion.

As soon as the Roman-Catholics in this Kingdom perceived that there was a
Party formed in Ireland who had openly declared for the late King; they began
to carry on the same design here, in secret Cabals, though with little appearance
of Success: For the smallness of their Numbers secured us from open violence;
and the Sense of our Duty and Interest kept us from being deluded by their
Artifices. They could neither have so mean an Opinion of our Courage nor
Judgment, as to imagine that we would voluntarily submit to an impotent and
implacable Enemy; or that a few canting Sophisms would prevail with us to
neglect Self-preservation.

And therefore, since they could never expect to be Masters, they ought to have
contented themselves with the quality and condition of Subjects. They might
have continued to enjoy whatever they could justly call their own, under the
protection of a Mild and easy Government, that allowed 'em all the Liberty they
could desire, except that of subverting the Laws, and destroying their Country
and Fellow Subjects. But their Minds were still possessed with the Remembrance
of those aspiring Hopes that were defeated by the Revolution; and their
Ambition was rather enflamed than allayed by so unexpected a Disappointment.
Besides, they thought themselves obliged to support a Prince who had sacrificed
his Crown to their Advancement; and fancied that notwithstanding their present
Weakness, they might easily make good their pretensions by the assistance of
their French Protectors. These were the Motives that engaged 'em in a Design
which could not be carried on without disturbing their own Quiet as well as
that of the Nation, and made 'em resolve to shut their Eyes against the visible
Dangers to which they exposed themselves by venturing upon so hazardous an
Attempt.

'Twas on the 18 of October 1689. that a Minister of State received a Letter
from the Assizes, held by adjournment at Manchester, by which he was entreated
to advertise the Council, That many of the Roman-Catholic Younger Gentry, some
of good Quality, were absconded for some Months, that to some of the Gentlemen
now absconded there had been sent from London several Boxes with Scarlet
Cloaks, Pistols and Swords, directed for safer conveyance to Protestants, who
knew nothing of them, and by that means discovered. That some had been
Modelling Officers and Men preparatory to their hope of an Invasion or
Insurrection, that though the Goals were full of Irish Papists, yet many were
entertained at Popish Houses, etc.

The Correspondence which the late King entertained with the Papists in
Lancashire, was managed by one Bromefield a Quaker, who lived at Redland near
Chester, in the House of one Wilson, who was acquainted with, and engaged in
the Conspiracy. But perceiving that they began to be taken notice of, and not
daring to continue longer in a place where they were looked upon as suspicious
Persons, the First fled to Ireland and the Second to Lancashire.

After them, the management of the Intrigue was committed to Gordon, Lunt, and
Thrilfall, who came from Ireland with Declarations and Commissions from King
James to the Roman-Catholics in several Counties of England. They landed in
Lancashire, where they opened their Commissions, by which Gordon was appointed
to go to Scotland, Thrilfall to Yorkshire, and Lunt to Staffordshire, Cheshire
and Lancashire. In pursuance of these Orders they parted, and went immediately
to the respective Places that were allotted 'em, where they executed their
Commissions, though with different Success.

Thrilfall had already finished his Negotiation in Yorkshire, and was returning
through Cheshire to Ireland, when he was pursued upon Suspicion, and killed as he
was endeavoring to defend himself. Lunt having performed his Commission, was
sent to London, to levy Soldiers, to be distributed among the Conspirators in
the North. In his return from thence, after he had Executed his Orders, he was
Seized at Coventry, by one of the Kings Messengers, brought back to London, and
Committed to Newgate. Five Months after he was set at Liberty; having given
Bail to appear next Hillary Term, at the King's Bench, from whence he was sent
to be Tried, at the Assizes in Lancashire. He was Committed for High Treason,
to the Castle of Lancaster, upon the Evidence of the Master of the Ship, who
brought him over from Ireland, and the Officers of the Custom-house, who found
some of King James's Commissions among the Papers which he left in the Vessel.

But these were not the most Terrible Witnesses, that were like to appear
against him: For about that time, the Conspiracy was discovered, by two several
Persons. The first was Kelly, who declared what he knew, to the Mayor of
Eversham, in Worcestershire; the Earl of Bellamont, and some Persons of
Quality, in that Country, who Communicated the Discovery to the Council. But
though his Deposition remained in the Hands of the Government, his Person
disappeared so suddenly, and in so strange a manner, that we could never
afterward hear an account of him. His Fate continues a Mystery to this day;
but, whether he was killed or carried away, it is certain that the Conspirators
from that very time began to resume their Courage, which was extremely sunk
upon the News of his Discovery.

Dodsworth was the Second who alarmed the Party, by discovering the Conspiracy
to a Member of Parliament, who sent an account of it to one of the Secretaries
of State, by whose Order the Informer was brought from Lancashire to London:
And 'twas found that his Deposition agreed exactly with that of Kelly, though
they were at a hundred Miles distance when they were examined.

Dodsworth was sent to the Castle of Lancashire to join his Evidence to the
Testimony of the other Witnesses that were to appear against Lunt, who,
nevertheless, could not be convicted according to the usual Forms of Law. For,
when he was brought to his Trial, the Master of the Ship, who brought him from
Ireland, either was, or pretended to be sick: And the Officers of the
Custom-house could not swear that the Papers which were produced in the Court
were the same which they found in the Ship, because they had forgotten to mark
'em. Thus the whole Evidence being reduced to the single Testimony of
Dodsworth, Lunt, though apparently Guilty, was acquitted; and both the Court and
Jury chose rather to absolve a Criminal, than to violate the least Circumstance
of the Law. A rare Instance of Justice and Moderation, which, at once, may
serve to convince us of the Mildness and Clemency of the present Government,
and of the extravagant Prejudice of those who would exchange it for Arbitrary
Power; and, of two things which seem to be equally the Objects of our
Admiration, leaves us in doubt, whether we have greater reason to Love and
Esteem the Former, or to Hate and Detest the Latter.

November 1691.
Lunt, by his Services and Sufferings, had so far insinuated himself into the
Favor and Confidence of his Party, that, in a Meeting of Jacobites at
Standish-Hall in Lancashire, he was chosen to go to France, to acquaint King
James with the present posture of his affairs here, and to know what Assistance
might be expected from him.

December 1691.
The Answer he brought was, that the late King was preparing to come in Person
to England the next Spring; and that in the mean time, he would send 'em his
last Instructions by a sure Febr 1691/2.
and faithful Hand. Not long after Walmuly and Parker came to England by that
Prince's Order, and appointed a Meeting of the principal Persons of their
Faction at Dungen-Hall, where they delivered the Commissions and Presents they
had brought from France; and at the same time assured 'em that King James would
speedily land in England with a sufficient Force to support 'em.

In the mean they were putting all things in readiness, at la Hogue, for the
intended Expedition: The Preparations they made were very April 1692.
great, and the Measures they had taken seemed to promise Success, as it will
appear by the following account of 'em.

By the Articles that were agreed upon at the surrender of Limerick, the French
had cunningly reserved a Liberty to retain a very considerable Body of the
Irish Forces in their Service, whom they designed, upon the first convenient
occasion, to send over to England. These Troops consisted of such as were most
deeply engaged in the routed Party, and longed for a Second War to make up the
Losses they had sustained in the First. They were rather irritated then
discouraged by their late Misfortunes, and so unaccustomed to Labor, that the
love of Idleness joined to the desire of Booty had made 'em forsake their
native Country. Besides, they looked upon our Happiness with Envy and Rage, and
could not endure to be Subject to those whom they once hoped to enslave. Such
Men as these were the fittest to be employed in a Design of this Nature, and,
in all probability would have proved the most effectual Instruments of our
Destruction, if they could have found an opportunity to join the Disaffected
Party among us.

There were Three sorts of Persons in this Nation, whom we might justly look
upon as Domestic Enemies. First the zealous and bigoted Roman-Catholics, or
rather all Roman-Catholics in general; for though some of 'em appeared more
cautious and moderate than the Rest, 'twas the general opinion of the Party
that all the Papists in England would take up Arms on that occasion. The Second
Order of Jacobites consisted of the late King's Servants, who owed their
Fortune and Preferment to his Favor: And the Third comprehends those whose
Interest and Safety depended upon the Subversion of the Laws; Men of turbulent
Spirits and desperate Fortunes, who hoped to raise themselves upon the Ruins of
their Country.

Such Persons as these are at once our Plague and our Reproach, but the Breed
is not peculiar to England; for every Nation has its share in the common
Calamity, and has the misfortune to produce a Set of Men who seem to be in Love
with Disorder, and are never more apt to appear in their native and hideous
Colors, than when they are protected by the Indulgency of the Laws and the
Clemency of the Government, and meet with an opportunity to cover their
pernicious Designs with a false pretext of Duty and Allegiance. They are
perpetually talking of Fidelity and Obedience, and seem to make Loyalty their
Idol; though they are usually the Principal Promoters of Rebellion, and seldom or
never well affected to the Government under which they live. Plotting is their
Business and Recreation; they love Confusion and expect to live by it, and are
ready to join with every Faction upon the cheapest Terms that can be proposed.
When there is no present Advantage in view, they work for Expectation; Plunder
is all the Pay they require, and their Prosperity consists in the Desolation of
their Country.

Besides, the French were preparing to land a considerable Body of Forces in
this Kingdom, to support the disaffected Party: For the Court of St. Germans
repented that they had formerly placed too much confidence in an Army of
English Men, who loved their Country and their Religion.

'Twas the general opinion of the Party, that the placing of too much
Confidence in Subjects who were unworthy of it, deprived King James of the
assistance he might have expected from others. They remembered the advice of
some of his Counselors, who, History of the Revolutions in England, Book II.
looking upon his Army as the Nerves and support of his Undertakings, and the
only Way to secure him against the obstinacy of those whom neither the
lawfulness of his Authority, nor his Moderation in using it could retain in
Obedience to the Government, would have persuaded him to entertain a sufficient
number of Catholics in his Army to keep the rest in awe, and to put it out of
their Power to betray him; and were of opinion that both these Effects might
have been produced by joining the Irish Troops to such of the English and
Scotch as were Remarkable for their Fidelity to his Interest. Thus History of
the Revolutions in England, Book II. p. 428.
we may easily perceive, by the reflections they made on their former Conduct,
what Measures they resolved to take for the future.

They concluded that an Army of French and Irish, with some pretended
Protestants who regarded neither their Country nor Religion, would never show
King James a Copy of his Salisbury Expedition; and that with such Forces as
these they might make an entire Conquest of England as soon as they should
think fit to undertake it.

In pursuance of that design the French labored with great application to
increase their Naval Strength; ping that, if they could corrupt the Officers of
our Fleet, or be in a readiness to put to Sea before the Dutch Men of War could
join Ours, they might easily find an opportunity to fight us with advantage,
and afterward Land their Soldiers without Opposition.

In the mean time, to oblige us to send our Land Forces to Flanders, and at the
same time to hinder our Allies from assisting us, the French King appeared at
the Head of his numerous Armies, as if he had resolved, in one Campaign, to
conquer a Country, which for Sixty Years had been both the Seat, and Cause of
the War. He intended to invade England, if our Army continued in the
Netherlands; or to make himself Master of those Provinces, if we should be
obliged to recall our Forces. But the Principal Design of all the vast
Preparations he had made, was to keep this Nation embroiled in a Civil War,
till he had broken the Confederacy, that he might fall upon us with his united
Forces, and by subduing England put himself in a condition to conquer all the
rest of Europe.

But tho the Conspirators expected a considerable Reinforcement from France,
and a powerful diversion in Flanders; tho they were sure of the Assistance of
so many false Protestants, and (as they imagined) of several Officers in our
Navy; notwithstanding all these Advantages, they looked upon His Majesty's Life
as an invincible Obstacle to the Accomplishment of their Designs, and despaired
of succeeding in their Attempt against us, while we enjoyed the Protection of
our Great Deliverer.

1692.
They dreaded his Power, Forces and Alliances; but were more afraid of his
single Person, than of the united strength of the whole Confederacy. They had
oftentimes had the unwelcome experience of his Constancy, Resolution, and
unwearied Application; and knew, to their sorrow and cost, that his Courage was
never shocked by the most terrible Dangers; that upon a pressing Exigency he
could brave a thousand Deaths, and cut his way through the most vigorous
Opposition; that when the posture of his Affairs required more Prudence than
Valor, he could proceed with all the Coolness and Policy of the wariest
Statesman; that he was peculiarly happy in baffling the Designs of his Enemies,
and in turning even their most successful Contrivances against themselves; that
he was equally unmoved in Good and Bad Fortune, that he was never capable
either of Vanity or Fear, and could only be overcome by Himself. These
Considerations made his Enemies resolve to take away a Life that secured
Europe, and England particularly, from the utmost Efforts both of their Policy
and Force: And in pursuance of this execrable Resolution they engaged some
desperate Villains to Murder him. But God saw, and blasted their dark
Contrivances, and delivered Him whom He had made the Deliverer of so many
Nations.

1692.
The Assassins were taken near Bosleduc; and by their Examination it appears,
That Dumont and Grandval were solicited to undertake the Assassination of the
King. That the Design having miscarried in 1691. was resumed the next year.
That one Leefdael, formerly Captain Lieutenant of a Troop of Dragoons in the
Service of the States, coming to Paris, Grandval communicated the Design to
him, and desired him to be concerned in it, with Dumont and himself, because he
thought Dumont would not be able to execute it alone. That Grandval went with
Leefdael and Colonel Parker to St. Germains, and that King James said to him,
Parker has acquainted me with your business; If you and the other Officers do
me this Service, you shall never want any thing. That upon this assurance, a
"Letter was sent to Dumont who was then at Hanover, desiring him to meet
Grandval and Leefdael in the Country of Ravestein, where they were to take
their last Resolutions, and entreating him to hasten his departure, least the
King, in the mean time, should return to England. That Dumont was to lie in
wait, and to kill His Majesty as he passed the Lines, or went to visit the
Posts at the decamping of the Army. That Grandval told Leefdael, upon the Road,
that if their Design succeeded, the Confederacy would be broken, that every
P^^nce would recall his Forces, that the Country being left without defense,
the French King would soon make himself Master of it, and that King James would
be restored to his Throne.

To keep Leefdael from being discouraged by the Difficulties and Hazards to
which the prosecution of their Design might expose 'em, he told him that they
were only to follow the King, that Dumont was to give the Blow, and that after
the business was done they might easily make their escape and leave Dumont to
take his Fortune.

But both Dumont and Leefdael repented their Engaging in so black a Villainy,
and discovered what they knew of it almost at the same time; the one to a
Prince in Germany, who was his Majesty's particular Friend, and the other to
some Magistrates in Holland who had a sincere affection to the Person and
Interest of that Monarch.

1692.
Grandval was taken and received the just Reward of his Crimes, after he had
made a full Confession without being put to the Torture. He seemed to be very
penitent, and declared with some resentment at his Death, that he was ruined by
the Authors of that detestable Project.

There was a Detachment made from the Duke of Luxemburg's Army, consisting of
Three Thousand Horse, who were to be Posted at the Advanced Guard to receive
the Murderers. This is a Circumstance that ought not to be forgotten; for it is
plain they took this way that the Assassination might be looked upon as a
Stratagem of War: And it is probable that either it was proposed at first as an
Attempt to carry away the King, or that they resolved, after the Blow was
given, to make it pass under that Notion.

It Is evident that this barbarous Design was the Favorite Project of the
Party, since they continued to pursue it after so Remarkable a Disappointment.
If we examine the whole Course of their Proceedings since that time, it will
appear that the Conspiracy which was lately discovered in this Kingdom, was the
same with that in which Grandval was engaged; and this is more than a bare
Conjecture, since it is confirmed by the Deposition of one of the Conspirators.
The Conspiracy, says he, has been carrying on a great while, Larue, in
Charnock 's Trial.
for some Years. And it originally came from Colonel Parker, especially as to
my knowledge of it, and that was Five or Six Years ago, at St. Germains, when I
was there: He proposed it to me, and said he would propose it to my Lord
Melford, etc.

We have already observed that the Assassination of his Majesty was contrived
and resolved upon, in order to the Invasion of his Subjects; and we have reason
to believe that the Design of God, in preserving his Life, was to make him once
more our Deliverer: For 'twas He alone who opposed our impending Ruin, and and
baffled the Designs of our Enemies.

He prevented the Loss of the Netherlands, by wise Delays; and took such
Measures as might one Day put him in a Condition to Recover what he could not
then Preserve.

He hastened the Sailing of the Dutch Fleet, and fitted out his own with such
diligence and expedition, that, notwithstanding the utmost Efforts the French
could make to prevent us, they were obliged to encounter with Two Fleets, when
they expected only to have met with One.

When his Enemies had recourse to their wonted Artifices, and endeavored to
corrupt the Officers of his Navy, he not only defeated their Treacherous
Project, but made their Stratagem Fatal to themselves: For Admiral Carter was
ordered to Treat with 'em, and amuse 'em with a seeming Compliance, till they
sell into the Snare which they had prepared for us.

1692.
He sent the Earl of Portland with secret Instructions to the Queen, that She
might not, even in his absence, be obliged to depend upon the Advice and
Opinions of any other Council but himself. In pursuance of these Orders,
Warrants were issued out to apprehend suspected Persons; the Arms, Horses and
Magazines of the disaffected Party were seized; the Army was put into a posture
of defense; care was taken to prevent Tumults and disorderly Meetings, and the
Officers of the Fleet were engaged by new obligations to continue Faithful to
the Government. These were the Measures that were taken to preserve us, and God
was pleased to bless our Industry, and to assert the justice of our Cause by a
glorious and important Victory.

The Fate of Europe was decided in one Day at La Hague, and every Nation had
its share in the Consequences of that memorable Action. We, who were more
immediately concerned in the Danger and Deliverance, and who had been so long
alarmed with the Expectation of the approaching Storm, could hardly forbear
Trembling, even in the midst of our Joy, when we reflected on the dismal
Alterations which we must have beheld if the success had answered the Hope and
Design of our Enemies. For, after such a Victory, the French might have drawn
immense sums from England, either as a Reimbursment for the Charge of the War,
or as a Subsidy imposed upon a subdued Nation. They might have added above a
Hundred Men of War to their Fleet, and increased their Landforces with the
formidable Addition of Fifty Thousand English Men, by whose Assistance they
might have enlarged their Conquests, while we should have been obliged to
entertain an Army of Enemies, to complete the destruction of our Country, under
pretext of supporting the Authority of their Allie.

In Ireland the Papists would have reacted their former Barbarities, and
dispossessed the Protestants a second time of their Goods and Estates. In
England, they would have renewed their Claim to the Church Lands, and made us
feel the severest Effects of their irritated Fury. In both the Kingdoms those
who had refused to take the Oaths to the present Government would have been
rewarded with the Places of those who had taken 'em; and the Non-Swearing
Clergy preferred to the richest Benefices. The Offices of State and the best
Posts in the Army would have been bestowed on those who had expressed the
greatest Zeal in enslaving the Nation; and the House of Peers would have been
filled with the most notorious Betrayers of their History of the Revolutions in
Engl. Book II.
Country. The Nobility, whom they had the Impudence to represent as a Company
of Traitors and Villains, would have been punished for their Fidelity to the
State, and for asserting their just Privileges with (at least) the Banishment
of their Persons and Confiscation of their Estates; and the Representatives of
the Nation Proscribed for Loving and Serving their Country. To conclude, the
Laws would have been at the Mercy of those whose Interetst obliged 'em to
violate and subvert Them; and none must have expected Preferment but such as
had merited the Favor of our Enemies, by striving to increase our Misery.

These Considerations which served to confirm all True Englishmen in their
Affection and Fidelity to the Government, were so many powerful Incentives to
its Enemies to pursue their former Designs. They continued still to hope that
France might repair her Losses, and be again in a condition to assist 'em; but
the Prospect was too distant to satisfy their eager Impatience: And therefore
they began to consult how they might be able to destroy the Nation without the
Assistance of Foreigners.

It Is thought the Party were not Novices in the Art of ruining their
Fellow Subjects. They have been frequently Charged with the Massacre in
Ireland, and the Burning of London; and it is strongly suspected that the Public
Robbers, Pirates, Incendiaries, Debasers of Money, Spies and Assassins, were
employed, as Instruments, in carrying on the great Design. The Reader is left
to judge of the Truth or Probability of these Conjectures.

Whatever Opinion weo ught to have of the Design of the Conspirators, we must
do 'em the justice to acknowledge their Skill and Dexterity, in contriving the
most probable Methods and Expedients, to accomplish it.

Of these Means and Expedients, foam have been long since Foretold, some are
universally known, our Enemies have betrayed their own Secret by divulging
others, and we may discover the rest by a heedful Examination of the
Proceedings of the Conspirators, and the Progress of the Conspiracy. I will
discourse of 'em in order, because the Subject is both Curious and Important.

About Seventeen or Eighteen Years ago, Titus Oats made a Discovery to the
Parliament, which was variously censured by Persons of different Principles and
Inclinations. Some gave credit to it, others rejected it as a mere Fable, and
there were some who looked upon it as a Mixture of Truth Sr. Edmundbury
Godfrey's Murder, which cannot be reckoned a Fable, is a strong Confirmation
of, at least, part of that Discovery.
and Fiction. I will neither pretend to justify nor condemn all his
Depositions, but content my self with observing, that there are some things
which were looked upon as incredible, by reason of the Enormity of the Crimes,
tho later Experience has convinced us that they were really true; especially
what relates to Trade, Exportation of Species, and the Debasement of Money.

Oats acquaints us, in the Appendix to his Information, Sworn before Sr.
Edmundbury Godfrey, Sept. 27. 1678. That the Conspirators could not endure King
Charles II. because he was not of their Religion, and that they resolved to cut
him off with all possible Speed. That they Charged him with Tyranny and Designs
of oppressing, Governing by the Sword, and without Parliaments, and exposing
his most Faithful and Valiant Subjects to be wasted and slain in foreign
Service. 2. That they aspersed, derided, exposed and declaimed against his
Person, Counsels and Actions, in Parliament and elsewhere; and particularly
scoffed at his security and confidence in them, and by this means animated and
encouraged their Party and Assassins especially, to attempt upon his Life, and
hasten his Ruin. 3. That they disclosed the King's Counsels to France. 4. That
they raised false News of his Affairs. 5. That they disaffected his Majesty's
Allies, Holland, Spain, the German Emperor and Princes, by false Intelligence,
etc. 6. That they disturbed Trade. 7. That they set up, sent out and maintained
Seditious Preachers and Catechists, and directed 'em what to Preach in their
own, or other private Conventicles or Field-Meetings. 8. That they animated
different Parties, one against another to Arm and put the People in Blood upon
the King's See, how they designed to bring the Irish over to England. The
application of the rest of the Particulars is obvious.
Death. 9. That our best Cities and Towns were to be Fired and Plundered by
Irish, French, Lay-brethren and others, disguised in Frocks and otherwise. 10.
That they endeavored to Poison and Assassinate by picked Quarrels, or
otherwise, those whom they supposed to be ready or able to detector otherwise
obstruct their Designs. 11. That they designed the Transportation of Trading,
People, Stock and Money, ADULTERATING MONEY and Plate; to which ends they had
Bankers, Brokers, Merchants, Goldsmiths and other Traders, whom they Stocked
and Set up with Money of their Society, of which they boasted to have a Hundred
Thousand Pounds in Cash.

Those who reflect upon what they see or hear, and consider the Temper and
Actions of these who make a noise in the World, may easily judge whether the
Party has continued to pursue the same Methods: And therefore, without
insisting longer upon this Subject, I shall proceed, in the next place, to take
notice of such of their Maxims as have been discovered by themselves.

As for Parliaments, it is their Opinion, That a King of England's Condescension
History of the Revolutions in England, Book II. p. 357.
to his Parliament seldom produces a good Understanding between 'em. And
particularly they tell us, that King Charles II. was advised to stand firm
against the Attempts of an Assembly that made it their usual Custom to oppose
and contradict him; that they would still be starting new Claims and Demands,
and would at last raise 'em to such a Height, that His Majesty would not be
able to grant 'em, without consenting to his own Deposition, and consequently
would find himself to be still in the same condition; that is, after a thousand
Condescensions against his own Interest, he would at last be obliged to break
with his Parliament, and find that his Complaisance had increased their
Boldness, and made 'em less afraid to oppose him.

They have left no means unattempted to set these Stratagems on foot against
the present Government, by employing all their Artifices in a successless
attempt to engage the King to invade the Liberty of his Subjects, or to make
the People incroach upon the Prerogative of the Crown. They endeavored to
revive the ancient Jealousies that disturbed the Quiet of the former Reigns; as
if it had been possible to keep us from perceiving the difference betwixt a
Deliverer and an Oppressor, whose Characters are so opposite, that they can
never agree either in the Manner or End of executing their Authority; for it is
a necessary consequence of their respective Maxims, that the Former should
endeavor to Preserve, and the Latter to Destroy his People. It Is both the
Interest and Duty of an English Parliament to protect the People whom they
represent from a Prince who treats 'em as Enemies or Slaves; but they cannot,
without consenting to their own Ruin, oppose a King who makes the Honor and
Prosperity of the Nation the End of all his Designs and Undertakings. And we
have reason to adore the favorable Providence of God, who has freed us from
the Apprehensions of so terrible a Misfortune, and established His Majesty's
Throne by the most perfect Union that ever was observed betwixt a King and his
Parliament.

Besides these Ways to destroy the Nation, which they have known and practiced
so long, the present Juncture has furnished 'em with new Expedients. In the
beginning of the War, our Trade was extremely disturbed by French Privateers;
but since their Defeat at La Hogue made 'em both afraid and unable to engage
our Fleet, they seem to make no other use of their Men of War than to surprise
our Merchant-Ships. And our treacherous Countrymen are always ready to give
'em secret and timely Notice of our Motions, and consequently betray the Riches
of the Nation to its most inveterate Enemies.

In the mean time they were secretly fomenting our Divisions, and animating the
different Parties that are among us, against us and one another. The Scotch
Presbyterians were incited to take up Arms, by Sir John Cochram, and those of
the same persuasion in England were managed by Mr. Ferguson and others.

Deposition of Brice Blair, March 12. 1695.
About the time of the Siege of Mons, Sir John Cochram sent a Person in whom he
confided, to King James, assuring him that, in some parts of Scotland, there
were several Presbyterian Ministers who were the Leading Men of the Party, and
some Gentlemen of Note that were entirely at his disposal. He offered his
Interest to King James, from whom he had received Fifteen Hnndred Pounds Sterling.
which he said he had faithfully distributed among his Creatures; and desired
him to send Three thousand Pounds more. In the mean time he pretended an
extraordinary Zeal for Liberty of Conscience, and declared if King James would
not comply with his Subjects in that point, he would Wade through a Sea of Blood
to go thither. Thus he was equally unfaithful to the Nation and to that Party
which he seemed to espouse, by selling the Blood and Liberty of the Former for
so small a Sum; and by obliging the Latter to depend upon the Late King's Word
for an Advantage of which they were already in possession, and betraying 'em to
those who are particularly animated against 'em.

See the Character of the Presbyterians, in the History of the Revolutions in
England, Book II.
Ferguson, the noted Contriver of those Intrigues which at last proved Fatal to
the unfortunate Duke of Monmouth, famed for Inconstancy and Treason, that
Prodigy of Plotters whose whole Life is One black Mystery, was also a busy
Promoter of this execrable Design. The Character that is given of him in the
History of the Conspiracy against King Charles II. and the Duke of York, which
was Written by their Order, is very remarkable, and serves to show us what use
the Party intended to make of a Person, with whose Temper they were so well
acquainted.

The Author of that Book informs us, that Ferguson was not only engaged in the
Design of Assassinating those two Princes, but applauded it as a Glorious Work,
saying, that it would be an Admonition to all Princes to take heed how they
oppressed their Subjects; and adding upon another occasion, that it was never
thought Injustice to Shoot, or set Traps for Wolves and Tigers. And one of the
principal Conspirators speaking of a Blunderbuss which he intended to use in
the Assassination of his Majesty, broke out into this profane Jest, That
Ferguson should first Consecrate it.

In the same Book we are told that the Duke of Monmouth confessed to the King,
That in all their Debates Ferguson was always for cutting of Throats, saying,
that was the most Compendious Way. That Ferguson himself, when he took his
leave of the Conspirators, declared, That he would never be out of a Plot as
long as he lived, and that at one of their Consults he proposed, that Five or
Six of the Old Rich Citizens should be killed at First, and their Estates given
to the Mobile, to terrify the rest. That 'twas his constant Custom to outdo
all the rest of the Conspirators, by some peculiar Circumstance of Cruelty of
his own Invention. That upon all accounts of his restless Spirit, fluent
Tongue, subtle Brain, and hellish Malice, he was perfectly Qualified to be the
great Incendiary, and common Agitator of the whole Conspiracy; and that after
Shaftsbury's Death, he was the Life and Soul of all, especially for the
carrying on of the Assassination.

While such Persons as these were endeavoring to incite the Presbyterians to
Rebellion, the Episcopal Party was cajoled by some of the Deposed Bishops, or
by certain Prelates that were sent as private Emissaries from King James. And
the same design was also zealously promoted by some Clergymen, who despaired
of Preferment under a Prince, who makes Merit and Virtue the only Objects of
his Favor and Bounty. They were enraged to find themselves disappointed of the
great Expectations they had conceived in the preceding Reign, when the
Government, designing to render the Church of England weak and contemptible,
made want of Merit one of the principal Recommendations to Advancement. It must
be acknowledged even by those who envy our present Happiness, that the constant
Care which is taken to bestow the Benefices and Dignities of the Church upon
the most deserving Persons, and to prefer the Desires of the People, in the
choice of their Pastors, before the most pressing Solicitations of particular
Persons, is one of the distinguishing Beauties of this Reign. The Merit of
those who have been advanced to the Episcopal Function since the Revolution, is
sufficient either to stop the Mouths, or baffle the Impudence of their most
virulent Enemies: And it is known that these worthy Prelates are not only
encouraged, but enjoined to make a conscientious use of the Power with which
they are entrusted, by virtue of their Office and Character to dispose of a
considerable number of the Inferior Benefices. So that it is hard to imagine
where the most impudent Malice can find a pretext to censure His Majesty's
Conduct in this Point.

Nevertheless it is certain, that the Conspirators carried on their black
Intrigues in all places, and among all sorts of Persons; and even were not
ashamed to contradict themselves by endeavoring at once to persuade all the
several Parties in the Kingdom that they had just cause of Complaint. They
suggested to the Rigid Presbyterians, whose ungoverned Zeal made 'em capable of
such Impressions, that they ought not to support a Prince who protected the
Church of England: And at the same time the Toleration he had granted to
Dissenters, was made use of as a pretext to render him odious to the hottest
Asserters of Episcopacy.

He had already given us a sufficient Intimation of his Sentiments in this
Case, and of the Maxims he intended to pursue; when he declared in the
beginning of his Reign, That He would be King of his People, and not of a
Faction. He loved moderate Persons in all Parties, and resolved to maintain all
his Subjects Indifferently in the Possession of their Privileges and
Properties. He would never permit any Order or Set of Men to domineer over the
rest of their Fellow Subjects; but suited his Maxims to the Free and Manly
Genius of his People, who love to be Governed by Law. He is naturally inclined
to Goodness and Clemency; and tho his Temper alone were not sufficient to
secure us against uneasy Apprehensions, the Consideration of his Interest
would infallibly restrain him from abusing his Authority. The preceding Reign
furnishes him with Instructing Examples, and his Virtue is confirmed by the
Faults of his Predecessor. He was advanced in opposition to Arbitrary Power,
and can never consent to the abolishing of those Laws on which his Authority is
founded: Nor can he endeavor to render himself absolute in one place, without
ruining his Interest in another; for he is equally obliged to maintain the Laws
of England, that he may preserve his Authority in Holland; and to preserve the
Liberty of the Dutch, that he may maintain his Power among us. Never was the
Interest and Happiness of a Prince so inseparably united to that of his People;
and never had Subjects less reason to be Jealous of the Authority of their
Sovereign. This is unquestioned Matter of Fact, a Truth that can neither be
denied nor concealed; nor can the Conspirators themselves be supposed to be
ignorant of it. And therefore, since they cannot discover, or so much as
pretend to discover any Faults in His Majesty, to excuse their Malice against
him, they endeavored, under the Shelter of his Virtues, to carry on their
execrable Designs.

The Honesty and Integrity of his Temper makes him incapable of Jealousy or
Distrust, and even seems to invite his Enemies to conspire against him.
Besides, he has so great a regard to the Laws, that he will not suffer 'em to
be violated under any pretext whatsoever; not even for the security of his
Person and Government. And it is this which encouraged the Conspirators to
proceed with less Caution and Fear, as the Reader will easily perceive by the
Continuation of the History of their Proceedings.

1692. His Depositions are in the Hands of the Government.
Lunt was very active in performing his Commission, and had made a considerable
progress about the time when the French were expected in England. He had been
at London, where he bought Arms, Carabins, Swords, Pistols, etc. which he sent
to Lancashire. He had also listed Soldiers whom he sent to the same County; and
had received Money for their Subsistence from the Lord Molineux and others. And
by his Diligence and Success he had insinuated himself so far into the Favor
and Esteem of the Party, that he was sent back to France, about a Year after
the Action at La Hogue. But, before I proceed to give an account of his Voyage
and Return, it will not be improper to acquaint the Reader with the State and
Disposition of the Court of St. Germains, about the time of his Arrival there.

It Is observable that the Policy of the Late King's Council has always
consisted in altering their Measures according to the Circumstances of their
Affairs. That this has been their constant practice, is plain from their
Conduct at the beginning of the Revolution. For upon the News of the
Preparations in Holland, he began to remove those instances of his Arbitrary
Power that had rendered him odious to his People; but as soon as he received
advice of the pretended Shipwreck of the Dutch Fleet, he repented his former
design, and sent Counter-Orders to Oxford. Again, when he left the Kingdom, he
endeavored to amuse us with new Promises, which were industriously dispersed
among the People, both in England and Scotland: Particularly, to oblige the
Scotch to support his falling Interest, he assured 'em, That they and their
Posterity should see See his Letter to the Lords and Commons of that Kingdom,
Dared from on board his Ship.
the Effect of the Promises which he had so often made 'em, to maintain their
Religion, Liberty and Privileges. But no sooner was he at the Head of his Party
in Ireland, and in a condition to pursue his old Maxims, than he seemed to have
lost the very remembrance of his Promises, and began immediately to persecute
the Protestants. The Defeat of his Army made him afterward change his note,
and resume a Language of Sweetness and Moderation: But after the Preparations
at La Hogue had revived his sinking Hopes, he ventured once more to put off the
Mask, and talked of nothing but Conquest and Revenge. At last their were two
Parties formed in his Court; and while one of 'em would have engaged him to
oblige himself to preserve the Ancient Laws of England, the other were still
suggesting to him that 'twou'd be too mean a Condescensien to enter into a
Treaty with his Subjects. The two Cabals were headed by Middleton and Melford,
who enjoyed their Master's Favor by turns, and were successively entrusted with
the Management of Affairs, according to the variety of his Circumstances.

When he fancied himself in a Condition to subdue the Nation by Force, Melford
was his Favorite; but when the posture of his Affairs obliged him to have
recourse to Flattery and Complaisance, Middleton was the principal Director of
his Counsels. The Factions were directly opposite, and were distinguished both
by their Names and Sentiments; for the Middletonians were usually known by the
Name of Compounders, and the Melfordians had the Title of No Compounders.

Melford had still a Share in the Management of Affairs; but his Interest was
sinking proportionably with the Hope of Conquering England, when, to recover
his Credit, he contrived the Project of Assassinating his Majesty.

He had already engaged Bromfield and Griffin, who had their Correspondents in
England. And upon Lunt's arrival, he proposed the Design July 1693.
to him, engaged him in it, and sent him to Dover to concert the means of
executing it with Captain Noel, Captain Walter, Captain Roberts, Pepper, and
Preston.

December. 1693.
They had promised to Assassinate His Majesty, and even Signed an Obligation to
that Effect: But after they had consulted with Lunt about the Means of
Executing it, they were seized with Horror and Remorse, and resolved to atone
for their Crime by discovering it to the Council.

January 1693.
And that their Information might neither be slighted nor suspected, they made
use of one Taff, who not long before had done a considerable Service to the
Government, and consequently was neither unknown nor unwelcome at Court. By
this Man Lunt was introduced, and had an opportunity to make his Discovery.
Some time after the Council sent 'em July 1694.
both to Lancashire with Captain Baker to seize and convict the Conspirators in
that County.

The Search and Prosecution continued July 14. 1694.
several Months with various Success. The Accused Persons, whose Names it is
thought fit to conceal, absconded as soon as they were informed of the
Discovery, and the Design that was on Foot to bring July 17. 1694.
'em to Justice. In the mean time their Houses were searched, and in them were
found Saddles, Swords, Carabines, great Quantities of Powder and Bullets,
Standards, a Commission from King James, etc.

October. 17. 1694.
At the Trial at Manchester, October. 17. 1694. the Witnesses deposed, That the
Persons whom they accused had received Commissions from the late King to Levy
Troops; that they had listed Soldiers, and formed 'em into Bodies, with a
Design to assist the French after their Landing; that the Papists in Lancashire
contributed for the Subsistence of these Troops; that they were furnished with
Officers, Arms, and all sorts of Ammunition for War, etc. But an unexpected
Accident put a stop to the further Discovery of the Conspiracy, and saved the
Traitors from the just Punishment of their Crimes.

They had Money to offer, and consequently could neither want Friends nor
Protection. The First whom they gained was Taff: He had been well rewarded for
his late Service, and expected a new Recompense for this Discovery, tho he had
contributed nothing toward it, but the Assistance and Testimony which he gave
to the Discover. The disappointment of his Hopes made him listen to the
advantageous Offers of the Faction, and resolve to save his new Masters at the
expense of his own Reputation; for he was not ashamed to declare that the
Lancashire Plot was a Fiction concerted betwixt Lunt and himself, to Ruin some
Gentlemen in that County. This Declaration was followed by Objections that were
made against the Witnesses. They were accused of Corruption and Misdemeanors;
some of the Judges were preingag'd and possessed with groundless prejudices
against 'em, and care was taken to disguise the whole Affair to the Sir William
Williams took Post for London immediately after Taff's Declaration, and gave a
horrible Character of the Witnesses; having obstinately resus'd to hear any
thing that was offered to be alleged in their Favor, or to comply with some of
the Judges who would have proceeded to the Examination of other Witnesses.
Council. The Witnesses were represented in the blackest Colors that Artful
Malice could invent, and committed to Newgate upon suspicion of having
Conspired against the Lives and Honor of the Lancashire Gentlemen.

The Affair was afterward brought before both Houses of Parliament, who heard
the Witnesses, and others who gave in new Informations. Some of 'em discovered
the secret Treaty betwixt Taff and the Conspirators; and all of 'em justified I
unt and his Accusation. And after a full Hearing and Examination, that lasted
about six Weeks or two See the Votes of the House of Commons on that occasion.
Months, 'twas declared by both Houses, That there had been a horrible
Conspiracy against their Majesty's Life and Government, etc.

This Vote was an Illustrious Testimony that the Witnesses were not only
Innocent, but merited the Thanks of the Nation; yet the Prejudice of those who
ought to have protected 'em, and the Interest of the Faction they had offended,
were so great, that the Resolutions of a whole Parliament could neither put a
stop to their Prosecution, nor procure 'em a fair Trial. They were indicted at
the Lancashire Assizes, and, by the prevailing Force of the secret Springs that
were employed against 'em, were found Guilty of Perjury.

Thus, by an unhappy and preposterous Turn, the Criminals were become
Witnesses; and the horrible Conspiracy against Their Majesty's was reduced to a
Conspiracy against Traitors.

1695*
But their Artifices were at last defeated, and Truth prevailed over the Power
and Treachery of its Enemies. The Discoverers asserted their Innocence by the
Testimony of Forty new Witnesses: The Lancashire Gentlemen could not prove
their Allegations, and those who were Guilty of no other Crime than endeavoring
to serve the Government, were sent away with assurances of a suitable Recompense.

In the mean time tho the Conspirators could not succeed in their main design
of discrediting the Witnesses; they had spread such a Mist upon the whole
Affair that they hoped they might easily conceal their Intrigues for the future
from the less penetrating part of Mankind. The Discoveries that had been made
were imperfect and controverted, and served only to give us a new instance of
the difference betwixt the King and his Enemies. He was so far from imitating
either the Arbitrary Violence, or Ungenerous Politics of some Princes in
Europe, that he openly protected those who had Conspired against his Life, so
long as there was the least appearance of Reason to doubt of their Guilt. So
dear is the Life or Honor of a Subject to a King, that is (what every Sovereign
ought to be) the Father of his Country.

On the other hand, the Conspirators endeavored to prevent a new alarm, by the
Death of those whom they suspected. For, not to repeat what has been said
concerning Kelly, Dodsworth was killed by two Jacobite Brothers after he had
discovered what he knew of the Conspiracy: And Redman was Murdered two days
after he had communicated his design to one who betrayed him.

While the Jacobites in Lancashire were pursuing their beloved Project, of
destroying the Nation, with so much Heat and Diligence; their Friends in London
were continually forming new Designs against His Majesty's Life.

When Parker came to England, to execute the Orders he had received from his
Master, he entertained an intimate Correspondence with Porter and Goodman, Two
of the most zealous Instruments and Promoters of the Treasonable Designs of the
Party. The First was born a Gentleman, and a Protestant; but had spent his
Estate, and renounced his Religion. The other was a Comedian by Profession, and
had been formerly Tried for endeavoring to Poison the Dukes of Northumberland
and St. Albans; but either his Interest, Innocence, or Subtilty had saved him
from the Punishment that is due to such a Crime. Parker gave 'em the Two
Goodman 's Deposition, April 24. 1696.
First Companies in his Regiment, with a large share in his Confidence, and in
the secrets of the Faction; but would never acquaint 'em with some of the most
Mysterious Circumstances of the Design. He ordered 'em to take a House in, or
near London, with large Stables, fit to lodge and accommodate Fifty or Sixty
Horses; that they might be in a condition to receive the Troops of Horse, that,
from time to time, were to pass through London, in their March to the Place of
Rendezvous. This is the account he thought fit to give them; but if we consider
what happened both before and afterward, 'twill perhaps appear to be more than
a bare conjecture, that, since the Design to Assassinate His Majesty was then
on Foot, these measures were taken to Facilitate the Execution of it.

His Imprisonment diverted his Thoughts to other Objects, and found new
Employment for his Friends; among whom, Charnock and Harrison, deserve a
particular Remembrance. The First, who went also by the Name of Robinson, was
Born and Educated a Protestant, but changed his Religion, to Merit the Late
King's Favor; which was the sure Reward of those that were willing to deliver
up their Conscience, as a Pledge of their Loyalty. He and another, were the
only Persons who complied with King James's Order to Magdalen College; and his
Complaisance, on that Occasion, procured him the Dignity of Vice President. But
when Honest Men began to recover what they had lost; 'twas fit that Persons of
another Character should loose what they had gotten: The Laws that were
Reestablished by the Revolution, rendered him incapable of enjoying his Place,
and by depriving him of his new Preferment, made him an Enemy to the
Government, both by Interest, and Resentment. He had an equal Aversion to the
Laws, to the People, and to their Deliverer; for after he had incurred the
Hatred of his Contrymen, he thought he could neither recover his Reputation,
nor Fortune, but by destroying their Liberty.

Harrison, alias Johnson, was a Priest, who, for a considerable time, had This
agrees with the Character, that Brice Blair, gives of him, in his Depositions.
been entrusted with the Management of King James's Affairs. He was a Violent
Melfordian; ^an Active and Zealous Agent of the Party, and so far from being
troubled with the Scruples, and Checks of a tender Conscience; that he never
looked upon any thing as Difficult or Criminal, that might serve to promote the
Interest of the Faction. He had entertained a long Correspondence with Melfort;
who lost his Credit at the Court of St. Germains, upon the miscarriage of the
intended Invasion; for, as we observed before, 'twas the constant Practice of
the Late King's Council, in such Iunctures, to advance Middleton, in
Complaisance to the Protestant Jacobites.

Good man 's Deposition, April 2 d, 1696.
After Melford's Disgrace; Harrison chose Caryl, the Late Queen's Secretary,
for his Correspondent. He was the Instrument of Delivering Colonel Parker out
of the Tower; which was an Important Service to the Party. He agreed with
those, who suffered him to make his Escape, for Five Hundred Pounds; Three
hundred of which were paid, and the rest promised.

Charnock and Harrison, were looked upon by the Court at St. Germains, as
Persons in whom they might place an Entire Confidence. The Project of
Assassinating the King was, doubtless, Communicated to 'em by Parker; who is
thought to be the first Contriver of it. Those who are engaged in such
Barbarous Designs, endeavor to find a sort of Justification, or Excuse, in the
Atrocity of their Guilt. Every new Crime stretches their Conscience, to make
room for a Sin of a larger Size, and Emboldens 'em both to Contrive and Commit
the most Horrible Villainies. Nor is it probable, that he concealed the Design
from Porter and Goodman, with whom, both before, and after his Imprisonment, he
entertained an Intimate Correspondence. However, it is certain, that these Four
Men, were either the first Contrivers of the Project, or at least consulted
about the most proper Ways, to put it in Execution, after it was Communicated
to 'em.

At first, they only mentioned, the Seizing of the King, and the carrying of
him to France; either because they had no other Intention at that time; or
because they fancied that even the Faintest Sense of Honor and Virtue, might
make the Conspirators, reject the startling Proposal of an Assassination.

It Is plain from their Proceedings afterward, that their seeming Moderation,
on this Occasion, was not the effect of any Inclination they had to spare His
Majesty's Life. That Barbarous Design was proposed, under several, and very
different Notions, according to the Characters of those to whom it was
Communicated: They usually contented themselves, with mentioning the carrying
away of the King, when they imparted the Project, to those in whom they found
some unextinguish'd Sparks of Honor; but they scrupled not to own the
Assassination in the broadest Terms to those who, they perceived, were
transported by a brutish and ungoverned Fury. Yet even those who had made the
greatest progress in putting off all Humanity could not forbear discovering the
inward Horror that racked their guilty Consciences. Their Minds were so
agitated by a Sense of the Enormity of their Crime, that they could not fix
upon the Way of executing it. Sometimes they concluded that the quickest way to
bring in King James, and restore him to his Crown was, by knocking King William
on the Head: Sometimes they resolved to hurry the King away to Rumney-Marsh,
and from thence to carry him over to France; And in some of their Consults
'twas determined to carry him-alive into France if they could, if they could
not take him alive then to Assassinate him, and pretend it was done by a Random
Shot.

Brice Blair was one of the first to whom they communicated the Design. He was
a Scotch-Man by Birth, and educated a Presbyterian, but afterward turned
Papist. All the Time he had spent in the Service could not procure him a higher
Post than that of a Lieutenant* and therefore he resolved to take a nearer (tho
a more indirect) way to Preferment. Yet neither his Religion nor Ambition could
make him so much an Enemy to Honor and Virtue, as to be a fit Companion for the
Conspirators. He was never present at those Consults where 'twas examined
whether the Assassination, or the Carrying Brice Blair's Deposition, March
13th. 1696.
away of the King was the quickest or surest way to bring in King James and
restore him to his Crown; for when Charnock proposed the Design to him by the
least odious name, he rejected it in such a manner that they durst never
mention it to him afterward.

Goodman 's Deposition, April 24 th. 1696
Not long after Porter and Goodman communicated the Project to Sir George
Barelay, who was then in England, and just ready to go over to France. They
desired him to acquaint King James with their Design, that, if he appro'd it,
he might send 'em a Commission with a Pardon included in it.

Goodman 's Deposition, April 24 th. 1696
It seems Barclay did not send 'em the Commission they expected: But, some time
after, Charnock told Goodman that there was an Order to seize the Prince of
Orange, for so they usually called his Majesty. Upon this Captain Porter 's
Deposition. April 24 th. 1696.
advice a Consult was held, where Charnock produced one Waugh that was lately
come from France, who told 'em that he expected a Commission to seize the King.
This was looked upon as a sufficient Encouragement to set all their Engines at
Work in order to a vigorous prosecution of the Grand Design. They held Meeting
after Meeting to concert the Methods of executing it: In these Consults some of
the Conspirators acquainted the rest with the Intelligence they had at Deal,
where they Goodman 's Deposition, April 24. 1696.
resolved to secure a Vessel. To this Effect they sent for a Man who offered to
furnish 'em with one, but dismissed him because they could not agree about the
Price. Then they resumed their Debates about the Commission; but since they had
none to produce, they broke up without coming to a Conclusion.

Some days after, Charnock, Porter and Waugh met at Brentford, where they
consulted about the Ways of executing the Attempt. They viewed the Ground,
considered the Houses* where they should place their Men, and waited till his
Majesty should Capt. Porter 's Deposition, April 15. 1696.
return from Richmond, that they might observe the Guards who accompanied him,
and his usual Way of Traveling.

They continued their Meetings during the Months of January, February and March
1694/5; and in one of their Consults at the Mitre-Tavern Larue 's Deposition,
February 26th. 1696.
in St. James's Market, the Design was communicated to Lariie, whom they looked
upon as a Person entirely devoted to the Faction, because he had suffered a
long and tedious Imprisonment upon suspicion of holding Intelligence with the
Enemies of the Government. He embraced the proposal, and perhaps was really
willing to be engaged in it; tho, if we reflect upon the Manner and
Circumstances of his Discovery, it may be presumed that he only seemed to
comply with 'em, that the Confidence they placed in him might enable him to
acquaint the Government with the dark Intrigues of its treacherous Enemies.

The Conspirators were all the while kept in Expectation of a Commission, which
was retarded by several Accidents. Waugh had told Capt. Porter 's Deposition,
April 15. 1696
King James that the Earl of Arran and the Lord Forbes were willing to be
concerned in the Design to carry away the King; but when he attempted to
discourse with 'em on that Subject, after his return from France, they both
refused to have any thing to do with him.

'Twas reported among the Conspirators, that the News of this Disappointment
stopped the sending of the Commission, which was already Signed, and expected by
every post. And besides, there was one Crosby who went to France, and talked so
freely and particularly of the Designed Attempt, that 'twas plain he was better
acquainted with the secrets of the Faction, than they either imagined or
desired. Parker wrote, Capt. Porter 's Deposition, April 15. 1696.
upon this occasion, to Porter and Goodman, who assured him that they had never
communicated the Design to Crosby: However it seems the Court of St. Germains
were so alarmed by this and other Accidents, that they resolved to be more
cautious and reserved for the Future.

In the mean time the Conspirators were so afraid of loosing the present
Opportunity, that they resolved to pursue the Design, without expecting a
Commission. To this end they provided Men, Arms and Horses; but wanted a Vessel
to Transport the King to France, if it should be resolved to carry him away, or
to facilitate their own Escape, if they should agree upon the Assassination,
and therefore, to supply that Defect, Charnock was sent to Deal, with
Recommendations to a Captain of Horse, who was acquainted with the Design; and
La Rue was appointed to accompany him. But their Measures were entirely broken
by the unexpected haste of the Kings Departure for the Netherl^nds.

When they saw they had lost the Opportunity of executing their Design upon His
Majesty's Person; they resumed the Project of the Invasion.

They entertained private Emissaries in all the Parts of the Kingdom, who made
it their business to study the Inclinations, and pry into the Affairs of the
People; that they might afterward attack 'em on the Weak Side, and strengthen
the Faction by the Addition of a Promiscuous Multitude of all sorts of Persons.

By this means they engaged a confused Medley of Disaffected Persons: And
besides, they depended upon the Assistance of all the bigoted Papists, and a
considerable number of pretended Protestants; all the Creatures of the Late
Reign, those who had lost either their Employments or Expectations by the
Revolution, all the Promoters of Arbitrary Power, several Officers of the Army
that was dispersed at Salisbury, and some Soldiers, who preferred a Seditious
Idleness, and the Ignoble Dangers of Plotting, before the Honorable Occasions
of acquiring Glory in the Field.

The whole Design was carried on by a Set of Men, who had either lost, or never
had, a Sense of Honor and Virtue; who looked upon the Laws and Religion, as
Vain and Empty Names, and acted as if their Private Interest, and the
Recompenses they expected had been a sufficient security for the Public Safety:
Men who had neither Reputation to loose, nor Estates to live upon; who were
equally Indigent and Idle, and were neither able to endure the usual Hardships
of Poverty, nor willing to prevent 'em by an honest Industry: Turbulent and
Restless Spirits, who delight in Tumults and Confusion, and repine at the Quiet
of their Neighbors; and, as a worthy Reinforcement to the Cabal, those who were
not fit to appear in better Company, I mean, such as were suspected of
Cowardice. For as no Man has contributed more than his Majesty to bring Valor
into Credit and Fashion, it is his Fate to be extremely hated by Cowards, as he
is generally respected, and in a manner adored by the Brave. Those who have the
Courage to aspire to Glory, Admire an Example which they can never imitate; and
never was any Prince so Pelov'd by his own Army, or so Esteemed by that of his
Enemies.

There were two sorts of Persons in whom the Conspirators placed a particular
Confidence; the New Converts and the Libertines whom they had drawn into the
Party; those who had either no Religion, or had embraced that of the Faction.
For they concluded that such Persons as these would always be ready to engage
in a Design, that tended to the Destruction of all Honest and Good Men.

'Twas one of their principal Stratagems to cry down Religion in general;
because they were sensible that the love of our Religion kept us inseparably
united to a Prince that had preserved it. And at the same time they left no
means unattempted to weaken and divide our Church: For on the one hand, they
endeavored to introduce a Remissness and Indifferency in Matters of Religion;
and on the other, they made it their business to foment our Differences about
certain new Opinions, exasperating the Zeal of our Orthodox Divines by
Artifices that need not be mentioned in this place.

They endeavored to insinuate themselves into the confidence of those who
seemed to be dissatisfied with the Court; and oftentimes made use of 'em as
Tools for the carrying on of a Design of which they were wholly ignorant.

They admitted all that were willing to be engaged, but were more than
ordinarily careful to draw in those who might be useful to the Faction;
flattering the Interest of some, and the Ambition of others, and enticing both
with small Presents and large Promises.

They endeavored to corrupt the Officers of the Fleet, Army and Militia; This
appears by Capt. Porter's Deposition, April 15th. 1696.
and tampered with the Clerks and Secretaries of those who either were, or had
been employed in Eminent Posts under the Government, that by their means they
might get Intelligence of such things as they were desirous to know. Thus they
obtained an Account of the Naval Forces of one, and a List of the Army of
another.

'Twou'd be an endless Labor to relate all their Contrivances and Machinations;
and therefore I shall content my self with taking notice of their General
Maxims.

They were sensible that the English are generally possessed with a natural
Antipathy against the French; that we had been for a long time under perpetual
Apprehensions of the growing Power of those incroaching Neighbors, and that our
Jealousy and Aversion were extremely heightened since the beginning of the War.
And therefore to divert our Hatred and Suspicion to another Object, they
endeavored to possess us with an illgrounded Jealousy of the Dutch. To this
end, they were still putting us in mind of the dangers to which we exposed our
selves, by depending upon the Friendship of a Nation, that was wholly composed
of Presbyterians and Republicans; without considering that their being so makes
it their Interest that we should never imitate their Example; since their
Provinces would be quickly abandoned, if their People could find in this
Kingdom the Religion, Discipline and Government to which they are inclined by
Birth and Education. For it is very natural to suppose, that if these
Impediments were removed, (...) Inhabitants of such a Country as Holland, would
embrace with Joy the inviting Opportunity of living in a Fertile and Pleasant
Land, where they might securely enjoy all the Comforts and Conveniences of
Life, with infinitely less trouble and pains, and without the Disadvantage of
paying Taxes in time of Peace; and to which they might easily transport both
their Trade and Estates.

Another of their detestable Contrivances was to make us forget, or, at least,
to lessen our Esteem for our Deliverer. 'Twas for this Reason they usually
called him the Dutch Prince, and sometimes had the impudence to speak of him in
base and scurrilous Terms; as when, at one of their Traitorous Meetings, they
squeezed an Orange, and drank a health to the Destruction of the squeezed and
rotten Orange.

'Twas thus they were not asnam'd to treat a Prince who saved Europe by his
Courage and Resolution, who inspires his Armies with Valor by his own
inimitable Example, and has made his Subjects Masters of the Sea, and Arbiters
of the Christian World. A Prince to whom we owe all the hopes we can reasonably
entertain, of an honorable and advantageous Peace; and who has raised the Glory
of the Nation to its Ancient Reputation and Splendour.

Sometimes they affected a seeming Zeal for the Public Good, that they might
have an opportunity to exclaim against the necessary Charge of the War. Those
who were best acquainted with the Interest of the Nation, and most concerned to
promote it, had often demonstrated, what common Sense suggests to every
considering Person, That the Expending of our Money, on this occasion, is the
best Instance we can give of our Frugality; That it is both our Duty and
Interest to give away part, that the whole may be preserved; That His Majesty's
Predecessors might, easily, and with little charge, have stopped the progress
of their ambitious Neighbor; That it is their Fault we are now obliged to pay so
dear for our Preservation; That if the French were Masters of the Netherlands,
the present Taxes would not be sufficient for our necessary Defense; That if
Holland were also added to their Conquests, the unavoidable Charge of the War
would be still greater; And that, at last, when we should have no Allies to
support us, we must infallibly become a Prey to the Insolent Cruelty of our
Enemies, and for ever groan under the insupportable Yoke of Popery and Slavery.

Such Reflections as these were made by several wise and judicious Persons, and
inculcated with all the force of Reason and Eloquence; but 'twas in vain to
hope that Reason would have any Influence upon those who were resolved to stop
their Ears against it, and made it their business to hinder others from hearing
it. The Conspirators, with their usual Impudence, continued still to insist
upon an Objection that had been so often and so unanswerably confuted; amusing
the People with perpetual Murmurings and Complaints, and imagining that the
groundless Apprehensions, which they endeavored to raise in the Minds of the
unwary Crowd, would, by degrees, make 'em lose the Remembrance of the Real and
Terrible Dangers that threatened 'em in the preceding Reign.

But the subtlest and most dangerous of all their Artifices, was that by which
they cunningly imposed upon the heedless Credulity of some Persons; who neither
approved their Principles nor Practices. For it is certain that the Party of
those who really long for the Establishment of Arbitrary Power and the
Destruction of the Protestant Religion, is in it self very small and
inconsiderable, and would be eternally the Weakest, if it were not augmented
and supported by an unthinking Multitude who suffer themselves to be led they
know not whither. This may be properly called, The Listing of Tools for the
Service of the Faction.

At first, to cajole the Church-Party, they employed the Interest they had at
Court, in some of the preceding Reigns, to raise a Persecution against the
Dissenters; but their seeming Zeal for the Preservation of the Church that is
established by Law was so little to be depended on, that, even then, they had
titular Prelates, who were actually engaged in a Conspiracy against the Nation,
and only waited for a favorable opportunity, to dispossess the Protestant
Bishops* In the late Reign they seemed to alter their Measures, and began to
court the Non-Conformists, that all the Sects in the Kingdom might think
themselves obliged, both by Gratitude and Interest, to support a Government
that protected 'em. By this unexpected appearance of Tenderness they insinuated
themselves into the good Opinion of a considerable Number of the Dissenters,
who desired no more than a Toleration to Worship God after their own Fashion:
But while these deluded People were expressing their Thankfulness to the Court
in fulsom and extravagant Addresses; those very Persons who appeared to be the
most zealous Promoters of a Liberty of Conscience here, employed all their
Interest to inflame the Persecution in France, and were perpetually soliciting
that Monarch to complete the Ruin of his Protestant Subjects.

Since the Revolution, it has been the constant Endeavor of the Faction to
engage those who are always uneasy in time of War, by reason of the Charge and
Inconveniences that attend it: But in this, as in all other Projects and
Contrivances, they were so far from making good their Pretensions to a hearty
Zeal for the Good of their Country, that they made two desperate Attempts to
deliver it up to the Revenge of an incensed Enemy.

At present they take advantage of the dangerous Folly of those who are still
wishing for a Peace, without considering either the Terms or Consequences of
it. They believe, or at least would make us believe, that every Man is a
declared Enemy to a Peace, who desires that it may be solid and advantageous.
They would fain persuade us that it is the King who opposes it; tho they are
sensible we cannot be ignorant, that it is his principal Care, as well as his
Interest and Glory, to procure the Quiet and Happiness of Europe. The main
Drift of these pernicious Insinuations is either to render His Majesty odious
to those who are unacquainted with their Devices; or, by a treacherous and
ill-secur'd Peace, to make way for a Fatal and Bloody War, against those very
Persons whom they now amuse with a pretended Zeal for the Interest of their
Country. For such would be the dismal and inevitable Consequences of their
false Politics, if the King and Parliament would renounce their wonted Prudence
in complaisance eicher to Fools or Knaves.

It must be acknowledged that we cannot, without Injustice, pronounce an
equally severe Sentence upon all who promote the designs of the Faction. For
it is certain there are a considerable number of deluded and unthinking Persons,
who suffer themselves to be led by those who are Superior to 'em both in Wit
and Malice. But tho the simplicity of such undesigning Tools may in some
measure extenuate their Guilt; their obstinacy makes 'em as Dangerous as the
fiercest and most desperate Traitors. For when one does what he can to destroy
the Laws, Religion, and Liberty of his Country, the Honesty of his Intention
can never atone for the fatal Consequences of his Error.

This Reflection would perhaps carry me beyond the Limits of my intended
Moderation, if I were not resolved to give the most favorable Treatment that
can be allowed to to those for whom His Majesty retains a Paternal Affection,
notwithstanding their repeated Provocations. In imitation of so generous an
Example, all possible care shall be taken, to spare the Names of those, whose
Crimes have not already rendered 'em incapable of such a Favor.

Among these notorious Criminals, we may justly reckon Sir William Parkins, Sir
John Friend and Sir John Fenwick. The First was bred a Lawyer, and never had so
much as the Name of a Soldier, till he was made an Officer by King James. He
was King James wrote several Letters to him with his own Hand.
treated by the Court at St. Germains, with a more than ordinary Civility: They
told him that they expected great things from him; and '^is probable he
expected great Rewards from them. At first he had only a Troop in Parker's
Regiment; but since they knew he had an Estate, they quickly put him in a way
to spend it, by sending him a Commission to Levy a Regiment of Horse.

Sir John Friend was a Citizen and Brewer of London, obliged to the late King
for an advantageous Place in the Excise. However, tho he was dissatisfied with
the Revolution, and refused to comply with the present Government, he seemed at
first unwilling to engage in any Plot or Conspiracy against it. The little
Sense he had was sufficient to convince him, that 'twas not his Business to
reform the Works of Providence, and much less to declare himself an Enemy to
his Religion and Country. But neither his Judgment nor Conscience was able to
resist his Vanity, which was strong enough to make him sacrifice both, for an
Brice Blair in his Depositions.
empty Complement. They showed him a Letter from Melfort, by which it appeard
that King James placed a great deal of Confidence in him; and the poor Man was
even ravished with joy at his Old Master's Kindness. He wrote a Letter to King
James, and received so obliging an Answer, that, to express his Gratitude, he
resolved to spend a good part of his Estate in his Service. In pursuance of
this Resolution, he advanced considerable sums of Money, upon several
occasions, which were paid in Parchment, a sort of Coin that passed currantly
among Persons of Sir John Friend's Character, tho its intrinsic Value was
scarce equal to that of the Irish Brass-Money. Sir John received a Commission
to be Colonel of Horse, and Brice Blair, whom the Party employed to draw him
in, was made his Lieutenant Colonel. Bertram 's Deposition March 3. 169^.
The First had an Estate, and the Second was a Soldier; Sir John was to be at
the Charge of raising the Men, and Blair was to instruct him in the Duties of
his new Occupation. Besides, Fer^uson was one of Sir John's particular Friends,
by whose Agency he endeavored to draw in the Presbyterians: And he was so
confident of the success of that Negotiation, that he prom^s'd to bring a
considerable Number of 'em to meet the Late King at his Landing. He entertained
also an intimate Correspondence with Harrison, and the Popish Rebels in some
Counties, with whom he was ready to join in the intended Massacre of the
Protestants; tho, after all, if we may take his own Word for it, he had the good
Fortune to dye a Martyr for the Church and Religion of England.

Sir J hn Fenwick is a Man of Quality, and had a considerable Estate. He was a
Colonel in the English Troops, that were formerly sent to the Assistance of the
Dutch; and it is said that he was cither dism^st from the Service, or quitted it
upon some disgu^^. His disgrace in Holland served to recommend him to the
English Court, and procured him the place of a Licutona^t in the late King's
Gu^rds. Since the Revolution, he his sp^r'd neither pains nor cost to promote
that Prince's interest; and as a Ma^k of his Zeal and Fidelity* undertook to
Levy a Regiment of Horse f r his Service. Yet tho the very Name he bears is
odious to Protestants, tho his Relations are Papists, and his Brother a Priest,
and tho he was always distinguished by the peculiar confidence which the
Faction placed in him; among all the Informations I have yet had occasion to
see, there are none that charge him with having any hand in the Conspiracy
against His Maj^sty's Person: But either his Confession or Trial will soon
unriddle Capt. Porter 's Deposition, March 3. 1695/6.
the Mystery, and clear all our doubts concerning him.

These Three Men were each of 'em to Levy a Regiment of Horse, and one Tempest
of Durham had a La Rue 's Deposition, Febru. 26. 1695/6.
Commission to raise one of Dragoons. Besides, they depended on Parker's
Regiment; for tho the Colonel was in France, there were Commissions actually
distributed to raise the Troops. These were the Five Regiments of Horse and
Dragoons, which the Conspirators boasted they had in England. They expected
also a Body of Horse from Lancashire, where a considerable number* of Papists
were still in a readiness to March to the Rendezvous. Sir John Friend
entertained a Correspondence with 'em, and paid 'em Subsistence-Money, either
upon his own account, or by Order* And 'twas by the Assistance of these
Imaginary Forces, that the Conspirators fancied themselves in a Condition to
undertake the Conquest of Great Britain.

The Earl of Aylesbury, and Sir John Friend.
Some of *em would have persuaded the Faction to try their Fortune with their
own Forces, without waiting for the Assistance they expected from France. They
had taken so many Ways to prepare the Dispositions of the People, that they
concluded 'em to be generally ripe for an Insurrection. Besides, the King was
in Flinders with his Army; and the Conspirators were not much afraid of the
small Number of standing Forces that were left for the Defense of the Kingdom.
And as Ten Seditious and Disaffected Persons make a greater Bustle than Ten
Thousand Men who live in Quiet; so the Jacobites, who are scarce a Handful to
the Honest Party in the Kingdom, make as much noise as all the rest of the
Nation.

The Impunity of their Crimes lessened their Remorse for 'em, and the Clemency
of the Government encouraged 'em to conspire against it; but since 'twou'd have
been a difficult Task to bubble a whole Nation, or to make 'em Actors in their
own Destruction, the Design of conquering England by an English Army was
rejected as impracticable; and the Conspirators found themselves obliged to
depend upon the Assistance of the French.

'Twas about the end of May, or the beginning of July, 1695. that Capt. Porter
's Deposition, March 14. 1695/6.
some of the most considerable Persons of the Faction met to deliberate about
the present posture of their Affairs. The Earl of Aylesbury, the Lord
Montgomery, Son to the Marquess of Powis, Sir John Friend, Sir William Parkins,
Charnock, Porter, Goodman, Cook, etc. were present at a Consult which was held
at the Old Goodman 's Deposition, April 24. 1696.
King's- Head Tavern in Leaden* Hall-Street; where they agreed to send Charnock
with a Message to King James, entreating him to procure Eight Thousand Foot, a
Thousand Horse, and a Thousand Dragoons from the French King.

Charnock accepted the Commission, but desired to know what number of Forces he
might offer in their Names; upon which they promised to meet King James at the
Head of Two Thousand Horse, as soon as they should receive the News of his
Landing.

This was but a small Force for so great an Undertaking; tho it will appear to
be much above the Strength of the Faction, if we consider the Ways they took to
Levy and Subsist their secret Militia. They tampered, indifferently, with all
Indigent and Scandalous Persons, especially the Officers and Soldiers who had
contributed, in Ireland, to the Oppression of the Protestants, or, in England,
to the Subversion of the Laws. They gave Money to the poorer Sort for their
present Subsistence, but kept 'em still in a necessitous Condition, that they
might be obliged to depend upon the Party.

They endeavored to engage the Officers, by Flattering 'em with Hopes of
Preferment; making the Ensigns Captains, and promising Regiments to those who
were Captains before. For it is neither Reason nor Justice, but Licentiousness
and Disorder, that advance the Designs of a Faction.

Of their Troopers, some had Money to buy Horses, but there were few of this
Number; some reckoned to borrow 'em upon occasion, and others resolved to take
'em where they could find 'em.

Goodman 's Deposition, April 24. 1696.
Sir John Fenwick was the Author of the last of these Projects; for, instead of
rendering themselves suspected by providing a great number of Horses, he
advised 'em, when the Design should be ripe for Execution, to seize on all the
Horses they could find, in, or about London. And this Advice was so well liked
by the Conspirators, that some of 'em took care to take a List of the Horses.

Nor was this merely the Effect of Sir John Fenwick's Prudence; for he had
already been so Liberal a Benefactor to the Faction, that he found himself
obliged to moderate his Expenses for the Future. His Creditors, to whom he had
resigned his Estate, allowed him an Annuity, which was sufficient for his
Subsistence, but not for carrying on his Designs. Brice Blair's Deposition,
March 16. 1695/6.


Sir John Friend was almost in the same condition; for he had advanced such
considerable Sums for the subsistence of his Men, that he was afraid, if the
Design of the Invasion should miscarry, he should not have enough left to carry
on his Trade.

Sir William Parkins had also put himself to a considerable Charge, tho Sweets
's Deposition, March 18. 1695/6.
he had bought but Thirty Horses, which was a mere Trifle in comparison La Rue
's Deposition, Febr. 26. 1695/6.
to the Number he wanted. And besides, the Arms he had provided would not have
furnished the Twentieth part of his Regiment: James Ewbanks 's Deposition,
March 23. 1695/6.
however they were more than he durst own, and therefore he was forced to hide
'em in the Country.

To conclude, they could not but foresee that those whom they had drawn in by
supplying their present Necessities, would not be so ready to encounter the
apparent Dangers of the Attempt, as they were to offer their Service.

It Is plain from these Remarks that 'twou'd have been a hard Task for the
Conspirators to make good their Promise, to meet the Late King at the Head of
Two Thousand Horse. Besides, the Charge of carrying on the Design was too heavy
for those that were engaged in it; their Money was spent in useless
Preparations, and a longer Delay would have been as dangerous as a rash and
preposterous Haste.

Charnock was a Man of too much Sense, and to well acquainted with the Strength
of the Faction, to rely upon the Promises they had made him: And therefore he
desired another Meeting, which was held at a Tavern near Sir John Fenwick's
Lodgings, and consisted of the same Persons that were present at the former,
except the Lord Montgomery. There Charnock desired to know whether they were
resolved to make good their proposals, and upon the new Assurances they gave
him, he undertook the Commission, and some days after, embarked for France.

But the late King's Council did not think fit to Answer their Expectations:
For the Design was not yet ripe for Execution, nor their Affairs, either in
England or France, in such a Posture as they desired.

They had sounded the Inclinations of the Parliament, People and Army; and by
several vain Attempts had endeavored to debauch their Fidelity. 'Twas their
Interest and Desire that either the whole Army, or a considerable part of it,
should be disbanded by the Parliament, that there might not be a sufficient
number of standing Forces left, to oppose the Conspirators.

To this end, their Emissaries were instructed to exaggerate the unavoidable
Inconveniences of the War, and to persuade the People, and especially their
Representatives, that 'twou'd be necessary to increase our Naval Force, for the
security of our Trade, and at the same time to lessen an Army that was useful
to Foreigners, but only chargeable to our Selves. How is the Nation cheated,
was their usual Cant, and what occasion is there for so vast an Expense, as if
so brave a Fleet were not sufficient to defend us? How are we degenerated from
the Valor of our Ancestors, how basely do we injure their glorious Memory, by
dreading an Enemy whom they have so often defeated, and how poorly it sounds in
the Mouth of an Englishman to talk of an Invasion from France? By these and
such like cunning Insinuations they would have persuaded us that we were
obliged in Honor to give our Enemies all the advantages they could desire; and
that 'twas a mark of Cowardice to put our selves in a posture of Defense. But
these Artifices did not take effect, tho there were even some well-meaning
Persons who had learned the Language, and promoted the Designs of those who at
the same time were plotting their Ruin.

They had endeavored to stir up the People to Rebellion, or at least to try
what might be expected from 'em if an Insurrection should be begun.

In pursuance of this Design, some Facobites, taking advantage of the Mildness
of the Laws, and the Indulgency of the Government, met at a noted Tavern, where
under pretext of a Drunken Frolic, which they hoped would be either slighted or
excused, they assumed the boldness to stop those who happened to pass that way,
and to make 'em drink a Health to King James and the pretended Prince of Wales.
But at last the People were so incensed, and broke into the House with so much
Fury, that the Impudent Rioteers, fearing to be torn in pieces by the Rabble,
were glad, for their own security, to be seized and carried to Newgate.

They had also formed a Project to surprise the Tower, to favor the intended
Insurrection; but all the Friends they had in it were not able to make 'em
Masters of that important Place, nor could they hope to keep it, if they should
have succeeded in the Attempt.

They had, in the last place, endeavored to corrupt the Forces that were left
in the Kingdom, but had no great reason to boast of their Goodman 's
Deposition, April 24. 1696.
Success: For, except some Troopers in the Earl of Oxford's Regiment, and here
and there an Officer or a Soldier in the Militia, there were none who would be
engaged in so black an Enterprise.

Capt Porter 's Deposition, April 15. 1696.
Nor was the posture of their Affairs in France more encouraging than in
England. For Lewis XIV. stood in need of all his Forces to oppose the
Confederates whom he could not hinder from making considerable Conquests. We
were Masters of the Sea, and were either preparing, or had actually begun, to
Bombard his Seaport Towns. His Fleet was cooped up in the Mediterranean and
durst not venture to repass the Streights: So that how welcome soever the
Proposals might be to the Courts of Versailles and St. Germains, they could not
in such a Juncture spare so many Men as their Friends in England desired. And
therefore Charnock was sent back with a Compliment to the Jacobites, and a
promise of Assistance upon the first convenient Occasion.

The last Winter was the Time they pitched upon to make good their Promise.
Thirty Batalions were ordered to March toward Calais, and the late King left
St Germains to put himself at the Head of 'em. Three or Four Hundred Transport
Ships were prepared with all possible secrecy and diligence to bring over their
Landforces, under the Convoy of a Squadron of Men of War, some of the Men were
already embarked, and the rest were embarking, in order to make a Descent upon
this Kingdom, before Providence thought fit to discover the mysterious Design
of this Expedition.

Any considering Person that was not acquainted with the Mystery of Iniquity,
would have concluded the Invasion of England to be as Impracticable then, as it
was the Summer before. The French Fleet was still at Thoulon, and
notwithstanding the Brice Blair 's Deposition, March 16. 1695/6.
advice we had of their Design to Re-pass the Streights, we had no reason to be
afraid of any Attempt they could make against us. For, in all humane
probability, we seemed to be equally secure, whether the Squadron that was
designed to reinforce our Fleet in the Streights should pursue their intended
Voyage or remain in our Ports; since their arrival there would have prevented
the Return of the Thoulon Fleet into the Ocean, and their staying here would
have enabled us to encounter with both the Fleets of our Enemies. And our
Apprehensions were extremely lessened by the daily Expectation of our Squadron
from Cadiz, which, we had all the reason in the World to believe, would sail
immediately after the French, since they had nothing to do in the Mediterranean
after their departure.

Besides, we know that the Thoulon Fleet could not pass the Streights without a
favorable Wind, and that even the quickest and most prosperous Voyage they
could expect, would extremely retard the Execution of their Designs.

Our Enemies knew before this time, that our Squadron would not sail to the
Mediterranean for that was so far from being kept secret, that 'twas openly
declared. Nor could they be ignorant that we had a very considerable Number of
Men of War in our Ports, and that the outward bound Fleets of Merchant Ships
with those that were daily expected, would furnish us with a more than
sufficient Number of Seamen to Man them.

Before they could execute their Design against us, 'twas necessary they should
Embark their Troops, pass the Sea and make a Descent in this Kingdom: And after
their Landing, some time must have been spent in Receiving the English Rebels,
forming a Body of Horse, Entrenching their Forces, and furnishing themselves
with Provisions and Ammunition. Now, supposing that all these Preparations
would have required no more than Four or Five Days; it is plain from the Event,
that, even upon so short a Warning, we could have put our selves in a posture
of Defense. For not long after, they found to their cost, that we were able, in
as little time, to bring Fourscore Men of War together; and consequently would
have been equally in a Condition to bring over a sufficient Number of Forces
from Flanders, and to hinder our Enemies from sending a Reinforcement to make
good their Descent.

Nor could it be supposed that any Jacobites, who had not entirely lost ^he use
of their Reason, would ven^re to join an Army of Foreigners ^at would have been
in a manner besieged both by Sea and Land, and could neither avoid nor resist
the just Fury of an injured Nation. And besides, we should have quickly raised
a numerous and formidable Army; for the City of London alone offered to furnish
the King with Twenty Thousand Men, on that occasion.

Thus it is plain that the Design of invading England, in such a Juncture, was
either absolutely impracticable, or at least attended with unavoidable, and
almost invincible Difficulties, and consequently might have been justly looked
upon as the Wild Project of a Distempered Brain; if the Conspirators had not
depended upon the success of an Expedient which they had contrived to dissolve
the Parliament, and put the whole Kingdom into a Consternation that would have
made us incapable of defending our selves. They knew that His Majesty was the
Life and Soul of his Subjects, that his Wisdom secured 'em from the Devices, as
his Valor protected 'em from the Attempts of their Enemies; and therefore
resolved upon the compendious Way of Destroying England in the Person of its
Great Defender.

But before I proceed to give an account of that Hellish Enterprise, 'twill be
highly convenient to take a view of the preceding Intrigues and Contrivances of
the Faction.

In France, they industriously exaggerated the Number and Power of the English
Jacobites. To persuade the People of that unhappy Nation to endure, with a
servile patience, the Tyranny of their insolent Oppressors, they gave out that
the English were quite Exhausted by the multiplied Taxes that were imposed upon
'em, that they were not able to support the Charge of the War any longer, and
would be quickly forced to submit to the Mercy of Lewis the Great. And the same
Artifice was made use of, to encourage the French Council to protect and assist
the Late King.

It appears that the French King gave Credit to those Surmises; for in a Letter
which he wrote to his Ambassador at the Court of Sweden, he says expressly, That
his Troops were Marching to the Coasts, and ready to Embark, as soon as the
News of an Insurrection in that Kingdom should confirm the Advices he had so
often received, etc. that the Nation was generally Dissatisfied with the Prince
of Orange's Government.

But he was quickly made sensible of his Mistake, and that too in a manner,
which was equally glorious to the English Nation, and mortifying to its most
terrible Enemy, for it is certain, and must be acknowledged, even by those who
saw it with Grief and Vexation, that never any Subjects discovered a more
tender Affection, and a more hearty and vigorous Loyalty to their Sovereign,
than the Parliament and People of England did, on this occasion, to His Majesty.

In the mean time the Emissaries of the Faction, who are dispersed through all
Europe, were industriously laboring to defame the English Nation, They
represent us as an ^ntractable, Seditious, and R belli^us People, always
Jealous of our Neighbors, and seldom in Quiet among ourselves. See the Second
Book of the History of the Revolutions in England.
and to render us either odious or suspected to the Princes our Allies, that
they might look upon us as unworthy of their Assistance, and leave us to the
Mercy of our Enemies. They endeavored to put all the World in Expectation of
beholding New Catastrophe's in a Kingdom, which they usually style, The Land of
Revolutions, (...) they pretend that Tumults and In^^rre^tions are the familiar
Recreations of the People

To vindicate the Honor of our Country, and disc^^^ the Weakness and Injustice
of these spiteful Aspersions, 'twill be sufficient to observe, that it has been
the constant Practice of the Faction, to fasten their own Crimes upon us; and
to ascribe the Disorders and Divisions, which they kindle and soment among us,
to the Genius of the Nation, and the Humor of the People. Nor will the
Parliament and People of England be accused of Lightness and Inconstancy by any
unbya^s'd Person that considers how much they have exceeded even their Wisest
and most Wary Neighbors, in securing their Liberty and preserving an
undisturbed Peace and Tranquillity in their Country, and how firmly they have
adhered to their own true Interest, during the whole course of a War, which
they maintain with equal Glory, Prudence and Resolution.

The Roman-Catholic Princes were upbraided for entering into a Confederacy with
the Enemies of their Religion. But they were too wise, and too well acquainted
with the Designs of those who would have persuaded 'em to sacrifice their
Interest to their Superstition; to suffer themselves to be imposed upon by an
Artifice, which, twice in our Memory, had almost proved Fatal to Europe. First,
when, under pretext of promoting, or, at least, not opposing, the Advancement
of the Roman-Catholic Religion, the French King was suffered to overrun the
United Provinces, and to extend his Conquests so far that in the Judgment of
the least Apprehensive Minds it seemed hardly possible to hinder him from
making himself Master of Amsterdam, and, with it, of the Fleet, Army, Credit,
and Money of that potent Republic, which would have rendered his Power almost
as boundless as his Ambition. And, a Second time, when, after the Peace of
Nimeghen, the French found a way to keep us from looking abroad, by engaging us
in unnecessary Quarrels about Religion at home, and by that means diverted the
prudent Jealousy of the only Nation in Europe that was able to curb their
Ambition; for, by retaining the possession of Pignerol, Cazal, Hunninghen,
Strasburg, Montroyal, Luxemburg, etc. they kept, at once Italy, Switzerland,
Germany and the Netherlands under a kind of Subjection; and, in the General,
all the Princes and States of Europe were over-awed by the severe Politics and
formidable Power of an ambitious Monarch, who, like an ill-natured Neighbor,
made every petty Trespass or accidental Slip, the pretext of a new Invasion.

If our Deliverance had been deferred till the Popish Party had secured the
Plurality of Voices in the Parliament* and Modeled an Army to support their
unjust Usurpations: If the two Kings had had time to execute the Grand Design
of destroying Holland, and extirpating the Northern Heresy; the House of
Austria would have been quickly sensible of the fatal Consequences of this
pretended Advancement of the Roman-Catholic Religion. But, to return to the
Kingdom that was doomed to feel the first effects of these dismal Alterations.

The English Jacobites, as well as the Court of St. Germains, were generally
divided into Melfordians and Middletonians; and while one of the Parties
declared openly for Arbitrary Power, the other insisted upon the Necessity of
entering into a kind of Treaty with the Nation.

The former were entrusted with the Secrets of the Faction, and the Command of
the Troops that were to be employed in the Destruction of their Country. All
the Colonels were animated with the Spirit of Melford: Parker was engaged in
the most furious Designs of the Party; and both Parkins and Friend are
represented as Brice Blair in his Deposition, March 9. 1695/6.
violent Melfordians, by a Person in whom they placed a particular Confidence.
The Lancashire Papists both by Inclination and Interest, were zealous Promoters
of Arbitrary Power. Porter, Goodman, Charnock, and the rest of the Officers,
who were to act either in the Assassination or Invasion, were influenced by the
same Principles, and ready to obey the most barbarous Orders of their
Commanders.

Thus each of the opposite Cabals applied themselves to their respective Tasks:
For while the Middletonians were employed to amuse the People with flattering
Hopes, and Assurances of a favorable Treatment; the Melfordians, who were the
sole Masters of the Forces and Arms of the Faction, were putting themselves in
a condition to violate the Promises of the former; which made one say, That he
was neither so much a Fool, nor a Villain, as to engage in the Party.

It seems the Faction imagined that they could easily betray the Nation to the
cruel Ambition of a Foreign and Implacable Enemy: But notwithstanding their
Confidence of Success, they scrupled not to contrive the basest and most
treacherous Expedients to accomplish their unnatural Design. The Reader will
find an evident Confirmation of both these Truths in a Discourse that past
Brice Blair 's Deposition, March 9. 1695/6.
between Brice Blair and Harrison, as it is related by the former upon Oath; I
wen^, says he, to see Mr. Harrison, a little after Sir George Barclay came from
France, who told me that there might be something done in a little time, which
might be an Introduction to King James's Restoration. I asked him after what
manner that business could be effected; and after some pause he told me, that
if King James could not come in time enough, that his Friends might burn the
Navy Victualling Office, wherein the Provisions for the Mouth lay, which might
retard the English Fleet from getting to Sea for a considerable time. I told
him, being amazed to hear such Words from a Priest's Month, that it was not
practicable, and if it were, there would be few found that would run the
risque. He told me that he would have me as forward in the King's Service as
any Man; and that he was told by a Gentleman, and a very good Officer, that if
he was sure of but a Hundred Horse, he would end the War in a Fortnights time,
etc.

'Twas by proposing such Expedients, that the Conspirators endeavored to
distinguish themselves; since they found by experience that this was the only
way to gain the Favor and Esteem of the Party. Melford himself was obliged to
give 'em a new Specimen of his barbarous Politics, and even to strain the
natural Fierceness of his Temper, to support his sinking Credit. For after he
had been dismissed for some time, as a Rash and Furious Person who was only fit
to pursue violent Methods, and incapable of that seeming Moderation which the
present Juncture required; he was immediately restored to Favor, as soon as the
Party was convinced of the Feasibleness of the Project he had contrived against
the Liberty of the Nation, and the Life of its Deliverer. Thus Middleton was
kept as a Reserve for the Day of Adversity, while Melford was cherished as
their better Genius, who alone had the Art of improving an Advantage, and
making our Yoke so heavy that we should never afterward be able to shake it
off.

They left no means unattempted to confirm the Court of St. Germains in these
Maxims. To this End, an ingenious Jesuit was chosen Father d'Orleans wrote the
History of the Revolutions i^ England, according to the Memoirs and
Informations which he received from the Earl of Castlemain, Skeleton and
Sheridon an Irishman. And besides he tells us that he had the Liberty to
Discourse with King James as long as he pleased See the Advertisement before
the Third Tome.
to represent the Affairs of England, and especially the late Revolution,
according to the Instructions he had received from the Party. It must be
acknowledged that the Work is adorned with all the Embellishments of a
beautiful Style; and the Management of the Subject would have been extremely
suitable to the Juncture, if the late King had been in as fair a way to remount
the Throne as they imagined. The Author endeavors to exasperate that Prince's
Revenge: He imploys all his Art to convince him of the Justice and Usefulness
of the Melfordian Principles, and, to render his Arguments more agreeable, and
consequently more Effectual, his Advices are always intermixed with Apologies
and Panegyrics.

Book II. p. 371.
He commends King Charles II. for seizing the Charter of London, and resolving
at last to Govern without a Parliament* and even has the confidence to tell us,
that, for this reason, Book II. p. 370.
the Four last years of his Life were properly the only years of his Reign; and
that he became the Master of his Subjects as soon as they perceived that he was
resolved to rule without a Parliament. He exclaims against the Presbyterians,
whom he styles, the natural Enemies of the Royal Preogative, adding, that of
all the Protestants, they are the most furiously bent to extirpate the
Catholics; and praises (...) II. p. 471.
King Charles for the Care he took to suppress their Meetings. Yet not long
after he becomes their Advocate against the Church of England, and brings in
King James, telling the Clergy, that the Persecutions they had raised against
the Dissenters, made diverse of his Good Subjects leave the Kingdom. He derides
the pretended Contract betwixt a Sovereign and His People, and reckons it a
pernicious Chimera; or, which is the same thing, he puts these Words into the
Mouth of those Lords whose Sentiments he 'Twou'd have been thought ridiculous
if, even before the Late Persecution of the Protestants, one should have talked
of the Popish Cabal in France.
approves. He speaks of the Protestant Cabal, and divides it into the Episcopal
and Presbyterian Cabals, as if the Roman-Catholics were the Body of the Nation.

He endeavors to fix a stain upon the Immortal Memory of those Illustrious
Defenders of the Laws and Liberty of England, who sacrific*d their Fortunes,
for the safety of their Country, and were neither afraid nor asham*d to mount a
Scaffold in so glorious a Cause. He speaks of a So he terms the Virtue and
Magnanimity of (...) who hazarded their Lives and Estates for the Preservation
of their Country.
matchless Infidelity; of perfidions designs, that cou d not be prevented by
the most cautious Prudence, of the unheard of Treachery of so many Persons of
great Quality, who abandon d a Pri ce from whom they had received such signal
Favors; of the shameful Conspiracy of so many Kings against him, and of the
Moderation with which he began his Reign. He tell* him that Bad Subjects can
never be gain d by Kindness, and that the Event has taught him what measures he
ought to have taken to prevent his Misfortune. To conclude, he does what he can
to inspire him with Revenge, and to persuade him that Cruelty and Oppression
are the two principal Maxims of State which he ought to pursue for the future.

At another time the Faction wou d have taken more care to conceal their
Sentiments; for we must do em the Justice to acknowledge that they want neither
Wit nor Prudence. But they looked upon the Conquest of England as so sure a
Project, and were so little apprehensive of its miscarriage, that they scrupl d
not to discourse publicly of the New Revolution. The News of the Design were
spread over all Europe; and even there were some who pretended to fix the time
of its Execution. Some talked at Easter, others mention d the Beginning of the
Spring, and some put it off till the Fleet from Thoulo^ should join that which
lay at Breast. In the mean time their confident Menaces were slighted as vain
Rhodo*montades by all honest Men, because they were not acquainted with their
execrable Design to Assassinate his Majesty.

Sir George Barclay, a Scotchman, Lieutenant of King James 's Guards, was the
person that was chosen to command the Assassins. He set out from St. Germains
in September, to execute his bloody Commission, with the assistance of Twenty
or Two and Twenty Men, who were appointed to obey his orders. Some of that
infamous Troop came over with their Leader: Some went before, and others
followed him. Harris was one They came over in a Vessel, which usually past
betwixt Calais and Rumney Marsh, bringing over Packets to the Conspirators,
with French Goods, and certain Jacobite Passengers who were wont to go and come
betwixt these two places. And among them there there were certain Priests who
oftentimes exported Contraband Goods, etc. James Hunt s Depositioh, April 6.
1696.
of the last, who in his Deposition, April 15th 1696, affirms upon Oath, That
he was an Ensign of Foot under the late King James in Scotland, that he had
serve d since in the Second Troop of his Guards in France. That about the 14th
of January last, New Style, King James sent for this Informant, and Michael
Hare his Camerade. That King James spoke with them in the late Queen 's
Bedchamber and told this Informant, that he had an Opportunity of doing
something for him, being very sensible he had served him well: That he would
send him into England where he should be subsisted, and that he was to follow
Sir George Barclay s Orders, and in so doing he would take care of him. That he
had order d them Money for their Journey, which they should receive from Mr.
Caroll (who is Secretary to the late Queen) King James told this Informant
further, that he should sind Sir George Barclay every Monday and Thursday
between Six and Seven at Night, in Covent Garden-Square, and that they might
know him by a white Handkerchief hanging out of his Coat-Pocket; and King James
pulling a List out of his Pocket, told this Informant, when he was in England,
he must go by the name of Jenkyns, and Mr. Hare by the name of Guinney. Colonel
Parker was by all the time when King James spoke to this Informant, and by the
King's Order, Colonel Parker went with this Informant and his Camerade to Mr.
Caroll's and Mr. Caroll told them, that the King had ordered them Ten Louis d'
Ors apiece, which would be enough to carry them over, and if they should chance
to be Wind bound, he had writ to the President Toss at Calais, to furnish them
with Money, etc.

The rest of the Assassins that were George Harris 's Deposition, April 15.
1696.
sent over to assist Sir George Barclay, were either Troopers in King James's
Guards, Pensionaries of the Court of St. Germains, Officers who expected
preferment, or Soldiers taken out of the Regiments, to be employed in that
execrable Service.

The Faction made use of none but such as were Persons of Trust, and who, they
believed, would not scruple to engage in the dire Attempt. And, that the
Assassination might be looked upon as a Stratagem of War, those who were to act
in it, were for the most part Officers and Soldiers.

This Infamous Detachment set out from St. Germains at several times, and under
various pretex's: One George Harris 's Deposition, April 15. 1696.
gave out, that he was going to continue his Studies in one of the Colleges in
Scotland; and another, that he was weary of the Service.

Secresy was particularly recommended and enjoin d to every one of 'em: And
least their absence shou d be taken notice of, and give occasion to various
Discourses and Conjectures, It Was Maxwell who acquainted the Conspirators with
this passage.
King Ja^es declared at his Levee, that 'twas his pleasure that none should
presume to talk of their Departure, and that he wou d severely punish those who
should give him the least occasion to believe, that they were more curious to
enquire into his designs, than zealous in obeying his Orders.

In the mean time Sir George Barclay arriv d at London, where he met with
Charnock, that faithful and zealous Agent of the Party, and afterward with
Porter and Goodman, who were easily prevail d with to engage in a Design that
was formerly proposed by themselves.

Afterward the Conspirators engag d Major Lowick, Knightley, Bertram,
Chambers, Durance a Walloon, Cranburn, Kendrick, Grimes, Fisher, Larue,
Sherburn and Keys, who was formerly Porter's Servant, but was now become his
Confident and Companion. And besides these, they reckon d themselves sure of
Pendergrass who was in the Country, and Plowden, whom they resolved to send for
out of Hampshire.

They were all engaged in the same Design, acted upon the same Principles, and
were influenced by the same Motives and Expectations; tho they made use of
various pretexts to lessen the scandal of their Crime, and to conceal the
mercenary Ends that engaged 'em in it. Chambers
One of them showed the Wounds he had received in the War, accusing his Majesty
as the cause of 'em; another complained that he had lost his place by the
Revolution: but all in general, were possessed with an immoderate desire to
advance their Fortunes, without considering either the danger or infamy of the
Ways they took to satisfy their Ambition.

There are still some Seeds of Virtue in the Soul of Man, some remaining
Strictures of her primitive Luster that cannot be blotted out with one Dash. It
requires time to finish a Villain, as well as to form a Hero; the one must sink
by degrees beneath, as the other must by successive steps ascend above, the
common Level of Humane Nature. The Conspitators were sensible of this Truth,
and since they cou d not expect to find Instruments ready made that were fit
for such a Work, they were forc d to undergo the trouble of fashioning their
own Tools. To this end, they concealed* the blackest part of the Knightly,
April 2. 1696.
Design from those with whom they began to treat, and contented themselves with
a general exhortation to contribute their assistance to restore their abdicated
Monarch, or, in somewhat plainer Terms, to meet him at his Expected Landing:
But after they had, by such Insinuations as these, prepar d the Dispositions of
their Proselytes for any violent Attempt, they proceeded to Disclose the bottom
of the Mysterious Villainy, and told 'em frankly, that the quickest way to bring
in the late King was by knocking King William on the Head, or, to give a softer
turn to such a startling Proposal, by making War upon him in his Winter
Quarters.

They pretended that such an Attempt could no more be reckoned an
Assassination, than if they had kill d him in Flanders, as he changed his
Quarters, and remove from one Town to another: And Barclay, to hide the Infamy
of the Parricide, was wont to say, Gentlemen, we are Men of Honor: We ll attack
the Prince of Orange at the Head of his Guards.

But since there are degrees in all sorts of Crimes, and every Traitor is not
willing to become an Assassin; the Conspirators had the Mortification to find
their proposals rejected by some, even of their own Party. Francis de Larue 's
Deposition, February 26. 1695/6.
The two Brothers, Thomas and Bevil Higgins, tho violent Jacobites, refused to
have any hand in the Design against his Majesty s Person.

Capt. George Porter's Deposition, March 3. 1695/6.
Sir John Friend was acquainted with the design, but disliked it, not from any
honest Principle, but because he was afraid it would ruin the Interest of the
Faction. Nor was this a groundless Apprehension, since few have so mean an
opinion of themselves, as to enter into the Service of a Party that would
engage 'em in such base and desperate Attempts, and even refuses to acquaint
'em perfectly with the Design of which they would make 'em the Instruments. Sir
William Parkins was an active Promoter of the Design, but was not willing to
act in it: And Brice Blair 's Deposition, March 9. 1695/6.
Blair endeavor to dissuade some of his Friends from being concern d in it.

The Officers that were sent from France to obey an Order which had never been
communicated to 'em, cou d not forbear murmuring when they were acquainted with
the Business in which they were to be employed. They asked one another, George
Harris 's Deposition, April 15. 1696.
whether this was the fine Exploit they were sent to atchieve; but all the
Scruples that Virtue, Conscience or Honor cou d suggest to 'em, were not able
to make 'em forget the positive Order they had received

Major Lowick was the first who declared that he wou d obey, because he was
sure that Sir George Barclay would not undertake any thing without Orders.
Rookwood was of his opinion, insisting still upon this, that the King sent him
to obey Sir George Barclay. Bernard, Harris, Hare, and the rest, said, they wou
d be governed by their Companions. Thus it is plain that they thought themselves
oblig d The brave Grillon refused to assassinate the Duke of Guise, tho the
Proposal was made to him by his Sovereign, Henry III. of France. And when King
John of England, would have persuaded Debray, the Captain of his Guards, to
assassinate a Prince that pretended a right to his Crown; that generous Officer
replied, That he was a Gentleman, and not a flangman, and immediately retired
to his House.
to Obey, in a case, in which Disobedience is the principal Duty and
distinguishing Character of a Man of Honor.

Several ways were proposed in their private Meetings, to Assassinate his
Majesty. Brice Blair in his Deposition March 17th 1696, takes notice of an
Attempt that was to have been executed by Men that were to lie in wait for him
on the Road as he was going to Embark for Holland. He affirms that Bertram told
him, the last year, that Charnock had engaged him and others to Assassinate the
King on his way to Flanders; and that the Design would have been put in
Execution, if they had not received Counter-orders from St. Germains, the day
before the King set out.

Tho the Credit of this Passage depends entirely on the discourse betwixt
Bertram and Blair, since there are no other Witnesses that attest it, nor any
circumstances or presumptive Evidence brought to Confirm it; I thought my self
obliged to mention it, as a thing that is neither improbable, nor impertinent
to the Subject of this History. But since I have such a variety of Matter
before me, and every Circumstance confirm d by unquestioned Evidence, I will
not insist upon any thing that comes short of an undoubted Truth.

It Is certain that there were several Projects set on foot, or at least
proposed by the Conspirators to execute their designed Attempt against his
Majesty's Person. In the beginning 'twas thought fit by some, either to Seize,
or Kill Him at Kensington, by attacking his Guards, and forcing his Palace in
the Night.

Richard Fishers 's Deposition, February 25. 1695/6.
Another Proposal was to murder him when he should come on Sunday to perform
his Devotions at St. James's Chapel. Two or Three and Thirty of the
Conspirators were to attack his Guards, which usually do not exceed Twenty or
Five and Twenty; while Six Men on Foot, who were to have been concealed for
that purpose in some of the Neighboring Houses should shut Hide-Park Gate, and
the rest Assassinate his Majesty. 'Twas agreed also to Kill the Coach-Horses
just as they were entering into the Park, that, the Passage being stopped, the
Guards might not be able to come up, till they had given the fatal Blow.

It appears that, after the committing of the execrable Deed, they resolved to
retire immediately to the Tower, which, for that end, they proposed to
surprise. And it is probable that the apparent Difficulty or rather
impossibillty of making themselves Masters of that Place, and the want of a
secure Retreat any where else, were the main Reasons that made 'em lay aside
the Thoughts of performing the Assassination this way.

Both these Proposals were soon rejected by the Conspirators; but there were
two other Projects that were the subject of a longer Deliberation, being looked
upon as more feasible, and obnoxious to fewer and less discouraging Hazards.
And therefore it will not be improper to give the Reader a more particular
account of 'em.

The King has a House at Richmond, whither he usually went to hunt every
Saturday, when free from the hurry of Business, and the perpetual cares in
which he had spent the Week, he had leisure to divert himself with that
Innocent and Manly Recreation. Near that place there is a little Park that
reaches to the River side; the Larne's Deposition, February 26. 1695/6. Capt.
Porter's Declaration upon Oath before a Committee of the Council, March 3.
1695/6.
Thames on one side, and the Park-pales one the other, forming a kind of Defile
or narrow Lane, about 150 paces long, in the middle of which there is a Gate
that hinders Coaches or Horses from passing that way, when it is shut. Through this
Lane the King usually returned from hunting, and 'twas here that the
Conspirators resolved to execute their barbarous Design.

The Park, the River, the Gate, and the Pales, were all to be made subservient
for facilitating the Attempt. Several Persons on foot, well armed, were to be
placed in Ambuscade behind the Hedges and Pales. When the King's Coach had
passed the Gate, it was to be shut upon the Guards that followed him; the Coach
was to be stopped by killing some of the Horses, and the Pales were to be saw d
so far, that they might be broken down as soon as they entered upon action. In
the mean time some Horsemen were to attack Six or Seven of the Guards, that go
before the Coach, and the Party that lay in Ambuscade were to fire on the Body
of the Guards that were stopped by the Gate, that the Assassins might have time
to murder the King and those who were with him.

'Twas also agreed that, after the Assassination, such of the Conspirators as
were on Horseback should immediately disperse, and those of the Ambuscade who
were to act on foot, dressed in Countrymens habits, should make their escape to
the Riverside, where there was to be a Boat lying ready to receive 'em. This
proposal was under deliberation for some time, during which some of the
Conspirators were sent to the place, in order to view the Ground, and upon the
Account they gave of it the above mention dScheme wasfram'd. But after all
their Consultations, since Sir George Barclay was not sure of a sufficient
Number of Horse to carry off those that were to lie in Ambuscade, who,
consequently, would have been exposed to very great dangers, before they could
have reached London, this Project was also rejected by the Cabal

The last way that was proposed to murder the King, was to assault him, as he
returned from Richmond, in a place betwixt Brentford and Turnham Green.

In a Bottom, where the Ground is moorish and uneven, there is a Bridge Capt.
Porter, March 3. 1695/6.
where diverse Roads meet and cross one another; on the North-side there is a
Road that goes round Brentford, and on the South a Lane that leads to the
River; so that one may come thither from four several Places. After you pass
the Bridge the Road grows narrow, having on one side a Foot-path, and on the
other a tall and thick Hedge.

This was to have been the scene of the most dismal Tragedy that ever was acted
in England; nor cou d they have chosen a more convenient Time or Place for
executing their barbarous design. For the King us d to return late from
Hunting, and to cross the River at Queensferry, by Brentford, with Five or Six
of his Guards. 'Twas also his custom to go into the Boat without coming out of
his Coach, and as soon as he landed on the other side, the Coach drove on
without expecting the rest of the Guards, who could not cross the River till
the Boat returned to bring *em over. In the mean time, the King, with his small
Attendance, would have quickly arriv d at the Bridge, which is at the other end
of Brentford next to London, and consequently would have fallen into the hands of
the Conspirators, who were to attack him on all sides.

They were to be divided into Three Parties, one of which was to come from
Turnham Green, another from the Lane that leads to the River, and the Third
from the Road that goes round Brentford. One of these Troops were to attack the
Guards on the Front, and the other in the Rear, while Eight or Ten detached Men
assaulted the Coach, where his Majesty would have been assassinated before the
Guards whom he left on the other side of the River could have come up to his
Assistance.

After the Assassination the Conspirators were to have kept together till they
came to Hamersmith, a little Town betwixt Turnham Green and London. There they
intended to separate, and afterward by several Roads to enter the City, where
they hoped they might lurk securely, during the general Consternation, till
they should Capt. George Porter's Deposition, March 3. 1695/6.
be freed from danger by the sudden Landing of the French.

This Proposal pleased the Conspirators better than any of the former, Porter,
King, and Knightly were sent to view the Ground, and upon the Report they made
at their Return, the Business was finally agreed upon.

Sir George Barclay had brought Eight hundred Pounds from France for the Charge
of the Attempt, but finding that he could not carry on the Design with so small
a Sum, he complained to his Friends, who soon found a way to supply that
Defect. For Charnock undertook to provide Eight men ready mounted and armed,
Porter Seven, and Sir William Parkins Five: So that Barclay was only obliged to
buy or hire Twenty Horses for the Officers and Soldiers he had brought from
France.

Porter and Rookwood commanded the Two Parties that were to attack the Guards;
and Sir George Barclay reserved the honor of the Assassination for himself.

One of the Conspirators was ordered to wait at Queensferry till the Guards
appeared, and then immediately to give notice to the rest, that they might have
time to prepare themselves and take their respective Posts, while the King was
passing the River.' They resolved to form themselves into several Bodies, which
were to advance with all possible Diligence to the Place appointed for the
fatal Rendezvous.

They had omitted nothing that might serve to secure and facilitate the
Execution of their Attempt. They had visited all the Inns about Brentford and
Turnham-green, and the places where they might set up their Horses till the
King should return from Hunting.

Larue 's Deposition, February 25. 1695/6.
They had also Two Spies, or Orderly men, as they called 'em, who were posted
at Kensington: Chambers.
One of 'em was to give notice when the King went out, and the other was to
bring Durant.
an account when the Guards began to March And that the Assassination might
pass under the Notion of a Military Exploit, they produced an Order to take up
Arms against the Prince of Orange and his Adherents.

There was some Difference among the Conspirators concerning the Terms and
Expressions of the Commission, even after they had confessed their Crime. For
some of 'em acknowledged that it contain*d an express order to Kill the King;
whereas Sir William Parkyn owned that (...) such a ^^mmisi^n* which he
understood to be King James's, that it had a Seal to it, that he saw it in the
Hand of a Friend, etc. See the Votes of the House of Commons, April 2. 169^.
others pretended that it only authorized em, in the general, to levy War
against the Prince of Orange and all his Adherents.

It Is the Opinion of several Judicious Persons, that the most considerable
Discovery was made by those who endeavored to put the fairest Construction on
this execrable Project. For to Levy War against the King and his Adherents,
after such a manner, and in such Circumstances, could signify nothing else
than the Murdering of the King and Parliament, and of all that loved, and were
resolved to maintain the Laws, Religion, and Liberty of England.

The Fifteenth of February was chosen for the Execution of the dire Attempt:
'Twas on that fatal Day that England, or rather Europe, was to lose its
Deliverer, and with him, all its hopes of accomplishing the Great Work which he
had so happily begun; and 'twas then that Heaven was resolved to work a new
Miracle for our Preservation. If we had foreseen the Danger that threatened
him, the remembrance of past Hazards would have only served to heighten our
Apprehensions for the future; His Subjects could hardly have welcomed him, at
his return from so glorious a Campaign; and instead of celebrating his
Victories, would have trembled at his Approaching Fate. But we found, to our
Comfort, that the same Providence which had so often cover*d his Head in the
Day of Battle, and guarded him from the fiercest Assaults of his Enemies* was
also able to preserve him from the treacherous Fury of Assassins.

To prevent Suspicion, they disposed their Men in different places of the Town,
and even in the remotest Parts of it: Barclay and Rookwood expected the Signal
in Holborn; and Porter, with some others, waited, upon the same account, at the
Blue Posts in Spring garden. Charnock resolved to accompany the latter, either
because he mistrusted him, and intended to animate him by his example; or
because he was willing to choose a Post that was least exposed to Danger, as
King.
another of the Conspirators suspected. And perhaps he had still so much Reason
left, notwithstanding the impetuous Pa^ on that disturbed his Judgment, as to
decline acting in the most odious Part of the Tragedy.

Thus they lay expecting the News of the King's Departure for Richmond, but his
Majesty did not go out that day; and some of the Conspirators were so alarmed
at this Disappointment, that they began to reflect either upon the Danger or
Infamy to which such an Attempt would expose 'em. Plowden, who came purposely
to Town to act under Porter, went back to the Country, and did not think fit to
return, according to his Promise. Kenrick pretended that he was disabl'd by a
Fall, and appeared for some days with his Arm in a String: Sherbourn started so
many Scruples, when the Design was proposed to him, that they did not think fit
to press him further; And even the fiercest and most harden d Assassins began
to be apprehensive of the Success of their Project.

But, at last, concluding that their Design was not discovered, because they
were not secured, Sir George Barclay, Sir William Parkins, Captain Porter and
Goodman, met on the 21st of February, and resolved to make a new attempt to
execute their Project, without altering the Method of it. In pursuance of this
Resolution, the Assassins were to be prepared for the bloody Action, on
Saturday the 22d of February, which was to have been the last Day of our
Liberty, and the Fatal Era of the irrecoverable Ruin of England.

The Morning was spent in an impatient Expectation of Advice from those whom
they had appointed to give 'em notice when the King went out. Charnock, who for
some days had been very uneasy and full of Jealousy and Suspicion, sent a Man
to Porter, for a List of those who were to act in the Assassination. He seemed
particularly to doubt Larue, and perhaps was desirous to have some Satisfaction
concerning him. The List was sent to Francis de Larue 's Deposition, February
26. 1695/6.
him, with Larue's Name at the head of the rest; and he sent it back again,
after he had inserted the Names of those whom he was to furnish.

Pendergrass was one of those who were with Porter: They had sent for him out
of the Country, and would have assigned him a remarkable part in the
Assassination. Porter had a Musketoon that carried 6 or 8 Bullets, with which
Pendergrass was to shoot at the King; and they desired him not to be afraid of
breaking the Coachglasses.

The Conspirators were disappointed a Second time; and the boldest of 'em could
not forbear discovering their Fears, when Keys acquainted 'em that the Guards
were come back all in a foam, and that there was an unusual muttering among the
People. This unexpected piece of News put 'em all into a Consternation; the
Cabal Capt. Porter 's Deposition, March 3. 1695/6.
was entirely dispersed, and most of 'em endeavored to secure themselves by a
speedy flight.

Nor was this merely the effect of a Panic Dread or groundless Apprehension;
for the Conspiracy was actually detected. Fisher, Pendergrass, Larue, and
another had separately given Information to Different Persons concerning it,
tho they had not yet discovered the Particulars.

Captain Fisher was the Man whom God inclined to make the first Discovery of
this inhumane Design. He went to the Earl of Portland, on the Tenth of
February, Five Days before the Time that was appointed for the Execution of it,
and informed him of the intended Enterprise, without acquainting him either
with the Time, Manner, or Circumstances, which were not yet agreed upon: but he
promised to give him further notice as soon as they should come to a positive
Resolution.

And now we may justly reflect, with an equal amazement, upon the Sedateness
and Generosity of his Majesty's Temper, who could hardly be persuaded to
suspect those who only waited for a convenient opportunity to Murder him; and
the barbarous Fury of his Enemies, who scrupl d not to conspire the Death of so
Good and so Brave a Prince. Any other Person would have been startled at an
Advice of this nature, or at least would have looked upon it as too important
to be neglected; but the King, secure in his own Virtue, conscious of no Guilt,
and consequently incapable of Fear, was so far from being alarmed at the
Discovery, that he would not give credit to it, because the Circumstances were
not particularly mentioned.

Febr. 13.
Three Days after, Fisher returned to Whitehall, and gave the Earl of Portland
an account not only of the Design itself, but also of the Method and order of
its Execution. Yet tho he made a full Discovery of the Time, Place, and other
Circumstances of the Enterprise, he peremptorily refused to mention the names
of the Actors; which confirmed the King in his former opinion, and made him
conclude that 'twas a story contrived on purpose to fright him with a false
Febr. 14.
Alarm. But, the very day before the Fatal Blow was to be given, God, by a
seasonable Providence prevented our impending Ruin, and delivered our King
from his own Generous Incredulity.

It happened that, on that very day, the Earl of Portland went to see the
Countess of Essex, and, contrary to his custom, made his visit longer than he
designed. By good fortune he called to mind that he had promised to meet a
certain person about a private Affair; and tho 'twas already time for him to go
to Kensington, he resolved, according to his usual exactness in keeping his
Word, to go first to his Lodgings at Whitehall. As soon as he went in, he found
an unknown person in his Antichamber, who desired to speak with him about a
matter of the highest importance, that could not be deferred to another time.
This was a sufficient Argument to obtain what he asked, especially in such a
juncture The Earl made haste to dispatch the person whom he had ordered to wait
upon him, and immediately admitted the Stranger, who accosted him with this
surprising Request, My Lord, persuade the King to stay at home tomorrow; for if
he go abroad to Hunt, he will be Assassinated.

Afterward he gave him a particular account of the Conspiracy, with almost
the same Circumstances that had already been discovered by Fisher. He added,
that his Name was Pendergrass, that he was an Irishman, and a Catholic; that
they sent for him out of the Country, without acquainting him with the reason
that made 'em desirous to see him; that afterward they endeavored to engage
him in the Design, that he was struck with horror at the first proposal, and
immediately resolved to discover it; that his Religion was accused for
authorizing and encouraging such Actions; but that, for his part, he abhorred
such Principles, tho in all other respects he was a true Catholic.

Thus his Majesty began to receive the just Reward of his Clemency and
Moderation: for he is, and has always been, equally remarkable for his steadfast
adhering to his own Religion, and his Indulgency to those of another
Persuasion. When he accepted the Crown of Scotland, he declared that he would
not be a Persecntor; and all his Actions are so many Illustrious Testimonies of
the Sincerity of that Resolution. Never any Papist, that was willing to live in
Peace, stood in need of an Intecessor with him. He protected 'em in Ireland
against the angry Counsels of some over-zealous Protestants: He favored 'em as
much as he could without injuring the rest of his Subjects, and treated *em
upon all occasions, with an Indulgency that surpised those who are not
acquainted with the Native Goodness of his Temper. It Is true, this may perhaps
be reckoned, in some measure, and Effect of his Complaisance to the Family of
Austria, with whom he has entertained a long and intimate Friendship, which has
been endeared by reciprocal Good Offices, and is confirm d and made necessary
to 'em both, by the Interest of their mutual Preservation. But tho the Papists
were deprov'd of such powerful Intercessors; his Virt e alone wou d supply that
Defect, and sufficiently recommend 'em to his Favor and Protection. And we have
reason to believe that God is pleased with his Mildness and Clemency to the
Roman Catholics in general, and to the Irish in particular; since by a
wonderful Providence, he made an Irish Papist the Instrument of Saving his Life.

Pendergrass added, that he would have gone straight to Kensington, to make the
Discovery to the King himself, if he had not been afraid of being seen and
taken notice of by the Two Orderly Men whom the Conspirators kept in that
place; and that since the Nature of the Business required all possible
Dispatch, he thought he could not make his Address to a Person that would be
more zealous and careful than his Lordship. But tho no means were left
unattempted to persuade him to name the Conspirators, he resisted with an
invincible Constancy all the Arguments that were made use of to that effect;
declaring that he would never be prevailed with to injure his Friends, or
betr^y those to whom he had been formerly obliged.

It has been frequently observed that the most trivial Accidents have given
birth to the most Memorable and Important Events: And, upon this Occasion, it
seemed good to that Supreme and over ruling Providence which guides the World,
that the Preservation of a Prince, in whose Life the Fate of Europe is bound
up, should depend upon a Visit that was made to the Earl of Portland at Ten a
clock at night.

At his Arrival at Kensington, which, notwithstanding all the haste he could
make, was very late, he found that the King was already retired, and that he
had given the necessary Orders for his usual Recreation the next morning. That
Virtuous and Magnanimous Prince was preparing to go to Richmond, with as sedate
and unconcerned a Mind as if he had not received Intelligence of the bloody
Design that was to be executed near that place. And even the new Confirmation
he received of it could scarce prevail with him to alter his Resolution, till
he was at last overcome by my Lord Portland's repeated Importunities.

In the mean time the number of the Discoverers encreas*d, and the Informations
they had given were confirmed by the concurring Testimony of another of the
Conspirators, who applied himself to Sir William Trumbal, one of His Majesty's
Princicipal Secretaries of State, and convinced him of the Reality of the Plot,
tho he could not acquaint him with the Circumstances of it. For that Minister
had already received advice that the French were bringing together a great
number of Transport-Ships, and making all the necessary Preparations for an
extraordinary Design, which was kept very Secret, tho, in all probability, the
Storm was like to fall upon England So that comparing these Advices concerning
a Foreign Invasion, with the Account he had received of the Design against His
Majestys Person, he found that they confirmed each other, tho he could hardly
look upon either of 'em as probable, when he considered 'em Singly. And
therefore he made all possible haste to communicate these Discoveries to His
Majesty, with his usual Zeal and Fidelity.

About the same time Brigadier Lewson acquainted the King, that one Larue had
informed him of a Design that was on foot to Assassinate His Majesty. This last
Discoverer gave a very particular and Circumstantial Account of the whole
Intrigue; but He, as well as the rest, seemed obstinately resolved to conceal
the Names of the Conspirators.

The King, convinced by so many Concurring Informations, and perceiving that
all the Accounts he had receiv d agreed exactly with one another, began to
believe the Truth of the Discovery. He ordered the Earl of Portland and Sir
William Trumbal to make a more particular Enquiry into the Progress and
Circumstances of the Design; the Former as having receiv d the first Advice of
the Conspiracy against His Person, and the Latter as having been first
acquainted with the Plot against the Nation.

'Twas a very Difficult Task to manage so nice an Enquiry; for tho they had
Four Witnesses, they cou d not produce one Legal Evidence. They could not
stifle the Informations they had received without exposing his Majesty's Life
to the brutish Fury of Assassins, who wou d soon find another Way to execute
their Detestable Project: Nor could they publish a Discovery which they could
not prove, without running the hazard of being charged with the first Invention
of it And besides, the Divulging of these Advices would have encouraged the
Conspirators to carry on their Design, and perhaps made 'em hasten the
Execution of it, least they shou*d at last be entirely discovered, and receive
the just Reward of their Crimes

In the mean time the King resolved to expose his Life to all the Dangers that
threatened it, if it could not be secured without violating the usual Forms of
Justice. So that we were like to perish by those very Laws that were contrived
and established for our Preservation, if the Earl of Portland had not found out
an Expedient to ward off the Blow without having recourse to any indirect of
unwarrantable Stratagem. He considered, that Pendergrass and Larue might be
persuaded to discover the whole Mystery, if the King himself should speak to
em, and that even tho they should refuse to yield to His Majesty s
Solicitations, the Information they were willing to give might serve to Convict
the Conspirators, if it were delivered in the presence of unexceptionable
Witnesses, who might Depose it at their Trials.

The King himself could not be an Evidence; and therefore 'twas necessary that
there should be at least Two Witnesses present, when he discoursed with 'em He
spoke to Pendergrass and Larue separately; to the First before the Earl of
Portland and the Lord Cutts, and to the Second, in the Presence of the same
Earl and Brigadeer Lewson. After he had assured 'em that he esteemed their
Persons, and was extremely pleased with their Proceedings; he told 'em, That he
owned himself oblig d to 'em for the Care they took to preserve his Life; but
desir d 'em to consider, that the Service they had done him by discovering the
Conspiracy cou d be of no use to him, so long as they concealed the Names of
the Conspirators; that he cou d neither Punish nor so much as Convict the
Criminals; that the People wou d never be persuaded to believe that several
Persons had discovered a Conspiracy which they either could not, or wou d not
justify; that, on the contrary, they would imagine that he had invented a
Sham-plot to destroy his Enemies, which would render him odious to all the
World; that so general and Imperfect a Discovery would expose his Honor without
Securing his Life, etc. These Arguments produc d the desir d Effect, and
conquered the obstinacy of the Discoverers: They could not resist the awful
Eloquence of an injur d Monarch, and were at last prevailed with to make an
Atonement for their Guilt by discovering their Fellow-Criminals.

After his Majesty was acquainted with the Names and Designs of the
Conspirators, he told the Cabinet Council, that he had for some time neglected
the Advices he had received of a Conspiracy against his Person; but since by
the favorable Providence of God, he was fully convinc d of the Truth of it, he
would not tamely Suffer himself to be assassinated. He added that he was
informed the French were peparing to Invade the Kingdom, but that he hoped God
would enable him to frustrate their Designs.

Not long after, he called the Great Council, and communicated the Discovery to
them. He received, from both, particular Assurances of Fidelity and Affection,
and immediately issued out a Proclamation requiring all his loving Subjects to
apprehend the Conspirators, and promising a Reward of a Thousand Pounds for
every one that shou d be seized

The Parliament was not yet acquainted with the Danger that threatened the
Nation; but as soon as His Majesty was convinced of the Reality of the
Conspiracy, and could produce Witnesses to prove it, he went to Westminster on
the 24th of February, and made the following Speech to both Houses.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

I Am come hither this Day upon an extraordinary Occasion which might have
proved Fatal, if it had not been Disappointed by the Singular Mercy and
Goodness of God; And may now, by the Continuance of the same Providence, and
our own Prudent Endeavonrs be so Improved, as to become a sufficient Warning to
Us to provide for Our Security against the Pernicious Practices and Attempts of
Our Enemies.

I have received several Concurring Information of a Design to Assossinate Me,
and that Our Enemies, at the same time, are very forward in their Preparations
for a sudden Invasion of this Kingdom, And have therefore Thought it necessary
to lose no Time in Acquainting My Parliament with these Things, in which the
safety of the Kingdom and the Public Welfare are so nearly Concerned, That I
Assure My Self, nothing will be Omitted on your Part, which may be Thought
proper for Our Present or Future Security.

I have not been Wanting to give the Necessary Orders for the Fleet; And I
Hope, We have such a Strength of Ships, and in such a Readiness, as will be
sufficient to Disappoint the Intentions of our Enemies.

I have also Dispatched Orders for bringing Home such a Number of Our Troops,
as may Secure Us from any Attempt.

Some of the Conspirators against My Person are already in Custody, and Care is
taken to Apprehend so many of the rest as are Discovered: And such other Orders
are given, as the present Exigency of Affairs does absolutely Require, at this
Time, for the Public Safety.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

Having now Acquainted you with the Danger, which has threatened Us, I cannot
Donbt of your Readiness and Zeal, to do every Thing which you shall judge
Proper for Our Common Safety: And I persuade My Self, We must be all Sensible,
how necessary it is in Our present Circumstances, That all possible Dispatch
should be given to the Business before you.

The Proclamation and His Majesty's Speech published the Conspiracy, and made
us Sensible of the dreadful Ruin which we had so narrowly escaped. All England
was alarm d at the Surprising News: an universal Horror was diffused through the
whole Nation; we trembled to think of the amazing Danger which humane Wisdom
could neither have foreseen nor prevented, and were scarcely capable of
reflecting upon our present Deliverance. The Conspiracy was the only Subject
both of our Thoughts and Discourse: We look d upon the execrable Design and the
treacherous Contrivers of it, with a just Abhorrence and Indignation, and every
one adored a Miraculous Providence in which All were so nearly concern d*

Some reflected upon the Massacres, Burnings and Persecutions, and all the
other dismal Instances of the implacable Rage of the Faction in former times;
and concluded that the Conspirators were afraid we had forgotten the Sufferings
of our Ancestors, and intended to refresh our Memory by re-acting the same
Barbarities.

Others entertain d themselves with the melancholy Prospect of our future
Condition, if Heaven, to punish our Crimes, had suffered our Enemies to deprive
us of our Glorious Deliverer. And even the calmest Minds could not preserve
their wonted Tranquillity, when they considered that after we had sustained so
vast an Expense of Blood and Treasure to maintain our Religion and Liberty;
after we had been delivered from Arbitrary Power by the miraculous Assistance
of Heaven, and Ireland reduced by glorious Victories; after we had made our
selves Masters of the Sea, and began to be Conquerors on Land; that after these
and so many other Blessings of Providence, we should have been forced to resume
our broken Fetters, and submit to the Insolent Revenge of a baffled Enemy.

Those who considered the Posture of Affairs abroad, were soon convinced that
the exeution of this detestable Project would have been no less Fatal to Europe
in general, than to England in particular. They were sensible that Our Disaster
would have broken the Confederacy; and that it would have been equally dangerous
to the Allies, to conclude a Peace, or continue the War.

These were some of the Reflections, that were made upon this occasion, by
particular Persons, while all, in general, were employed in blessing God for
their wonderful Preservation, and admiring the adorable Wisdom of Providence,
which had not only disappointed the Designs of our Enemies, but so overruled
their Malice, that their Projects served only to confirm and strengthen the
Union betwixt the King and his People, by the Interest of their mutual
Preservation.

But, as our Representatives in Parliament are entrusted with the Management of
Public Affairs, and consequently have the deepest Share in the General Concerns
of the Nation; so there were none that were more sensibly affected with the
Discovery, or made more serious Reflections upon His Majesty s Speech For both
the Interest and Designs of the Faction are entirely opposite to those of that
Illustrious Body: The Former is a Secret Cabal that has been long Contriving
our Ruin, and the latter is a Public Council which Studies the Means to
preserve us; and therefore it is no wonder that there should be such a strong
and lasting Antipathy betwixt 'em.

Since the Faction endeavored to destroy King James the I. and his Parliament
by the famous Gunpowder Conspiracy, they have been still intent upon the
Hellish Design, and forming new Projects to destroy us. It Is thought they were
active Promoters of the Civil War, which disturbed the Reign of King Charles
the First, and was attended with consequences that will for ever be lamented by
the Nation. And none but those who are sorry for the bad Success of their
Contrivances, will deny, that the Son and immediate Successor of that
unfortunate Monarch, was influenced by their pernicious Councils; that they
made him jealous of his most faithful Subjects, and at last persuaded him to
undermine the very Foundations of our Liberty, by destroying the Freedom of
Elections, and Governing his People without the Advice of his Parliament.
During the late Reign they attacked us with Authority, and have been ever since
endeavoring to regain the Ground they lost by the Revolution. The same Design
is still carried on, but with this happy difference, that Loyalty is become at
last the distinguishing Mark of Honest Men, and Traitors to their Country are
looked upon as Traitors to the Government. For, tho Treachery is usually said
to be more dangerous than open Violence; yet after all a Wise man would rather
choose, that the Enemies of his Country should be Plotters than Oppressors.

The Faction (which, thanks to Heaven, we can now call, The Disaffected Party)
cannot endure a Prince, who not only will not help 'em to destroy the Nation,
but was the Instrument whom God chose to preserve it; and who, instead of
relying upon the Councils and Assistance of the Cabal, makes it his principal
care to preserve an entire Confidence and inseparable Union betwixt Him and His
Parliament. Less than this wou d have been sufficient to make the Faction
Dispute his Title; tho the very Hatred of those who Dispute it, may be justly
looked upon as an evident and unexceptionable Confirmation of it.

It Is to be presumed that there are a considerable number of Persons engaged.
in the Party who have Sense enough to perceive, that it is impossible to
controvert His Majesty s Right to the Crown, without denying us the common and
most essential Privileges of a Nation. For unless they pretend, with the most
furiously bigoted Papists, that the Consent of the Head of their Church is
necessary for the Establishment of the Secular Power, or, suffer themselves to
be so miserably deluded by a new sort of Fanaticism as to imagine, that every
Race of Kings is established by an immediate Oracle or supernatural Revelation;
they cannot refuse to acknowledge that the Safety and Consent of the People
were the primitive and most sacred Foundations of Sovereign Authority; and that
the unanimous Suffrages of those who thought fit to enter into Societies for
their own Preservation, was the Voice of God himself, in the first
Establishment of Monarchy.

It Is an undoubted and a remarkable Truth, that those very persons who are
angry with us for assuming a power to secure our Liberty by modifying our Laws,
upon so extraordinary an Occasion, pretend a Right to the same Privilege, and
have more than once actually made use of it. It Is known that the Estates of
France regulated the Succession, by making a far more considerable The Salic
Law which is said to be as ancient as Pharamond, is an undeniable Argument that
the French supposed their Government to be (as it really was) a Hereditary
Monarchy.
Alteration in their ancient Laws, than that for which we have been so often
reproached, in the case of Childeric III. who was succeeded by Pepin, and that
tho Mezeray says expressly, That if the French had ascribed that Regulation to
the Pope, they would have discovered themselves to be ignorant of their own
Right, Abreg. Chronol. p. 206.
Pope Zachary pretended that this Regulation was made by virtue of his
Approbation and Authority, the People of that Kingdom have always refused to
acknowledge him as the Author of that important Alteration, and maintained that
it was made by their own Representatives. This Remark may be further confirm d
by the instance of Mezeray affirms that the Consent of the People of France was
the best Title which Hugh Capet, who succeeded Charles, could pretend to his
Crown, Abreg. Chron. p. 454.
Charles of Lorrain, who was dethroned for the good of the State: Two Races of
Kings have enjoyed the Crown of France, by Virtue of these Regulations that
were made for the good of the State.
And it is certain that since that time the French Kings never had, nor have at
this day, any Title to the Crown but what is founded on this Establishment; so
that since a false Title to a Crown can never be rectified by Prescription,
it is plain that, if King William be not our Lawful and Rightful Sovereign,
France has for several Ages been governed by Usurpers.

He deserves not the Name of an Englishman, who believes, with Father d'
Orleans, That the Power of the English Monarchs is originally as absolute and
arbitrary as any Power can possibly be; that it is founded on a Right of
Conquest, which the Conqueror exercised and settled in its utmost extent; that,
at first, the Parliaments were only Seditious Conventicles, erected upon the
occasion of a Successful Revolt of the English Nobility, who sinding themselves
able to prescribe Laws to their Masters, assumed the Power of granting
Subsidies, etc. that afterward the Kings being obliged to call 'em, when they
stood in need of Supplies, these Meetings began to be looked upon as a lawful
Senate, and by degrees acquired an established Form, and the Authority which
they enjoy at present. History of the Revolutions in England, Book III. p. 294.
England has been always looked upon as one of the most considerable Kingdoms
in Europe; but the it were the meanest and most contemptible Nation in the
World, it could not be deprived of the most ancient and fundamental Privilege
of Mankind, I mean that of Self-Preservation. It Is true, a People may be
Subdued and made Slaves by a Victorious Invader; but they can never be robbed
of their natural Right, to endeavor the recovering of their Liberty. And
supposing that this was formerly a Conquered Kingdom, it is plain that the
Conqueror could not become a Lawful Monarch, but by Treating with the Nation,
and preserving its ancient Privileges; since a True King must be the Governor
of Subjects, and not of Slaves. 'Twou'd be a direct overturning of the Order of
Nature to pretend, with our Enemies, that the Sovereign Authority in England is
originally Arbitrary, and that the People are only Free by Usurpation; since,
by the fundamental Constitution of our Government, the People are originally
free, and the Royal Authority Limited.

The Roman Catholics were naturally disposed to embrace these pernicious
Notions: for it is one of the Principles of their Religion, that the Pope's
Jurisdiction extends over the Temporal Authority of Kings, and the Property of
the People; and that those whom he Deposes or Excommunicates, are, ipso facto,
deprived of all their Rights and Privileges. It Is true this Opinion has been
look d upon as dangerous, even by the Princes of that Persuasion, who are not
willing that their Authority should depend on the Arbitrary Will of One Man.
And from thence some have taken occasion to call those Catholics who moderate
the Power of the Sea of Rome, and only to give the Name of Papists to those who
require an unlimited Submission to the Pope. But this Distinction was never so
generally known or teceiv'd in this Kingdom as in other places. For in Popish
Countries, it is the Interest of the Prince to inspire his People with a less
extravagant respect to the Head of their Church: whereas in England, where the
Roman Catholics have neither a Prince nor Magistrate of their Persuasion, they
are wholly governed by their Directors, and follow all their Maxims, unless
they have Sense enough to perceive the dangerous Consequences of these
Opinions, or by the Mildness and Integrity of their Temper, are naturally
inclined to detest such a barbarous and inhumane Doctrine. But, in the general,
they are easily persuaded to look upon Protestants as Men that have forfeited
all their Privileges, and are already doomed to Death, for the Crimes of Heresy
and Schism, by the repeated Sentences of several Councils. And it is plain that
those who are possessed with such a Prejudice will never heartily acknowledge the
Title of a Protestant Prince; since they reckon our Religion a sufficient
ground to deprive a People of the natural Privileges of a Civil Society.

It has been, upon all cccasions, the constant Practice of the Faction, to
accommodate their Notions to the various Humors and Inclinations of those whom
they endeavor to draw into their Party. For as they entertain some of their
Proselytes, with Projects to destroy the Liberty and Privileges of the Nation,
they insinuate themselves into the good opinion of others, by exclaiming
against the Prerogative of the Crown. When they meet with Persons that are fond
of a Popular Government* they pretend to be of the same opinion, exasperate
their Grievances, and persuade 'em that it is the Interest of the Nation to
weaken the Power and Authority of the King, that, upon the first occasion, they
may be able, withless difficulty, to introduce a Republican Government.

When Father d' Orleans declaims against the Republicans, he usually runs to
the opposite Extremity, and commends the most pernicious Maxims of Despotic
Tyranny; such as Governing without a Parliament is, and will always be Reputed
in this Kingdom. See the History of the Revolutions in England, Book II.
At the same time, they make use o other Artifices to delude those who are
superstitiously addicted to Monarchy. They exasperate their Zeal, fill their
Minds with unreasonable Jealousies, and by scaring 'em with false Alarms of the
Progress of the Republican Party, endeavor to secure their Assistance for the
Introducing of Arbitrary Power, as the only Way to keep out a Commonwealth. For
it is their usual custom to tamper with the most violent Persons of all Parties,
that, by animating 'em one against another, they may divide the Nation into
opposite and irreconcilable Factions.

They labored to persuade the World that the late King might justly assume an
Arbitrary Power, that he might reign without a Parliament, and absolutely
renounce all Contracts with his People. And even after he had deserted the
Kingdom, and was declared an Enemy to our Laws, Religion and Liberties, by the
Representatives of the Nation; they had the confidence to pretend that he was
still our Lawful King.

But the Artifice was too gross to pass upon a whole Nation: for, in the first
place, they must have persuaded us that We were not a People, but a Multitude
of Rebels, that had forfeited all our Privileges, that were condemned by our
Prince, and had neither Laws nor Parliaments to protect us; that, like a
company of Robbers who had escaped the Execution of Justice, we maintained our
Illegal Possessions by an unjust Force, and had no Title either to our Lives or
Estates; that we were Slaves by Law, and Proscribed Malefactors, and
cousequently were in a more wretched Condition, than if we had been actually
Conquered and Subdued.

Blessed be that Almighty Goodness which defeated the Contrivances of our
Enemies, and gave us a King, upon whom they could never fasten the least
Aspersion, who manages the Reins of Government with an equal and Steady Hand;
who never was, and we have reason to believe, never will be Guilty either of
Tyranny or Remissness; who will neither oppress us himself, nor Suffer us to
oppress one another; and has always pursued such Maxims as are most agreeable to
the admirable Constitution of our Government, which preserves the Just mean
betwixt the arbitrary Tyranny of Despotic Power, and the Tumultuary
Liccntiousness of Anarchy or Democracy; and will neither suffer the Parliament
to make Laws without the Authority of the King, nor the King to Govern without
the Advice of his Parliament.

But since they cou*d not Debauch the Fidelity of his People, by controverting
his Title to the Crown; they made use of that pretext to encourage the
desperate Bravo's of the Faction to murder him. They told 'em that they could
not be accused of conspiring against the Life of a King; Capt* Fisher's
Deposition.
since the Prince of Orange had no See the Bishop of Soissons*s Order* about
the beginning of April.
right to that Title: Capt* Fisher's Deposition.
And it appears that the same Pretense was alledg*d as one of the Reasons for
the designed Invasion.

The whole Nation was alarmed with the common Danger, and the Parliament,
especially, made serious Reflections upon the Designs of our Enemies.

His Majesty's Speech to both Houses was seconded by Sir William Trumbal, who,
in a Pathetic Harangue before the House of Commons, acquainted that Illustrious
Body with the particular Characters of the Witnesses, the uniformity of their
Evidence, and the improbability of their Conspiring together to deceive us; and
from all these Considerations concluded that there was never less reason to
doubt the Truth of a Conspiracy than of This. Such a discourse as this was very
Seasonable, and even necessary at a time, when several Persons were endeavoring
to make the whole Discovery pass for a Fiction, either because they imagin*d
that the King and Council had been imposed upon, or perhaps because they wished
that we had been convinced of the reality of the Design by the Execution of it.
However, Time and the Confession of the Criminals have stopped the Mouths of
those who would have stifled the Discovery. And the Parliament, to express
their Zeal and Affection, in such a dangerous Juncture, made the following
Address to His Majesty, which was presented by both Houses in a Body.

WE Tour Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Aslembl'd, having taken into
our Serious Consideration what Tour Majesty has been Pleased to Communicate to
us this Day, Think it our Duty, in the First Place, to give Tour Majesty most
Humble Thanks, for having Acquainted Tour Parliament with the great Danger Tour
Sacred Person has been so nearly Exposed to, and the Design of an Invasion
from our Enemies Abroad; We Heartily Congratulate Tour Majesty's Happy
Preservation, and Thankfully Acknowledge the Signal Providence of God in it,
and at the same time Declare our Detestation and Abhorrence of so Villainous and
Barbarous a Design. And since the Safety and Welfare of Tour Majesty's
Dominions do so entirely Depend upon Tour Life, we most Humbly Beseech Tour
Majesty to take more than ordinary Care of Tour Royal Person. And we take this
Occasion to Assure your Majesty of our utmost Assistance to Defend Tour Person,
and Support Tour Government against the late King James, and all other Tour
Enemies both at Home and Abroad; hereby Declaring to all the World, That in
case Tour Majesty shall come to any Violent Death (which God forbid) we will
Revenge the same upon all Tour Enemies and their Adherents; And, as an Instance
of our Zeal for Tour Majestys Service, we will give all possible Dispatch to
the Public Business. And we make it our Desire to Tour Majesty to Seize and
Secure all Persons, Horses and Arms, that Tour Majesty may think fit to
Apprehend upon this Occasion.

His Majesty received this Address in a very obliging manner, and was pleased
to return a most gracious Answer in these words.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

I Thank you heartily for this kind Address; On My Part you may be Assured that
I will do all that is within My Power for the Preservation of this Kingdom, to
which I have so many Obligations; I will readily Venture My Life for Preserving
it, and Recommend My Self to the Continuance of Tour Loyalty and Good
Affections.

At the same time both Houses entered into an Association to defend his
Majesty's Life, and to revenge his Death; and, particularly the House of
Commons agreed to several important Resolutions. 'Twas ordered, That leave
should be given to bring in a Bill to Empower His Majesty to Secure and Detain
such Persons as His Majesty should suspect were Conspiring against His Person
or Government: And Resolved, That an Humble Address should be presented to His
Majesty, that He would please to issue out His Royal Proclamation, to Banish
all Papists from the Cities of London and Westminster, and Ten Miles from the
same: That all the Members of the House should either sign the Association, or
declare their Refusal so to do; and that whosoever should by Writing, or
otherwise affirm that the Association was Illegal, should be look d upon* as
Promoters of the Designs of the late King and Enemies of the Laws and Liberties
of the Kingdom.

'Twas also Resolved nemine contradicente, that a Bill should be brought in for
the better security of his Majesty's Person and* Government, with these
Clauses. 1. That such as shall refuse to take the Oaths to his Majesty, shall
be Subject to the Forfeitures and Penalties of Popish Recusants, Convict. 2. To
inflict a Penalty on such as shall by Writing, or otherwise Declare, that King
William is not Lawful and Rightful King of these Realms, or that the late King
James, or the pretended Prince of Wales, or any other Person, than according to
the Act of Settlement of the Crown, has any Right to the Crown of these Realm^.
3. To ratify and confirm the Association entered into all his Majestys good
Subjects, for the Preservation of His Majesty's Person and Government. 4. That
no Person shall be capable of any Office of Profit or Trust, Civil or Military,
that shall not sign the said Association. And 5. That the same Penalties be
inflicted on such as come out of France, as upon those that go thither.

Nor must we forget that wise and important Resolution of the same honorable
Body, in pursuance of which 'twas enacted, That whenever it shall please God to
afflict these Realms by the Death of His Present Majesty* the Parliament then
in being shall not be dissolv d thereby, but shall continue until the next Heir
to the Crown in Succession, according to the late Act of Settlement, shall
dissolve the same.

'Twas also Ordered, That the Speaker, upon Presenting the Association to His
Majesty, should make it the Request of the House, that His Majesty would please
to order, that the said Association of the House, and all other Associations by
the Commons of England, be lodged among the Records in the Tower, to remain as
a perpetual Memorial of their Loyalty and Affection to His Majesty.

The Associations of both Houses were almost the same, as to the sense; and
therefore I shall content my self with inserting that of the House of Commons,
because of its Conformity to the abovementioned Resolutions.

WHereas there has been a Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy, Formed and Carried
on by Papists, and other Wicked and Traitorous Persons, for Assassinating his
Majesty's Royal Person, in Order to Encourage an Invasion from France, to
Subvert our Religion, Laws, and Liberty: We whose Names are hereunto
Subscribed, do Hertily, Sincerely, and Solemnly Profess, Testify and Declare,
That his Present Majesty, King William, is Rightful and Lawful King of these
Realms. And we do Mutually Promise and Engage to Stand by and Assist each
other, to the utmost of our Power, in the Support and Defense of His Majesty's
most Sacred Person and Government, against the late King James, and all his
Adherents. And in case his Majesty come to any Violent or Untimely Death (which
God forbid) We do hereby further Freely and Unanimously Oblige our Selves, to
Unite, Associate, and Stand by each other, in Revenging the same upon his
Enemies, and their Adherents; and in Supporting and Defending the Succession of
the Crown, according to an Act made in the First Year of the Reign of King
William and Queen Mary, Entitled, An Act Declaring the Rights and Liberties of
the Subject, and Settling the Succession of the Crown.

His Majesty received the Association very graciously, and express d the Sense
he had of the Zeal and Affection of his Subjects in these obliging Terms.

Gentlemen,

I Take this as a most Convincing and most Acceptable Evidence of your
Affection: And as you have freely Associated your Selves for Our Common Safety,
I do Heartily enter into the same Association; and will be always ready with
you and the rest of My Good Subjects, to Venture My Life against all who shall
endeavor to subvert the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of England.

And afterward His Majesty was pleased to say, That he would take care, that
this, and all other Associations presented to Him, should be Lodged among the
Records in the Tower.

While the Parliament was taking such effectual measures for the Security of
his Majesty and the Nation; 'twas thought fit, in the most legal and regular
manner, to satisfy offended Justice, by the Conviction and Punishment of some
of the most notorious Conspirators. 'Twou'd be needless to give the Reader a
particular account, either of the Proceedings at the Trials, or of the
Behavior of the Dying Criminals; since there can be nothing added to the
public Relations of the former, and there is nothing remarkable in the latter
but Hypocrisy and Passion. This is the genuine Character of the Declarations
they left us of their last Thoughts. One of 'em owns the Crime for which
Charnock.
he was condemned with a kind of impious Ostentation; and yet, in another place
of the same Paper, he seems to acknowledge the Infamy of it, by endeavoring to
vindicate his Party from having any hand in it. Another, in spite of Nature,
would Sir John Friend.
act the Part of a Hero, and was not asham d to pretend that he died a Martyr,
tho it is plain both by his Conviction and Confession, that his Punishment was
the just Reward of his Treasonable Practices to betray the Nation to Papists
and Foreigners. One of 'em is angry with the King, Rookwood.
because he wou d not pardon a barbarous Assassin, and was the first Person
that ever had the Confidence to charge His Majesty with Cruelty: And another
leaves us a terrible Instance Cranbourn.
of the Divine Justice in hardening impenitent Offenders, by ending his Life in
a Transport of Fury.

But since nothing can excuse us from doing Justice even to our most barbarous
and implacable Enemies, I think my self obliged to make a more honorable
mention of Sir William Parkins. He acknowledges the Assassination to be a
Crime, and repents that he was concerned in it. He seems to have been acted by
a mistaken Notion of Honor, and to have aimed at an Appearance of Magnanimity,
which he did not well understand. For he wou^d not be persuaded to name the
Accomplices of his Crime, tho he had some reason to believe, that an ingenuous
Confession might have procured him a Pardon. A generous Principle, if it had
been better placed, and if, by preserving his Friends, he had not saved the
Enemies of his Country.

The Convicted Criminals received the Sentence and Punishment which the Law
appoints for Traitors; and their Quarters were exposed in the most oublic
places, as a terrible Example of the just Severity of an injured Nation, and an
Admonition to their Traitorous Friends, that those who are not capable of
nobler Sentiments might at least be restrained by Fear.

In the mean time the Faction perceiving that all their pernicious Artifices
were either discovered or defeated, resolved at least, to pay the last Honors
to their expiring Cause. Three Jacobite Clergymen, pretending to be Ministers
of the Church of England, under pretext of assisting Sir John Friend and Sir
William Parkins a^ their Death, gave 'em a general Absolution for all their
Sins, without obliging 'em either to confess or declare their Abhorrence of the
particular Crime for which they suffered; and by such an impudent and irregular
Action put a public Affront upon the Government and the Nation.

Two of 'em were apprehended in order to be prosecuted for so heinous a
Misdeameanor; and, in the mean time, the Church, of which they pretended to be
Members condemned their Proceedings in a Public Declaration of its Judgment on
that occasion, which was signed by Fourteen Bishops who were then in Town, and
approved by those who A Declaration of the sense of Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
were absent. In that Paper, they declare that they disclaim and detest the
Principles and Practices both of the Criminals, and the Three Ministers who
assisted 'em; that they disown and abhor 'em, as highly Schismatical and
Seditious, dangerous both to the Church and State, etc.

Thus while our Enemies both at home and abroad, were mourning the Fate of
their blasted Project, while they suffered all the Horrors and Torments of Rage
and Despair, the constant Attendants of Disappointed Revenge; we had the
pleasure to behold the happy Period of the dismal Tragedy, and the blessed Event
of the blackest and most barbarous Design that ever was set on foot. We
observed, with inexpressible satisfaction, that our Almighty Protector had
convinced our Enemies, by a very unwelcome Experience, of two important Truths,
which they could never endure to believe, That His Majesty's Life is necessary
for the Preservation of his People; and that his Subjects are inseparably
united to him, both by Duty, Interest, and Inclination. This is a glorious
Confirmation of the Title which they presume to controvert, and a convincing
Proof of the Justice of his Cause, which God himself has vouchsafed to
establish and confirm, by the execrable Projects that were formed against him.

The World has been so long accustomed to see his Majesty expose his Life for
the Preservation of his Subjects; he has braved Death so often, and run through so
many Dangers in our Defense, that it cannot be supposed we should be surpised
at every new Instance of his Generosity. But that the Preservation of his
single Life should secure a whole Nation from impending Ruin; that the Rebels
at home durst not attempt to disturb our Quiet, because they knew that he was
alive; that our Foreign Enemies should immediately retire upon the News of his
Deliverance; that the whole Nation should place their only Confidence in the
Person of their Sovereign, and enter into a solemn and unanimous Confederacy to
Defend his Life, and Revenge his Death, there is something so surprizingly
Great in such a Combination of Wonders, and so conspicuous Marks of the Finger
of God in the several Instances of our Happiness, that 'twou'd be equally
impious and absurd, to ascribe our Deliverance to a lucky concourse of
fortuitous Accidents.

As His Majesty's Life is our only Security, and the Foundation of all our
Hopes; the happy Union that is now so firmly established betwixt us and our
Sovereign, is of no less importance to the rest of Europe. To this we owe the
advantageous Change in the Posture of Affairs, abroad; it is this that has
reduced our Enemies to more reasonable Terms, and makes way for the Conclusion
of a general and solid Peace.

When the long expected Time shall come, that the Just Desires of those who
long to see Peace and Tranquillity once more established in Europe shall be
accomplished; it will appear, and be acknowledged by the grateful World, that
as England was delivered from Slavery and Oppression, by the Blessing of God
upon His Majestys generous Undertaking, so 'twas England that had the greatest
share in the general Deliverance of the Christian World.

Time and Experience will ere long convince us of this great and important
Truth, and Posterity will for ever acknowledge the Immortal Obligation. And
even tho it were possible that future Ages should forget their Great
Benefactor, the Benefit will remain, notwithstanding their Ingratitude, as long
as there shall be Laws in England, or a Free People in Europe.

FINIS.

