AN ADDRESS OF THE Dissenting Ministers (In and about the City of London) To
the KING and QUEEN, upon their Accession to the CROWN. With their Majesty's
ANSWER to it.
To the KING.
May it please your Majesty,
THE Series of Successful Events that has attended your Glorious Enterprise for
the saving these Kingdoms from so imminent and destructive Evils, has been so
visible and extraordinary, that it may force an Acknowledgment of the Divine
Providence from those who deny it, and raises Admiration in all who believe and
reverence it. The Beauty and Speed of this happy Work, are the bright
Signatures of his Hand who creates Deliverance for his People. The less of
Humane Power, the more of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness has been conspicuous
in it. If the Deliverance had been obtained by fierce and bloody Battles,
Victory it self had been dejected and sad, and our Joy had been mixed with
afflicting Bitterness. But as the Sun ascending the Horizon, dispels without
noise the darkness of the Night; so Your serene Presence has, without Tumults
and Disorders, chased away the Darkness that invaded us. In the sense of this
astonishing Deliverance, we desire with all possible ardency of Affection, to
magnify the glorious Name of God the Author of it, by whose entire Efficacy the
Means have been successful: And we cannot without a warm rapture of
Thankfulness, recount our Obligations to your Majesty the happy Instrument of
it. Your illustrious Greatness of Mind, in an Undertaking of such vast Expense;
Your Heroic Zeal, in exposing Your most precious Life in such an adventurous
Expedition; Your wise Conduct and unshaken Resolution in prosecuting Your great
Ends, are above the loftiest flights of Language, exceed all Praise. We owe to
your Majesty the two greatest and most valuable Blessings that we can enjoy,
the preservation of the True Religion, our most Sacred Treasure, and the
recovery of the falling State, and establishing it upon just Foundations.
According to our Duty, we promise unfainting Fidelity, and true Allegiance to
your Majesty's Person and Government, We are encouraged, by Your gracious
Promise upon our first Address, to humbly desire and hope, that your Majesty
will be pleased, by your Wisdom and Authority to establish a firm Union of your
Protestant Subjects in the Matters of Religion, by making the Rule of
Christianity to be the Rule of Conformity. Our blessed Union in the Purity and
Peace of the Gospel, will make this Church a fair and lovely Type of Heaven,
and terrible to our Antichristian Enemies: This will make England the steady
Center from whence a powerful Influence will be derived for the support of the
Interest of Reformed Christianity abroad: This will bring immortal Honor to
your Name, above the Trophies and Triumphs of the most renowned Conquerors. We
do assure your Majesty, that we shall cordially embrace the Terms of Union
which the ruling Wisdom of our Savior has prescribed in his Word. We shall not
trespass farther upon your Royal Patience, but shall offer up our fervent
Prayers to the King of Kings, that he will please to direct your Majesty by his
unerring Wisdom, and always incline your Heart to his Glory, and encompass your
Sacred Person with his Favor as with a Shield, and make your Government a
universal Blessing to these Kingdoms.

His Majesty's Answer to the Ministers.
I Take kindly your good Wishes; and whatever is in my Power, shall be employed
for obtaining a Union among you. I do assure you of my Protection and Kindness.

THE ADDRESS of the Dissenting Ministers to the QUEEN, upon her Accession to
the CROWN.
May it please your Majesty,
YOUR happy Arrival into your Native Country, and Accession to the Crown, has
diffused an universal Joy through this Kingdom. It Is an auspicious Sign of
public Felicity, when Supreme Virtue and Supreme Dignity meet in the same
Person. Your inviolable firmness in the profession of the Truth, and exemplary
Piety, are the most Radiant Jewels in your Crown. The Luster of your
Conversation, unstained in the midst of tempting Vanities, and adorned with
every Grace, recommends Religion as the most honorable and amiable Quality,
even to those who are averse from hearing Sermons, and apt to despise serious
Instructions and Excitations to be Religious. We humbly desire your Majesty
will be pleased, by your Wisdom and Goodness, to compose the Differences
between your Protestant Subjects, in Things of less moment concerning Religion.
We hope those Reverend Persons who conspire with us in the main End, the Glory
of God and the Public Good, will consent to the Terms of Union wherein all the
Reformed Churches agree. We shall sincerely address our Requests to God, that
he will please to pour down in a rich abundance his Blessings upon your
Majesty's Person and Government, and preserve. You to his Heavenly Kingdom.

The QUEEN'S Answer.
I Will use all Endeavors for the obtaining a Union that is necessary for the
edifying of the Church. I desire your Prayers.

LICENSED

May 11. 1689.
LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.


