An ADDITION TO THE CASE of the Paper-sellers Humbly offered to this Present
PARLIAMENT Against the PAPER-BILL.
WHereas the Paper-sellers of London being very sensible that the Bill offered
to this honorable House by the New Company of White-Paper-makers would not
answer the Name and pretended Design of it, but on the contrary be very
destructive to the general Trade of Paper-making, and the Ruin of many
hundreds of Families now maintained by the Making, Selling and Working of all
sorts of Paper, did therefore Petition, as the Ancient Paper-makers had before
done, that the said Bill might not pass, and in a true state of the Case and
Circumstances of Paper-making, have, as they humbly conceive, made it appear
that the said Bill was contrived for sinister ends and purposes of Private Men,
and to carry on a Monopoly against the Common and Statute Laws of this Realm,
and expressly against a Statute, 21. Jac. 1. cap. 3. against Monopolies and
Dispensations with Pena! Laws, and that the same does no way. tend to any
public Good, but would be very grievous to many of their Majesty's Subjects,
which the said New Company being not able to give a sufficient Answer to, by
several unttue and reflecting Papers, and other disingenuous Practices have
endeavored to insinuate,

That they the said Paper-sellers have combined with diverse Persons to
discourage and oppose the increasing of White Writing and Printing Paper in
this Kingdom: It is therefore humbly offered.

That the said Paper-sellers are, and will be ready when they shall have leave
to be heard by their Council, to make it appear as they now humbly aver; that
they have not in any of their Proceedings discouraged, and do not desire to
obstruct the making of greater quantities of White-Writing and Printing Paper
in England, which is evident, in that the said Paper-sellers or the Ancient
Paper-makers, though they have suffered for fifteen Years past very much by the
Patentees, interloping into their Trade and Livelihoods, have not endeavored
as they might have done to stop or hinder the said Patentees in their
Prosecuting to make any sort of White or Brown Paper, as they do at this
present day, though they endeavor to conceal that they make Brown Paper; of
all which sorts the said Paper-sellers have from time to time bought of them,
and frequently advised and instructed them what sorts of Paper were best for
the Markets.

That the said Paper-sellers can make it appear the late Patents and Grant for
a Corporation to Monopolize the sole making of White-Writing and Printing Paper
were not only against Law, but have greatly hindered the making of that
Manfacture in England, the Ancient Paper-makers having been thereby threatened
and overawed from making thereof.

The said Paper-sellers do also most humbly offer that there is a considerable
number of the Ancient Paper-makers now working in Mills very proper for making
of Writing and Printing Paper, and have Workmen who by their Experience well
know the best way of sorting white Rags to make fine Writing and Printing
Paper, and by reason of the present hindrances from abroad, all the Artists in
England are few enough to make a sufficient supply of Paper for the necessary
use of this Kingdom.

And whereas the said Companies last Paper does insinuate that by their Bill is
reserved to the Ancient Paper-makers the freedom of making any sort of Paper of
the value by them formerly made, the same is untrue, for that it will, if it
should pass, confine them not to make any White-Writing or Printing Paper above
the value of four Shillings per Ream, when as they have made many sorts of a
much greater value; besides if the said New Company were as they have pretended
to be the sole Inventors and Artists of making such sorts, they need not desire
to confine others at all.

There are many more Contradictions and false Insinuations contained in the
said New Company's Papers, which the said Paper-sellers to avoid Prolixity
forbear to take notice of.

The whole considered, it appears unnecessary both in respect of the
skillfulness of the Ancient Paper-makers in the said Manufacture, and that they
want no Stock nor Mills to manage the same, and that this Kingdom will be
supplied better by allowing a free and open Trade to all Persons that are
brought up to, or understand, the making of all sorts of Paper, and the New
Companies Bill being in the opinion of learned Council, to confirm a notorious
Monopoly, and as such will be attended with destructive and mischevious
consequences to the Public, the said Paper-sellers most Humbly pray the said
Bill may not pass into an Act.

This is Printed upon Paper (without the Letter W.) made in England, and not by
the New Company nor Mr. Watkins which the said Company have unadvisedly
Challenged the Paper-sellers to produce.


