Physical Reflections UPON A LETTER WRITTEN By J. Denis Professor of PHILOSOPHY
and the MATHEMATICS, TO Monsieur de Montmor Counselor to the French King, and
Master of Requests.

Concerning a New way of Curing sundry Diseases BY TRANSFUSION of BLOOD.

BY GEO. ACTON a Spagyricis Regiis in Ordinario.

LONDON, Printed, by T. R. for J. Martyn, at the Bell without Temple-Barr, 1668.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
HAd not the subject of this following discourse, been the discovery of the
most acute and curious Genius of this age, the Virtuosi of the Royal Societies
of London and Paris, and the quality I bear, of your Majesty's servant, given
me some title to your Majesty's Protection, I durst not have presumed to front
such a bagatelle as this, with an Adress to the mightiest Monarch in Europe;
But a Cherry or Rose preventing the ordinary seasons of the maturity of the
rest; by their rare singularity are rendered acceptable to Princes, not for
their own real value (which is none) but novelty, which challenges their
acceptance. And Sir, the Experiments of Healing by Transfusion of Blood, are
both New and Curious, and I hope these Reflections may cast some Radiatiations
of light upon the obscure and devious paces of Nature, such as may perhaps
discover some of her more hidden recesses, especially in her regiment of Humane
Bodies. I have (as far as was possible) avoided hard and obscure words, but
having taken upon me to inquire into the reasons, and examine the admirable
success of these late Experiments, by the Test of Hermetick Philosophy, it was
not possible for me to avoid such Terms as this Art necessarily requires to
render it intelligible; though (if I mistake not) this method gratifies the
understanding with far more evident and apparent reason than that of the
Peripateticks, commonly received in the Schools; I need not labor to persuade
Your Majesty into a good opinion of the noble Science of Chemistry, which
solely possesses all the keys of the three Kingdoms of Nature, the natural
propensity of Your Royal Genius, strongly inclines You to the love of all
Learning, but more particularly of this, the most worthy perhaps of all humane
Sciences, such as that anciently amongst the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Arabians,
etc. Many of their Kings have gloried more in the knowledge of this Art, than
in the luster of their Diadems, such were Hermes, Tresmegistus, Morienus,
Calib, Alphonso King of Portugal, etc. and although the ignorance and
Thrasonick boasting of Pseudochymists, have almost brought it into contempt in
this Age, yet it is a most undoubted truth, That Paracelsus, Van Helmont, and
many others, have been able to conquer all Diseases Gallenical Physicians now
call incurable, and that with great facility; in effect, true Philosophers have
not only had Universal Medicines for Humane, but Metallic bodies also,
insomuch that the Chrysopaean Art is said so to have flourished in Egypt, about
the year 294. that the mighty Emperor Dioclesian could never conquer that
people by force, till he had by Stratagem in time of peace possessed himself of
the Books, together with the Artificers, and by that means subjected them to
his Empire. But Mr. Denis's Letter gives me only opportunity at present to
expose some few Physical observations, tending to health and prolongation of
life, both which, with excess of all humane felicity, may the King of Kings by
the guidance of his inviolable providence, inseparably annex to your Majesty's
Crown and Sacred Person.

Your Majesty's most Loyal and most Obedient Subject and Servant. GEO. ACTON.

Physical Reflections UPON A LETTER, etc.
THat which I find most remarkable in Mr. Denis's Letter, is first, the
Transfusion of the Blood of a Mangie Dog into a Sound one, to try whether the
Mange would be communicated with the blood; the Mangie Dog is found cured; and
the other who had received his blood, not become Mangie.

The next is the Experiment upon a Youth, who had for the space of above two
Months, been tormented with a contumacious and violent Fever, which (says the
Narrative) obliged his Physicians to bleed him twenty times, in order to
assuage the excessive heat. Before this Disease he was not observed to be of a
lumpish dull Spirit, his Memory was happy enough, and he seemed cheerful and
nimble enough of body: but since the violence of this Fever, his Wit seemed
wholly sunk, his Memory perfectly lost, and his body so heavy and drowsy, that
he was not fit for any thing: to trouble you no longer with every particular of
the relation; They opened his vein, and took about three ounces of blood, so
black and thick, it could hardly form it self into a thread to fall into the
Porrenger: At the same time they brought a Lamb, whose Carotis Artery was
prepared, out of which, they emitted into the Young man's vein about three times
as much of its Arterial blood, as he had emitted into the dish, and so stopped
the Orifice of the vein as usually in other Phlebotomies; being asked how he
found himself, he said during the operation, he felt a very great heat all
along his Arm, but in brief, he presently became more cheerful and lively, eat
his meat very well, and showed a clear and smiling Countenance; the next day
slept better, and from that time got the victory over his drowsiness, he had no
longer slowness of Spirit, nor heaviness of Body, grew fat visibly, and is
(says Mr. Denis) a subject of amazement to all that know him.

Though Mr. Denis has sufficiently answered the weak objections aagainst the
Practice of this new Art, yet, how the sound infused blood of one Animal,
mingling with the infected Mass of another (and especially, of a different
Species,) induces renovation and health into the diseased, without receiving
infection from so desperate acommixtion, seems worthy of a further inquiry than
has been yet made.

As to the Experiment of the exchange of blood, between the Mangie Dog and the
Sound one, by which the first receives his cure, the other remains uninfected,
Mr. Denis inquires whether the blood of the Mangie Dog were putrefied, and
corrupted in his veins or not: As if putrefaction of the blood, were
necessarily the efficient cause of the Disease; but by the common experience of
Anatomy, the blood is found not to putrefy within the vein many days after
death; much less than it is to be suspected ordinarily of putrefaction in the
living vein, where, by continual circulation, and the irrigation of the vital
Balsome of its volatile salt, congelation, the beginning of putrefaction is
most powerfully refitted. Besides, the Adepti know how to rectify the blood in
all Fevers, the Gallenists call putrid, (cito tuto and jucunde) with the
precipitate Diaphoretick of Paracelsus; But surely, if putrefaction be the
repulsion of the Crasis of the thing putrefied, necessarily inducing a new
form, the blood must either be granted not putrefied in the Vessels, or a
regression from privation to habit, which is absurd.

In the same Experiment, Mr. Denis supposing the blood of the Mangie Dog to be
wholly corrupted in his veins, imagines it probable that the cooler blood of
the sound Dog, alaying the extreme heat of the other, may work the cure;
ascribing the Disease to the Transpiration of corrupted blood, and that, to an
extraordinary heat. But the blood being supposed to be vit^^^^ to prevent its
difflation by cooling, were sooner to introduce death, than a remedy; besides,
Transpiration is not the effect of heat effective, but excitative only; for the
blood is prop^^ly volatiz'd by the Vital spirit and its own Ferment, whose
operation is more powerful than that of Fire; for Glass held for the last act
of Fire, is really further reducible by the help of Ferment into water. So then
the action of extreme heat (such as is supposed here) would rather have
desiccated and and fixed the blood than have moved it to Transpiration; Be it
then properly the act of the Vital spirit and Ferment, and not of heat, and
consequently no need of cooling in our case.

Now as to the Disease it self, I take it to be the excretion of an Acid salt
from the blood, closing with Hippocrates Acidum, Acre, Amarum, Ponticum, etc.
for Morbifick causes. This hostil Acidity (as we see in Tartar of Wine, which
is no other than a congelation of the Acetous part of the Wine into Salt,)
beginning some degree of fixation of the volatile Salt of the blood, contrary
to the scope and intention of Nature, which is, to have it totally volatile and
transpirable without any foeces, is by the prepotency of the Vital spirit and
Ferment, driven out together with the half fixed Salt into the skin, where for
want of volatility, it sticks and turns to the Mange. Hence I suppose that if
the sound Dog had been coupled up with the other for some time, he had been
more likely to have received his contagion, than by the Transfusion of blood.

The Experience upon the youth laboring of a violent fever and cured by
immission of the Arterial blood of a Lamb into his vein, is more observable,
as being more applicable to practice; now As to the fever; I take it for a
Maxim, Quidquid in sanis edit actiones sanas, idipsum in morbis edit actiones
vitiatas. But in health the vital Spirit naturally warmes a man, the same
Spirit therefore aestuates in a fever, vehemently striving to expel the
occasional matter of the Disease, and this I take to be the (...), or Spiritus
impetum faciens of Hyppocrates Van Helmont proves this by the example of a
thorn run into the finger, which though both actually and potentially cold,
nevertheless quickly raises a burning, pain, and phlegmot in the part,
inasmuch as the sensitive Spirit being hurt by the thorn, provokes the Archeus
to expulsion, in which endeavor, the Spirit is first accended and then the
part: Hence expert Physicians direct their cure of fevers and other acute
Diseases, to the pacation of the Archeus, without purging or letting of blood;
how contrary was the procedure of those Physicians who blooded this youth
twenty times to assuage the heat of his fever; but to how little purpose these
large profusions of blood are, may appear by the miserable death of Pr.
Ferdinand Governer of Flanders, who in the year 41 fell sick of a fever, his
Physicians (according to the method of these) with reiterated Phlebotomies so
exhausted the stock of his blood, that being dead, and his Heart, Lungs, Liver,
Veins, and Arteries dissected in the presence of Van Helmont, there was scarce
found a spoonful of blood left in his body, and yet the day before his death,
he had sustained as violent a fit of his fever as at first; I leave it then
to the Judgment of the indifferent Reader that has not Subjugated his reason
to the Authority and vulgar practice of others to the contrary, to judge
whether Bleeding be a proper Remedy for a fever, when the Exantlation of
almost the whole Mass of blood, had not so much as made any Diminution of the
Paroxisme. But to strengthen this my opinion a little further, which seems to
be singular, easily to gain credit, take this familiar Instance: Let a vessel
of new Wine before its clarification, be supposed to be agitated by a vehement
Fermentation, which motion in the Wine (as in our case of the fever) is stirred
up by the natural force and activity of its Spirit, striving to attain the
virtue of its perfection, which cannot be but by the shaking off, and
Separation of the Tartarous and other wild Heterogenious and Immissible parts
from the truly Vinous and Homogenial; the scope of Nature is the very same in
the fit of a fever, viz. Separation, now let any man to stop this Fermentation
draw off a part of the Wine, and he shall soon perceive that although he has
lessened the quantity of the Wine, he has by this means made no alteration in
the quality, the Fermentative principles in the remaining part, keeping still
their natural Energie in proportion to the whole: but if an untimely
Fermentation happen, tending to the destruction of the Wine, let him but cast
in a due proportion of milk, and he shall quickly find that furious orgasme of
the Wine to cease; so that this turbulent motion in the Wine either ceases
naturally, the Heterogenious parts being separated by due Fermentation, or else
by Sedation, as in the experiment by milk, the like method seems most rational
in the cure of a fever, either by Medicines separative, of which I prefer
Diaphoreticks, or sedative without phlebotomie, by which there always happens
some irreparable loss; for though not only the blood, but influous Spirit too,
be restorable by our daily food, yet the loss of the insitous or innate Spirit
is never recoverable by art or Nature; if it were it would not be impossible by
art to render men immortal. If then either the insuccesfulness of the practice,
or reason may prevail; I advise the Gallenists to make use of powerful
Diaphoreticks in rectifying the blood, or such sedative Medicines as can quiet
the enormontick Spirit, rather than this needless custom of Bleeding.
Especially since the Angina, Peripneumonia, and Pleurisy can more speedily and
securely be cured without it. The Experimentor here seems to be well satisfied
with his conceit of stagnation of the blood in the vessels, thinking his
opinion sufficiently confirmed by the issuing forth of a blood blacker and
thicker than ordinary upon the opening of the patients vein. But the
Aethiopians in their youthful and most vigourous estate of health, are said to
have their blood very black, with little or no Serum. And upon inspection of
the blood of near 200 several persons drawn in one day (it being a custom
amongst the Bores in Flanders to be blooded upon a certain day) there were
found all sorts of colors and consistencies the most dissimilar imaginable to
be found in blood, and the several men from whom such variety was drawn, all of
them in a perfect state of health. Van Helmont (well acquainted with the
excellent Medicinal use of the blood) goes further, and making choice of the
most different sorts, First, tryes them by their analyzes, then by their
virtues, administering them prepared severally according to Art, and finds them
(notwithstanding their diversity of colors) of equal force in medicine; so
that this sort of divination by color seems full of uncertainty. As Dyers out
of the same vate, and same tinging liquor, at the same time give several
colors, according as the several pieces are variously praedispos'd; so perhaps
the univocal liquor of the Stomach in its progression to the liver, meeting by
the way with several Ferments, receives several tinctures, without any
Depravation at all of its Substance. For proof of this the foregoing
experiments may suffice.

Now as to the process; the Arterial blood of the Lamb, is immitted into the
vein, of the man the Patient finds a great heat all a long his Arm but not any
further. The reason perhaps why he finds a heat in his Arm and no further, may
be the impetuosity of motion in the narrow chanel of the Arm by the irruition
of a quantity of fresh blood, which entering by the subclavia into the large
ascendant trunck of the Cava, though quickening the motion there, yet having
more room and being more immerg'd, the excessive heat ceases, for no more new
blood enters this great channel than passed the lesser; besides, motion of
impulse is so much the quicker, by how much it is nearer to the impellent. Nor
shall I doubt to assign the cure both of his side and fever, principally to
the nimbler circulation of the blood of the Patient, actuated as well by the
extrinsick motion of the Arterial blood of the Lamb, as by its tenuity, for it
may probably be supposed much thinner than the Venal blood of the Patient,
since naturally the Arterial blood is thinner and moves faster than the Venal.
Nature seems to teach us not only the use, but even necessity of a nimble
circulation of the blood by stirring up quicker and stronger pulsations in the
Heart and Artery during the crisis; here I must forsake Gallen and not allow
the principal use of the pulses to be Ad cordis refrigerium et fuliginum
explosionem; for the Heart and Artery of a frog (without need of refrigeration
or fuliginous explosion, because actually cold) being dissected alive, pulse as
in other Animals whose blood is actually hott; and if you will say that
potential suffices; It seems absurd to suppose a thing barely in Potentia,
Actu jam agere; it is more likely then on the contrary, to be Ad caloris
augmentum, and that for the most part; but always for the production of the
vital Spirit, and participation of it, to the languishing mass; and this by
traction of Air by the Arterial vein and venal Artery into the left ventricle
of the heart; for Gallen esteems Air as it were the food of the vital Spirit,
and the learned Chemists (not every distilling Mountebanck) know how by the
help of Air, to volatize the most fixed Alkalious salts, that the force of the
most vehement Calcination can produce: so then Nature seems rather to intend
Volatization than Refrigeration, by the pulses; for as Bartholinus observes in
acute fevers, and most violent Ebullitions of the blood, the pulse is often
weak and low, which otherwise ought then to be strongest. This being granted,
let us see in our case, what probability of quickening, the motion and
volatization of our Patients diseased blood by this immission of the blood of a
Lamb; and what other benefit may occur by this commixion tending to a cure.

I have already showed how the motion of the Patients blood, might be advanced
by the Impulsion and Attenuation of the other; there is yet a more natural way,
which is, by the induction of a new Ferment. This, Hippocrates calls Divine,
and is the undoubted parent of natural motion, Cum tendentia (says the
excellent Dr. Willis in his book de Fermentatione) ad perfectionem, vel propter
mutationem in aliud. Now the motion required in our case, tending to the
Melioration of the blood, and consequent cure of the fever, is, that it be
thoroughly volatiz'd, and disposed to an easy transpiration; Hence Paracelsus
and Van Helmont (next to their great universal medicines conquering all
diseases) commend the volatile salt of Rosemary, Sage, Rue, etc. for the cure of
fevers, and the volatile salt of Tartar, for the cure of almost all diseases;
we see how soon a little Spirit of Wine cheers and quickens the vital Spirit,
by mingling it self presently with it by reason of their Analogy; but the
Spirit of Wine is nothing but the solution of its volatile Salt; for it may by
the spirit of Urine or Salt of Tartar, be corporified into a manifest and
palpable saline concretion, and indeed it is in this instance by contact of the
Vital Ferment presenty turned into a volatile saline nature, such as is the
Vital spirit it self. Now that the Vital spirit is of a saline nature, seems
evident by the testimony of Sense, for if a part happen to be torpid or
benumbed, by any accidental prohibition for a while of the influx of the Animal
spirit, which acquires no formal transmutation in the medulla oblongata, nor
other difference from the Vital, sane gradu perfectivo, upon the return I say
of this spirit to the succor of the part laboring, we find a kind of stinging
and pricking, and infallible Index of its saltness; as is its total difflation
in healthful bodies, of its volatility: I mean here the Influous spirit, which
is continually restored, not to the Insitous, whose decay is naturally attended
with irrepairable weakness and its total extinction or efflation, with present
death. Let us now see if we can find such active principles in the blood of the
Lamb thus emitted without diminution of its vital energie, as may suffice for
the actuating of the languishing Ferment of the blood of the Patient.

It cannot be denied, but that the blood of Beasts as well as men, is full of
Vital spirit, and volatile Salt. Fernelius (de spiritu viventium) defines the
spirit of all living creatures to be Corpus aetherium, and Aristotle holds it
to be of a Caelestial Divine nature; answering to the Element of the Stars.
There cannot probably then be so great a dissimilarity between the Vital spirit
of the Lamb, and that of the Man, but that the first, (elaborated in its way to
the patients heart, by the Action of the Innate spirit implanted in every part,
and afterward by the force of the Vital Ferment in the left Ventricle, which
Helmont calls (Maxim vitale and luminosum) may easily be transmuted, and
assimilated into the latter; and the Archeus of the Patient thus fortified
might well overcome his disease, Nature being her self (if freed from
impediment) Morborum Curatrix.

Now as to the volatile Salt, it may be esteemed the Balsome of life, and
preserver of the whole body from corruption, upon whose Economy depends the
just Circulation, and (as I said) the Difflation of the blood; and upon these,
the preservation of the life of the Individual: This Salt resolves the
Congelations of extravasated blood, opens Obstructions in the Veins, resists
and conquers Acidity; Omnem Aciditatem quam attingit, perimit, says Helmont;
but Acidity (according to him) out of the stomach is inimicous to the whole
body, Exorbitans Pestilensve impressio est in cruore si acescat, ast si a venis
spreta ejiciatur, Apostema parit ubicunque id locorum contigerit. Besides these
more than sufficiently powerful Operations of the Vital spirit and Volatile
Salt, there are yet in the blood innumerable secret medicinal Virtues. The
blood of a sound man prepared according to Paracelsus, is allowed by the
consent of the most learned and experienced Chemists, to cure Radically the
Epilepsic Palsy, Apoplexy, exulcerated lungs, and Pleurifie; and (if Faber
deserve credit) may worthily be esteemed amongst the greatest Arcana. The blood
of an Ass is said to cure a Quotidian Fever, and of an Asses Colt the Yellow
Jaundies. The blood of a male Goat rightly prepared (for as it is found in
Apothecaries shops it fails) certainly cures the Pleurisy and Peripneumonia.
The blood of an Ox is said to cure the Dysenterie. The blood of a Cat cures
the Falling Sickness and Herpes. Of the blood of a male Deer is made a Balsom
against the Gout. The blood of a Fox is an excellent remedy against the Stone
in the Reins or Bladder. If then Blood extravasated be endued with so many
admirable and powerful virtues, what may we expect from it communicated (as in
this our Experiment) without any loss at all of its mumial virtues? surely such
an addition of Vital treasure to the depauperated store, must needs enrich it
with new strength, quicken all the Vital faculties, and might with very good
reason overcome our Patients Fever.

There is yet a consideration which perhaps may not seem vain to such as are
acquainted with Hermetick Philosophy, and it is this, a Lamb is esteemed to be
the meekest and most peaceable Animal Nature has brought forth; why then might
not his blood sigillated with conformable Idea's, by the imagination of the
Archeus, introduce such a pacation into the tumultuous blood of the Patient as
was sufficient for his cure? For thus certain Arcana prepared by secret Art
(unknown to all vulgar Chemists) by inducing only rest and in the Enormontick
spirit, are esteemed by Paracelsus and Van Helmont (and some of them known to
my self) for almost Universal Medicines.

Since then the practice of this new method of Healing by Transfusion of Blood,
seems to be warranted both by reason and experience, I advise the curious
Experimentor, to make trial upon Animals of the longest life, such as are
Staggs, Eagles, Crows, etc. for the prolongation of life; And in the cure of
Diseases, to make choice of such Animals as by their specific proprieties are
found to have curative virtues peculiar to several Diseases.

And thus I have given a guess at the reason of this new and (till of late)
unheard of way of curing, by Tranfusion of Blood, which if I have erred, let it
serve for my excuse, that no man has gone before me to show the way.

FINIS.

