(...) That True (...) Word is the (...) of Divine (...)

As it was made (...) General Assembly (...) Massachusetts (...) NEW ENGLAND
May 27. 1685. (...) ELECTION there.

By Mr. WILLIAM ADAMS.

Mat. 3. 9. Think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham (...) our
father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham.

Prove. 29. 23. A man's pride shall bring him low: but Honor shall (...) hold
the humble in spirit.

Zeph. 3. 12. I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and (...)
people, and they shall trust in the Name of the Lord.

BOSTON in NEW (...) Printed by Richard (...)

Isai. 66. 2. For a^ tho^ (...) has my (...) (...), and all says the Lo^ but
to ^is (...) will I (...) and of a (...) ^rit, and (...) ^th at my (...)
THis Chapter and the foregoing contain the last and (...) ing S^ on of this
Prophet, in the public A^ce o^ (...) Jews, (...) that did concern and was
proposed to the General ^dy of that People. in which Discourse the Lord does by
the Prophet declare the Removal of the Glory and of his Kingdom from them to
another People: and withal mentions the ^rticular sins, and their Obstinacy in
them; for which he would (...) deal with them in removing from and rejecting of
them. But yet notwithstanding to evidence his Love and Faithfulness to this
people that had been so near him, and that he had so graciously manifested
Himself to: the Lord promises to preserve a Remna^ in this calamity, whom He
would follow with signal favors where ever they should be cast, and reserve to
better times. In the finishing and making up of his Prophecy the Prophet
intermixes many things by way of Comfort to the godly, and Threatening to the
wicked under all the great Revolutions of Providence that should happen in the
accomplishment of what was here foretold. And because this people of the Jews
both good and bad did too much confide in the Temple and the external Rites and
Ordinances of God's worship attended among them: while in the mean time they
were not suitably spirited nor did suitably carry themselves. The Prophet in
the beginning of this Chapter beats them off from that carnal confidence, and
shows them the true way of obtaining and re-taining Divine, Favor* declaring
that it would be vain Confidence to rest in any external ^gns of Gods pr^e or
(...)

be constantly and certainly depended upon: But to this m^ (...) look, even to
him that is poor and of a contrite spirit and tremble^ at my Word.

Concerning the former part of the words, there a rise two Questions:

QUST. I. What is the Antecedant to the Relative those, those things which its
said God had made, and that they had been?

ANSW. Some refer it to the Heaven and Earth mentioned in the beginning of the
first verse. Them, and whatsoever is contained in them, all the works of
Creation which we behold, above or below, in the Sky or Heavens, or on the
earth. Others refer it t^ the House that had been built unto God, that had been
the place of His rest viz. the Temple mentioned in the latter part of the first
verse. it is not inconsistent or impossible but both may be referred to, having
been just before both mentioned, and the repeating of the Relative is not
unlikely, but does intimate so much; All those things has My hand made, (...)
the works of Creation. And all those things have been, viz. ^t have pertained
to my Temple, House, Rest and Abode among you.

QUEST. II. What is the scope and drift of these words, to what end (...) they
thus expressed? [For all those things has mine hand made etc.]

ANSW. They may import either

1. Seeing that God is HE who has given being to all things, one and another,
He cannot be supposed to have any need of, to receive benefit by, or be engaged
unto Man for any service he has done Him. And so they respect and may be
joined with the following words after this manner, q. d. Although I who AM the
Author and Creator of all things whatsoever, cannot therefore need or be
engaged to any creature, yet I will condescend to show grace to such who are of
(...) truly humble mind, and do fear before Me. My Greatness shall not hinder
Me dwelling with, and regarding the lowly in spirit. Or else

2. It may be as if the Lord should say. Its true My Temple, My House, My Rest,
My Worship, Order and Ordinances have been among you: All these things have
been: But the bare Being of these is no certain Sign of My continuing Presence
and Favor; There may be many things that may drive Me away, notwithstanding
all that may have been of this nature: But here I give you a certain mark by
which you may try and be assured of My Favor, Viz. if these following
properties be found in you; That you be poor, contrite in spirit, and tremble
at My Word. But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, etc.

I shall a little open this latter part of the words,

But to this man] scil. To every such man; man or woman; and therefore to any
Company or Society of such men as shall be so spirited; To any people that are
in such a frame. What agrees to Individuals, will also agree to the whole that
is made up of such Individuals.

Will I look] Verbs of Sense denote also suitable and proportionable
affections. It imports therefore. To look with favor and acceptance, to
respect, regard, take notice and take care of, to accept with good Will, to
embrace with Favor and Love. So Exodus 2. 25. God looked upon the children of
Israel, and God had respect to them. Numb. 16. 15. Moses was very wroth and
said to the Lord, respect not thou their offering. Psalm. 11. 7. His countenance
does behold the upright. Amos 5. 22. Your meat offerings I will not accept,
neither will I regard -- which is the same word ^th this here in the Text.

Even to him that is poor] The word sometimes signifies those which are
outwardly poor and afflicted, and such frequently is the condition of those in
this world who find most Favor with God. But here it is to be understood of
such who are spiritually poor, or poor in their own sight and esteem, poor in
spirit, as they are called Mat. 5. 3. that think modestly, lowly, meanly of
themselves. They are meek and humble, that feel their need of divine answers to
their cries, and of divine Help. All men indeed are poor in spiritual regards,
but it is the man that does duly sense his spiritual poverty, who understands
himself to be and bears himself as a poor man, that is here meant. Qui nihil
altum de se sapit. His heart is not haughty, nor his eye lofty, and he feels
and believes that there is no cause they should.

And of a contrite spirit] The word properly signifies smitten in spirit, and
intends one whose heart smites him for his Sins and sinfulness, whose spirit is
grieved and wounded under his guilt and pollution, who is in bitterness by
looking on his Lord whom he has pierced by his sins, and his heart yields and
falls under the Lords threatening of, and sentence against his sin.

And trembles at my word] i. e. That has a filial fear of God wrought in his
heart by the Word, so as to stand in aw of the Word and with Reverence to
receive and attend it. This Trembling (according to the use of the word
[Hharad] imports

1. An Aw of the Word of God: that it commands and stills the hear^, that there
is a fear of the threatenings, a fear of incurring the penalty of unbelief of
and disobedience to the Word; A fear of neglecting the Commands and losing the
Reward proposed in the Word. Amos 3. 6, 8. Shall a trumpet (to which the voice
of the Lords Prophet convincing of sin by the word is compared Isai. 58. 1.
Lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression.) be
blown in the City and the people not be afraid? The Lion has roared (i. e. the
Invincible irresistible GOD has threatened judgment by His word) who will not
fear? It is expected such Reproofs and Threatenings by the word should work an
Aw.

2. A careful solicitude to attend the Direction and Prescript of the Word of
God. To give it due entertainment, to have it flourish and prosper. In this
sense the word is used, 2. King. 4. 13. Behold thou have been careful for us
with all this care. It is such a trembling, not as makes men fly from God, but
as makes them most careful to subject to the will of God revea^d in his Word,
as makes them busy themselves to perform, and do what Gods Word requires.

3. A making have to attend the commands of Gods Word. Making speed without
delay to obey the word of God as that which we are afraid to put off or neglect
at all. So the word sometimes signifies to run in haste, or to run in fear or
with trembling.

Thus God here gives the character of those whom He will in favor and mercy
look to or upon. And this is to be understood as exclusive of all others, scil.
that they are these only that God is engaged thus to look upon. He has
something else to say to those of a contrary spirit and frame. Psalm. 138. 6.
Though the Lord be high, yet has He respect to the lowly, but the proud he
knows afarr off. And this the Seventy do directly point to in their rendering
this latter clause thus, Ki epi tina epiblepso all' e epi ton tapeinon etc. And
upon whom should I look but upon [or unto] him that is poor etc. And I have
seen an old English Translation that renders the words in like manner. q. d.
Whom else can it be thought I should regard with Favor and set My heart upon,
but such as are here characterized? But these I will. Whence we may observe;


DOCT. That whatever may have been the great Works of God in the World, or his
signal Dispensations toward any people, yet the standing Trial of a person's,
and so a peoples Acceptance with God, is their being of a poor and contrite
spirit, and trembling at His Word.

See this further confirmed Isai. 57. 15. For thus says the High and Lofty O^
that inhabiteth Eternity whose Name is HOLY, I dwell in the High and Holy
place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the Humble and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. Hos. 14. 3.
In Thee the fatherless find^h mercy. Prove. 3. 34. He gives grace to the lowly.
Psalm. 51. 17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.

I shall endeavor to lead you to the plain and clear understanding of this
Truth, by these following Conclusions.

Concl. I. All the great Things done in the world, they are the work of God.
His hand has made and framed the whole Fabric of Heaven and Earth. He has
hung out the Globe of this World; hung the Earth upon nothing; drawn over the
Canopy of the Heavens; laid the foundation of the earth in its place; Created
that Fountain and Center of Light, Heat, and Influence in this lower World, the
Sun; together with all the lesser light Bodies, which are for Times, for Signs
and for Seasons, the Moon and Stars; and He has set and settled the Ordinances
for them all. Psalm. 102. 25. Of old have thou laid the foundation of the earth,
and the Heavens are the work of thy hands. Jer. 31. 35. Thus says the Lord,
which gives the Sun for a light by day, and the Ordinances of the moon and of
the stars for a light by night* which divides the Sea, when the waves thereof
roar; The Lord of Hosts is his Name. The Seas, the vast Mountains also, and the
Wind so undiscernable in its motions, and other strange Meteors, they are His
Work. Amos 4. 13. For lo, He that forms the mountains and creates the wind,
and declares unto man what is his thought, that makes the morning darkness,
and treads upon the high places of the earth: the Lord, the God of Hosts is His
Name. Job 37. with 38. Chap. The continued Creation of those Beings that are
ever coming up, and going off the Stage of this world, by a perpetual, orderly
Succession and propagation, they are also His Work. Psalm. 104. The whole
Administration of Providence in the Upholding and Government of all created
Beings, in a way of highest Wisdom and exact Order, it is all His work. All
great Revolutions, signal and remarkable Dispensations, Things beyond the
ordinary Course and power of Nature, or such as do show forth the highest
strains of Wisdom, Power, Grace or Justice, He does them all. Psalm. 74. 12, --
17. For GOD is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth.
Thou did divide the sea by Thy strength. Thou brakest the heads of the
dragons in the waters. Thou brakest the heads of the Leviathan in pieces, and
gave him to be meat to the people inhabiting the Wilderness. Thou did
cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty rivers. The day is
thine, and the night also is thine, thou have prepared the light an^ the Sun.
Thou have set all the borders of the earth: thou have made summer and winter.
Those notable changes in the World in the promoting or suppressing, exalting or
bringing down of Kingdoms, Nations, Provinces or Persons, they are all wrought
by Him. Psalm. 75. 6, 7, 8. For promotion comes neither from the East, nor from
the West, nor from the South. But God is the Judge, He pu^teth down one, and
sets up another. For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is
red: It is full of mixture, and He pours out of the same. Ezekiel. 17, 24. And
all the trees of the field shall know that I the LORD have brought down the
high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have
made the dry tree to flourish: I the LORD have spoken, and have done it. The
Yearly seasons, also Seed-time and Harvest, Summer and Winter, binding up and
covering the earth with Frost, Ice and Snow, and the releasing and renewing of
the face of the Earth again, it is His work. Psalm. 147. 15, 18. He sends forth
His Commandment upon earth; His Word runs very swiftly. He gives Snow like
wool, He scatters the hoar frost like ashes. He casts forth his ice like
morsels, who can stand before His cold? He sends out His Word and melts
them: He causes His wind to blow and the waters flow. Psalm. 104. 29, 30. Thou
hidest thy face they are troubled: Thou take away their breath, they dye, and
return to their dust. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou
renewest the face of the Earth. These as all other great works whatsoever, they
are the Lords. Nothing is done without Him. La^. 3. 37. Who is he that says
and it comes to pass, when the LORD commands it not? Psalm. 136. 4. To Him, who
alone does great Wonders. Hence in consideration of this, let the Lord's People
say as they, Ier. 14. 22. Art thou not. He, O LORD our GOD? therefore we will
wait upon thee: for Thou have made all these things.

Concl. II. God's Dispensations many times to this or that People, are very
Signal. Plain Demonstrations of His Favor, Kind-Kindness, Grace and good Will
to them He does more for one Nation or People many times, a great deal, than He
does for another. Psalm. 147. 19. 20. He shows His Word unto Jacob, His
Statutes and His Judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation.
He not only prospers them in the World above others, but makes known and gives
forth more of Himself as to visible Dispensations and outward means and
advantages for Heaven than He does to others. Thus signally did God dispense to
Seth, in whose Family and Race the Worship of God and the visible Adoption and
Covenant was continued, Genes. 4. 26. And to Seth, to him also there was born a
son -- then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord. Or to be distinguished
by calling upon, or being called by the Name of the Lord: Religious Worship
being especially attended in Seth's Family, when lost by others, hence those of
his posterity (though they afterward Degenerated) are called the Sons of God,
and so distinguished from the Daughters of men, Genes. 6. 2. That the sons of
God saw the daughters of men. Thus signally did God dispense to Noah, (who when
all the World besides were overthrown with a deluge of waters) found grace in
the eyes of the Lord and is saved with his house in the Ark, Genes. 6. 8. and
7. 23. And every living substance was destroyed, which was upon the face of the
ground, both man and cattle and the creeping things and the fowl of the heaven,
and they were destroyed from the earth, and Noah only remained alive, and they
that were with him in the Ark, To Abraham also, whom God separated from his
idolatrous kindred, revealed Himself most graciously to, made of him a great
Nation, appropriated Blessing to him, and to them that should bless him, and
Cursing to them that should curse him, Genesis 12. 1, 2, 3. Now the Lord had said
unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy Country and from thy kindred, and from thy
Father's house, unto a land that I will show thee. And I will make of thee a
great Nation, and I will bless thee and make thy Name great, and thou shall be
a Blessing. And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses
thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. Josh. 24. 2, 3.
Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah the
father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor: and they served other Gods. And I
took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, and led him
throughout all the Land of Canaan and multiplied his seed and gave him Isaac.
Most signal were the Dispensations of God to the Children of Israel, whom God
chose out of all People to be a peculiar people to Himself, to bear His Name in
the world, to dwell in His presence, to be betrusted with all the Ordinances of
His House and visible Kingdom, to have God nigh to them in all that which they
called upon him for, to work wonderfully and gloriously for them in all their
necessities and difficulties. Exodus 19. 3, -- 6. And Moses went up unto God,
and the Lord called to him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shall thou say to
the house of Jacob, and tell the Children of Israel: Y^, have seen what I did
to the Egyptians, and how I bare you on Eagles wings and brought you unto My
Self. Now therefore if ye obey My voice indeed, and keep My Covenant, then ye
shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the Earth is
Mine. And ye shall be unto Me a Kingdom of Priests and an holy Nation. Deuteronomy.
26. 18. 19. And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people,
as He has promised thee, and that thou should keep all His Commandments.
And to make thee high above all Nations which he has made, in Praise, and in
Name, and in Honor and that thou may be an holy people unto the Lord thy
God, as He has spoken. Deuteronomy. 4. 7. For what Nation is there so great, who has
God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon
Him for. Signal also were the Lord's Dispensations to, and so the privileges
and Advantages of those places where our Lord Jesus in the days of His flesh
did mostly converse, preach, and do his mighty works, viz. the Region of
Galilee and Cities thereabout. Mat. 4. 23. And Jesus went about all Galilee
teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom; and
healing all manner of sickness and all manner of Disease among the people. The
like favor was afterward shown to those places where Christ's Apostles and
Evangelists were sent in His Name, by His order, and with His Authority to
publish and preach the Gospel of salyation, beginning at Jerusalem, and passing
through the Regions, of Iude^ and Samaria to Cesarea, Damascus, Ioppa, Lydda
and Saron, Cyprus, Derbe, L^stra, Icomu^ and An^och, and a great part of Asia;
and at length in Europe, to Macedonia, Thessalonica, Berea, Corinth, etc. And
since the Apostles days, some Nations, and several coun^ ^s and Bodies of
People have been by Divine Dispensation (...) only privileged with the Gospel;
but God has to man ^aces and people wrought wonderfully for the bringing of
(...) to, or settling them under the enjoyment of it, or for the Continuance of
it to them. Ecclesiastical history may give us many instances of this nature.
And we in New England (who should if God persuade us so, look upon our selves
as less than the least of all God's sincere people) have been behind but few in
the signalness of God's dispensations to us in these respects as this Place,
and these Solemnityes have often born us witness. I mean not only, that the
solemnityes themselves have been witnesses, but also that upon them, frequent,
plain and full Reports have been made of the Lords wonderful and gracious (...)
people. Ps. 77. 14. 15. 19. 20. and 111. 6. (...) people the power of his
works: that He may give (...) heathen.

(...) ^orks and Dispensations of GOD though admira^ (...) men; yet they are no
certain Evidence of (...) special and entire Acceptance with God. As (...)
^eation and external Providence, the bene^ (...) ^n to all the inhabitants of
the World. God (...) on the evil and on the good, and sends rain (...) ^ust.
Mat. 5. 45. Its true, the Lord does (...) ^ss the righteous, and blast the
wicked; but (...) ^t and perpetual, as that any man can merely (...) know love
or hatred to be in God to (...) before him. Things fall out alike to all (...)
one event to the righteous and to the wic^ (...). And as to signal
dispensations of visible (...) privileges; what God has done, or is (...) ^d
continuing his Gospel, Worship and Or^ (...) ^h a great advantage and hopeful
token, yet (...) concluding mark of special favor and of the (...) ^e
Salvation* For

1. They may be abused by the corruptions and sinful neglects of men. True
grace in a Saint is not subject to a total abuse, but every other thing, even
the most glorious Enjoyments and Privileges men have in this life, may be
abused. Men may (and would to God there were none here that did so!) live under
the most clear Gospel Light, in the pure, peaceable, free Enjoyment of Gospel
Order and Ordinances, be obliged by manifold Kindnesses from God, themselves
have great Knowledge in Religion, and make high profession with much
Criticalness therein; and yet live in some sin openly or secretly, be enslaved
to some base defiling lust, wherewith they may not only pollute themselves, but
others also. Let the Heaven hear and the Earth give ear, let them be astonished
at it, be horribly afraid, and be very desolate, for it may be found that they
whom God has nourished and brought up as His children, do rebel against Him;
that the Lord's own people do forsake Him the Fountain of living waters, and
go to empty or muddy Cisterns: As the Lord emphatically complains of them in
Isai. 1. 2. and Ier. 2. 12, 13. Privileged professors, Professors in
New England may be discovered to be sinners; some to be proud, haughty,
high-minded, supercilious, self-exalting, arrogant; others to be sensual,
intemperate, corrupt, fleshly, lascivious; some to be Company-keepers, to sit
and spend time with vain persons; others to be covetous, unjust, oppressing,
defrauding and overreaching others; some to be revilers, railers, ungoverned
in their speeches and expressions; others to be despisers of that, which is
good, etc.

Moreover, There may be under such Enjoyments, Grievous and horrible Neglects,
receiving the Grace of God (in Gospel offers and means of Salvation) in vain;
Woeful formality and slightiness in holy Duties, men not stiring up themselves
to seek GOD, resting in a name to live: Carnal confidence in privileges and
former visible enjoyments of Divine Favor, Ier. 7. 4. Want of Zeal for GOD His
Service and Glory, against Sin: Too great Indulgence to Sin and Sinners, in
compliance with the Laxness, Looseness and spirit of the Times, Unaffectedness
with, and Unreclaimedness under the loud-speaking voice of God's Dispensations.
Zeph. 3. 1. 2, 5, 6, 7. Woe to her that ^lihy ^lthy and polluted to the
oppressing City. She obeyed not the voice: she received not Correction: she
trusted not in the LORD; she drew not near to her God. -- The just Lord is in
the midst thereof, -- every morning does He bring His Judgments to light, He
fails not, but the unjust knows no shame. I have out off the Nations: -- I
said surely thou will fear me thou will receive instruction -- but they arose
early and corrupted all their doings.

2. Such offenses in a people are not secured from provoking God's Displeasure
and drawing down punishment by any signal Dispensations, such a people have
been under. However near any have been lift up to Heaven by mercyes, this
[endon to kakon,] this Sin within will tumble them down again, Obad. 3. 4. And
the Holy Oracles of Truth tell us, that Corruptions and Neglects after and
under such signal Dispensations (1.) They do more provoke Divine displas^. God
is more offended with the miscarriages of such as He has brought near to
Himself than with others: It is in God's account an aggravation of sin. Deuteronomy.
32. 19. And when the Lord saw it He abhorred them, because of the provoking of
His sons and of His daughters. And therefore (2.) They do expose to greater and
sorer punishment. Thus Christ told Capernaum, Chorazin, and Bethsaidah, Mat.
11. (...) God's favor, and fell under the severe effects of His displeasure.
As their case is lamentably described, and you may read in Lam. 2. 3. -- 9. The
Churches of Asia also and other Churches (among whom, as golden Candlesticks
the Son of man sometimes gloriously walked) through their degeneracy and sin,
have lost all, been overthrown and sunk into Ruin.

Concl. 4. There is that which is a certain Evidence and standing trial of a
person and people's Acceptance with God. God has not left men altogether in
the dark, and at uncertainty in this matter: But has told us to whom He will
look in favor and with mercy. Tho. Privileges will not, yet there are
Qualifications which will infallibly evidence special Favor. We need not be at
a loss if we will consult and study the Divine Will, what we may depend upon
for His Acceptance and Salvation. The spiritually wise do understand, and the
prudent do know these things; what course is to be taken that they may stand
before the Lord, have His presence with, and grace toward them. If men be so
qualified as the Word of God decla^s and requires; He will save them from
trouble, or at least He will be with them when in outward trouble, and support
them therein; and He will everlastingly save them. There are a number or sort
of people whom God does bear a Favor to, to whom good belongs, who shall
rejoice with gladness and shall glory. Psalm. 106. 4, 5. Remember me O Lord with
the favor that thou bear unto thy people: O visit me with thy Salvation;
that I may see the good of thy chosen; that I may rejoice in the gladness of
thy nation, that I may glory with thine Inheritance. Whom God will bless and
compass with Favor as a shield. Psalm. 5. 12. For thou Lord wilt bless the
righteous, with Favor will thou compass him as with a shield.

Concl. 5. The standing trial of a person's and so a peoples Acceptance with
God, is their being of a poor and contrit spirit, and trembling at His Word.
The Text is plain and peremptory for this, from the Lords own mouth: What is
signified by these expressions, was shown in the opening of the words. In
sum, they imply the meek, humble and lowly, the evangelically poor, contrite
and tremblers at God's Word. Here may be considered,


I. Who are they that are poor, contrite, and humble, II. Whence it is that God
accepts of and respects such. III. How God does accept and look upon them.
I. Who they are that are poor contrite and humble, meek and lowly. Or when a
person or people may be said to bear the Character of the Text. And they are
and do so

1. When they are poor, contrite and lowly in their Spirits and esteem of
themselves. Prove. 16. 19. Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly
-- when their spirits are humble. Unto which Contrition and lowliness of
spirit, there is requisite the sense and acknowledgement

1. Of the infinite Distance and Disproportion that is betwixt GOD and them.
That they are worms to the LORD. Psalm. 22. 6. But I am a worm. If the nations
be as the drop of a bucket and as the small dust which will not turn the Balance,
Isai. 40. 15. what then is a small handful of people, and what are single
persons to Him?

2. Of their Guiltiness and Pollution by S^. The heart of the contrite-spirited
person, smites him, and is wounded for his ^in, as its contrary to God's Will
and Holiness. His sins are before him. Psalm. 5. 1. 3. My sin is ever before me.
The sense of them, in their numbers and aggravations, take hold upon him and
make his heart even to fail, Psalm. 40 12. For innumerable evils have compassed
me about, mine Iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to
look up: they are more than the hairs of my head, therefore my (...) fails
me. And He is doubtful and afraid of unseen errors and faults. Psalm. 19. 12.
Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults. He trembles
to think how many Words of God he has cast behind his back; and how prone he
is still so to do: For the less Corruption any one has remaining i^ him, the
greater burden it is to him: As on the Contrary, they who have most Corruption
in them, feel it least.

3. Of their Unworthiness to receive the least favor and mercy from God.
Genes. 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the
truth which thou have showed unto thy servant. Luke. 15. 19. -- and am no more
worthy to be called thy son, Look themselves through and through, they can find
nothing to build any claim upon to the smallest mercy. All their
righteousnesses they know are but filthy rags, Isai. 64. 6. Though they pray
earnestly and ca'nt take a denial, yet it is with a sense of their unworthiness
to receive, Dan. 9. 18, 19. O my God, incline thine ear and hear: open thine
eyes and behold our Desolations, and the City which is called by thy Name: for
we do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but
for thy great Mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord ^earken and do,
defer not for thine own Sake --.

4. Of their Forfeiture of all that which they have received from God already:
and Desert of the greatest Evil. That they deserve, as to receive nothing
further; so to be stripped of all that which they already have. And therefore
under all afflictions and bereavements, when God comes out snarply against
them, they can heartily say, He has punished us less then our iniquities
deserve, and It is the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed. Ezra. 9. 13.
Lam. 3. 22. They know they live upon sparing Mercy and longsuffering; and, that
if God should mark their iniquity, they could not stand. Psalm. 130. 3. And
therefore they humbly acknowledge that God has not dealt with them after their
sins, nor rewarded them according to their iniquities. Psalm. 103. 10. The^ have
not taken so slight a view of themselves and their sins, as to imagine that
Justice can demand no more of them.

5. Of their absolute need of Divine help and grace upon all accounts That they
cannot live but are most certainly undone without God's Grace and help in
Christ. Their help, all their help, and their only help is in the Lord. 2.
Chron. 20. 12. We have no might -- neither know we what to do, but our eyes
are upon thee.

2. When they are lowly in their Carriage and behavior of themselves. The poor
and contrite-spirited person

1. He ingenuously confesses all he knows and is sensible of by himself, unto
God. He does not seek to cover or cloak any of his weakness or wretchedness,
but openly acknowledges all, he is willing to speak plain truth of himself
before, and unto God. And the forementioned things which his heart knows to be
Truths concerning him, with respect to God, he subscribes to them all. Luke.
15. 21. Father I have sinned -- and am no more worthy -- He humbly receives his
Doom and Sentence from the Word of God, the Judgment it passes upon him. To
this practice of Humiliation, God would have his sinning people brought, to
confess their trespasses and humbly declare their acceptance of the punishment
of their iniquity, justifying God therein. Levit. 26. 40. 41. If they shall
confess their iniquities, and the iniquities of their fathers, with their
trespass which they trespassed against me, and that also they have walked
contrary unto me; and that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have
brought them into the land of their Enemies; if then their uncircumcised Hearts
be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquities, then
will I remember --

2. He lays himself down before God, to be dealt with as He ^ees meet. 2. Sam.
15. 26. But if He thus say, I have no delight in thee: Behold here am I, let
Him do to me as seems good unto Him. If He shall refuse to help and rescue
him, he justifies and clears Him: If He does help, it will be undeserved Mercy.
Therefore he puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope for him,
and he may receive any thing from God, who is so far above him, and of Whom he
has so ill deserved. Lam. 3. 29. He kisses the rod when lai^ in the dust; and
submits himself to God's sovereign disposal. To this degree of practical
humility and submission God brought His people before He afforded them
Deliverance in a desperate case. Judge. 10. 15. And the Children of Israel said
unto the Lord, we have sinned, d^e thou unto us whatsoever seems good unto
thee, deliver us ^s only, we pray thee this day.

3. He humbly accepts of offered Mercy by a Mediator and Surety. To be
beholding to Him for all, and to take all upon His Account. He looks for Merit
and Righteousness that may procure him good els-where, feeling he has none in
himself: And therefore he prizes exceedingly the Hope set before him, which he
fl^es to. Luke. 18. 13. He would not so much as lift up his eyes to Heaven, but
smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. Which mercy to a
sinner can be only through Jesus Christ the Mediator. Thus a backsliding people
when humbled, pray the Lord's Favor for his Names sake. Ier. 14. 7. O* Lord,
though our iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy Names sake, for
our backslidings are many.

4. He subjects himself to be wholly ruled and ordered by the Will of his Lord.
Let God command and dispose of him, he will not withstand in the least; but
yield and comply. He fears to stand against any Command of God, Counsel or
Warning from Him, Thus when Israel under threatenings of God's departure were
soundly humbled, they seriously reformed themselves by the Word of God, and
found compassion in His sight. Judge. 10. 16. And they put away the strange Gods
from among them, and served the Lord; and His soul was grieved for the misery
of Israel.

5. He behaves himself meekly, humbly, self-denyingly in all things, at one
whose proud spirit has been broken. Ps. 131. 1, 2. Lord mine heart is not
haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I exercise my self in great matters,
or in things too high for me. Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a
child that is weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child. He bears
and carries himself as a poor, meek and humble man: not proudly, confidently,
arrogantly etc. His behavior testifies his lowliness and meekness of spirit
before, and toward God and men, as one that seeks not himself any way, not to
lift up himself, not to set forth himself, nor to set up himself: But it is
clearly another thing which he purely designs, viz. the promoting the work and
honor of Christ by all due ways and means, thinking meanly of, and humbly
behaving himself therein. Act. 20. 19. Serving the Lord with all humility of
mind. This should be the carriage of all those that profess themselves to be
the Lords people. Phil. 2. 3, 4. Let nothing be done through strife or vain
glory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves.
Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others.

II. Whence is it that God accepts and respects the humble and lowly? It is
indeed wonderful condescension in the Infinite GOD, thus to vouchsafe His
Regard to such low worms as the best of the children of men are. That the Great
GOD should look upon such nothings, is a great stoop. Psalm. 138, 6. Though the
LORD be high, yet He has Respect to the lowly. These do'nt indeed redissentire,
but they do ratione: They do'nt in Reality disagree (...) for it is a truth
that God does respect such, but they do in Reason; for it is admirable that the
Highest and the lowest should thus meet. Psalm. 8. 3, 4. When I consider thy
Heavens, the work of thy fingers, the Moon and Stars which thou have ordained:
What is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou visitest
him? The reasons and grounds hereof are

1. Because It is the Lords's Free will and good pleasure. This is the bottom
cause He is pleased thus to do wonderfully. Mat. 11. 25, 26. -- and have
revealed them unto babes: even so Father for so it seemed good in thy sight. 1.
Sam. 12. 22. Because it has pleased the Lord to make you His people.

2. Because These do most truly respect the Lord. Therefore will the Lord so
accept and look upon them, above others. The poor have their eyes unto and upon
the Lord, and therefore the Lord will have His eyes upon them. In them there is
the most free and open passage for the Lord to come into their souls with all
His Power, Authority, Sovereignty, Glory and Grace. True Contrition,
Humiliation and Poverty of spirit opens the heart to God to let Him in, to come
and do all for the soul as belongs to a God to do. but on the Contrary, Height
of Spirit and Unbrokenness of heart withholds that due re^pect from God, and
so bars His so full passage into, full possession of, and dominion over the
soul. And God has said, that as men are disposed and carry to Him, so he will
carry Himself to them: And therefore He will regard and save the afflicted and
humble people. Psalm. 18. 25, 26, 27. With the merciful thou will show thy self
merciful, with an upright man thou will show thy self upright, with the pure
thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will show thy self
froward For thou will save the afflicted people, but wilt bring down the high
looks.

3. Because Those do most gladly look to, and depend upon the Mediator, in whom
God is well pleased. Whence they thus improving and honoring Him, God has a
gracious respect to them for His sake.

III. How God does look upon and accept the humble and lowly. It is with
special and peculiar Grace: He looks Favorably on them. Such are the greatest
Favorites in the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. 18. 4. Whosoever therefore shall
humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of
Heaven. He takes pleasure in them. Psalm. 147. 11. The Lord takes pleasure in
them that fear Him. He will instruct them. Psalm. 25. 9. The meek will He guide
in judgment, and the meek will He teach His way. He will communicate His grace
to them Iam. 4. 6. -- but gives Grace to the humble. He will dwell with them.
Isai. 57 15. GOD will make His settled abode in the humble soul; own and use
it as His special propriety; place and dis-place what He sees meet there. He
will remember them, in searching and trying Times Psalm. 9. 12. When He makes
inquisition for blood, He remembers them: He forgets not the cry of the humble.
He will work for them, arise for their Judgment, Help and Salvation. Psalm. 76.
9. When God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Psalm. 147.
6, The Lord lifts up the meek. Job. 22. 29. And He shall save the humble
person. He will do what is good, what is indeed best, for such as are indeed
lowly and humble: In the day when they cry He will answer them: and if He do
not give them outward deliverance, yet He will strengthen them with strength in
their souls; with Faith, patience and Courage to bear up, and hold out under
the Continuance of their pressures, which will be as good and better to them
than external deliverance. Psalm. 138. 3. In the day when I cried, thou
answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my Soul. God will be near
at hand to support and save them in and out of the floods or Fires of
Affliction and calamity. Psalm. 34. 18. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a
broken heart and saves such as be of a contrite spirit.

I. USE. It is of solemn Conviction and Humiliation to us this day, That we
have not been, that we are no more such as God has declared His Acceptance of,
and Respect to. That we have been and are no more poor, contrite and trembling
at His Word. Alas that this people has lain no more low before God. Let the
Prophets of the Lord and all the Lord's people mourn, and their souls weep for
the Pride of New England, as he Ier. 13. 17. But if ye will not hear i^, my
soul shall weep in secret places for your pride, and mine eyes shall weep sore,
and run down with tears, because the Lord's (...) is carried away captive. O
that we could so take reproof from God, as to make this place and this day a
Bochim! As they Judge. 2. 4, 5. And it came to pass when the Angel of the Lord
spoke these words (viz. words of Conviction and Reproof, ^e have not obeyed my
voice: why have ye done this? ver. 2. and words of Threatening; I will not drive
them out before you, but they shall be as thorns in your sides) unto all the
Children of Israel, that the people lift up their voice and wept: and they
called the name of that place Bochim. They were deeply affected, and greatly
mourned under that Divine Reproof. Has not God spoken as plainly and directly
to us, of our neglect to obey. His voice; and in particular of the pride and
Lordliness of of hearts, by that and many other words: Ier. 2. 31. O
generation, see ye the word of the Lord, have I been a wilderness unto Israel?
a land of darknes^? Wherefore say my people, we are Lords, we will come no more
unto thee? Had we not been stout against the Lord, we could never have stood
out against so many solemn counsels and warnings upon these and other
occasions, as we have done. Oh that (as it is said of Hezekiah, and all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem 2. Chron 32. 26. Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled
himself for the pride of his heart, both he, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
so) all our Rulers, and all the people would humble themselves for the Pride of
their hearts! This would be a means to keep wrath off the Land, even that
which has been threatened.

Here Consider, 1. What we have done. 2. What we have suffered for want of this
humble spirit: Both which should convince and abase us.

I. What we have done for want of this spirit. The want of this has been the
cause of all our errors, of all provoking errors in Doctrine, Worship, in
Administration both Civil and Ecclesiastical, and in Conversation. The Pride
and Unbrokenness of our hearts has caused us in many Instances to wander from
the pathway of Wisdom and understanding. In general

1. Hence we have withold from God His Right. what was due to Him: viz. The
full honor of His Sovereignty, Power, Authority and Command over us. This has
not been fully and practically acknowledged by us, which yet has been due from
us. Mal. 1. 6. A son honors his Father, and a servant his Master: If then I
be a Father, where is (...) honor? and if I be a Master, where is my Fear?
says the Lord of Hosts unto you that despise my Name.

2. Hence, We have taken to our selves more than our Right. More than becomes
(not so much creatures, as) those who profess utmost Reverence, Subjection,
Obsequiousness to, and Dependence upon the Lord our Creator and Redeemer, as we
have done. 1. Cor. (...). 7, 8. -- why (...) thou glory as if thou had not
received it? Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings without
us. Particularly

1. Hence it is that we have no more duly sought God. Hence we have sought Him

No more fully according to His Order. There has been much Ignorance and
Mistake in, and about the things of God's House and Kingdom. Some Ordinances of
Christ laid by, and thrown aside by many; if not despised and reproached. Too
much baulking also of known Institutions and Commands: Men have not been
willing thoroughly to subject themselves to God's Ordinances and Institutions,
especially when any thing of their own has come at any time to be thwarted by
them. Inst: gr. It has been too much-in New England, that the Discipline of
Christ in His Churches has been in great part neglected; or attended according
as it suited with, or happned to the humors, affections, interests or
relations of some men, and so the Ordinance of Christ that ought to be attended
and administered without partiality, prostrated to men's lusts.

No more sincerely and uprightly: But with so much Formality Hypocrisy,
carelessness and indifferency in the Ordinances that have been attended. And all
neglect of seeking God at all, or in due order it arises from pride. Ps. 10. 4.
The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God. Though
not always from the pride of a wicked person, but sometimes from unmortified
pride in a righteous man.

2. Hence we have been contentious. The wise man tells us what is the only
cause of Contention. Prove. 13. 10. Only by pride comes contention. And how much
of this, together with the evil concomitants of it, Jealousies, reproaches,
Slanders, Alienations of spirit etc. has there been in Churches and other
Societies! The Remembrance of those woeful Contentions that have been in many
Churches, may justly humble us this day; as also the Dissentions, Heart-risings
and counter-actings, that have been in Courts and civil Assemblyes, while we
were otherwise at quiet. Oh how high have we been in our Contests with, and
Censures one of another! And it is lamentable to consider, what
Mis-understandings, Jealousies, Animosityes, Prejudices and evil eyes have been
between Rulers and People, or some among either. On which side in our late
Differences of apprehension about the management of public affairs, which did
rise so high, there was most blame, I shall not affirm. Only I wish that ever^
one, of whatsoever Opinion or Apprehension, might be sensible of every
particular wherein they have been out of the way and too blame, in that or any
other controversy, which has at any time unhappily spread among us. It is not
so much difference of apprehension (that is common to men and the best of men
in this world about Circumstantials and non-fundamentals) as vehemence and
bitterness of spirit, and the like evils arising from, and accompanying such
differences (which sucks away the vital spirits of Gospel-charity) that has
wounded us. Whatever provocations therefore there may have been at any M^ssah
or Meribah of ours, let every one concerned take heed that he do not suffer any
bitterness of spirit then taken, to ly and rankle into any Malignity on one
side or other; for I intend not one more than another: But earnestly desire
that all the Lord's servants, however for some time, through temptation falling
out; yet will in the end show themselves to be true Children of peace and
lovers of Condescension. Romans 12. 16. 18.

3. Hence we have been acted by Self-Interest. It is sad when it may be said of
a Christian people, or any of those among them that have the care or conduct of
public Administrations, as Phil. 2. 20. 21. I have no man like minded, who
will natural ly care for your state. For all seek their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ's. When some private Interest of their own, their own
Advantage, Preferment, Fame and Reputation or the like, shall carry them off
from, and make them stand in the way of that which is truly for the public
good in Church or State. And this is the want of humility, when we prefer any
Interest of ours, or make it to justle with the Lords. And would to God we had
not cause to lay our hands upon our breasts upon this account! Let all the
Lords servants whom he has any way employed in His work in whatsoever capacity,
faithfully examine themselves in this matter: when this or that has been
before them that would really have been beneficial for the public, has not
some such Thought; I shall lose by this; Some way of advantage that I have had
will be hereby stopped. or, I shall be eclips't or over^opt, or I shall not have so
much glory of the work if it go so, or I have a friend that is concerned; or
the like: I say, has not some such kind of thought, secretly stirring in your
mind (though it may be too unobserved) made you to oppose or at least not to be
earnest for, or staunch in what would have been for good, yea and it may be
sometimes not in that which is just or honest? I make no particular Application
or Instance here, I know good men have their failings, and those who in general
do truly seek the Interest of Christ, may yet in this or that particular be too
much swayed by private interest, and we must not presently cas^ them (especialy
if otherwise men of worth and use) because of this. But I heartily wish that
those scales of self-interest and affection which blind the eyes of many men,
might whol^y fall from the eyes of all you whom the Lord has or shall any way
improve in his service in this Israel, and from the eyes of every Christian.

4. Hence we have born too high a sail. That there has been an affectation of
Gallantry unbecoming our condition, has been long complained of, and many
times testified against in this place and on these occasions, and that I
believe rationally. But its most apparent that this has exceedingly grown upon
us of latter times, and is accompanied also with sufficient, if not much too
great delicacy of living, wherein we abuse our mercyes God has given us.
Further, it is not improbable but that some for whom Providence has favorably
and honorably cast their Lot may have been under temptation to have their
hearts lifted up above their Brethren; through the gales of Popular applause,
or an overweening esteem of their own worth or the Largness of Divine Bounty to
them in any remarkable Dispensation, or the like; to make too much of
themselves, and it may be too little of others; overlooking, neglecting, or too
much imposing. As One says It Is a hard matter for a man to be a painful
Preacher, a zealous Professor, a faithful Statesman, or a man that has laid out
himself for the Public any way, Strong. of Covenants. page. 26.
but his heart will swell with privy pride therein, yea even though he do
profess to despise and disesteem the praise of men. Good Hezekiah failed herein
upon occasion of a gracious Providence wrought for him. 2. Chron. 32. 24. 25.
In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed to the Lord: and He
spoke unto him and He gave him a sign: But Hezekiah rendered not again
according to the benefit done unto him: for his heart was lifted up. If there
be any such with us who have their spirits upon any account whatsoever thus
raised too high, I wish they may know themselves, and have more of the Spirit
of Christ; as in other particulars, so in that of the Meekness and Lowliness of
His mind. Finally, let it not be offensive if I mention it as a thing worthy of
Consideration, Whether this Government or the Persons managing it, have not in
some instances born themselves too high, assumed more than God has given them
full ground for: and if it should be so, no doubt but that may have been a
provocation, and no wonder if God threaten to bring you low.

5. Hence We have not been subject to Order and Government, civil,
ecclesiastical or domestical. We have been a Corporation that have lived too
much in the violation of our own Laws: Of some good Laws we have been too high
to bear the Execution of them at the hand of our Neighbors, whether such as
were called to see them observed, or such as would secure themselves by them:
There has been to much of a lawless, ungoverned spirit. And for the true Order
and Government of Christ in His Church, that has been in some places little
practiced, in some much withstood, and in others quite overthrown, whilst power
and Government has been fixed in those that should be ruled, and only a
liberty to lift up their hands left to the Rulers, and together therewith other
Ordinances of Christ have been undervalued and abused. And as for
Family-Government and Order, that is in a great Measure lost in New England, as
those who undestand what it is, do too too sensibly complain.

6. Hence We have set other things in the place of GOD. We have left God and
our first love to Him. Through want of true poverty of spirit, we have not
maintained that constant feeling sense of our need of Him, and so have suffered
our selves to decline and go away from Him, away from that strict and close
dependence and communion which was sometimes in Christians. We have not been so
earnestly careful to ly always in the arms of a Gracious Savior under the
full expressions of His Love, but have been slothful and slumbering in carnal
rest and ease, hard and loath to be awakned and stirred up to open to Christ and
let Him fully in to our souls, as the Spouse. Cant. 5. 2, 3. -- the voice of my
Beloved that knocks, saying, open to me -- I have put off my coat, how shall
I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them. And our hearts
have gone after some other thing, some new love, some vanity or other, which we
have entertained, embraced and set in God's place: and these we have Idolized,
set our hearts upon them, and given more than their due to them. Thus we have
done to the World, we have fallen down to that, and that has lifted us up in
our minds, wherein we have violated that solemn caution God left with His
People to be minded by them when in a riseing condition in the World. Deuteronomy. 8.
12. 13, 14. Beware lest when t^ou have eaten and art full, and have built
goodly Houses, and dwelt therein: And when thy Herds and thy Flocks multiply,
and thy Silver and thy Gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is
multiplied: Then thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God.
Truly here is our main wound, and the great cause of God's Controversy with
us, that we are declined and gone off so much from God, from the life and power
of Grace and Godliness, from keeping our hearts and walking with God; and have
suffered other inferior things to take up, fill and take away our hearts. Rev.
2. 4. Nevertheless (notwithstanding all that was commendable among them, in
purity of Doctrine and Worship, and travel in God's work and service) I have
somewhat against thee because thou have left thy first love. These inward
soul-declensions and decays, and goings off of the heart from God, were very
offensive to him: as Ezekiel. 6. 9. Because I am broken with their whorish heart
which has departed from me, and with their eyes which go a whoring after
their Idols. In like manner, it is not unlikely, but we have abused the most
glorious privileges of the Gospel here afforded, to be in some degree and too
much haughty because of God's holy Mountain. Zeph. 3. 11. So does want of true
humility and poverty of spirit expose us to abuse the best things. And if there
be any other particular wherein this people have incurred like guilt, I had
much rather they should take notice of it themselves than hear it from me.
Whatever it be that men have their eyes upon, whether any thing they suppose in
themselves, or any thing that has been done for them, or any privilege
bestowed upon them, these cannot give them rest and security in God's Favor,
and it will be an error to have recourse to, or depend upon them for divine
Protection, while we neglect true humility poverty of spirit and trembling at
God's Word. There is many a tall Elia^, that even some Samuels may think to be
assuredly favored of God, which yet God will reject: But the true spirit of
David which we have in Psalm. 131. Lord my heart is not haughty etc. He never
will reject.

7. Hence, We have been Impatient of Reproof; though necessary, orderly, and
without Reflection. Too much uncircumcised in heart and cars, resisting, or
turning away from the Holy Ghost speaking to us in, and by his Word. The form
of Religion, to many lifted up therewith, is (as One speaks) a B^ Coat to their
sins, to turn the sharpest reproofs that can be levelled against them. It was
so with that people, Zech. 7. 11. 12. They refused to hearken and pulled away
the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear, yea, they made
their hearts as an Adamant stone, lest they should hear the Law, and the words
which the Lord of Hosts has sent in His spirit by the former Prophets. And we
have reason to acknowledge and be humbled that it has been too much so with us;
that so much unwillingness to, impatience of, and incorrigibleness under the
Reproofs of God's Word, has shown it self among us.

II. Consider What we have suffered for want of this humble spirit. This has
been the procurer of all our sorrows, that we have been no more humble and
submissive unto God. For this we have been threatened: It was said upon a like
Occasion, now twelve years agone, Probable it is, that it must be some sharp
affliction, some S^ Mr. Oaks his (...). S^rm. p. 25.
smarting Rod, or sore Trial that must come upon these Churches, to reduce them
generally to their old trembling frame of spirit at the Word of God. Whether
the whole of what God intended by and like words, be come upon us, is yet a
question: but much we have suffered, which we may justly reckon to this
account: God has brought many of our fears upon us, because we have been too
high to answer His Calls, and we know not what He may do more therein. Isai.
66. 4. -- and will bring their fears upon them, because when I called none did
answer, when I spoke they did not hear, but they did evil before mine eyes, and
chose that in which I delighted not. God has drawn out His sword against us,
and has given it a charge to devour round about our Coasts, and many have
fallen down slain by it. God has blown upon the Labor of our hands, by
Blastings, Floods, Droughts, and losses by Ship-wrecks and otherwise; and of
what has remained he has found out continual ways for disbursment, to make
and keep us empty. God has sent sore Sicknesses and Pestilential diseases upon
us which have sorely wasted us. God has again and again contended by terrible
Fires, which have eat up a great part of our pleasant Enjoyments. He has also
frustrated our expectations and hopes many ways: as it is Ier. 8. 15. We
looked for peace but no good came; and for a time of health, and behold
trouble. Now all these things God has done to humble us; for we are His
covenant People: we have not been therefore humble enough. The Lord's goodness
would not have suffered Him to do thus, if our badness did not force Him to it
Ier. 9. 7. Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts, behold, I will melt them,
and try* them: for how shall I do for the daughter of my people? q. d. What
other course can I take but this according to the nature of man? The Goldsmiths
has no other way to separate the dross from the metal but by melting
Charnock. Attrib. page. 657.
it down. Its when the impurities and unhumbledness of His people necessitate
Him to this proceeding, that God sits as a Refiner and brings humbling
dispensations upon them. All that we have suffered and been threatened with, it
has been but necessary for us; less would not bring us to tremble before God,
and in our selves: And Oh that this might! God could yet, and doubtless would
save us, give us favor with Himself and what we should need elsewhere, for the
continuance of our mercies, our precious and pleasant enjoyments.

II. USE. Exhort. Let this people and every person of us, get and keep in this
frame of spirit mentioned in the Text and Doctrine, to be poor and contrite in
spirit, and tremble at GOD's Word. That which you are now exhorted to is, to be
true and through Christians, and to keep always in a Christian frame of
spirit, or to be eminent in the exercise of Christianity. For this real poverty
and contrition of spirit and trembling at God's Word is to be found no where
else, but where true grace is, and where the spirit of Christ dwells and Rules.
You are herein exhorted to be Christ's true Scholars and followers. Mat. 11. 29.
Take my yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. Phil.
2. 5. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. To be and carry
like Christians indeed.

I. Motive. Consider the disadvantage of being without this spirit. In several
respects,

1. The Word you hear will do you no good. Pride is an enemy to profiting. It
is observed that the ground whereon the Peacock that proud bird sits, is
barren: the heart where Pride sits is barren. The Word must be received Watson.
in meekness, that it may be savingly efficacious. Ia. 1. 21. While men remain
in the pride and unhumbledness of their hearts, whatever their professions be,
and whatever they may do, the best counsels and cautions will not work kindly
upon them. A People will never be brought to do their business thoroughly with
God, in compliance with His Word, till they be brought to such a trembling
frame. Ezra. 10. 3. Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God, to put
away -- according to the counsel of my Lord, and of those that tremble at the
Commandment of our God, and let it be done according to the Law. There must be
an awful, sanctifying, reverential, fiducial fear in all our Transactions with
God, otherwise they will be but formal, Hypocritical, vain and ludicrous; there
will be no good effect of the Word of God upon us. The Lord's Words will indeed
do good and come to something in those that walk uprightly. Mich. 2. 7. But it
is expressly declared, that his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him.
Hab. 2. 4. Therefore such will do nothing to purpose with God, in attending to
His Word, let it be spoken never so plainly, closely, solemnly and frequently.
Neither will the Word spoken go down with an unhumbled people, unless it be
such as suits them, they not so much desiring that their wills should be
brought to the Word, as that the Word should be brought to their wills. A sad
Instance we have of this Ier. 43. 1. 2. And it came to pass, that when Jeremiah
had made an end of speaking unto all the people all the words of the Lord their
God, for which the Lord their God had sent him to them even all these Words;
Then spoke Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah, thou speak falsely; the Lord our God
has not sent thee to say, go not etc. Notwithstanding their solemn
profession. Chapt. 42. 5, 6. Then they said to Jeremiah, The Lord be a true and
faithful witness between us, if we do not even according to all things for the
which the Lord thy God shall send thee to us, whether it be good or whether it
be evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord our God to whom we send thee, that
it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of the Lord our God.

2. This will make men that they will not be afraid when God is displeased with
themselves or others: When sin is committed or Judgment threatened. Ier. 36.
23. 24. And it came to pass, that when Iehudi had read three or four leaves, he
cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that was on the hearth,
until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was on the hearth, yet they
were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the King nor any of his
servants that heard all these Words. This is from an inward stoutness and
unsubduedness of heart. Hence many a professor, can be loose in his walk;
formal and flighty in Religious duties; careless of the Sabbath; indulge his
corruptions; comply far with some sins of the times; neglect the trust and
charge committed to him: and yet his heart not smite him, the thoughts hereof
do not trouble him, nor make him afraid. And this is a dangerous thing.

3. This will expose us to Misery and Destruction. If we should have no other
Molestation come upon us any way, yet if we be without this spirit of awful
fear and trembling before God, we shall be like enough quickly to sink in our
own ruins, under the weight of our pride and other corruptions. Ier. 44. 10,
11. They are not humbled even to this day, neither have they feared, nor walked
in my Law, nor in my Statutes that I set before you and before your Fathers.
Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Behold I will set my
face against you for evil, and to cut off all Judah. For in setting up our
selves, we reject and forsake God. And this People have been told that if they
forsake God, God will cast them off for ever. 1. Chron 28. 9. Uzziah's
self-exaltation emboldned him to venturre upon such things as were the occasion
of his destruction. 2. Chron. 26. 16. But when he was strong, his heart was
lifted up to his destruction, for he transgressed against the Lord, and went
into the Temple of the Lord to burn Incense. A heart not duly subdued will
expose men to venture upon such things as will tend to wound their consciences
dishonor Religion, and procure their calamity. All the world can never keep
that man up, that never seeks to (...) his own spirit low. GOD has not been
wont to prosper any People long, however good they were, or however good their
cause were, if their spirits have been high, and so shown more of themselves,
than of the spirit of Christ, as it is too often with God's people. So true is
it which the Holy Ghost says, Prove. 29. 23. A man's pride shall bring him low.
and Chapt. 16. 18. Pride goes before destruction; and an haughty spirit before
a fall. If Hezekiah's heart be lifted up, there is a Dispensation of wrath
near. 2. Chron. 32. 25. -- for his heart was lifted up, therefore there was
wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. The loftiness of man shall be
made low, God will have it so. Isai. 2. 11. 17. The lofty looks of man shall be
humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day. For the day of the LORD of Hosts shall be upon
every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he
shall be brought low, etc.

II. Mot. Consider the Advantage of being of this poor, contrite and trembling
spirit. It will be exceeding beneficial many ways.

1. This will dispose you to acknowledge and sanctify the Name of God under
all Dispensations: under all visitations: To see and own how God is fulfilling
His Word; making good His threatthreatnings; and executing His Judgments He
has foretold, and so to give Him the glory of His work. Zech. 11. 9, 10, 11.
Then said I, I will not feed you: that that dies let it dye: and that that is
to be cut off, let it be cut off, and let the rest eat every one the flesh of
another. And I took my staff, even Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might
break my covenant which I had made with this people. And it was broken in that
day: and so the poor of the flock that waited upon me knew that it was the Word
of the Lord.

2. This will dispose you to that Mourning and weeping which we have now need
to attend upon God with. We have reason to make this day, yea these days
wherein God is afflicting us; and these years wherein we are seeing evil, to be
times of Mourning and Sorrow. The Lord God calls to weeping; that we look over
our sins, look unto Christ, whom we have peirced by our sins; and look and go
after God in attendance to His word, weeping and mourning.

3. This will spirit and dispose you to embrace and practice all those counsels
have been given you in the Lord's Name, and from his Word. To attend all those
Duties the Lord requires of you. If the Question be ask't, What does God now
look for from us? The Answer is in Deuteronomy. 10. 12. And now; Israel, what does the
Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all His
ways, and to love Him, and to serve the LORD thy GOD with all thy heart and
with all thy soul. You need not look for any thing in particular from me now.
Much has been plainly spoken from God to this people again and again: God has
told us his mind fully, what He would have us do, and where our life lies
Deuteronomy. 32. 46, 47. Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you
this day, -- for it is not a vain thing for you: because it is your life. And
if we had but this spirit that I am now pleading for, we should then be ready
to rise up to do the words of the Lord, which we have heard from Him and
thereupon to engage in a saving and lasting work of Reformation. It would raise
us to an excellent temper in Christianity; to be high in worth, but low in
spirit; to do much for God, and think little of our selves.

4. This will give us access to, and acceptance with God in prayer. Psalm. 10.
12. Arise, O Lord, O God, lift up thine hand, forforget not the humble* ver.
17. Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble: Thou will prepare their
heart, thou will cause thy ear to hear. God sometimes denies to hear His own
people's prayers, when their spirits are no so low as they should be. And how
often has God refused to hear our prayers! But here is a way to have certain
Audience at the Throne of Grace. Psalm. 102. 16, 17. When the Lord shall build*
up Zion: He shall appear in His glory. He will regard the prayer of the
destitute, and not (...) their prayer. New- England had never more need of
importunate earnest praying: Woe to us if we be wanting now in importuning mercy
from heaven! A People or person become speechless in this respect is near to
death. Pray therefore we must and ought, and if we would be heard and accepted,
we must get our hearts and spirits thus meekly and humbly disposed. God could
not overlook them when thus humbly praying. Ier. 31. 18, 19, 20. I have surely
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me and I was
chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned, for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned, I
repented: And after that I was instructed I s^ote upon my thigh: I was ashamed
yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. Is Ephraim my
dear son? is he a pleasant child? For since I spoke against him I do earnestly
remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely
have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

5. This will dispose us to Patience and enduring under all Sufferings. The
heart that is not truly broken and meek'ned, finds it harder to comport with,
and bear quietly that which is contrary to him without flinching one way or
other; either on the one hand by succu^bing and yielding to the Temptation; or
on the other, by d^sorderly flying out beyond his Duty. The Historian gives
that as the reason why Origin faultred under the Temptation, quia virtutum
omnium parente, Niceph. p. 730.
summissione et humilitate excidisset: because he had lost or wanted the Mother
of all virtues, Humility and lowliness. But the Contrary is observed of
Athanasius, as the cause of his Constancy that steeled him against all his
Adversaries and Sufferings; that he was Ypselas tois ergois, tapeinos de to
phronemati. He was as truly low in heart, as really high in worth. He had great
seize, but was very humble and lowly under all. By this humble meek frame
of spirit we shall be enabled with Patience to endure under all Trials,
whatever we may meet with.

6. This will give ground for, and further our Faith and Reliance on the Lord.
The humble Centurion had great Faith. Mat. 8. 8. Lord, I am not worthy that
thou should come under my Roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall
be healed. The more humble we are, the more we shall be disposed to believe
aright, without any mixture of presumption: and the more ground we shall have
to believe. Let New England be humble, and New England shall not fail to be happy.
It is only the contrary hereto that will undo us. If we be poor and low in our
selves, we may trust in the Lord for His Salvation. Zeph. 3. 12. -- an*
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust -- Isai. 14. 32. -- the poor of
His People shall trust -- God will have His time to appear for the joy of those
that tremble at His Word. Isai. 66. 5. To make the firstborn of the poor to
feed, and the needy to ly down in safety. Chapt. 14. 30. To make the meek to
increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men to rejoice in the Holy
ONE of Israel. Cap. 29. 19. yea to tread down the lofty. Chapt. 26. 5. 6. And
God can easily make the designs and hopes of such as would, or have already in
heart swallowed the poor of His people, to be but empty dreams. Chapt. 29. 8.
If we be truly humble, God's Ax shall not cut us down, but His hand shall lift
us up in due time. 1. Pet. 5. 6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty
hand of God, that He may exalt you in due time. God knows how to make
distinction between the humble, and the proud, when his Wrath makes the
greatest confusion in the world. When we are once brought to this Frame of
Spirit, we may look for good tofollow: The more humility and less Pride in
Christians, the nearer we may suppose good times. We cannot (says Glanvil.
Cathol. Charity.
One) expect those glorious days, which are to commence upon the fall of
Antichrist, till we see all Christians sincerely set upon destroying what is
Antichristian in themselves.

And a spirit of Self-exaltation is such. They are God's secret, humble,
trembling, brokenhearted People, lying in the howels of the country, that must
be the Rise of all our Salvation. Job. 22. 29. When men are cast down, then
thou shall say, there is a lifting up: and He shall save the humble person.
^et a degenerate, backsliding people, that have been under divine Correction,
thus humble themselves, and God will return to them with mercy. Levit. 26. 40,
41, 42. If they shall confess their iniquity, -- that they have walked contrary
unto ^e, and that I also have walked contrary unto them; -- If then their
uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of
their inquity: Then I will remember my Covenant with Jacob. -- and I will
remember the Land. And it is God's manner in his signal Dispensations of Favor
to His People, to humble His people, before He give birth to His promises* to
bring down their hearts, before He fill them and raise them with Joy and
gladness; to strike them dumb in a holy self-abhorrency and confusion, before
He open their mouth in praises. Job. 40. 3, -- 6. and 42. 6, -- 10. We have
therefore encouragement and all Reason on every hand, to imitate those more
eminent and illustrious Saints, which are noted by the Elders round about the
Throne in the Revelations, who cast not only themselves but there Crowns down
before the Lord; laid all their Honor, Worth, or Endowments at the Lord's
feet, as sensible of, and acknowledging their own utter emptiness and
unworthiness. Chapt. 4. 10. I shall be brief in the Directions.


Direct. I. Get a real apprehension of the Lord's most excellent sovereignty
and Glory. That we be persuaded that it ought, and willing that it should be
so, that God should be every way glorified, and we be nothing. None was meeker
than Moses, before whom God had displayed His glory, and talked face to face.
The^ shall we be lowest in our selves, when God is highest and most lifted up
in our hearts. Isai. 6. 1, -- 5. I saw also the Lord sitting upon a Throne,
high and lifted up, and His train filled the Temple. Above it stood the
Seraphims -- and one cried unto another and said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the LORD
of hosts, the whole earth is full of His glory. And the posts of the door moved
at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke, Then said
I, woe is me for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips.

Dir. II. Get a through sense of your sins, and the desert of them. How could
we look high; or how could we choose but ly^ low, if we understood our selves
what we had done, and what we are? We must needs think the least mercy too good
for us. There is sin enough in the Country, and in our hearts, (had we a sense
of it) to break and humble us. Ezekiel. 36. 31. Then shall ye remember your own
evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in
your own sight, for your* iniquities, and for your abominations.

Dir. III. Live beholding and eyeing the Lord Jesus. Look to His Example. Mat.
11. 29. Learn of me, for I am meek and Lowly in heart. And look to Him for
influence to break and bring down our hearts. We are all sick of a hard and
proud heart, and if ever we desire to be healed of this woeful disease, we must
have recourse to the Lord Jesus Christ, and never leave meditating of His low
estate and breakings for us, till we find virtue coming out of Christ, to break
and humble our hearts, and He who smites through the proud in Judgment, do
smite through our pride in Mercy.

Dir. IV. Look to, and improve the Lords gracious Promises for the giving this
Spirit to his Church and People. In the sense of the unbrokenness and
unhumbledness of our hearts, mourn and cry to the Lord, and plead with Him to
remember His holy Covenant-promise, and to perform it for, and unto us. Ezekiel.
36. 26. A new heart also will I give you and a new spirit I will put within
you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and give you an
heart of flesh. Zech. 12. 10. And I will pour upon the House of David and upon
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications etc.

Dir. 5. Turn the Ambitious working of our hearts another way* Cure this malady
by Diversion: Turn it into that Channel wherein it may run: Let our Ambition be
to please, and be accepted of God. 2. Cor. 5. 9. Wherefore we labor, that
whether prepresent or absent we may be accepted of him. [We labour] (...), we
are ambitious, carried away by a holy Ambition. There is an Elevation of spirit
in the ways of God (oh that we had more of it!) which is desirable and
commendable. 2. Chron. 17. 6. And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the
Lord. And the more this grows, and prevails, the more will it suck dry that
unbecoming elation of spirit. Be therefore seeking and striving for that Honor
which comes from God only, and this will further you in the Obedience, Comfort,
Joy, and fruits of Faith, and this fruit of it Humility and Me^kness. Joh. 5. 4*

For a Close of this Discourse, this Doctrine and Exhortation may by a
particular Application be proposed

I. To Rulers: Such as are yet betrusted with the Charge of this people.
Honored and much esteemed! You are hence exhorted.

1. To Labor for a large measure of this spirit of humbleness of mind and
meekness in your selves. You need it to make You meet for your work, that You
may be accepted therein of God and men. There are other things indeed that may
buoy You up in the favorable opinion of men, for some time; but there is
nothing can give You a lasting room in the hearts of wise and good men like
this. But that which is more, this only can give You a standing under Divine
Favor and Acceptance; and of this you need a great degree, especially under
the circumstances of the present Time, to bear all the Conflicts, Hardships and
Discouragements You meet with* When God chose a man to lead his people in a
Wilderness (...) Difficulties, Dangers, Sufferings and Temptations, He (...)
Moses the meekest man in all the earth; one able, thr^ the intimacy of his
acquaintance with God, to bear thi^ ^tolerable unto others: And yet
notwithstanding even (...)'s spirit was sometimes too much provoked. What (...)
^en have You to be eminent in this respect, to be beyond ^ption for true
Gospel-Humility and subjection to the Wor^ (...) God, to be wholly mortified to
Self, to the Pride, Vanity* (...), Excess, Grandeur and Love of the World.

2. To labor to promote this spirit and frame in the People under Your charge.
If God continue You that are from among ourselves in this Trust, Your faithful
endeavors in this matter will still be expected. Remember that You rule not
only over men, but over a People of God, (though indeed too sadly* declined and
degenerate) and therefore You are to take care to manage them so as may set and
leave them under the highest degree of Divine Acceptance; that is to be as
humble and trembling under the word of God as may be. What therefore may be
done to convince of, and deter and recover this people from Sin of all kinds:
and what may be done to encourage, Draw on to, and settle this People under a
careful attendance to all good works in the Reverential ^ear of God; This is
Your Work* In which the LORD guide, prosper, and long continue You.

II. This Exhortation may be proposed To the Lord's servants in the Ministry.
Fathers, and Brethren, suffer this word of Exhortation from the unworthiest of
your Order, or rather from your Lord Jesus Christ: Show your selves Patterns,
as in* other things, so in the Humility and meekness of your spirits, the
contrition and brokenness of your hearts, awful trembling at God's Word, and in
the Administration of His Worship, and labor to promote this frame in the
Lord's people, by showing them their sins in the vileness and desert of them,
and by setting before them the Majesty and Glory of God. When God has
eminently improved succeeded and honored to the last any of his servants in
the work of the Ministry, He has given them a good measure of His Spirit. Our
Work is to receive the Word from God's mouth, and to give His people warning
from Him: To both which a large measure of this spirit is necessary; so much as
is not easily or, presently attained. It was some time before Elijah's spirit
at Horeb the mount of God, was sufficiently prepared to an awful regard of the
Divine presence, and to the receiving the Lord's message* First a great and
strong Wind rends' the mountains* breaks in pieces the Rocks before the Lord:
after the wind, an earthquake, and after the Earthquake, a Fire: and after
all these the Lord appears in a small still voice, and then Elijah wr^ his face
in his mantle, and in that awful posture receives the mind of God. 1. King. 19.
11, 12, 13. To Isaiah the Lord appears in such glorious manner as makes him cry
out, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips; and then
He gives him and sends him upon his special errand to his people. I^ai. 6. This
spirit also is needful for the due delivery of the Lords mind to His people. 2.
Tim. 2. 24, 25. The servant of the Lord must -- be gentle, -- patient, in
meekn^ss instructing etc. Whatever message we have; whether of Mercy or
Judgment, our souls should be feelingly and heart-breakingly concerned for
those to whom we speak. In the discharge of our Trust, as we are special
servants of Jesus Christ, we should have much of His spirit, who could not
denounce Judgment against Jerusalem without many tears and heart-breakings for
them. Luke ^9. 41, 44. And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and ^ept
over it, saying, If thou had known even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. For
the day shall come upon thee, that thine enemies* shall cast a tr^nch about
thee, etc. I need not say what present ^ause there is for the Lord's faithful
Watchmen to be alike affected for Zion. And in all our Administrations we be
carried forth with a full sense of our own weakness* worthiness. What a nothing
does the great Apostle Pau^ (...) ^f himself in the whole of his ministerial
conversation! I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the
graee of God which was with me. 1. Cor. 15. 10. In nothing am I behind the very
chiefest of the Apostles, though I be nothing. 2. Cor. 12. 11.

III. Finally, this Exhortation is proposed to all the People of the Land. You
are a professing People, and do something in Religion externally; but all your
Profession, and all that you do, will signify and come to nothing, if this
spirit be wanting. What Arrowsmith. Engl. Eben-iz. p. 28.
One says of Thanks, is true of all Worship and Service performed to God; The
value of it resolves it self wholly into the frame and Disposition of the
heart. You have the more need to be jealous of your selves, for many times
Christ's own Disciples don't know their own spirits: There is a height of
spirit* sometimes that under a Zeal for the Lord's work and glory grows
insensibly upon them, notwithstanding their converse with, and constant
attendance upon the Lord, insomuch that they do hence expose themselves to the
Lords rebuke. Luke 9. 54, 55. And when his Disciples James and John saw this,
they said, Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from Heaven, and
consume them, even as Elias did. But he turned and rebuked them, and said, ye
know not what manner of spirit ye are of. O therefore look to your hearts, take
heed to your spirits, that there be no Pride, Loftiness or sinful Discomposure
lodging there. Labor to be within that promise which makes over the great
Blessing of the Kingdom of Heaven; of Comfort, and an Inheritance on the earth
to the poor in spirit, that mourn and are meek. Mat. 5. 3, 4, 5. As for your
outward concerns, those of this Day and the like, seeing you have opportunity,
and so long as you shall have opportunity to be managing of them, I wish you
may show your selves meek, humble, patient, self denying, forgiving supposed
errors and wrongs: Laying aside inconvenient or unreasonable disgusts; not
leting Anger to rest in your bosoms; and that however God may further try you
in these things, that a spirit of patience and quiet submission to any such
Dispensation as is according to God's Will, may ever possess you, while you
both render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things
which are God's. But your great business is with God, and the most proper
advice I have to offer therein is,

Get and be of a poor and contrite spirit and trembling at the Word of God. Let
your hearts come down and lie low before God and as the sheep of His hand hear
his voice Psalm. 95. 6, 7, 8. O come let us worship and bow down, let us kneel
before the Lord our maker, For he is our God, and we are the people of His
pasture and the sheep of his hand: to day if ye will hear his voice harden not
your heart as in the provocation and as in the day of temptation in the
Wilderness* It is hardness and haughtiness of men's hearts that makes all Divine
Exhortations ineffectual. Oh beware of it in the least deg^e of it! Consider
what God has done to stain the glory of all flesh: He will have no flesh to
glory in his presence. Conside^ the ax is now laid to the root of the tree.
Mat. 3 10. If we will not lower to bring forth the fruit of true Humiliation
and R^ pentance, we shall be laid low, even to the ground: But thos^ that t^ble
when the Ax is at the root of the tree, when Judge meant is gathering in the
Cloud, God will look to them, that the Ax shall not cut them down, nor the
storm sweep the^ away. Go^ will be to them a Sanctuary. Isai. 8. 13. 14.
Sanctify the Lord of hosts Himself, and let Him be your fear, and let Him be
yo^ dread, and He shall be for a sanctuary. And they shall have rest i^ the day
of trouble, either by escaping, or having full suppo^ under it. Hab. 3. 15, 16.
Thou (...), (...) walk through the sea wi^ thy horses, through the heap of
great (...). When I heard, my be^ trembled: my lips quivered at the voice:
rottenness entered into (...) bones, and I trembled in my self, that I (...)
rest in the day of troubl^ We should therefore stand trembling before God under
t^ sense and apprehension of present and impending Dispensation but more
especially under the sense of whatsoever evils have kindled the Lords
Displeasure, and made Him threate^ (...) D^ parture from us Ezra. 9. 4. and 10.
9.

Let our whole Course, Garb, Guise, Converse and Spirit spea^ Humility and
Humiliation in so humbling a time as this is Carry it in all things as becomes
a poor and an afflicted people. I a^ sure you will be thereby better Disposed
to trust in the Na^ of the LORD, and have firmer ground to believe in His Sa^
vation.

The Subject therefore I have been discoursing is, I trust thro^ Grace a
suitable word from the Lord, as I was desired to p^ pare for this Occasion. I
have not designed to gra^ or (...) an^ have aimed to speak what may fall upon
the consciences of us all, a^ we are more or less guilty: and I fear we have
been (...) in the thing, one way or other, most of us, of wha^soever (...)
(...) (...) prehension. Oh that we might now list up our s^es no (...) The we
might now lay our hands upon our mouths, and put ou^ (...) in the dust, if so
be there may be hope! Famous, remarkable a^ admirable might the Lord's
providential operations then be (...) us in the eyes of others; as well as
comfortable to our s^ Isai. 14. 2. What shall O^ then answer the messengers of
the (...) That the Lord has founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall
(...) it. Acclamations of joy for the Lord's Grace; as in ^aying the Foundation
of, so in strengthening, defending, carrying on and (...) Temple-work among us
should not be wanting. It would ^n be well, yea it could not be otherwise. At
the worst, though all passages for Comfort and Relief on Earth were block't up,
yet Heaven would be open to you, whence you might receive Help: And whatever
should threaten, yet you might say with him (when demanded where he would be
then, if such a thing as was threatened should come to pass) that you shall be
aut in Coelo aut sub Coelo, either in Heaven or under Heaven: either under
Heavens Protection while you live, or in Heavens Possession if you should be
moved out of this world.

FINIS.

