PISTOS 'AYTO'THEOS OR AN Historical Account OF THE HERESY Denying the GODHEAD
OF CHRIST.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Hodgkin for Robert Clavell, at the Sign of the Peacoak
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1696.

TO THE READER.
AFter the Heresy denying the Divinity of Christ had been long silenced by
Argument and Discipline, it was again brought upon the Stage by Arius, whose
Character makes not much for its Credit. For though in holy Orders, he was proud
and aspiring, subtle witted, and an excellent Proficient in the Art of
Flattery. Besides he was one that had such an overweaning Conceit of his own
Abilities, that he thought all to be his Inferiors in Desert. And through this
his vain unhappy Temper he became impatient of Contradiction, full of Envy and
Stomach, and bold to broach Heresy. And it was observed That Discipline and
good Counsel, which usually make others better, made Arius the worse; and the
more his Heresy was condemned, the more he labored to propagate and defend it.

Sulpitius lib. 2. observes, that the Arian Heresy received no small Advantage
from the Quality of the Persons chosen to be its public Managers. Who (as he
tells us) were Senes callidi, old stanch Disputants, who had been long versed
in Controversy. Whereas the Managers chosen by the Orthodox, were Young Men,
parum docti and parum cauti, fuller of Warmth than of Learning. And this had a
great Influence upon the Cause, all Men concluding of the rest on either side,
by the Quality of the Managers.

Besides, the Orthodox dealt plainly, argued with Openness and Simplicity, and
in their Forms of Confession were clear and ingenuous. Whereas the Heretics
wrought with great Subtilty, declining no Artifice that might advantage their
Cause; and in their Confessions, they loved Ambiguity and Equivocation, and
(which did not a little turn to their Advantage) they always labored to beget
in the several Emperors and their Favorites a good liking of their Doctrine,
and either to gain them to it, or not greatly to disapprove it.

But (according to an Ancient Writer) it may justly create our Wonder, Phrob.
contna Ar.
that notwithstanding the Authors of this Venom are long since dead and gone,
the wicked Doctrine should still remain, and that after so many Confutations
and Censures thereof, any should be found to maintain and diffuse it. But our
Wonder will cease when we consider with judicious Hooker That the Weeds of
Heresy being grown up to Ripeness, do even in cutting down sometimes scatter
those Seeds, which for a while lie unseen and buried in the Earth, but
afterward freshly spring up again no less pernicious than at the first. And
the same learned Author observes, that the Heresies concerning the Holy Trinity
have of later Years grown up no where so fast as where the Athanasian Creed and
the Gloria Patri have not been made use of. And no Wonder that Heresies should
thrive in those Places where the best Preservatives against them have been
neglected.

For as to the Creed of Athanasius, what is it else, but a Divine Explication
of the chief Articles of the Christian Faith? Which Creed was so highly valued
by the Church, that she made it part of her Liturgy. And as for the Gloria, or
the Hymns and Sentences of Glory, they were a Part of the Liturgy long before
the Athanasian Belief: And they were ever looked upon as an heavenly
Acclamation of joyful Applause to his Praise in whom we believe. And from the
beginning the Church of Christ by a secret universal Impulse of God's Spirit,
always tied it self to end neither Sermon nor almost any special Matter wherein
the Things of God were concerned, without some peculiar Words of Honor and
Glory to the Trinity, which all true Christians believe and worship. And
whoever omitted to do this, was suspected to want a right Faith of the Trinity,
and to doubt of the Equality of the Persons: For if we really believe, The
Godhead of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, to be all one,
the Glory Equal, and the Majesty Coeternal, why do we not publicly own it, by
ascribing equal Glory to each of them? And where can we do this with more
Solemnity than at the Close of those Homilies and Discourses which we make unto
the People? The Use of the Gloria was never quarreled at or omitted by any
till Arius, who being pressed with this Usage of the Church, as an Argument
against the Heresy which makes the Son inferior to the Father, labored to
corrupt this Hymn, saying, Glory be to the Father, by the Son, in the Holy
Ghost. But the Church was careful to maintain the ancient Usage, Con. Va. c. 7.
adding on Purpose against Arius, As it was in the Beginning, is now, and ever
shall be.

The Gloria Patri it has ever been esteemed the Christians Creed and Hymn. For
the Sum of the Christians Faith is the Mystery of the Trinity, by which he
declares against all Heretics in the World. And it is also the Christians Hymn
wherewith he ought to close all his Religious Services, Praises, Prayers,
Thanksgivings, Confession of Faith and Sins. And as to the great Mystery
contained in the Gloria, it was well with Christianity when Men went no farther
therein than the Scripture led them, and when they rested in such Discoveries
of the Trinity as God has been pleased to give in his Word. By which Word if we
would once guide our Sentiments, and submit them to it, we might hope to see
all those Disputes buried in silence, which now make so great a Noise: Ridente
Turca, non dolente Judaeo. And if those very Men, who are at present so keenly
engaged in Debates about the Trinity, would speak out, they would tell us That
Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity is a Mystery surpassing their Abilities
to explain, and that it surmounts the Power of humane Nature to give a
satisfactory Answer to all the Doubts, Cavils and Questions which bold Men may
raise about it.

Let the Mysteries of Christianity continue at that Distance where God has set
them to be believed and adored, and then Peace and Truth will meet and embrace.

(...) OR AN Historical Account OF THE HERESY Denying the GODHEAD of CHRIST.
WE may know the better how to determine of the Opinion which denies the
Divinity of our Savior, if we pursue it through its whole History, and
consider where it first took Root, when it began to spread, and how in time it
overran so great a Part of the Christian Church. Now in doing this, we must
look beyond the Annals of Christianity: For long before that Christianity was
known by Name in the World, its Author was robbed of his Godhead, by that very
People which hoped for the largest Benefits from him. For at least, ever since
the Schools of the Rabbis gained Authority among the Jews, that infatuated
Nation have been of Opinion, that the Messiah whom they still expect, is not to
be the Son of God in that Sense in which the Christians own him to be the
second Person in the Holy Trinity: For though the Jews by many Texts of
Scripture, prove that the Messiah shall be the Son of God, yet they hold he is
not to be the Son of God by Nature, but only by Deputation: So that they deny
his Eternal Existence and Deity. Now this is an Opinion which was afterward
followed by those Heretics who held the Kingdom of Christ was not perpetual
and eternal; and that he was made the Son of God only from the time that he
took our Flesh, and was born of the Virgin. When Christ put that Question to
his Disciples, Whom do Men say, that I, the Son of Man am? He reflected upon a
double Error in his Countrymen the Jews, concerning the Messiah. The first
Error respected the Manner of his coming among them, which they expected should
be in Secular Pomp and Grandeur, and attended with the Conquest and subduing of
the Nations. From which Error he labored to withdraw their Minds, by recalling
them to the original Promise of his Coming, and showing them that the end
thereof was not to conquer Kingdoms, but to bruise the Serpent's Head; and to
manifest that he was the Seed of the Woman, which was promised to do this, he
takes upon him no higher Title than that of the SON of MAN. A second Error the
Jews had imbibed concerning the Messiah, respected his Descent: For they were
uncertain whether he was to arise from the Living or from the Dead; which Doubt
Christ also fully cleared, when he expressly owned himself to be the Son of Man,
or the Son that was promised to the first Man, who should be born from the Seed
of the Woman. Christ did not so much enquire whether the Jews thought him to be
the Messiah, as what kind of Person they thought him to be, as he was the
Messiah: So that the Question he put to his Disciples did not so much regard
his Person, as the Quality of his Person, and whether the Messiah, whom they
all acknowledged, should be the Son of Man, was not also to be the Son of God,
not only by Adoption, Deputation and Promotion; but by Nature. And the
Disciples returned an Answer to their Master's Question, according to the
Opinion the Multitude had of him, telling him that some took him for John the
Baptist, some for Elias, and some for one of the old Prophets, who was either
returned to Life, or else that the Soul of one of them was transmigrated and
come into his Body; which Opinion the Pharisees had borrowed of the
Pythagoreans.

And when the Disciples had given Christ this Account of the various Sentiments
the Jewish People had of the Quality of his Person, he was pleased to ask them
their Opinion of him; But whom do ye (my Disciples) say that I am? To which
Demand, Simon Peter in the Name of the rest, makes this Reply: Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God. The Answer is not only wonderfully
emphatical by reason of the Multitude of Articles that are in it; but also
because that Peter did not return it of his own Head, nor by any Dictate
inferior to that of the Holy Ghost: For Flesh and Blood (as they signify mere
Man in Opposition to God) did not put this Answer in Simon's Mouth, but it was
immediately from Heaven: For from thence he was inspired to declare, that Jesus
was the true Messiah, and by Nature the Son of the living God. He needed no
Revelation to enable him to confess that the Messiah was the Son of God by
Deputation: Every ordinary Jew could have told him so much: For it was
generally believed that when ever God should be pleased to send the Messiah, he
would depute him to be his Son; but that he was to be his Son by Nature: Very
God of very God, was no Article in the Jewish Creed. And this great Truth was
not founded on Humane Testimony, nor on the Votes and Wishes of Men, but on the
Testimony of God himself: For it was he that put it into Peter's Mind to
declare the Divinity of Christ, and by that Means to settle the uncertain
wavering Thoughts that were on Foot, concerning the Quality of the Person of
the Messiah, and that it might be no longer doubted that he was God. The
Divinity of Christ is indeed the Rock on which the Christian Church is built,
and that which makes it stand impregnable against the Gates of Hell, the
greatest Power and Artifice that can possibly be used to destroy it.

From what has now been intimated, we may conclude, that the Denial of Christ's
Divinity, came originally from the Jews, and that it is an Opinion which
received its full Confutation from Heaven: So that it may justly create our
Wonder, that after so solemn a Confession as Peter Made of Christ's Divinity,
and that too by the Dictate of God himself, that any who believe the Scripture
should be so hardly as to gainsay it. But seeing it has happened to be
otherwise, and that among the Professors of Christianity some have so far
Judaiz'd in this Particular, as sacrilegiously to rob our Lord of his Divinity.
We are next to consider who and what sort of Persons they were that first did
thus.

Eusebius, upon whose Authority I depend in this Point, writes, how that one
Theodotus was the Inventer of this Atheistical Opinion, and that he was a Man
of mean Education, being by Profession a Tanner. This Man drew into his Heresy
another of his own Name, who was a Banker, and both together proselyted
Asclepiodotus; of whose Quality and Condition the Historian makes no mention.
This Asclepiodotus gained to his Opinion Natalis, a Confessor, a Man of Piety
and good Meaning; who being afterward convinced of his Error, recanted it.
This Heresy was no sooner heard of, but it was exploded and writ against, and
Enquiry made after those who maintained it. And one Artemon being found a
zealous Stickler in Defense of this blasphemous Heresy, it was called the
Heresy of Artemon: In Confutation of which several Pieces were composed by the
Ancients, evincing that the Opinion which asserted our Savior to be mere Man,
was an Innovation of late Date amongst the Christians. Of those Tracts that
were written on this Argument, none was so elaborate as that called the Little
Labyrinth; whose Author, according to Nicephorus, is unknown: And Theodoret who
mentions the Story of Theodotus the Tanner, and Natalis the Bishop, attests
that he had taken it out of the Book called the Little Labyrinth. Photinus
relates, that Caius a Roman Presbyter, living in the Time of the Pope's, Victor
and Zephyrin, in the Year 199, wrote a Book against the Heresy of Artemon, but
says that it was not the same with the Little Labyrinth. But to proceed out of
the Little Labyrinth, Eusebius tells us, that those who affirmed our Savior to
be a mere Man, boasted much of the Antiquity of their Opinion, and how that all
the Ancients, and the very Apostles themselves received and taught the same
things that they asserted; and that the same was taught till the Times of
Victor, who from Peter was the thirteenth Bishop of Rome; but that when
Zephyrinus was made Pope, the same Opinion began to be adulterated, which
(says Eusebius out of the Little Labyrinth) might seem probable, if it were
not contradicted by the sacred Scriptures, and the Writings of some Christians
ancienter than the Times of Victor, who lived in the End of the second Century:
For Justin, who died about the Year 166, and Tatianus who lived about the same
time; as also Clemens, wrote in the Defense of the Truth, against the Gentiles,
and the Heresies of their own Times; and these in all their Books have
maintained the Divinity of Christ. And who is he that is ignorant of the Books
of Irenaeus, Melito the Sardian Bishop, and others, which declare Christ to be
God and Man? Pliny (in his Epistle to Trajan) tells him how it was the Custom
of the Christians to compose Psalms and Hymns in Honor of Christ, in which
they attributed Divinity to him, and sang forth his Praises as God. These very
Psalms and Hymns, written at the Beginning of Christianity by its faithful
Professors, yield an undeniable Attestation of their believing Christ to be
God. So that the Heretics who first held the contrary, had no reason to say
that their Opinion was the Creed of the Primitive Christians: And it is a
shameless Falsity to affirm, that Victor, Bishop of Rome, was of their
Judgment: For Victor was so far from abetting those who held Christ to be a
mere Man, that he condignly punished them; as was evident in the Case of
Theodotus the Tanner (the Founder of this Apostasy) whom Victor excommunicated
and proscribed: Which certainly he would not have done, had he been of the same
Judgment with him. Thus stood Affairs in the Times of Victor, and in what
Posture they were in the Days of his Successor Zephyrinus, who was made Bishop
of Rome about the ninth Year of Severus's Empire, comes now to be recounted.

The Person that compiled the Book concerning the execrable Heresy, now
treated of, relates a very remarkable Passage that happened in the Days of
Zephyrinus, concerning one Natalis, who, as Valesius conjectures, was that
Caecilius Natalis, who, by a Dispute of Octavius Januarius's before Minucius
Felix at Rome, was converted to the Christian Faith; as Minucius Felix relates
in his Dialogue; and the Name, the Time, and the Profession of this Person, do
all agree to make this probable.

This Natalis was a Confessor, and lived at the Time when the Little Labyrinth
was composed; but by the Craft of Asclepiodotus and Theodotus the Banker, both
Disciples of Theodotus the Tanner, he was seduced to their Opinion, and
persuaded by them to be elected a Bishop of their Heresy. And the most
prevailing Argument with Natalis to accept of this Office, was the
Consideration of a monthly Salary, amounting to an hundred and fifty Pence,
which they promised duly to pay him. Natalis being thus made a Bishop, turned a
vehement Assertor of the Heresy of Theodotus; but he did not long therein
continue with any Sedateness or Complacency: For by Visions in his Sleep, he
was frequently admonished by our Lord, whose Compassion toward him was so
great, that he would not let him who had been a Witness of his own Sufferings,
to perish in his Heresy, and under Excommunication. But Natalis being
bewitched with the Bait of Primacy among those of his Sect, and with the Lucre
he got by being their Bishop, he regarded not the Visions he had in his Sleep,
but continued as zealous in the Defense of his Opinion, as if he had never been
warned from Heaven to reject it. Whereupon it pleased the compassionate God to
send his holy Angels to chastize him, who for a whole Night having loaded him
with severe Stripes, he was therewith so far awakened, that he thought of
nothing but a speedy Recantation and Repentance: And rising very early the next
Morning, he put on Sackcloth, and besprinkled himself with Ashes, and with
Tears in his Eyes, prostrated himself before Zephyrinus the Bishop, and fell
down not only at the Feet of the Clergy, but of the Laity also; and with Tears
moved the Compassion of the Church; which having viewed the print of the
Stripes he had received, and observed his sorrowful Carriage, and other Tokens
of his Repentance, at last, though with great Difficulty, she admitted him into
her Communion.

But besides the Little Labyrinth, out of which Eusebius transcribed this Story
of Natalis, he takes notice of other Books written against the Heretics, that
denied Christ to be God, which Books represent them to have been Persons of the
vilest Impiousness and Immorality: And such as impudently adulterated the
sacred Scriptures, rejected the Canon of the primitive Faith, and were ignorant
of Christ: For they neglected the holy Bible; and instead of enquiring into its
Meaning, they labored to obscure the Light thereof, bestowing their Pains in
finding out such Schemes of Argumentation as might confirm the System of their
Impiety. If any proposed unto them a Text of the divine Scriptures, they
examined whether a connex or a disjunctive Proposition, might be made out of
it; and instead of studying the Word of God, they applied themselves to
Geometry, and to the reading of Euclid, Aristotle, Theophrastus and Galen;
admiring the Books the last had written concerning the Forms of Syllogisms, and
the whole Body of Philosophy. They made use also of the Arts of Infidels for
the Confirmation of their Heretical Opinion; and by the Craft of some Atheists,
they adulterated the sincere Authority of the divine Scriptures, on which they
impudently laid their Hands, saying, that it ought to be corrected: They put
out several Copies of the Bible; which Copies, upon Examination, and comparing
them one with another, were found to be very disagreeing: For the Copies of
Asclepiodotus were much different from those of Theodotus; and the Disciples of
each of them labored diligently to amend the Corrections of their Masters. The
Copies of Hermophilus differed from those of Asclepiodotus; and those Copies of
Scripture, written by Apollonides differed one from another: But all the Copies
agree in an audacious wresting and deforming the Word of God: And we may well
imagine that these Heretics were not ignorant of their wicked Acting in
depraving the divine Scriptures: For either they did not believe the divine
Scriptures to have been dictated by the Holy Spirit, and then they were
Infidels: Or if they did believe this, and yet went about to correct them, then
they must think themselves wiser than the Holy Ghost, and what were they then
but mad Men? For they cannot deny this their bold Fact in correcting the
Scriptures to have been done by them; because the Copies were written by their
own Hands: And they did never pretend to have received such Copies as they
produced, from those who were their Instructers; nor could they ever show the
Copies out of which they transcribed their pretended Corrections. But this was
not all, for the old Heretics, who denied Christ to be God, were not content
only to corrupt the Scriptures, to make them speak in Favor of their Heresy;
but some of them quite rejected both the Law and the Prophets, under a Pretense
of the Grace given by the Gospel.

This is the Account which Eusebius gives of the first Impugners of the
Divinity of our Lord: And they appear to have been bold, crafty, assuming Men:
Men of that Impudence, as to affirm the first Christians, even the Apostles
themselves, to have been of their Opinion; though they cannot be ignorant, how
that both the Inspired Scriptures, and the first and best Christian Writers
attested the quite contrary: And had we no other Proof hereof than the Psalms
and Hymns composed and sung by the first Christians in Praise of Christ, even
these would sufficiently demonstrate that they did own him to be true God, or
else we must conclude them to have been Idolaters, who sang those Hymns to him
as God. But the Villainy and Poison of these Heretics was most signally
displayed in those Corruptions of the Scriptures, which they called
Corrections: For this was to envenome the Spring, and to keep both themselves
and others from ever coming to the Knowledge of the Truth. But their Devices
and Councils were all disappointed in their Disagreement about that which they
called the Corrections of Scripture: For they could never hit of any Harmony in
their Copies, nor determine which of their correct Copies of Scripture, should
be the Conon.

After the Heresy of Artemon had been condemned and refuted by the Writers of
those Times, we hear no more of it till about the middle of the third Century;
when it began again to be revived by Paul of Samosata. This Paul was Bishop of
Antioch, and notorious for the abject, mean Opinion which he had of our
Savior, denying that the Word was ever truly united to the Humanity in the
Person of Christ, and that he was ever any more but a mere Man. For the
Suppressing of which Heresy, and Censure of its Reviver, a Council was held at
Antioch; where all the Pastors of the Churches did assemble, only Dionysius
Bishop of Alexandria was not there, which he excused by reason of his Age and
Infirmity of Body: But he declared by Letter his Sense and Opinion concerning
the Matter in Debate.

At this Council there was assembled the most eminent Bishops of those Times,
such as Firmilianus Bishop of Caesaria in Cappadocia, Gregory and his Brother
Athenodorus, Bishops of the Churches of Pontus: There were also present Helenus
Bishop of Tarsus, Nichomas Bishop of Iconium, Hymenaeus Bishop of Jerusalem,
Theotecnus Bishop of Caesaria, on the Confines of Jerusalem, Maximus of Bostra,
together with many eminent Priests and Deacons. All these being assembled in
the same Place, Disputations and Questions were raised about the Heresy of
Paul: In all which he was observed to use great Art in concealing his heterodox
Opinions, whilst others were as diligent in finding them out and exposing them.
At last the Synod, which consisted of a very great Number of Bishops, convicted
Paul, and unanimously condemned him of false Doctrine, and by Excommunication,
cast him out of the Catholic Church. The deepest Wound the Heretic received
in this Council was from Malchio a Presbyter of the Church of Antioch, an
eloquent Man, and one very famous for teaching the Grecian Philosophy: He was
also much taken Notice of for his surpassing Sincerity in the Christian Faith.
This Malchio having undertaken to dispute against Paul, wonderfully detected
and confuted the Frauds and Sophistries of that crafty Heretic, by which and
his Excellent Virtues, Malchion gained such a Credit and Renown, that he was
thought worthy to be canonized in the Greek Menology at 28th of October.

The Prelates being assembled in Council at Antioch, they agreed upon sending a
Letter to Dionysius Bishop of Rome, and to Maximus, who succeeded Dionysius in
the Bishopric of Alexandria; and having done this, they sent the same Letter
over all the Provinces; wherein they set down the pernicious and obstinate
Heterodoxy of Paul, the Confutations and Disputes that had been held against
him; together with a Narrative of his Life and Carriage. A Copy of which
Epistle as it stands entire in Eusebius, and translated at Cambridge, I have
thought not improper here to insert.

The Synodical Epistle of the Antiochian Fathers, concerning Paul of Samosata,
Bishop of Antioch, excommunicated by them for denying the Divinity of Christ.
To Dionysius and Maximus, and to all our Fellow-Ministers over the whole
World, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons; and to the whole Catholic Church
under Heaven, Helenus, Hymenaeus, Theophilus, Theotecnus, Maximus, Proclus,
Nichomas, A^lianus, Paul, Bolanus, Protogenes, Hierax, Eutychius, Theodorus,
Malchion, Lucius, and all the Bishops of the Neighboring Cities and Provinces,
which are with us; the Presbyters and Deacons, and the Churches of God, to the
beloved Brethren in the Lord, Health.

WE have written to, and entreated many of the Bishops far remote, that they
would come to assist in the curing of this pestilent Doctrine: For we wrote to
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, and to Firmilianus Bishop of Capadocia, Men of
blessed Memory. The first of them wrote to Antioch; but did ^o^ so much as
vouchsafe the Author of the Heresy, a Salutation; neither did he write to him
by Name, but to the whole Church: A Copy of which Letter, we have here
inserted. The other (to wit) Firmilianus, came twice, and condemned Paul 's
Novelties, as we who were then present, do attest, and many others do also know
as well as we. But when Paul promised to recant, Firmilianus believing him, and
hoping that the Business might be composed without any Reproach to our
Religion, he deferred his Sentence, being deceived by him who denied his God
and Lord, and who kept not the Faith which he formerly professed.

But Firmilianus was now coming to Antioch, and came as far as Tarsus: For he
had Experience of his malicious Wickedness, who denied his God. But in the
Interim of our Assembling, and whilst we were sending for him, and expecting
his Coming, he died.

But since that Paul has returned to forged and spurious Opinions, departing
from the true Rule, it is not our Concern to examine the Actions of one who is
out of the Church; neither how he who was formerly poor and indigent (having no
Estate of his Parents, nor got any thing by any Trade or Profession) is now
become incredibly rich, by his unlawful and sacrilegious Dealings, by Extortion
and Vexatiousness, used toward the Brethren, and by taking Bribes from those
that were injured, promising them to help them to their Right, for a Reward:
But he deceived them, getting Money for doing nothing, through their
Willingness (who were entangled in Suits) to give any thing to be delivered
from those Troubles. He supposed Gain to be Godliness: Neither declare we how
proud and insolent this Hertick was, being invested with secular Dignities, and
desiring to be styled a Ducenarius, rather than a Bishop; and how he walked
through the Forum, reading and dictating Letters as he walked in public, with
a numerous Guard about him, some going before and some following after him:
Insomuch that there was an ill Opinion and an Odium brought upon the Faith,
through his Pride and Haughtiness. Neither does it concern us to examine his
vainglorious Ambition in the Ecclesiastic Conventions, which he greedily
pursues being desirous of Glory, and affected with an imaginary Pomp; with such
Devices as these, terrifying the Minds of the Faithful and Ignorant,

Besides, he ^rected for himself a Tribunal, and a lofty Throne, not like one
of Christ's Disciples; but had a place called his Secretum, like as the secular
Magistrates have. He also used to clap his Hands upon his Thigh and stamp upon
the Throne with his Feet: And such as did not commend him, and shake their
Oraria as they usually did in the Theaters, and did not make loud Acclamations,
nor leapt up and down in the same manner as his Favorites did (which were a
Company of silly Men and Women that during their hearkening to him, used such
Indecencies) but were attentive to him with such a seemly Reverence and Decency
as becomes the House of God; those Persons he rebuked and reproached.

In his public Discourses he reflected upon the Doctors of our Religion that
were dead, with all imaginable Scorn and Petulancy: But he magnified himself,
not as became a Bishop, but rather like a Counterfeit and an Impostor.

He abolished the Psalms which were usually sung in Honor of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as a Novel and the Composures of modern Men. On the great Feast of
Easter, he appointed Women to sing Psalms in his Commendation in the Body of
the Church; which whosoever heard, might justly tremble at: He also privately
sent the Bishops of the neighboring Villages and Towns, and the Presbyters who
were his Flatterers, to make Discourses to the People in Commendation of him.
He will not join in a Confession with us, that the Son of God came down from
Heaven; that we may premise some things of what we shall hereafter more at
large declare in Writing: Neither shall this be affirmed on our bare Word, but
it is evident in many Places up and down his Acts, which we have sent you. And
more especially where he says, that Jesus Christ is of the Earth. But those who
chant out his Praise, and sing his Encomiums amongst the People, do say, that
this their (impious) Master is an Angel come down from Heaven. Nor does that
haughty Fellow prohibit those Expressions, but is himself present when they are
spoken.

What need we here mention his and his Presbyters and Deacons subintroduc'd
Women (as the Antiochians term them) in whom he conceals, not only this, but
many other damnable Crimes, which he is conscious of, and of which he has been
convicted, they are guilty; that by this means he may keep them so obnoxious as
not to adventure through a Fear of their own Guilt, to accuse him for his
impious Words and Practices? Moreover he has enriched them, and for this Reason
he is beloved and admired by them who are covetous.

But why do we write these things? We know, (Beloved) that it is the Duty of a
Bishop, and of the whole Clergy, to be Examples of good Works to the People.
Neither are we ignorant, that by introducing Women into their Society, some
have wholly fallen away from Goodness, and others have been suspected: And
although it should be granted that he committed nothing that was unchaste, yet
the very Suspicion which arises from such a thing, ought to be avoided, lest it
should be offensive to any one, and induce others to imitate it. For how can he
reprove or admonish another not to frequent the Company of Women, and to take
heed lest he fall, who indeed has sent away one, but now keeps two that are
young and beautiful, and carries them along with him wherever he goes, and
indulges and stuffs himself with Delicacies?

These are the Reasons that all People sigh and lament privately: But they so
dread his Tyranny and Authority, that they dare not accuse him. Now (as before
we have said) any one would call a Man, who professes the Catholic Doctrine,
and is reckoned of our Communion, to an Account for these things. But from one
who has abjured the Mystery of our Religion, and has boasted in that cursed
Heresy of Artemon, we judge it needful to require an Account of these Things.

Having therefore excommunicated this contumacious Enemy of God, we are
necessitated to ordain another Bishop in his stead over the Catholic Church
(as we are persuaded not without the Providence of God) to wit Domnus (the Son
of Demetrianus, of blessed Memory, who before him was the eminent Governor of
that See) a Man adorned with all Accomplishments requisite for a Bishop; which
we have therefore signified to you that you may write to him, and receive from
him Communicatory Letters: But as for this Paul, let him go to Artemon, if he
pleases, and let the Followers of Artemon hold Communion with him.


This is the Circular Epistle which was composed and dispersed by the second
Antiochian Synod, which Baronius has placed at the Year of Christ 272. Seventy
Fathers, says Athanasius, were present at this Council, besides Presbyters and
Deacons, who did all unanimously concur in the Excommunication and Devestiture
of Paul of Samosata; who according to what is intimated in this Synodical
Letter, was a Man of great Injustice and Avarice, and also of great Pride and
suspected Chastity. His Injustice and Covetousness, were but too evident in the
Methods which he used to make himself rich. His Extortion is particularly taken
Notice of: Which he might commit, either by the Terror of his Authority, like
Soldiers who fright and plunder Men, which was forbidden by our Savior: Or as
he exercised Extortion by Deceit and Cunning, when under Pretense of favoring
and helping Men, he took Bribes. And to this the Fathers of the Council in all
Probability had respect, when they say that he did (...), extort the Brethren.

Next, his Pride was evident in his Ambitious affecting to be called a
Ducenarius, which was, an Officer appointed by the Emperor to collect and
receive his Revenues; who for his Service, was allowed a yearly Salary of two
hundred SESTERCES, and from thence had his Name Ducenarius. The Antiochian
Fathers take Notice of this Heretick's Pride in his haughty and pompous walking
through the (...), as that Word may signify any promiscuous or popular
Assembly, met together, either for Traffic, as in a Fair or Market, or Hall,
or Court of Judicature. Which Places, it is like, the vainglorious Man
frequented on purpose to receive the Acclamations of his Flatterers. His Pride
appeared likewise in erecting of a lofty Throne. For although Episcopal Thrones
were customary, even from the times of the Apostles as we may conclude from the
Mention Eusebius makes of the Throne of James, Brother of the Lord; yet this
Throne was no more than the Bishop's Chair, which was but little higher than
the rest of the Clergies: But Paul erected a Tribunal in the Church for
himself, and sat on a Seat higher than it was before. For though the Bishops
ever sat somewhat higher than the rest of the People, yet we find not that
they had a Tribunal. This Piece of State was the peculiar Invention of Paul the
Apostate, as was also the Secretum, or Place railed about in the inner Court,
and hung with Curtains, where none sat but the Judices majores, or Judges of
Life and Death; or such as heard Trials of Criminals. And when Paul chose to
have such a Secretum, it showed he was of an ambitious Spirit, and that he
immoderately affected secular Grandeur, having rejected not only the Divinity
of Christ, but also his Doctrine and Practice concerning Lowliness and
Humility: For Vanity swelled him so much, that on all Occasions he courted
Applause, and expected that those who were Auditors of his Homilies, should
express their Praise and Commendation of what he said, by shaking their Oraria,
or Handkerchiefs, as Spectators did at Theaters, to declare their Approbation
of what was acted.

And to manifest yet further his insatiable Thirst of Praise, he privily
excited the Chorepiscopi, or Vicar-Bishops, to make public Discourses and
Harangues in his Commendation, and to extol his Merits and Government, in their
Popular Meetings. But the infamous Carriage of this haughty Heretic was not
bounded with filthy Lucre and vain Ostentation; but it went on to a vehement
Suspicion of Incontinency with those Women whom the Antiochians called (...),
of which he had always with him those that were young and beautiful, with whom
he lived in great sensual Delights; as Feasting, Drinking, and indulging
himself in the common Incentives of Lust. This sort of Women are neither Wives
nor Concubines, but such as were kept by the Clergy upon a Pretense of Piety.
Valesius says, they were by some called Sisters, and by others Commanentes;
because they constantly abode with those Presbyters and Deacons, who chose
them, as was pretended, not upon the Account of Lust, but for Religion: And the
Clergy of those Times gave it out, they did this in Imitation of the Apostles,
who carried Women along with them whither ever they went to preach the Gospel:
Which Practice was founded upon those Words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 9.5. But this
Custom of superinduced Women, was condemned by the Synod, and it is warmly
inveighed against by Jerome. in his Ep. to Eustochius. And notwithstanding that
the least of the mentioned Crimes, was in the purer Days of Christian
Discipline, Ground enough to cast any (guilty thereof, much more a Bishop) out
of the Communion of the Church; yet Paul, though he deserved to be, was not
censured for his Manners, but his Heresy, in denying Christ to be God. And for
a further Proof of the Pride and Obstinacy of this ill Man, he slighted even
Excommunication, and was so far from being humbled thereby, that he grew more
insolent. For being Canonically excommunicated, and deprived by the Antiochian
Fathers, he would not quit the Possession of his Church but kept it for some
Years after the Sentence of being deposed, was passed against him, and would
not obey the Decree of the Synod: But the better to fortify his Contumacy, he
put himself under the Protection of Zenobia, an Eastern Queen, into whose
Favor, by servile Flatteries, he had slily insin uated himself. But when
Zenobia was conquered, the Christian Prelates petitioned Aurelianus, that this
Paul, who had formerly conspired with Zenobia against the Romans, might be
removed from the Sea of Antioch. And Aurelianus was at that time so well
affected toward the Christians, that he granted their Request, and gave Command
that the Bishop's Palace should be resigned to whom the Christian Bishops
should assign it by their Letters. Thus was the Heretic with great Disgrace
thrust out of the Church by the secular Power, in the third Year of Aurelianus.
It is remarkable that in the first Council at Antioch, Paul seemed to have
recanted his Heresy; but returning to it again, as a Dog to his Vomit, he was
deprived by the Second, which was held on Purpose to examine and censure his
Doctrine concerning Christ; which (says the Council) was no other than what
Annas and Caiphas taught concerning the Messiah; namely, that he was to be the
Son of God, no otherwise than by Favor and the divine Grace, that accompanied
him after God had made choice of him to be the Savior of Mankind.

Paul of Samosata being now suppressed, his Heresy was no more heard of till
the Reign of Constantine, who (having vanquished his Colleague Licinius, and
after put him to death upon his new Revolt) had Command over the whole Roman
Empire, and being proclaimed Emperor and Augustus, he endeavored to augment
the Affairs of the Christians, who by his Means enjoyed a profound and secure
Peace; which in all Probability might have continued, had not the Christians
fallen into intestine Wars among themselves; which broke forth first in the
Churches of Alexandria, occasioned by a private Dispute in the College there:
But in a very short Space (as Socrates observes) overran all Egypt, Lybia and
Thebais, and the rest of the Cities and Provinces. The Quarrel began thus.
Alexander who succeeded Achilles in the Sea of Alexandria, discoursing one Day
in the Presence of his Presbyters, and the rest of his Clergy, too curiously
concerning the Mystery of the Holy Trinity, he asserted this Point of Divinity,
That there was an Unity in the Trinity. But Arius one of Alexander's
Presbyters, being skilful in the Faculty of Reasoning, supposed that the Bishop
designed to introduce the Opinion of Sabellius, who affirmed the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost to be but one Substance, one Person under three several Names:
Which in the Time of the old Testament gave the Law under the Notion of the
Father; In the New Testament was made Man, in the Capacity of the Son; and
descended afterward upon the Apostles, in Quality of the Holy Ghost; which
Opinion Dionysius opposed with so much Eagerness and Warmth of Disputation,
that he bent it too much the contrary Way, asserting not only a Distinction of
of Persons in the Trinity, but also a Difference of Essence, an Inequality of
Power and Glory.

For which Dionysius was severely censured as one of those who in great Measure
opened a Gap to those Arian Impieties, which afterward broke into the Church.
Arius (as Socrates observes) fell into an Opinion wholly opposite to that of
Sabellius; not out of any Dislike to Sabellianism, but only to oppose the
Bishop. He was of a perverse and contentious Humor, and one that had too good
an Opinion of his own Abilities. When Alexander gravely taught his Clergy, that
there was an Unity in the Trinity, or, that the same numerical Godhead was in
every one of three Persons of the Holy Trinity; what Lover of Truth and Peace
would have excepted against it? And yet Arius a nimble sharp Disputant, flew in
the Face of the Bishop; and merely out of a Spirit of Opposition, confronts his
Assertion of an Unity in the Trinity: And from thence draws a Conclusion that
was very remote and unnatural. For (according to Socrates) Arius argued thus:
If the Father begot the Son, he that was begotten, has a Beginning of his
Existence: And there was a time when the Son was not, and by necessary
Consequence, he must derive his Existence from nothing. This was the Form and
Matter of Arius's Argumentation, as Socrates relates it; which I leave the
Logician to examine, only to observe, that this was no extempere or occasional
Objection, brought by Arius against what had been discoursed by the Bishop; but
the very Judgment and Thoughts which he had concerning the second Person in the
Trinity, whom he held was not from Eternity, but took his being in Time, and
was made of nothing, as will appear in the Sequel of this Discourse.

Now to show that Arius did not draw his Conclusion only by way of Argument,
but that it was his fixed and resolute Opinion, he presently began to make
Proselytes, and to excite many to be of his Judgment: Among whom, some think
the first and chief was Eusebius, who had formerly been Bishop of the Church of
Berytus; but was surreptitiously crept into the Bishopric of Nicomedia in
Bithynia: And from this Spark (says the Historian) was kindled a great Fire,
many patronizing Arius's Heresy, and appearing in its Maintenance and Defense.

Alexander hearing and seeing what was done, became highly incensed, and having
convened a Council of many Bishops, he degraded Arius as an Heretic, and those
that embraced his Opinion; and gave the Bishops of every City an Account of his
Proceedings in a circular Letter; a Copy whereof as it stands in Socrates, now
follows.

A Copy of the Letter written by Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, to his
Fellow-Bishops, concerning the degrading of Arius.
To our well-beloved and dearest Fellow-Ministers of the Catholic Church, in
all Places, Alexander wishes Health in the Lord.
WHereas there is one Body of the Catholic Church; and it is commanded in the
holy Scriptures that we should keep the Bond of Peace and Concord, it is
requisite that we should write and inform one another of what things are done
among us; to the end, that if one Member suffer, or rejoice, we may either
jointly rejoice, or suffer together.

In our Diocese, therefore there are lately started up Men that are impious and
Enemies of Christ, who teach such Apostasy, as one may judge, and justly term
the Forerunner of Antichrist, which I would most gladly have buried in
Silence, that the Mischief might have been consumed, by being included among
the Apostates only, lest happily by its further Progress into other Places, it
should have infected the (...) of the Simple.

But because Eusebius, now Bishop of Nicomedia, supposing that the Affairs are
wholly at his Dispose (in Regard, that having deserted the Church of Berytus,
he has sordidly coveted that of Nicomedia, and has not been prosecuted by any)
does patronize even these Apostates, and has boldly attempted to write Letters
up and down in Commendation of them, that thereby he might seduce some Ignorant
Persons into this worst Heresy and most displeasing to Christ.

I thought it therefore necessary, being sensible of what is written in the
Law, to be no longer silent, but to give you all Notice, that you might know
who are the Apostates, and likewise the detestable Expressions of their
Heresy, and that if Eusebius write to you, you should give no Heed to him: For
he is now desirous to renew his former Malevolence, which seemed to have been
silenced and forgot by Length of Time, and pretends to write Letters in their
Behalf: But in Reality he declares that he uses his Utmost to do this upon his
own Account.

Now the Names of those that are turned Apostates, are these, Arius, Achilles,
Aithales Carpones; Another Arius, Sarmates, Euzoius, Lucius, Julianus, Menas,
Helladius, Gaius, Secundus also and Theonas; who were sometimes Bishops: And
the Tenets which they have invented and maintained, contrary to the Authority
of Scripture, are these following, viz. God (they say) was not always a Father;
but there was a Time when God was not a Father. The Word of God was not from
everlasting; but had his Beginning from Nothing: For God who is, made him who
was not, of Nothing. Therefore there was a Time when he was not: For the Son is
a Creature, and Work: Neither is like to the Father, as to his Essence; nor is
he by Nature the genuine Word of the Father, nor his true Wisdom: But he is one
of his Works, and one of his Creatures, and is only improperly styled The Word
and the Wisdom: For he himself exists by the proper Word of God, and by the
Wisdom that is in God, by which God made all things, and him also: Wherefore he
is by Nature mutable, and subject to Change, as well as all other rationable
Beings: So that the Word is different, disagreeable and separate from the
Essence of God; and the Father cannot be declared or set forth by the Son, and
is invisible to him: For the Son does not perfectly and accurately know the
Father; neither can he perfectly behold him: For the Son knows not his own
Essence what it is: For our sakes he was made, that God might make use of him
as an Instrument in order to our Creation; nor had he ever existed, had it not
pleased God to create us.

In this Heap of Blasphemies are summed up the Dogmata of Arius and his
Sectaries: And when one asked them, if the Word of God could be changed as the
Devil was, they were not afraid to answer, that he might; because he is (said
they) of a Nature subject to Change, in that he is begotten and created.

We, therefore, with the Bishops of Egypt and Lybia, near an hundred in Number,
being met together, have Excommunicated Arius for these his Principles, and for
his impudent Assertion of them, together with all his Adherents: But Eusebius
has given them Entertainment, endeavoring to mix Falsehood with Truth, and
Impiety with Godliness: But he shall not prevail: For Truth gets the
Victory; and Light has no Communion with Darkness; nor has Christ any
Agreemont with Belial. For who ever heard the like? or what Man, if he should
now hear them, would not be amazed thereat, and stop his Ears, lest the Filth
of those Doctrines should penetrate and infect them?

What Man is he, who when he hears these Words of Saint John, In the Beginning
was the Word, will not condemn those that affirm There was a Time when the Word
was not? Or who is the Man that hears these Words of the Gospel, The only
begotten Son, and by him all things were made, will not abominate these Men,
that say, the Son is one of the Creatures? But how can he be one of those
Things that were made by him? Or, how can he be termed The only Begotten, who
(according to the Sentiments of Arius) is reckoned among all the other
Creatures? How can he be made of Nothing, when as the Father himself says, my
Heart has indicted a good Matter: And, before the Morning, I have begotten thee
in the Morning? Or, how can he be unlike the Father in Essence, when as he is
the perfect Image and the Brightness of the Father; and when, as he himself
testifies, he that has seen me, has seen the Father? Now if the Son be the
Word and Wisdom of the Father, how can there be a Time when he was not? For it
is the same Absurdity as if they should say, There was a Time when God was
without both his Word and Wisdom. How can he be mutable and subject to Change,
who says concerning himself, I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and I
and the Father are one? I spoke also by the Prophet, behold me, for I am the
Lord, and am not changed: And though some may say, that this was spoken in
Reference to the Father, yet it will be more accommodate to understand it now
to be spoken in Relation to the Word; because although he became Man, yet was he
not changed; but as the Apostle says, Jesus Christ the same Yesterday, and to
Day, and for ever. But what Motive could they have to say, that he was made for
us, when as Paul says, for him are all things, and by him are all things?

But concerning their Blasphemy in affirming that the Son does not perfectly
know the Father, it ought not to be wondered at: For having once resolved to
fight against Christ, they despise even the Words of the Lord himself; who
says, as the Father knows me, even so know I the Father. If therefore the
Father knows the Son only in Part, it is manifest, that the Son also knows
the Father only in part: But if it be impious to assert this, and if the Father
knows the Son perfectly, it is perspicuous, that as the Father knows his
own Word, so does the Word know his own Father, whose Word he is.

By asserting of these things, and explaining the sacred Scriptures, we have
frequently confuted them: But they, like Chamaelions, have again been changed,
pertinaciously contending to appropriate to themselves this that is written:
When the Impious is arrived at the very Extremes of Wickedness he despises.
There have indeed been many Heresies before these Persons, which by their too
much Audaciousness have fallen into Imprudence and Folly: But these Men, who by
all their Discourses, attempt nothing less than the Subversion of the Divinity
of the Word, have to the utmost of their Power, made those preceding Heresies
to be accounted just, in regard they approach nearer to Antichrist: Wherefore
they are expelled out of the Church, and anathematized.

We are really troubled at the Destruction of these Men, and the rather because
they were heretofore instructed in the Doctrine of the Church, but have now
renounced it: Yet we do not look upon this as so strange a Thing: For the same
befell Hymenaeus and Philetus, and before them, Judas; who though he had been our
Savior's Disciple, yet was afterward his Betrayer and an Apostate. Neither
have we continued unadvised of these very Persons: For our Lord has foretold,
Take heed that no Man deceive you: For many shall come in my Name, saying, I am
Christ: And the time draws near, and they shall deceive many: Go ye not
therefore after them. And Paul having learned these things from our Savior,
wrote thus; That in the latter Days, some shall depart from the sound Faith,
giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, who detest the Truth.
Since therefore our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has himself commanded this,
and also by his Apostle has given us Intimation concerning these, we being
Eyewitnesses of their Impiety, have deservedly anathematized them, as we said
before and openly declared them estranged from the Catholic Church and Faith.

Moreover we have signified thus much to your Piety, (Beloved and dearest
Fellow-Ministers) that if any of them should have the Confidence to come to
you, you might not entertain them, and that you should not be persuaded to
believe Eusebius, or any one else that shall write to you concerning them: For
it is our Duty, as we are Christians, to detest all those that speak or devise
any thing against Christ, and to look upon them as the Enemies of God, and the
Corrupters of Souls, and not to say to such Men, so much as God speed, lest we
become Partakers of their Iniquities (as St. John has commanded us) salute the
Brethren that are with you; they that are with us, salute you.


Alexander having writ after this Manner to all the Bishops in every City, the
Acceptance of his Letters was very different: Those of his Opinion received
them with great Respect, and readily subscribed to their Contents, praising his
Zeal and Conduct in so important an Affair: But others did the quite contrary,
scoffing at and ridiculing what he writ; and instead of being thereby stirred up
to Peace, they began to be enflamed with a pertinacious Desire of Contention:
So that as Socrates observes, the Mischief grew worse, and the Disease was
increased by the Misapplication of the Remedy, designed to cure it. Eusebius of
Nicomedia appeared most concerned at Alexander's Letter, as finding himself
therein mentioned by Name, and not without a particular Mark of Reproach.
Constantine at the same time kept his Residence at Nicomedia in the Palace
which Dioclesian had built there, which gave Eusebius an Opportunity of making
an Interest in him: And being a smooth subtle Courtier, he quickly gained his
Point and grew very gracious with the Emperor; which the Court-Bishops
observing, they became very obsequious to Eusebius, who writ frequently to
Alexander, advising him to suppress the Controversy, and to restore Arius and
his Adherents to the Peace of the Church. He wrote likewise to Bishops of every
particular City, that they should not consent to Alexander. This occasioned
great Animosities, and filled all Places with Tumults and Disturbances; and not
only the Prelates of the Church, but the Populace also were miserably divided,
some inclining to one Party, and some to another; and the Matter at length came
to that Height of Indignity and Insolence, that the Christian Religion was made
the Ridicule in the public Theaters. Eusebius still pressed Alexander to
abrogate the Sentence of Excommunication that had been pronounced against Arius
and his Party, and to re-admit them into the Church, alleging that they
asserted nothing that was perverse and impious. On the other Hand, those who
looked upon the Opinion of Arius as absurd and blasphemous, approved of
Alexander's Proceedings, maintaining the Condemnation of Arius, and of all that
favored his Heresy, to be just and equitable, and that his Sentence out ght
not to be repealed.

Many Letters from both the disagreeing Parties having been sent to the Bishop
of Alexandria, there was a Collection made of them. Arius collected those that
were written in his Behalf, and Alexander those that were writ against him: And
by this Example, all other Sects took Occasion of defending their own Heterodox
Opinions, each quoting the Epistles of their own Party that had been written in
Confirmation of them.

Constantine having Notice of these things, was greatly troubled, and looked
upon this calamitous State of the Church as if it had been his own; and it did
not a little perplex his Mind, that that Tranquillity he had provided for the
Christians, should be disturbed by themselves: And foreseeing that the
Mischiefs of these Contentions, if let alone, would daily grow worse, he
instantly made it his Business to suppress them. To this End, he sent Hosius
Bishop of Corduba in Spain, a Person of approved Fidelity, and one for whom the
Emperor had a particular Kindness and Esteem, with Letters to Alexander and
Arius. In these Letters the Emperor sets down the Ground of the Controversy;
and beginning with Alexander, he reproves him for enquiring of his Presbyters
what every Man's Opinion was, concerning a Point which he called a fruitless
Controversy: Next he blames Arius for his inconsiderate venting such
Sentiments as he ought either not to have conceived at all, or if he had had
such Conceptions, yet it was his Duty not to have divulged them; but to have
buried them in Silence. He told them how that by their Dissension, Communion
was refused; and that the most religious Populace was rent into two Factions,
and separated from the harmonius Unity of the whole Body; and upon this
Consideration, he advises them mutually to pardon each other, and quietly to
accept of what he as their Fellow Servants, did lovingly counsel them. He tells
the Bishop that he ought not to have propounded the Question which first
occasioned the Dispute; and he told the Heretic, that he ought not to have
been so forward in returning an Answer. Such Questions (says the Emperor) as
no Law does necessarily limit or prescribe, but are proposed by
Contentiousness, and unprofitable Want of Business (although they may be framed
to exercise and employ our natural Parts) yet they ought to be confined within
our Breasts, and not to be inconsiderately divulged in public Assemblies, nor
unadvisedly committed to the Cares of the Vulgar: For what Person amongst a
thousand is sufficiently qualified either accurately to comprehend the full
Efficacy and Nature of things so sublime and profound, or, to explain them
according to their Dignity and Importance? Or if any should look upon this to
be an easy Performance, yet how small a Number of Vulgar will be induced to be
fully persuaded thereof? Besides, a Man of Prudence will not venture upon the
accurate Discussion of such nice Controversies, for fear he should fall into
gross Errors.

In Questions of this Nature (says the Emperor) Loquacity must be bridled,
and the multiplying of Words restrained; lest through our own Inability to
explain such absolute Points; or through the Slowness of the Auditors
understanding clearly to comprehend what we discourse, they should unhappily
fall into Blasphemy and Schism.

Wherefore Constantine would have an unwary Question, and an inconsiderate
Answer by both of them to be mutually forgiven. The Contest (as he tells them)
was not kindled upon Occasion of any principal or chief Commandment of our Law:
Neither had they introduced any new Heresy concerning the Worship of God: But
that they both held one and the same Opinion: So that they might easily close
in a Consent of Communion with each other. But whilst they pertinaciously
contended about things of inferior Moment, it was not convenient that so great
Numbers of God's People should be under their Care and Government, lest through
their Dissension they should be misled as looking upon it, not only as
undecent, but also unlawful.

And the Emperor inforces his Advice to Peace by the Example of the
Philosophers, who albeit they frequently disagree in some Part of their
Assertions, and jar about the very Perfection of Knowledge yet because they are
all united, and agree in the Profession of one and the same Sect, they do again
close in mutual Consent.

Now if it be so amongst Philosophers, it will certainly be much more
reasonable that those who are Ministers of the most high God, should in like
manner be unanimous in the Profession of the same Religion.

Can you think it to be just and equitable, that by Reason of your pertinacious
Contrasts about Words, Brethren should be set in Array against Brethren, and
that that venerable Assembly (meaning either the Council or the Church) should
upon your Account who contend with one another about things slight, and no way
necessary, be rent in sunder by an impious Variance? These your Contests (says
the Emperor) are poor and mean, fitter for a childish Ignorance, than the
Gravity of Priests and the Wisdom of prudent Men. Be content to depart from the
Temptations of Satan: And consider that our great God, the Savior of all Men,
has reached forth a Light, common to all. By the Assistance of whose
Providence, give us Leave who are his Servants, successfully to finish this our
Endeavor, that by our Exhortaion, Diligence and earnest Admonitions, we may
reduce you to Unity, and bring you back to the same Communion: For seeing you
hold the same Faith, and have the same Sentiments of Religion: And seeing the
Commandment of the Law does in all its Parts enclose all in general in one
Consent and Purpose of Mind, let not this thing that has raised a mutual
Division betwixt you in a Point not appertaining to the Power and Efficacy of
Religion in general, by any Means make a Separation and Faction amongst you.

We speak these things (says the Emperor) not to force you to be all of one
Opinion concerning this idle foolish Controversy, of what soever it be: For
the precious Value of the Assembly may be preserved entire amongst you; and one
of the same Communion may be retained, although there may be amongst you a great
Diversity of Sentiments in things of smaller Significancy: For we don't all
mean the same in all things; neither is there one Disposition or Opinion in us
all. Concerning the divine Providence; let there be among you one Faith, one
Meaning and one Covenant of the Deity. But as for these slender and light
Questions, which with so much Niceness you dispute of, and with too great
Curiosity enquire into, though you are not therein of the same Mind, but disagree
in Opinion, yet it is your Duty to confine them to your own Thoughts, and to
keep them to your selves. And upon this Consideration, he exhorts them to
common Friendship, to a cordial Belief of the Truth, to promote the Honor of
God, and to a Religious Observance of the Law; that they would let those things
remain firm and inviolable amongst them, that they would return to mutual Amity
and Charity, and to restore to the whole Body of the People their mutual
amicable Embraces, that the Contenders would purify their own Souls, be again
acquainted, and renew their Familiarity one with another, and to revolve with
themselves how that Friendship is often more sweet and pleasant after the
Occasion of the Enmity is laid aside, and Men return again to Reconciliation.

The Emperor having thus pressed Alexander and Arius to mutual Friendship, and
to put away their Contentions as being hurtful to themselves and the Church, he
likewise exhorts them to do this for the Emperor's Sake, that his Days thereby
might be peaceable, and his Nights void of Solicitude, that during the Residue
of his Life he might have the Pleasure of a pure Light, and the Joy of a quiet
Life reserved for him; and that if he missed of this, he must necessarily be
grieved, and testify the same with Tears: For whilst he beheld the People rent
asunder by the pernicious and indiscreet Dissension of a Bishop and a
Presbyter, and engaged in their undecent and untimely Quarrel, he tells them he
could not continue in a sedate Temper of Mind, nor finish his Life without
great Disquietude: And that they might be the more sensible of his great Sorrow
and deep Resentment for their Divisions, he further tells them, that it had put
by his Journey, which upon his coming to Nicomedia, he had resolved to make
into the East: And that whilst he was hastening toward them, and had performed
above half his Journey, the News of their Discord quite altered his Resolution,
lest he should be a Spectator of those things which he could not endure so much
as to hear of. And the pious Constantine closes his Letter to Alexander and
Arius in these affectionate Words; Do you by your Unanimity for the future,
open a Way for us into the East, which by your Discord you have stopped up Give
me Leave with Joy speedily to see you and all the rest of the People, and that
with an unanimous Consent of Praises we may offer up ((...)) to God Thanks for
public Unity, Agreement, Liberty and Concord.

Victor Constantinus Maximus Augustus having sent this Letter to Alexander and
Arius, when the Contents of it came to be fully considered, it was shrewdly
suspected that Eusebius of Nicomedia had a Hand in the Contrivance of it, if it
was not wholly compiled by him: And the Circumstances favoring this
Conjecture, were, first, the great Credit Eusebius gained with the Emperor now
residing at Nicomedia; by Means of which he was able, as he did, to impose upon
him in this whole Affair. Next, the Scope of the Letter is exactly agreeable
with the Carriage of Eusebius in this Controversy, which was, not to have it
determined either Way; but only silenced as an overcurious Speculation: And as
for those Lessenings, which through the whole Letter are given of this Heresy,
they seem to have been the crafty Insinuations of Alexander's Want of Temper
and Prudence in raising so great a Dust, and making so much ado in so trivial
and light a Matter.

Eusebius (as all observe of him) was a Man of a proved Spirit, impatient of
Contradiction, very vindictive, and could not brook Alexander's Carriage
toward him: And the Hatred he bore him for his reproachful naming him in his
circular Letter, made him favor Arius as he was Alexander's Enemy, and not out
of any good Liking he had for his Heresy: For though Eusebius is on all Hands
represented as a Ringleader of the Arian Faction, yet this is a Mistake that
has brought Confusion upon the whole History, and made the Arian Heresy to
seem of much greater Extent than it was: Whereas Eusebius and his Party were no
less adverse to the Arians than to the Orthodox; and yet it was they that all
along made the greatest Show and Noise in the Contest: All which seems to have
had no other Source than merely their Hatred to Alexander, and the Delight they
took to oppose him.

The Emperor having, as he thought, by this Letter, made Provision for the
ending of the Controversy, and reconciling those to each other, by whom it was
first raised; and the good Man Hosius who carried it, having used likewise his
utmost Diligence that the same Letter should take Effect, yet all was to no
Purpose: For the Contention of the disagreeing Parties was so far from being
compromis'd, that it daily increased and grew up so fast, that in a short time
it overran all the Eastern Provinces: For Envy and the malicious Devil being
vexed at the Prosperity of the Church, invented these things for our
Destruction, as Eusebius writes de Vita Constable. B. 3. Chapter 73. But neither
Alexander nor Arius were in the least mollified, either by the Emperor's
Letter, or the excellent Arguments for their mutual Agreement, urged by the
holy Man that brought it. At the time when this Epistle was sent, the Disputes
about the Feast of Easter were very warm, and the Division arising thereupon
very threatening. Some contended that the Celebration of that Festival should be
kept after the Jewish Manner; others in their Solemnization thereof imitated
the Custom of the Christians all over the World. But it was very happy this
Controversy happened only in the East, and that it created no Separation, but
that the adverse Parties still continued united in the same Communion: For though
the Joy and Glory of the Festival was much clouded, and impaired by the
Controvesies held about it, yet mutual Communion was still preserved. But
Constantine observing the great Disturbance that the Church suffered by Reason
of this and the other Controversy, began to think of a Remedy for them both.
He had already seen that his Letters were ineffectual to this Purpose, and that
the Minds of the Contenders were so imbittered one against another, that
Exhortations to mutual Peace and good Will, had little other Effect than to
enrage and inflame them the more. He therefore thought of a general Council, as
the likeliest Cure for such Distempers. Nice, a City of Bithynia, was the Place
where he determined the Council should be held: And hither by his Letters he
requests the Bishops to repair; who readily complied with his royal Request:
For (as Eusebius in the third Book of Constantine writes) the most eminent
amongst God's Ministers of the Churches in Europe, Lybia and Asia, were
convened: And one sacred Oratory, enlarged as it were by God, included at the
same time within its Walls, Sirians, Silesians, Phoenicians, Arabians,
Palestinians, Egyptians, Thebaeans, Lybians, and those that came out of
Mesopotamia. There was also at the Synod a Persian and a Scythian: Pontus also
and Galatia, Pamphilia, Cappadocia, Asia and Phrygia afforded their most select
Divines. Moreover there appeared at Nice, Thracians, Macedonians, Achaians and
Epirots. And many who dwelt far beyond these, were there also present. Hosius
the Spaniard, famous for his Piety, together with many of his Countrymen, sat
in the Council. The Prelate of the Imperial City was absent by reason of his
Age; but his Presbyters were there, and supplied his Place.

The Emperor (says the Historiographer) was the only Person of all the
Princes since the Foundation of the World, who having platted such a Crown as
this with the Bond of Peace, dedicated it to Christ his Savior, as a Divine
Present and Acknowledgment of the Victories he had obtained over his Enemies.
And he intended the Synod should be constituted to be a lively Representation
of an Apostolical Quire: That it might be now as it was in the Days of the
Apostles when devout Men of all Nations under Heaven were gathered together. In
this Council the Number of the Bishops exceeded Three Hundred: But the
Presbyters, Deacons, Acoluthi, and the many other Persons that accompanied
them, were almost innumerable. Of these Ministers of God, some were eminent for
their Wisdom and Eloquence; others for their sober and discreet Lives; others
for their patient Sufferings, and others were adorned with Modesty and
courteous Behavior; Some of them were highly respected for their great Age;
others were eminent for their youthful Vigor both of Body and Mind; some were
newly initiated into the Order of the Ministry. To all these the Emperor
commanded a plentiful Provision of Food to be daily allowed.

Paphnutius and Spiridion were the most eminent among the Bishops. There were
also present a great many Laics, Men skilled in Logic, ready to assist each
their own Party. Eusebius of Nicomedia, Theognis, Bishop of Nice, and Maris
Bishop of Chalcedon in Bithynia were the chief that favored Arius; against
whom Athanasius contended vigourously, and expressed a signal Zeal and Depth in
his Disputes; which brought upon him the implacable Hatred of Eusebius of
Nicomedia. A little before the Bishops were met together in one Place, the
Logicians exercised themselves in some skirmishing Disputes; and seeming
therewith to be overmuch delighted, a Laick, one that was a Confessor, an
honest well-meaning Man, opposed these Disputants, and told 'em, That neither
Christ nor his Apostles taught or used the Art of Disputing, nor vain
Subtilties or Fallacies, but a plain Doctrine, which is to be defended by Faith
and good Works. All that stood by, hearing him speak these Words, admired him,
and approved of what he said: And the Logicians themselves hearing this honest
and plain Declaration of the Truth, did patiently acquiesce, and the Tumult,
raised by Disputation, was composed.

The next Day after the Logic Disputes were so happily concluded, all the
Bishops were convened, after whom came the Emperor, whose Respect and
Reverence was so great to the Clergy, that he stood in the midst of them, and
would not take his Seat, till such time as the Bishops signified that it was
their Desire that he would sit down and take the Chair of State; which he did,
and from thence spoke to the Synod in kind persuasive Words; exhorting 'em to
Unanimity and Concord, and to suppress all private Piques and Animosities, and
those Accusations which they had framed one against another: For many, the Day
before, had presented Libels to the Emperor containing several Articles of
Personal Miscarriges, savouring more of a Desire of Revenge than of
Reformation. These accusatory Libels the Emperor commanded to be burned, and
advised them to consider and obey what Christ had enjoined concerning forgiving
one another: And having largely discoursed of the Nature and Advantages of
Concord and Peace, he bid 'em proceed to the Business before 'em, for which
they were convened, leaving it, to their Power and Arbitrament accurately to
inspect the Points in Controversy. Upon this the Council entered upon the
Affair, and many Questions were proposed by both Parties, which caused great
Stirs and Heats before they came to the main Debate. Constantine all the while
heard 'em very patiently, and with an intent Mind received their proposed
Questions, and by turns assisted the Assertions of both Parties, and by Degrees
he reduced them, who pertinaciously opposed each other, to a more sedate Temper
of Mind; and by his gracious Speeches to each Person, he rendered himself
pleasing and delightful. Some he brought to be of his Opinion by the Force of
his Arguments; others he gained over to him by Condescentions and Entreaties.
He commended those that spoke well, and whom he observed to be less peaceably
inclined, he excited to Quietness, and conjured all to an Agreement: And by his
prudent and temperate Manage, he at length made 'em all of the same Mind in the
Matters concerning which they had before disagreed: So that after many Debates
upon the Subject before 'em, Three Hundred and Eighteen Bishops concurred in a
Creed, which with loud Acclamations they published and approved of. A Copy of
which Creed, as it stands recorded by Socrates Scholasticus, Lib. 1. C. 8.
Hist. Eccles. now follows.

WE believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things visible and
invisible, and one Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, begotten of the Father,
the only Begotten, that is of the Substance of the Father, God of God and Light
of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, of the same Substance with
the Father, by whom all things were made that are in Heaven and in Earth: Who
for the sake of us Men, and for our Salvation, descended, and was incarnate,
and was made Man, and he suffered and rose again the third Day, ascended into
the Heavens, he shall come to judge the Dick and the Dead. We also believe in
the Holy Ghost. But the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church does anathematize
those that averr, That there was a time when the Son of God was not, and that
he was not before he was begotten, and that he was made of Nothing: Or, that
say he was made of another Substance or Essence: Or, that he is either created,
or convertible, or mutable.

This Creed (as Valesius observes) is wanting in all the Mss. he had met with,
and says that Christopherson did very well in placing it here in Socrates: For
it is plain, both from Epiphanius Scholasticus, as also by those following
Words, (...), that it was placed here by the Historian himself. But all the
MSS. did omit it in this Place, because it is repeated a little after in
Eusebius Pamphilus's Epistle, (...), Then this very Creed above repeated, was
subscribed by Three Hundred and Eighteen Bishops, who were all unanimous in
their Suffrages and Sentiments concerning it. Socrates writes, that Five
Bishops refused to allow of it: But Theodoret, and before him Hierom, (in his
Dialogue against the Luciferians) affirm, that Secundus and Theonas were the
only two Bishops that were Diffenters, refusing to subscribe to the Nicene
Creed. Eusebius of Nicomedia, with four Bishops more, disliked the Word
Homoousios, which they did upon Supposal that only that can be said to be
Homoousion, of the same Substance which is from another; either by Partition,
as two or three Pieces of Gold the whole Mass; or, by Derivation, as Children
from their Parents; or, by Eruption, as a Branch from the Root. But seeing that
the Son of God could by none of these Ways be from the Father, they could not
therefore give Consent to this Draught of the Creed, in which the Word
Homoousios was used. Great and tedious were the Cavils and Debates about this
one Word Homoousios, which Eusebius and his Party would by no Means admit of;
and because it was not eras'd out of the Creed, they refused to subscribe the
Degradation of Arius; which Obstinacy of theirs moved the Synod to anathematize
Arius and all of his Opinion; forbidding Arius in particular to enter into
Alexandria. The Emperor also by his Edict, banished Arius, Eusebius and
Theognis: But the two latter soon after their Exile repented of their
Contumacy, and sent their penitentiary Libels to the most eminent Bishops; and
in these Libels they declared their Assent to the Word Homoousios, and their
Belief of it as it was used in the Creed, and in every thing agreed to the
Exposition of the Faith: And upon their doing this, they were by Imperial Order
recalled from Banishment, and restored to their own Churches.

At the same time, Eusebius, surnamed Pamphilus, Bishop of Caesarea in
Palestine, having made some Hesitancy in the Synod, whether he might safely
admit of this Form of Faith; having taken time maturely to consider what in
this Case he might with a safe Conscience and a satisfied Reason, conclude, he
at length gave his Assent, and subscribed. And lest any of the People of his
Diocese should be offended at his Backwardness in subscribing the Creed, and
have an Ill Opinion of him for scrupling the Use of the Word Homoousios, he
sent a Letter unto them, wherein he explained that Term, and apologiz'd for his
Hesitancy.

Eusebius Pamphilus 's Letter to those of his Diocese.
IT is very probable (Beloved) that you may have heard what has been done
concerning the Ecclesiastic Faith in the great Council convened at Nice, and
in Regard that Report does usually outrun an accurate Narrative of the Matters
transacted, lest by such a bare Report, the Matter might be represented to you
otherwise than really it is, we thought it requisite to send to you, first, the
Form of Faith which we our selves proposed to the Council; and likewise that
other published by the Bishops, who made some Additions to ours. That Form of
Faith drawn up by us, we read in the Presence of our most pious Emperor; and
it appeared to all to be sound and Orthodox, and is as follows.

WE believe in one God, the Father Almighcy, Maker of all things, visible and
invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Word of God, God of God, Light of
Light, Life of Life, the only begotten Son, the first born of every Creature
begotten of God the Father before all Worlds, by whom also all things were
move; who for our Salvation was incarnate and conversed among Men; who suffered
and rose again the third Day; he ascended unto the Father, and shall come again
in Glory to judge the Quick and the Dead.

We also believe in the Holy Ghost: we believe that each of these Persons is,
and does subsist: That the Father is truly the Father, the Son really the Son,
and the Holy Ghost really the Holy Ghost: As our Lord also when he sent his
Disciples out to preach, said, Go ye, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Concerning which
Articles, we do averr, that we thus maintain and hold them, that these are our
Sentiments of them, that this was our Opinion formerly, that this Opinion we
will retain till Death, that we we will persevere in this Belief, and
anathematize every impious Heresy: We call God Almighty and Jesus Christ our
Lord to VVitness, that these were sincerely and heartily our Sentiments ever
since we were capable of knowing our selves: And that we do now speak and think
what is most true, and we are ready to demonstrate to you by most infallible
Proofs and to persuade you, that both in times past, we thus believed and
likewise thus preached.


Eusebius Pamphilus having given the People of his Diocese this Account of the
Creed which he proposed to the Council, he farther tells 'em, That there was no
body could oppose it: That the Emperor did attest its Truth, protesting that
he was of the same Opinion, and exhorted all to assent to, and subscribe it,
and unanimously to agree in the Profession of it. Only he desired that the Word
Homoousios might be inserted; though others with greater Probability affirm, that
that Word was added by the Bishops, and that the Emperor explained it, saying,
that he supposed that the Word Homoousios was not to be taken in such a Sense
as is agreeable to the Affections of the Body and therefore that the Son had
not his Subsistence from the Father, either by Division or Abscission: For it
is impossible (says he) that an immaterial intellectual and incorporeal Nature
should be subject to any corporeal Affection: But that our Sentiments of such
things should be expressed in Divine and Mysterious Terms.

The Emperor having thus Philosophized upon the Word Homoousios, the Bishops
drew up another Form of Belief, in which they inserted that Word; but in all
other things it was the same with the first. Now that the Form of Faith was
agreed upon by the Bishops, Eusebius Caesarienses gravely and maturely enquired
of them What they meant by these Words, [Of the Substance of the Father, and of
the same Substance with the Father;] Which gave Occasion to many Questions and
Answers, and to an accurate Examination of the Importance of the Words. And at
last it was acknowledged by the Bishops that these Words, To be of the
Substance did only signify thus much: That the Son is of the Father, but not
as a Part of the Father. To which Sense of the Words Eusebius Caesariensis
thought it both reasonable and safe to give his Assent: And having Peace before
his Eyes, as the Mark at which he aimed, and being cautious lest he should fall
from a right Apprehension of the Faith, he also admitted of the Words Begotten
not made, For Made (said the Fathers) is a common Term attributed to all other
Creatures which were made by the Son, of whom the Son has no Resemblance.
Wherefore he is no Creature like those which were created by him; but he is of
a far more excellent Substance than any Creature: Which Substance is begotten
of the Father, but in such a Manner of Generation as is ineffable and
inexpressible by any created Being: For, his Generation, who shall be able to
declare? Who can express how he was eternally begotten? Who can explain of set
forth his Divine Extraction? No Man knows the Son but the Father. That Light
that shone before the World, that Intellectual and Essential Wisdom that was
before all Ages, the living God; the Word who was in the the Beginning with the
Father, who, but the Father alone can clearly and perfectly comprehend? The
Proposition that says, The Son is of the same Substance with the Father, being
also discussed; Eusebius Caes. declared, that it was not to be understood
according to the manner of Bodies, nor in a Sense agreeable to mortal
Creatures: For this Constantiality, said he, cannot be either by the Division
of Substance, or Abscission or Change of the paternal Essence and Power: For
all these things are inconsistent with the uncreated Nature of the Father. But
this Proposition, To be of the same Substance with the Father, signifies no
more, than that the Son of God has no Community with, nor Resemblance to
created Beings; but that in every Respect he is like to the Father only, who
has begotten him; and that he does exist of no other Substance or Essence, but
of the Father.

To this Opinion thus explained, Eusebius gave his Assent: And he was the more
inclinable to do this, because that he knew some of the Ancient Learned and
Eminent Bishops and Writers had used the Term Homoousios in their Explanations
of the Divinity of the Father and of the Son.

And Eusebius Pamphilus having said thus much concerning the Creed published at
Nice, the Historian observes, that the Bishops did not hastily, but with deep
Consideration and mature Examining, agree unto it, and that every Man's Sense
was fairly discussed before the Emperor, and that their Consents to what was
concluded, was free and unanimous. As to the Anathematism published by the
Fathers after the Creed, the same was liked by Eusebius, in regard it did
prohibit the Use of Terms that occur not in the Scriptures. From the use of
which Terms came almost all the Confusion and Disturbance that had been raised
in the Church: And since no Part of the Scripture, given by Divine Inspiration
has made use of these Arian Terms, viz. of Things which exist not: And there
was a time when he was not: It was concluded as a thing agreeable to Reason,
that these things should neither be mentioned nor taught; which Eusebius calls
a good and sound Determination; and says, that in former Times no such
Expressions were made use of; so that they were the Invention of the Heretic
Arius, and first used by him.

Eusebius having given the People of his Diocese this Account of his
Backwardness in consenting to the Creed drawn up, and formed by the Nicene
Fathers, and of his final Agreement with them; All things were happily
concluded, and the Holy Synod decreed to send an Epistle to the Church of
Alexandria, and to the Inhabitants of Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis, and therein
to acquaint them with the Matters determined by the Synod; and how they had
degraded Arius, and all those who embraced his Opinion. A Copy of which Letter
is, as now follows.

The Synodical Epistle.
To the Holy and great Church of the Alexandrians, and to our Beloved Brethren
the Inhabitants of Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis; the Bishops assembled at Nice,
who fill up that Great and Holy Synod, send Greeting in the Lord.
FOrasmuch as by the Grace of God and (the Summons) of the pious Emperor
Constantine (who has called us together out of diverse Cities and Provinces,) a
Great and Holy Synod has been convened at Nice, it seemed altogether necessary,
that a Letter should be written unto you in the Name of the Sacred Synod,
whereby you might understand what things were there proposed, and what taken
into Examination, as also what were decreed and established.

First of all therefore, the Impiety and Iniquity of Arius and his Accomplices,
was inquired into, in the Presence of the most pious Emperor Constantine, and
the Council's Determination (which was confirmed by the Suffrages of all) was,
that his impious Opinion and execrable Terms and Names, should be
anathematized, which he blasphemously used, affirming that the Son of God had
his Being of Nothing, and that there was a time when he was not; as also saying
that the Son of God had a Freedom of Will, whereby he was capable of Virtue or
Vice; and calls him a Creature and a Work. All these Tenets the Holy Synod has
anathematized, not enduring so much as patiently to hear this impious Opinion,
or rather Madness, and these blasphemous Expressions.

But what Issue these Proceedings against them are arrived at, you have either
heard already, or will hear; lest we should insult over a Man who has received
a condign Recompense for his own Wickedness. But his Impiety was grown so
prevalent, that he drew into the same Pit of Perdition, Theonas, Bishop of
Marmarica, and Secundus, Bishop of Ptolemais: For the same Sentence that had
been given against him, was pronounced against them.


Thus far the Synodical Letter respects the Synod's Proceeding against Arius:
The Residue of the Letter concerns Melitus, and those that by him had been
admitted into Holy Orders. It pleased the Synod to use Gentleness toward
Melitus, and not to treat him according to the strictest Sense and Rigor of
the Law: For they suffered him to continue in the City, but to have no
Jurisdiction, nor to ordain nor to propose the Names of those that were to be
ordained, or to appear in any Village or City upon this Pretense; but that he
should barely enjoy his Appellation and Title. But to return to the Synodical
Epistle: Wherein it evidently appears, that the Nicene Fathers did not only
anathematize Arius and his Followers, but also the very Terms of his Opinion.
They also condemned his Book entitled Thalia, which he writ in Defense of his
Heresy. The Doctrine contained in that Book, was loose and dissolute, much
resembling (says Socrates Scholasticus) the Songs and Verses of Sotades, the
Maronite, an obscene Greek Poet. This Thalia written by Arius, Athanasius takes
Notice of in his Second Oration against the Arians.

Nor was the Synod only sollicitous about writing Letters concerning the Peace
restored to the Church, but also the Emperor Constantine signified the same,
as appears by his Epistles extant in Socrates, one of which was written to the
People of Alexandria, and is as follows.

Constantinus Augustus to the Catholic Church of Alexander.
GOd save you (Beloved Brethren.) We have received this great Blessing from the
Divine Providence, that being released from all Error, we now embrace and
profess one and the same Faith. The Devil has no longer Dominion over us: For
all the Machinations he designed against us, are now totally destroyed: The
bright Luster of Truth has defeated and expelled all Dissentions, Schisms,
Tumults, and (if I may so term them) all fatal Poisons of Discord. We all adore
one God in Name; and we believe that he is: And that this might be effected by
the Wisdom and Goodness of God, we convened a great Number of Bishops at the
City of Nice, and we our self made one of the Number; and it is our singular
Joy, that we are your Fellow Servants, and have undertook the Disquisition of
the Truth. We did therefore enquire into, and accurately discuss all things
which seemed to yield the least Occasion of Ambiguity or Dissension. But how
great and horrid were the Blasphemies concerning our great Savior, concerning
our Hope and Life? How have some openly spoken and professed that they believe
things which are contrary to the Divinely inspired Scriptures, and to the
sacred Faith?

After that, no fewer than three hundred Bishops and upwards, admirable both
for Moderation and Acuteness of Understanding, have unanimously confirmed one
and the same Faith (which according to the Verity and accurate Disquisition of
the Divine Law, can only be the Faith) Arius possessed with a Diabolical
Spirit, was found to be the only Person, who with an impious Mind disseminated
this Mischief first amongst you, and afterward amongst others. Let us embrace
that Opinion which God has delivered: Let us return to our beloved Brethren,
from whom this impudent Servant of the Devil has separated us: Let us with
Diligence hasten to the common Body, and to our own genuine Members. For it
becomes our Prudence, Faith and Sanctity, that since his Error, (who has been
evidently proved to be an Enemy of the Truth) is confuted, we should return to
the Divine Grace. For that which was approved of by three hundred Bishops, can
be judged nothing else but the Determination of God. For doubtless the Holy
Ghost residing in the Minds of such great and worthy Persons has disclosed to
them the Will of God.

Wherefore let none of you continue dubious, let none of you make Delays: But
you all with great Cheerfulness return to the right Way, that when we come unto
you (which shall be as soon as possible) we may together with you, return due
Thanks to God (who inspects all things) because he has revealed the pure Faith,
and thereby restored to you that mutual Love, which was the subject of good
Men's Prayers. My beloved Brethren, God preserve you.


Thus wrote the Emperor to the People of Alexandria: And from his affectionate
Letter we may conclude, That the Determination of the Faith was not made
unadvisedly and in Haste; but with a mature Disquisition and diligent
Examination of the Matters in Controversy, every thing being exactly poised
and considered by the Council, and nothing passed by in Silence that was fit to
be spoken of, every Man having Liberty to produce and urge what he was able in
Behalf of his Opinion: So that the Controversy was not inconsiderately
determined, but with great Accuracy first discussed: Insomuch that all things
whatsoever which seemed to produce Matter of Ambiguity or Dissension, were
wholly cleared and removed. And things being so prudently and piously managed
and the Disputes carried on with that heavenly Calmness and Temper, the
Emperor thought the Determination of all those there assembled, could be
nothing else but the Will of God, and he stuck not to affirm, That the
Unanimity of so many and such eminent Prelates, was procured by the Holy Ghost.

But the Conduct of the Synod, though it was even prudent to a Wonder; yet there
were those who thought it to be orberwise, and who reflected upon the Nicene
Bishops as so many Idiots and ignorant Fellows; of which Number was Sabinus,
the Ringleader of the Macedonian Heresy. This Man was not ashamed to asperse
even Eusebius Caesariensis with the Imputation of Ignorance, and to accuse the
whole Synod of Rashness and Indiscretion; not considering that although the
Fathers in that Synod had been Idiots, yet in regard they were illuminated by
God, and directed by the Holy Ghost, they could in no wise err from the Truth.

The Emperor having writ in particular to the Alexandrians, he sent another
Lettter to the Bishops and People of other Countries, wherein he sets down what
had been decreed against Arius and those who embraced his Opinion; and that
seeing he had followed the Practices of wicked and profane Persons, it was but
just that he should undergo the same ignominy with them: And that as Porphyrus,
an Enemy of true Piety, found a just Recompense for composing impious Volumes
against Religion, and such a Recompense as had rendered him ignominious to
Posterity, and covered him with Infamy and Reproach: So it seemed reasonable to
term Arius and those of his Opinion, Porphyrians, and that they should derive a
Name from him whom they so exactly imitated: And the Emperor commands that if
any Book could be met with that was writ by Arius, it should be immediately
burnt: That by this Means not only his wicked Doctrine might be wholly
destroyed, but also that not one Monument of him should be left to Posterity:
And the Emperor in the same Letter further declared, that if any Person should
be found to conceal any Book compiled by Arius, and did not immediately produce
and burn it, he should suffer Death immediately upon his being found guilty.

To this Letter of the Emperor, Athanasius alludes in his Epistle ad Solitar.
and blames him for endeavoring to admit the Arians into the Church, seeing
that he himself had fixed upon them the ignominious and execrable Name of
Porphyrians.

It is evident this Letter did not concern the Council of Nice: For it makes
not any Mention of it: But it did proceed from the Emperor's pious Zeal to
have the Heretic Arius utterly suppressed; against whom and the Followers of
his Opinion, he wrote several other Letters, which he caused to be published in
every City, according to the Custom of the Roman Emperors, which was to
propose to public View those Rescripts they wrote to the Cities: And at the
Close of every Rescript they added this Word [Proponatur] let it be published.
So Constantine when he wrote many Letters against Arius and his Followers,
commanded they should be propounded to public View in the Forum. And in all
his Letters against Arius, he represents him as an infamous Person, and rebukes
him with great Warmth and Sharpness.

Now Arius his Opinion, and all Books and Persons favoring it, being censured
and anathematized; Two of his most eminent Abettors, namely Eusebius and
Theognis, began to retract what they had done; upon which they sent a Libel of
Repentance to the most considerable Bishops, declaring their Agreement to the
Exposition of the Faith given by the Nicene Fathers. Hereupon they were by
Imperial Order recalled from Exile, and readmitted to their Sees. This happened
in the third Year after the Synod, that is, in the 328th Year of Christ. Upon
their Restoration, those who had been ordained in their Places were removed.

Eusebius put out Amphion, and Theognis, Crestus.

The Libel containing the Recantation of Eusebius and Theognis, being very
remarkable, I thought it very proper here to insert it.

The Libel of Recantation made by Eusebius and Theognis, two notorious
Sticklers for Arius.
WE having sometime since been condemned by your Piety, without having our
Cause declared or defended, ought quietly to bear what has been determined by
your holy Discretion.

But because it is absurd, by silence to give Occasion of Calumny against our
selves, for this we declare to you, that we have unanimously agreed to the
Determination about the Faith: And also, after we had made Researches into the
Notion of Homoousios, with our utmost Earnestness, labored for Peace, having
never been Followers of any Heresy: And when we had suggested whatever came
into our Minds upon the Account of the Churches Security, and had fully
satisfied those that ought to be persuaded by us, we subscribed the Faith, but
have not subscribed the Anathematism. Not that we had any thing to object
against the Faith, but because we did not believe the Person accused to be such
a one, as he was represented; having been fully satisfied that he was no such
Person; partly by the private Letters that he wrote us, and partly by the
Discourse that he made in our Presence: But if your Holy Council was then
satisfied, we now make no Resistance, but agree to what you have determined.
And by this Libel we do fully declare and confirm our Consent, which we are
induced to do, not because we look upon our Exile to be tedious and
burdensome, but that we might avoid the Suspicion of Heresy: For if you shall
now vouchsafe to let us return to your Presence, you shall find us to be of the
same Opinion with you in all Points, and quietly adhere to what you have
determined: And since it has seemed to your Piety, to treat with great
Gentleness even Arius, who is accused for these things, and to recall him from
Banishment: Seeing that he who seemed guilty, is recalled, and has made his
Defense in Reference to those things laid to his Charge; upon this
Consideration it may justly seem absurd, that we should be silent, and by that
Means yield an Argument against our selves. Do you therefore as befits the
Piety of such as love Christ. Remind the Emperor of us, and to offer up our
Supplications to him, and speedily to determine concerning us as shall be most
agreeable to your Prudence.


By this Libel it appears, that Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia and Theognis
Bishop of Nice, did subscribe the Faith which had been published, but would not
give their Consent to the deposing of Arius. It likewise appears by the same
Libel, that Arius was recalled from Banishment before the two Bishops; which
was done by the Emperor, and not the Fathers. But though he was recalled, yet he
was forbid to enter Alexandria: And this Socrates concludes from the Way he
afterward invented for his own Return into that Church and City; which was
(says Socrates) his making use of a counterfeit Repentance.

It Is certain Eusebius of Nicomedia and his Confederates made it their Business
to bring Arius back again to Alexandria. But how they prevailed in their
Design, and after what Manner the Emperor was wrought upon to admit Arius and
Euzoius into his Presence, comes now to be succinctly reported.

The Emperor Constantine had a Sister called Constantia, who had been married
to Licinius, once Colleague with him in the Empire. This Constantia had a Priest
for her Confident, who was reckoned among her Domestics, and a great Favourer
of Arianism. This Man, prompted thereunto by Eusebius, and those of his
Faction, did in his familiar Discourse with Constantia let fall some Words
concerning Arius, saying, That the Synod had done him Wrong, and that his
Sentiments were not as they represented. Constantia was easily induced to
believe what was told her by the Presbyter: But she wanted Confidence to
declare it to the Emperor. It happened that Constantia fell dangerously sick,
and was daily visited by the Emperor; and finding her Distemper to grow
mortal, and expecting nothing but immediate Death, she recommended the
Presbyter to his Royal Favor, praising his Diligence and Piety, assuring the
Emperor of his good Affection to his Government. Constantia dying, her Brother
made the same Presbyter one of his greatest Confidents, who having by Degrees
got a Liberty of speaking to the Emperor, took his Opportunity to tell him
many things concerning Arius, affirming, he had no other Sentiments, than what
were agreeable to the Synod's Determination; and that if the Emperor would
admit him to his Presence, he would give Consent unto what the Synod had
decreed. He told him also that Arius without all Reason had been falsely accused.

The Emperor seemed much surpised with what the Presbyter told him, and said,
that if Arius would consent to the Synod's Determination, and declare that he
was of the same Judgment with the Nicene Fathers, he would admit him to his
Presence, and also send him back to Alexandria with Repute and Honor. And the
Emperor having said thus, he immediately wrote to Arius after this Manner.

Victor Constantinus Maximus Augustus to Arius.
IT has sometime since been made known to your Gravity, that you should repair
to our Court, in order to your being admitted to the Enjoyment of our Presence:
And we much admire that you have not forthwith performed this. Wherefore
immediately take a public Chariot, and come with speed to our Court, that
having experienced our Care and good Will, you may return to your own Country.
God preserve you, Beloved Brother. Dated before the first of the Calends of
December.


Arius upon receiving this Letter, instantly repaired to Constantinople, being
accompanied with Euzoius, whom Alexander had divested of his Deaconship, when
he deposed Arius and his Associates. The Emperor admits them both into his
Presence, and asked them whether they would agree to the Nicene Faith; and they
readily giving their Assent, the Emperor commanded them to deliver in a Libel
containing their Faith. Whereupon they drew up a Libel of Repentance, which
they presented to the Emperor, and was as follows.

Arius and Euzoius to our most Religious and most Pious Lord Constantine the
Emperor.
ACcording to the Order of your Piety (most acceptable to God, our Lord the
Emperor) we declare our Faith, and in Writing profess in the Presence of God,
that we, and all our Adherents do believe, as follows:

WE believe in one God, the Father Almighty; and in the Lord Jesus Christ, who
was made before all Worlds; God the Word, by whom all things were made that
are in Heaven and that are in Earth: Who came down from Heaven, and was
incarnate, and suffered and rose again, and ascended into the Heavens: who also
shall come again to judge the Quick and the Dead. We also believe in the Holy
Ghost, and in the Resurrection of the Flesh, and in the Life of the World to
come, and in the Kingdom of Heaven, and one Catholic Church of God, which is
spread from one God of the World to the other.

This Faith we have received from the Holy Gospels, the Lord saying to his
Disciples, Go ye, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. If we do not believe these
things, and if we do not admit of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost in
such Manner as the Holy Catholic Church and the Scriptures (which we believe
in all things) do teach, God is our Judge both now and in the Judgment to come.

We therefore beseech your Piety (O Emperor most acceptable to God) That being
Ecclesiastical Persons, and holding the Faith and Sense of the Church and the
Holy Scriptures, we may by your peaceful and religious Piety be united to the
Church: All Questions and superfluous Disputations being wholly taken away and
suppressed; that so both we and the Church enjoying a mutual Peace and Union,
may jointly offer up our usual Prayers for the peaceable Reign of your imperial
Majesty, and for your whole Family.


Arius having deluded the Emperor with this Libel of Repentance, obtained
Leave to return to Alexandria, where Athanasius being made Bishop upon the
Death of Alexander, denied him Reception; whereupon Arius attempted to stir up
new Commotions by dispersing his Heresy. And albeit that both the Emperor and
Eusebius wrote to Athanasius, That Arius and his Accomplices might be admitted
into the Church, yet Athanasius utterly refused to grant them Admission;
acquainting the Emperor, that it was impossible for those who once had
rejected the Faith, and were anathematized, to be entirely readmitted to their
Degrees in the Church at their Return: For he held that the Ringleaders of
Heresies are not so easily to be reconciled to the Church, as their deluded
Followers; and that the Church had been always wont to punish them with greater
and longer Severities. Besides, Athanasius declared that he was not at all
satisfied concerning the Sincerity of Arius's Repentance; and therefore till
further Trial was had of him, he would not hear of his Restitution.

This was presently seized upon by Eusebius Nicomediensis as a fit Handle for
his Design, who immediately goes to the Emperor, and informs him of
Athanasius's Carriage, complaining that he kept up Discord in the Church merely
to gratify his private Piques and Animosities: And, that contrary to his Duty
and the Laws of the Church, he denied Arius Absolution, when he desired it upon
his Repentance. The Emperor hearing this, was highly incensed, and being
instigated by Eusebius, he wrote a threatening Letter to Athanasius; Part of
which was thus.

HAving received the Knowledge of our Wills do you grant a free Admission and
Entrance into the Church to all such as desire it: For if we receive
Information that you have prohibited any of those that are desirous to be
united to the Church, or have hindered their Admission, we will immediately send
one who shall be empowered by our Order to depose you, and banish you your
Country.

To this sharp Letter, Athanasius returned such a soft satisfactory Answer, as
made the Emperor desist from interposing any further in the Business: But
Eusebius finding himself defeated in this his Stratagem against Athanasius,
tampers with the Meletian Schismatics of Egypt, to form a Plot against him.
But this with all other Machinations, were by the Divine Providence wonderfully
disappointed, as appears by the History of those Times.

Arius and his Followers were no sooner returned to Alexandria, but there began
new Disturbances.

The People of that City were much troubled at the Return of them, and at the
Exile of Athanasius. But the Emperor perceiving the perverse and turbulent
Nature of Arius, he orderd him to be sent for again to Constantinople, to give
an Account of the Troubles he had labored to rekindle.

Alexander, who sometime before this had succeeded Metrophanes, did now preside
over the Church at Alexandria. This Man gave sufficient Proof of his Piety and
Acceptableness unto God, in the Conflict he at this Time had with Arius. Upon
whose Arrival at that City the People divided in Factions, which caused an
universal Commotion amongst them; some of them affirming that the Nicene Creed
ought to continue inviolate, and without any Alteration; and others
pertinaciously asserted that Arius's Opinion was consonant to Reason. Alexander
thereupon was reduced to a great Straight, and the more because Eusebius
Nicomediensis had sorely threatened him, saying, that he would forthwith cause
him to be deposed, unless he would admit Arius and his Followers into
Communion: But Alexander was not so sollicitous about his own Deposition, as he
was fearful of weakening the Faith, which the Heretic and his Associates,
endeavored to subvert: For looking upon himself as Guardian and Patron of the
Determinations made by the Nicene Synod, he made it his Business to prevent the
Wresting and depraving of 'em. Being therefore reduced to signal Extremities,
he entirely bad farewell to all Humane Assistances, and humbly and solely
depended upon God; whom having made his only Refuge, he devoted himself
continually to Fasting and Prayer: And having shut up himself in the Church
Irene, he went to the Altar, and laying himself prostrate on the Ground under
the Holy Table; where for many Nights and Days together he poured forth his
Prayers and Tears, begging of God, that if the Opinion of Arius was true, he
might not live to see the Day appointed to discuss it: But if that which he
professed was true, that Arius might receive some visible condign Punishment
for his Impiety in opposing it. And God was pleased to hear his Prayer: For the
Emperor (says the History) being desirous to make trial of Arius, sends for
him to the Palace, and asked him, whether he would give his Assent to the
Nicene Determinations: He without any Hesitation said he would, and subscribed
them in the Presence of the Emperor, who admiring at it, required him to swear
to the Truth of what he had subscribed; which he also did, making use of
Artifice and Fraud; which was thus. Arius having writ down his Opinion in
Paper, hid it under his Arm-pit, and swore that he really thought as he had
written.

That Arius did both swear and subscribe to the Determinations of the Nicene
Synod, appears by the Emperor's own Letters; but for the Deceit he used in
swearing, Historians are not positive.

But the Emperor believing that Arius dealt sincerely in what he swore and
subscribed, presently gave Order to Alexander, Bishop of Constantinople to
admit him to Communion. It was then Saturday; and on the next Day he expected
to be a Member of the Assembly of Believers: But Divine Vengeance followed him
so closely that he did not live till next Day: For when he came out of the
Imperial Palace attended by the Eusebian Party, like Guards, through the midst
of the City, the Eyes of all People being upon him, as he came near the Place
called Constantine's Forum, he was seized with a horrible Terror, proceeding
from his Guilt, which was accompanied with a Looseness. Hereupon he enquired for
a House of Office, and understanding there was one behind Constantine's Forum,
he went thither; whither he was no sooner come, but he was seized with a
fainting Fit, and together with his Excrements his Fundament fell down, and a
great Flux of Blood, his Spleen, Liver and Small Guts all gushed out together:
So that he immediately expired.

The Suddenness and Manner of Arius's Death occasioned a great Fear and Anxiety
amongst those of the Faction; and it moved the Emperor to say, that God
himself had confirmed the Nicene Faith. But contrary to all Expectation, the
Heresy survived the Heretic, it being kept alive by Eusebius: Who though he had
no great Kindness for Arianism, yet he could not endure the Word Homoousios,
nor those who defend-it. And it is very observable, that after the Nicene
Council, the Eusebians never appeared barefaced in the Behalf of the Arian
Doctrine, and yet they were still angry with the Nicene Creed, merely for the
sake of the Term Homoousios. Eusebius by the Interest he had got in
Constantine's Court, had great Opportunity of doing much Mischief to the
Church: And where his Malice and Revenge were concerned, he was never wanting
to do his worst. It appears by what is related of his Carriage, that he was a
proud Man, of an implacable Spirit, and one who could not brook any thing that
he apprehended to be an Injury or an Affront: which unhappy Temper put him upon
studying nothing so much as Revenge. And Athanasius appeared on all Occasions
to be the main and peculiar Object of his Malice. For he could never forget how
that excellent Person had born down him and his whole Party, in the Synod of
Nice. Now for so powerful a Prelate as Eusebius, to be top'd by so mean a
Person as Athanasius, who had attained no higher Degree in the Church than that
of a Deacon: For Eusebius, I say, by so mean a Person to be brought on his
Knees and forced to public Submission, was an Indignity so intolerable to the
proud Spirit of Eusebius, that neither the Blood of Athanasius, nor of all his
Friends was sufficient to satiate his unquenchable Revenge: And all the
Accusations forged against Athanasius, were of such Crimes, for which nothing
less than capital Punishments could be inflicted. For they laid to his Charge
no Sin inferior to Murder, Rapes and Treason; as is to be seen in
Athanasius's second Apology.

Another Pique Eusebius had against Athanasius, was his not restoring Arius at
his Request. And, as Socrates informs us, Eusebius set all his Wit at Work to
undo Athanasius, and to root out the Doctrine of Consubstantiality, and that
for no other Reason, but because he was not the Author of it himself; and that
it was brought into the Creed by Athanasius, and others whom he hated. But not
only Eusebius, but also several others, either by his Example or by his
Instigation, had their Minds much disturbed about the same Point. And it
appears (says Socrates) by several Letters which the Bishops wrote to one
another after the Synod of Nice, that they were not all well pleased with the
Term Homoousios; which proved of ill Consequence: For whilst they were busy
about this Word, making but too curious Enquiries into its Importance and
Meaning, they raised an intestine War amongst themselves: And what was done
herein was not unlike a Fight in the Dark: For neither Side seemed to see
perfectly what they fell out about, or why they reviled one another. They that
had an Aversion for the Term Homoousios, looked upon them that embraced it, as
Introducers of Sabellianism and of the Opinion of the Followers of Montanus;
who denied the three Persons of the Godhead, saying, that the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost are one and the same Person.

On the other hand, they that were for the Word Homoousios, abominated those
that were against it, looking upon them as bringers in of Polytheism: And though
both sides asserted that the Son of God had a proper, real and peculiar Person
and Existence; yet (how it came to pass I know not) they could in no wise agree
among themselves, nor endure to be quiet. But the Bishops wrote one against
another with as much Bitterness as if they had been utter Enemies.

But the Controversy being long continued between the Eusebians and the
Assertors of the Nicene Faith, the Arian Heresy as if it had taken the
Opportunity of this Contrast, began again to appear upon the Stage, with a
little Alteration in the Dress. For Photinus Bishop of Sirmium in Illyricum,
revived the old exploded Opinion of Paul of Samosata, which differed from
Arianism but in this one Circumstance, viz. That it affirms the Son of God was
created, but not before his Nativity: Whereas Arius will have him to have been
created the first of the Creatures. So that they differ only as to the time of
his being created, both agreeing in the Poison of the Heresy: Namely, that
Christ was created. But yet Arius was not altogether so degrading of the
Messiah as Photinus: The Former allowed him a great Share in the Creation of
the Universe, and an Eminency, Power and Dignity over all other Creatures: But
the Latter brought Christ down into the same Rank with every ordinary Man. This
bold Heresy alarmed both the Catholics and Eusebians, and both agree to have
a Council called at Sirmium about it; where the Bishops being assembled, they
condemned the Photinian Heresy, and composed a large Explication of the Faith,
which they sent to the Bishops of Italy. In which Explication they take Notice
that Photinus and his Followers derived their Heresy from the Jews, who deny
the eternal Existence and Godhead of Christ, holding that the Messiah whom they
still expect shall be by Nature a mere Man, and be Deified only by Promotion:
Which Jewish Blasphemy being defended by Photinus, he was justly deposed by a
Synod of Bishops, which the Emperor convened at Sirmium.

But notwithstanding that he was Synodically deposed, yet the Sentence of
Deposition was not irrevocable: For we find that Photinus might have been
restored to his Bishopric, if he would have altered his Mind, and
anathematized his Opinion, and consented to the Sentiments of the Council. But
he was so far from doing this, that he challenged the Bishops to a Dispute, and
to vindicate what he held. Basilius at that time presiding over the Church of
Ancyra, accepted the Challenge, and entered Disputation with Photinus, and an
Account of their Dispute was taken by Notaries appointed for that Purpose. The
Combat was on both sides managed with Warmth. Photinus in the End was overcome,
and condemned to Exile; in which he spent the Residue of his Life in writing
against Heresies.

But the Mischief ended not in the Deposition and Banishment of Photinus: For
at Antioch in Syria there arose another Arch-Heretick, one Aetius, Surnamed
Atheus. He was of the same Opinion with Arius, but yet separated from the
Arians; because they had admitted Arius into Communion, whom he detested for
his Dissimulation in holding one Opinion in his Mind and making Profession of
the contrary with his Mouth; as all knew he did in his Subscription (made
before the Emperor) to the Form of the Creed drawn up by the Nicene Fathers:
For though Aetius was a zealous Assertor of the Arian Doctrine, yet he would not
join in Communion with those who professed it: Because when they knew the
Hypocrisy of Arius, they admitted him into their Fellowship. This Aetius, by
what we find recorded of him, appears to have been a Man of little Learning,
unskilful in the Scriptures, and of a wonderful contentious and disputing
Humor. He was not at all studious in the Perusal of those ancient Writers, who
had explained the sacred Books of the Christian Religion. And though he was of
the same Opinion with the Arians, yet he was so obstruse in his Arguments for
it, and his Sentiments were so perplexed, that the Arians themselves not being
able to understand 'em, judged him to be an Heretic: And as such he was driven
from their Communion.

But to conclude all I have to say at present on this Subject: There happened
at last such an happy Agreement amongst the Bishops, as through the Blessing of
God turned to the casting out of that evil Spirit of Arianism, which had so
long tormented the Church. For the Bishops being by the Death of Constantius
freed from that Violence and Oppression which that Emperor and his Officers,
had put upon the Discipline of the Church; and being at Liberty to exert that
Authority wherewith Christ himself had vested them: They restored that Peace
and Concord to the Church which they could never compass under Constantius; and
put an End to the Arian Heresy, and established the Nicene Faith over the
Christian World. Which wonderful Felicity was by God's Providence chiefly
procured by the Zeal Piety and wise Conduct of Athanasius; who being restored
by the Synod of Sardica, returned to Alexandria: Where he presently called a
Council for the Resettlement of the Catholic Church; which by the furious and
long Oppression of Constantius had been miserably harassed and disturbed. The
Bishops being assembled, they luckily hit upon several healing Conclusions. As

1. That those Bishops who had joined with the Heretics, either out of
Ignorance, Surprise, or Violence, upon their Return to the Catholic Church,
should be received without Deprivation of Dignity; because their Compliance
with the Arians was to be looked upon as Want of Prudence, and not as an
Apostasy from the Orthodox Faith. For though for Peace sake some of the Bishops
that were restored, had consented to have the Word Hoomousios, or
Consubstantial left out of the Nicene Creed, yet they anathematized all the
Points of the Arian Heresy, and showed that they were not tainted therewith.
But as to those Bishops who had been the Ringleaders of Heresy, they were so
deprived as never to rise Lay-Communion. Which was agreeable to the standing
Discipline of the Church.

2. The Synod adjusted the Controversy which had lately happened between the
Greeks and Latins, concerning the Words Hypostasis and Persona. For Hypostasis
being the same with Ousia (signifying Substance) the Latins thought that the
Greeks owned three distinct Substances when they professed the Belief of three
Hypostases. And the Greeks finding that the Latins rejected the Word
Hypostasis, and in Lieu thereof used the Word Persona, they thought that they
asserted nothing real, but a mere relative Distinction. The word Persona
generally denoting not the Man himself, but his Office and Relation. And the
Contest about these Words ran so high, that it had like to have produced a
Breach between the Greek and Latin Churches. Which being foreseen by
Athanasius, he prudently to accommodate the Dispute, propounded to the Synod,
That both Words should indifferently be made use of in both Churches. And the
Proposition being agreed unto by the Synod, all Suspicion on both sides was
removed, the present Controversy silenced, and so continues to this Day.

3. Athanasius finding that the Confession of Faith, which the Eusebian Party
had presented in the Council of Sardica was by some mightily cried up as if it
had been approved of by that Council, the Alexandrian Fathers took Care to
undeceive the People in this important Affair; which they did by proving that
the Eusebian Confession was utterly rejected by the Council of Sardica; and
that that Synod refused to alter any thing of the Nicene Faith.

And the Council having thus adjusted all Matters, and finished their Decrees,
they drew them up in a Circular Letter, which they sent to the Bishops of the
CHRISTIAN WORLD.

And, as Athansius took much Pains for settling the Church in Africa, so
Hilarious did the like to restore the Church in France. And in order to this, he
got a Council to be called at Paris, wherein the Proceedings at Ariminum were
condemned, and the ancient Liberties restored to the Church, which she enjoyed
till they were invaded by Constantius. In this Council those that had
subscribed the Creed of Ariminum, confessed their Fault in leaving out the Word
Ousia (or Substance) frankly owning that they had been over-reacht; and they
took the Sacrament that they meant no harm in what they did, and that they
abhorred the Consequence that all Men made out of it; and so begged Pardon for
what through Ignorance and Surprise had been done by them. This Council was so
unanimous in their Opinions, that there was but one Dissenter, Namely,
Saturninus, Bishop of Arles; who for his disagreeing from the Synod, was
deposed by it.

And thus by the pious and discreet Care of Athanasius in the East, and of
Hilary in France, the Church was settled in Peace and Truth, and a good
Correspondence maintained betwixt the Oriental and French Bishops, which
occasioned no small Regret to the Enemies of Christianity; especially to Julian
the Emperor, who used all imaginable Artifice to root it out, and to replant
Paganism in its Room.

This Apostate now put off his Visor of pretended Kindness to the Christians:
And this happy Settlement of the Church so heightend his Malice, that as both
Sozomen and Socrates observed, he out-did all his Ancestors in Fury and Rage
against the Christians; who likewise outdid all their Ancestors in Patience and
Obedience.

Julian, famously known by the Stigma of Apostate, being dead, Jovian succeeded
him in the Empire. He found the Affairs of the Christians in a very unsedate
Condition, partly by reason of the malicious Industry his Predecessor had used
totally to suppress them; and partly by the Divisions that were among the
Christians themselves. The last Stratagem invented by Julian to extirpate the
Christians, was the Law he made, That Christians should not be allowed an
Education in Humane Literature; lest, said he, when they have therewith
sharpened their Tongues, they should with greater Readiness answer the Heathen
Disputants.

This Law occasioned the two Apollinaris's, Father and Son to write with good
Success in Behalf of the Christians. The one was famous for Grammar, and the
other for Rhetoric. But Divivisions among the Christians were most obstructive
of their Peace.

At Jovian's Entrance upon his Reign, the Principal Heads of every Party made
their ((...)) Addresses to the Emperor, in hopes they should obtain from him
Power and Authority against those whom they reputed their Adversaries.

Basilius, Bishop of Ancyra, with six other Bishops, presented a supplicatory
Libel to the Emperor, in behalf of the Macedonians, who took their Name from
Macedonius, an Arian Bishop of Constantinople. They held that Christ was not of
the same Essence with the Father, A. D. 343.
but only like unto him: And that the Holy Ghost was not God, but God's
Minister, and no more eternal than any other Creature. These Heretics were
never constant in their Doctrine; but sometimes Arians, sometimes Semi-Arians,
and sometimes Orthodox. In the Name of these Weathercock Heretics, Basilius
and his Fellows supplicate the Emperor, that all those who Asserted the Son to
be more than barely like the Father, might be cast out of their Churches, and
themselves put in their Places.

The Emperor having received their Address, sends them away without any other
Answer, than that he abominated Contentiousness, and loved and honored those
who were desirous of Unity and Concord. Which Words had the good Effect to
mollify their Stissness, who were Lovers of Contention: Which was the Thing
designed and intendded by the Emperor.

At this time also the Icacians (who held, That the Son was a Creature made by
the Father, and like him in Will, but not in Substance) began to show their
Disposition to Unpeaceableness. They were indeed Notorious Trimmers, and ever
ready to be of their Judgment who were uppermost and likeliest to promote 'em.

These meeting with Meletius at Antioch, in Syria, and entering into Discourse
with him, and finding that he embraced the Homoousion Doctrine, and that he was
highly in Favor with the Emperor, they made Profession of the same Doctrine
and conformed to the Nicene Greed. And by a general Consent drew up a Libel and
presented it to Jovinian: which is to be seen in Socrates, Book 3. Chap. 25.
Eccles. Hist. In which Libel they in particular declared their Embracing the
Term Homoousias, as it was with great Caution explained by the Nicene Fathers:
And at the same time publicly declared, first, That the Generation of the Son
was inexplicable. 2. That the Term Ousia was not taken by the Nicene Fathers in
the usual Signification which the Grecians put upon it; but that they made use
of it in order to the Subversion of what had been impiously and audaciously
held by Arius concerning Christ, who affirmed, That he existed of things that
were not. (Which Opinion the Upstart Eunomeans maintained to the great
Disturbance of Ecclesiastic Unity.) 3. They assured the Emperor, that in all
Points they did agree to the Belief set forth by the Bishops convened at
Nicaea. And the Bishops, who consented to the Libel, subscribed their Names.

Jovian graciously received the said Libel, and seemed not at all concerned
what Opinion they were of, so long as they kept themselves quiet. And it is
very observable, That by kind Words and Persuasives he mightily suppressed the
contentions Humor then on foot, and strangely calmed their Fury, who made it
their Business to cavil and contend. And by his dextrous Management, if Jovian
had lived, both the Civil and Ecclesiastic Assairs of the Roman Empire might
in all Probability, have been fortunate and succesful. But alas! a sudden Death
deprived both Church and State of this excellent Personage.

Jovianus having ended his Life at Dadastana, on the Frontiers of Galatia and
Bithynia, after the short Reign of seven Months, Valentinianus, by an unanimous
Suffrage of the Soldiers, was chosen to succeed him. Upon which Choice, he
straightway made his Brother Valens his Colleague in the Empire. They were both
Christians; but both disagreed about the Faith of the Christian Religion.
Valentinianus had a Veneration for the Nicene Creed. Valens by reason of a
Prepossession, adhered to the Arian Heresy. And this his Pre-possession arose
from his being baptized by Eudoxius of Constantinople, a Prelate of the Arian
Opinion.

Both the Brothers were very warm in Maintenance of the Sentiments to which
they adhered: And though they agreed in the Care of the Civil Government, yet
they differed much about the Christian Religion. And were very different in
their Carriage toward such as professed it. For Valentinianus, though he much
favored those who were of his Judgment, yet he was not in the least
troublesome to the Arians. But Valens desirous to promote the Arians, did most
grievously disturb and molest those who differed from them in Opinion. Every
Sect had their Bishops to preside over them. And all but the Orthodox were
still striving to mend the Belief of Nice: To which Purpose the Macedoniani
desire the Emperor Valens to give leave to convene a Synod.

He supposing that they had been of the same Opinion with Acacius and Eudoxius,
granted their Request.

Accordingly a Council met at Lampsacus, nigh the Hellespont. It was a Synod of
Macedonian Heretics, and it ratified the Council which Seven Years before had
been held at Seleucia, A. D. 363, and damned that of Constantinople, held by
the Acacians. They also anathematized the Creed, that was published at Arimine,
though they had before declared their Agreement in Opinion with those that held
it.

Valens was much incensed against this Synod, both because it had deposed the
Arian Bishops, and anathematized that Draught of the Creed, published at
Arimine. And the Emperor was resolved to leave no Means unattempted whereby he
might win all Persons to Arianism. Elusius Bishop of Cizicum, was the first he
aggressed; who for fear of losing his Estate, turned Arian. And the very
Semi-Arians fared no better than the Orthodox; but all were the Object of his
persecuting Spirit, who were not thoroughly Arianized. But his Rage was most
visibly exercised against the Homocusians, whom he persecuted in all those who
bore them any Esteem or good Will. He was much stirred up to this Cruelty by
the Arian Prelate Eudoxius, by whose Instigation he turned out the Orthodox
Clergy; who during the sixteen Years that Valens reigned, scarce ever enjoyed
the Comfort of one peaceable Day.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by R. Clavel, at the Peacock in S. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Church History cleared from the Roman Forgeries and Corruptions found in
the Councils and Baronius: In Four Parts. From the Beginning of Christianity,
to the End of the fifth General Council. 553. By Thomas Comber, D.D. Dean of
Durham.

Aristophanis Comaediae Duae, Plutus and Nubes, cum Scholiis Graecis Antiquis.
Quibus adjiciuntur Noctae quaedam, simul cum Gemino Indice. In usum studiosae
Juventutis.

The Reasons of Praying for the Peace of Jerusalem: In a Sermon preached before
the Queen at White Hall, on the Fast Day, being Wednesday, August 29. 1694. By
Thomas Comber, D. D. Dean of Durham, and Chaplain in Ordinary to their
Majesty's. Printed by their Majesty's special Command.

A Daily Office for the Sick; Compiled out of the holy Scriptures, and the
Liturgy of our Church; with occasional Prayers, Meditations and Directions.

The Catechisms of the Church, with Proofs from the New Testament, and some
additional Questions and Answers, divided into twelve Sections, by Z. I. D. D.
Author of the Book lately published, Entitled a Daily Office for the Sick,
with Directions, etc.

A Church-Catechism, with a brief and easy Explanation thereof, for the Help
of the meanest Capacities and weakest Memories, in order to the establishing
them in the Religion of the Church of England. By T. C. Dean of Durham.

The Pantheon, representing the Fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods, and
most Illustrious Heroes: In a short, plain, and familiar Method, by the way of
Dialogue, for the Use of Schools. Written by Fra. Pomey, of the Society of
Jesus; Author of the French and Latin Dictionary, for the Use of the Dauphin.

Bedae Venerabilis opera quaedam Theologica, nunc primum edita, neonon
Historica antea semel edita. Accesserunt Egberti Archiepiscopi Eboracensis
Dialogus de Ecclesiastica Institutione, and Aldhelmi Episcopi Scireburnensis
Liber de Virginitate, ex codiceantiquissimo emendatus.

Disquisitio in Hypothesin Baxterianam de Foedere Gratiae, ab Initio and
deinceps, semper and ubiqueomnibus indulto, and adhuc apud Ethnicos and
extra-evangelicos vigente ac valente ad salutem. Autore Carolo Robothamo,
Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero Norfolciensi, S. Th. B.

Q. Horatii Flacci Opera: Interpretatione and Notis illustravit Ludovicus
Desprez. Cardinalitius Socius ac Rhetor Emeritus, Jussu Christianissimi Regis,
in usum Serenissimi Delphini, ac Serenissimorum Principum Burgundiae, Andium,
Biturigum. Huic Editioni accessere Vita Horatii, cum Dacerii Notis ejusdem
Chronologia Horatiana, and Praefatio de Satira Romana,

L. Annaei Flori rerum Romanarum Epitome; Interpretatione and Notis illustravit
Anna Tanaquilla Fabri Tilia, Jussu Christianissimi Regis in usum Serenissimi
Delphini.

Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, continens ex 7959. Versiculis totius N.
Testamenti tantum Versiculos 1900. (non tamen integros) in quibus omnes
universi Novi Test. Voces una cum Versione Latina inveniuntur: Auctore Johanne
Lusden. Philos. Doctore, and Linguae Sanctae in Academia Ultrajectina
Professore Ordinario. Editio Quinta.

A Second Admonition to the dissenting Inhabitants of the Diocese of
Londonderry, concerning Mr. Boyse's Vindication of his Remarks on a Discourse
concerning the Inventions of Men in the Worship of God, with an Appendix
containing an Answer to Mr. Boyse's Objections against the Sign of the Cross.
By William Lord Bishop of Derry.

The End of the Catalogue.

