THE Present State OF THE JEWS: (More particularly relating to those in
BARBARY.) Wherein is contained an exact Account of their CUSTOMS, Secular and
Religious. To which is annexed a Summary Discourse of the Misna, Talmud, and
Gemara.

By L. Addison, one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary; and the Author of
the late Revolutions and present Customs of the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco.

Alius alio plura invenire potest, nemo Omnia.

LONDON: Printed by J.C. for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar; and to be sold by John Courtney Bookseller in Sarum. 1675.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR JOSEPH WILLIAMSON, Principal Secretary of STATE,
and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
THat Generousness which pardoned my first Address (of this Nature) to your
Honor, has only served to Embolden a Second. It faring with Scriblers, as
with those Votaries who never forsake the Saint they once find Propitious.

If the ensuing Discourse treated of Maxims of Rule, there would need no
Apology for its Dedication to a Person whose Prudence and Virtue have given Him
the blessing of his Prince's Favor, and the Reputation as well in Foreign
Countries as his own, of an excellent and profound Statesman.

But what is here devoted to your Honor, is of a different, and (perhaps) of a
much inferior Character. The following Papers containing only a plain Account
of the present Customs and Religion of the Hebrew People, Collected in some of
those Hours the Employment would spare me, which for several years I underwent,
abroad in the public Service of our Religion, and in a Latitude that yielded
no few opportunities of making these Observations.

That I have hereunto prefixed your Name, it was not for Shelter against the
Common Enemy, Rudeness and Censure; nor only to take this occasion of telling
the World how much I am obliged by your Favors* For though I am thereof truly
sensible; yet this way of acknowledgement was never greatly welcome to those
Generous Persons, who are no less obliged by the benefits they bestow; than by
those they receive.

But besides all this, pardon me, Sir, that I take this opportunity to make
Public Recognizance of your Honors Eminent Bounty to (our Common Mother)
Queens College in Oxon. To which Ancient Nursery of Loyalty and Good Letters,
though your pious Liberality be already magnificent; yet they who know your
Temper, believe that what you there have done, is but an Earnest of what you
intend to do. For which a Thankful Posterity will for ever Celebrate and Bless
your Name. But I dare not give my self the Liberty of expressing so much as a
short Elogie, upon a Subject that is able to justify the largest Panegyric.
For when I consider that you are one of those Public Spirits, who under our
Gracious Sovereign assert the Individual Interest of Church and State, I cannot
hope the Grand Affairs of your Eminent Place should spare Minutes enough to
peruse a longer Dedication.

That your Honor may long Live Exalted in your Prince's Favor, and Prosperous
in your Negotiations, to the Encouragement and Promotion of true Learning,
Piety and Virtue, shall be his incessant Requests to Heaven, and at all those
Devotions cannot forget to be

Your Honors most humble, and most obliged Servant, LANCELOT ADDISON.
From Milston, near Ambrosbury in Wilts, Jan. 28. 1674/5.
TO THE READER.
I Shall not offer at any thing of Apologetick in behalf of the ensuing
Discourse, but freely leave it to the Tribunal of the Reader, whom I
acknowledge to have an unquestionable Authority to Acquit or Condemn it.

As to the Account it gives of the Jews, I conceive there is not any so modern,
nor in many things so particular and true; this being the Result of
Conversation, and not of Report. And as to its Composure, it is neither so
exact as to deserve Commendation; nor yet so faulty as to need much excuse. If
it may do good to some, and no hurt to any, the Author has got his ends of its
Publication.

BOOKS Newly Printed by W. Crook.
THe Primitive Institution; or, a seasonable Discourse of Catechizing; wherein
is shown the Antiquity; Benefits and Necessity thereof; together with its
suitableness to heal the present Distempers of the Church of England. By L.
Addison, one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary, and the Author of this
Book.

Homer's Odysses translated into English by Tho. Hobbes of Malmsbury, with a
large Preface concerning the Virtues of an Heroique Poem. By the Translator.

A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, showing the Manner and Qualities of that
People.

Brevis Demonstratio: The truth of Christian Religion Demonstrated by Reasons
the best that have yet been out in English.

The Court Leet and Court Baron. By Kitchen. The 5th Impression.

The Flower-Garden: Being an exact way to Plant, Set, and Sow all sorts of
Flowers. By W. Hughes.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THough the Jews inveterate obstinacy against the Truth, has justly rendered
them the object of the Divine Displeasure; yet their Primitive Ancestry,
Religion and Privileges, ought still to secure them a great measure of Regard.
For this people, if any under heaven, may boldly glory of the Antiquity and
Nobless of their Descent. There being no Nation can prove its Pedigree by such
clear and Authentic Heraldry as the Jews. For though a ridiculous Vanity has
tempted some to date their Original before that of the world, and others with
great assurance have made themselves sprung from their own Soil; yet the Jews,
by an unquestionable Display through all periods since the Creation, can prove
their Descent from the first man. So that all other Nations must have recourse
to the Jewish Records, to clear their Genealogies, and attest their Lineage.

And indeed their Progeny would be sufficiently renowned if it were derived no
higher than whither their present Appellation does entitle them. For the Jews
have their Name from Judah (Jacob's fourth son by his wife Leah) who
notwithstanding the degeneracy of his Descendents, was a Prince of a brave
Nature and great Eloquence. An Essay of the former we find in his endeavor to
have saved his brother Joseph; and it was a fair intimation of the later, that
he was chosen Orator to his Brethren. Over whom he obtained a Sovereignty, and
from whose Loins many Princes, Generals, Statesmen and Prophets have
descended. And what is yet more remarkable, to Judah was made the famous
Promise, That the Scepter should not depart from his Tribe, nor a Lawgiver
from between his feet, until Shiloh came. Though I am not ignorant how it is
the Opinion of some learned men, that the continuance of the Scepter, or
Sovereign Power, was not so fixed in Judah's family, as to exclude all the
rest. For at least after the Captivity, there were several of the other Tribes
who attained to Kingly Honor among the Jews. And therefore they understand
Jacob's prediction of the whole Hebrew Nation, which he foresaw in process of
time would derive their Name from Judah; and that they should never totally
loose the visible Being of a Kingdom or Commonwealth, or all form of
Government among themselves, until the coming of Shiloh, or the Manifestation
of Messiah in the flesh. And we find the truth hereof abundantly attested by
the event. For notwithstanding that the form and state of the Jewish Government
was often changed, its luster obscured, and its puissance and Grandeur lessened
and impaired; yet they were never totally without a Scepter till they were
entirely brought under the Roman yoke; which happened about the time of our
Savior's Nativity, and a little after his Crucifixion. When the unbelieving
Jews were so altogether inslaved by the Romans, that they retained not the
least footstep of a free State, but the Kingdom was utterly taken from them.
And though this ought to be reckoned for a Misery in their Fortune, yet it was
no debasement in their Genealogy. For Affliction (according to the Jews own
saying) may be a very great inconvenience, but no disrepute.

But if from the Jews Ancestry we look into their Primitive Religion, they will
be found to be no less happy in this, than honorable in the other. For it
immediately (as all true Religion) had God for its Author, and was attested by
such numerous and apparent Miracles, as made its truth unquestionable, and the
people (to whom it was first revealed) formidable, among all to whom the
knowledge thereof did arrive. And though for many years the Jews have been most
vile adulterers of that Religion which was delivered them in greatest purity,
yet it must needs be reckoned for no ordinary privilege of the Hebrew Nation,
to have received the first Religion of the World, and that too immediately from
the Almighty, and comprised in a Breviary of Ten Words, containing an exact
Model of Holiness and Virtue, and more true Wisdom than all the Volumes that
ever since have been Compiled by mere humane industry and invention.

And together with this excellent Religion (which they have so foully depraved)
they received other Privileges of no inferior concernment: for not only the
Adoption, Covenants and Promises did first belong unto the Jews, but also from
their Fathers, as concerning the flesh, Messiah came. And when we have clothed
their present infidelity with the most aggravating Circumstances, yet we must
confess our selves beholden to them for the preservation of that inestimable
Jewel, The knowledge of the one true God, when the rest of mankind was involved
in the belief and adoration of many false Deities.

To the Jews likewise we stand obliged for the Original History of the
Creation, and that with indubitable integrity they have delivered to us the
infallible Memoires of all those passages which happened before and after the
Deluge. Of which the faint glimpses, retained by other Nations, were wrapped up
in Stories so notoriously fabulous, that they were fitter to evidence the
vanity of the Pagan Rhapsodies, than to confirm a Truth of so great an
importance. Now seeing that they have been the chanel of so many benefits to
the rest of Mankind, they ought to be the matter of our thankful Reflection,
and not of our obloquy and reproach.

Nor have we been less benefited by their deplorable miseries, than matchless
privileges: seeing that their fall was our rise, and their diminution our
riches. But if the cutting off of the Jews (the natural branches in St. Paul)
was the occasion that the Gentiles, like Ciens were grafted in their place; and
because of their pride, contumacy and unbelief God has dealt thus severely
with them, we ought not therefore to insult over their Infidelity, but hasten
their Conversion; not to triumph in their downfall, but to labor their
restoration. Being ascertained, that if they abandon their obstinacy and
unbelief, God will revoke their Rejection, and receive them again into favor.
And if we may rely upon St. Paul's Eleventh to the Romans, the fall of the
Jews ought to make us careful of our own standing, and also to endeavor their
recovery; which later Christians pretend both to hope and desire. And to this
end I ever labored to manage that conversation, which for several years I held
with the Jews in Barbary, who are the subject of the ensuing Remarks. In which
I have taken care for nothing, but to prove my self a faithful Reporter of
matter of Fact, without using any other Art to please either the Severe or
Curious, but plainness and Truth.

CHAP. I.
The present Condition of the Jews in Barbary; their Places of Residence,
Profession, Apparel, Stature and Complexion, etc.

WHen I looked into the great number of Jews in Barbary, and saw how they were
lorded over by the imperious and haughty Moor, I could not but resent their
Condition, and wish their Deliverance from that direful imprecation, His blood
be upon us and our Children. One effect whereof may be seen in their present
Condition under the Moresco Government; which is no other then a better sort of
slavery. For even in those places where they have permission to inhabit, they
are not only Tributary, but upon every small disgust, in danger of Ejectment.
Insomuch that they cannot promise to themselves either any durable Settlement
or Security. Indeed their calmest state is sufficiently stormy; and when they
seem to enjoy the greatest peace, they are vilely Hectored by the Moors,
against whom they dare not move a finger, or wag a tongue in their own defense
and vindication; but with a Stoical patience support all the Injuries and
Contumelies to which they are daily exposed. For in the midst of the greatest
abuses, you shall never see a Jew with an angry countenance, or appearing
concerned; which cannot be imputed to any Heroic Temper in this People, but
rather to their customary suffering, being born and Educated in this kind of
slavery. By reason whereof, they were never acquainted with the sentiments of
an ingenuous and manly Usage. It is very common with the Moresco-Boys to rally
together, and by way of pastime and divertisement, to beat the Jewish Children:
which later, though they should far exceed the former in numbers and age, yet
dare not give them the least resistance or opposition.

The Moors permit not the Jews the possession of any warlike Weapons, unless in
point of Trade. And herein they do not so much restrain, as gratify their
disposition; for they seem generally inclined to a great averseness to every
thing that is Military: being as destitute of true Courage, as good Nature. Nor
does this their cowardly humor at all render them unfit for the Musters of
their expected Messiah: for though they believe that his appearance shall be
Warlike, and that he shall lead all their Enemies Captive, and triumph in the
Spoils of Esau; yet they imagine there shall be such a general surrender of the
Edomites, that there will need no Valor by dint of Sword to subdue them: and
that this submitting themselves to his rod, shall be an infallible Testimony of
the truth of his coming.

The Jews in Barbary generally decline living in the Country, not out of any
dislike of a rural Conversation, but because it does not yield sufficient
opportunities and safety for Traffic. For this being their general
Profession, they can with more convenience and advantage manage it (as we say)
in good Towns: And in these they live in a heap, seldom (or not at all, if it
be in their power to avoid it) mingling with the Moors. And the Apartment of
the Town where they have permission to inhabit, is from them Called the
Juderia, or Jury; which in some places in Barbary is so contrived, that the
Moors can lock it up at night.

Merchandise is their common Profession, wherein they are notoriously dextrous
and thriving. And as their Dexterity may be imputed to their continual practice
in Trade, so their Thriving therein to their Frugality in living. For both in
Diet and Clothes, they seem to design nothing but Sustenance and Covering. And
in this plain and frugal way of living, they greatly symbolize with the Moors,
who (as I have observed in another Discourse) take no care for sumptuousness or
delicacy.

When it is said that Merchandise is the Jews general Profession in Barbary, it
is not to exclude their darling Brokage and Usury, in which they are very
serviceable both to Christians and Moors. And indeed the latter do seldom use
them for any other purposes, unless in sending them upon hazardous Messages, or
to Collect their Maritime Imposts, in which they know them to be more exacting
than any else they can employ.

It Is true, the Moors entertain but a very mean esteem of this people, being
taught by Tradition, which age has made Authentic, that they are an
anomalous issue, and not like other men descended from Adam; and that the end
of their Being was to serve the Musulmin: which Opinion the Jews sufficiently
deride, and give it no other confutation, but the citing of Obadiah, which
Prophecy they wholly apply to their Condition, upon the coming of their
Messiah: when all Edom, that is, all Mankind who are not of their Religion,
shall become their Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water.

The next thing which I promised to remark concerning the Jews, is their
Apparel, in which those who have been born and bred up in Barbary, differ
little from the Moors. For first, they wear little black brimless Caps, as the
Moors red; which they seldom move in greeting one another. They likewise, as
the Moors, go slipshod, and wear linen Drawers and Vest, over which they put a
loose Garment, called a Ganephe, which differs only in color from the
Mandilion, or Albornoz, which the Moors bestow upon the Christians when they
are redeemed from slavery. This Ganephe is a black square piece of course
Hair-stuff, closed at the cross corners, and all round it is a large Thrum,
which at first sight looks like their Religious Fringes, whereof we shall have
occasion in due time and place to discourse.

The Jews in this Continent much resemble the Spaniard and Portuguez in their
Stature and Complexion, but are much different in their nature and disposition,
as being more flexible and sequacious, especially in things whereby they may
reap advantage. In point of Civil Government, they indifferently submit to any
that is able to secure their Interest; and boggle at no servile obeisance that
may be conducive to their worldly ends. They are not peremptory in intitling
themselves to any peculiar Tribes, yet they generally believe that they are the
remains of Judah and Benjamin, together with a few among them of the Family of
Levi: whom they conceive to be wonderfully preserved, that they might not be
destitute of competent persons to officiate in the Synagogues.

There are not any to be found among them who publicly own the Samaritan
Schism, in rejecting all books of Scripture, but the Pentateuch of Moses. Of
which Sect there were some not long since (says a great Traveller) who
worshipped a Calf at Sichem, or Neapolis. Nor are there any to be met with who
adhere to the Old Bible, without Talmud-Traditions. There are likewise none
among them who are known by the peculiar Denomination of any Sect, such as were
the Assideans, Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes, or Gaulonitae of old. For however
their private judgments may dispose them, yet they are careful to preserve an
outward Unanimity in their Religion; and are signally vigilant to avoid
Divisions, as looking upon those among Christian Professors, to be an Argument
against the truth of the things they profess. And that the differences in
matters of Religion, which are so offensively visible among Christians, may be
reckoned for one impediment of the Jews Conversion, we may in another place
have occasion to demonstrate.

CHAP. II.
The Moral Conversation of the Barbary-Jews: the ingredients of their Religion;
their backwardness to Disputes: their Creed, occasion, Author; with a short
Paraphrase thereof, etc.

REsearching in the Conversation of the Jews here treated of, it seemed to be
very regular, and agreeable to the Laws of a well-civilized conduct: For
setting aside the Artifices of Commerce, and Collusions of Trade, they cannot
be charged with any of those Debauches which are grown into reputation with
whole Nations of Christians, to the scandal and contradiction of their Name and
Profession. Fornication, Adultry, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Pride of Apparel, etc.
are so far from being in request with them, that they are scandalized at their
frequent practice in Christians: And out of a malicious insinuation, are sorry
to hear that any of their Nation should give a Name to, and die for a people of
such Vices.

But how commendable soever they may be for their Sobriety and Temperance, and
other domestique observances, yet that wherein they ought to be chiefly
Orthodox, they are the most erroneous, namely their Religion. For however they
may pretend the present Judaism, or that sort of Religion and Worship which
they now profess, to be contained in the Law and Prophets; Yet to those who
duly consider the ingredients thereof, it will appear to be patcht up of the
Traditions of the Masters, and the Opinions of old Philosophers; which are
indeed so artificially interwoven with Scripture, that this last to an unwary
Surveyor may still seem to be predominant. The truth of which assertion will be
manifested when we report the particulars of their Religion. But whatever it be
composed of, there is but small hope, as things now stand, to have it Reformed:
for the Bible, the Rule of all Reformation, though it be not denied the Peoples
Reading, yet the giving the sense thereof belongs only to the Masters, in whose
interpretation of the Text, the Vulgar upon pain of Excommunication are bound
to acquiesce. And this was told me as an Arcanum Judaismi by Rabbi Aaron
Ben-Netas, a person not unlearned in their Law, and one who wanted nothing but
Christianity to render him acceptable to equal Esteemers; to whose free
Communication I owe many of these Remarks.

Though these Jews are sufficiently taught to Evade all those Scriptures which
relate to the Truth and Establishment of Christianity, yet they are not forward
to enter into Disputes concerning them. And if it so happen that they are
forced thereunto, they will not be confined to the Laws of Disputation, but
usually confront Text with Text, and never directly answer the Objection, but
set up another against it. But as to their declining of Disputes about
Religion, it seems very wary and prudent; for when any thing concerning
Christianity is the matter controverted, they are generally so fiery and
choleric, that they cannot refrain from an ill-bred railing; and those
blasphemous contumelies, which are even detestable to common Ingenuity and
Candor, are usually vented by the Jews in their arguings about the Gospel.
Against which they are trained up in an unmanly hostility: it being a part of
their first Institution, to imbibe a malicious prejudice against Christianity.
And the better to manage this ill seasoning, there is not a passage of the Old
Bible any way relating to the proof of the Messiah's being already come, but it
is so perverted by the Glosses of the Rabbis, that the common people are not
able to arrive its genuine intent and meaning. And what is more observable, and
not less to be deplored, even the meaner sort are so versed in these spurious
glosses, that scarce any can be met with who is not provided of one evasion or
other, to elude the plainest Text that proves the Advent of Christ to be
already past. Nor need it be matter of wonder to hear that the very common Jews
are so well skilled in what we now speak of; seeing that it is the first and
last of all their Instruction, to understand and defend their Religion, in a
direct opposition to Christianity.

And the better to facilitate the peoples understanding of their Religion, and
to prevent the dangers that may accrue by leaving them to the hazardous Toil of
Collecting their Principles out of Moses and the Masters, they are provided
with two Systems or Abridgments thereof; the one containing the Rule of their
Actions, to wit, their book of Affirmative and Negative Precepts; the other the
substance of their Faith, or the things to be believed, namely their Creed:
which consists of thirteen Articles, and commonly called, Sepher Ikkarim, or
the Book of Fundamentals. They greatly glory in the immemorial Tradition of
this Creed, and of the joint agreement in the meaning thereof, ever since they
were a people. It Is true, the committing of it to writing they grant to be but
of a late date; and that Moses Ben-Maimon (a Corduba-Jew, who died about the
1104 of Grace) foreseeing the dangers that would hardly be prevented in the
present Dispersion of the Jews, which might come upon a mere Oral Tradition of
(so great a Depositum) their Creed, caused it to be ensured in writing; and in
this condition it now remains. But Rabbi Joseph Albo, another Spanish Jew, and
a most virulent blasphemer and indefatigable impugner of Christianity, not
being content with Ben-Maimon's division of the Jewish Creed into thirteen
Articles, reduced them to three, and called his Antichristian Exposition
thereof, by Maimon's Title, Sepher Ikkarim; which he writ 321 years after the
others death.

Now because this Creed is the sum of the present Judaism, we will here insert
it, with the common and received sense and meaning of every Article.

ARTICLE I.
I Believe with a true and perfect Faith, that God is the Creator (whose Name
be blessed,) Governor and Maker of all Creatures, and that he has wrought all
things, works and shall work for ever.

By this Article they assert and believe the Divine Essence. That God is the
cause of causes. That by him the whole Creation is preserved and sustained.
That when he pleases he can reduce the World to nothing, as he raised it
thence. That he has an absolute Power and Empire over all things. That his
being is so perfect, that he needs no aid nor assistance, nor is liable to
diminution or change.

ARTICLE II.
I believe with a perfect Faith that the Creator (whose name be blessed) is
one, and that such an Unity as is in him, can be found in none other: and that
he alone has been our God, is, and for ever shall be.

By this they affirm the Unity of God. That he is not like a common Nature
running through diverse kinds and individuals. Not compounded like Bodies of
integrant parts. That he is so one, as that he can neither be divided nor
multiplied.

But how true soever this Article may be in it self, or plausible in this
Exposition: yet the Jews manage it to pull down the Christians faith of the
Trinity; which they maintain to be an assertion of a triple Godhead.

ARTICLE III.
I believe with a perfect faith, that the Creator (whose Name be blessed) is
not Corporeal, nor to be comprehended with any bodily properties: And that
there is no bodily Essence can be likened unto him.

Here they declare their faith of Gods incorporeity; and that he is so pure a
Spirit, and simple a being, that none of those things can be said of him which
are of bodies.

And by this Article they confirm their infidelity of the Incarnation of the
second Person of the Trinity: because thereby they imagine, that according to
the Principles of Christianity, God must become a body, to whom all corporal
proprieties are utterly incompatible.

ARTICLE IV.
I believe with a perfect faith the Creator (whose Name be blessed) to be the
first and the last, and that nothing was before him, and that he shall abide
the last for ever.

Though this is their faith of Gods Eternity, yet from hence they despise and
deride that fullness of time wherein (according to the Christians) God was
manifest in the flesh, and the Word was made man.

ARTICLE V.
I believe with a perfect faith that the Creator (whose Name be blessed) is to
be worshipped, and none else.

Here they protest against Idolatry: and exclude all sorts of Creatures from
being the object of Divine Adoration. But their chief design is by this Article
to deny and contemn the Christians invocation of Christ, as a Mediator and
Advocate.

ARTICLE VI.
I believe with a perfect faith that all the words of Prophets are true.

By this they declare how God out of his mere good pleasure, chose some out of
Mankind, whose understanding he purified and enlightened above others, and
gave them the spirit of Prophecy: Causing their understandings closely to
adhere unto his. And then God spoke by them, and revealed unto them that way
wherein he would have men to walk.

ARTICLE VII.
I believe with a perfect faith that the Prophesies of Moses (our Master, may
he rest in peace) were true. That he was the Father and chief of all wise men
that lived before him, or ever shall live after him.

In this Article they intend not so much to magnify Moses, as to lessen
Christ. And the blindness of their malice is herein so great, that they have
here made that an Article of their Faith, which they ought to make the
contrary: for while they place so much confidence in Deuteronomy. 18.15. it is wonder
to see them believing so contrary to their hope.

ARTICLE VIII.
I believe with a perfect faith that all the Law which at this day is found in
our hands, was delivered by God himself to our Master Moses (Gods peace be with
him.)

On this Article they build the Divine Authority of the Law. But much dispute
about the manner of its delivery: whether God gave it Moses in writing, or he
writ it from Gods mouth.

ARTICLE IX.
I believe with a perfect faith that the same Law is never to be changed, nor
any other to be given us of God (whose Name be blessed.)

And it is upon the supposed immutability of the Law that they hope for the
rebuilding of the Temple and Jerusalem; their return to Canaan, and the
restoration of all the Mosaical Ritual, which is the chief Pillar of Judaism.
The latter part of this Article is wholly to decry the Gospel, or the Law of
Christ.

ARTICLE X.
I believe with a perfect heart that God (whose Name be blessed) understands
all the works and thoughts of Men: As it is written in the Prophets, He
fashioneth their hearts alike: he understands all their works.

ARTICLE XI.
I believe with a perfect faith that God will recempence good to those who keep
his Commandments, and will punish those who transgress them.

In this they believe a final retribution of good and evil works: That every
one shall have as he deserves.

ARTICLE XII.
I believe with a perfect faith that Messiah is yet to come: and although he
retard his coming, yet I will wait for him till he come.

In this Article the Jews declare their assurance of the coming of the Messiah.
That there is no set time for his coming. And upon this account they forbid all
curious inquiring concerning the hour of his Appearance. And they still use
that old Rabbinical Execration -- Let their Spirit burst who count the times.

ARTICLE XIII.
I believe with a perfect faith, that the dead shall be restored to life, when
it shall seem fit unto God the Creator; whose Name be blessed, and Memory
celebrated world without end. Amen.

I do not find that they strive much to crook this Article to any evil purpose
against Christianity: but that it is a bare affirmation of the Resurrection. Of
which the Jews retain very extravagant Opinions, as will shortly be discoursed.

In these thirteen Articles are comprised the Jews Credenda, wherein they
exhort and oblige all of their Communion to live and die, as they hope for any
comfort in the future State. And notwithstanding that many of these Articles
may be capable of a good construction, yet according to the present received
interpretation thereof among the Jews, they are not so much a system of
Judaism, as a cuning and malicious contradiction of Christianity. And the
subtle Rambam (who is said to have first committed them to writing) seems
rather to have designed the Jews confirmation in an ill opinion of the
Christian, than any instruction in their own Religion. And that they might
imbibe a more implacable hatred against the Christian Faith, the crafty Rabbi
so composed (for he is thought to have been the Author thereof) the Jews Creed,
that it might one way or other wholly confront the Christians. Not doubting but
that they would hardly be induced to embrace a Religion, which they saw was so
greatly opposite to that of their first Catechism, and wherein from their
infancy they had been taught to expect an happy immortality.

Now this which we may suppose was but the Design of Maimonides, is become the
general practice of the Jews in Barbary. For I have heard from one (whose
understanding in their Religion had got him the Title of a Master,) That there
was not an Article of their Faith which they did not understand in a sense
wholly opposite to Christianity. And taking a freedom to rail at our Religion
(in which they are all well gifted) he instanced in the Eleventh Article, as
seeming to bear the least ill will to Christianity, and from thence warmly beat
down all thoughts of Redemption; with great assurance protesting, That he would
have none to pay his debts, nor any but himself to satisfy divine justice for
his sins: That he did not expect the felicity of the next world upon the
account of any Merits but his own: That he was certain whosoever lived piously
and kept the Law, could not miss of being happy: or arriving the bliss to come
upon his own legs. With a deal more of the like stuff, even too heinous to be
inserted.

But wishing this poor obstinate people an happy rescue from such impious
thoughts, I shall close up this Chapter with observing, that the Jews give
their Creed a double note of Respect above any other part of their Religion.
For though I do not find this Creed set down in their Common Service Book, yet
in honor thereof they begin their Mattins with it, and utter it in a hollow
tone differing from that wherein the rest of the Office is chanted.

CHAP. III.
The Barbary-Jews Opinion of the Trinity, Angels, several States of the Soul,
the Law, Merit, Purgatory, Resurrection, last Judgment, end of the World, etc.

NOtwithstanding that the Jews are very unanimous in the literal Profession of
the same Fundamentals, yet they are not so well agreed in any Exposition
thereof, as that which most opposes Christianity. That the Jews in Barbary are
in many things differing from the sentiments of the Jews in other parts of the
world, and that too in points of no inferior concernment, may be seen in the
following particulars.

And in the first place, both the Jews and Moors accord in exploding the
Trinity, which they look upon as an Hypochondriacal imagination of the
Christians, whom they accuse of Polytheism, out of an ignorant conceit that we
make every Person of the blessed Trinity a distinct Deity. Nor are they more
malicious and blind in the utter denial of the blessed Trinity, than
extravagant in their opinions concerning the Angels. It Is true, they all accord
in dividing them according to their Natures and Employments, into good and bad.
The good Angels (they say) are employed in Messages of Comfort, as were those
who brought Abraham the glad Tidings of his Wives Conception and time of
Childbirth. Other Angels (they hold) are sent upon Errands of Destruction; and
they commonly place the instance in those who came to Sodom. They likewise
opine that there is another rank of Angels, to whom is committed the protection
and safeguard of particular persons; and they give an example in the Angel
which appeared with the three Children in the Babylonian Furnace.

But beside these more general Objects of the Angels Employment, the Jews allot
two of them to every individual person of their own Nation. Whereof one is a
good Angel, and stands at the right hand of every Jew, to register his good
Actions, and to set down the particulars wherein he does well. And at the left
hand of the same Jew stands a bad Angel, and keeps an account of whatsoever he
does amiss. And when the Jew dies, these Angels bring in accounts of all that
he has done when alive. And the good Angel pleads in behalf of the deceased
the good deeds, as the bad Angel does the contrary. And according to the
accounts these two Angels give in of his behavior, the departed Jew is punished
or rewarded by another sort of Angels appointed for that purpose.

But not only two Angels are thus allowed to every one of the Jewish Religion,
but also (according to the Doctrine of the Barbary Jews) there is a distinct
Order of Angels which is entrusted with the Care and Patronage of the whole
Hebrew Nation, and who are always ready to prevent those who would hurt them;
like that Angel who would not let Balaam curse their Forefathers, when Balak
had sent for him to that end.

They hold likewise that every Governor has an Angel to assist him in Governing
the people, and another to suggest to him what will be happy or otherwise. For
they think it to exceed the power of one and the same Angel to assist the
public Magistrate both in the Counsel and Execution of what is fit. And the
reason of this Opinion is chiefly drawn from the difficulty of right Governing
the various humors of the many. Indeed they are so liberal of the Angels
service, that they prostitute it to meaner Offices than can well be mentioned.
For there is scarce any thing done among them in which they do not interess the
Ministry of those excellent Spirits.

Next to Angels they place rational Souls, to which they assign a fourfold
State. The first is that in which they were created. For they are strongly of
opinion that all Rational Souls were created at once, and placed in a certain
Region, whence, as out of a common Storehouse, the several bodies in their
proper times are furnished, as they are ready to receive them. And if the Souls
offend in this State, their punishment is to be sent into infirm and unhealthy
Bodies. And this pre-existence of Souls they chiefly found in Eccles. 4.3.

The second State of the Soul is that of its Conjunction with the Body, which
they esteem no better than an Imprisonment, wherein it lives as a Bird in a
Cage, and where it contracts that pollution which is afterward to be cleansed
in Purgatory.

The third State of the Soul is that of its Separation from the Body, wherein
it continues until the final Sentence, and is happy or otherwise according to
what it has done in the body. And when at the Resurrection the Souls are again
united to their Bodies, then they enter into their fourth and last State, which
is as durable as Eternity.

Their next singularity of Opinion respects the Law of Nature, which alone they
affirm to be obligatory of all Mankind. And to those who observe this Law, they
promise the World to come, which (in the phrase of the present Jews) is all one
with Eternal life. But when the Jews grant this hope to all Mankind, yet they
reserve a peculiar privilege to themselves, to whom alone God gave the Law of
Moses; to whose due observers there belongs a greater Glory and Happiness than
to any other.

There are some who have imagined that this Opinion of the Jews concerning the
universal possibility of being saved by the Law, does favor their fancy, who
maintain an indifferency in the external profession of Religion, and that a man
without scandal may join himself to the Worship of the place he resides in. And
this Opinion was by some Beaux Esprits of France zealously promoted, till it
received a Learned Confutation by Sieur Moses Amyraldus, a late Professor in
Saumur.

But the practice of the Jews in Barbary sets them far distant to any such
conceit, there being no people under Heaven more averse to communicate in the
Rites of other Nations than they. And if they could have been reconciled to the
opinion of Indifferency, and accommodated themselves to the Religion of the
Places and Countries where they came to reside, the Jews might have obviated
many exiles and penalties to which a contrary extreme has so long and often
exposed them.

And yet it cannot be denied but that there are several Jews who make use of a
scandalous compliance in this particular. Of which sort are many of those who
coming within the cognizance and power of the Papal Inquisition can join
themselves to a Crucifix and Rosary, as well as to the Zizith and Tephillim.
And I am assured that some Jews have have gone herein so far as to enter into
Holy Orders, and the profession of a Religious life, who yet coming to places
where the Jews have public Toleration have joined themselves to the Synagogue.

And of this we have a very late instance of two Jews who in Spain having for
several years professed the Religion of Saint Dominique, coming to Legorn in
their Friar Habits they instantly changed their Cowle for a Ganephe, and of
idle Friars became progging Jews. Another Jew (of my acquaintance, who for
about five years had Studied Physic at Saragoza in Spain) being asked how he
could comply with the Religion, he merrily made this reply, That his compliance
was only the work of his Nerves and Muscles, and that his Anatomy told him
nothing of the heart was therein concerned. Another Jew who in Malaga
counterfeited Christianity so well as to be entrusted with the Sale of
Indulgences, having made a good Market thereof in Spain, came with what he had
left to a Christian City in Barbary, where his Indulgences being all bought up
by the Irish and others of the Papal persuasion, he declared his Religion. The
Papists who had bought his Indulgences impeach him to the Governor for a Cheat,
and clamor to have him punished according to demerit. The Jew pleaded the Laws
of the free Port, that he had neither imported nor sold any thing but his
professed Merchandise, and therefore desired (and obtained) the Liberty and
Privileges of such as traffick'd to that Port. I report nothing but matter of
personal knowledge.

That there are many such Temporizing Jews, especially in Spain and Portugal, I
have been assured from their own mouths: and what is more observable, some have
ventured to affirm that there want not Jews among the very Judges of the
Inquisition; which may be one reason why of late so few are convict of Judaism
by that dreadful Tribunal. But what kindness soever these Temporizers may bear
to the Doctrine of Indifferency, I am sure the Barbary-Jews bear it an
irreconcilable enmity: for they are so far from complying with other
Religions, that they will not so much as eat of the meat which is dressed by
one of a differing persuasion; nor drink in the same Cup after a Christian or
Moor, till it be washed.

The Jews (now spoken of) considering the many irregularities to which through
temptations and humane Frailties they are hourly liable, conclude that the most
vigilant and wary among them cannot live without contracting some stain and
pollution, which must be cleansed ere they can enter that place of rest,
whereof they esteem the Holy of Holies to have been a figure. But lest the
doing away of this pollution should by any means be thought a work of the Holy
Ghost, whom by way of Derision they call the Christians Sanctifier, they have
resolved upon a Purgatory for this purpose. Wherein all the Relics of
Uncleanness, which Repentance had left uncleansed, are to be done away.

How the Jews Purgatory differs from that of Virgil, Cicero, and Plato, it will
not be worth our travail to set down. Yet I cannot but observe that they speak
herein much after the manner of those Platonists, who assigned a punishment to
every sin, yet held that all such punishments, whether now or hereafter, did
only tend to purge the Soul from her Enormities. S. Aug. Civitat. Dei, lib. 21.
cap. 13. Neither would it more avail our present purpose to compare the Jewish
with the Papal Purgatory; which how much soever they may differ in other
Circumstances, do sufficiently harmonize in vain and groundless extravagancies.
The Papists, it is true, have much disputed the place of their Purgatory, and
were not resolved therein till Saint Patrick obtained the Key and opened the
Receptacle. But the Jews without controverting the situation thereof,
unanimously agree, except a few that place it in transmigration of Souls, that
it is in Hell. From whence they can never be delivered but by the power of the
Kaddisch: which is a Prayer that being for the space of a year repeated once a
day, by some surviving Relation of the party in Purgatory, is able thence to
deliver him. And therefore if the dying person leave any behind who will be so
courteous as to repeat the Kaddisch, he need not fear that the pains of
Purgatory shall endure above a year. And indeed the Jews generally hold that
there shall none of them stay above twelve months under this purgation, though
they have dyed never so impenitent or devoid of Remorse: and that they shall
not tarry there above seven days, if at their Decease they were penitent and
sorrowful for what they had done.

Now if any ones Sins are so great and many, that a years Purgatory will not
atone them, then the Soul is to return into a Body to finish the Penance. And
to support this Opinion, these Jews hold a transmigration of the Soul from one
body to another, but without changing of the Species or the Jewish Nation. And
by this transmigration (they hold) that the Soul shall satisfy in the second
body what it had done amiss in the first, and so successively till it come to
the seventh: where it is sure of a Sabbath, and rests from its penance and
satisfaction. And if the Soul in all the seven bodies has sinned more than it
has satisfied for; yet having suffered what was appointed, God (they say) in
mercy gives it a release. But the portion of bliss allotted to this incomplete
penance, is far less than that of the Soul which has made entire satisfaction.
And they so greatly magnify the penitent, that they think him of greater value
than one who never sinned: and that one day spent therein is more worth than
Eternity. But a man would think the Jews needed not load Repentance with such
great Encomiums, seeing that the future bliss may be attained for thirteen
Moons durance in Purgatory.

To the expiation of those faults whereby the neighbor is injured, the
repentance of the offender and compassion of the offended is strictly required
by the Jewish Casuists.

The Jews in Barbary entertain no thoughts of Merit in a Papal sense, but smile
to hear any should be so vain as to imagine they can do more than the Law
requires. They hold that all reward proceeds from Divine Bounty, and that
obedience is the only thing looked upon in man's service; and that every one
shall receive according to their obsequiousness to the Law. But that we may not
imagine the Jews to design the Christian any kindness by this Doctrine, we must
observe that all hope and promise of future Reward is confined to themselves,
and that to those who are not of their Religion they allow nothing but a total
perdition of their Being.

Both the Jews and Moors are of Opinion that the infernal Torments shall have
an End: and that the fallen Angels after many years of punishment shall be
received to mercy. Which (says St. Aug. Civit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 17.) was the
judgment of some tender hearts among the Old Christians: and gives the Example
in Origin, whom for his Circumvolution and Rotation of bliss and misery the
Church did Excommunicate. And to carry this remark a little further, some of
the Masters are of opinion, that when God, after the Resurrection, shall take
accounts of men's actions, he will not to magnify his power and justice condemn
any one to endless tortures, but that it is more agreeable to Gods nature and
the daily expresses of his Providence to save all. And notwithstanding they
place the punishment of the Christians in a sort of Annihilation, yet to any of
their own Nation they hold no other misery shall remain after the last
Judgment, but a lesser measure of Happiness.

As to what relates to the Consummation of the World, the Jews do not place it
in a confused Destruction of its present order and beauty, but in its
restoration to that purity and perfection, which (say they) it possessed at
the Creation. And that every part of this lower World shall attain that
perfection, whereunto it was at first designed: and that seeing he is the
inexhaustible Fountain of all Goodness, that God will at last invest the
Creatures with happiness according to their Capacities.

And though in lesser matters, opinions of no ordinary extravagancie may be
better endured, yet it is heinous to see them so loose in their judgment
concerning that Universal Article, The Resurrection of the Body; which they
will not permit to go beyond their own Tribes; for they plainly affirm that
none shall be capable of the Resurrection, who do not die in the Communion of
the Synagogue. And that this may not be thought the sentiment only of the less
cultivated Jews in Barbary, we find it to be the general position of their
Masters: Who affirm that there are four privileges so peculiar to the Hebrews,
that no other Nation can thereof communicate. And these are the Land of Canaan,
the Law of Moses, the Gift of Prophecy, and the Resurrection. And that this
last might not be looked upon as a mere Talmud-fancy, they deny the
Resurrection to all but themselves, upon the account of Esaias 26.14. They are
dead, they shall not live: they are deceased, they shall not rise.

But while they utterly expunge out of their Creed the Resurrection of other
Nations, it were well if they agreed concerning their own Rising. For some of
their Masters have expressly held that both the bodies and souls of wicked Jews
shall be totally annihilate, and that the Resurrection shall only be of such
Jews as have lived godly. Some again hold that all the Jews shall rise again,
but to different Conditions; for the perfectly just upon their Resurrection
shall be instated in an undefeisible happiness: next, those that have died in
utter impenitence shall according to some of their Rabbis, rise to be
cruciated in Gehenna: and a middle sort between both these shall at the
Resurrection for twelve months space be punished in Hell. But to speak truly,
these are the private opinions only of their Masters; for the Common people
plainly acquiesce in the literal sense of the thirteenth Article of their Creed.

Before we dismiss this Chapter, it may not be incongruous to observe that the
Jews in Barbary much dote upon the judgment of Rabbi Solomon Jarchi, who held
that Israel's Command to Joseph to carry his bones into Canaan was not only
because he foresaw that the dust of Egypt should be turned to Lice; or for fear
that the Egyptians should idolize his Carkas: but because that those who are
buried out of Canaan should have a very troublesome Resurrection. For the Jews
believe that the Resurrection shall be in the Holy Land, whither all of them
that are buried in other Countries, must incessantly roll through the dark
caverns of the Earth, that they may rise there and be possessed of their final
rest.

And however this may seem an Opinion too vain and absurd for men even of
ordinary parts to maintain, yet it is at this day a prevailing Doctrine among
these Jews: who greatly desire to be buried in Canaan, to the end they may
escape that toilsom rolling through the Earth, which those must undergo, whose
hard lot it is to be buried out of the Holy Land. But to avoid this
inconvenience, as many of them as are able, endeavor to return to Palestine
when they grow old, that they may have an easy and compendious Resurrection.
And upon this account the Jews in Barbary imagine their condition to be much
happier than those in Northern Countries, because they are nearer to Canaan,
and therefore have a less way to tumble under ground for the Resurrection.

We have already taken notice that some Jews place their Purgatory in a
Transmigration of the Soul to seven bodies; and discoursing one of them who was
of this opinion, and showing him that by this Doctrine at the Resurrection
either seven Bodies must have but one Soul, or six Bodies must have none: he
made light of the objection, saying, That at the Resurrection all the seven
Bodies should be set together, and the six that had it first shall come to the
seventh Body, wherein the Soul is then placed as a Candle in a Candlestick, and
that all the Bodies like so many Tapers shall be lighted thereat: for the Soul
shall communicate it self just as a Lamp its flames, etc.

But I have been too tedious in these miscelaneous extravagancies already,
which I hope to make some amends for in the succeeding Accounts; wherein I
shall endeavor to be as succinct and orderly as the subject will give leave.

CHAP. IV.
Their Opinion of Matrimony and Coelibate, their Espousals, Dowry-Bill, etc.

NOtwithstanding that all civilized Nations in the World agree and consent that
Marriage is a State of Honor and Sanctity, and one of the ancientest
Institutions which any Tradition does report: yet none are so warm Assertors
thereof as the Jews in this Clime. Who do not only contract Marriage early, but
infinitely extol it above Single-life, and hold it a Condition more suitable to
Nature, more advantageous to Mankind, and more acceptable to God. Insomuch that
they admit not any unmarried Sect among them, but on the contrary look very
jealously upon such of their Nation as either Marry not at all, or long defer
it.

And on this account their Espousals are very early, their Daughters being
usually betrothed at ten years of age; and if rich, are Married when very
young. And when they have once entered this Solemn State, they are religiously
careful to express all faithfulness to their husbands. And indeed the whole
Nation of the Jews are such great Enemies to a treacherous Bed, that if they
had liberty they would certainly punish Adultery according to the letter of
Levit. 20.20.

And in further testimony of the great esteem the Jews have of Wedlock, they
reckon it among the affirmative Precepts, which they make obligatory of their
whole Nation. Besides they are generally taught by the Masters, that every Male
coming to years of maturity is bound to take a Wife of his own Family or Tribe,
for to preserve and increase it. There are some among them who allow of no
other end of Matrimony but Propagation, and account them, naughty persons who
therein do project any other satisfaction. And the Rabbis tell them, that
augmenting and preserving of their Families include all other purposes of
Marriage whatsoever.

Their manner of taking of a Wife, which is next to be considered, is
sufficiently orderly and decent. For when any Male is disposed to Marry, he
enquires among his kindred for a Virgin to whom he may be joined in this Sacred
Bond, for the maintenance of his Name and Family in Israel. And being informed
that there is such an one, he acquaints himself with her Age, Complexion, state
of Body, etc. and after this begins to drive the bargain with the Virgins
Relations, who if they like his Condition and Proposals, admit him to visit
her. But the Virgins Relations are very cautious that the Visit be short; for
should the Match not succeed, the familiarity of such an interview will much
tend to the Damsels disparagement. But if the parties like one another, and the
friends agree about the Dowry, then the man has liberty to make her presents,
in imitation of Genesis 24.53. (which was also a Custom among the Grecians, as
Suidas in (...).) And these he sends by the hand of some discreet Female, who
ascertains the Virgin of the reality of his intention and good will.

After the parties have given all proper assurance of one another good liking,
and thereof certified their Relations; these presently call for a Master, who
at the Damsels house draws up the Articles of Marriage and Covenant of Dowry.
In which is set down all that belongs to the intended Bride, the particulars of
her Night-dress not being omitted. And a Bill of particulars being delivered to
the Bridegroom, by virtue thereof he has power at the day of Marriage to call
for and recover whatsoever is therein specified. I enquired, but could meet
with no Form hereof, nor could I perceive that it was any thing but a bare
Envois of the goods belonging to the Bride, Signed and Witnessed.

But besides this on the woman's part, there is also a Dowry made by the man;
which varies in quantity according to the plenty or nearness of his fortunes.
David we find being but poor, gave for his Wife so many skins of the
Philistines: but Sechem being a man of wealth, was willing to give as much for
Dinah as ever they would demand. Of old (they say) that the Dowry of a Virgin
was fifty Shekels, which sum is constantly set down in the present form of
their Matrimonial Letters, or Dowry-bill. And this they collect from Exodus
22.17. compared with Deuteronomy. 22.29. In the Dowry-bills made to Widows, but half
the sum is given in Barbary, which they give to Virgins.

The Dowries being settled, they pass to the affiancing; wherein the Woman is
given to the Man, by some of her near kindred in this form of words; -- Behold,
take her after the Law of Moses: And the Man replies, Be thou unto me a Wife
according to the Law of Moses and Israel.

There is but one form of Dowry-bill, or Matrimonial Letters in present use
among all the Jews, whereof we have a Copy translated by Cornelius Bertram out
of the Babylon-Talmud, and another in Buxtorfs Gram. Chald. p. 389. betwixt
which there is some small variance; but the sum of both amounts to the ensuing
Copy.

A Copy of the Dowry-bill now in use among the Jews in Barbary.
UPon the sixth of the Week, the fourth of the Month (...) in the year (...) of
the Creation of the World, according to the Computation which* We use here at
Arzila, a Town situate on the Seashore of Barbary, the Bridegroom Rabbi (...)
the Son of Rabbi (...) said unto the Bridewife (...) the Daughter of Rabbi
(...) Merchant in Alcazar; Be unto me a Wife according to the Law of Moses and
Israel; and I according to the word of God, will worship, honor, maintain and
govern thee, according to the manner of Husbands among the Jews, who do
faithfully worship, honor, maintain and govern their Wives. I also bestow upon
thee the Dowry of thy Virginity amounting to fifty Shekels, which belong unto
thee by the Law. And moreover thy food, thy raiment, and sufficient
necessaries, as likewise the knowledge of thee, according to the Custom of all
the Earth.

And these words being thus pronounced, the Virgin from that time forward
becomes the man's Wife. To this form of [honouring and worshipping the Wife] some
think the Scripture alludeth, 1 St. Pet. 3.7. And that due Benevolence spoken
of 1. Cor. 7.3. is that is here called -- knowing of the Wife according to the
Custom of all the Earth. Though it is true, the Jews by the same phrase express
both Death and Marriage. But to return, this Dowry-bill at the day of wedding
is delivered into the custody of the Bride, who thereby is empowered to
challenge from her Husband Food, Apparel, and the Right of the Bed. And
according to the Law, Exodus 21.10. If the Husband take him another Wife, he
cannot withhold or diminish from the former the Food, Raiment and Duty of
Marriage.

CHAP. V.
Of other Ceremonies relating to their Marriages.

AMong the Ancient Jews there was ever a competent time intervening betwixt
their Betrothing and Marriage; which Custom they deduced from the answer given
by Rabecca's friends to Abraham's servant, when they desired that the Maid
might not depart presently, but remain after the Espousals ten days, Genesis
24.55. which yet seems rather to imply the Mothers unwillingness so soon to
part with her Daughter, than any legal intervention of time between the
affiancing and confirmation of Marriage. But however the old Jews were
persuaded in this particular, the modern of whom we now treat of, think it very
disagreeable to the nature of Amors to use any protraction of their
Accomplishment. And therefore they stay no longer for Marriage after the
betrothing, than is sufficient to make preparation for so great a Solemnity.
For after the Dowry-bill is finished, the day of Marriage is appointed: and in
the interim the Bride prepares her self for the Celebration: And for eight
days uses bathing. Upon the Marriage-Eve at the going down of the Sun, she
has her Tabila or Cistern filled full of pure water, whereinto she is put by
two discreet Matrons, who are very diligent that not an hair of her head appear
above water: for if any part about her remain uncovered with water, she the
second time must be put into her Tabila. For this Bath (they say) ought to be
very exact, because it is to supply whatever was defective in the other
circumstances of the Brides preparations. When she comes out of this cold Wash,
her hair with great curiosity is tied up, and her person secluded from the eyes
of all men, it being not allowed for her Father or Brothers to look upon her,
till she be delivered to her Husband.

In some places, as I have been told, the Bride goes to this Bath through the
Streets, accompanied with several women who dance and sing as they pass, and
name the party that is shortly to be married. But this is a freedom would be
very scandalous to the Jews neighborhood in Barbary; besides, the modesty to
which from their infancy the women here are inured, will not in the least admit
of this liberty.

The dressing of the Brides hair when she comes out of the Bath, (which was but
now intimated) though the common people may look upon it as a mere act of
handsomness and adorning; yet their Masters teach it for an instance of
Religion, and as a thing very acceptable to God. And those words -- And brought
her unto the Man, Genesis 2.22. they thus expound: And God brought Eve to Adam,
after the same manner that a Bride is brought to her husband, that is,
elegantly dressed, with her hair curiously curled and plated; and with joy and
dancing.

Upon the day of Marriage the Bride puts on her Wedding Garment, and adorns her
self as sumptuously as her fortunes will allow, and in an apartment by her
self, spends the time until the usual hour of Marriage, in Fasting and
Devotion. And though they have no Canonical hours for this Solemnity, yet it is
most usually kept toward night; which some gather (from St. Matt. 25.1.) was
the custom of the Jews in our Saviors time. Though the Parable (think others)
relates rather to the Marriage Feast than the Marriage it self.

The Bridegroom likewise spends several hours in private Devotion before the
Marriage. And recommends his Condition unto God, begging happiness upon his
wedlock. After these private Devotions are ended, he goes to the Service of the
Synagogue, whence he usually returns accompanied with some choice friends, who
straightway conduct him to the chamber, where the Bride sits in a chair on
purpose to receive him, having a Virgin on each hand, as her attendants. And
she changes not this posture, till some Rabbi (or other aged Jew, skilful in
the Law) reads the Dowry-bill with an audible and distinct voice; and the
Bridegroom has put the Kedusim or wedding-Ring (of pure Gold, and without a
Stone) on the Brides thumb, or third or any finger of her right hand, and
called all that are present to attest it; upon which the Rabbi says unto the
Bride, Thou art Married or Sanctified to this Man with this Ring, according to
the Law of Israel. And these Ceremonies being finished, the Rabbi says a
Prayer, which is called the Nuptial-Blessing (the form follows presently) and
then takes a glass crowned with Wine, which having blessed and tasted of, he
gives to the Bridegroom, who with a sudden violence breaks it, in memory of
the Destruction of the Temple. And this being done, he takes off the Brides
Vail, and giving her the right hand sits down by her; and having entertained
her with a short discourse, serious or otherwise as he best affects, they have
a Collation, and retire to their lodging room.

And these are the antecedent and concomitant Rites of Marriage in present
practice with the Jews I now discourse of, to which I will annex two Forms of
Blessing used by the Rabbi at this Solemnity.

The forms of Blessing used by the Rabbi at the Consummation of Marriage.
BLessed art thou O Lord our God, who have created Mirth and Gladness, the
Bridegroom and the Bride; Charity and Brotherly Love, Rejoicing and Pleasure,
Peace and Society. I beseech thee, O Lord, let there suddenly be heard in the
Cities of Judah and Streets of Jerusalem the voice of joy and gladness; the
voice of the Bride and the Bridegroom. The voice of Rejoicing in the
Bride-chamber is sweeter than any Feast, and Children sweeter than the
sweetness of a Song.

Another.
BLessed be the Lord our God, King of the World, who has created Man after his
own Image, according to the Image of his own likeness, and thereby prepared
unto himself an everlasting building; blessed be thou O Lord who have created
him.

In the apartment whither 'twas said that the new Married retire after
Collation, there are two Beds made upon the floor (according to the Eastern
Custom) to one of which the Bridegroom betakes himself, after he has received
those tokens mentioned Deuteronomy. 22. But first of all he uses this Mystic Oraison.

BLessed art thou Adonai, our God, King of the World, who planted the
Walnut-tree in the Garden of Eden, the Book of the Valleys: suffer not a
stranger to enter into the sealed Fountain, that the servant of our loves may
keep the seed of Holiness and Purity, and may not be barren. Blessed be thou
Adonai, who have chosen us in Abraham, and in his seed after him.

The Marriage Feast begins next morning after the Marriage, and lasts precisely
eight days. During which time the Bridegroom stirs not abroad, but the
Neighbors come and pray with him at his own house: nor does he for the same
space any further accompany with his Bride than at meal-time. Eight days by a
New Leviticus being allowed her for Purification after Marriage. And the
Sabbath which happens in this time they keep with more than ordinary festivity
and mirth, because somewhere in Scripture (they say) that the Sabbath is called
a Bride.

In some places, we are told, that the young Men who wait upon the Bridegroom
at the hearing of the Husband giving the Missal Tob, or wishing happiness to
his Wife, break certain small Earthen pots which for that purpose they hold in
their hands. And thereby signify their good wishes of prosperity and health to
the new-married couple. As for the Custom of the young Men's keeping the
Bridegroom Company for the eight days that he keeps within-doors, they found
it upon the Story of Sampson's Wedding, Judges 14.2. They also have an odd
Custom, whereby the New-Married during their eight days separation, are
obliged to send girdles (a very mysterious utensil among all the Jews) one to
the other. That which the Wife sends has a Silver-buckle, but that which he
returns has a buckle of Gold.

The Jews in Barbary usually keep their Summer-Marriages in Bowers and Arbors,
which resemble, and perhaps are in stead of the Chuppa Canopy or Covering said
to be in use among the Jews of other Countries. And the Guests at the first
entrance of these Bowers say, Baruch Habba, blessed is he that comes; which
they apply to the Bridegroom coming thither to his Bride. And to his coming out
of the same Chuppa they allude the 4 and 5 verses of the Nineteenth Psalm. At
the Wives first meeting of her Husband she walks thrice about him, because the
Scripture says, A woman shall compass a man, Jer. 31.22. And the Man walks
once round the Woman; but no Text is offered at to ratify this Custom. In some
Countries the Guests bring with them handfuls of Corn, which they cast at the
New-Married, saying, Increase and Multiply. By which they also wish them Peace
and Abundance. If the Bride be a Virgin, they give her Wine in a narrow Cup; if
a Widow, in a wide one: for excellent reasons, no doubt. While the Banquet
which immediately follows the Marriage is preparing, the Company have store of
Hens set before them, ready dressed, which when The Couple have tasted, they
tear in pieces, and devour with strange scuffling and disorder: But without any
other Mystery than to make the New-Married pastime.

This Counter-scuffle being over, the Bridegroom takes a raw Egg, which he
casts at the Bride; intimating thereby his desire that she may have both an
easy and joyful Childbirth. The Marriage-day is taken up with these
Ceremonies, which they conclude with a Supper and a Dance.

In Barbary the Jews admit no Christians to be present at their Marriages,
unless such as are their Slaves. And for this they quote Prove. 14.20. For they
are of opinion, that to invite a Christian, or any who are not of their Faith,
to these Solemnities, is so displeasing to the good Angels, that they force
them to leave the Company. And thereupon those bad Angels enter, which cause
quarrelling and disorders, to the troublesome and dangerous interruption of
their Mirth and Disports.

Now these are the chief of the Matrimonial Rites in present use with the Jews
in Barbary; besides which, there are several others of a Miscellaneous Nature,
which for their seldom practice with these Jews are here omitted.

CHAP. VI.
Their Opinion of Sterility: their Lilis: their Rites of Childbirth.

HAving taken this short view of their Marriages, the method will not be
unnatural, if in the next place we look into the fruits thereof. For we may
conclude that Children are esteemed by the Jews no small blessing of Wedlock,
seeing that in all Ages they have thought the barren Womb not only to be a
reproach but a Curse; and that to want Children is to be civilly dead,
according to the old Jewsh Proverb, -- A Man childless is liveless. And indeed
the Jews now, as of old, have such an high value for procreation of Children,
that they place it among those keys which God keeps in his own hand: and who
therefore is said to remember Rachel and open her womb, Genesis 30. And if having
Children be a token of Gods remembrance, the Jewish women are seldom forgotten.
For they are so generally fruitful, that she who proves otherwise is said to
have no Mazal in the Firmament, or to have been married under no good Planet.

And as the Jewish Women in this Country are fruitful in Children, so they are
laudably decent in their Travails: observing therein such orderly deportment as
is agreeable to all well civilized humanity. It Is true, the Rabbis (who too
much play the Poets with all their Rites) have not forborne even those of
Childbirth: but have devised several fabulous Stories and impertinent Rites
concerning it. A taste whereof we shall here insert, for the satisfaction of
the Inquisitive.

And in the first place the Rabbis have appointed that the Father of the
Family, or any other religious Jew in his stead, upon the approach of
Childbirth, shall draw several Circles in the Chamber of the impregnate, as
also upon the doors both within and without, on the walls, and about the bed,
Inscribing every Circle with these words, Adam, Chava, chutz Lilis: that is,
Adam, Eve, be gone Lilis. The meaning of which Conjuration depends upon the
right understanding of what is meant by Lilis. Now the Jews are not unanimous
in their account hereof; yet the best we could collect take as follows.

When God had made Adam, and saw that it was not good for him to be alone, he
created a Woman, and gave him her for a Wife; and she was called Lilis. But
being no sooner brought unto Adam, than she began to brawle and contend, and
would not acknowledge that power over her wherewith Adam was invested. And when
he advised her of her subjection, and that she ought to obey his commands; she
insultingly replied, That subjection arose from inequality, and therefore could
have no place between them who were equal by Creation. And in this pelting and
quarrelsom humor they lived so long, that Lilis foreseeing little likelihood
either of its ending or amendment, she named The most Holy Name, and thereupon
was immediately rapt out of Adam's sight into the Air. Adam seeing this sudden
departure of his Wife, is said thus to have addressed himself unto God.

O King of the World, the Wife which thou gave me has forsaken me. Hereupon
three Angels ( Senoi, Sanfenoi, and Saumangeloph) were commanded to pursue and
bring her back, and to threaten her with severe punishments in case she
refused. The Angels pursuing overtook her at the Sea (wherein afterward the
Egyptians were drowned) which then was stormy and tempestuous. But Lilis
refused to return, and pleaded that she was not made to be subject to any Man,
but that the design of her Creation was to molest and destroy the Male-Children
for eight days, and the Female for twenty after their Birth.

But the Angels not approving her reasoning, they endeavored to force her to
return; but perceiving in her a shreud resistance, they agreed to dismiss her,
upon this Condition, That she should never hurt any Infants wherever she saw
their Names written. And to this end, the Jews use to write the Angels Names in
a Table or Parchment, and to hang them for Amulets about their Childrens Necks.

As to the inscribing of the forementioned Circles with Adam, Eve, chutz Lilis,
they imply that if the Mother bring forth a boy, God would not give him such a
brawling Wife as Lilis, but one like Eve, who would be mild and peaceable,
loving and obsequious, and such an one as may build his house in Peace. But
enough of this story. But the chief intent of these Circles is to fortify the
Chamber appointed for the Teeming woman against all Haggs and Goblins.

When the great Belly finds her pangs to be near, she calls some discreet
Matron to assist her delivery; but she must be one of their own Religion. For
nothing but insuperable necessity can induce them to admit either Christian or
Moorish Women to be at their Travails, out of a jealousy that some mischief
may befall the Child. Nor is this the fancy only of the suspicious Mother, but a
strict prescription of their Masters, who in no case but that wherein necessity
gives a Dispensation, will give leave that a strange Woman should be Midwife to
a daughter of Israel.

When the Woman is brought to Bed, the joy and festivity is according to the
sex that is born. At the birth of a daughter they use but little exultation,
because she cannot support the family, which is extinct without Males. Whence
they have a saying, The Family of the Mother is not called a Family. And the
Hebrew word for Woman is fetched from a root signifying forgetfulness: because
the Fathers Family is forgotten in marriage of a daughter.

But if the Woman be delivered of a Boy, there is great joy in the Family, and
the Father in testimony thereof presently begins the Feast for his Sons
Circumcision, which is never deferred beyond the eighth day, unless want of
health in the Child prevent it. The first seven days after the Child's Nativity
are wholly spent in festival Entertainments, at which none can be a Guest who
has not past his thirteenth year. Neither must there be fewer than ten at this
Feast. Upon the Eve of the Circumcision, the Women visit their Gossip, with
whom they usually pass the whole night in mirth and freedom; On purpose to
console and recreate the Mother, that she may not be over-troubled for the
pains of her Sons Circumcision, as also to prevent those mischiefs to which
they imagine Childbed-women are very liable the seventh night after their
Delivery.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Rites of Circumcision and Purification.

CIrcumcision has so peculiar a veneration among the present Jews, that if all
other parts of their Religion were to be changed, this like Mount Sion, would
stand immovable. And though many other Nations (of old) and at this day the
whole profession of Mahumedism, use Circumcision; yet none but the Hebrews
embrace it as a Sacrament. Concerning the figurative Circumcision of the Heart,
Lips and Ears (whereof the Scripture makes mention) there is no considerable
disagreement among Christians or Jews; nor is their harmony less about the
literal Circumcision: for both grant it to be of Divine Institution, and
appointed both for a sign and seal of the Covenant God made with the Jews, as
St. Paul (Romans 4.11.) interprets Moses (Genesis 17.11.) But the discoursing of
this point belongs not to this place, whereby the Method we have proposed in
this Treatise, the modern Rites of Circumcision are plainly to be recounted.

And in the first place, the Jews of whom I now write, are very conformable in
their observation of the time appointed for the celebration of Circumcision.
For where they enjoy the free exercise of their Religion, they never defer it
longer than the eighth day. But they Circumcise indifferently at home or the
Synagogue. Though for the greater parade, the wealthier Jews seldom neglect to
carry their children to the Synagogue.

The chief Officer at Circumcision is the Mohel, or he that Circumciseth, who
is not bound to be of the Priesthood; for any has liberty to Circumcise who has
skill therein. The Rich admit none to perform this office upon their children,
who have not been bred thereunto, and long make it their Profession. And it is
usual to serve a sort of Apprenticeship to gain the Art and Credit of a skilful
Mohel. To this end, those who herein intend to be Artists, deal with the
indigent Jews to Circumcise their Sons, giving their Fathers money for so
doing: and having gained a competent skill and experience, they set up for
Circumcisers. Who are easily discerned to be of that Profession by their
Thumb-nails, which they keep sharp and long, as a badge of their Calling. And
from one of these Mohels I received this following account of Circumcision,
according to the Use of the Synagogue in Fez, the place of his Practice and
Abode.

The time intervening between the Child's Birth and Circumcision is spent in
frequent bathing it; which with more than ordinary Circumspection is washed at
the time it is presented to this Sacrament. Of which it is altogether
incapable, if the least filth be left about it. So that if any natural
Evacuation happen as it is brought to the Mohel, or before the Prepuce be taken
away, he cannot proceed in his Office till the Child be new washed.

The morning is the usual time of Circumcising; out of this supposal, that the
flux of blood is then least, and the child will be most patient: but this they
do not by the advice of the Rabbi, but Physician; it being no rite of their
Religion, but a rule in their Dispensatory.

Upon the day when Circumcision is celebrated, there are two seats set close by
the Ark in the Synagogue; the one for Elias, whose presence they still expect
at this Solemnity; and another for the Baal-Berith, or Godfather. By these two
Seats stand the Mohel, and the Jews that are invited. Then the child is brought
in Parade, with several boys, whereof one carries a Torch of twelve lights,
denoting the twelve Tribes of Israel: another brings a dish of Sand; another
the Circumcising Instrument (which is of Wood, Stone, Iron, etc.) Oil, soft
Linen Rags. In some places they have a Cordial ready, in case the Child should
faint. And when the Men in the Synagogue have sung the Song of Moses as it is
extant Exodus 15. and have Notice that the Women have brought the Child to the
Door of the Synagogue, the whole Company stands up, and the Baal-Berith goes to
receive and bring in the Child to the Congregation, who receive him with this
Acclamation, Blessed is he that comes: which they understand either of the
Child, who is so happy as to come to Circumcision; or, of Elias, whom they
believe to come along with the Child, and to take his place by the Godfather,
to observe and testify that all things concerning Circumcision were duly
administered.

When the Congregation are settled in good order, the Godfather holds the Child
to the Mohel, who gives God thanks that in Abraham he gave them this Sacrament,
and thereby signed and sealed them for his peculiar people. Then he takes away
the Foreskin, and in the interim the Father praises the Lord that he gave
Abraham a heart to fulfill the Law of Circumcision, and preserved him to see
this his Son Circumcised. The Foreskin being cut off, the Mohel casts it into
the dish of Sand, with no less mystical intimation, than that the Seed of the
Child should be numerous as the grains of that Sand; and that the Nation of the
Jews to whom God gave this Sacrament, might still verify what was observed of
them Numb. 23.10. But I rather think it to reflect upon Abraham's blessing,
Genesis 22.17.

When the Mohel has thus disposed of the Prepuce, he prays that the Child may
live and see his Sons thus initiated into the Covenant; may keep the Law, and
do good works. Then he takes a cup of Wine, and blesses God that he has
created the Vine, and given it a power to exhilarate and nourish: then he dips
the little finger of his left hand thrice in the Wine, and lets it drop into
the Child's mouth; and having tasted of it himself, reaches it to the
Congregation. This done, the Mohel again gives thanks, that God sanctified the
child in the Womb, and has brought it to the Foederal Sacrament. He prays
likewise that the children of this child may obey the Law. Then he takes the
Infant from the Baal-Berith, and delivering it to the Father, gives it a Name;
praying for him, that by that Name there given him, he may quickly be healed,
live prosperously, be a joy to his Parents, and beget children who may be
zealous Assertors of the Law.

And thus far I have transcribed my old Mohel, who assured me that the whole
Ritual of Circumcision was summarily contained in what is now set down.

They have such a great esteem for this Sacrament, that they still enjoin it
under its old penalty, That Soul shall be cut off from his people, Genesis 17.
Which some interpret of Excommunication, or the bodily death of the Parents who
out of contempt or neglect of the Institution, omit the Circumcision of their
Males: and others understand it of those who at years of Maturity took not care
to perform that themselves, which through their Parents negligence was omitted
in their infancy.

And though the party delinquent herein incur this penalty, yet these Jews do
not so expound the precept of Circumcising the eighth day, as if it admitted of
no relaxation. For in case of the child's sickness, they generally hold that its
Circumcision may be put off till seven days after its recovery. And those
likewise who are born where there is no Toleration of their Rites, do not incur
this censure, if they take care to be Circumcisied when they come where their
Religion is Tolerated. And they prove from the first Institution of
Circumcision, that Age can privilege none from undergoing it: Abraham being
ninety years old and nine, when he was Circumcised in the flesh of his
Foreskin, Genesis 17.24. And I knew one Jacob Israel Belgara, who being born in
Spain, and a long time Student (...) Physic at Saragosa, coming to Barbary,
Anno Dom. 1667. was Circumcised in the fortieth year of his Age. And they are
careful not to delay the first occasion of being Circumcised, because every
moment of such delay is a distinct breach of the Commandment. It Is true,
instances of the Parents negligence in this particular is very unusual; they
being so far from omitting this Sacrament, that they are but too rigorous in
exacting it. But if any omission happen herein through the Parents default,
then the Masters of the Synagogue have power to convene and Excommunicate* (or
to cut off from the Communion of the Synagogue) the offending party, and to
take and Circumcise the child.

If a child die ere the eighth day, it is Circumcised at the place of burial,
but without any further Ceremonies than giving a Name, and praying that God
would be mindful of it in the day of the Resurrection, and to give it life
among those who are Circumcised. Now they Circumcise the child, to make it
capable of Jewish Sepulcher, and to prevent all mischief that might otherwise
befall the uncircumcised in the future State. For they are not yet argeed
whether or no Circumcision be of absolute necessity to the life to come. Those
who adhere to the very letter of its Institution, make Circumcision so
requisite to the obtaining of future happiness, that they deny those who want
it, any portion in the Resurrection; misunderstanding Ezekiel. 28.10. But others
think there is nothing dangerous in the want thereof, but its contempt. And in
the Christian Church the Council of Braccara ordained that those who despised
their Baptism, and died in that opinion, should, as guilty of their own eternal
death, be buried with Self-Murtherers.

But all we have hitherto mentioned concerning Circumcision, is to be
restrained to those who are born in the Jews Religion. For as to the admission
of Proselytes unto Judaism, Circumcision, Baptism and Sacrafice were in
ordinary course required. But these old Articles of Proselytism are not exacted
by the mordern Jews. For Sacrifice has been utterly out of use ever since the
Destruction of the Temple. And lest the shame or pain of Circumcision might
deter any from proselytizing, they are taught not rigorously to exact it. And
there Moses Egyptius tells them, that many Proselytes were admitted into the
Jewish Communion without Circumcision. Moses's Father in Law they hold to have
been the first Proselyte of Justice, who upon his turning Jew had his Name
Jether changed to Jethro. But after him there were many made Proselytes of the
Gate, without Circumcision, of which Mr. Seldom gives several instances. But
however they dispense with Sacrifice, and speak warily of Circumcision, yet
Baptism is a constant initiatory of the Proselyte, which has nothing common but
the water with those daily Baptisms of the Jews, reflected upon by Tertullian,
lib. 6. de Baptismo, cap. 15.

I confess Barbary affords but few of these Proselytes: for though there are
frequent examples both of Jews and Christians turning Moors, yet very seldom
are any met with who turn Jews; which made me less inquisitive after the
present manner of receiving Proselytes. And as to what relates to the ancient
Form of Proselytism, enough is to be seen in Mr. Seldom, lib. 2. cap. 2, 3, 4,
etc. de jure Naturali and Gentium juxta Disciplinam Hebraeorum. If any
Proselytes happen among them, we may presume they conform to the Rites herein
used by the Jews of other Nations. Of which we have this summary Account in
Leo. Modena, a Venetian Rabbi: Historia de gli riti Hebraici, Part 5. lib. 2.
Si alcune volesse farsi Hebraeo, primo sono tenuti tree Rabbini, o person di
Autorita interrogarto settilmente, che cosa lo move a far questa Rissotione,
etc. that is: If there be any that has a mind to turn Jew, there are three
Masters, or persons of Authority appointed warily to examine him what cause
moved him to this resolution, and whether any worldly interest had a hand
therein; to the end they may admit him as they ought. Next, they denounce and
make known unto him the great strictness of the Law of Moses, and that the Jews
are at present an abject, vile, and despicable people, and that upon this
account it is better for him to continue as he is. And if after all this he
continues his purpose, then he is to Circumcise himself; and as soon as he is
whole, he bathes himself all over in water in the presence of the three
foresaid Masters: and after this, he is accounted as good an Hebrew as the
rest. At the Circumcision of the Proselyte they use this Form of Prayer.

Blessed be thou O God and King of the World, who have sanctified us with thy
Precepts, and commanded us to Circumcise Proselytes, and to take from them the
Blood of the Covenant. Because according to thy Prophet (Jer. 33.25.) unless by
the Blood of the Covenant neither Heaven nor Earth should remain.

Then the bystanders say, As thou have brought him into thy Covenant, so guide
us in thy Law and good Works, and bless us with protection and safety.

Now because some other Nations have gotten a Traditionary Custom of
Circumcising, without turning Jews, or undertaking any degree of Proselytism
(as all the Mahumedans:) It is therefore resolved among the Jews, that if any
such become a Proselyte, though he cannot be Circumcised again, yet on the
eighth of his Proselytism, some blood must be fetched of that part, which they
call the Breaking of the Skin. But they are so ingenuous as to confess that
this is none of the Laws of Moses, but an Institution of their own.

And having thus briefly viewed the Ritual of Circumcision, that which remains
of this Chapter shall be filled up with this short Account of their
Purification after Childbirth. And the Law of this Ceremony is, Levit. 12.
from which they in no wise decline, unless in the number of days; for
notwithstanding that but sixty six days are appointed by the Law for the
Purification after the birth of a Daughter, yet in Barbary the Jews observe
seventy six: but for a Son they keep close to what the Law has herein
appointed. During the time appointed for Purification, the Childbed woman
abstains from all intimate communion with her Husband: who is not permitted so
much as to touch her finger, or clothes, or to eat and drink with her out of
the same dish or cup. And at the end of these days allotted to her
Purification, she returns not to the free conversation of her Husband, till she
has been wholly washed, and put on all such accoutrements as are used in token
of purity. And that there might be no collusion herein, she must prove by the
Testimony of two credible Matrons that all things concerning her Purification
were duly observed. In the Bibliotheca Rabbinica there is Mentioned the Sepher
Naschim, where the whole Ceremony of Purification is set down. The reasons why
a different number of days are observed herein for a Boy and a Girl, are to be
seen in Estius's Notes upon Levit. 12. whither I refer the Reader.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Jews Polygamy: Divorce: A Copy of their Bill of Dismission, etc.

POlygamy respects both Sexes, and is of two sorts; whereof the one is a having
of many Wives or Husbands at once, the other an having many successively.
Concerning which the Jews at no time have raised any considerable controversy,
saving that they have always refused the woman to have a plurality of husbands
at once. Though they denied her not a liberty of a second Marriage, when by
Death or Divorce they were freed from the first.

Among Christian Authors this Point has been deeply controverted; and
Tertullian was equally against both these sorts of Polygamy; putting but little
difference between having many wives at once, or by succession* lib. de
Monogam. But others granting the lawfulness of successive Marriages, have yet
wholly exploded the license of many wives at one time, unless where Divine
Revelation gave toleration. Mr. Grotius says there was no restraint herein
until the Coming of Christ. l. 2. c. 5.. 8, 9. de jure Belli and Pacis.

But as to what herein relates to the Jews Polygamy, has ever been so far from
an ill name among them, that it has been reckoned for one of the chief
Privileges conferred upon them by Divine Prescription. So that if we be
herefrom abstemious, it is not out of Conscience, but worldly Interest. The
Gemara Babylonia (as Mr. Seldom writes) makes it lawful for any Jew to take as
many wives as he can maintain: that is, according to the Barbary-Jews, Any one
may take as many wives as he can find with meat and cloth, and the right of the
Bed. For to all these he obliges himself in his Marriage-Letters. And what the
Jews herein pretend unto by Divine Law, other Nations practice through evil
Custom. For Tacitus (de moribus German.) says, That they used Polygamy as a
mark of Nobless and Gallantry.

But the Jews of whom I now write, though they greatly magnify and extol the
concession of Polygamy, yet they are not very fond of its practice. For they
are generally abstinent herein, not out of Religion but policy, as finding one
wife at a time enough for their maintenance and government. Besides, if they
find any grievance in being always confined to one Female, they have a present
remedy in Divorce or Concubinage. Of which we must now speak a little.

Now as touching Divorce, there are several things thereunto required, which
being all contained in the Sepher Kerithuth, need not any particular
enumeration. And in this Sepher Kerithuth, or Book of Cutting off, (so called,
because the wife thereby was cut off from her husbands Family) I have met with
three several Copies hereof, one taken out of Moses Kotsensis, where, says the
citation* there is another. A second Copy hereof is collected out of
Maimonides, and extant in the end of Burtorf's Caldee and Syrian Grammar: and a
third used in Barbary; among which there is little difference but in
circumstances.

A Copy of the Bill of Divorce.
UPon the (...) day of the Week and (...) of the Month (...) and Year of the
Creation of the World, according to the account which we Hebrews use at Tituan
in the Kingdom of Fez, governed by the puissant Muley I Joseph -- Ben Rabbi
have desired of mine own accord, without any Compulsion, to cut off, divorce,
dismiss, and cast thee out; thee I say, thee my Wife Fatima, the Daughter of
Rabbi Ben which has been my Wife heretofore. But now I cut thee off, divorce,
dismiss, and cast thee out. And be thou cut off, divorced, dismissed, and cast
out from me. And be at liberty, free, and Mistress of thine own self, to go to
Marry whom thou have a mind to; and let none be refused for my name, from this
day forward for ever. And this shall be to thee from me a Bill of Divorce, and
the Epistle of putting away according to the Law of the twelve Tribes.

This is done before two or more Witnesses, who attest it by subscribing
thereunto their Names.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Jews Concubinage: of their Marrying the Brothers Wife.

THose secondary Wives which were of old among the Jews, our English
Translation renders Concubines, Genesis 25.6. And Tertullian (speaking hereof in
the first Chapter of his Book De unis Nuptiis ad Vxorem) affirms that not the
Patriarchs alone, but also our Ancestors had a right not only to Marry, but
also to use Matrimony variously: and that there were Concubines, before the Law
we read of the Concubines of Abaham, Nahor, Jacob, etc. And out of Philo we are
told by Mr. Seldom, that the primary wives were called the just, and the
secondary Concubines.

A Learned man of our own Nation (in his Annotations upon the New Testament)
seems to incline to another Opinion: for he says that the Matrimonial Laws of
the Jews forbad a servant, or Gentile woman to become wife to a Jew, but that
she was called a Concubine. Whether or no this might be so by some new
Institute of the Masters, I have no just occasion here to enquire: But I am
sure the Egyptian Agar, who was Abraham's Concubine, is called his wife, Genesis
16.3. And that both she and Kethurah were called both his Wives and Concubines;
but Sarah bore only the name of his wife. August. Civitat. Dei, lib. 17. cap.
34. But grant that the Concubine by (some late Rabbinick) Matrimonial Laws of
the Jews, was not called a wife, yet she was far from the ill character of an
Harlot, nor was conjugal association with her any more unlawful than Polygamy,
which was practiced among the Patriarchs, and is still allowed of by the Modern
Jews. And yet if we grant Concubines the Title of Wives (and Concubinate to be
Marriage) yet betwixt them and the primary wives there was and is still no
small difference and disparity. For the first sort of wives were taken by
Matrimonial Patent, or Dotal Covenant, with solemn Espousals, and had a power
to receive all such presents as might testify both the husbands Affection and
the Contract: but Concubines were taken without any of these Ceremonies or
Assurances. Next, the primary wives were the Governesses of their husbands
Families, but the Concubines live therein as Servants, and equal to the former
in nothing but in the right of the Bed. In the third place, the children of the
first wives had a right to succeed to the hereditary Estates and Titles of
their Fathers, but those of the Concubines were secluded all succession
therein, and instead thereof receive portions, Genesis 25.6. And some think that
it was upon this account, that Jephte being the Son of a Concubine, was denied
to co-inherit with his brethren. Agreeable unto this Custom is the Matrimonium
Morgengabicum in some Countries, where the second wife and her children are not
taken in to a right of the husbands Estate, whereby the woman can have no part
thereof for a Jointure, nor the children for their inheritance, but only
certain portions are assigned them by Compact; which are called Morgengab, or
Marriage-Gifts.

But not to pursue the Laws of the old Jewish Concubinage (whereof enough is to
be met with in Mr. Seldom;) Our present task is to state the present use
thereof among the Jews in Barbary. Who are generally herein very abstemious:
but when they make use of it, it is with such Rites as have been already
mentioned. And we may easily imagine the unsettledness of their Condition to be
the main reason why they are so reserved in the use of this privilege. People
of an Ambulatory state being usually very careful not to multiply their lumber.

The next thing to be accounted for, is the Marrying or refusing of the
Brothers wife who is dead without Issue. A custom which is at this day in
request and practice among these Jews, according to its first Institution,
Deuteronomy. 25. But if the surviving Brother refuse (as he may) to raise up seed to
the deceased, then they proceed to a very solemn separation, which is after
this manner.

The man who refuses to pay this debt unto the dead, is bound to take two
well-reported Jews of the Neighborhood, and with them to go to his Brothers
widow; to whom he declares his resolution of not receiving her in Marriage, or
of not performing unto her the Duty of a husbands Brother. This being done
before the two credible persons whom we just now mentioned, the widow
accompanied with the same witnesses, and three more, makes her address unto the
chief of the Synagogue, who upon the receiving of her Petition, appoints a day
of hearing; and both the parties according to Summons being present, the chief
of the Synagogue propounds several questions. And first he demands of the
widow, How long her husband has been dead? whether three months be fully
passed since his death? for so much time is required to clear her from being
with child by her late husband. Next he demands, Whether her husband left ever
a brother behind him? whether the man who is there present be his full brother,
and whether he be a single man? After this the Master demands their Age, and
whether she thinks they are compotent for generation? and whether the surviving
Brother and the Defunct had both one Father?

These Proposals being directly answered unto by the woman, the Master turns to
the man, and asks him, whether the woman there present was his dead brothers
wife? and, whether he will Marry her, or suffer his shoe to be pulled off? If
he there declare again his refusal to Marry her, they presently execute the
Law: and having first put and tied a shoe on his right foot being bare, the
slighted widow loses it with her right hand, and says, calling the Synagogue
or Congregation to witness it, This my husbands brother refuses to raise up
seed unto his brother. And then pulling off his shoe, she contemptuously spits
in his face, saying, So shall it be done to the Man, that will not build up his
brothers house. Then the Rulers of the Synagogue, with all that are present,
pronounce these words: The shoe is taken off. And from that time forward she
is at liberty to Marry to whom she pleases. It is required that all this be
transacted when the woman is fasting; and though not in Barbary, yet in some
other Nations, she loses the shoe with her teeth. I have been informed that
they have a Ritual of the whole process, and a prescript Form which they call,
The pulling off of the shoe: And that a Copy hereof is given to the woman,
which serves her for a Testimonial that her Separation was legal, and that she
may join her self in Wedlock to whom she has a mind.

But if possible, the parties so accommodate the matter betwixt themselves,
that it seldom comes to this extremity. For this mode of Separation is
generally looked upon as reproachful and contumelious. An Example of the
Libellus eductionis Caleei, I could by no endeavor yet obtain; which I impute
to the great cautiousness of the Jews in communicating any thing of this Nature
to strangers, lest it should reflect upon their Religion, or be misconstrued to
their Reproach.

CHAP. X.
Of the Institution of their Children: the time and manner thereof.

HAving already treated of the Jews Marriage, with its several appendages, and
viewed their Childbirth and Circumcision: the Method cannot be unnatural if we
next enquire into the Education of those children, by whom they hope to
preserve Their Name in Israel. And indeed the care of the Jews is very laudable
in this particular, there being not many people in the World more watchful to
have their children early tinctured with Religion than the present Hebrews. And
there needs not many other reasons to be given of their unshaken adherence to
their present Faith, than that they are therein so timely and deeply grounded

Nor is their diligence herein more commendable than their orderly Method; for
as soon as their children are able to pronounce, they are taught such Sentences
of Holy Writ, as seem to favor their Religion, and to infuse into them the
feeds of Piety and Virtue. And to this purpose they frequently make use of
Solomon's Exhortatory: Catechize a Child in the way that he should walk when he
is young, and his old age will not depart from it.

Now because the Jews in Barbary usually speak Moresco, the Language of their
Nativity, and a sort of Spanish which inables them for Traffic; lest they
should fall into an utter oblivion of the Hebrew Tongue, they are careful that
the Rudiments be in that Speech. And to facilitate their Childrens Learning
thereof, they usually teach them Hebrew for the Utensils of the House, Terms of
Traffic and Negotiation, etc. And by this Order they furnish the Children with
a Nomenclature of Hebrew Words; and all this before they admit them to Syntax
and Construction. Hence it is that in speaking Moresco and Spanish, they so
intermingle their first Vocabulary, that thereby it is not easy to be
understood. But still the main Design of their early Instruction is especially
spent in imprinting Religion upon the tender minds of their Children. And
because the Sabbath is appointed for the more Solemn Celebration and
Instruction in Religious Rites, and ordained to be one Character, whereby the
Hebrew people is distinguished from all other; for these Reasons the Jews are
signally diligent to implant into their Children a singular reverence thereof.
And to this end they employ the Morn and Even of this Queen of Feasts (as the
Masters call the Sabbath) in teaching their Children several pious Forms of
Saluting their Parents and others. In which Greetings they permit not their
Children to use the Name of God, till they are seven years old, that they may
retain the greater veneration for that Name which is Holy and Reverend. And
therefore the first Salutations of the Children are plainly, I wish you a good
Sabbath: May you have a good day, etc.

When their Children are grown up to be fit for such Conversation as Talk and
Play, they permit them not the least Society with the Mahumedan Children, but
strictly forbid them their company; that hereby they may timely possess them
with an averseness toward all Mahumedism. And this they practice out of a
consideration that there is so great likeness between many of their own and the
Moresco Customs, that a Child may be easily induced to a promiscuous imbibing
of either. And as for the Divine Mysteries of Christianity, the Jews represent
them to their Children in such monstrous shapes, that they are fitter for their
affrightment than embraceing. Besides, they teach their Children that Christian
Religion is so utterly destructive of their Ceremonies, that they ought to
avoid all fellowship with those who profess them.

When the Jews have taught their Children some decent Modes of Salutation, and
imprinted them with an awful Reverence of Gods Name, and the Essays of hating
all Religions but their own; Their next endeavor is to instruct them in the
Elements of Book-learning. Where the first Lessons are about the Name and
Figure of the Hebrew Letters: in which they use this Method: First, upon a
smooth stone or board they cast two or more Letters of the Alphabet, and
acquaint the Child with the Name and Figure thereof. And when the Child is able
to pronounce these Letters, they proceed to more, according to the capacity and
towardliness of the Scholar. And so forward, till the whole Alphabet be run
over. When this task is finished, the children are taught to join the Letters
into short and easy Sillables; and having attained to read a little, they are
put into the first Book of Moses, and so pass through the whole Pentateuch. In
teaching their Children to write they use as the Spaniards, a Plana, which is a
draught of very large Letters upon a fair Paper, which they imitate upon a thin
Paper laid thereon.

When the Parents have at home pretty-well grounded their Children in these
prelusory Rudiments, they send them to School; and every Morning before they go
thither, it is the Mothers Office to provide them something to eat, which is
sweetened with Sugar or Honey; which serves them both for Beakfast and an
Instruction. For at giving the Child the sweet Morsel she uses these words; As
this is sweet to thy Palate, so let Learning be sweet to thy mind. And she
gives directions how to behave himself at School, as that he is to use no
filthy words, but such as he reads in the Law: because God loves clean Lips,
pure, wholesome discourse, and that all communication ought to be agreeable to
the Divine Word. Next, that the Child must not spend his time in idle talk to
his own hindrance, or his fellows. With other such directions as a Mothers Care
and Affection shall suggest.

They have a saying very common among them, That there is no fruit at Autumn,
where there is no budding in the Spring; which they apply to the Education of
their Children, whose riper years they hope to have pious and well-governed,
when their tender minds are duly instructed in Religion and Virtue. And much to
this purpose may be met with in their Homilies.

At five year old the Children go to School, where they spend five years in
Learning the Pentateuch; and at ten year old they are put (if they prove
towardly) to read the Mischua and some choice parcels of the Talmud; which
contain the Body of their Institutes. During the time that boy is learning the
five books of Moses, he is called Ben Mickra, the Son of the Law; and when he
is thirteen year old he is Ben Mitzva, the Son of the Precept: for now the
youth receives the Passover and is purified. For until he comes to be a Son of
the Commandment, the Father stands charged with his Miscarriages. But at
thirteen year old the Lad being supposed to be able to discern Virtue from
Vice, and Good from Evil, he is bound to answer for his faults. Therefore the
Father having before a Synagogue of ten ancient Jews declared that his Son whom
he there produces has been well Catechized in the Law, and understands the
general Decisions of the Mischua and Talmud, and that he can repeat the daily
Prayers, he lets them know that he no longer charge himself with his Crimes,
but that he leaves him to answer therein for himself, and to be punished if he
shall be delinquent against the Commandments. Where note by the way, that by
Commandments here must not be understood either the Decalogue or the Ritual of
Moses, but those 313 Precepts into which they have resolved their Religion and
the Bible. Drusius (in Exodus 26.) observes, that the Jews old manner of
Instructing was by Interrogations and Questions, or Catechism. By which present
Method there is no youth under Heaven can at thirteen years old give so exact
account of the Rites of their Religion as the Jewish.

I meddle not here with the special places which were of old appointed for the
Education of youth, because those ancient Gebaoth or Colleges, Houses of
Doctrine, and Hills of the Teachers, which the Divine writings often mention,
are now fallen under a fatal Devastation. Neither does it concern the present
Subject to reflect upon the Mishne, or College in Jerusalem, where the
Repeating of the Law was Studied: this being also extinct. Only I observe at
this day the Jews in Barbary, like their neighbor Moors, are wholly destitute
of Places for liberal Education; and therefore when any of them intend to
Study Physic or the like, they repair incognito to the European Universities,
and more especially to those of Portugal and Spain.

But to return: The Jewish Fathers are not more careful in the Catechism of
their Children, than the Mothers in their Nurserie. In which they do not follow
their own delicacie, but the prescriptions of their Masters: who appoint that
the Nurse (who is always the Mother, unless some unavoidable necessity
interpose) eat such Viands as yield good nutriment, to the end that the child
may the sooner grow up, and come to the public Worship, and take the
impressions of their Religion. And the Mother who is diligent herein, is said
To walk in the ways of the Lord: (for so they are taught to understand Deuteronomy.
28.9.) who feeds his Creatures with a ^^asonable and liberal hand. They have
very odd conceits about the Situation of the Mothers Breasts, which they use as
natural motives of affection and tenderness toward their Infants. And to
imprint in the woman a greater averseness to nurse their children at another
Bosom, their Masters tell them strange Stories of several men who have been
miraculously enabled to give their children suck upon the death of their wives.

During the time of Nursing, the women are not permitted to go with open
Breasts, nor to keep Fasts, nor to expose their tender Sucklings to the Sun or
Moon. Neither when the Child is able, do they permit it to go bare-headed out
of doors, because on a time one of their Masters seeing a child in this
posture, pronounced it unlawfully begotten, and that his Mother was either
menstruous or unchaste in her Embraces.

The Jews usually Girdle their children as soon as their bodies will endure it;
and when they are grown up none of them go ungirt to the Synagogues: for if
they should do so, they think that not only thereby the benefit of the Prayers
is forfeited, but also the Divine displeasure is provoked. Hence is that
saying, Ungirt, unblessed. Albeit I know the Jews use to Girdle their children,
lest from the intuition of their own nakedness, they should imbibe an immodest
Confidence.

CHAP. XI.
Of their Synagogues: the Officers thereof: time of their Election: Hours of
Prayer.

THe Synagogue in the N. T. is often taken for any place of public concourse:
But its usual acception is either Civil or Ecclesiastic. In the former
acception it denotes the place of their Consistories and Judicatures; in the
later the House or Room where the Law and Prophets are read and expounded, and
the whole System of public worship performed.

The Rulers or Chief of the Synagogue, or such as negotiated their Mysteries,
were different from the Rulers of the Consistory or Judicature. But we are here
to speak of the Synagogue as a place wherein they tolerated the public
Exercise of Religious Solemnities. Which Toleration the Jews in Barbary
purchase with their Coin. For it is usual with the Moresco Governors, when
fallen into any Exigence of Moneys, to shut up the Jews Synagogue, out of certain
experience that its Redemption is the readiest Subsidy.

In this part of the World, the sense of their Ambulatory condition will not
permit the Jews to be at the pains and charges of Erecting new Synagogues. But
they hire Houses or single Apartments proportionable to their Number, to
assemble in. In whose Furniture they seem to neglect all other Ornament and
Sumptuousness but cleanliness and decency. But as if they vyed the store of
Moresco Moschs, they strive much to have their Synagogues numerous. And in this
they do not recede from the practice of their Ancestors, who had four hundred
and eighty Synagogues at once in Jerusalem. So Sigonius, de Rep. Hebr. lib. 2.
c. 8. And in other Provinces and Cities (as we read in the Acts) there was the
like plenty. And the numerousness of these Holy Houses may easily be granted,
seeing that a very few make up a Jewish Congregation. For they have a
Tradition, that wheresoever ten men of Israel are, there ought to be a
Synagogue.

Of old, the Jews wrote the Entrances of their Synagogues with devout and
cautionary Sentences, as Buxtorf has observed in several Pages of his
Abbreviatures; which Custom is wholly out of fashion with the Jews here
discoursed of: which seems chiefly to be imputed to the uncertain tenure of the
Houses which they hire for Synagogues, and not to any dislike of the practice.
For doubtless the Inscriptions now spoken of were very laudable, as directing
those who entered in their deportment in the Divine Worship. Of old, the Walls
within as well as Entrances of the Synagogues were written with Sentences
tending to the same purpose: As, Enter the House of the Lord thy God with
humility: Be attentive in time of Prayer; Think upon thy Creator, etc.

To every Synagogue there belongs six Officers; first the Summas, or Sacristan,
answerable to our Sexton: whose Office is to sweep and keep clean the
Synagogue, and to trim the Lamps. The Second is the Pernas, to whom belongs the
care of providing the Holy Wine, which is given to the Youth at the entrance
and end of their Sabbaths and Festivals. The Third Officer is the Mari-Acatab,
who folds up and unfolds the Law, and shows it to the people. The fourth (whose
title I remember not) is he to whom belongs the Elevation of the Law, and the
bearing it in procession through the Synagogue; which is an honorable
Employment, and his who gives most. The fifth Office belongs to the Elhaim, or
those who touch the two staves (which they call the trees of life) whereon the
Law is rolled up, when it is carried in procession. The sixth is the Chesau (or
Praecentor.) All these Offices are bought and sold upon the day when the last
Section of the Law is read, and without a new Election are not held above a
year by the same persons. To express their Zeal to the Service of God, they
canvas for these Offices, and give Moneys to obtain them, which goes to the
Poor-stock. The folding up and unfolding of the Law, being an Office of the
greatest esteem, none carry it but he who is able to give liberally to the
Corban; by which they raise a comfortable subsistence for those are grown
indigent: as in another Chapter we shall have occasion to discourse.

Their times of repairing to the Synagogue, or hours of Prayer, are next to be
considered. To the Holy Exercise of Prayer, the Jews thrice every day assemble
at their Oratories; first at Sunrising, which they call Tephilla Sabarit, or
Morning-Prayer. Their second time of going to the Synagogue is about three in
the Afternoon, which is their Tephilla Mincha, or Evening-Prayer. The last is
after Sunset, and this they call the Tephilla Arvit, or Night-Prayer. To every
one of which times there are proper Offices appointed, as is to be seen in the
Sepher Tephilot. But the Office for the Morning far exceeds the other two in
length. For they are above two hours in the Synagogue at Morning-Prayer, and
not above half so much at both the other.

They have no perfect difference between Proseuchae, Synagogues, Schools and
Houses of Prayer, as was of old. For if there be or ever was herein any
distinction, it is swallowed up into the one Title of Synagogue, by which is
barely to be understood the place where the Jews gather together for Religious
purposes; and may well be called an Oratory, or House of Prayer, because that
is the main Duty for which they repair thither.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Jews Preparation to the Synagogue.

THe apprehension of the Divine Greatness and Majesty of God, which by all
Civilized Religions is acknowledged for the sole and proper object of their
Worship, has moved men of all Faiths to ordain some Rites of preparation to so
solemn an Address. This I have already observed in Mahumedism, the most
considerable Religion for secular Grandeur in the World. And the present
Judaism is no way thereunto inferior in this particular. For before the Jews
go to the Synagogue to celebrate the Public Service of God, they carefully
observe all such preparations as they have learned from Custom, Superstition,
or their Masters. In whose observation they are rather too punctual and
precise, than any way negligent or remiss. And first of all, the Jews are
vigilant to Pray betimes in the morning, out of an Opinion that the more early
the Oraison, the more acceptable it is to God. And this they found on the third
Verse of the fifth Psalm: My voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord; early in
the Morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up. When at any
time they find themselves backward to these Morning-Devotions, they upbraid it
with their forwardness to pursue their Secular interest, and show how far the
concerns of Religion does exceed all worldly business: and that their care to
seek God ought at least to equal that in seeking Mammon. There is a saying
common to all Jews; That in Winter they raise the day, and in Summer the day
them. The meaning whereof depends upon their rising before day to Prayers from
the fifteenth of June till Pentecost, and after from Pentecost till the
fifteenth of June. Let the Reader understand it.

There are some Jews who to be esteemed Devout, rise very early every morning
to lament the ruins of Jerusalem and the Temple: and they hope by the merit
of so doing to move God to hasten their reparation, and the restoring of the
Kingdom to Israel. And there are those who believe that the Planets and Stars
weep with those who in the night shed tears for the City: and that when they
run down their cheeks, God puts the tears in a bottle, and keeps them to blot
out all the Edicts which at any time shall be made by their Enemies for their
Destruction.

But to return to their Mattens. There is a general Tradition among the Jews,
That at night the Gates of Heaven are shut up, and that the good Angels sit
silent by them, and that the Evil Spirits are then at liberty to wander up and
down to effect their projects: And that a little after Midnight the Gates of
Heaven are opened with so great a noise, that the Cocks here below are
therewith awakened, and Crow to awaken them to their Prayers: And that this
might not be thought to be the melancholy of some few imagining Jews, they have
put it into their general Lyturgie, wherein for this good Office of the Cock
they thus give thanks: Bendito tu Adonai, nuestro Dio Rey del Mundo d^n al
Gallo distinto para entender enter dia y noche: Blessed be thou Adonai, our
God, King of the World, who have given understanding to the Cock to distinguish
the night from the day.

But the Oraisons we have now been speaking of relate to their private
Devotions, which are preparative to the public. To which later they are not
suffered to repair till they have dressed their bodies according to
prescription. And to a stranger they seem herein very antic and humoursom. For
beginning with their Shirt, that must not be put on but after such a secret
manner, that the very beams of the house must not be privy to their Nakedness;
and therefore they creep under the Counterpane or Coverlet while they put on
their Mutands. And for this they cite and praise the Example of one Master
Jose, who upon his Deathbed gave God thanks that through the whole course of
his life the timber of his Bed never discovered his Natural retirements. Much
of this stuff might be set down relating to their present manner of dressing
themselves, as how that the left-foot-shooe must be put on before the right,
etc. But the love of brevity has prevailed with me to omit them.

When they have accoutred themselves for the Synagogue, at the leaving of their
Apartments they are commanded moderately to bow down their Heads, to express
thereby their great sadness for the desolation of the Temple. Before they go to
public Prayers they use all manner of needful Evacuations of the Body; and
when for this purpose they enter their Retraits, the Devouter beseech the
Angels to stay at door till they come out: whom they thus accost.

Most Holy and most Glorious Ministers of the most High, I beseech you keep,
preserve and help me: wait till I go in and come out: for this is the custom
and way of all men. They account it a heinous Sin to retard the Natural
Purgations of the Body, because thereby they may incur Distempers. And to this
unsavory purpose they allege Levit. 20.25. but for what reason, is not so
easily to be comprehended.

But their chiefest bodily preparation consists in washing, which is a Ceremony
bestowed on all those parts of the body that are more notoriously liable to be
unclean. And the hands, which (according to their Masters) after sleep are
venomous and impure (by reason of the noxious spirits lodged as they opine in
the palms thereof when they are asleep) are first of all to be punctually
washed. For they hold, that if a Jew should touch his eyes, nose, ears or mouth
with unwasht hands, he should be troubled with dimness of Sight, Catarrhs,
Deafness, and a stinking Breath. In washing their hands they hold them up, that
the water may run down to their Elbows. Which elevation of their hands,
Ceremony of washings, help to explain the (...), St. Mark 7.3. which has made
so much stir among Critics.

At the time of this preparative washing the Jews say this Hymn; Bendito tu
Adonai, Nuestro Dio, Rey del Mundo, que nos Santifico en sus en comendancas, y
en comendo sobre limpieza de Manos. Blessed be thou O Lord our God King of the
World, who have sanctified us with thy Commandments, and enjoined us cleanness
of hands. Where by Commandments must not be understood any strict Law of Moses
in this particular, but of the Tradition of their Elders, or injunctions of
their Ancient Sanhedrim, by which they are bound to wash not only when they go
to the Synagogue, but also whenever they eat. To which Custom that passage of
Saint John 11.6. has an unquestionable reference. For the water-pots which were
set ready at the Feast, (...), were for the Jews to wash in before they did
eat. But we speak not here of their every-dayes washing, but of that which they
now use in order of preparation to their public Devotion, which is the last
thing they do before they go to the Synagogue. And if any occasional defilement
happen as they go, as the touching of a dead Carcass, the killing of a Flea,
(for a small thing will defile a Jew) they presently wash their hands before
they appear in the solemn Worship.

There were other sorts of washing of old among the Jews, as that of the
Priests when they went to the Temple to officiate: in imitation whereof arose
the washings and lustrations among the Gentiles. There was also another sort of
washing belonged to their Proselytes at their reception into the Church of the
Jews: of which we have already spoken something in their Proselytism.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Jews Zizith and Tephillim, or Phylactery or Prayer-Ornaments.

WHen the Jews prepare for Morning-Service they with singular circumspection
put on their Zizith and Tephillim, which are properly their Prayer-Ornaments,
and so necessary an accoutrement for the Synagogue, that they are the chief
Cognizances and badges of Religion, without which they cannot hope that their
Church-Services should be accepted. The wearing of the Zizith or Fringe, they
collect from Exodus 15.37. And they very confidently assert, that a careful
observation of the Commandment concerning the Zizith, is a fulfilling of the
whole Law. And they ground this peremptory position upon a Mystery which their
Gemalria has found in the word and manner of its making. For (say they) the
Zizith has five knots representing the five Books of Moses, and the eight
threads added thereunto make thirteen, which together with the Numeral Letters
in the word it self amount to six hundred and thirteen, which is the number of
all the Commandments contained in the Law. And therefore they conclude that the
right wearing of the Zizith is an observation of the whole Law. Credat Judaeus!

Now as to the form and matter of the Zizith, it is a quadrangular piece of
Linen Cloth (or Silk, etc.) with Fringes, worn next the Shirt, hanging down
upon the Breast and Shoulders. At the putting of it on, they use these words:
-- Bendito tu A. N. B. Rey del mundo, etc. Blessed be thou, O Lord our God,
King of the World, who have sanctified us with thy Precepts, and commanded us
to wear the Zizith.

To this Religious Utensil no fewer Miracles are ascribed then to the Cowle of
St. Francis: for the Jews say it can deliver from sin, and make Proselytes to
their Faith: And that it is an Amulet against Sorceries, and preserves those
from receiving any hurt from evil Angels who constantly put it on. But all are
not admitted to the honor of wearing this Holy Ornament: for it being a part
of the habit to be worn at the Synagogue, the women are totally forbid it, as
being excluded the public Service.

Their next Prayer-Ornament is the Tephillim, which are Scrowles of Parchment
written with several Sentences of the Law; and tied upon their Foreheads and
left-Arms. And this they observe upon the account of the sixth of Deuteronomy. the
sixth and eighth Verses. The Sentences wherewith the Phylacteries were
anciently inscribed, are conjectured to have been Exodus 13. from verse the 11
th to the 17 th, Exodus 13.2. to the 11 th, Deuteronomy. 6. from verse 4. to the 10 th,
and Deuteronomy. 11. from the 13 th to the 22. Others are of Opinion that the
Phylacteries were written with the Decalogue. But for mine own part, I believe
the Inscription to be concealed: for the Jews with whom I have practiced in
this particular, would not be moved either to show or explain their
Phylacteries. At the putting them on, they say this Eucharist: Bendito tu, etc.
Blessed be thou O God our Lord, Governor of the Universe, who have hallowed us
with thy Law, and commanded us to wear the Tephillim. i. e. Phylacteries.

The Phylactery worn upon the Forehead is folded up, and hangs between the
brows, so as they may see it, and thereby be minded of walking according to
Gods Statutes. There has been no small dispute among the Critics and
Interpreters concerning the Name and Office of the Tephillim: but if they will
acquiesce in the meaning which the Modern Jews give thereof, they signify no
more than Ornaments to be worn at public Prayer, in which such Sentences of
Scripture are written as they deem most proper to remember them of their
Duties, according to the first appointment hereof, Exodus 13.16. Deuteronomy. 6.8. It Is
true, the first, plain, and wholesome intent thereof has in course of time been
much corrupted chiefly by the Schismatical Pharisees, who in stead of binding
them for a sign upon their hands, and as Frontlets between their Eyes, hung
them as Charms about their Necks, supposing in them a secret Power to defend
them from Dangers. Out of which corruption it is probable did arise that
superstitious Custom of some women in St. Hierom's time, of wearing their
Parvula Evangelia, or short Sentences of the Gospel, to keep them from
Enchantments and other Mischiefs. And at this day the Papists permit the
wearing about their Necks the beginning of St. John's Gospel, as a Defensative
from Evil. That the wearing hereof was not unlawful, some produce Christ's
wearing them for a convincing Argument, St. Luke 8.44. but the Fringe or Border
of the Garment there mentioned may belong to the Zizith, but no way to the
Tephillim. However, the Jews were not condemned by our Savior for the use, but
superstition of this Ornament: and because they made their Phylacteries larger
and broader than commanded, and this too to the end that they might appear more
holy than others. And we may conceive the whole matter to be briefly thus:
Tephillim or Phylacteries are with the later Jews become a great part of their
Religion, which they ground upon the last mentioned Texts, taking them in a
literal, which were intended in a figurative sense, according to their
explication, Deuteronomy. 6.7. But this carnal people, which have ever been apt to
turn all inward Piety into outward form, and to make that matter of Ambition
and Ostentation, which was designed for humility and holiness, understand the
Precept concerning the Phylacteries merely according to the Letter. And
therefore make them Scrowles of Parchment, in which they write the four
Sections of the Pentateuch, which were named before; and wear them on their
Arms and Foreheads. As we have said already.

In preparing these Scrowles, these Ceremonies are still in use: first, the
skins whereof they are made must be of Beasts which the Law has pronounced
clean. Secondly, none but a Jew must kill the Beast and dress the skin for this
purpose: for if a Christian, or in their Language, any other Edomite have a
hand therein, it is wolly polluted and unserviceable. Thirdly, the Ink
wherewith the Sections of the Law are writ, must not be black, nor of the
ordinary confection. Fourthly, they must be writ with the right hand, without
interlining. These, with other niceties concerning columning and cutting the
Parchments, are used about the Phylacteries. And being thus Canonically made,
they sit and apply them to their Foreheads and Hand-wrists, and call them
Tephillim, because they are especially used in Praying. The Greek Phylacteria
relates to the end hereof, namely to keep the Law in memory. Though there is a
present superstition which lays claim to the Phylacteries, because they keep
those that wear them from Sorceries and Diseases, and the Malus Genius. Now
what is principally blameable herein, is their affixing on God their own carnal
observation and frivolous Ceremonies of these Tephillim, as if they were his
own Institution and Appointment. And it was the peculiar fault of the
Pharisees, to wear the Tephillim of a greater breadth than any other Jews, that
they might be looked upon as persons of a greater Sanctity than the rest.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Jews hastening to Morning-Prayer. Their Manner of Entrance into, and
Deportment in the Synagogue, etc.

THrice every day (as we have said) the Jews repair to the Synagogue* and
herein they express a great cheerfulness and delight. For they leave their
houses in a hasty posture, and with great willingness; and seem to strive who
shall be first at the Synagogue. But they return thence in a far different
manner. For when they leave the Synagogue they go backward, and use a very slow
pace therein. By which they testify their delight in Gods public Worship, and
their unwillingness to go from it. And they interpret Hosea 6.3. of that
dispatch, readyness and alacrity wherewith they ought to come unto Gods House.
And to those who are backward and come late to the Synagogue, they apply that
of Esaias 50.2. Wherefore when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there
no man to answer? And of him who comes not to Prayers at all, they understand
Esaias 50.10, 11.

At the Entrance of the Synagogue they either make clean or put off their
shoes, in obedience to Eccles. 4.17. and Exodus 3.5. Put off thy shoes, etc.
And this saves them the uncovering of their Heads: for their little black
brimless Caps are never moved all the time they stay in the Synagogue.

At their stepping into the Synagogue, they first spend a few minutes in the
meditation of his Attributes whom they come to invoke; which is to beget in
them a Deportment humble and reverend. And when they have duly possessed their
minds with an awful reverence of Gods Majesty, they repeat to themselves Numb.
24.5. How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel! And
Psalm 26.8. O Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place
where thine honor dwells. And the 6 th Verse of Psalm 95. O come let us
worship, and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our Maker. This Meditation
being ended, they lay the right hand upon the heart, and bowing their bodies
toward the Chest where the Law is laid up, they begin the public Service with
the 7 th of the fifth Psalm: I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy
mercies, and humble my self with fear in the Temple of thy Holiness: So it is
Verbatim in an old Spanish Translation of the Jewish Lyturgie.

They Pray standing, girt, with their faces toward Canaan, their heads
moderately bowed down, and hands upon their heart. They utter their Prayers in
a sort of Plain-Song, sometimes straining their Voices to a very harsh and
unpleasant Note, and then on a sudden letting it fall into a kind of whisper.
Their bodies are always in a wagging unsteddy posture: which they say expresses
joy and satisfaction in Devotion. But to him that knows not the intent hereof,
this wavering and (sometime) exulting of the body, will seem very careless and
negligent, and that they Pray with none, or very little intention and devotion
of mind.

Those which cannot read the Service in Hebrew (who are but few) are bound to
learn when to say Amen. A thing the more easily attained unto, because they
have a prescript Form. And how heedless soever they may appear in other parts
of Prayer, yet they use a signal diligence in the right timing and pronouncing
of the [ Amen.] Because whosoever says it with all his might, the Gate of the
Garden of Eden is opened to him.

In time of Prayers none are permitted openly to spit, belch, yawn, or blow the
Nose. All which they do with great Secrecy in the Synagogue, when they have
occasion. Neither may they spit, or any such thing, to the right hand or before
them; because of the Angels, which have made those places their Situation in
the Synagogue.

And from this short Account of the Jews entering, and behavior in the
Synagogue; we come to take a general view of the Prayers made therein. And here
we shall follow the Breviary in present use with the Jews in Barbary, which was
Printed at Venice in the 1622 Year of Grace.

And first of all, they begin the Morning-Service with the eighteen
Benedictions, of which, says Moses Maimon, Ezra was the Author. For when the
Israelites returned from the Captivity, their Native Language was so corrupted
with that of their Bondage, that they were not able to praise or serve God in a
continued Speech: And upon this occasion Ezra is thought to have composed
eighteen short Benedictions, wherein they might praise God, and beg at his
hands the supply of his daily blessings. But others are of opinion that these
eighteen Benedictions were composed as a Directory whereby they might guide
themselves both in the private and public Service of God: to which purpose
they are employed at this day.

After the Benedictions, follows a large Office for Sacrifice and Oblations:
which begins with the History of Abraham's going to Offer up his Son. To this
succeeds a long course of Psalms: then a tedious Thanksgiving. Then a
Confession of Sins; at the saying whereof they throw themselves prostrate, and
express a great sense of their own vileness and misery, and that they have no
strength but in the Almighty. Then all on the sudden they start up, and comfort
themselves with the Oath God made unto Ahraham, when he went to Sacrifice his
only Son. And now with great cheerfulness they bless their Lot, that God has
chosen them for his Heritage and the people of his Covenant. But besides all
this, they have in this Office a peculiar Thanksgiving for the Delivery of the
Law; and a Prayer (which they say with a low voice) for the restoration of the
Temple; That in their days God would rebuild the House of his Sanctuary, which
they hourly hope for. And they shut all with praying that God would lead them
in his righteousness, and make plain his way before them.

And this is the sum of their daily Morning-Service; for whose more regular
Celebration, there are Rubricks intermingled with it, directing them to the
Responses, Praises, and how every part must come in course. This Morning-Office
(as was said) is very long; for which they make sufficient amends in the
brevity of the other two. In some places they have a Custom for those to shut
the Prayer Book who are at Variance with their Neighbors: thereby signifying
that they will not Pray at all, because they cannot pray aright, till the
difference be reconciled. At the saying of [ Give Ear O Israel, the Lord our
God is one God,] they turn themselves East and North: at the pronouncing of [
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath,] they jump up three times. They dare not
turn their Backs on the Chest where the Law is deposit; and lest they should do
otherwise, they go backward out of the Synagogue, having their eyes always
fixed thereon. They are very careful that nothing may interrupt them in their
Devotions, at which if they sneeze, they account it a lucky token of being
therein accepted, but to break wind preposterously is a very unhappy abodement.

I have omitted in the former Paragraph to observe that after the appointed
course of Psalms they have two Lessons; the first out of the Law, which is
always read by the Chasan, or some eminent Jew. The second Lesson is taken out
of the Prophets, and is read by any ordinary Jew who is able to read
distinctly. And in the difference of the persons employed in these Lessons,
they show the great value and esteem which they have for the Law above the
Prophets.

There is an universal Agreement among the Jews of all Countries, that they
ought every day to repeat a hundred Benedictions; which they thus compute: At
w^shing in the Morning twenty three: At their Entrance into the Synagogue six:
At putting on of the Zizith or Fringes one: At putting on the Tephillim one: At
every one of the three Offices in the Synagogue, eighteen: Three after dinner,
and two before night: At going to sleep two: and as many at dinner and supper.
Which if they reckon right make up the sum.

At the saying of the Benediction for Gods giving them the Law, they stand up
with their heels joined together, and their toes opened, bowing their heads
toward Jerusalem. They have also a Prayer which is said by the Priest alone,
wherein he desires God that he would be pleased to pardon all those who have
been negligent and unattentive at the time of Prayer. But I could not find
this Prayer in their Breviary, though with some curiosity I perused it to that
purpose.

Besides the Sabbath, they keep Monday and Thursday as weekly Holy days. On
each of which they read three Sections of the Law: the first by a Koen, whom
they suppose to be descended of Aaron; the second by a Reputed Levite; and the
third Section by a Common Jew.

As concerning the keeping of Monday and Thursday Holy, and reading the Law
thereon as well as on the Sabbath, after a more Solemn manner: the Vulgar Jews
give no other account thereof but Custom and the Pleasure of the Masters. But
those who pretend to give a Rationale of their Rites, refer it to an
Institution of Ezdras, grounded upon the peoples wandering three days without
water in the Desert of Sur, in memory whereof he appointed the Law to be thrice
solemnly read every week. Now to be without water, say they, is to be without
the Law: for which interpretation they bring Esaias 55.1.

Others think that Thursday and Monday are set apart for the solemn Lesson of
the Law, in memory of Moses's going the second time into the Mountain to renew
the Tables of the Law, which happened (say the favorers of this Opinion) upon a
Thursday, and to have returned thence upon a Monday. Upon which days some of
the preciser sort keep a strict Fast, like those in St. Luke 18. and in all
probability for the same end. On these two days they have besides the usual
Office, a proper Prayer, which from the first words thereof bears the title of
Vehu-rachum, which is said with singular attention. Of old this Prayer used to
work Miracles; but by reason of some great delinquency in the present Jews, it
has lost this Efficacy.

CHAP. XV.
Their Ceremonies about the Book of the Law: Their Manner of Celebrating the
Sabbath: The Offices which thereon are Solemnized, etc.

IT is a Canon strictly observed by the Jews, That a Book of the Law is
necessary to the Constitution of a Synagogue: And therefore the first thing
they provide in order to set up a Synagogue, is a Copy of the Law, and a Chest
or Ark wherein to lay it up. Now that which is called the Book of the Law is,
The Pentateuch written in a large Character on Parchment, which is dressed
according to the manner of the Phylacteries. The Parchment is rolled up upon
two staves, to make it the more convenient to be carried in Procession. It is
also usually wrapped up in a covering of Linen, Silk, Tissue, etc. As for the
piece of Tapistry pictured with diverse Birds, which was the old-fashioned
Covering of the Ark, the Jews in Barbary use no such thing, for they abhor all
manner of Imagery in their Service, as minding them of the Idolatry of their
Fathers, for which they conceive themselves to be still punished; and also out
of an averseness to be thought to imitate those Christians, who have
offensively introduced Pictures into their Oratories, not only for Ornament but
Veneration.

But to return to the Law: The Jews pay the five Books of Moses so great a
Reverence, that they never suffer them to be taken out of the Chest, or looked
upon, but on three days (namely Monday, Thursday and Sunday) when they are
read: and this too in the Morning, because it is esteemed the purest part of
the day. It Is true, they use also to show the Law to the people on the
Sabbath-night, but it is because the whole day is hallowed. The taking out of
the Law belongs to a Noted Rabbi, or in his absence to one of the more ancient
and Devouter Jews. But to carry it in Procession within the Synagogue, is sold
to him who is able to give most for the Place. As we have observed in the
Officers of the Synagogue. At the taking out of the Law, the Officer turns
himself to the people, and repeats this Versicle: Come and extol God with me,
and let us praise his Name together. And at the Elevation of the Law, the
people bow their Faces toward it, and make a long Respond, wherein they declare
their own vileness, and magnify the Majesty of God. And when the Rabbi holds
up the Law and opens it, he speaks these words: This is the Law which Moses
laid before the Children of Israel, and which proceeded from God, whose ways
are all just: The word of the Lord is pure, and a defense to all those who
believe it. When the Law is carried from the Ark to the place where it is
appointed to be read, all the people there present sing the Hymn of Moses,
Numb. 10.35. Rise up Lord, and let thine Enemies be scattered, and let them
that hate thee flee before thee. By which they wish and pray for the
Destruction of all those who are not of their Religion. When they carry the Law
either to the Reading-place or in Procession, there is always one who steps up
to him that carries it, and kisseth the Covering thereof; for it were to defile
the Law, to kiss either the Letters thereof, or the Parchment whereon they are
written. And he who does this, with a Voice moderately elevated blesses God
for having made the Jews his peculiar people, and that he has given them his
Law. When the Book returns from Procession, and has put on its Coverings, all
the Males in the Synagogue kiss it in Order, as the Papists do their Pax: and
when they have done, the Officer gives the Book an Elevation, and so lays it up
in the Chest. And as it returns thither they say the words of Moses at the
resting of the Ark, Numb. 10.36. Return, O Lord, unto the ten thousand
thousands of Israel.

The Pentateuch is divided into fifty two Sections, to the end that it may be
read over upon the fifty two Sundaies in the Year. And in reading it they are
bound to be very plain, audible, and articulate. Because every tittle thereof
is of singular weight and moment. The last Lesson constantly falls upon
September the twenty fifth, which immediately follows the Feast of Tabernacles.
And when this Section is read over, the Chasans, or those who read the Law,
declare a great joy and satisfaction, that they lived to make an end of the
Annual Lesson. They also praise God that notwithstanding the many Miseries
befaln them, they are still in possession of the Law, in which all other
Blessings are abridg'd.

On the day when this last Section is read, all the Copies of the Law are
brought forth of the Ark, about which the people dance in imitation and
remembrance of David, 2 Samuel 6.16. During the time that the Law is out of the
Ark, they place burning Torches therein, in token that the Law performs all the
duties of a light to those that obey it. On this day also the Elder Jews make
themselves merry in seeing the Youth scramble for the fruits they cast among
them. On this day also are sold the Offices of the Synagogue to them that will
give most. And all being orderly consummate, every one leaves the Synagogue
with this Prayer: The Lord preserve my going out, and my coming in, from
henceforth and for ever.

The next thing that we are to account for in this Chapter, is the Manner of
their keeping the Sabbath, and the Offices thereon celebrated. A Theme large
enough for a whole Volume, if we were to give an exact description of all Rites
and Cases thereunto belonging. But I shall confine the discourse at present, to
the Customs of the Jews in Barbary, among whom and the rest of the Jewish
Nation there is but small disagreement in the Sabbatarian Ritual. Though it
must be confessed that the Barbary-Jews are neither so strict nor Ceremonious
in this matter, as the Jews of other Countries, if we may believe the account
which good Authors have given of the later.

The whole Nation of the Jews sufficiently accord in the notice of the word
Sabbath, and grant that it barely signifies no more than Rest; and that
sometimes too it is used both for working-dayes and Festivals, and that it puts
on a more peculiar and restrained sense, when it is concisely taken for that
seventh day which God set apart for his Worship. And in the Observation of this
Sabbath or Rest, the Jews practice numerous Ceremonies: some antecedent, and
relating to their preparation; and others concomitant, or waiting upon the day.
Their antecedent Ceremonies are seen in dressing and preparing on the Eve of
the Sabbath the Victuals that are thereon to be eaten: According to the
Commandment Exodus 16.23. To Morrow is the rest of the Holy Sabbath unto the
Lord; bake that which ye will bake to day, and sees that ye will sees, etc.
From which they conclude, That all things necessary to the Sabbath, and for the
Honor thereof, ought to be provided over night, that there may be nothing to
interrupt this Rest. If it falls out that the Servants are not able to make all
things ready, the Masters assist them, to the end that the Sabbath by no bodily
labor may be transgressed. And they are able to cite many great Rabbis who
have helped their Servants in preparing for this Rest.

But this strict Custom of dressing no Victuals upon the Sabbath, is not
universal with the Jews we now speak off. With whom I have been entertained
with good cheer on the Sabbath that was thereon prepared. And asking them how
they durst or would act so contrary to their own pretenses; the Reply was, That
they thought the Crime of a low nature, if it was done without giving scandal
to others, that is, secretly. Which was then the Case.

Every Sabbath is observed with three Feasts, and four Offices. The first Feast
is upon the Friday-night, or rather at the very entrance and beginning of the
Sabbath: The second is their Sabbath-dinner; and the third Feast concludes the
Sabbath. Now the Custom of this triple Feast they deduce from the triple
repetition which Moses used of the word [ To day] when he gave out Orders
concerning gathering of the Manna, Exodus 16.25. Some of the more hospitable and
wealthier Jews keep their Tables spread during the whole time of the Sabbath.
And in this as other things they generally tread in their Forefathers steps,
who were excellent at turning the power and intention of the Law into Carnal
Form and Superstition.

But besides their greater apparatus in Diet for the Sabbath, they use other
preparative Rites in order to the Solemnity of This Great Day: All which are
bodily and external, and not worth our recital, if it were not to let us see
into what follies a people may fall in Religion, when they have once renounced
the Truth. All the Friday-afternoon is usually taken up in Sabbatical
preparations, as washing of the head and hands, the trimming of their beards
(whose corners the Graver sort suffer not to be cut, according to Law) and in a
peculiar Superstition of paring their nails; on which parings they are forbid
to tread; in prevention whereof they usually burn or bury them. In like manner,
they spend no small time in whetting the Knives, and preparing other Utensils
of the Table. The women on the Friday comb and dress their heads, and make
ready all accoutrements of the body. For they esteem a neglect in any of these
particulars, a downright violation of the Rest. And because their Masters use
a word for Sabbath signifying Queen, they think it reasonable that they as duly
prepare themselves thereunto, as they would for the reception of so great a
Personage. And he (says the Jewish Canon) is greatly to be praised, who
honors the Sabbath with his Body, Clothes and Diet: with his body, by duly
dressing it: with his clothes, by having a Sabbath Days Suit: and with his
diet, which on the Sabbath should be both more and better than on other days.

In Barbary they have their Sabbath-Lamps, which are lighted by the women, to
which being lighted they hold up their hands and say this Benediction: --
Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, King of the World, who have sanctified us with
thy Precepts, and commanded us to light the Sabbatine-Lamps.

If any man's curiosity lead him to enquire into the reason why the Office of
lighting these Lamps belongs to the women: I shall only tell him, that among
many other reasons pretended to be given hereof, the chief is the keeping the
women in mind of the transgression of Eve, who seducing Adam to disobedience,
thereby put out, say they, and extinguished his Light and Glory. But the women
do it upon the account of a received Opinion among them, that thereby they
facilitate their Childbirth. There being these three Precepts recommended to
them for that end, viz. To keep the Sabbath-bread, light the Lamps, and
carefully to attend their Months.

The Sabbath-lights we now speak of are so contrived, that they may last the
whole Sabbath, on which they are not allowed so much as to snuff them, for fear
of transgressing the fourth Precept. But notwithstanding that the Jews in this
part of the World are sufficiently rigorous in the observation of the Sabbath,
yet I neither could find nor hear of any of them, who would if surprised with
the Sabbath, expose themselves to the danger of abiding in Woods and Deserts,
rather than on the Sabbath to travel a few furlongs to gain a safer residence.
For they are willing to let things necessary to save man's life thereon to be
provided for. And some will not doubt to say, that if ever they be Masters
again of Jerusalem, they will not loose it for fear of transgressing the
Sabbath. And they have an usual saying, Paligro del alma quaebra el Sabbato:
That the hazard of loosing a man's life dispenses with the Sabbath.

They have a Custom in some places on the Friday to put water into little pits,
and to draw no place dry, to the end that the Souls in Purgatory may therein
cool and refresh them. For on the time that is over and above added to the
Sabbath, they suppose the Souls in Purgatory have liberty to recreate. There
are many other Rites belonging hereunto, the most whereof will fall in with the
Offices: which are now to be accounted for.

Upon the Arvit or Eve of the Sabbath, they have a peculiar Office, which
begins with the twenty ninth Psalm: Give unto the Lord, ye sons of the mighty,
give unto the Lord honor and strength. Give unto the Lord the honor of his
Name, and bow your selves to the Lord with the beauty of Holiness. The voice of
the Lord is upon the waters. The God of honor has made it thunder. The Lord
is upon much waters. The voice of the Lord is with strength, the voice of the
Lord is with beauty. The voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars, and has broken
the Cedars of Libanus. And he has made them leap as a Calf; Libanus and Sirion
like the sons of Elephants. The voice of the Lord cutteth the flames of fire;
the voice of the Lord vexes the Wilderness, he vexes the Wilderness of Cades.
The voice of the Lord makes the Hinds to be in pain, and discovers the
Forests, and in his Palace every thing speaks honor. The Lord has been upon
the water, and the Lord has sat King for ever. The Lord will give strength
unto his people, the Lord will bless his people with peace.

The Translation I have here given of this Psalm, which begins the Office of
the Sabbaths Arvit, is Verbatim out of the old Spanish wherein the Jewish
Liturgy is extant. And it is here inserted for no other purpose, but to show
how it differs from our present Translation. Where the Reader may observe, that
the word Adonai is here and through all their Liturgy used for Lord; it being
altogether unlawful for them to mention even in their Devotions the word
Jehovah.

After this Psalm immediately follows in their Liturgy a very large
Expostulation concerning the oil and weke, and whole confection of the
Sabbath-Lamps. Where the Opinions of several ancient Masters are recited
concerning this matter: as the Opinions of Rabbi Ismael, Rabbi Tarphon, Rabbi
Elihezer, Rabbi Aquiba, Rabbi Jehudah. Which (...) Master gives them leave to
put out their Lamps on the Sabbath-night, for fear the Nations (those that are
not Jews) and evil Spirits should do hurt therewith.

On the Arvit they make confession of the three sins, for which, as has been
said, women die in Childbed. And among these three deadly sins* the want of
due lighting the Sabbath-Lamps is none of the least.

On the Arvit likewise when it grows dark they are bound to propound and answer
these three Questions: Have thou paid Tithes? Have thou made the Hirub? Have
thou lighted a Candle? After this they repeat such Hymns and Psalms out of Holy
Writ, as commemorate Gods gracious Promises to Israel, of which they make a
comfortable application to themselves. There are likewise repeated some short
periods of Scripture relating to the Season of the year: as in the Spring -- He
shall make his dew to fall: and in Autumn -- Thou make the wind to blow and
the rain to descend, etc. Having done this, they use a Thanksgiving unto God,
for that he refreshes the dead with his mercies, and confirms his Truth to
those that sleep in the dust: that he punishes Apostates, loses the
imprisoned, redeemeth the captive, provideth Medicines for, and heals the
sick. And at the end of this long Thanksgiving follows this Benediction for the
Institution of the Sabbath.

Blessed be the Lord our God the Holy, Thou have Sanctified the seventh day for
thy Glory (having first finished the Heavens and the Earth) and have blessed it
above all days, and sanctified it above all times, as it is written in the
Law. And here the Institution of the Sabbath out of Genesis is distinctly
repeated.

These things with the rest of the Office of the Sabbath- Arvit, which is very
long, is concluded with a thankful recapitulation of Gods favors toward them,
especially in that he has made them his peculiar people, given them his Law,
and promised that it shall never be changed, nor they deprived of it. Then they
most humbly implore the Almighty, that at last he would fulfill his promise,
retarded so long by reason of their sins, and send them their desired Messiah.

The next Office is that of the Sabbath-Morning, where the Rubric directs them
to rise before the Sun, and to read the ordinary course of Psalms till they
come to the nineteenth: And then to begin their Mattins. Which for the most
part are collected out of the Scriptures; some portions whereof are said by the
Cazan alone, and others by the Kahal and Kohen, as the Rubric all along
directs them. This day the Law has always a solemn Procession, and is openly
shown to the people. When it is brought to be laid up in the Hehal or Chest, he
that bears it says these words: Turn again to thy resting place, and to the
house of thy desire, that every Mouth and Tongue may give praise and glory to
thy Kingdom. And turn unto the million of the thousands of Israel: and, O Lord,
turn us unto thee, and we shall be turned; renew our days as in former time.
And with this Prayer they conclude the Morning-Office for the Sabbath.

The third Office is the Musaf or Afternoon-Service, which begins thus -- O
Lord, thou shall open our lips, and our mouth shall show forth thy praise.
After they have said this, they bless and laud God for the continuance of his
favors both to quick and dead. Next, they recount how God gave their Great
Master Moses the Commandment for the Sabbath. After this they make a
gratulatory Oration unto God for that he has been pleased to assist and accept
their Services. And the whole Office is shut up with a distinct enumeration of
the Divine attributes: and recommending themselves unto the Divine Protection,
beseeching God to take the safeguard of them both when they sleep and watch.

Their fourth Office is that of the Minha, or Sabbath-night: which being of the
same tenor with the last we but now mentioned, there needs no more but to name
it. At the determination of the Sabbath, they have an additional Service, at
which though none are bound to be, yet all are present, to show their Devotion
to the Sabbath, and how loath they are to part therewith. But others hold that
they ought to protract this Rest as long as they can possible, for the sake of
the Souls in Purgatory, especially for such as were condemned thither for the
violation of the Sabbath.

Through all their Offices there is still something peculiarly relating to the
hastening of Elias, to the end that he may not only loose their knots, or
resolve their scruples, but give them timely notice of the advent of the
Messiah. But notwithstanding that their Offices for the Sabbath contain
excellent things, according to their way of Worship, yet they have therein many
things apparently trivial and ridiculous. Of which we may give example in their
praying over the Lamps, Wine and Spices which are brought unto the Synagogue.
Where the Wine being consecrated, it is carried home, that therewith they may
sprinkle their houses, to preserve them from Witchcraft and Sorcerous
Incantations. Some likewise wash therewith the parts of the Body that are
infirm, and conceive that the consecrate Wine yields present cure. The Spices
also being hallowed, are made use of to refresh the Soul that is left alone in
the Body when the Sabbath is ended; for on that day only they hold that every
Male- Jew has two Souls. But the consecrate Wine and Spices have yet an higher
purpose and virtue. For with the Spices they refresh the Souls below on the
week-dayes, because the fire of Purgatory thereon is believed to send forth a
very grievous stench. And by pouring some of the consecrate Wine upon the
ground, they imagine Corah and his fellow-Mutineers to be assisted. For they
are of Opinion that that factious crew are still living in flames under ground.

It cannot be denied, that albeit the Sabbath- Offices of the Jews are taken
for the greater part out of Scripture, but that they entertain a very Carnal
sense thereof, and that the whole Rest tends more to gratify the Body than to
serve God. And to engross this Ease unto themselves, and to show that the
Sabbath was purposely appointed for their sakes, and that none other have
thereunto any right or title, as also to declare their just Dominion over all
other people in the world, the Jews in Barbary employ their Slaves in all
manner of servile Offices upon this day. And on it too give solemn thanks unto
God, That he has put no less difference between Israel and the Gentiles, than
between light and darkness, the six days and the seventh.

Mr. Seldom observes out of their Rabbis that there were three things
peculiarly commanded the Israelites; namely Circumcision, the Tephillim, and
the Sabbath. The first was expressly commanded Genesis 17. the second in Exodus 13.
and the third, Exodus 31. Now this last was so particularly commanded to the
Israelites, that the Jews think no Gentile has any share therein; that they are
not bound to its observation, and therefore cannot be punished for the breach
thereof. And upon this account, as we but now intimated, they employ their
servants and slaves who are not of their Religion, in every sort of drudgery
upon the Sabbath: that their Doctrine may be illustrated by their Practice.

And for a further Argument of the appropriation of the Sabbath to the Jews,
they wear thereon no Phylacteries, because without those, the Celebration of
the Sabbath is thought sufficient to distinguish them from all other Religions
in the World.

The Jewish Masters have raised no few disputes concerning the cause and reason
of the Institution of the Sabbath: with the persons to whom it belongs: the
time when its observation began: together with its obligation both upon the
Originarie and Proselyte Jews. All which are industriously collected and
learnedly discoursed by Mr. Seldom, lib. 3. cap. 10, 11, 12, 13, etc. de jure
Not. and Gentium juxta Disciplinam Hebraeorum.

What we have already set down concerning these Sabbatine Rites, has respect
unto the Jews in Barbary, whom I find to harmonize herein with the Jews of
other Countries. Now because the Sabbath and its Rites make up a great part of
their present Religion, I thought it not improper to insert the Rules of the
Sabbath which are practiced by the European Hebrews, as they are set down by
Mr. Buxtorf in the tenth and eleventh Chapters of his Synagogue. I have been
enforced to make use of a young Pen in the Translation thereof, and to deliver
them to the Press without either Perusal or Transcribing, and therefore desire
the Reader to correct and pardon what faults may therein occur.

CHAP. XVI.
How the Jews Prepare themselves for the Sabbath, and how they begin it.

WE read how the Jews prepared themselves on the sixth day, according to that
of Exodus 16.5, 23. To morrow is the rest of the Holy Sabbath unto the Lord;
bake that which ye will bake to day, and sees that which ye will sees. Which
they interpret of providing all necessary things against the Sabbath, that they
may the better honor it; but especially all Diet is to be prepared and
dressed, that they may have the better leisure to hallow the Day. And to this
end, whatsoever they intend to eat on the Sabbath, they make ready on Friday
before night: the women chiefly are employed in making sweetmeats of diverse
sorts; and when they make ready their dough, they make it in a great lump
undivided; but if the lump be so great, as it is in large families, that it
must be divided, the remaining part is kept covered, lest a neighbor seeing it
may be ashamed that others have provided for the next Sabbath, and he not for
the present.

Every one according to his Ability hallows the Day with three splendid
Banquets. They begin the first on Friday-night before the Sabbath: the second
on Saturday at noon: the last in the evening of the Sabbath. And they justify
the performance of this Ceremony from Moses his writings, where concerning
Manna it is thus expressed: Exodus 16.25. Eat that to day, for to day is a
Sabbath unto the Lord, to day ye shall not find it in the fields. Here the
Rabbis say that Moses meant (by repeating the word Day three times) that they
should in their Banquets on the Sabbath thrice eat of the Manna. But the
repetition of those Banquets has some other meaning, as is evident by their
Book of Ceremonies written in the German Dialect. For unless they had been
commanded to eat at three set-times, they would have so indulged themselves,
that the whole Sabbath would have been a time only to eat and drink: but
because all knew when they were present at one Banquet, that they must attend
on two more, every one observed that moderation agreeable to their particular
appetites, and befitting such a Solemnity, thinking on the dainties which they
should again shortly taste. What is moreover meant by this Banquet, and how
much they reckon of it, shall a little after be declared

Moreover, none, whether noble, rich or wise, ought to think it beneath him to
do something in the honor of the Day. For though a man have an hundred maids,
yea though he have the command of a thousand servants, yet he himself ought
with his own hands to do something in the honor of the Sabbath: And so we read
in the Talmud that Rabbi Chasdam cut the Pot Herbs, Rabbi Joseph clave the
Wood, Rabbi Sira kindled the Fire, Rabbi Nachman swept the House and covered
the Table.

Their Meat whether roast or boiled is kept hot in a Cauldron, as being then
most delightful.

The Table is night and day, whilst the Sabbath lasts, kept covered: for which
they have a particular reason (as shall be afterward showed.)

They wash their heads: the men, if it be the Custom, are shaved; the women
comb their hair, plaiting it decently, and binding it with Fillets; they either
wash their hands and feet, or else bathe themselves in hot Baths.

They every Friday (superstitiously) pare their nails, beginning with the left
hand; they first pare the nail of the fourth finger, then of the second, then
of the fifth, then of the third, and end with the thumb: so doing, they never
cut the nails of two fingers together, but still leave one betwixt. When they
pare the nails of the right hand, they begin with the second finger, and so
pass to the fourth, and so on to the rest.

It Is impious to cast the excrescencies under foot, for so the Devil gets power
over them; but he who burieth them is reputed just, and he who burns them is
righteous, and obtains a full pardon. And all this is grounded upon the place
before mentioned, Exodus 16. And the sixth day they made ready, etc.

Furthermore, every one pollisheth and whets his Knife; and that is justified
from Job, And thou shall visit thy Habitation, and know that thy Tabernacle
shall be in peace, etc. Hence the Jewish Doctors observe, that if the Knife be
dull that it will not cut, there is no peace to the House or Table.

They have Garments designed only for the honor of the day, and every one is
according to his ability decently clad, because Esaiah says, Esaias 58.13. Thou
shall honor him. And how can thou do it in thy every^ays vile habit? as the
Talmud has it; and therefore the Jews have costly Garments pecu^iar for those
days.

The Rabbis call the Sabbath Malkah, i. e. Queen; and therefore the Royal
Apparel must be put on, or otherwise the Queen is disgraced.

They cover the Table with clean white ^innen; provide Cups, Napkins, Seats,
and other things convenient, that the Queen, viz. the Sabbath coming, may find
all things decently placed; and he that honors the day with his Body, his
Raiment, Meat and Drink, is very commendable.

'Twas anciently a Custom to wind a Horn, or sound a Trumpet six times, that
every one might prepare for the Sabbath; but now in well-ordered Assemblies,
it is proclaimed by a Crier. That they may cease from work, and provide
honorably to entertain the Bride, viz. the Sabbath.

And therefore when the Evening draws nigh, they do no business abroad, but
early begin the Sabbath, solemnizing some part of the remaining week: they
repair to the Synagogue, and hallow the time with Hymns and Prayer.

Now when the Sun begins to leave their Hemisphere, the Candles appointed only
for the Sabbath are set up: as soon as they are kindled, a Jewish woman lifts
up both hands toward them, and says; Blessed art thou, O Lord God, King of
the World, that thou have devoted us to thy Service, and have commanded us to
light Candles on the Sabbath. And the like Custom is observed by them on
Holy-day-Eves. If it be troublesome weather, so that the sky be cloudy, the
hens teach them their duty; for when they see them going to roost, then the
time of providing Candles is approaching: but if any live without the City,
where they want such information, they are instructed by Ravens and Daws; for
those Birds provide themselves a Lodging in the evening. But the reasons that
women light up the Candles, and not men, are by tradition chiefly two: The
first is, when Eve after eating the forbidden fruit perceived by certain tokens
that she should dye, she persuaded her husband to taste it too, and told him,
If I must die thou shall die with me; but when her persuasions prevailed not
over his constancy, she brake off a branch from the tree, and beat him till he
did eat; as it is expressed in Genesis 3.2. The Woman which thou gave to be
with me, she gave me of the Tree, (that is, she plucked off a bough from the
Tree, and with it beat me) and I did eat; so it is expounded in the Book Chajim
(that is, the way of Life.) And by this means poor Adam was subject to his
wife, brake the command of God, and brought death upon himself, and bequeathed
it to all his posterity.

But before Eve had sinned, the Sun shined bright, as it will in the World to
come on the just; then they wanted not the instruction of Hens and Daws to
teach them their duty: but as soon as she had transgressed, the Sun was
clouded, and the Light of Heaven was soon darkened.

The second reason why the women light the Candles is, because they are always
at home, but the men often abroad: Moreover, we read Exodus 27.20. Thou shall
command the Children of Israel, that they bring thee pure oil-olive beaten for
the light, to cause the lamp to burn always in the Tabernacle before the
testimony. The Rabbis moreover count that if a godly woman attend on the
lighting of the Candles, she does as holy a deed as if she had kindled Candles
for the Golden Candlesticks in the Holy Temple at Jerusalem. Moreover, we have
it in the Talmud, that a woman guilty of these sins shall die in Childbed:
first, if she have not provided a Cake: secondly, if she have not lighted up
the Candles: thirdly, if she have not taken great care of her menstruous
clothes. But if the women diligently observe these Precepts, they sooner
conceive, and are easier delivered. Of these Candles they have commonly two,
some times more, according to the capacity of the house or dining-bed.

And in those Candles all the members of man and woman's bodies are secretly
contained: according to Jewish Anatomizing, men have 248 members, women 252,
which being added together make 500, which number the Hebrew word Ner
(signifying a Candle) does signify.

They use Candles of two sorts, because the light of life lost in Eden, may be
restored again both to man and woman. The reason that they lift up both hands
toward the light is, to guard their faces from the rays of the Candle,
whilst they repeat a short Prayer, which is not to be said till the Candles
are lighted up.

The matter whereof the wekes of these Candles is made, and what oil they make
the Candles with, may be seen at large in the Talmud, to which I refer the
Reader.

That they set apart some time of the week-dayes, in which they early begin the
Sabbath, is in love to the dead, whose Souls, they say, come from Hell or
Purgatory to keep the Sabbath: for as soon as they enter the Synagogue they
sing a short Hymn, at the hearing of which, the Souls of the deceased hasten
from Purgatory, and rush into the water they first meet with, to wash off the
stink of the smoke, and cool their flames; and therefore the Rabbis have
strictly charged that no water should be drawn at that time, lest those sad
Souls should be disturbed, as we read in Ritualibus eorum.

Whilst they are intent on their Devotion, two Angels approach, one good,
another evil, and place themselves one against another in the Synagogue: if
they hear any one praying, or repeating his Lecture with a godly intention, him
the two Angels lead forth with their hands on his head, saying, Thy iniquity is
taken away, and thy sin is purged. And if at their entrance into the Synagogue
they find the Candles well kindled, the Table well furnished, the Bed covered
with clean Linen; then the good Angel says, I wish I may see all things in
this posture the next Sabbath, and the bad Angel is forced to say Amen. But if
things are not well ordered, then the bad Angel says (as the good before) I
wish I may find all things thus the next Sabbath; to which the good Spirit,
though unwilling, says Amen.

When they come home, they sit down at the chief place of the Table, where the
Salt is placed with a Cup of Wine and two Loaves covered with a Napkin: Then
the Master of the Family taking the Cup of Wine, consecrates the Sabbath,
saying; The sixth day the Heavens and the Earth were finished, and all the host
of them, and on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and
rested the seventh day from all his work which he had made: and God blessed the
seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all his
work which God had created and made. Genesis 2.1. etc. Then adds; Blessed art thou
O Lord our God, Creator of the Universe, who have created the fruit of the
Vine. Blessed art thou O Lord God, Creator of the Universe, who have devoted us
to thy Praecepts, and have given us a holy Sabbath, and in thy good pleasure
have left us an heritage as a remembrance of the Creation: it is a token of the
Communion of Saints, and a remembrance of the departure out of Egypt; for thou
have chosen and sanctified us among all Nations; thou out of thine abundant
goodness have left to us thy holy Sabbath: Blessed art thou O Lord who have
hallowed the Sabbath. When he has said this, he tastes the Wine, and delivers
it to all present to taste: then he removes the Napkin, and takes the two
Loaves, but cuts them not before Prayers, as they do on week-dayes, but
forthwith says, Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, Lord of the World, who have
caused the Earth to bring forth bread. After this, he cuts and eats a piece of
bread, and gives to all that are present, in larger shares than on week-dayes;
and all to honor the Sabbath, wherein all niggardliness is contemned.

Whilst the Wine is consecrating, every one looks diligently on the Candle,
because the wise Rabbis write, that if they travel hard on week-dayes they
loose much of the strength of their eyes; and looking on the Candles at the
Consecration of the Wine is an effectual remedy.

The Bread is covered on the Table, that its vileness in respect of the Wine
may not be seen; for in the Law it is mentioned before the Wine, though
consecrated after it, as it is written Deuteronomy. 8.8. A Land of Wheat and Barley,
and Vines. Where the Wheat and Barley of which the Bread is made are first
named, yet consecrated last on the Sabbath; and if it were not covered, it
would be much despised. The Rabbis say, that it is covered in remembrance of
the Manna. For in the Wilderness the Dew fell, then the Manna, after that the
Dew; so that the Manna lay betwixt the Dew, after the same manner as the Bread
is laid on a Table-cloth, and covered with a Napkin: and for this reason, the
holy women bake a sort of Wafers which they eat instead of Manna. Their
Flesh-pyes are made like ours; the Meat is laid on a thin cake, and covered
with another of the same sort, so that it lies as the Manna did betwixt the
Dew. And they take two loaves, because on Fridays in the Wilderness they
gathered a double quantity of Manna, as it is written, Exodus 16.22. But on the
sixth day they gathered twice as much Bread.

What we shall chiefly Note, is, that on the Sabbath they much indulge their
Genius, as is observable in the Law, Esaias 58.13. where the Sabbath is called a
delight; that is, that we may enjoy all delights that day; and so ought all our
Feasts to be according to that: Thou shall rejoice in thy Feasts, that all may
be done to the honor of God; wherefore thou may eat and drink, and cloth
thee decently, that so thou may truly honor the Sabbath; but don't be
excessive in thy charge.

All this is contained in Libello Timoris, where the Reader may see with what
Charms they excite their Devotion, by repeating such short Sentences as these
following.

Prepare to keep the Sabbath, and Rest from all thy work.

If all things necessary are provided, thou art praiseworthy.

Yea if thou have a great retinue of Servants and Maids.

The Day requires strict observance.

Be content, and thou have plenty enough.

Wear good Habit, for the Sabbath is called a Bride.

Provide the choicest diet for the Day.

And observe all Ceremonies carefully.

Come with a good Appetite.

Prepare good Wine, Flesh and Fish.

Cover the Bed decently. Let the Table be furnished splendidly.

Anoint thy Head, but be not proud.

Sharpen thy Knife, and cut thy Meat modestly.

Cast the parings of thy Nails into the fire.

Do not grudge Wine at the Consecration.

Wash thy hands and feet, for this is no trivial Injunction. Have a good
courage.

Wash all thy Cups. Be not mindful of any injuries.

Rejoice with thy Wife and Children.

Banquet thrice in the day. Speak nothing but what may cause mirth.

Besides these, they have a Book of all the Blessings for the Feasts of the
whole year; amongst other these are observable.

Wear such Habit as may donote mirth.

Consecrate the Candle, that it may burn well.

Finish all thy work on Friday, and rest.

Eat all dainties, Fish, Capons and Quails.

Walk softly, for the Law commands meekness, and morning-rest.

Silk Garments are of much account, and they who wear them also.

The Sabbath is holy, and he who rightly observes it.

Let no care trouble you, though Spiders be in your houses.

Be merry and jolly, though at other men's charge.

Get the best Wine, Fish and Flesh, and Banquet thrice that day.

If thou observe all this, thy reward is great.

And, Ye women see that the Candles be lighted, and be attentive.

Your convenience will be much when you are with Child.

And if you provide plenty of Wafers, you shall easier conceive, and bring
forth with joy.



But lest the curious Reader may think these to be mere fictions, I shall
instance some pleasant passages out of the Talmud relating to the same purpose.

Where we read that one Rabbi Chaja fortuned to lodge one Sabbath with a
Butcher, and there was set before him a Golden Table, burden enough for
sixteen men, on which there hung sixteen silver Chains, and on it many vessels
of the like Metal were set, as Spoons, Plates, and Cups furnished with plenty
of dainties. When all things were set in order, he praised God, thus: The Earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: and when the Banquet was ended, he gave
thanks after this manner: The Heavens are the Lords, but the Earth has he
given to the sons of men. And then the Rabbi began to enquire of the Butcher
how he had gotten such riches, and what good works he had done? the Butcher
replied, Hitherto have I been a Butcher, and when ever I lighted on a Beast
fatter than usual, I reserved it for the Sabbath, that I might do as I am
commanded, and therefore God has given me much riches, for the honor I do to
his day. And when the Rabbi heard this, he gave God thanks that he had bestowed
on him such abundance. And here we leave the Butcher.

Moreover, we read in the same Page of a man truly Charitable, named Joseph; if
any thing extraordinary came to the Market, especially Fish, he spared no
charge to buy it; and he had a rich neighbor, who would often mock him, asking
him what good this strict observing Sabbath-duties did him? thou gettest naught
by it, says he; I am much richer than thou, yet do not observe it so
punctually: but Joseph took of his words but little notice, and answered, That
God was able to recompense him. And at the same time, there came Astrologers to
the rich man, saying: What good have thou of thy riches? thou dare not buy a
good Fish with it: we find that the Fates have given all thy store to Joseph
the Sabbath-observer: he spares no charge to honor the day. The rich man took
some notice of what they said, and went and sold all his possessions, and with
it bought Jewels, and hung them in his hat, and resolved to travel, to secure
his riches from Joseph; and taking ship, he was so tossed with a Tempest, that
he lost his Hat and Jewels in the Sea; there came a great Fish and swallowed
them up: and a little after, the same Fish was brought into the Market to be
sold; many cheapened it, but thought it too dear: at length came this Joseph,
and soon bought it; and dressing it, found the Hat and Jewels which the rich
Traveller had lost: So the Astrologers Predictions were verified, and Joseph
grew Rich on a sudden. Then there came a Wise Old man to Joseph, and said, He
who bestows much on the Sabbath, him the day recompenseth; but he that of a
little bestows a little, to him God gives fourfold.

We read of another Passage in the Talmud concerning Feasts; how a certain
Rabbi every Friday sent his Servants into the Market to buy off all the Herbs
which the Sellers could not vent, and then he cast them into the River: and the
Rabbis inquiring the cause why he had not distributed them to the poor
Israelites, the Answer was this: That if he had given them to the Poor, then
they in expectation of having them given still, would not have provided for the
Sabbath; and therefore if it should happen that the Sellers had sold all, and
the Poor not provided for themselves, then the Sabbath would not have had its
due honor. But why then did he not cause them to be given to the Cattle? it
had been better to do so, than to cast them carelessly away. The Answer was,
That he would not give those things to Cattle which men might eat, and from
which they might have profit; for they might perchance take them out of the
water. But why did he command them to be bought? the Reason is, That those who
sold such Commodities might willinglier come to the Market: for suppose them to
come often and sell naught, they would soon be weary, and not frequent the
Market; and then the Poor would have had nothing to eat on the Sabbath, and
thereby would have deprived it of its due honor.

Moreover, we read in a Treatise of the Sabbath, that if any one on the Sabbath
let loose the Reins to pleasure, and so pass the day, that God gives him an
Heritage for ever, as it is written: When thou shall call the Sabbath a
Delight, then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord: and I will cause thee to
ride upon the high places of the Earth, and feed thee with the Heritage of thy
Father Jacob: of which Heritage it is largely spoken; For thou shall be spread
abroad to the East, and to the West, and to the North, and to the South* Rabbi
Mackman says, He that feeds high on the Sabbath, and is joyful, shall be free
from the Servitude of Kings, as it is, I will lift thee above the high places
of the Earth, and thy Enemies shall be found Liars.

Another Rabbi says, That he who merrily passes the Sabbath, has whatsoever
he will ask of God, as it is written; Delight thou in the Lord, and he will give
thee thy hearts desire.

Seeing therefore that the Jews have not conquered their Enemies, nor obtained
their desire, that they have not yet subdued the Christians, nor are Lords of
the whole Earth according to their prayers on the Sabbath and Feast-days, may
be imputed to their want of a right Hallowing the Sabbath, or at least, that
they have not thereon been sufficiently merry.

When they have thus joyfully finished the first Banquet, they again go to
Prayers; but the Table is kept covered, and the Candles burn till the evening
of the Sabbath. And they dispute much what is to be done with those Candles,
whether it be lawful to catch Fleas or Lice with them; but reading by them is
forbidden, lest when the light is dim he that reads should snuff the Candle and
so violate the Sabbath. And because the Sabbath is called a Delight, they often
marry on it, and enjoy the society of their Wives; they say those who are
conceived on the Sabbath live to a good age, if their Parents don't respect the
pleasure as the honor of the day.

Finally, when a Jew travelleth on Friday, and has a greater Journey than the
Sabbath allows of, he ought to take up his Lodgings in the Fields or Woods at
the approaching of the Sabbath, and there to continue till it be ended,
exposing himself to the danger of Thieves, and want of sustenance. There is a
memorable Story in their Histories to this purpose.

Three Jews on a time took a Journey on Friday when the Evening drew nigh, and
the Sabbath approached; two of them spoke thus to each other: What shall we do?
we are in certain danger, the way is beset with Thieves* and the wood barbours
wild Beasts; we had therefore better keep on our Journey and save our lives,
than with certain danger both of body and life hallow the Sabbath. But the
third replied; Truly we ought not to stir hence but here to keep the Sabbath;
God who has commanded us so to do, is able to preserve (...) safe. The other
two persisted, and broke the Sabbath, but the third pitched his Tent and there
abode; he covered the Ground (instead of a Table) with a Cloth, and on it laid
the Provision he had with him, and so betook himself to Prayers; that being
ended, he sat^ down to eat of the first Banquet of the Sabbath: the Attendance
he had was a terrible Bear almost pined with hunger: the good Jew was almost
afraid, and gave the Guest a piec^ of Bread, and had faith that God would
preserve him; the Bear took the Bread, and attended on him. The Jew after
supper betook himself again to prayer, and so to sleep, and the Bear lay down
by him; in the morn h^ was very glad that the hungry Bear was s^ kind as to
spare his flesh, and for it gave God ^hanks, and so provided for his
Morning-prayers: he then dined, and after sup't, and did all his duty. When the
Sabbath was ended he went on his Journey, the Bear still following him. The
same night it fortuned that his Companions fell among Thieves, who stripped
them of all they had. At length this devout Jew and the Bear overtook them; and
though the Beast was so kind to him, it was not for want of natural
fietceness, for he soon tore the other two in pieces. Then the Godly Jew began
to be afraid; but whilst he mused with himself, the Thieves beset him, and
asked who he was, whence he came, and whither he was going? he told them he was
a Jew, and that he came from the Kings Palace; they asked whence he had that
Bear; he answered, The King gave it as a Companion. One of the Thieves told the
other, that surely this Person was beloved of the King, that he had given him
such a guard. The other said, Let us give him all our money, and follow him
through this Wood, that the Bear hurt us not. So they gave him all their money
to conceal them; and going far with him, at length departed, the Bear also
returned to the Wood. And from this story the Jews conclude that they ought to
observe the Sabbath in whatsoever place they are, and commit themselves wholly
to the protection of God Almighty.

CHAP. XVII.
How the Jews hallow the Sabbath, and how they end it.

IN the morning they rise not up so early as on other days; but for the greater
pleasure in honoring the day, they sleep a good part of the morning. And for
this custom the Rabbis have consulted the Writings of Moses, and find in
Numb. 28. where it is spoken of daily Offerings, that it is expressed by the
word Babboker mane, that is, the morning: but when it is spoken of the Offering
of the Seventh day, it is expressed by the words Die Sabbathi (that is) the
Sabbath day; intending this meaning, that the daily Offerings were to be
performed Antelucano tempore, that is, at break of day; and instead of this on
the Sabbath they had Morning-prayers, and referred their Offering till later in
the morn: therefore the Jews sleep longer than on other days, to prepare them
for Prayers.

When they repair to the Synagogue, they pray as on other, but longer, and sing
more Hymns to honor the day; they put not on their Phylacteries as on other
days, because they think the Sabbath it self is a sufficient sign of the
Jewish Faith, and ordained only for them to hallow; and have therefore no need
of Circumcision and Phylacteries, though both are signs by which Jews are
distinguished and known.

They bring the Book of the Law out of the Ark after the same manner as is
declared in the ninth Chapter. They read a Section out of the Law, and divide
each Section into seven Lessons, to be read by seven choice men.

After the reading of the Law, they read Lessons out of the Prophets, which are
agreeable to the Writings of Moses; of which custom this is the Original: When
in old time they were forbidden to read Moses, they chose a Section out of the
Prophets, which agreed with the Writings of Moses: of this there is mention in
the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 13.27. They which dwell at Jerusalem, and their
Rulers knew him not, nor the Voices of the Prophets which are read every
Sabbath day. And again, Act. 15.21. Moses of old time has in every City them
that Preach him, being read in the Synagogue every Sabbath. But though they are
not forbidden the reading of Moses, yet they keep the Old custom, and read the
Prophets after Moses.

They pray also for the Souls of the dead who have not kept the Sabbath aright:
For the Rabbis suppose that they, both before and after the Sabbath, are
tortured in Hellfire; and therefore they pray for them on the Sabbath, that
thereon they may have rest. They continue in prayer not after the sixth hour of
the day, being forbidden to fast or pray longer, as they plead, from the place
so often recited, Thou shall call the Sabbath a Delight. Here they say that the
word signifying in Hebrew Delight, is written without the Letter, which
signifies six; by which the Prophet meant implicitly that they should pray but
till the sixth hour.

When Morning-prayer is ended, they provide for the second Banquet; and to
honor the day, they generally indulge their Appetites: but if it happen that
any one have a strange Dream, as if he should see the Book of the Law or his
house burn, or his teeth struck out, or suchlike portending evil, he has
liberty to abstain from meat till the evening. He who in a dream is offended
with meat, and delights in fasting, may do as he himself pleases; and he that
is so grieved that he cannot refrain from tears, he may weep, for by it grief
is eased, and such pleasant weeping honors the day; but he that fasts on
purpose on the Sabbath, is bound to fast the next day after, that thereby he
may do Penance for detracting from the honor of the day.

After Dinner the Rabbis have thought fit to study or read in Sacred Writ:
for one of the chief Rabbis relates, that the Sabbath made complaint that God
had given to every thing a companion and equal, except to it; and God answered,
Israel shall be thy companion; for on the Sabbath they shall learn the Law,
whereas others are idle. The Law also came and complained, saying, When Isarel
returns into his own Land, one possesses his Vine, another his Field: Who then
shall regard me? To which God said, Israel shall respect thee, for on the
Sabbath they shall not labor. And considering this, they have thought it fit
to spend some time after dinner in studying the word of God, that the Sabbath
or the Law might have no more reason of complaint.

At the time of Evening Sacrifice they repair again to the Synagogue, and say
their Evening-prayers, and then eat the third and last time on the Sabbath:
when it begins to depart, they take leave of it with a Blessing.

They look upon the observance of these three Banquets to be of much concern;
for they think that he who thus observes the Sabbath shall escape Hell, and be
preserved from the dreadful War of Gog and Magog, and also be free from the
perplexities that shall attend the coming of the Messia: and therefore one of
the Rabbis prayed that his Portion might be with those who celebrate the
Sabbath with three Banquets.

At Evening they are again prohibited to draw water out of the River or Well,
by reason of the Souls of the wicked deceased, which again refresh themselves
as they are returning to Hell.

At the very departure of the Sabbath, after supper, one very nimbly draws the
Cloth from off the Table; for they say that he who does it, shall in a short
time be set at liberty. Aere Alieno.

About the Evening they again go to prayers, in which they make mention of the
Prophet Elias; for they say that his coming was promised in the evening of the
Sabbath or some Feast Day: and when the Sabbath is gone, they ask him if he
will come the next Sabbath and acquaint them with the coming of the Messia.
Some of them also write, that the Prophet sat under the Tree of Life in
Paradise, and registered the good Works the Jews did on the Sabbath.

They continue these Prayers till late in the night, out of love to the Souls
of the wicked, that they may have the more respit from torments: for as it is
in the Evening on Friday proclaimed in Hell, by Dumah an Angel that is Ruler
among the Spirits, that the wicked may go to their rest as the Jews do and all
Israel on the Sabbath: So when the Prayers are ended, the Spirit cries again,
Return ye wicked into Hell, for the Jews have done Prayers.

As soon as the Hymn Benedicite is ended, the women go with haste to the wells
and draw water: for they write that the well Mara whereof they drink in the
Desert, runs into the Sea of Tyberias, and thence in the end of the Sabbath did
mixed it self with the water of all their wells; and if a woman should chance to
draw in that instant, she would have an Antidote for all Diseases.

A certain woman gave testimony to this most precious Panacea, who immediately
after prayers going to draw water, came in that instant in which the Well had
mixed it self with hers; but being somewhat slow in drawing, her Husband was
very angry: The woman for fear let the Pitcher fall out of her hands, and it
happened that some drops fell upon her Husband, and those parts which the water
touched were immediately healed.

See the effect of this his anger! for he was only healed in part, whereas if
he had drank, he had been totally cured, and clean as a newborn Child. Hence is
that notable Saying of the Rabbis; Iracundus nihil aliud quam iram suam
reportabit.

Lastly, they separate the Sabbath from the Week following, and give God thanks
that he has enabled them so to hallow the Sabbath. They do it after this
manner.

A great Taper like a Torch is kindled, which they call the Candle of
Separation; they have also a little Box full of sweet Spices provided: Then the
Master of the Family takes the cup of Wine in his right hand, and sings with a
loud voice, Behold, God is my Salvation, I will trust and not be afraid: I will
receive the cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord, etc. Which
done, he consecrates the Wine, and (spilling a little on the ground) says,
Blessed art thou O Lord who have created the Fruit of the Vine. Then he smells
to the sweet Spice, and delivers it to all present to smell to: afterward he
takes the Cup in his right hand, and going to the great Taper, looks diligently
on the nails of his left hand, bowing his fingers inwards toward the palm of
his hand, that they may cause a shadow; after that he opens them again, and
looks on the outside so diligently, that he may discern the nails to be whiter
than the flesh, and says, Blessed art thou O Lord who have ordained a clear
light: then taking the Cup in his left hand, he vieweth the nails of his right
hand; which done, he removes the Cup into his right hand, and says, Blessed
art thou who have made difference betwixt things holy and profane; betwixt
Israel and other Nations; betwixt the seventh day and the other six days of the
week: and while he says this, he spills a little of the Wine on the ground,
and then drinks, and gives to all present to drink. And so the Sabbath is
ended, and the Week begun.

They prove the difference between the Sabbath and the Week-daies by these
words: And that ye may put difference between things holy and unholy; and, God
divided the light from the darkness.

They smell to the sweet Spice to avoid dotage, because they are deprived of a
Soul at the end of the Sabbath, which Soul they again receive at the beginning
of it, and enjoy more than on week-daies. Antonius Margarita in his Book de
side Judaica has something to this purpose. The Jews write in the Talmud, that
every man has three Souls; and prove it from Esaias 42.5. Thus says the Lord
God, he that created the heavens, and stretched them out; he that spread forth
the earth, and that which comes out of it; he that gives breath to the people
upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein. From this Text they attribute to
man two Souls, which with the true Natural Soul always inherent make three:
moreover they say, that when a man sleeps, these two adventitious Souls steal
from him; one ascends to Heaven, and there hears all future Events; the other
roves about the Earth, and there beholds naught but folly and vanity; and this
they call the Irrational or Brutish Soul: but that Soul wherewith every man is
first inspired, has its immovable residence in the heart, and sees all that
those two Souls that have forsaken the body, do or see. Hence all dreams arise,
and therefore not always to be lightly esteemed. But on the Sabbath a fourth
Soul comes as a fresh supply, which elevates their minds, that so they may the
better honor the Sabbath; and when the Sabbath is ended, this Soul leaves
them again: Hence it is that they are dull, and smell to the sweet Spices to
refresh their Spirits. (So much of Margarita; but whence he collected this,
cannot as yet be understood by the Jews writings.)

Some more wise than the rest smell to the sweet Spices, because on the Sabbath
the fire of Hell does not stink; but as soon as the Sabbath is ended, and the
Gates of Hell opened, that the Souls of the wicked may again enter in, it sends
forth an ill sent; and these Spices are preservatives against it (as they say.)

They spill a little of the Wine in the consecration, as a sign of plenty and
abundance in their houses; for they say where the Wine is not spilt, there is
no blessing: some think it is done to refresh Core and his company whom the
Earth swallowed up; as if they were yet alive, and could perceive refreshment
from this waste.

They take strict notice of their nails, because of their soon growing; for
though they pare them every Friday, they grow up again by the next. Some say it
is by reason of the great difference betwixt the nails and the flesh, which
made Adam so much to wonder when he saw the world dark, and cried out, Ah me
miserable creature, for my fault was the world darkened: and hereupon God was so
merciful to him, that he gave him discretion to knock two Flints together, from
which there came fire, with which he lighted a Candle; and when he saw himself
all naked save only the tops of his fingers, he burst out into admiration, and
praised God.

To prove their Opinion of the stench of Hell, they produce this story out of
the Talmud: One Turnus Ruphus a wicked fellow, asked one of the Rabbis what
the Sabbath was better than other week-daies? whom the Rabbi asked again, Why
art thou more honorable than other men? he answered, Because it was the good
pleasure of his Lord and King: So, says the Rabbi, it was the good pleasure of
the Lord of Hosts, to command us to prefer the Sabbath before other days. But
says Turnus, How know thou that the seventh day is your true Sabbath? it
may be some other day: perhaps the first, second, third, etc. The Rabbi told
him that this was first revealed to them by a certain River which flows so
strong six days that it hurls with it great stones, and is not navigable all
the week; but on the Sabbath it moves not at all. A second Proof of it, says
the Rabbi, is from thy own Fathers Sepulcher, which all the week is infected
with a loathsome vapor caused by the stench of Hellfire, in which he is
tormented; but on the seventh day it has no ill smell, because on the Sabbath
thy Father comes from Hell, and the evil Spirits have no power over him, and
therefore also Hellfire has no ill smell on the Sabbath. When Turnus heard
this, Perhaps (says he) his punishment is ended. The Rabbi bid him go to the
Sepulcher after the Sabbath, and he should smell a stench. When Turnus had made
trial and found it so, he by the help of Magic raised his Father's Ghost, and
spoke thus to him: Whilst thou livedst thou did not regard the Sabbath, but
now thou art dead thou hallowest it: How long have thou been a Jew? His Father
answered, Dear Son, he who living observes not the Sabbath willingly, in Hell
shall be forced to do it. His Son proceeds, What is your employment in Hell on
week days? His Father answered, We are tortured in the fire, but on the Sabbath
we enjoy our ease; for Friday in the evening, which is the preparation for the
Sabbath, Proclamation is made in Hell, It Is a time of rest, therefore rest ye
wicked; so are we eased, and do hallow the Sabbath; but at the end of the
Sabbath, when the Jews have ended their customary Prayers, an evil Spirit
called Dumah, who is our Ruler, calls us back again to Hell, because the
people of Israel have ended the Sabbath, where we renew our torments, and
endure them till the next Sabbath. And this is our Employment.

He who desires to know more of this, let him consult Rabbi Bochai in his
Exposition of the eighteenth Chapter of Exodus, where he writes much concerning
the Sabbath. And because God has commanded in the Law, that not only Man but
Beast also should rest on the Sabbath; they make great inquiry how far a Horse
or an Ass may travel on the Sabbath, and whether it may carry any thing on it?
And here they say, that no beast ought to carry any thing on the Sabbath, but
that with which it is led, as a Horse or Ass may carry a Bridle or Halter; and
these too must be put on on Friday before the Sabbath begins. They ought not to
let a Horse go abroad with a Saddle on, much less must one ride upon it. If any
one come home on the Sabbath with a Saddle on, they may loose the Girts, but
not take off the Saddle; if the Horse shake it off, then the Jew is free.

The Cock is not to be let loose with a piece of cloth tied to his leg or wing,
but is to be loosed on Friday, that it may rest on the Sabbath.

If a Beast fall into a Pit on the Sabbath, and cannot get forth of it self, it
is to be fed in the place till the Sabbath is ended, and then to be helped out.
If the place be so deep that the beast is in danger of being drowned, then they
are to put straw (and suchlike stuff) under it, to preserve it; and if it get
out of it self, then the Jew is free. But this seems to contradict that answer
Christ made to the Jews, when they blamed him for healing on the Sabbath Day,
Mat. 12.11. Which of you (says he) having an Ox or an Ass fallen into a pit,
will not straightway help him out on the Sabbath Day? But this is the
injunction of the Talmud.

On the Sabbath, a Christian may milk the Jews Cows or Goats; but the Jews must
not eat the milk, unless they buy it of the Christians, as they usually do. The
men or women must not run on the Sabbath, unless they be commanded of God;
neither must they step more than the length of a Cubit at once, lest they hurt
the eyesight. No man ought to carry any sort of weapon, neither must a Tailor
carry needles on his sleeve.

If any one be lame or sick, so that he cannot walk without a staff, he may use
it; but he who is blind may not. They must not use Stilts to help them over
the water; for though they seem to carry a man, yet are they born of him; and
any burden is forbidden on the Sabbath. They must carry no moneys with them on
the Sabbath. They may shake off the dirt from their shoos against a wall, but
not on the ground, lest they may seem to fill the ditch. If any one have dirt
on his hands, he may wipe them on his horse-mane; but washing is forbidden.
They are forbidden to catch Flies or Gnats which stick on their Garments, or
creep on the ground; but if they offend them, they may catch them, not hurting
them, and throw them away. A Louse may be killed; but one of the Rabbis says,
He who kills a Louse on the Sabbath, breaks it as much as he who kills a Camel:
and this raises a dispute, what was to be done with such offensive creatures;
and it was agreed, that those creatures which were generated by natural
coition, should not be hurt; (and therefore Flies were free) but those which
were bred of corrupt, putrified matter, were to be killed (and therefore Lice.)

They are forbidden to climb trees, lest they should break the boughs. He who
feeds his Hen and Chickens in any open place where the rain may fall, with any
Corn, must not give them more than they can eat, lest when it rains it should
grow, and so he might be said to sow on the Sabbath; which is a sin
unpardonable. They must not knock at the door with the iron hammer, lest they
may seem to drive a nail; and therefore Chassan, the Sexton, does knock with
his fist. They may not knock with the fingers on the table, nor write on sand
or ashes, but they may in the Air. No Picture, either in paper or wax, is to be
defaced.

The sum of all that they are forbidden, is contained in 39 Articles, to which
all lesser matters are reducible.

The First Article concerns Plowing; under which, is comprehended dressing of
Gardens, removing Herbs, setting Trees, planting Vines, digging, pruning, etc.
whereby the growth of any thing may be improved: and because it is not lawful
to fill Ditches, the Rabbis have thought fit that the Chambers should be
sprinkled with water, that the dust might not arise; but sweeping is forbidden,
lest thereby any little chink in the Chamber should be filled: and for this
reason, they would not throw nutshels toward the Ditch, lest peradventure they
might fall into it.

The Second Article concerns Reaping; under which, is contained gathering any
kind of Fruit, which they are forbidden; as also to take honey from the Bees,
and suchlike. They may on the Sabbath eat any Fruit as it hangs on the stalk,
but not break the stalk: they may not go over a Corn-field newly sown, lest the
Corn should stick to their shoos, which is, as if they had purposed to take it.
And it seems that the Jews were offended with our Savior, for the breach of
this Article, when his Disciples plucked off the ears of Corn on the Sabbath,
Mat. 12.

The Third Article respects Thrashing; to which pertains beating of Hemp or
Flax, to press any moist Fruits, as Grapes, and suchlike. Milking is also
contained under this Article; but the Rabbis don't as yet agree about it.

You may judge of the other Articles accordingly: The difference betwixt the
general ones, and those contained under them, is not great. He who bears
false witness against another, is to be stoned; and he who willingly sins, him
God shall judge, and root out of the Land of the Living. These are explained in
the Talmud, in Tractatu de Sabbatho, Chapter 7. with many more, but they are
too tedious to be named.

And though the Jews think that they rightly observe the Sabbath, yet they may
be convinced of the contrary from their own Conscience: For we read in the
Talmud, that he who observes all the Ceremonies of the Sabbath to do them,
shall have free pardon of all sins; yea though he be an Idolater, as Enoch, in
whose time they say this sin had its Original. According to Genesis 4.26. Then
began men to call upon the Name of the Lord: And Esaias the 56.2. Blessed is the
man that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it. Rabbi Juda said, If the
Israelites had kept the first Sabbath aright, immediately after the Law was
given, no Nation would ever have overcome them. And another Rabbi said, If they
had kept the two first Sabbaths aright, they had soon been set at liberty;
according to Esaias 56.4. They that keep my Sabbaths aright, them will I bring
back into my holy Mountain, (that is, Jerusalem.) But seeing they are not,
neither are like to be set at liberty, it must needs be because they have not
kept the Sabbath aright, as they confessed, while the Temple stood at
Jerusalem. As the Talmud expressly speaks; For no other reason was the Temple
at Jerusalem destroyed, but because the Jews observed not the Sabbath aright.
As it is written, Ezekiel. 22.27. They have hid their eyes from my Sabbath, and I
am polluted among them. The Jews celebrate the Sabbath with Wine, Fish, and
Flesh, and all kind of Delights: they abstain from work, and are not at any
time desirous to do any thing, but only command the poor Christians; and
therefore boast, that they are Lords over them.

I shall conclude this Chapt. with the complaint which God made to Israel by
the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 1.13. Incense is an abomination unto me: the new Moons
and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with: it is iniquity,
even the solemn meetings. Your new Moons, and your appointed Seasons my Soul
hates, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Jews Feasts: The manner of their Celebration.

IN the Order of Prayers according to the Hebrew Use, the Offices for the
Festivals immediately follow those of the Sabbath, though the Service Book does
not yield Offices for every Feast which are in present observation with them.
For besides a peculiar Order for the Purim, there is but one general Office for
all the rest.

Now besides what occurs in Holy Writ concerning the institution and reason of
the Jewish Festivals, there are some modern Customs chiefly therein to be
considered, which we shall refer to the several Feasts, and only give them a
naked enumeration.

The chief both of the Ancient and Modern Jewish Festivals, are the Passover,
the Feast of Weeks or Pentecost, and the Feast of Tabernacles. The Passover is
the first both in time and dignity, and the Divine Scriptures exhibit enough in
testimony both of its Institution and Design: So that we shall only succinctly
set down the usual Rites of its present observation.

And in the first place, the Jews esteem the Passover of so great moment, that
their preparation for its solemnity is much more great, than to all the other
Festivals. For the Wealthier and Devouter sort spend above a Lunar Month in
preparing for its coming. But their preparations consist not in any Spiritual
exercise, but in a carnal providing for the body. Where they use no small
curiosity and diligence in getting the finest Wheat for the unleavened bread,
which by Divine appointment is thereon to be eaten. And what is very
commendable, the Richer are careful to provide the Poorer with fine Wheat for
the same purpose gratis, out of their own Store. For they account it a great
Scandal to their Religion, that any Jew should be unprovided of things
requisite to so sacred a celebration. The two or three days before the
Passover, are spent in cleansing their houses, and washing their Furniture of
brass, pewter, and iron. On the Eve of the Feast, the Firstborn of the Family
always fasts: and the rest of the household are employed in searching every
corner, that not a crum of leavened bread may remain till the Passover. And
because they pray that not the least mite may escape their discovery, it is
ordinary with them to cast some pieces of hard crusts into the secret corners,
that finding them, they may not be said to have prayed in vain. Whatsoever
crumbs they meet with, they are carefully laid up till the next morning, when
they are burned; and all this to testify their especial diligence to observe
the Law concerning the Passover.

The Sabbath immediately antecedent to this Festival, is for its singular and
peculiar Sanctity, styled the Great Sabbath: which name was occasioned by a
Miracle that thereon happned: of which the Rabbis give this short Legend.

Our Ancestors, when they lived in Egypt, taking their Paschal Lambs, according
to Gods appointment, upon the tenth day of the month, and tying them to their
bed-posts, that (...) might have them ready to kill upon the fourteenth day of
the month; (which interim of time (from the tenth to the fourteenth day) they
were to spend in meditation of their deliverance, and in searching if the Lamb
was without blemish.) The Egyptians demanding a reason of their so doing, the
Hebrews told them, that their Lambs were kept to be killed at their Passover.
The Egyptians murmured greatly thereat, and grew very much incensed against the
Hebrews for killing the Lamb, because it so much resembled one of their Gods.
For they had placed Aries, the Ram, one of the Celestial signs, in the number
of their Deities. Whereupon the Egyptians began to complot the Hebrews Ruin,
but were suddenly struck with so much horror, that they durst not open their
lips, nor move a finger, against them: And because this happened the next
Sabbath before the Passover, it was therefore called the Great Sabbath: On
which they make long discourses, relating to the Ordinance and Use of the
Passover.

While they are searching and cleansing their houses, they are either to be
silent, or to speak of nothing but finding out and burning the leavened bread.
And at the lighting of the Candle wherewith the Crumbs are sought for, the
Father of the Family says this Benediction: Blessed art thou, O Lord our God,
the Lord of the whole earth, who have Sanctified with thy Precepts, and
commanded us to cast out the Leaven.

And all his Domestics distinctly answer, Amen. Some Jews will not suffer the
women to cleanse the house, because they say, Talkativeness is so natural to
that Sex, that they cannot perform that Office with so great silence as is
required. The Father of the Family has always the inspection of purging the
house, who lest any leavened bread might be left undiscerned, uses this
Execration: Let all the leaven which I have not found and taken away, vanish
into the dust of the Earth.

While some of the Family are making clean the house, others grind the Wheat
for the Azima, or unleavened Cakes. Where their first care is to see the Mill
thoroughly cleansed from all Grain that was designed for leavened bread. And in
Barbary this task is not long or difficult, because the Jews use small
handmills, like the Moors. Next, the Master of the house, betwixt Sunset and
Starlight, draws water and puts it in such consecrate Vessels as are purposely
set apart for their Festivals. And when all things are in readiness, they fall
to making of the Pascal Cakes: Which are of a round figure, and without any
other ingredient, than pure water and fine flour; which must have been two or
three days ground before they use it. And this they do, lest the heat it takes
in grinding, should make it smell, and grow leavenish. If in kneading or
moulding the Cakes, any part of the dough happen to fall to the earth, they
must not take it up, but leave it to be eaten by any creature that has a mind
thereunto. For they are of opinion, that the least crum falling to the ground,
being taken and put to the rest, will sower the whole lump.

The woman that makes the Cakes, bakes first one alone, over which she says,
Blessed art thou our God, who have commanded us to separate the leavened Cake.
And having said these words, she instantly burns it to ashes, and then begins
to bake the rest.

Upon the Eve of the Passover, at the time of the Mincha, they go to the
Synagogue, where they celebrate the Office of the Sabbath-Arvit. The Prayers
for the Passover, are for the most part the same with those of the Sabbath;
save that they intermingle therewith some of the Roshodes. During the time that
the men stay at the Synagogue, the women spread the Tables, and adorn their
Cubbords, not for Ostentation, but honor of the Festival. Against they return
from Public Oraisons, there is a Cushion, the best they can provide, laid for
the Head of the House, at the upper end of the Room where they are to dine: For
their posture of eating, is exactly Eastern, or lying upon the ground. But this
is no part of their Religion, but a conformity to the mode of their Residence.
Upon the day of the Passover, they compose themselves to a stately Gesture of
body, and an imperious Carriage, only to signify thereby their deliverance
from Egyptian Bondage. And the women which at other times sit hanging their
heads, at this Feast look loftily, expressing thereby Alacrity and Triumph.

In eating the Paschal Lamb, the Jews of all Countries use the same Ritual.
Four Dishes make up their Bill of Fare; which are these: The first Dish
contains three Paschal Cakes; the uppermost whereof represents the High Priest;
the middle, the Levite; and the lowermost, the Common Hebrews. The second Dish,
is a Leg of Lamb or Kid roasted, together with an Hen-egg: The mystery of which
last morsel, I could never meet with any Jew was able to reveal. The third
Dish, is a deal of thick Stuff much like the Moors Cuscussow; but of much
better ingredients: For the Moors make theirs of mere water and flour, or
crum'd bread; but the Jews put several spices in theirs: and the better to make
it represent the color of the bricks they made in Egypt, they tincture it with
Saffron. The fourth Dish, is a green Salad attended with Vinegre, in which they
dipping the Salad, call to mind the sower herbs wherewith their Fathers were
commanded to eat the Passover. At this Feast every Jew is to drink Wine, but
none to exceed four glasses, and none to refuse so many. Before they lie down
to eat, the Chief of the Family consecrates the Viands. And when the Cakes are
broken, and every one has eaten a piece, and drank a cup of Wine, the whole
Family sing an Hymn: In which they remember the bread of Sorrow eaten by their
Fathers in Egypt; concluding with their hopes of a speedy Restoration unto
Canaan.

At the breaking of the second Cake, the Master of the house puts a piece
thereof in his Napkin, in memory of their Ancestors wrapping up their Dough in
haste before it was leavened, when they posted out of Egypt. And then they
drink a second glass of Wine, and sing an Hymn; wherein they commemorate their
deliverance. And having past the afternoon and part of the night in liberal
refreshment; they eat the third Cake, and drink a glass of Wine: Then the
Father of the Family says Grace, and with the fourth cup of Wine in his hand,
repeats the 6 verse of the 79 Psalm, and the last verse of Lamentations the 3.
and utters most direful Execrations against all that are not of their Religion.
And immediately upon this, they go to sleep. On the night of the Passover they
think themselves so safe from danger, that they let the doors stand open, which
at other times are bolted and locked with all imaginable security. But some
tell us, that they leave their doors open upon the night of the Passover, that
there may be nothing to hinder the entrance of Elias, whose coming on that
night is expected.

As for the rationale of the four Cups of Wine, the number of the Cakes, time
of Execration, and other mysterious Rites of this Festival, it is to be learned
out of their Masters, whither the Curious are remitted. All that I have here to
take notice of, is their Custom of showing the Paschal Cakes to their Children,
and instructing them in the Institution and Ceremonies of the Passover: Wherein
they pretend to be very faithful observers of Exodus 12.26, 27. As for the other
days of this Feast, there is little to be observed concerning them, except
that thereon the Jews eat better, and go finer than at other times.

CHAP. XIX.
Of their Pentecost, or Feast of weeks.

THe meaning and institution of this Festival may partly be learned from its
name. For Pentecost denotes the time of its observation, which was the fiftieth
day, reckoning from the second of the Passover. It was also called the Feast of
Harvest, and of First Fruits; because the Jews then began their Harvest, and
offered the first Fruits of the Earth, Exodus 23.16. And seeing they cannot keep
this Feast according to its first Institution, they spend the time allotted
thereunto in praying for their Restoration, that God would hasten their return
to Canaan, and the rebuilding of the Temple: For which they use this form.

Let it be thy good pleasure, O Lord our God, and the God of our Fathers, that
the house of thy Sanctuary may speedily be rebuilt in our days: and give us
our portion in thy Law.

And indeed, this Feast may well bear the Title of the Feast of Harvest,
because it contained the weeks usual for that season: which were bounded with
two remarkable days, whereof the one began, and the other ended the Harvest.
The former was called the second of the Passover, and the later the Pentecost.
And from this second day of the Passover, they number their Sabbaths, which
Custom explains the (...), etc. Sabbatum, used in the Gospel.

At this Festival, the present Ceremonies are but few: only they carry the Law
twice in Procession, and read out of it such portions as concern the Oblations
which were of old accustomed to be offered. And these parcels of the Law are
after a most solemn manner read by five select Jews. Their entertainments
likewise are at this time very plain and frugal; using little flesh-diet,
though they are bound to use some, that they may not contradict their own rule:
A Feast without flesh, is without joy. But still white meats, and confection of
milks, are their prime Delicacies. And this sort of Viand is at this time made
use, of, out of no less mystery, than that by its color and dulcour, they
might be remembered of the purity and delightfulness of the Law. To which they
allude the 10 verse of the 19 Psalm.

They have a Custom at this Feast to strew the Synagogues, their dwelling
Houses, and the Streets (if they have leave) with Greens, and to wear some upon
their heads; out of no deeper mystery, than to commemorate that pleasant
Verdure which was upon Mount Sinai when the Law was there given unto their
great Master Moses. A Custom they have likewise, to bake a Cake of seven folds,
to signify (say they) the seven Heavens, into which God ascended when he went
up from the Mount.

At the beginning of this Feast, the Jews with great Devotion make this Prayer.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, the King of the World, who have sanctified
us with thy Precepts, and have enabled us rightly to number the days, as thou
have commanded us, this being the first day. Thus they proceed to number until
the whole fifty days be expired, every day using the same Benediction.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Feast of Tabernacles.

THis is the third Capital Feast of Divine appointment among the Jews, which
those of Barbary keep at present as their Fathers did anciently, in Booths,
which being made of green Canes, it is now generally known among them by the
Spanish name of Fiesta de las (writing as it is pronounced) Caunias, or the
Feast of Reeds. And the end of this Feast is to preserve the memory of their
Ancestors long Pilgrimage in the Wilderness; and it lasts eight days. The
Institution hereof is to be met with, Deuteronomy. 16. and Exodus 23, and 34. Now, as
of old, the chief Solemnity and observation of this Festival is confined to the
first and second day thereof.

In that Liturgy of the Jews (which I have so often named) there is no proper
Office for this Feast; so that thereon they do no more but go to the Synagogue,
and there solemnize the Usual Service, and thence hasten home to their Booths,
Bowers, Tents, or Tabernacles; which they find furnished as richly as their
Estate and Fortunes will make them. During the whole eight days of this
Festival, they live in their Booths, and adorn them with the Furniture of their
houses; and constantly lodge therein, unless it fall out that the rains (which
in Barbary often begin in September, the time of this Feast) force them into
more comfortable lodgings.

Paulus Fagius (on Levit. 23.) reports out of the Rabbis, that every man was
bound every morning to bring a burden of Cittern, Palm, Myrtle or
Willow-boughs, toward the making of these Booths. And this burden was called
Hosanna. And the cutting down of the Boughs, and strowing them in the way, and
crying Hosanna to Christ as he rode to Jerusalem, is thought to have been in
allusion to this Custom. And the Jews in Barbary are wont at this Festival, to
take any sort of boughs in their hands, and to shake them toward the four
Cardinal Points of Heaven; beginning at the East. And by this action they
foretell and threaten destruction to all the ends of the Earth that oppose them.
With these Boughs also they make a great noise, in allusion to the 12 verse of
the 69 Psalm, and also to terrify the Devil, and triumph over sin. At the
shaking of these Boughs, they use these words: Blessed art thou, O Lord our
God, King of the World, who have sanctified us with thy Precepts, and commanded
us to carry a bundle of Palm.

At this time also, the Law is brought to the Reading-place, about which they
walk with great state; and nothing but threatening and victory appear in their
looks. This they do seven times, in memory of their Fathers compassing the
walls of Hiericho. But others say, That this compassing of the Reading-place
seven times, is in prediction of the certain ruin of their Enemies. And this
notice of the Ceremony, is very agreeable to the Execratory which is now used
by them: Wherein they profoundly curse the Christians; desiring that God would
smite them as he did the Firstborn of Egypt. And though this Direful Prayer is
not found in that Liturgy printed at Venice, (as I abovementioned) yet I am
assured by a good Author, that it is extant in the Machsor of the Cracovian
Impression.

Upon the last day of this Festival, the last Section of the Law is constantly
read, and the first Section begun. For they begin and end the Lesson of the Law
on the same day, to declare their joy therein. This last day of the Feast of
Tents, is called the Great day of the Feast, S. John 7.37. where Tremelius
observes, that on the last of Tabernacles, the ancient Jews used to incompass
the Altar (as the modern Jews now the Reading-place) with Palms in their hands,
crying Hosanna, that is, Preserve us we beseech thee: Whence it was called
Hasanna Rabba, or the Great Hosanna, or the Chief of the Feast: And that on the
same day they drew water from the Well of Shiloah at the foot of Mount Sion,
and brought it to the Temple, where the Priests mingled it with the best Wine,
and poured it on the Altar: and that the people sang these words of Esaias; With
joy shall they draw water out of the Wells of Salvation. To which our Savior
is thought to have alluded, in that speech which on this day he made use of, S.
John 7.38. Every one that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow living
waters.

When they have built their Tabernacles, they may not use them till the Father
of the Family has consecrated both them and all the Utensils of the Feast:
wherein he gives God thanks that he has chosen and sanctified the Jews above
all other Nations, and that to them only belongs the habitation in Tents. At
the expiration of the Feast, when they come out of their Tabernacles, the Chief
of the Family says these words: God grant that the following year we may dwell
in the Tent of the Leviathan. The mystery of which Prayer depends upon the
Opinion that the Jews have of eating with their Messiah of the great Fish
called a Leviathan; which they imagine to be of a Poetical Magnitude, and
preserved on purpose for that great Entertainment to which they shall all be
invited by Messiah, at his coming. And the Prayer abovenamed, has respect to
this Opinion, and designs no more than their desires that their King may have
a speedy advent.

And having now taken this short view of the present Rites wherewith the Jews
celebrate their three Cardinal Feasts, their Minor Festivals come next to be
considered. Among which, their Purim or Feast of Lots merits the first
remembrance: For to it is allotted a proper Office, which honor is not granted
to any of the rest.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Jews Purim, or Feast of Lots.

THe word Purim is Persick, and signifies Lots; and the Feast bears this name
from the occasion of its Institution, which without the trouble of
transcribing, is to be seen at large in the Book of Esther. The Mischiefs
plotted against the Jews, falling upon their Enemies, and those being killed by
them who designed their destruction; and all this happening upon the 13 of the
Month Adar, answering to our February, and ending upon the 14 of the same
Month: in memory of their own deliverance, and the destruction of their
Enemies, the Jews keep those two days Festival, whereon they both happened.

In the Celebration of this Feast, they at present use these Ceremonies: First
they light up great store of Lamps, that thereby they may testify their joy;
and read over the Book of Esther: At which, both the women and children are
bound to be present. Who at the naming of Haman, make an hideous noise, beating
with their hands, and stamping with their feet: and at the same time pronounce
these words; Let his name be blotted out: Let the name of the ungodly come to
naught: Cursed be Haman; blessed be Mordachee: Cursed be Zeresch, but blessed
be Esther: Cursed be all Idolaters, and blessed be all Israelites. Which
Maledictions are now applied to the Christians. And when they come to that
passage concerning the death of Haman's Sons, they huddle it over without pause
or distinction; intimating that they were all killed in a moment, and that they
hate to be long mentioning them.

When they come out of the Synagogue, they fall to eating and drinking; and are
therein much more liberal at this, than any other time. And they have a Rule,
that at the Feast of Purim they should drink till they cannot distinguish
between, Cursed be Haman, and blessed be Mordachee. At this Feast, the Rich
supply the Poor with Wine and Viands; and for two days none undertake any
Servile work: The women especially are to keep Holy Day, in honor of her who
was the occasion of their Deliverance. At this Feast also they salute one
another with presents, and bestow large Alms upon the Needy, in compliance with
what their Great Patriot commanded, Esther 9 20, 21, 22. Where he established
the Institution of the Feast of Lots.

The Mattins of this Feast, begin with extolling Gods mercy and power in their
Deliverance: After which follow the Proper Lessons out of Esther. When those
are finished, the Chasan leaves the Pulpit, and says part of the Daily
Service. Their Vespers they begin with this Psalm: My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? etc. and then again a Lesson is read out of Esther; and after
that, the ordinary Evening-Service: Then follow four Benedictions, and all is
concluded with select Psalms.

Purim is the last of their Anniversary Festivals: for happening in Adar, there
is none between it and Easter; which always falls in Nisan, the Month that
began the Year when the Hebrews came out of Egypt, and which still keeps that
place in the Computation of their Greater Feasts. Besides their Purim, and the
three Capital Feasts which we have already considered, the Jews have other
Minor Festivals, as that of Reconciliation, Dedication, Church Officers, New
year, and Lunar Mutations; of which take this short account in their Order.

And beginning with their Feast of Reconcilement or Expiation, we find the
ground thereof in Lev. 16. and an express Statute for its Celebration, v. 29.
In the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your
souls, and do no work at all, whether he be one of your own Country, or a
stranger ihat sojourneth among you: v. 30. For on that day shall the Priest
make an Atonement for you to cleanse you, that you may be clean from all your
sins before the Lord.

In obedience unto which Law, the Jews upon the 10 of Tizri repair to their
Synagogues, and in places of open Toleration, carry waxlights in their hands,
which when they have lighted, they begin in a very dismal note to lament their
sins, and continue fasting and praying for ten days, which are called the
days of Contrition: for which their Liturgy has a proper Office.

Every morning, during this Feast of Expiation, they thrice repeat this
Confession.

O Lord, thy people, the house of Israel, they have sinned, they have done
wickedly, they have transgressed before thee; I beseech thee now, O Lord,
pardon the sins, iniquities, and transgressions, with which the people, the
house of Israel have sinned, done wickedly, and transgressed before thee, as it
is written in the Law of thy Servant Moses: That in that day he shall make an
Atonement for you, that he might cleanse you, and that you might be clean from
all your iniquities before the Lord.

This Confession, says P. Fagius, is of very great Antiquity, and was made by
the High Priest when he disburden'd the sins of the whole Congregation upon the
Head of the Scapegoat. Since the destruction of their City, the Jews have no
place for a proper Sacrifice; and therefore, instead thereof, when they come
from the Synagogue, every Father of a Family takes a Cock, (a white one if
possible) upon the 9th day of the Feast, and calling his Household about him,
repeats several Sentences of Scripture; among which, the principal are the 17
verse. of Psalm 107. Fools because of their transgression, and because of their
iniquities are afflicted. And 23 verse. of Job 13. How many are mine iniquities
and sins! Make me to know my transgression and my sin. After the repetition of
these Scriptures, he waves the Cock three times about his head, at each of
which he uses these or the like words: Let this Cock be a Commutation for me:
Let it be my substitute: Let it be an Expiation for me: Let the Bird die; but
let life and happiness be to me and to all Israel. Amen. Then he again swings
the Cock thrice about his head, once for himself, once for his Sons, and once
for the Strangers that are with him. Then he kills the Cock, and says, I have
deserved thus to die. The Woman takes a Hen, and does the like for those of her
Sex. In Barbary where the Houses are flat-roofed, they cast the Garbage
thereon, to be devoured by some ravenous Birds, in token that their sins are
removed as the Entrails they cast out. Now the reason why they choose a Cock for
the Expiatory, is drawn from the ambiguous word in the Talmud, which may
signify either Man or Cock. So that they repute the death of a Cock, as much
as that of a Man: and to this Domestic bird the 53 of Esaias, with many other
Passages of Holy Writ, are profanely and ridiculously applied. But however
they may at this Feast greatly extol* the Merits of the Cock, and imagine all
their sins to be atoned by his death: yet when themselves come to die, they
acknowledge no Commutation, but skin for skin according to this saying of one
of their Masters when he was a dying: Let my own death be the Expiation and
Satisfaction for all my sins.

When they have done with the Cock, they repair to the Sepulchers, where they
repeat, enlarge, and enforce their Prayers, and Confessions. They bestow the
value of their Cocks upon the Poor, to whom formerly they gave their Carcasses,
which they now keep to furnish out their own Tables. Besides that form of
public Confession which we mentioned before, they use private Confession one
to another: which they thus perform. About the middle of the Service they make
an interruption, and two by two step aside in the Synagogue and confess their
sins to each other. During the time of Confession, he that confesses turns his
face Northward, and with great seeming Contrition bows his body, beats his
breast, and readily submits his back to such stripes as his friend will inflict;
who yet never exceeds the number of 39. And the first having thus made
Confession, the second goes upon the same duty.

This Feast as it has the name of Expiation (because according to its first
Institution, the High Priest did then confess his own sins and the sins of the
people; and by certain Rites did expiate, and make atonement to God for them)
so is it likewise called the Feast of Reconciliation, because at this time they
endeavor a general Amnesty and Pardon. For they labor that no quarrel among
them remain unreconciled. He that seeks to be at peace with his Neighbor,
though he be refused, is looked upon as innocent. They hold this Reconciliation
so necessary, that if the offended die without it, the offender must go to his
Gr^^e, and in the presence and hearing of ten Witnesses, confess his trespass.

Upon the Even of the 9th of this Feast, they repair to the Synagogue, where
they trim and increase the number of their Lamps. The women do the like at
home. If the Lamps burn clear, it is a good sign that their sins are pardoned,
and that they shall live cheerful and happy. But if the Lamps burn dim, it is a
sad abodement their trespasses are not expiated. Whereupon some of them renew
their penances, and use several abstinences, and remain restless till the Omen
alter. Some are reported at this time to bribe the Devil that he may not accuse
them; and some again are so confident of their Expiation, that they bid the
Devil do his worst.

That the Expiation and Reconcilement might be extended unto all, upon the Eve
of the 9th of this Feast, they absolve all Offenders, restore the
Excommunicate, and admit to the Prayers and Communion of the Synagogue, even
the stubborn and refractary. At last the Chasan blesses the people, stretching
out his hands toward them: which hands the people dare not steadfastly look upon
while they are elevate, because they suppose them for that time to be full of
the Holy Ghost. After the Expiation is thus ended, they continue a space
fasting at the Synagogue, and then return home to feast: and to testify their
mutual Peace and Reconcilement.

Their next Feast is that of Dedication, whose Institution we meet with in 1
Maccab. 4.59. Moreover Judas and his brethren, etc. And this our Savior
honored with his presence, S. John 10.22. not to countenance the abuses, but
to own its appointment, and to approve the Consecration and Dedication of times
and places to Gods service. This Feast in the N. T. is called (...) or
Renovations, or a Feast wherein something is renewed, and is in memory of
second Dedications. It continues 8 days, during which time the Synagogues are
full of Candles; which may be the reason that the Spanish Jews call it Fiesta
de las Candelas; and some call it the Feast of Oil: and both give this reason
of the name.

In the Dedication of the Temple, and Restoration of the Divine Worship, there
wanted Oil for the Holy Lamps; whereupon Judas Maccabaeus diligently seeking
every corner of the Temple for Oil, at length found a Jar full, which was
sealed with the Highpriests Seal, and had never fallen into the desecrating
hands of the Enemy. But the Oil was of so small a quantity, that it was but
enough for one night. Whereupon, he and the people became very sorrowful, not
being able to procure Oil for the present necessity. For the place where it was
to be bought, stood three days journey from Jerusalem. But God (says the
story) by a bountiful Miracle made the small Jar of Oil to last the whole eight
days of the Feast. In memory of which miraculous supply, some, as I said, have
called it the Feast of Candles, and others, the Feast of Oil. They spend the
eight days in junketing and Games; little of Religion appearing through the
whole Solemnity.

They have another Feast in remembrance of giving the Law, at which time they
sell those Ecclesiastic Offices we spoke of before: and which always falls out
upon the same day that the last Section of the Law is finished, and the first
begun. And they begin the Law the same day they end it, that the Devil may not
tell God, that Israel is weary of his Law. On this Feast all the Copies of Law
are taken out of the Ark, and in very solemn Procession is carried through the
Synagogue with all manner of Exultation and rejoicing. And after this, they
make the best provision they can possible, which they call the Supper upon the
finishing the Law. And it is founded upon the Act of Solomon, who coming to
Jerusalem, and there offering Burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings before the
Ark of the Covenant of the Law, made a Feast to all his Servants, 1 Kings 3.15.

The next Feast, is that of the New year, which is kept in Tizri; for that is
the first Month according to their Secular, though but the seventh according to
their Ecclesiastical Computation. On the day of this Festival, they repair to
the Synagogue; and the Usual Service being ended, with a short Prayer they
consecrate the Feast, and drink, if they can possible procure it, some Mustum,
because it is Wine of a good abodement of an happy Year, which they then wish
one to another.

The Younger sort do now receive the Chief Priests Benediction, which he gives
them by laying his hands upon their heads, and praying they may have a Good
Year. In some places Rams horns are sounded at this Feast, in memory (think
some) of the Ram which was sacrificed in stead of Isaac; some, in memory of the
giving of the Law with sound of Cornets; and some, to mind them of the day of
Judgment, to which they shall be summoned by the sound of Trumpets. Now the
deliverance of Isaac, and the giving of the Law did, and the last Judgment
(say they) shall happen upon the first day of Tizri, answering to our September.

The Jews have had a Custom on this day to run into the Rivers, and there to
shake off their Sins, that according to Micah 7.19. they may be carried into
the depths of the Sea. If at this Lustration they have the good Fortune to see
a Fish, they shake themselves lustily on purpose to load it with their Sins,
that it may swim away with them, and be as the Scapegoat of old, which carried
the peoples Sins into the Desert. Some among them would have this repairing to
the running-Water, to be in memory of Abraham's being led by an Evil Spirit
into a River, (when he went to Sacrifice his Son) where being in great danger
of Drowning, he prayed unto God, and the River upon the sudden became dry Land.
But he that shall converse with the Jews, shall be furnished with plenty of
Stories of this nature; and if upon every occasion I should have set down the
Miracles wherewith their most ridiculous and improbable Rites are attested, I
might have made this Discourse Voluminous to no purpose.

Their last Feast I shall take notice of, is that of their New Mons, which are
a sort of Half Holy Days; the Morning, as on other days, being spent in the
Synagogues, and the Afternoon in Good Company. At the first sight of the
New Mood, they have a Benediction, wherein they bless God, that with the breath
of his Mouth he has created the Heavens and all the Host thereof, and
appointed them Laws which they observe: That he renews the Moon, and makes it
assist the pregnant Hebrews. And then they leap as 'twere to catch her, and
wish their Enemies may come no nearer them, than they to the Moon. Then they
extol her good qualities; for which they have but little reason, seeing that
they are told how in the beginning God deprived the Moon of Light for Murmuring
against Him; to expiate which Crime of the Moon, the Jews were appointed to
keep this Feast.

At the Feast of Tabernacles, they Divine from the rays of the Moon, of the
accidents of the whole Year. If the Shadows of their Bodies appear defective,
they accordingly foretell their own or Friends Deaths. As if a man see his
Shadow without a Head, then he is to fall into danger of Death, or die, the
following year. If it wants a Finger, he shall loose a good Friend. If the
Right hand, a Son: If the Left, a Daughter. If no Shadow at all appear, then
the man's death is unavoidable.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Jewish Fasts.

THe Jewish Fasts, except that upon the Expiation, are esteemed to be all of
Humane Institution. Their first Fast, is in memory of Nebuchadnezzar's Siege of
Jerusalem, which happened upon the tenth of Tebeth, answering to our December;
for which their Liturgy has a small Office.

Their second, is in memory of Moses's breaking the two Tables of the Law; for
the loss of their daily Sacrifice; for setting Idolatry in the Temple; for the
second Siege of the City, and breaking down the Walls thereof. And this
constantly falls upon the 17th of Thamuz, corresponding to our June, and lasts
till the ninth of Ab. All the days of this Fast are accounted ominous and
unlucky; so that thereon they avoid all business of moment, and if possible to
begin Journeys, or attempt ought that is considerable: And so careful are they
hereon to be idle, that Schoolboys are not thereon to be Corrected. Upon the
fifth of Ab, or July, they sit on the Ground, read Jeremiah's Lamentations,
bewail the Dead, and the loss of Jerusalem; and for ten days live so
severely, that they abstain from every thing wherein is supposed to be delight.

Their third Fast is for the death of Gedaliah, whom we read was Treacherously
Murdered, Jer. 41.2. and it falls out in Tizri, or September. Besides these
Fasts which are of public Institution, they have several that are private, as
those of Monday and Thursday: one for the death of Miriam and Eli; and another
for the turning of the Bible out of holy Hebrew into profane Greek, by the
Seventy Translators. But these Fasts being the private Exercises but of some
Jews, their Rites fall under no certain annotation.

The general Rule in all their Fasting, is to abstain from all manner of Meat
and Drink till the Stars appear: and if the Jews were Orthodox in the
circumstances of this Afflictive, no people would therein exceed them. But in
this, as all other things, they are palpably Carnal, relying upon the very
doing of the work, and esteeming a mere Corporal abstinence highly Meritorious.
Besides, there are not a few Miracles ascribed to the bare act of Fasting.

The Prayer used upon Fasting-daies; translated out of the Jews Liturgy.
HEar our voice, O Lord our God, and have Compassion upon us; and with Mercy
hear our Prayers: and impart thy pity, and subdue us to thy Holiness. Deliver
us from death and the sword, and hunger and captivity, from the prey and an
evil desire; and bad infirmities, and hard chances. Pronounce a good sentence
upon me and all the males of my house: And let thy Compassions return with thy
Conditions; and O Lord our God, deal with us in mercy and favor, and enter
with us before the Rule of Justice, and harken unto our Prayer, our
Supplication and Cry: for thou hear the Prayer of every mouth.

Answer me O my Father, answer me in this day of Fasting and Affliction.
Because I am in a great strait by reason I have offended, and rebelled against
thee since the day that I was upon the Earth until this hour. I blush and am
ashamed of my Rebellion, I repent me of my sins and transgressions.
Notwithstanding I have put thy Mercies before mine eyes, with which thou art
wont to keep off thy fury, and to be appeased with thy Creatures: Thou art good
to pardon* and have great pity upon all that call upon thee. For thy manifold
Mercies now answer me, and let a little of my Fat and Blood be mingled with my
fasting, and be received of thee, as the fat put upon the top of thy Altar to
pardon every one that has sinned, and that has striven and rebelled against
thee. I beseech thee for the sake of thy Power, Sovereignty and Knowledge, bear
good will unto me for thy Great Mercies, and look not upon my wickedness, nor
stop thine ears at my prayers; be nigh unto my calling, and to the calling of
the men of my house. It is said, Before we cry unto thee, thou will answer;
before we speak, thou will hear: It shall be that before they cry, I will
answer; and before they speak, I will hear. That thou, O Lord, wilt deliver,
and answer, and be appeased in the hour of adversity, and hear the Petition of
every mouth. Blessed be thou Adonai: Lord hear our Prayer.

The Prayer used by the Jews after they have done fasting; translated out of
their Liturgy.
O Lord of the Worlds, I have afflicted my self this day with fasting before
thee. I have made known and manifest before the Seat of thy Honor, that in the
time that the house of thy Sanctuary stood, the man that sinned brought before
thee an Offering, and offered nothing but the fat and blood, and was forgiven.
And at present we have neither Sanctuary (that is, Temple) nor Altar for our
many sins, nor Priest to pardon.

Let it be thy will, Lord our God, and the God of our Fathers, that the little
of my fat and blood which is this day spent before thee, may be reckoned with
my fast, and accepted before the Seat of thy Honor, even as if I had done it
upon the sides of thy Altar; and receive me of thy great mercies.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Jewish Excommunication.

THe Mahumedans (as I have observed in another Discourse) are not acquainted
with Church Censures; the contriver of that Religion having left all sorts of
Delinquents to the Civil Sword. And though for greater Decorum and Solemnity,
the Grand Segnor keeps his Musti, whom he makes his Pope, and pretended Oracle
in Religion; yet he has no power to chastize any by Spiritual Censures, be
their Enormities never so heinous. And upon this account the Jews upbraid
Mahumedism with great deficiency, because it has no power to terrify Evil
doers, to preserve the broken from the whole, and to prevent and divert Gods
Judgments; to bring Offenders to amendment, and to maintain the credit and
power of their Religion. To all which ends the Jews manage and hold
Excommunication necessary. Concerning which, this ensuing Chapter shall give
the Reader a short account of the causes of Excommunication, its kinds and
form.

Some have thought that the Jews of old used Excommunications only in case of
Pollutions: of which they held chiefly these three sorts, viz. by Leprosy,
touching of the Dead, and an Issue. And that to these three sorts of
Pollutions, were adapted as many kinds of Excommunication, namely, the Niddui,
Herem, and Shammatha.

But besides these three causes of Excommunication among the Primitive Jews,
the Modern assign twenty four more; for all, or any of which, they at present
Excommunicate, that is, forbid those of their Religion the free enjoyment of
all Civil and Religious Society.

The causes of Excommunication among the Jews, are chiefly these.

1. He that does Scandalize a Master, though he be dead. 2. He that does revile
a public Minister of Justice. 3. He that calls a Freeman, a Slave or
Servant. 4. He that does not appear at the Consistory upon the day prefixed. 5.
He that does undervalue a single Precept, or one head of Doctrine, which is
contained in the Prescripts of the Scribes, or the Law. 6. He that does not
what he is appointed, stands Excommunicated till he does it. 7. He that keeps
in his House what may do mischief to another, as a biting Dog, or broken
Scales, is Excommunicated until the fault be corrected: that is, till the Dog
be Hanged, and the Scales be mended. 8. He that sells his Land to a Gentile, is
Excommunicate, till the Damage be repaired that thereby shall accrue unto an
Israelite. 9. He that in the Courts of the Gentiles shall be a Witness against
an Hebrew, so that he shall be forced to pay Money contrary to the custom of
his Nation; shall be Excommunicate until he refund it. 10. The Priest that
Sacrificing does not give the Dues to the rest of the Priests, is to stand
Excommunicate until he does. 11. He that shall do any Work in the forenoon of
the day before the Passover. 12. He that shall carelessly, or with an Oath, or
in lofty and Hyperbolical terms pronounce the Name of God. 13. They that shall
cause the Vulgar to profane the Name of God. 14. He that shall cause the Vulgar
to eat holy things out of holy places. 15. He that does reckon the Years, and
prefix the Months out of the Holy Land. That is, shall otherwise observe the
Months and Years than of old their Fathers appointed them in the Holy Land. 16.
He that puts a Stumbling Block before the Blind, or causes him to slip.
17. He that hinders the Common people in keeping any Commandment. 18. The
Priest that suffers a torn Beast to be Sacrificed. 19. He that kills a
Beast for the Sacrifice, and does not first try his Knife before a Master,
Rabbi, or Wise man. 20. He that is morose and backward to Learn. 21. He that
keeps company with the Wife whom he has Divorced. 22. The Wise man that is
ill-reported, or of a bad fame. 23. He that does undeservedly Excommunicate
another. 24. He that profaneth the Festivals.
These were the old primarie Causes of Excommunication, most of which are now
in present use with the Jews. Those indeed relating to the Sacrifices, (because
they now have none) are quite out of use: As also that which respects their
selling of Land or House; for in Barbary they have none but what they hire.

The kinds, or rather the Degrees of Excommunication in ancient use with the
Jews, were the three abovenamed, whereof the Niddui is by some Christian
Authors reckoned the lowest sort; and by which they understand a Separation
from, or a casting out of the Synagogue; which usually lasted 30 days; but
might be of a shorter or longer continuance, as the Offended gave signs of
Repentance. During the time of this Excommunication, the party was not to come
within four Cubits either of a man or Woman, nor to dress or trim himself as at
other times: yet they say he was admitted to Instruction, to hear Divine
Service, to hire others, and to let out himself to work; on condition of
observing the four Cubits distance but now mentioned. But if the Consistory
pleased, upon the contumacie of the Excommunicate, they might retrench these
Privileges, and aggravate the Penance, even to the denial of his Son
Circumcision, and the Burial of his Dead. Also if himself died, he was denied
all usual Rites of Burial, and a great Stone laid upon his Grave, in token that
he deserved to have been Stoned to death.

The denouncing of this Excommunication was not always confined to the Court or
Consistory: (which at this day cannot consist of fewer than three Masters) for
it was in the power of any private person to Excommunicate those whom they
found guilty of the thirteenth cause of Excommunication; and he that was herein
negligent incurred the like penalty: But they were presently absolved, lest it
should become a Snare and an offense unto others. And to restrain them to
Sobriety herein, the Court had power to punish him, that did it rashly. From
these private Excommunications their Superiors, Rabbis, and chief Lawyers,
were Exempt: for these had a privilege to Excommunicate and Absolve
themselves. The form both of Extrajudicial and legal Excommunication, was one
and the same, which is this: N. Let him be Excommunicate. And the Excommunicate
upon Repentance, was absolved in this form: N. Thou have Absolution, or thy
offense is forgiven thee. But at the time of Absolution, the Court had power to
correct the Trespasser with Stripes.

The second kind of Excommunication was called Shammatha, the same with the
Maran-Atha think the most. And it sounds (says Mr. Seldom, according to the
opinion of some) The Lord comes. He would not have his Shammatha at all to
differ from Niddui; which opinion he grounds upon some sayings in the Talmudick
Commentaries. But J. Drusius intimates otherwise, when he says, the Jews were
wont to Excommunicate per maledictionem, that was their Cherem, or Anathema;
per Separationem, that was their Niddui; and by Maranatha, the same with
Shammatha; and by others of that kind. By this last intimation, I conceive,
may be meant the Anathema Maranatha. Their Shammatha was a total Exclusion from
the Church, a blotting them out of the Book of Life, and not permitting them
the least communion in things of public Religion. And by the word Shammatha,
they signify the coming of the Lord, to take Vengeance upon those who are thus
Excommunicate. And it was never pronounced upon the offender, till he became
desperately irreclaimable.

A third kind of Excommunication was the Cherem, which enforced the Niddui when
the offender within 30 days gave no signs of Amendment, nor sought to be
reconciled. A new form of Excommunication was now used, containing dreadful
Execrations, Imprecations and Cursings of it.

As to the Maranatha, an old Spanish Author tells us, it got the signification
of Anathema upon this occasion: The Jews glorying of their Messiah to come,
commonly used the word Maran* Our Lord: in opposition whereunto, the Christians
used to say Maran Atha; Our Lord or Messiah is come already. Whereupon no small
strife arose betwixt them. The Jews frequently out of contempt saying Maran,
and contumeliously called the Christians Maranites. On the contrary, the
Christians replied Maran Atha, affirming that their Lord was come already. And
hence it grew that the Spaniards call those Maranos, who being descended of
Jewish Parents, and being Christians, turn Apostates, and yet expect the coming
of Messiah.

But the Maranatha is certainly of far greater antiquity, than in this story it
can pretend to. For it was used in S. Paul's time, as 1 Cor. 16.22. does
clearly testify. Where an old English Translation (cited by Mr. Seldom) of an
hundred twenty and five years standing, renders Anathema Maranatha, Let him be
had in Execration to death: Meaning (perhaps) that the Excommunicate should die
under this severe Censure. For Anathema being added to Maranatha, by a general
agreement, was the highest degree of Excommunication. There were indeed two
sorts of Cherem in the Old Testament: the one a Consecration of things to Gods
Service, by separating them from Common and Ordinary use: Of which we read,
Lev. 27.28. And as in the case of Hierio^^, where pilfering or stealth of such
things as were devoted, was punishable by death. Jos. 7. The other sort of
Cherem, was a devoting of persons unto death. But the Cherem we now speak of,
was in our Saviors time a very fearful kind of Excommunication among the
Jews. In which, with Solemnity and Authority, and a heap of direful Execrations
and Cursings, a man was turned out of the Synagogue. And this sort of
Excommunication was so dreadful, that for fear of it, many principal Jews who
believed on Christ, durst not confess him, S. John 9.22. and 12.42. and 16.2.
Of the manifold use of this Cherem among the ancient Jews, Mr. Seldom has made
so plentiful a Collection, that the Reader may there best be satisfied, De jure
naturali and gentium, etc. lib. 4. c. 7, etc. That which upon this subject I
have here to take further notice of, is the Ancient Form of their General
Cherem or Anathema, as it denotes the severest Censure of the Jewish Church.
The Form I shall here insert, is taken out of that Ritual, which they call
Sepher Colbo, or Pandects; and which was used against all those Israelites who
wilfully and knowingly transgressed any chapter of the Law Sacred or Introduced.

The Form of Cherem or Anathema.
BY the Decree of Cities, and Command of the Holy, we Anathematize, Adjure,
Exterminate, Excommunicate, Curse and Execrate, God being willing, and his
Church, by the Book of this Law, by the 600 Precepts therein written, by the
Anathema with which Josua Anathematized Hiericho, by the Curse wherewith Elisha
cursed the young men, by the Curse wherewith Gehezi cursed his Boy, and by the
Excommunication with which Barach Excommunicated Meroz, and by the
Excommunication which Rab. Jehuda Son of Rabbi Jehezkiel used in this matter,
and by all the Anathemata, Imprecations, Curses, Excommunications and
Exterminations which have been made from the time of our Master Moses, and
since, by the name of Acetheriel, Jah, the Lord of Hosts* by the name of
Michael the Great Prince, by the name of Mittatron, whose name is as the name
of his Master; by the name of Sandalipon, who tieth the hands of his Lord; by
the name of forty two Letters; by his name who appeared to Moses in the Bush;
by the name with which Moses divided the Sea; by the name I am what I am; by
the Mystery of the name Tetragrammaton; by the Scripture that was written upon
the Tables; by the name of the Lord of Armies, the God of Israel sitting upon
the Cherubin; by the name of the Spears and Circles, and living Creatures,
Saints and ministering Angels; by the name of all the Angels which wait upon the
most High God: every Israelite, and every Israelitess, who willingly and
knowingly violates any of those which are now denounced to be observed, let him
be Cursed of the God of Israel who sits upon the Cherubin.

Let him be cursed by the bright and glorious name, which the High Priest in
the day of Expiations expresses with his mouth. Let him be cursed by Heaven
and Earth. Let him be cursed from God Almighty. Let him be cursed of Michael
that Great Prince. Let him be cursed of Mittatron, whose name is as the name of
his Master. Let him be cursed of Acetheriel, Jah, the Lord of Hosts. Cursed be
he of the Seraphin, and the Orbs, of the holy Animals and Angels, who wait
before the most High God of Israel in holiness and purity.

If he was born in the month Nisan, which the Angel Vriel, as the Prince of the
Classes under which it is, governs* Let him be cursed of him, and of all his
Order. And if he was born in the month Ijar, which the Angel Tzephaniel
governs, Let him be cursed of him and his whole Order. And if he was born in
the month Sivan, etc.

(The like imprecation is made in the same words by the Angel of this month,
and so forward by the Angel of every month.)

Let him be cursed of the seven Angels set over the seven Weeks, and of all
their Order, and helping Power. Let him be cursed of the four Angels which
govern the four Seasons of the Year, and of their Order and helping Power. Let
him be cursed of the seven Palaces. Let him be cursed of the Princes of the
Law; by the Name of the Crown, and the Name of the Seal. Let him be cursed of
the Great God, Strong and Bright. Let him receive confusion from his Embraces.
Let him fall with swift Ruin. Let the God, the God of Spirits, destroy him to
all Flesh. Let the God, the God of Spirits, put him under all Flesh. Let God,
the God of Spirits, lay him prostrate to all Flesh. Let God, the God of
Spirits, cut him off from all Flesh. Let the Wrath of the Lord and violent*
Whirlwinde fall upon the Head of the Wicked. Let the destroying Angels run upon
him. Let him be cursed in every thing he puts his Hand unto. Let his Soul
depart in terror. Let him die of the Quinsie. Let not his Breath come or go.
Let him be smitten with a Fever, Dryness, the Sword, Rottenness, the Jaundise.

Neither let him be delivered from them before Destruction. Let his Sword enter
his own heart, and let his Bows be broken. Let him be as the dust before the
wind, and let the Angel of the Lord drive him away. Let his ways be darknesses
and slipperiness, and let the Angel of the Lord persecute him. Let sudden
desolation come upon him, and his net which he has laid let it catch himself.
They shall drive him from light to darkness, and exterminate him from the
habitable World. Tribulation and anguish shall make him afraid, and his eyes
shall see his destruction, and he shall drink the fury of the Lord. He shall
cloth himself with cursing as with a garment. Let him eat the strength of his
skin. God shall scatter him for ever, and pull him out of his Tabernacle. The
Lord will not rest that he may be propitious to him, but the Wrath of the Lord,
and his Zeal shall smoke against him, and upon him shall rest all the
Maledictions written in the Book of this Law, and the Lord shall blot out his
name from under Heaven. Also the Lord shall separate him to mischief out of all
the tribes of Israel, according to all the Curses of the Covenant which are
written in the Book of this Law. But you who adhere to the Lord your God, are
all alive this day. He that blessed Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Moses and Aaron,
David and Solomon, and the Prophets of Israel, and those who were pious among
the Nations, let him bless all this Holy Congregation, with all Holy
Congregations, except the man only, who has violated this Anathema. God of
his mercy keep them, make them safe, and deliver them from all evil, misery,
and affliction; and prolong their days and years, and send his blessing and
happy success to every work of their hands, and avenge them quickly, with all
other Israelites. And so let it be his will and decree. Amen.

CHAP. XXIV.
Concerning the present Judicature among the Jews.

COncerning the Ecclesiastical and Civil Consistories among the present Jews,
little of moment is now observable. And though the Synedrion of old related to
Civil Matters, as the Synagogue to Ecclesiastical: Yet the affairs of Religion
and the World now do both fall under the cognizance of one and the same Court.
But that which is the subject of the present remark, is the manner of legal
proceeding in the case of Meum and Tuum; which is plainly and compendiously
thus: When any contest arises among them concerning Debts, Bargains,
Contracts, etc. a Juncto of Sabios, Chachams or Masters, are appointed to hear
and determine in the Cause. This Court of Chachams consists of 11, 9, 7, 5. and
can never be of fewer than three. To these the party promovent makes his
address, in a short and plain Allegation of the Case: which the Judges examine
by Witnesses; who must be persons well reported of, and very sober: For so much
is required by their 212 Precept. In case of want of Witnesses, the bare Oath
of the party producent is sufficient: if he be a man of known integrity and
good fame. If the Creditor have any thing under the Debtor's hand, he has the
privilege of attesting the truth thereof by his own Oath. But if he demands a
debt for which he can produce no Writing, the Debtor has leave to swear the
Negative. If the Witnesses whose names are at the Bill be dead, and there be
none to attest their Hands, the Bill is invalid, and cast out of Court. That
which much renowns their Judicial Procedures, is cheapness and expedition; the
whole matter being tried and determined in a few hours. Yet if either party
find himself agrieved, he has the liberty of appealing to another Court, and
may carry the Appeal as far as Jerusalem: beyond which, there lies none. But
though they may dislike, yet they dare not revile the Sentence of any Court.
For to speak evil of any Minister of Justice, is ipso facto Excommunication.
And he incurs the like punishment, who ventures to appeal to a second Court,
before he has obtained leave from the first: which lays so great a restraint
upon Appeals, that few now happen, unless in some such important Case, as
Marriage and Divorce.

It is very observable, that the Jews have made very cautious Provision to
conserve the Esteem and Reverence of their Masters. Insomuch that none in word
or carriage can offer them the least disrespect, but he is Excommunicate, and
his Testimony rendered invalid. And if within three days he make not his Peace
with the offended Rabbi, the Excommunication is aggravated, and pronounced
before witness in open Court by a Rabbi, who superaddes thereunto a Solemn
Malediction. If the Excommunicate fly to another Country, the Curse follows
him, and he is sent before to beg pardon and be absolved in the same place
where the Crime was committed; or in case of contumacie, the Execration is
aggravated. Sometimes the delinquent Jew frees himself from the whole Censure
by turning Renegate.

The Masters, of which the Court consists, are chosen upon their Reputation for
their Learnedness in the Law, and Integrity of their Manners: and for a clearer
testimony of the former, they sometime are tried by Disputation. But besides
Understanding and Good life, there is a competent Age required to make a
Master. Who upon Election, is invested with Authority in this form: Behold,
Hands are laid upon thee, and Power is given thee to exercise Authority in
things Criminal.

That which most tends to the Commendation of the Jewish Courts, are (as I
said) Brevity and Cheapness: For they use no Delatory Artifices, nor Covetous
Exactions; but in a very small time, and at a very easy rate, the Litigants
know their Doom.

CHAP. XXV.
The manner of the Jews Alms, and of their making provision for the Poor.

THose who have observed that the Jews have no Beggars, seem not well informed
of the manner of their Alms, and their way of providing for the Poor. Whom it is
true we may not reckon among Beggars, as that word usually implies a seeking
Relief from house to house. For though among the Jews in Barbary there is great
store of needy persons, yet they are supplied after a manner which much
conceals (as to men of other Religions) their Poverty. For the Wealthier take
care to provide for them, and very much magnify their Religion upon this very
score, that they live under its profession in a more mutual Charity of Alms
than either the Moore or Christian; both which (with great insulting) I have
heard them upbraiding with their common Beggars.

And it cannot be denied, but that the Jews manner of Relieving their Poor is
Regular and Commendable. For first they suffer them not to take Alms of any man
who is of a different Religion from their own: and this inspection of them and
their wants, is consigned to no meaner persons than their chief Masters, who
once or oftener every Year (as occasion requires) are very solemn in this
Inspection. In every Synagogue they have in store several Copies of the Law,
which they sell for great sums of Money: But the Buyers are not permitted to
carry these Copies out of the Synagogue, or any further to impropriate them to
their own use, than that (if any of them fall into Necessity) they may be sold
again to relieve them. And therefore the Name of the Buyer is upon a Label
annexed to the Copy of the Law, that they may know to whom it belongs, and for
whose use it may be sold, if any of the Buyer's Relations be reduced to Want.
Insomuch that the buying of one of these Copies of the Law, is a certain
provision against Poverty, if it shall happen. But that which is here chiefly
to be remarked, is their raising of Maintenance for the Poor with the prizes of
these Copies. And to make more ready Chapmen, the buying of them is accounted
very Honorable, and Meritorious, and of no small Interest to the Buyer's
Family.

Another way of raising Provisions for the Poor, are the Legacies and
Bequeathments of dying persons: For the Jews have a Rule, that none die safely,
who bequeath not some part of their Estates to the Corban of the Poor. Next
they have their Contributions; and out of all these together they raise
Portions, and make provisions for Orphans and indigent Females, and the
Necessitous in general. And to prevent all Sophistication and partiality
herein, the poorer Females are provided for by Lot; and without respect of
Circumstances, those on whom the Lot falls, are first placed in Marriage. They
moreover permit the Poor upon every Friday and Holy-day-eve to receive private
Alms, to honor (that is, to keep) the Sabbath and the Festival with. They have
also their Kibbuz, or Letters of Collection, by which the Indigent has liberty
to go from Synagogue to Synagogue, to receive the Benevolence of their
Countrymen. And these Kibbuz much resemble our Briefs. In them the Poverty,
Religion and Honesty of the Bearers are certified, who are first to produce
them to the Chief Master of the Synagogue; and he having given his approbation
thereof, appoints a day for the Collection, which is usually made at the door
of the Synagogue. By these Letters also the necessitous Father raises Portions
for his Daughters. When any poor Jew is upon a Journey, it is the custom for
him to repair for relief to those of his own Religion, who are oblidgd to treat
him civilly; but his company quickly becomes troublesome, according to the old
saying among them: The first day a Guest; the second a Burden; the third day a
Vagamond.

CHAP. XXVI.
Their Visitation of the Sick; Testaments: Burial of the Dead, etc.

WHen a Jew falling sick apprehends his Disease to be mortal, he sends for a
Sabio, or Master, and some of his more intimate Friends, with whose advice and
assistance he sets his house in order. The Rabbi first draws up an Envois of
his Estate: then he takes account of his Debts, and making first provision for
their payment out of the Estate, the rest is disposed of in Legacies and Alms.
The object of the later, are Orphans, Widows, Synagogues, and the Holy house;
for so they call the Temple, which they expect shall be rebuilt at the coming
of their Messiah. And therefore toward the structure thereof, every dying Jew
that is able, contributes something. For they have erected a Treasury to this
purpose; which is managed by the Masters, and carefully improved by them. The
rest of the Estate is divided among the Wives and Children: The Wives first
taking out their Dowries doubled. If the Children of the dying person be very
young, the Master is to be their Guardian; who with a signal care labors to
improve their Fortunes. The Alms likewise are deposite in the Rabbis hands,
who out of them disposes of some Females every year in Marriage.

When the sick man has set his house in order, and is under evident indications
of Death, He makes confession of his Faith, and in a short Oraison is
recommended to Mercy. And the breath is no sooner out of his Nostrils, but
they prepare for his Funeral, which is always within the natural day of his
Departure. And first the Corpse is washed in clean water; or if he be rich, in
water of Roses, Orange-flowers, or any thing that is Aromatic. While the Corpse
is thus making clean, they pray that God would cleanse the Soul from all the
defilements that it had contracted in the body. This ceremony of washing being
finished, they put the Corpse in a clean Shirt and Drawers, and then a Strip of
linen resembling the Zizith; and after all, they sow him in a very white
Sheet, and put him into a Coffin.

The relations of the Deceased, for seven days after the Interment, stir not
abroad; or if by some extraordinary occasion they are forced to go out of
doors, it is without Shoos; which is a token with them, that they have lost a
dear Friend. For the seven days that they stay within, the Neighbors come to
the house to pray with them; and their Mourning habit is either a black
Ganiphe, or the same clothes they wore when the party died.

The Corpse is born by four to the place of Burial, in this procession: In the
first rank march the Chachams or Priests, next to them the kindred of the
Deceased, after whom come those that are Invited to the Funeral; and all
singing in a sort of plain-song the 49th Psalm. And if it last not till they
come to the Grave, they begin it again. At the Grave, ten Rabbis, or so many
old Jews in their room, say over some certain Psalms, composed by the Rabbis
for that purpose. And when they are ended, the Corpse is laid in the Grave and
covered with Earth; and the Rabbis compassing the Grave seven times, say, From
the Earth thou came, and to the Earth thou art returned. After this is done,
they return from the Grave to the house of the Deceased, where one, who as
chief Mourner receives them, with his Jaws tied up with a linen Cloth, after
the same manner that they bind up the Dead. And by this the Mourner is said to
testify that he was ready to die with his Friend. And thus muffled the Mourner
goes for seven days; during which time the rest of his Friends come twice
every twenty four hours to pray with him. At the end of these seven days, the
Friends of the Deceased repair to his Grave, which they cover with a black
Cloth, and say this Prayer, Vide Syracides 22.23.

Judge of the Truth, who Judge truly, be Judge of the Truth; for all thy
Judgments are Justice and Truth.

And then the Kindred of the Dead wish one another good health and Comfort. And
the same Ceremony is repeated precisely that day twelvemonth; till which time
the Obsequies are incomplete.

If the Friends of the Deceased be devout, they often every Week repair to his
Grave, where they make great Lamentation and bitter Weeping over him; they pray
at the same time, That God would pardon his Sins, and receive him into the
Garden. Meaning the Garden out of which Adam was cast, when he became
disobedient.

In the Funeral-Rites of the Jews, the same order is observed for both Sexes:
only with this Decorum, that the Women meddle not with the Men, nor the Men
with the Women: but each Wash and Shroud those of their own Sex. They never
bury their Dead promiscuously with those of another Faith; but have purchased
distinct Burying-places where they reside, which they very much respect, and to
which they often resort, both in contemplation of their own Mortality, and to
lament and pray for those who are dead already.

It may not be unfit to observe, that though the Modern Ceremonies of Burial
are neither so numerous nor costly as those of old among the Jews; yet they do
not much vary from them: For the washing of the Body was in use at the time of
Tabitha's death; and the Chief Mourner, spoken of before, as also the Weekly
Lamenting of the Dead, refers to the Women hired to lament at Burials: And
which the Scripture calls Mourning-Women, Jerem. 9.17. the same with the
Praeficae among the Romans. They likewise agree in the places of Burial, which
are now as formerly without the Towns or Cities where they live, except that in
Fez they have a Burying-place within the City, adjoining to the Juderia, or the
part where they live; as was said in the entrance of this Discourse. Enquiring
after Inscriptions or Epitaphs, and though often in the Burying-place for that
end, I could see none, nor any other State about the Graves than Green Turf and
Boughs. But this remark respects the Jews in Barbary, whom I conceive to come
far short of those of other Countries, in this sort of Funeral Pomp. But we are
told that they were not without Inscriptions upon their Sepulchers, as Hic
jacet N. Memoria ejus sit in Benedictione. Though this I confess be now used,
rather as an honorable Commemoration, when any Author of worth being dead, is
cited by the Masters, than as a common Epitaph. But when they use Sepulchral
Inscriptions, they are usually a Prayer for the Dead, such as, Let his Soul be
received into the Garden of Eden. Or, Let his Soul be bound in the bundle of
Life with the rest of the Just.

The Confession of Sins made by the Sick upon his Deathbed.
I Acknowledge and confess before thee, O Lord my God, and the God of my
Fathers, the Mighty God of the Spirits of all flesh, that both my Health and
Death are in thy hands. Restore me I beseech thee to my former health; be
mindful of me, and hear my Prayers, as in the time of King Ezechias, when he
also was grievously sick: But if the time of my Visitation be come that I must
die, let my death be an Expiation for all my sins, iniquities, and
transgressions; whether I have committed them ignorantly, or knowingly, from
the day that I first drew in the light. Grant I beseech thee, that I may have
my Portion in Paradise, and the future World appointed for the Just. Make known
unto me the ways of Eternal Life; satisfy me with the joy of thy glorious
Countenance at thy right hand for ever. Blessed art thou, O Lord God, who
hear Prayers.

This Confession is usually made by the sick person in the presence of ten more
invited thither for that purpose.

After this Confession, follows the Absolution, which is pronounced by some
chief Rabbi; wherein the sick person is absolved from all the Execrations and
Curses which are fallen or may fall upon the sick and his Family. Here are also
read the 20, 38, and 91 Psalms: then follows this Prayer, uttered by the Rabbi.

Let God be merciful unto N. and restore him to life and former health, and let
his name be hereafter called B. Let him rejoice in this name, and let it be
confirmed in him. Let it be thy good pleasure, O God, that the change of his
name may help to abolish all hard and evil decrees, and to tear in pieces the
Sentence that is brought against him. If death be decreed upon the former name
N. it is not decreed upon the later name B. If evil be designed against N. it
is not so against the name B. Behold, at this hour he is as it were another
man, as a new Creature, as a newborn Babe; bring him to a good life, and
length of days, etc.

In dangerous Diseases, they change the Name of the sick, and impose a new one
(as the Prayer shows) on purpose thereby to move God to have compassion upon
the sick, on the account that he desires to become a New man.

Another Prayer used at the Grave.
BLessed be God, who has formed, created, fed, brought up, preserved, and does
kill us all in Justice and Judgment; who knows the number of you all, and will
restore you all to life in his good time. Blessed be God, who kills and makes
alive. Amen.

In some places, the Jews are said, upon the Departure of a Friend, first of
all to cast all the Water out of the house; and then presently to cover his
Face, without permitting any one to look upon him. They likewise bow down the
dead man's Thumb into the hollow of the Hand, and by that incurvation they
fancy to express the Holy Name of God; which is an Amulet against Satan. But
all the rest of the Fingers of the Dead are stretched out at length, to show
that they have utterly forsaken the things of the World, and hold nothing of
its Goods.

Returning from the Grave, they pluck up Grass and cast it behind their backs,
to signify their hope of the Resurrection of the Dead, Who shall flourish
again as the Grass, according to Es. 66.14. The Mourners use to eat Eggs, out
of no less Emblem, than that Death is voluble like an Egg, and to day takes
one, and another to morrow, and so will come round upon all. The Children
yearly Fast upon the day their Parents died, and for the eleven Mouths say the
Prayer for deliverance out of Purgatory. Where the Children out of a Reverend
esteem of their Father's Piety, suppose that he stays but eleven months, though
all the other Jews tarry twelve there. As we have said in our Chapter of
Purgatory.

They are very wary that none of the Earth taken out of the Grave remain uncast
upon the Corpse; for they imagine this were to upbraid the Dead, as if the Earth
should disdain to cover him. There are many other minute Ceremonies relating to
the Jewish Interment, omitted chiefly upon the account of their small
importance.

THE CONCLUSION:
Wherein is considered The present OBSTRUCTIONS OF THE JEWS CONVERSION.

HAving (through the Divine assistance) finished this Succinct Account of the
present State of the Jews, I deemed it would not be unwelcome to the Reader, by
way of Epilogue to recollect some of the visible Impediments of their
Conversion. Of which, some respect the Jewish Nation in general, and others
relate to the Jews of a particular Residence.

Among the fatal Impediments respecting the Jews Conversion in general, their
own ingrafted Perverseness, and obstinate adherence to the Doctrines of their
Forefathers, may be reckoned for the chief; and indeed, the root of all the
rest. As to the former, the Jews are Notorious therein above all other people;
though the latter be a thing common to the Hebrew with other Nations. For not
only Cotta in Cicero, but most men of any parts or Education, have thought
themselves under no small obligation to keep close to the Traditions of their
Fathers; although no rational Evidence could be produced for the matter of the
Tradition. Vnum mihi satis est Majores nostros ita Tradidisse (which was
Cotta's) is the ultimate Resolution of the Jews Religion. And not to speak of
the obstinacy of Education in this particular, we find even the renowned
Propagators of Christianity complaining of a Prioribus Credere, as the most
knotty and stubborn objection they met with. And when the Jews (such I mean as
are considerate and ingenious) do freely acknowledge the Religion of Christians
to be very conformable to the Law of Nature, which they account the Principal;
yet lest they should seem to think themselves Wiser than their Ancestors, and
so incur the imputation of being Proud, or upon the change of their Faith to be
branded for Inconstancy; they resolutely retain the Religion in which their
Forefathers lived and died, and thought themselves happy and secure. And this
is spoken not upon Trust, but Experience: For upon a fair occasion pressing a
Spanish Jew with the evident danger he was in, if after means of Conviction he
should obstinately die in his Judaism; he made no other Reply, but that he
desired to be in no better State, nor to be accounted wiser than the Sabies or
Wise men of his Nation. And that if he was Damned, so would Rabbi Ben Maimon,
Rabbi Solomon Jarchi (and so run over a large Catalogue of their Rabbis)
placing great consolation to have such good company in Perdition.

But beside all this, they esteem it so scandalous a thing for any man to
forsake his Native Religion, that even those who turn Jews are still under a
very jealous aspect, according to their own old Proverb: Beware of Proselytes
to the tenth Generation. Which is also the Genius of the Moors: for albeit that
with a seeming Triumph they receive a Renegado for a Musulman; yet they never
repose in him any considerable Trust, nor look upon him as a person of any
worth or Gallantry.

As to the (...), which some reckon among the Internal Obstacles of the Jews
Conversion, if thereby be meant their ignorance, either in their own Rites, or
in evading the Arguments brought against them; those that shall practice them
herein, will find they have arrived to no contemptible knowledge in both;
there being no Rite of their Religion whereof they have not been taught
(according to their Principles) a probable Rationale; nor any objection brought
by Christians against the present Judaism, for which they are not furnished
with an Evasion. For the Jewish Masters take an especial care, and use an
utmost diligence, to see the Youth be so profoundly instructed in the Elements
of their Religion, that it may be no easy task to efface the Characters of
their first Catechism, or to pull down the Fortress of Education. And above
all, it is in this point highly considerable, that the common sort of Jews are
bound to acquiesce in the Judgment of their Rabbis, to whom they make their
last appeal, when pressed with Arguments too difficult for their own Solution.
Of which I could produce a numerous Citation; but I shall content my self with
the single instance of one Jacob Israel Belgara, who from Hag. 2.7. being
clearly confuted that the time of Messias's Advent was already past, eluded the
whole Argument, by referring himself to the Sentiments of their Masters.

The next thing which may be reckoned among the grand impediments of the Jews
Conversion, are the Christians uncharitable Dissentions and Divisions, which
they suppose proceeds from a want of the Unity of Truth in the Foundation:
And which they can no way make agreeable to that mutual peace and affection
foretold to flourish among the Professors of the true Messiah, and to be the
signals of his Kingdom, Isaiah 11.6, 7, etc. This I always found a string
continually harp'd upon by the Jews; and one scoffingly told me, that if he
should turn Christian, he knew not what Sect to be of: reflecting upon the
manifold divisions that are woefully happened under the general denomination of
Christian. In the body, a wound is worse than corruption; the former being a
Solution of Continuity, the later but a disorder of some Humor. In Christians,
evil manners are wholly contradictions of the Purity of their Religion, but
Schism brings its Truth into question; and is of that wretched consequence,
that it keeps those out that are without, and drives those out that are within.
For our speaking with different tongues, will make the Atheist, as well as
Infidel, say that we are mad.

But were the scandal of our Divisions removed, yet the Naughtiness of our
lives would become a new hinderance of the Jews conversion; who are very
greatly scandalized with the open, and even professed, transgression of the
third Commandment, so apparent in those Blasphemies which hellish mouths dart
up against God, and those horrid Oaths which are become, with some, mere
Interjections of Speech, and with others, Phrases of Gallantry. And that those
sins which the Jews severely punish, should become the Christians Physic and
Recreations: and that we should live in so palpable a contradiction to our Vow
and Promise of a clear contrary Carriage. And it was this Licentiousness of
Conversation that made a lewd Jew (in Spain turned to Popery) magnify the
happiness of his change, because he had light on a Religion, wherein at once he
could enjoy Both his Beads and his Whore. Reflecting upon that old Spanish
Proverb, Las quentas en la Mano, y el Diablo en el Capillo: Good words, and
wicked works.

And if this obstacle were also taken away, and Christians would take care to
be as regular as their Religion does oblige them; yet there wants proper means
for the Jews Conversion, as being vouchsafed neither competent conversation,
nor Books for that purpose. As to the first, none I think will deny it highly
requisite in this affair, unless such as would make the Gospel (like
weapon-Salve) to work at a distance. Now we know that in our own Nation there
is no such competent familiarity or civil Society held with the Jews, as in any
degree of probability may in ordinary course be sufficient for their
Conversion. For since their Expulsion out of England by King Edward the First,
about the year 1290, the greatest conversation with them has been managed by
Tradesmen upon the account of Trafick, and secular purposes: as is evident at
this day. And we have been so far from endeavoring their conversion to
Christianity, that that which might greatly have encouraged it, is quite taken
away. I mean, the House of Converts erected by our Henry the Third, (which he
piously endowed for the maintenance of poor Jews converted to Christianity,
where every one during their lives was allowed two pence a day) and appointed
by Edward the Third for Records to be kept therein, now called the Rowles.

Nor has it fared any better with the Jews in other Nations than in our own:
for since from France they were banished by Philippus Pulcher, Anno 1307: From
Spain by Ferdinand, Anno 1492: From Portugal by Emanuel, Anno 1497: Out of the
Kingdom of Naples and Sicily by Charles the Fifth, Anno 1539. they have in
these Kingdoms been so far from any enjoyment of that Society requisite to make
them converts, that they dare not set a foot within their Borders without
running very great adventures: as is known to all, acquainted with the Regiment
of those Countries. It Is true, in the Jurisdiction of Avignon, (the Popes
State) the Jews are admitted: And they are very numerous in Rome, Venice,
Legorn, etc. (not to speak of their Toleration in Germany, Bohemia, Polonia,
Lituania, Russia,) yet they are so little invited to Christianity, that they
meet with no small motives to the contrary. For in the Papal Dominions no Jew
can be admitted to Baptism till he has renounced the World; that is, till he
confess all the Estate gotten in Judaism was ill gotten, and that he does and
ought to renounce it, and leave it to the Church. And it is but cold comfort to
a Jew, so notoriously devoted to the world, to take a final farewell of his
beloved Mammon, and to divest himself and Family of all maintenance, at his
initiation into Christianity; without any convenient provision for his future
subsistence, unless he will betake himself to a Cloister; a kind of life very
unpleasing to the Jews, as contrary to the design of Nature, which intended
man for Society, and each to be helpful to other in civil duties. Besides that
Monkery is a trade which they never find commended or enjoined by God; never
practiced or counseled by their renowned Ancestors, who received continual
instruction and inspiration from above; which none of their Patriarchs or
Prophets have given Example of; only in three or four thousand years, Elias and
some one or other have been found upon very extraordinary cause to have taken
also an extraordinary course of life, though of other nature, and to other
purpose, then the Votaries of the Roman Church. It Is true, the Pope has power
to dispense in this particular, and to grant the Jew Baptism without
confiscation of his Estate; yet this is so seldom and uncertain, that few Jews
are found so hardy as to try the Experiment.

In the next place, as to Books tending to further the Jews conversion, it must
be granted that there is no small impediment arising from this particular. For
notwithstanding that many learned Treatises have been compiled upon this Theme;
yet they have either been penned in Languages unknown to most of this ancient
people, or in a Method exceeding the generality of their capacities, or, no
means have been used to bring such Books to their perusal. And what is herein
not the least considerable, Tracts against Judaism, or rather for Christianity,
have been composed by Bookish and Retired persons, who undertook the
confutation of such Jewish Tenets, as the course of their Studies best enabled
them to encounter. And others have spent much oil and time in demolishing a
fortress which most of the Modern Jews never undertook to defend. An instance
whereof, I found in a learned Discourse concerning Christ's Resurrection, in
which the Author excellently confuting that Calumny of the Disciples stealing
away their Master while the Guard slept: The Jews, with whom I discoursed this
Article, professed a deep silence therein, and that they meddled no further with
our Messiah, than to bring him to the Cross; not being at all concerned for
what happened afterward. So that all the Arguments brought to vindicate Christ's
Resurrection from the Jews belying the Disciples in conveying away secretly the
Body of their Blessed Master, was answered by denying the supposition.

Several Volumes (as I have seen) are written both in Spanish and Portuguez
upon the same subject; but so far from any likelihood to confute the obstinacy
of the Jews, that there is a greater probability they may add to its
confirmation. For the Books (I speak of) are stuffed with such ridiculous and
irrational Miracles, that in reading of them the Jews take no small
contentment, as being so subservient to their purposes of speaking evil of the
Christian Faith, which they hope cannot long stand, while they imagine it is
supported by such frail and chimerical buttresses. And besides all this, the
Jews have ever been as diligent to detect, as the Friars to contrive their
fictitious Miracles. And what is herein truly deplorable, Christianity has the
hard fate to be weighed in these Scales, and all its Sacred Truths to be
rejected for a few Monkish trumperies. For I have heard some maligning Jews
urging the brainless conceits of the Spanish Friars (who of all others seem
herein the most Hypocondricaal) for the principles of Christianity; which they
are the more ready to believe, as finding it advantageous to their design; and
that the Books wherein they occur are of no surreptitious Edition, but Permissu
Superiorum, and allowed of by that Church, which calls her self the Catholic.

What I now speak of, respects the Obstacles of the conversion of those Jews
who converse with the Romanists, and live even in Rome it self: Where more
Monks turn Jews, than Jews Monks; as all Ages have observed. And indeed,
through all the Papal Countries there is but little probability to make the
Jews have any good will for Christianity, if we consider the manifold offenses
apparently arising from the whole Economy of their Public Worship and
Doctrine, of which I shall for brevity sake give instances only in the Vows
and Prayers made to Saints and Angels, which the Jews in all Ages have esteemed
a duty peculiar unto God. And they observe too, that more Devotions are made to
the Virgin, whom all Christians acknowledge to be but a Creature, than to
Christ, who by all Orthodox Christians is believed to be God. But that which of
all other yields greatest matter of Scandal to the Jews, is the worshipping of
Images, for which both the Hebrew and Mahumedan lay Idolatry to their charge;
from which naught is left to defend, them but an unintelligible distinction of
(...) and (...), and of a final and Instrumental intention in Worship. At which
the Jew has no small occasion to be Scandalized, when they consider that yet
the Sun never rose upon a Nation that was so blockish, as to make a Stock or a
Stone the Final Object of their Worship; but looked upon their Simulachra as
the representations of some absent Divinity, or things wherein the Divine Power
did sometimes inhabit, and by his virtue work Miracles, even as the Papists
opine the B. Lady in infinite places of Christendom, does in her Images. And
whatever apprehensions and distinctions these venturous Votaries of the Roman
Church may be furnished with, to save them from Idolatry, when they fall down
before their Images; yet seeing they use therein all the circumstances
appointed and fitting to wait upon the immediate Addresses which are made unto
God, the Jews can perceive nothing visibly fit to vindicate the Service from
being thought Idolatrous. For, as to the mental affection, so much spoken of,
it lies altogether hid to the Beholder, and no less perhaps to the blunt and
undistinguishing Wits of the Vulgar, who therein are concerned. It would be a
matter of no great difficulty to enlarge the instance to many particulars of
the Roman Doctrine, whereat the Jews (in no mean degree) are daily Scandalized,
as may be exemplified in their Transubstantiation, where the Jews are told
Messiah to be comprehended under the appearances of a Wafer; which is a thing
to them so egregiously offensive, that they spit at its mentioning. Those that
have met with the Roman Catechism, observe the second Commandment to be
wanting, and the tenth to be cloven into two, to keep up the Decalogue. Now all
these things, and many more, are of so much the greater Scandal and indignity,
as being believed by the Jews to be the Universal Tenets of Christians; and
that Christ's (pretended) Vicar does herein follow the Footsteps of his Master.

Discoursing once with an Italian Jew concerning the Conditions of Rome, (where
he had long dwelt) he began with great assurance to tell me, That at Rome great
wonders were to be seen, as, a Man that could make his God, make and unmake
Sins at his pleasure: and so run inveighing against the filthy and unhallowed
Conversations of the principal Roman Clergy; closing up his Discourse with a
deep protestation, That if he were a Christian, the vices and Doctrines of
Italy would strongly tempt him to disown that Name.

And what in the last place is not the least considerable, even at those
Sermons in Italy, to which the Jews are bound to resort, little or nothing is
to be heard directly tending to the subversion of those points, wherein they
place their strongest Sanctuary: But obiter, and by the by, the Preacher
Sallies out into a numerous invective against their obstinate infidelity,
without laying down such plain Arguments as may rationally move them to forsake
it. And if herein there were no fault, yet as long as the Jews (coming to the
Christian Sermons) shall see the Preacher begin his Discourse with an Ave
Maria, (which is a general custom with the Papists) and frequently to direct
his Speech and Prayer to the B. Virgin, and the little (Wooden) Crucifix which
stands on the Pulpit by him; to call that Image his Lord and Savior, to Kneel
down to it, to Embrace and Kiss it, to Weep over it, and after all perhaps to
cast it to the Ground, (to let the people see they meant not there to terminate
their Worship) the very sight hereof does as much induce the Jews to hate
Christianity, as any reason can be alleged to persuade them to love and
Embrace it.

These are the Terms, in which the Jews (with whom I have conversed) do stand,
who above all that has been said, derive the greatest obstruction of their
Conversion from their own obstinacy; being not more scandalized, than
stifneckt; nor less untractable within, than offended without: And as proud of
their opinions, as they are despised for them. Glorying in their Ancestors and
Founders; in Gods Temple, and Oracles, peculiar promises, and Prerogatives,
long continuance in Honor and Prosperity; and indefatigable in their
Expectation of being Triumphantly recollected, and Victoriously to Reign over
the Edomites, when the promise of their Messiah shall be performed, which has
(as they say) so long beyond the appointed time been protracted, by reason of
their own Unworthiness.

A SUMMARY DISCOURSE Concerning the Jewish TALMUD, MISNA and GEMARA.
HAving in the former part of the Antecedent Discourse observed, That there are
no Jews to be met with who adhere to the Old Bible without Talmud-Traditions; I
thought it would be disagreeable neither to the Reader, nor the Subject, to
give a succinct account of the Talmud, Misna, and Gemara, in order to
facilitate the meaning of the Traditions abovementioned.

And waving all Critical reserches into the word Talmud (which makes so great a
Noise in the World) it may suffice to observe, that by a sort of Metonymy, it
signifies the Book containing the main Doctrines of the Jews, which by way of
Eminence is called the Talmud or Doctrinal. So that the word Talmud may as well
be used for a System of Christian, as Jewish Doctrines, for any thing therein
to the contrary.

The two Talmuds (of which hereafter) are according to Mr. Seldom, the Pandects
of the Jews Sacred and Civil Laws; and they are generally received of the
present Hebrews for the Great Body of their Learning, and Standard by which the
whole Israelitick Nation is to regulate both their Conversation and Doctrine.
And there needs no other Testimony of their great esteem hereof, than the RR's
frequent using it in the proof and Confirmation of their Tenets. For it is very
observable, that the Talmud is oftener brought in Vindication of their
Religion, than Moses, the Prophets, and Holy Writings: Insomuch that they make
it, and not the Old Bible, the Touchstone of their Doctrine, and that into
which they resolve the Decision of all their Cases. Nor are they herein greatly
blameable, seeing they esteem the Talmud of equal Authority with the Canonical
Scriptures, and no more inferior thereunto, than a Law given by word of mouth
is to one in Writing. For the Jews hold there is a twofold Law, which they are
bound to observe: the one written, which is contained in the five Books of
Moses; the other Oral, which they call the Misna, or Traditional Law which God
gave to Moses at the same time he did the other; but did not commit it to
Writing, but left it to be preserved and propagated Orally.

Some of the Masters gifted with a wonderful Sagacity, with great assurance
maintain that Moses, during his abode in the Mount, could not discern the time
of Night from the Day, but by the delivery of these two Laws: That when God
gave the Written Law, he knew it was Day; and that it was Night when he gave
the Oral. And R. Eliesar (as a late Author writes) affirms that Moses read the
Scripture by Day, and the Misna by Night. But this will scarce sound
congruously, if it be considered that the Misna was not written, and therefore
could not be Read, till some thousand years after Moses received it in the
Mount.

And as to the reason why God would not suffer it to be written, it was the
profound Mysteriousness of its Nature (say the Masters) which to have
communicated by writing to the Vulgar People, would have been no better than to
give Holy things unto Dogs, and to cast Pearls before Swine.

Others are of opinion, that God foreseeing how the Nations would Transcribe
the Books of the Law, Prophets, and Holy Writings, and pervert them to
Heretical and Impious Doctrines; lest they should to the like to the Misna or
the Second Law (for so (...) signifies) he would not suffer it to be committed
to Letters.

And here it may be pardonable to take notice of two things; first, that by the
Holy Writings, which the Jews call Cetaphim, they understand the Books of
Daniel, Psalms, Proverbs, Job, Canticles, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes,
Ezra, Nehemiah, Chronicles; and that they were Compiled or Collected by Esdras,
and the Seniors of the Synagogue, after the Jews returned from Babylon. Next,
that the Jews were of old so cautious of preserving their Law secret to
themselves, that they would not suffer it to be Translated into any other
Language out of their own. Insomuch that in the days of Ptolemy when the
Penteteuch was put in Greek by the Jews of Alexandria, they say that as if God
had been therewith displeased, there happened three days of darkness over the
whole Earth. And to testify their own abhorrence of so execrable a fact, the
Jews appointed a solemn Fast to be kept upon the eighth of Tebeth, as the
immortal Joseph Scaliger has observed. But to return.

That Moses in the Mount did receive from God not only the Written Law, but
also a secret Explanation thereof, seems to have been the opinion of Origin (of
the third) and Hillary (of the fourth Age.) And this Explanation is supposed to
have been none other but the Misna, or the Oral and Second Law we now speak of,
which was preserved as the Cabala of the Creation, and of the things happening
before the Flood, by Tradition from mind to mind (to use Mirandula) without
Letters, by word of mouth. For Moses thus delivered it to Aaron; and he to his
Sons; they to Joshua; Joshua to the Elders; the Elders to the Prophets; the
Prophets to the Great Synagogue; and so it was drawn down by the Rabbis of
successive Ages, of whom the Famous Ramban has given an account.

And in this state the Misna continued till many years after the Nativity of
our Blessed Savior; even till Rabbi Jehuda (who for his Piety was called the
Saint, and for his singular love to his Nation, and knowledge in their Law, the
Prince) perceiving that this Oral Tradition grew difficult, and that thereby
the Misna was in no small hazard to be utterly lost or grievously corrupted, by
reason of the extreme dispersion of his Nation, collected all the Notes (taken
by the Jews to assist their Memories) which contained any thing of the Misna,
and digested them into one Volume, which he called the Sepher Misnaioth, or the
Book of Traditions. And this was no sooner compiled, than it gained such credit
with the Hebrews, as to be publicly taught in their Colleges, and to be made
the Catechism of their Youth; as in another Discourse I have observed. The time
when this Syntagm was finished by Rabbi Jehuda is not certain; but most
conjecture it was about an hundred and twenty years after the Destruction of
the Temple, and near upon the 190th year of the Crucifixion.

About an hundred and eighty years after that Rabbi Jehuda had thus composed
the Misna, one R. Jochanan (who for many years had been the Head of a College
in Palestine) added to the Misna of Jehuda, his Gemara; which together with the
Misna made up the Hierusalem-Talmud, or the Doctrinal of the Jews who dwelt in
the City and Judea. But this was looked upon as not sufficient for all the
Constitutions and Decisions of the Hebrews (in Captivity and Dispersion)
especially after they were passed from under the Roman to the Persick Empire.
And therefore one Rabbi Ashi, or Ase, composed a Second Gemara, about an
hundred years after the First; which being effected by him when he lived in
Babylon, and for the use of the Jews there, it with the Misna was called the
Babylonian Talmud. And notwithstanding that the Talmud of Jerusalem is
confessed by the Jews to have fewer Mysterious (that is Fabulous) Stories than
the Talmud of Babylon; yet this later has obtained public Honor and Belief
among them: and at this day is universally received as the Authentic Body of
their Law. In this Compilement the Misna is as the Text, and the Gemara as the
Comment; in which the different Opinions of the Ancient Masters are reported
and discussed, and a final and absolute Decision thereunto annexed.

And thus we have seen (in brief) the Original of the Talmud, which by way of
eminence is often styled the Law; and indifferently used for the Misna or the
Secundary Law, which contains the Traditions of Moses; and the Gemara,
containing the Disputations and Decisions that have been made upon those
Traditions; though properly speaking, these two are constituent parts of the
Talmud. In which many passages are inserted, which if taken literally, the Jews
confess, would look like the most idle and Romantic Tales that ever filled a
Legend. And therefore they assign them a secret and reserved interpretation,
which, say they, fall not under the comprehension of Vulgar and Ordinary
Capacities.

But after all this, it must be granted, that some Christian Writers understand
the Talmud to be nothing else but a System of the (...) or Traditions of the
Jewish Fathers; which if granted, can at most respect but one part thereof,
namely the Misna. It is true, that these (...) were highly valued by the
Pharisaical Jews, and as meanly looked upon by the Sadduces; who pleaded as
eagerly for their Non-observance, as the other did to the contrary. And the
fierce and impetuous contention which happened about these Traditions in the
School of Antigonus Sochaeus, gave name and birth to the Pharisees and
Sadduces, the first factious Sectaries notorious among the Jews. Josephus
speaks much of their Emulation and Strife; and how the Sadduces were abetted by
the Wealthy, and the Pharisees by the Multitude: And that in the end the later
so prevailed with the Populacie as to have the (...) to be taught for Doctrine,
and to be made an Authentic Institution of their Schools. Of which numerous
are said to have been erected purposely to advance the Pharisaical Discipline.

Yet it must here be remarked, that the teaching of these Traditions did not
totally exclude, though greatly diminish the instruction of the written Law.
For in every College of the University of Jerusalem, there were two Schools,
the one called the Bibliotheca, because therein they used Books, and taught the
Scriptural Law; the other was called the Misna, or Beth Talmud, or House of
Doctrine, by reason of the Traditions that therein were instilled. Both these
Schools flourished till they were laid desolate by Titus; whose desolation
occasioned (in great part) the writing of the Sepher Misnaioth by R. Juda, who
is said to have lived under the three Antonines; Pius, Marcus, and Commodus.

But what in this affair is not the least observable, there is no express
notice taken of the Talmud, by those Fathers who lived in the four first Ages
of Christianity; notwithstanding they spoke many things of the Jewish
Traditions. And Tertullian ex professo writing against the Jews, though he
speaks distinctly of the Primordial Law given to Adam, and of the Law of the
two Tables delivered to Moses, yet he makes not the least mention of the Misna,
or Oral Law. S. Austin (of the fifth Age) does expressly name this (...), or
Second Law, as containing certain Traditions of the Jews, which they wrote not,
but got by heart, and transfused them from one to another by word of mouth. But
the great darkness that befell the Jews Records at the beginning of
Christianity, might be one reason why the knowledge of the Talmud came so late
to the Christian world. And indeed, for almost two Ages after the Talmud was
finished, but little light or certainty is to be met with in the History of the
Jews. And as to our part of the world, it was not much acquainted with the
Doctrines and Records of the Hebrews, till they were expelled Babylon. At which
time a great part of them came into Europe, and especially settled in Spain;
where applying themselves unto Study, the Rabbis began to multiply, and grow
Learned; and to illustrate the Talmud with Commentaries, Expositions, and
Homilies: As is to be seen in the Writings of Zacuth, Abarbinel, Gautz, Ben
Nachman, etc. (all Spanish Jews) but especially R. Moses Ben Maimon (born at
Corduba, and a Student in Egypt, whence he was called Moses Egyptius) who in
the 23d year of his Age began to comment upon the Misnaioth, or the Text of the
Talmud; which he finished at thirty. He lived seventy years, and during his
whole life was so studious in writing upon, and instructing Religion, that to
this day it is said of him: From Moses (the Prophet) to Moses (the Egyptian)
there was never such another Moses.

The first among Christians who took more solemn Cognizance of the Talmud, was
Justinian the Emperor, who about the 551 year of Christ gave Toleration to the
Jews to read the Sacred Bible in their Synagogues in the Greek Tongue; but
utterly prohibited them the Reading of the Misna, as being neither adjoined to
the Sacred Books, nor delivered from above to the Prophets; but a mere
invention of Earthly Men, who had nothing of Heaven in them. As is to be seen
Novella 146. where the Notes upon that Constitution say, that the Misna Torah
was Composed out of the Caballisticks and Anagogicks of the Jews, or some
allegorical interpretations, pretended to be derived from Moses.

When the Jews were settled in Italy and France, the Bishops of Rome began to
take severe cognizance of the Talmud. For Pope Innocent IV. commanded all the
Copies thereof that could be found in France to be burned, because it contained
manifest Blasphemies against God, Christ, and the Virgin Mary, inextricable
abuses* erroneous and unheard of Fooleries. And in Italy the Talmud fell under
the same Condemnation: for Pope Julius the third by solemn Bull sentenced it to
the Flames, as containing many things offending the Divine Law, and the
Orthodox Faith. Upon which the Inquisition seized upon all the Gemara's that
could be met with in the Regions of Italy, and made them an Holocaust to the
Holy Chair, etc.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe present Condition of the Jews in Barbary; their places of
Residence, Profession, Apparel, Stature and Complexion, etc. page 7. CHAP. II.
The Moral Conversation of the Barbary-Jews: the ingredients of their Religion*
their backwardness to Disputes: their Creed* occasion, Author; with a short
Paraphrase thereof, etc. 13. CHAP. III The Barbary-Jews Opinion of the Trinity,
Angels, several States of the Soul, the Law, Merit, Purgatory, Resurrection,
last Judgment, end of the World, etc. 26. CHAP. IV. Their Opinion of Matrimony
and Coelibate, their Espousals, Dowry-Bill, etc. 40. CHAP. V. Of other
Ceremonies relating to their Marriages. 46. CHAP. VI. Their Opinion of
Sterility: their Lilis: their Rites of Childbirth. 54. CHAP. VII. Of the Rites
of Circumcision and Purirification. 59. CHAP. VIII. Of the Jews Polygamy:
Divorce: A Copy of their Bill of Dismission, etc. 71. CHAP. IX. Of the Jews
Concubinage: Of their Marrying the Brothers Wife. 74. CHAP. X. Of the
Institution of their Children: the time and manner thereof. 80. CHAP. XI. Of
their Synagogues: the Officers thereof: time of their Election: Hours of
Prayer. 88. CHAP. XII. Of the Jews Preparation to the Synagogue. 93. CHAP.
XIII. Of the Jews Zizith and Tephillim, or Phylactery or Prayer-Ornaments. 99.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Jews hastening to Morning Prayer. Their manner of Entranc^
into, and Deportment in the Syn^gogue, etc. 104. CHAP. XV. Their Ceremonies
about the Book of the Law: Their Manner of Celebrating the Sabbath: The Offices
which thereon are Solemnized, etc. 112. CHAP. XVI. How the Jews prepare
themselves for the Sabbath, and how they begin it. 130. CHAP XVII. How the Jews
hallow the Sabbath, and how they end it. 150. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Jews Feasts:
The manner of their Celebration. 167. CHAP. XIX. Of their Pentecost, or Feast
of weeks. 175. CHAP. XX. Of the Feast of Tabernacles. 177. CHAP. XXI. Of the
Jews Purim, or Feast of Lots. 182. CHAP. XXII. Of the Jewish Fasts. 194. CHAP.
XXIII. Of the Jewish Excommunication. 198. CHAP. XXIV. Concerning the present
Judicature among the Jews. 210. CHAP. XXV. The manner of the Jews Alms, and of
their making provision for Poor. 213. CHAP. XXVI. Their Visitation of the Sick;
Testaments: Burial of the Dead, etc. 216. The Conclusion: Wherein is considered
the present Obstructions of the Jews Conversion. 225. A Summary Discourse
concerning the Jewish Talmud, Misna and Gemara 239.
FINIS.

