Southt. ss. Ad General. Quarterial. Session. Pacis Domini Regis tent. pro Com.
praedict. apud Castrum Winton. in Com. praedict. Die Martis Octavo Die Octobris
Anno Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi Tricesimo coram Carolo Domino De la War,
Hugone Stewkeley, Baronett. Carolo Lee, Mil. Thoma Cole, Ar. Olivero St. John,
Ar. Willielmo Wither, Ar. and aliis Justiciariis, etc.
FOrasmuch, as the grand Inquest has informed this Court that the daily
concourse and great increase of Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars is a
great grievance and annoyance to the Inhabitants of this County, and through
the negligence, or ignorance of those Officers, who have been entrusted in this
concern, they are now grown so insolent and presumptuous, that they have often by
threats and menaces extorted Money and Victuals, from those who live in Houses
far remote from Neighbors, whilst their Husbands and Servants have been
employed abroad in the management of their lawful Vocations: and have put the
people in a general Consternation or Fear, that they will fire their Houses, or
steal their Goods: the Consequences may prove very dangerous if not timely
prevented. Wherefore this Court taking into their serious Consideration what
remedies may be most properly applied to these growing mischiefs, do Order and
Command all chief Constables, petty Constables, Headboroughs, Tythingmen, and
all other Officers herein ^^ncerned, that they do forthwith cause all the Laws
and Statutes heretofore made against Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars,
wandering and idle Persons, to be put in Execution, and to that end it is here
Ordered,

1. 7 Jam. 4.
That all High Constables, petty Constables, Tythingmen, and other Officers
herein concerned shall within their several and respective Limits make privy
search, One every Week (and oftener if need be) in all Houses, Victualling
Houses, Barns, and other suspected places in the Night time, for the finding
out and apprehending of Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, wandering and idle
persons; and they shall also apprehend all such Rogues, etc. who travel with
forged and counterfeit Passes in the Day time, and all such Persons which they
shall apprehend in such search, 39 Eliz. 4.
or shall take begging, wandering, (...) disordering themselves, the Constable,
Headborough, or Tythingman, being assisted with the Minister, and some other of
the Parish, shall cause to be stripped naked from the middle upward, and to be
openly whipped until their Bodies be bloody.

2. 9 E^^z. 4.
That the Constable, etc. shall strictly examine all and every Person and
Persons, who shall produce any Testimonial or Pass, to travel to any
particular place within this Realm; and if they shall find that any such
Testimonial be not Signed under the Hand end Seal of some Justice of the Peace
of some County, or the Mayor or head Officer of some Town Corporate, or the
Constable of some Parish, or the Minister, Headborough, or Tythingman of some
Parish from whence the Party came, or any two of them; or if the Party be not
in the direct Road homewards, or within the time limited by the Testimonial or
Pass, or that the Party begs by the way of any Person; such Persons so
offending in any of these Cases shall be whipped, as aforesaid.

3. When any Rogue, etc. has been whipped, the Minister, Constable, etc. of
the Parish where he was so whipped, or any two of them shall give him a Pass
or Testimonial under their Hands and Seals, in this or the like form, etc. J.
R. A sturdy Vagrant Beggar, of tall Stature, gray Hair'd, and blind of the left
Eye, aged about forty Years, was such a Day and Year openly whipped at D. in
the County of Hants, according to the Law for a wandering Rogue; and is assigned
to pass from Parish to Parish by the Officers thereof, the next straight way to
A. in the County of Wilts; where (as he confesses) he was Born, and he is
limited to be at A. aforesaid, within ten Days now next ensuing, at his Peril.
Given under the Hands and Seals of J. S. Minister of D. aforesaid, and B. D.
Constables there.

4. And if such Rogue, etc. by his own default exceed the time limited by any
such Testimonial or Pass, he shall from time to time receive the like
punishment. And the Minister of such Parish shall Register such Testimonial
upon the penalty of 5 s.

5. 39 E^^^. 4.
When such Testimonial is thus made, every Rogue, etc. shall be forthwith sent
from Parish to Parish, by the Officers of every respective Parish through this
County the next straight way to the place of his Birth; and if that cannot be
known, then to the place where he last dwelt by the space of one whole year
before the same punishment, there to be set to work; and if that cannot be
known, then to the Parish through which he last passed without punishment; and
the Officers of that Parish shall convey the Person to the House of Correction,
or the Common Gaol of the County, there to be employed in work until he shall
be placed in some Service for the space of one Year, or not being able of Body,
until he shall be placed in some Almshouse in the County.

6. 14 Car. 2.12. 1 Jam. 7.
When any Rogue, etc. shall be brought by any Officer, to any Parish, with such
Testimonial or Pass, the Constable there shall give him necessary relief for
his passage, and then convey him by himself or some other person to the
Officers of the next Parish, in the way to the Parish directed by the
Testimonial or Pass. And if any Constable, etc. be negligent, and do not his
best endeavor to apprehend such Rogues, etc. idle or disorderly persons, and
cause them to be punished, and conveyed away as aforesaid, He shall forfeit 20
s. for every such Offense, and if any person whatsoever shall hinder the
punishment or conveyance of any Rogue, or shall make Rescouse against any
Officer, or hinder the Execution of these Laws, he shall forfeit for every such
Offense 5 s. and be bound to his good behavior.

7. 39 Eliz. 4.
That if any such Rogue shall be incorrigible, and shall seem dangerous, or
will no^ be reformed of his Roguish Life, then the Constable, etc. shall convey
him to some Justice of the Peace, to be committed to the House of Correction.

8. 39 Eliz. 4.
That the Constable, etc. shall give necessary relief, and provide lodging for
impest Soldiers, or Seafaring-men suffering Shipwreck, not having wherewith to
relieve themselves in their travels homewards, and having a Testimonial under
the Hand of some Justice of the Peace, of, or near the place where they Landed,
declaring the place and time of their Landing, the place of the Petitioners
dwelling, or Birth, unto which they be to pass, and the time limited for their
passage, so that such Seafaring-men be in the direct way homewards, and within
the time limited for their passage. And that no Constable or other Officer give
relief to any other persons than those that have been whipped, or otherwise
qualified, as aforesaid.

9. 39 Eliz. 17.
If any Soldiers or Mariners fall sick in their passage home, they shall be
excused though they exceed the time limited in the Testimonial, so that they
perform their journey in convenient time after their recovery.

10. 39 Eliz. 17.
That wandering Soldiers, or Mariners, and all others wandering as Soldiers, or
Mariners, who will not settle themselves to work, or have not a Testimonial
under the Hand of some Justice of the Peace, near the place of their landing,
declaring the place where they landed, the place whither they are to pass, and
the time of their passage; or exceeding the time limited above fourteen days,
or having a counterfeit Testimonial, shall in all these cases suffer as Felons,
without any benefit of the Clergy.

11. 1 Jam. 11.
The Constable, Deputy-Constable, Headborough, and Tythingman, shall go from
house to house, and give notice to every Householder in person within their
respective limits, that they take care, that neither they, nor any of their
Servants shall from thenceforth receive any Rogue, etc. wandering, or disorderly
person, or any other person, unless poor Inhabitants of the same Parish
licensed to beg by the Officers, who shall happen to beg at any of their
houses. But if they see or know any such person to beg, they shall forthwith
send or convey him to the Constable, etc. in order to be whipped according to
Law upon the penalty of 10 s. for every such Offense, and to be prosecuted for
the same at the next Sessions.

12. 1 Jam. 7.
That no Housekeeper, or other person whatsoever, shall permit or suffer any
Rogue, etc. wandering, or disorderly person, to lodge, or abide within their
Houses, Barns, or Outhouses, near home or remote in the Fields. But upon
knowledge thereof they shall forthwith give notice to the Constable, etc. of
the same Parish, to the intent that such Offenders may be punished according to
Law, upon pain that every Housekeeper, or other person shall forfeit 10 s. for
every such Offense.

13. That if any Ale-house-keeper, or Victualler, shall from henceforth
relieve, entertain, lodge or harbor in their Victualling-houses any Rogues,
etc. wandering, or disorderly person, without special Order from the Constable,
or Tythingman of the same Parish ^r their Victualling-houses shall be suppressed,
and they shall be further dealt with according to Law.

14. 24 Car. 2.12.
That every person, who shall bring any Rogue, etc. before any Justice of the
Peace, shall have 2 s. allowed him for his pains, to be paid by the Constable
of the Parish through which such a Rogue last past unpunished, and such Justice
of the Peace is desired (...) grant a Warrant to Levy the same.

15. That the Constable of every respective Parish shall not charge or compel
the inhabitants of any Village, Town, Parish, or Hamlet, to pay any Money to
their rates concerning impressed Soldiers, Mariners, Rogues, Vagrants, or other
disorderly persons, than to the use expressed as aforesaid. And if they do, the
same shall not be allowed upon their Accounts.

16. That Chief Constables, Petty Constables, Headboroughs, Tythingmen, and all
other Officers herein concerned, shall use their utmost endeavors to execute
those Laws, and shall give an account upon Oath in Writing, under the Hand of
the Minister of every respective Parish to the Justices of the Peace, at their
Meetings for their respective Divisions. And in default of such Meetings, to
the Justices at the next Quarter Sessions, what Rogues and Vagabonds, wandering,
or disorderly persons they have apprehended, and how many they have punished,
upon the penalty of 40 s. for every such Offense. And moreover they shall also
present at the next Quarter Sessions, all Housekeepers, Ale-house-keepers, or
Victuallers, who have relieved at their Doors, or have lodged or harbored in
their Houses, Outhouses or Barns, any such Rogues, Vagabonds, or sturdy
Beggars, to the intent they may be prosecuted according to Law. And that in the
mean time, they cause all those Laws and Directions to be publicly read in
their respective Parish Churches, or at the Church Door, and to be registered in
their respective Parish Books, there to be kept and preserved for the better
Information and Example of those that shall succeed them.

Tho. Cobbe, Clericus Pacis Com' praedict'.


