The CARE of the PEACE OF THE CHURCH, The DUTY of Every Christian.

In a Discourse upon Psalm 122.6. Wherein the Main Pleas, for Separation are
Examined, and the true Causes thereof Showed. Being very seasonable for these
Times, and seriously recommended to all, especially to the Nonconforming
Preachers.

By Tho. Adderley A. B. sometimes of St. John's Coll. Oxon.

To which is annexed a Letter, Briefly showing the great danger and sinfulness
of Popery, Written to a Young Gentleman (a Roman Catholic) in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for John Williams at the sign of the Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

To the Right worshipful Sir Edward Boughton Baronet one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, and a Deputy-Lievtenant for the County of Warwick, and
now a member of the honorable house of Commons.
Honored Sir.
THis small thing, that is now venturing abroad into the world, does in a more
especial manner belong unto you. It was born under your roof, and that little
strength it has since gathered, was in the same place. But alas! it is still
weak, and I fear, may not meet with that kindness and tenderness of compassion,
which an innocent Infant might in reason expect. The parent of it does
therefore humbly crave your patronage and protection; and he does the less
scruple a grant of it, the request being made to a person that has been ever
hospitable and charitable. And for this, Sir, you are so eminent in your own
Country, that when (through the importunity of the whole Gentry of the County
of Warwick) you did at length appear in the field as a competitor for a Knight
of the Shire, I my self heard diverse say, that it was pity, that a Gentleman
of so much Charity to the Poor, should be taken out of the Country. Nay! some
did say, that they would give their votes against you merely upon this score,
to keep a Gentleman of such liberality to the poor and hospitality to all
others, still amongst them. Now Sir, the God of mercy and compassion reward you
for it, by continuing his temporal blessings to you here, and with a Crown of
glory hereafter. And this shall be the constant prayer of

Your Worships most humble and most obliged Servant Tho. Adderley.

To the Charitable, Christian, and peaceably disposed Reader.
A Preface, which at first I looked upon as useless, upon second thoughts
seemed little less then necessary. Not so much to importune favor, as equity
and justice from the Reader. I am not ignorant that most things of the same
nature with the ensuing tract, though written with never so good intentions and
meaning, are apt enough to be misconstrued by some ill disposed persons; and
the Authors of them, though earnestly industrious for peace and unity, are sure
to be branded for the only disturbers. Those that go about to lay open the sin
and folly of some men, shall be sure to find censurers enough; and if they
cannot find any thing more to say, yet this they will be sure to insinuate,
that we write not so much out of zeal to the truth or love to dissenters, as
out of design of advancing our selves, and of Eclipsing the repute and fame of
others. This, I know, has been the common reward of persons, who for their
excellent parts and pains have merited better things of them. And therefore I
cannot much expect any other return. If they have called the Master of the
Family Beelzebub, how much more will they call the Servant so? But I protest,
that my main design, in publishing these papers, was merely to mind our
dissenters of the folly and sinfulness of keeping up a Schism in the Church,
and widening it is breaches, since it is apparent, that it makes way for the
entrance of the common Enemy. And if any one does yet question the truth of
this, let him but seriously peruse Doctor Oats his Narrative of the horrid
Plot, and Conspiracy of the Popish party, and that will plainly evince it, and
show that these persons are but the Instruments of the Papists to bring about
their designs. What dangers we have been in (at least) if we are not so still,
of the Romans coming and taking away our place and Nation, surely they cannot
but see. But would to God that their eyes were once opened to discern, that
their persistance in their separation from us, makes their passage to it the
more easy. Sure enough, our differences and dissentions are more then a little
pleasing to our adversaries of Rome, who very much delight to look on and see
our scuffles, and clap their hands at the sport, saying, Aha, so would we have
it. The very manner of relating the contention betwixt Abraham's and Lot's
Servants is very observeable. Genesis 13.7. And there was a strife between
Abraham's Herdsmen, and the Herdsmen of Lot's Cattle; and the Canaanite and
Perizzite then dwelled in the Land. Which surely was inserted by the Spirit of
God, as no small aggravation of the unseasonableness of the strife. But it is
much to be thought, that the Canaanite and the Perizzite, or, that which is as
bad, the Friar and the Jesuit, are not merely lookers on, but they have a very
near interest in our strifes, by strong and secret influences, causing and
fomenting differences and contentions, and kindling sparks into a flame. Surely
the hand of Joab is in this matter.

This then being so apparent, what Christian, much more, what Protestant
Minister, could forbear a little sharpness against our blind, or, that which is
worse, obstinate dissenters, who are the undoubted promoters of their own, and
of the Church's ruin? I am not to be told, that the least tartness against our
Nonconforming Teachers, is enough to give any man the name of a well-wisher to
the Romanists, if not of a downright Papist, amongst their favorers and
followers. And therefore here I w uld crave so much Charity from my Reader, as
not to fauster any such thoughts of me, and if for no other reason, yet for the
sake of the Letter annexed to the ensuing discourse* And let me tell him this,
that had it not been for the prevention of that calumny, I had not published
it, and that because I could not think it any ways worthy of the Press. Having
thus craved so much Charity of the Reader, I shall readily admit his perusal of
the ensuing pages of this Book, and by that let him judge, whether or no I may
deserve it.

Psalm 122. Verse 6. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.


THat the Psalms of David were Penned at several times, and designed for several
occasions, is most unquestionably true. And let the condition of Christians,
either in their public or private capacities, be almost what it will, they may
easily find out some Psalm very proper and seasonable for their relief and
comfort; and suitable enough to that their present condition. As men infested
with several Diseases and Distempers of Body, may find some Drugs and Medicines
in the Apothecarys Shop, to Purge out those different humors that do most
infest their Bodies. So may Christians find out some Portion of the Psalms of
David, that may Administer some ease and comfort to them, under all or most of
those many troubles that are incident to Humane Life. And hence it is, as I
suppose, that our Church has so wisely proportioned the Psalms of David, that
they may be read through once at least in every Month of the year, by the
constant frequenters and attenders of her Service, that so, by our frequent
reading and observing the same, we might readily find out some Psalm, either in
the whole, or at least in the greater part of it, applicable to that our
present condition.

That this Psalm, wherein my Text is, was Penned by Holy David, is agreed upon
by most Expositors. And if you would know the time and occasion of his Writing
it, it is likewise concluded by most to have been composed by him at such time,
when the Ark of God was most happily restored, and brought back by him to
Jerusalem. If you look into the 2 Samuel 6.2. you will there find, that the Ark
of God was in the House of Abinadab in Gibeah, a High place in the City Baalah
of Judah; and from thence it was removed and carried by David into the House of
Obed Edom the Gittite, who received a Blessing from God, together with all his
Household, by reason of the presence of it, v. 10.11. of that Chapter. But as
Noah's Dove, when he sent her out of the Ark, could find no resting place for
the sole of her Feet, until the Waters were so abated that the dry ground
appeared: So neither could the Ark of God find any rest, either in the House of
Abinadab in Gibeah, or in the House of Obed Edom the Gittite, or any where
else, until it was brought into Jerusalem, the City of David, and there placed.
Thither it was at length brought by Israel with joy and great gladness, with
shouting, and with the noise of a Trumpet, v. 15. of the same Chapter. And it
is (as I told you before) the opinion of most Expositors, that David composed
this Psalm, and delivered it to be sung at this solemnity. This was a time of
gladness and great joy amongst them; the people, at it is approach, do (as it
were) unanimously run to bid it welcome. And it was no sooner settled amongst
them, but they do as unanimously desire to enter therein to pay their Thanks,
and to perform their Devotions. They stay not to be invited thither by the
Prophet, neither was there any need of his Exhortation to them to go, for they
came on purpose to invite and exhort him to it. At which readiness and
willingness of theirs, the Holy Prophet was so well pleased, that he tells us,
v. 1. of this Psalm, that he was glad, I was glad (says he) when they said
unto me, let us go into the House of the Lord. And now that the Holy Prophet
might not fear their weariness and inconstancy in the performance of their
Devotions, that he might not think that this their great zeal would prove like
the Morning Dew, quickly scattered and soon gone; that he might be fully
assured and persuaded of their perseverance and constancy in it, they presently
make this firm resolution, v. 2. Our feet shall stand in thy Gates, O
Jerusalem. This indeed was a very good way to keep the Ark of Gods Covenant
amongst them, and to secure it from being again carried away Captive from them.
For when any Nation or People do once begin to grow negligent and weary in the
performance of Religious Duties, when once they become so backward and slack,
as to be indifferent whether they come or not at all unto them; though they do
not hear that very voice that was heard a little before the Destruction of
Jerusalem, a voice (as some think) uttered by the Angels out of the Clouds,
abeamus hinc, let us flit and be gone, yet may they very justly fear the
dreadful effects and sad consequences of it; that God will depart, and that he
will stay no longer with them; that he will take away his Word and his Gospel,
his Worship and his Service, (so much slighted and abused) and all sense of
Religion, and bestow it upon a people that will bring forth the Fruits thereof.
This the Holy Prophet very well understood, and therefore how greatly does he
rejoice to hear their resolutions of being constant in their Devotions. He
could never forget the miseries and troubles, the fears and distractions they
were constantly in, while the Ark of God was under Captivity. And therefore,
seeing that it was now once again most happily restored and settled amongst
them, so that they might for ever after as happily enjoy the presence of it; he
puts them in mind, that in their Prayers and Devotions, they should Pray for
the peace of Jerusalem, or that they should put up their Petitions unto God,
for the prosperity and safety of it.

The words of my Text then in the whole are (as you see) an Exhortation of Holy
David to the people, to Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

In which Exhortation you may observe these Three particulars.

First, Here is a plain specification of the thing for which he importunes
their care, and that is Jerusalem.

Secondly, Here is an indication of the action, by which they may evidence
their love to it, and their care of it, and that is by Prayer. And

Thirdly, ult. Here is the Blessing which in their Prayers and Petitions they
should beg and request of God for it, and that is peace. Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem.

Before I come to treat of any particular point, it will be needful to speak
briefly of a very great mistake, that is crept into the minds of many ignorant
people, in reference to duties of this nature. Some there are that will tell
us, that because there is mention made of Jerusalem, and of the Ark of Gods
covenant, and of a Temple and the like, being things long since demolished and
gone, that this Exhortation therefore is of no obligation at all unto them,
that they are no ways concerned in it, and that it reached no further then just
to those to whom it was at first made. But the Apostle St. Paul has told us,
that whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning,
Romans 15.4. And again, in the 2. Tim. 3.16. That all Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, and instruction in righteousness. So that although we are not
concerned as to the literal meaning of the words, yet as to the inward import
of them, we are, and so far we may conclude, that whatsoever was thus spoken
unto them was spoken unto us, also, even to all Christian people that ever were
before us, or that shall ever come after us, that they should pray for the
peace, and unity, and safety of the holy Catholic Church, even to the end of
the World. There is no question to be made (said a Reverend Prelate and Martyr
of our Church) but that the eye of the Prophet was so clear, that he looked
quite through the Temple of Jerusalem, which was but a Figure or Shadow of that
which was to come, and saw Christ, his Church and Kingdom at the end of it. So
that this Psalm has a great reach, and it is of a very large extent; it
reaches not only to the Jew but also to the Christian, not only to the Temple,
but also to the Church. So that we now, as well as they then, may and must and
ought to pray for the peace of our Jerusalem.

By Jerusalem here is indeed meant, as well the State or body of the Kingdom,
as the body of the Church. For after the Ark of God was placed there, it became
not only the house of Religion or the House of God, verse the 1. But also the
house of the State or Kingdom, because there also is the Seat of Judgment,
verse the 5. And therefore it is our duty to pray for the peace of both, not
only for the peace of the Church, but also for the peace of the Kingdom. But
how rare a thing is it to meet with any, but what are ready, and willing enough
to consult the good of the State, and the peace and safety of the Kingdom,
because the estates and lively hood both of them and theirs, does very much
depend upon it. But alas! The thing which most men are most extremely forgetful
of, is the peace of the Church, they are but little concerned at the rents and
breaches that are made in it; never considering that if the Church be
disquieted and disturbed, the State or Kingdom can never be at peace.

The word here rendered, pray, is in the Septuagint (...), which signifies to
ask and enquire after, to labor and endeavor the good of any thing. Some would
have it read quaerite, seek it and follow hard after it. And then the sense of
the exhortation, will be much agreeable with that of the holy Apostle St. Paul,
Romans 14.19. Follow after, or most zealously attend to those things, that make
for the peace of Jerusalem or the Church. By the word, peace, is here meant all
kind of blessings, all manner of prosperity. Pacis nomen generaliter accipitur
pro loeto and foelici statu (says Molle^^s in his exposition of this Psalm)
the word peace is generally taken for a joyful and most happy State, because,
this is that which Crowns all other blessings, and is above all others the most
to be desired by us.

And now having thus laid open to you the meaning of these three terms here
used in the Text, and thereby showed you what is the import of praying for the
peace of Jerusalem, I shall lay down, and prosecute this following observation,
which is altogether agreeable with it (viz.)

Obs. That is a duty, highly concerning and much incumbent upon all Christians,
to endeavor the safety, and to pray for the peace of the Church. I might here
give you a large discourse of peace, and of the several benefits of it. I might
show you at large, that peace is absolutely the greatest temporal blessing,
that any people or nation can possibly partake of. It is a thing so good, that
without it nothing can be good, with it (says Solomon) an handful of herbs,
without it an house full of Sacrifices is not good, Pro. 17.1. These things
(which I shall anon lightly touch at) I might insist upon at large, and thereby
engage, and persuade you all to this great and important duty, of praying for
the peace of Jerusalem, or for the prosperity and safety of the Church. But I
question not, but that I shall effectually engage you to it, and convince you
all of the great necessity of endeavoring the safety, and of praying for the
peace of the Church, from these following reasons and considerations. As

1st, It will appear to be a duty highly concerning, and much incumbent upon
all Christians, to endeavor the safety, and to pray for the peace of the
Church, because of those many enemies which continually lay siege against it,
endeavoring to disturb it is peace, and, as much as in them lies, utterly to
overthrow it. In the 16 Chap. of St. Matthews Gospel and the 18. verse. When
our Savior Christ (upon St. Peter's acknowledgment, and confession of his being
the true Messiah, and the son of the living God) told him, thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock (i. e.) upon this confession, which thou, whose name signifies a
Rock or Stone, have made, I will build my Church; and withal made that promise,
that the Gates of Hell (i.e.) all the power and strength, wisdom and policy,
authority and empire in the world, no, not the grave or Satan himself, which
proverbially are said to be irresistible, should ever prevail against it, or
destroy it. By this promise, I say, he does insinuate and inform us thus much,
that those open Gates, and Gates of Hell, gape not wider for any thing than for
it. Though the Ark of God was settled in Jerusalem, and though the people (as
you have heard) were so resolvedly constant in the performance of their
devotions; yet the holy Prophet knew, that the Philistines, those enemies of
God and of his Church, waited only for an opportunity of taking it again
Captive: And therefore upon this account, or more especially for this reason,
pray (says he) for the peace of Jerusalem. No sooner had the Apostles planted
the Christian Church, but the Gnostics, the followers of Simon Magus, that
first Priests of the Church, presently sowed their Tares of discord and
dissension in it, and raised up the unbelieving Jews in every City, and in
every place, where they might be suffered for to come, to disquiet and disturb
it. And hence were all those pathetick exhortations laid down by the Apostles,
in their several Epistles to the several Churches, of following the things that
make for peace, of having peace amongst themselves, of keeping the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, and the like. That they should by no means,
hearken to any of those Sowers of discord and sedition, though they made never
so fair a show, and specious pretense of piety and holiness. Who came indeed
(according to our Savior's prediction) in Sheeps clothing, as the true
Prophets of old used to do, thereby pretending the greatest innocence and
meekness that could be, but inwardly they are ravenous Wolves, they design
nothing in the conclusion but devouring and rapacity. Saint Paul, at that
visitation of his Brethren held at Miletum, and recorded in the 20. Chap. of
the Acts of the Apostles, after he had told them of his going up to Jerusalem,
and of the bonds and afflictions, which, by the testimony of the holy Ghost, in
every City, should attend him there; he commits to them the care of his flock,
charges them to feed the Church of God, which he had purchased with his own
blood, and to be the more careful and watchful over it, for this reason,
because that after his departure, grievous Wolves would enter in amongst them,
not sparing the flock; and men would arise, speaking perverse things to draw
away Disciples after them (i. e.) because they would soon be solicited with
false Teachers, seducing the faithful, and doing great mischief amongst them.
The Christian Church, by reason of that false Doctrine of Simon Magus and the
Gnostics, which spread like leaven, or, like the Leprosy quickly overrun the
whole body of the Church; and by reason of those grievious persecutions of it
by the heathen Emperors, soon after the first plantation of it, may not unfitly
be compared, to that Man-child of which the Woman Traveled, Revel. 12.4. Which
was ready to be devoured as soon as ever it was born. Had it not been for the
extraordinary assistance of Divine Providence, the Church of Christ could never
have been planted; and when it was planted, it could never have been preserved,
had not God himself most miraculously upheld it. For on the one hand, the
heathen Emperors, Nero and Domitian, Maxentius and Dioclesian, and the rest of
those that make up that decuplum flagellum Dei, that Ten-stringed Scourge of
God, sought to batter it down by violence, and to suppress it. And on the other
hand, Simon Magus and his followers, by sowing their Weeds and Tares sought to
choke it, or at least, to stop the growth of that Vine planted by Gods own
right hand, and by their secret workings to undermine it. The former, like the
Wild Boar out of the Wood, sought to root it up; the latter, like the little
but cunning Foxes, sought for to devour her Grapes. And therefore the Church of
God, may again be very well compared to that house (in the parable) that was
built upon the Rock, Matthew. 7.25. It has hitherto, and it shall for ever stand
firm and unshaken, though the rain still descends, the Floods come, and the
winds do still blow and beat upon it. It Is true indeed, the Church of God has
ever since the time of Constantine the great, the first of all the Roman
Emperors, that publicly owned and embraced Christianity, enjoyed some
halcyonian days, days of peace, and of some freedom from those former bloody
persecutions. But still the Devil has other Instruments and Engines at work,
either by violence to batter it down, or else by Heresy, and Schism, and
Division, and other politic contrivances, secretly to undermine it. As Saint
Paul, at his first being at Athens, was encountered by two different Sects of
Philosophers, the Stoics on the one hand, and the Epicureans on the other: So
is the Church of God at this time, most miserably infested by two differing
enemies, the Papists on the one hand, and the dissenting Sectaries amongst us
on the other. And as it was heretofore, Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses
against Ephraim, but both against Judah; So the Papists make a great clamor and
outcry against our Sectaries, and our Sectaries cry out as eagerly against the
Papists, when as they are both of them really and truly against the true
Church of God. And by this means, alas! they do contribute too much toward the
growth and increase of each other, and indeed (as might easily be made out) to
the growth and increase of Atheism, and of all manner of wickedness and
profaneness. So that for this reason, I say, it will appear to be a duty highly
concerning, and much incumbent upon all Christians, to endeavor the safety, and
to pray for the peace of the Church, because of those many enemies, which
continually lay feige against it, endeavoring to disturb it is peace and utterly
to overthrow it.

2ly. It will appear to be a duty highly concerning etc. because the peace and
safety of the State and Kingdom, does very much depend upon it. Here I may ask
St. James his question; whence come wars and fightings among you? Whence have
all those Wars and Broils and Bloody Massacres, which have happened within less
then one Century of years, in several of our neighbor nations, proceeded, but
only from diversity of opinion in Religion? Whence proceeded our own late
civil, yet most uncivil and unnatural Wars, wherein some Hundreds of Thousands
lost their lives, when Brother fought against Brother, Father against Son, and
Son against Father, but only from the same diversity of opinion in Religion,
and about the Worship and Service of God? From whence springs, that inveterate
and implacable malice of the Papists at this present, even to the endeavoring
of the utter destruction of our King and Kingdom, but only from a (false)
supposal of our being Heretics in religion, and schismatics in the Church? Ut
fratrum odia sint acerrima, sic e^rum fere qui consortes aliquando ejusdem
religionis, says the learned Lypsius: As the hatred of Brothers, if once they
fall out, is the most inveterate and irreconcilable, so none do more envy and
hate one another then persons that have been, but now are not of the same
opinion in matters of Religion. This indeed ought not to be, especially amongst
Christians, whose Religion enjoins them, not only to bear with one another, and
to be ready to do all acts of kindness one for another, but also to love their
very enemies, to do good to them that hate them, and to pray for them that do
despitefully use them. But alas! this is too too little observed; and the other
(viz) envy and hatred, despite and malice, evil speaking and slandering, and
the like, are the most usual and ordinary effects and consequences of
difference in Religion. If you look but into the 9. Chap. of St. Lukes Gospel,
and compare it with the 4. Chap. of St. John's, you will find all that I now
speak of to be true. The Jews and the Samaritans, were of a different opinion
as to the place of Gods Worship. The one thought Jerusalem to be the only place
for it, the other Mount Gerisin. And therefore our Savior Christ coming to a
Village of the Samaritans, because he did but seem to them to be going toward
Jerusalem, they would not so much as give him the least kind reception, and
entertainment amongst them. Did any but seem to them to be Jews, or to be going
toward Jerusalem, they shall neither have meat, nor drink, nor lodging, they
may starve for any relief they are like to find from them. How is it, that
thou, being a Jew, ( says the Samaritan Woman to our Savior Christ) ask
drink of me, who am a Woman of Samaria? For the Jews have no dealings, no
communication or familiarity with the Samaritans. And as the Samaritans dealt
thus unkindly with the Jews, merely because of their dissenting from them in
Religion; so the Jews, even James and John, two of our Savior's immediate
Disciples and Attendants, showed as great, or rather greater malice against the
Samaritans, and that too upon the same account, because of their dissenting
from them in matters of Religion: What! will they not give entertainment to the
Savior of the world, to the Lord of Life, and to the Prince of Glory? Let us
call for fire to come down from Heaven to consume them. Are they Jews? let them
then starve, says the one; are they Samaritans? Burn them, says the other. This
is the fruit, and sour fruit indeed of dissension in Religion; and this is the
spirit, the Diabolical spirit indeed, it makes men commonly of. And now ye your
selves shall judge, whether it is possible, for that State or Kingdom to
continue long in peace and safety, where there is great difference in Religion.
Certainly there can be but little peace, since it renders men thus malicious
and inveterate one against another. If some of the Bells of Aaron be rung
backwards, and made to jangle, it portends no less then a combustion in the
Kingdom. Turbata religio politiam turbat, is another saying of the learned
Lypsius; a saying which I am confident the Papists make great reckoning of; do
but divide them in their opinions about Religion, and then the Kingdom must
needs fall into disorder and confusion. If there be no peace in the Church,
there is but little to be hoped for in the State. And therefore for this reason
also, it will highly concern us all, to endeavor the safety, and to pray for
the peace of the Church, because the peace and safety of the State or Kingdom
does very much depend upon it. Again

3ly and ult. It will appear to be a duty highly concerning, and much incumbent
upon etc. because of the blessed and happy effects and fruits of it. Had we but
peace and unity and an amicable agreement amongst our selves, we need not then
so much fear all the cunningst plots of the Jesuits, that are hatched in the
conclave of Rome, and acted by their Emissaries here; who, as our Savior
Christ says of the Scribes and Pharisees, do compass Sea and Land to make a
Proselite, and afterward make him seven fold more the Child of the Devil than
he was before. And as we need not then fear the Plots of the Jesuits, had we
but unity amongst our selves; so should we most readily and willingly, and
without the least compulsion and constraint, lay aside all private meetings and
unlawful assemblies. We should all go to the house of God as friends, Psalm.
55.5. and meet as the Apostles did at the descent of the holy Ghost upon them,
Acts 2. with one accord in one place. Behold, how good and pleasant a thing it
is (says holy David) Brethren to dwell together in unity! Certainly, were but
the blessed effects of peace, and the pleasant fruits of unity, once tasted,
and thoroughly relished by us, it would prove effectual to the provoking of all
men, to lay aside all those little picks and quarrels, and indeed most
unreasonable complaints, which they make against our Church, and to unite
against that common enemy, who so vigorously endeavors the ruin of it, but
knows withal that there is no speedier way, whereby this can possibly be
effected, then by fomenting those little differences that are amongst us, and
by blowing up those little sparks into a flame, which we alas! of our selves
are too too apt to kindle. As the concurrence of multitude of Heresies, and
mutability in Religion (as a late Learned and judicious writer observes) was a
means to bring in Antichrist; so the present differences and animosities
amongst our selves, fomented by the Factors of Rome, will have no small
tendency to bring back the infallible Chair. For people (as he very well goes
on to prove it) will accept of a quiet harbor, though upon hard conditions,
rather then be afflicted with continual tossings in Stormy Seas. It Is natural
to man to covet any quiet Land, rather then to dwell with the terror of a
continual Earthquake. How mightily that party has increased upon us of late
years, I think I need not, because the former and the very late endeavors of
the higher powers to suppress them, do sufficiently tell us. And from whence,
the increase of that party does undoubtedly proceed, I have (according to the
judgment of all our late writers) now showed you. And if God Almighty should
again suffer that common enemy, to enter in at the breaches we have made
amongst our selves (as a just and deserved punishment upon us for it) then (to
use the words of the Learned Doctor Stillingfleet,) should we begin to wish,
that we had soon known the difference, between the reasonable commands of our
own Church, and the intolerable Tyranny of a foreign and usurped power,
between the soft and gentle hands of a mother, and the iron sinews of an
Executioner, betwixt the utmost rigor of our Laws, and the least and mildest of
an inquisition. None can ever be sufficiently sensible of the blessed effects
of the peace of the Church, as those that are deprived of it. Peace indeed is
better known by want than use, and is thought most worthy the having by them,
who have it not. Let but your fancy therefore lead you for a while, from the
consideration of your own present peace, into some Kingdom rouling in Blood,
and into some Church infested with Persecution. Ask them who are divided by the
Sword, which are rosting at the flames, torturing upon the Rack; such as the
Apostle St. Paul speaks of in the 11. Chap. of his Epistle to the Hebrews, As
are forced to wander about, in Sheepskins and goatskins, to hide themselves in
Dens and Caves of the Earth, being destitute, afflicted and tormented. Ask such
as those, I say, what a blessed and happy a State it is, to live in the
Fellowship and Communion of such a Church as ours is, wherein the word of God
is truly and sincerely, not rashly and unpremeditately Preached, the Sacraments
rightly and duly, and not irreverently given and received, where there is
nothing enjoined or commanded, but what is altogether agreeable with the
prescribed rule, and canon of holy Scripture. If you should ask them this
question, I am persuaded, that they would be ready to return you an answer in
those words of holy David, Psalm. 144.15. Happy are the People that are in such
a case; or else in those words of our Savior Christ, Luke 19.42. That you did
but know in this your day, the things that do belong unto your peace before it
be too late, before they are hid from your eyes. And thus you see the several
reasons, why it does so highly concern us all to endeavor the safety, and to
pray for the peace of the Church. 1. because of those many enemies, which lay
seige against it, endeavoring to disturb it is peace and utterly to overthrow
it. 2ly. because the peace and safety of the State and Kingdom does very much
depend upon it. And lastly, because of the blessed effects and happy fruits of
peace.

Let us now see what uses may be made of this point.

Use 1. First then, Is it so that it is a duty of so great concernment to us
all, to endeavor the safety and to pray for the peace of the Church? How
cautious and careful should we all then be, in avoiding all such who endeavor
to break the peace of it, and to sow division and dissension in it? Look upon
that exhortation of the Apostle St. Paul, which I shall make use of at this
time unto you all, in the 16. Chap. of his Epistle to the Romans and the 17.
verse, I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine ye have learned, and avoid them. For verse the 18.
They that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and
by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. And much like
unto this, is, that warning given us by our Savior Christ, Matthew. 7.15. Beware
of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps-clothing, but inwardly they are
ravenous Wolves; ye shall know them by their fruits, (i. e.) if you do but
observe and weigh the Doctrines, which they will endeavor to infuse into you
(not suddenly but by degrees, and as soon as ever they are got into some power
and authority with you) you may easily discover what they are. If they endeavor
to infuse into you, higher degrees of all kind of piety toward God, and
charity toward your neighbor, you may then resolve that they are sent from
God; but if their design be to infuse into their followers and seeds of
impiety, injustice, uncleanness, uncharitableness, sedition, rebellion,
disobedience to Governors, and the like, be sure then that they are false
Prophets, such as seek to disturb the peace of the Church, and to embroil the
Kingdom in trouble. And therefore beware of such as these, and avoid them. And
let us not only avoid them, but also pray against them, as against those that
have evil will at our Sion, that they may never succeed, or prosper in their
intended design of breaking and disturbing the peace of our Jerusalem.

2. Secondly, A second use which we may make of this point may be this, is it
so, that it is a duty so highly concerning, and incumbent upon all Christians,
to endeavor the safety and to pray for the peace of the Church? How justly
blameable then, nay? how wretchedly sinful is it in any to be disturbers of
it is Peace and Unity, and to make it their main business, to make the rents and
breaches of it wider? This Church of ours (like the poor Traveller, in the
Parable, that was going down from Jerusalem to Jerico) has had the hard
fortune, to fall amongst merciless Thieves and Robbers, who have not only
stripped her of her Raiment, and left her too naked, but they have wounded her
too, and left her (in a manner) half dead. And too many there are, who, though
professedly her sons, are yet so indifferent, and cool in their affections
toward her, that (like the Priest and the Levite) if they happen to Travel
that way where she lies, they may perchance vouchsafe to cast a look at her,
but then they presently pass by on the other side. Though these can never be
reckoned amongst her friends; for can any man persuade me, that that person is
my friend, who when he either sees or hears me grossly wronged and abused, will
only stand and look on, as altogether unconcerned for me? So that, I say,
although these persons can never be reckoned amongst her friends, yet they are
not her worst enemies neither, for others there are that are far more
unmerciful to her still, who instead of having compassion on her, instead of
coming to her (like the good Samaritan in the forenamed parable) to bind up her
wounds, and to pour in Oil and Wine, the most healing and comfortable
Medicines, seek rather for salt and vinegar, the most corroding and fretting
ingredients, and all on purpose to keep the wound still open, and to make the
cure the harder. That there are too too many such amongst us, we find by sad
and woeful experience. But would to God, that not only those, who pass her by so
unconcerned and indifferent, would consider how unacceptable and unpleasing
such a lukewarm, treacherous temper is to God, and whether this be any better
then to be ashamed of him before men; but also those, and those especially, who
do thus endeavor to keep open at least, if not to widen her differences also,
would timely consider, not only the manifest folly, but also the extreme
sinfulness and the inexcusable impiety of it. As for the folly of it, that has
been already evinced, in that they make way by these breaches, for the common
enemy to enter in amongst us, whom yet they seem the most zealously to hate and
fear. And then as for the sinfulness of it, there is nothing sure that can more
easily be made appear. For if our Savior Christ has promised the greatest
blessing to those that are Peacemakers, even to be called the sons of God,
surely then we may from hence most reasonably infer and conclude, that no less
then the greatest punishment and curse, shall be the reward and portion of all
such, as do promote and encourage discord and dissension; And sure I am, that
there is no punishment for any thing but what is sinful. But in regard, this is
a thing which many men are not so fully convinced of, or at least, do not so
well consider, as they should and ought, I shall beg leave to enlarge a little
further upon it. That this sin of dividing the Church, is a sin of a very deep
dye, and of no little guilt cannot well be doubted by any man. For why should
our Savior Christ have taken so much care to prevent it, had it been but a
small matter? Why should he have took so much pains (as he did) with his
Apostles, to instruct them thoroughly, that so they might not disagree or thwart
one another in any thing, when they should come to deliver his mind unto the
world, if it had not been of a dangerous and sinful consequence for them, to
have fallen out, and to have divided one from another? He that considers, how
ardently he prayed for them, not long before he left the world, that they might
be at Unity and Peace amongst themselves, will never doubt but that it had been
sinful, and dangerous for them to have jarr'd and fallen out, John 17.11. Holy
Father, keep through thine own name, those whom thou have given me, that they
may be one, as we are. And as our Savior Christ used the greatest care, so the
Apostles after him showed no less diligence and circumspection to prevent it.
They were earnestly industrious, to stop all beginnings of Schism in the
Church, to heal all breaches, and to take away all occasion of Division from
amongst their Disciples and followers. When the Apostle St. Paul heard of the
divisions that were risen in the Church of Corinth, he sends a very sharp
reproof for it. Now in this that I declare unto you, I praise you not (i. e.) I
very much blame and reprove you for it; for the phrase there used is a Meiosis,
and has more in the meaning then is expressed. And what is that which he so
highly reproved them for? Why it is for this, when ye come together in the
Church, I hear that there be divisions among you, 1. Cor. 11.18. And if the
Apostles were thus careful and circumspect to prevent it, and so sharply
reproved those that were guilty of it; we can never imagine, but that they
looked upon those as very ill men, who fomented a Schism and Division in the
Church. But this is not all neither. Let us consider a little further, what
odious names and appellations they have bestowed upon schism and division. They
call it carnality, they call it the work of the Flesh, nay! They call it the
very work of the Devil. Whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and
divisions, are ye not carnal? 1. Cor. 3.3. And again verse 4. While one says,
I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal? And if that rule
be true, noscitur ex socio -- we may nearly guess what a man is, by the company
he usually keeps; then we may also guess of the evil of this sin, of causing
variance and seditions, by those, and those no Peccadillos, with which the
Apostle has conjoined them. Now the works of the flesh (says St Paul) are
manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies, and so on, in the 5. Chap. of his Epistle to the Galathians 19.20.
verses. And then verse the 21. he tells us what will be the punishment of this
sin, of causing variance and seditions, as well as of the rest, no less then an
utter deprivation of the Kingdom of Heaven; of the which (says he) I tell you,
as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. One of the main things which we lay to the charge
of the Church of Rome, and of which I do verily believe they are guilty, is
Idolatry. But I would to God, that all that lay that sin to their charge, would
consider, that this sin of making a schism and divisions in the Church, is
reckoned up by the Apostle in the same Catalogue. And therefore though they may
not receive that punishment, of not inheriting the Kingdom of God, as
Idolaters, yet as Schismatics and dividers of the Church, they may. And so to,
though they renounce all communion and fellowship with them here, yet they
cannot fail, if they persist in it, of being made their companions in that pit
of darkness hereafter: Though they seem to hate and abhor one another so much,
as to grate their teeth one against another in despite and anger; yet let them
take heed, that they meet not one another in those Everlasting Burnings, where
they shall weep and wail, and gnash their teeth too; the one for his Idolatry,
the other for fomenting schism and division in the Church. Thus we see what an
ill Character the Writings of holy men, that were inspired from above, have
given us of schism. And if we should trace the sense of the church a little
further, we should find that the primitive Fathers, held this sin in no less
abhorrence and detestation, and that they thought it equal with the most
notorious sins, even such as were reckoned up by the Apostle forenamed. But I
shall forbear, and only remember you how evident and apparent it is, that to
make a Schism in the Church of God, and to promote and encourage divisions in
it, is a sin of a very deep dye; which appears both from our Savior's care,
and the diligence and circumspection of the Apostles to prevent it; from the
odious names and appellations they have bestowed upon it, and the punishment
which they have threatened for it. And therefore we may (with the greatest
seriousness) say unto those who do promote and encourage division, and do all
they can to widen the differences in the Church, to those we may say, as St.
Paul and Barnabas said to the men of Lystra in another case, Acts 14.15. Sirs?
why do you these things? why will ye thus make, and still foment and carry on a
schism and division in the Church? But here they think to wipe of all that is
thus said against them, by telling us that their departure or separation from
our Church, is altogether involuntary, and that they cannot hold communion with
us without sin; so that, when we say to them, why do ye these things? They are
presently ready to reply, in those words of David to Eliab, 1. Sam. 17.29. What
have we done? What evil is there in what we do? Is there not a cause? Have we
not sufficient reason for it? Here therefore we have an occasion given, to
examine their pleas and pretenses for their separation, and to see, if they can
in the least justify or excuse themselves in it. I shall not wast so much
time, or, trouble your patience so far, as to speak particularly, to every
little exception they make against our Church, for they are generally so weak
and senseless, that they themselves are become almost ashamed to insist any
longer upon them. I shall therefore pass all such by, I shall not stay so long
as to tyth their mint and cummin, for it will scarce be worth the while; but
come directly to the weightier matters, which (they themselves say) they have
to object against us. And because they are so well known to take all occasions
and opportunities, to infuse such things into the heads of their Disciples and
followers, not only in their meetings and conventicles; but to creep into
private families, and to infect them also; it will be more necessary to speak
somewhat to them, by way of prevention to such as are not yet infected, and by
way of cure (if possible) to such as are.

The very strength of all their objections against our Church, and their
greatest pleas for their separating and dividing from it, may briefly be drawn
up under two heads, which I shall first lay down, and then return as brief an
answer as the subject is capable of.

First, they say, that this Church does too nearly comply with the Church of
Rome, and is not wholly cleansed from it is superstitions. And

Secondly, that this Church commands and enjoins those ceremonies in it is
worship and service, which are no where commanded by God, and therefore it is
merely will worship, which is condemned by the Apostle, and therefore cannot be
complied with without sin.

First then, they say, that this Church does too nearly comply with the Church
of Rome, and is not wholly cleansed from it is superstitions. The charge indeed
is great, and were it as true, as it is utterly false and malicious, it would
not only justify their separation from it, but also most justly exasperate the
minds of all men against it. But it is most certain that all is not popery,
that is in use and practice in the Roman Church; and if we should once resolve,
to follow nothing that is used and practiced there, we must then resolve not
only to for bear to say our prayers, and to lift up our eyes to Heaven, but
also to lay aside the very profession of Christianity its self, as (I remember
I have read) that Renowned and Learned Prince, King James, long since observed
somewhat to this purpose. And therefore so long as there are no other things
used in our Church, but such as were generally received by all Christian
Churches, and by the Romans too, but long before she left her first love, and
so became vitiated and corrupted; this charge of Popery is very unjust and
utterly unreasonable. But not to dwell overlong in answering this objection;
let but any person seriously consider these two things, and then he will most
readily acquit her from this charge, and save both my self and all others any
further trouble. 1st. Let him consider, that if this Church were any ways
affianced to that of Rome, I mean as to any thing that is truly superstitious
and sinful, certainly there had not been a man of all those pious, Learned and
conscientious Divines, in Queen Mary's days, that would have Sacrificed their
estates and lives, in testimony of the purity and uncorruptness of it. The
Devil, though he was a liar from the beginning, yet in this he spoke truth,
skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life, Job. 2.4. And
the Apostle St. Paul, speaking of the extraordinary love of Christ, in laying
down his life for us sinners, tells us, Romans 5.7. That scarcely for a righteous
man will one dye, yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to dye,
intimating thereby that none will go so far, as to lay down their lives, for
any thing but what they are strongly opinionated to be good and holy. If
therefore this Church, in it is first reformation, and from whence she has
never deviated, save only in some few things, in mere condescension to our weak
Brethren, and I hope they will easily forgive her that wrong; I say, if this
Church had then retained any thing sinful, Surely we can never imagine that
Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, and diverse others should have been so prodigal of
their blood, as to pour it out in testimony of the goodness and purity of it.
To say that we have greater light now, and that we do espy those deformities in
it, which they, at that time, were not aware of, is to charge those holy men
with ignorance and blindness (which is but an ill requital) who were as
quicksighted, as holy and conscientious as any of our greatest zealots and
pretenders now. But Secondly, if there be any person that entertains any such
suspicion of our Church, as that it complyes too nearly with that of Rome, let
him tell me, in the next place, why those of the Romish Church should not only
withdraw themselves from ours, as any one that does not wilfully shut his eyes
may plainly see they do, but also bear the most implacable spite and spleen
against it; greater indeed, far greater, then against any sect or party
whatsoever. If ye were of the world (says our Savior Christ to his Disciples)
the world would love his own, but because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you, John 15.19. And so
may we argue much after the same manner here, if this Church was any ways of
the Church of Rome, the Church of Rome would rather love then hate it, but
because this Church is not of the Church of Rome, therefore does the Church of
Rome so greatly hate it. This very consideration, I say, together with the
former, will most clearly vindicate and acquit it, in the judgment of every
honest and unprejudiced person, from that first objection which is so commonly
made against it, (viz) it is too near compliance with the Church of Rome, and
it is superstitions. Again

Secondly, their second objection is this, That this Church commands, and
enjoins those ceremonies in her worship and service, which are no where
commanded by God, and therefore it is merely will worship, which is condemned
by the Apostle, and cannot be complied with without sin.

Before I can return any answer to this objection, I must take it in pieces,
and show what it is we own, and what we utterly disown and deny. That this
Church does enjoin some ceremonies in her service, which God has no where
particularly and precisely commanded, that we own, but that she is therefore
guilty of that will worship, which is condemned by the Apostle, that we deny.
But why, I wonder, should they lay so great stress upon this objection, as they
commonly do? What can be more easily answered? What though God has not
particularly and precisely commanded such ceremonies? What is all this to their
purpose, since he has commanded by his Apostle, in the 1. Cor. 14. ult. That
all things should be done decently and in order? And therefore so long as the
Church enjoynes, no other then such as tend merely to the preservation of
decency and order, What fault can any man justly find with her for it? It is
altogether impossible to perform any worship to God without some ceremonies. He
that goes to his devotions, though but in his closet, must use the ceremony
either of sitting, or standing, or kneeling; and one of these is as much a
ceremony as the other. He that stands as stiff as the Pharisee is as
ceremonious, as he that kneels with the Apostle, or, lies prostrate with our
Savior. And therefore these persons that exclaim so much, against a ceremony
must needs be (...), not only accusers but condemners of themselves too, if
ever they say their prayers. Seeing therefore that the worship of God cannot be
performed without some ceremonies, and since any of them is in itsself as
lawful as the other, the superior surely may appoint, which he in reason and
conscience thinks most fitting, and in so doing he commands nothing unlawful;
And he that does disobey any of these things, after it is so commanded and
appointed, can never excuse himself from that sin of disobedience to Governors.
And if he be punished for it, he has no reason to think that he suffers for
doing well, for he is but buffeted for his faults, and what glory is it (says
the Apostle) though he takes it patiently? 1. Pet. 2.20. But to make short of
the business; Let us but take the same course with these people as Nathan did
with David, 2. Sam. 12. or, as our Savior did with the Priests and Elders, in
the 21. Chap. of St. Matthew. Gospel (i.e.) Let us but state the case to them
under a disguise, and I am persuaded, that they will readily enough acquit
their governors from all faults, in enjoining some harmless and indifferent
ceremonies, and condemn themselves for not obeying the same. Let us (when ever
opportunity serves) put the case thus unto them. Suppose that you, that are
masters of families, should command your children and household, to appear
before you at such a time, and at such a place, and there to join with you to
worship God in such a posture, and by the use of such a prayer, which you have
composed in consideration of their weakness, and that they might all speak the
same things. This you have given sufficient notice of, and none can pretend
ignorance of it. Suppose now that some of them should come and tell you, that
you exceed your bounds, that you take too much upon you, in restraining them
thus of their liberty, and in tying them up so strictly to the use of such
things, as God has no where commanded, but has left them altogether free.
Suppose one, that is a little more saucy and confident than the rest, should
venture to tell you, that if you intend to have his company at your prayers,
they shall then be at such an hour, and not at that time which you have
appointed. A second, encouraged by the example of the other, tells you that
your Prayers shall be in such a Room, and not where you have ordered. Another
comes and asks you, what you have to do to appoint the posture or the habit, in
which their Prayers shall be performed; he is resolved to come in what dress he
pleases, and there either to sit, or stand, or loll at his pleasure; not so
much for his ease, as merely to cross you, and to show that he will not do, as
you order and prescribe. What, I pray, would you now think of these people?
What would you, their Masters and Governors, do to such servants? Would you
think that you your selves had done any thing amiss herein, or that you had
done more then you could justify, and so beg their pardon; or, would you not
rather look upon them as a company of unmannerly servants, would you not handle
them a little ruffly for such sauciness, and put them out of your houses, as
persons unfit to live in any civilized families? sure enough they would. And
then we may presently come upon them with a, ye are the men; you are these very
saucy, refractory servants. For a kingdom is but a larger family, over which
the Prince is the Governor and master. And therefore when he has by his Laws
enjoined such and such ceremonies, as are no ways contrary to the commands of
God, you that disobey your Prince in these things, do justify your own
children and servants in their disobedience to your selves. But come, and let
us reason together a little further; why may not Christian Kings use the same
authority, as the Kings of Israel and Judah did? Produce your cause, bring
forth your strongest reasons. Show us when and where, and how they lost such
authority. This seems to be no less a right then what is founded in nature, and
approved of by God himself. Abraham shall become a great and mighty Nation
(says God) and then it follows, I know that he will command his children and
his household after him, to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.18.19. There is
nothing more plain, then that the Governors and Princes of Judah did exercise
such power, and that it did of right belong unto them. And this is a thing that
has been often proved beyond all contradiction; especially in a late piece
called, the modern pleas for comprehension, toleration etc. To which I shall
refer my reader. Thus you see, that this objection against our Church, of
enjoining some ceremonies, which are no where particularly and precisely
commanded by God, is of no validity at all. And that in regard the worship of
God cannot be performed without some ceremony, and who so fit (in order to the
avoiding of confusion) to determine in this case as our Governors, to whom God
has enjoined obedience, and told us that we must submit to every ordinance of
man for his sake? In regard, the Church does no more then what every Master of
a family does expect, from his children and servants. And in regard too, that
it is no more then what has been done by Kings and Princes in the Old
Testament. And I am sure, that they can never prove, that they have been
divested of this power in the new. And that we may not pass the least part of
the objection unanswered, I shall, in a few words, show you, that this is not
that will worship which is condemned by St. Paul, and therefore they cannot
have the least shadow of reason, to separate from our Church upon this account,
and so disturb the peace of our Jerusalem. If you look into the 2. Chap. of St.
Paul's Epistle to the Colos. you will find, verse 18. That the Apostle forbids
the worshipping of Angels, as a bold invention of men, for which there was no
revelation. From thence he proceeds to speak against such superstitious people,
as did forbid marriage, and the eating of some sorts of meat, as in themselves
utterly unlawful. And those that were of this humor, he directly charges (verse
23) with will worship. So that it is very plain, that those persons whom he
charges with will worship, are such as do enjoin or command any thing to be
done or not done, as if it were the will and command of God, he should be so
served, when it is but a mere constitution of the will of man, and enjoined for
some prudent considerations. Now all the world must needs acquit our Church
from this, when she has plainly declared (as it is in the preface to the
Common Prayer Book) that none of these ceremonies are imposed, under the notion
of necessary or religious, but are of an indifferent nature, and only used, as
decent and comely in the judgment of the present Governors, who may alter these
things, and constitute others in their stead when they see fit, which they
could not do, did they look upon them as things in themselves necessary. And
thus have we fully answered the main objections, which are commonly made
against our Church; and showed, that it has no affiance at all with the Church
of Rome, in any thing that is sinful. And that the enjoining some ceremonies,
which God has not particularly and precisely commanded, is not that
will worship which is condemned by the Apostle; and therefore we may reassume
what we did at first lay down, and say, that to separate and divide from this
Church, upon such accounts, is highly blameable in any, nay! Extremely sinful.

But what, if after all this, we should undertake to show that these are but
mere pretenses, and that the great maintainers of a separation from our Church,
have not really any such thoughts of her; but yet, least the people should
suspect their separation from her to be causeless, they are willing that they
should think so of her. Alas! how commonly has the world been deluded by
specious pretenses? When Mary anointed our Saviors feet with a pound of
Spikenard, which (says the Text) was very costly; Judas cries out of a wast,
tells them that the Ointment might have been sold for an hundred pence, and
given to the poor. Here indeed was a fair pretense (viz) charity to the Poor.
But St. John the Evangelist tells us, that this was but a mere outside, a mere
pretense, and that covetousness was the true cause of his muttering against it;
for this he said (says St. John) not that he cared for the poor; but because he
was a Thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein, John 12.6. And so
too, we have a great deal of reason to think, that the real causes of the
separation from our Church, and of the clamor that is made against it, are
quite otherwise then what is commonly pretended. It will be worth a while
therefore, to search a little into the true causes of our divisions, because we
shall thereby discover the true images of things, through those dark mists,
which cunning but ungodly men, have endeavored to cast before the eyes of the
vulgar; we shall hereby discern how sadly the ignorant, but well-meaning,
vulgar, are deluded with mere pretenses, and that while their teachers cry,
conscience, conscience; it is merely their own lusts that promote and carry on
divisions in the Church.

But because those that separate and divide from our Church, are commonly
distinguished into a twofold rank and order, the teaching and leading men, and
the silly and deluded vulgar; we shall therefore reckon up the causes under a
twofold head, and show, that some of them are to be appropriated to the one,
and some to the other. And least those leading men, who think themselves some
body in their own conceit, should take it in great dudgen, if they should be
put off to the last, and that we may not offend them in this, we shall
therefore speak to them in the first place.

1. First then, the first cause or reason of these persons separating from the
Church, and consequently disturbing the peace and unity of it, may be an
ambitious and aspiring spirit: There is no question to be made, but that there
have been, and are still many such men in the world, who, viewing themselves in
a false glass, do ( Pigmalion like) fall in love with their own parts; and from
an overweening conceit of them, they will not only adore them themselves, but
expect that all the world should adore them too; and those that do not see as
much in them as they do in themselves, they conclude that all such are blinded
by emulation and envy. From this over-weaning conceit of themselves comes a
fancy, that none are so worthily deserving of the more honorable places in the
Church, as they. And when they come to make suit and claim for such places, if
they happen to be put by, and others (perhaps more deserving) to be preferred
before them. This very thing shall presently put them into a rage, they will
forthwith bethink themselves of a revenge, they will hereupon study, how to
make themselves considerable at the cost of those, who, they judged, did
consider them too little. And hereupon they will contrive some fair pretense to
draw a party after them, and make a faction. Thus we are told, how that Arrius
missing of a prelation to the order and dignity of a Bishop ( Alexander being
preferred before him) he broatch'd, and troubled the Church with an heretical
opinion, whereby he denied the Divinity of our Savior Christ. And some
conceive, that the occasion of Tertullian's defection from the true Faith, and
of his fall to Montanism was, because that after the death of Agrippinus, he
sufferr'd a repulse, and was put by the Bishopric of Carthage. I could produce
diverse instances of the like kind, were it at all needful. But it is much to be
thought, that our present age will afford too many; that it would turn us out
too many persons, who have chose to set up a party against the Church, and to
be leaders of a faction, merely because they might not be Governors of it, and
could not satisfy or content themselves with what their Governors thought them
deserving. But what a sad thing is it, and how unchristian too, for men (who
pretend to be holyer and more conscientious then others) to abuse and delude
the world so grossly, as to pretend that their separating from the Church, is
upon the account of conscience; when it is merely from an over-weaning conceit
of their abilities, that they are wiser and better then others, and will
therefore disturb the peace of the Church, if they are not preferred before
others. Is this humor in the least answerable to our Saviors Command, of
Learning of him, who was lowly in heart? Matthew. 11.29. Or does it any ways
answer his Apostles charge, that in lowliness of mind we esteem others better
then our selves? Phillip. 2.3. Certainly had they not quite laid aside, and
forgotten some of the weightier precepts of the Gospel, they would quickly lay
aside that vain fondness they have for themselves, they would cast an eye upon
their deformities, as well as upon their excellencies; and then they would
begin a little to contract their plumes, and think others as good, if not
better then themselves; and no longer disturb the peace of the Church, upon
this account, because they have not those honorable places in it, which they
vainly and groundlesly think they do deserve.

Secondly, a second cause or reason of these persons separating from the
Church, and consequently disturbing the peace and unity of it, is interest, or,
the desire of gaining riches and money, what sin is there indeed that the
charming force of these will not persuade some men to? Judas betrayed his
Master for Thirty Pieces of Silver; and the Husbandmen (in the parable)
instigate and prompt each other to murder, and to kill the heir, to get the
inheritance to themselves. The love of money (says the Apostle) is the root of
all evil, 1. Tim. 6.10. And therefore, why may it not be supposed to be the
root of this evil we are now speaking of (viz) of the disturbance of the peace
of the Church? Nay! he that reads but the next words following, in the Text
forenamed, will find that the Apostle has asserted as much himself. The love
of money (says he) is the root of all evil; which while some have coveted
after, they have erred from the Faith. And the same Apostle, St. Paul, has
left an instance of it upon record, 2. Tim. 4.10. Demas has forsaken me,
having loved this present world. There is no question, but that some of those
Doctrines, which make the partition wall betwixt us and the Church of Rome
somewhat higher, and which they are so zealous to maintain, are oweing merely
to interest, and to the profit they get by them. As I could instance in their
Doctrines about purgatory, about pardons and indulgences, their Praying for the
Dead, and such like; which would certainly fall to the ground, were it not for
their interest and profit to uphold them. And there is as little question to be
made, but that most of the zealous Preachers in the separated congregations,
would soon return to that Church, which they have causlesly left and forsaken,
were it not for the profit and advantage they reap by it. They find a more
fruitful crop, as to temporal advantage, by sowing in those by-fields and
unlawful enclosures, then they could expect by laboring in Gods Vineyard, where
alone they ought to have been true Laborers and workmen. Though I will not
say, that the Disciples and followers of these men do so highly affect them, as
to pluck out their eyes for their sakes, as St. Paul tells us the Galathians,
once would have done for his; yet it is easy to be observed, by any that will
but a little inquire into it, that their liberality and bounty is so great
toward them, that many of them will almost starve themselves and their
families, to feed and to cloth their admired teachers; they will leave
themselves neither scrip, nor shoes, nor purse, rather then not be
contributers toward filling the purses of those, whom they look upon to be the
only soul-saving teachers. They make but little conscience to rob their Parish
Ministers of their Dues, to bestow them upon these House Preachers. Like the
wicked sons of Athaliah the usurper, they take away the dedicated things from
the house of God, to bestow them upon Baalim, 2. Chro. 24.7. And while they
find their admirers so bountiful to them, it is no wonder if they continue their
separation from the Church, and use their utmost endeavors to keep up a
faction, which (it is well known) affords more profit to the greater part of
them, then those livings which the best of them held, during the sad times of
confusion. So long as they can, by this craft, get such a plentiful livelihood,
it is no wonder; if (like the Silver-smiths at Ephesus) they decry Apostolical
Doctrine and Government it is self, and cry up their own fancies, as the only
Diana's to be worshipped. But would to God these persons would timely consider,
what is like to be the issue of this; whether this be any better then to make
gain their godliness, and what it can profit, though they should gain the whole
world, and lose their own souls at least, if not the souls of others too
thereby at the last. Would they would consider how much alike they are, to the
Priests and Prophets of Israel, spoken of by the Prophet Micah, Chap. 3.11. Who
did teach for hire, and Divine for money (i. e.) they taught such Doctrines as
they knew to be most pleasing to their hearers, not regarding the truth, and
that too merely for the sake of profit. And yet will these too (as well as
they) lean upon the Lord and say, is not the Lord amongst us? None evil can
come upon us. But let them read the next verse, and see what is like to be the
issue and event of this: Therefore shall Sion for your sakes be plowed like a
field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps. But

3ly. ult. A third cause or reason of these persons separating from our Church,
and consequently disturbing the peace and unity of it, is a fond and
unjustifiable desire of preserving their reputation and credit. I do not design
hereby to blame any man, for using his utmost care to keep a good name, because
it is a thing so tender, that (like a glass that is broken and shattered in
pieces) if it be once lost, it is very hardly recovered. A good name is rather
to be chosen then great riches, says Solomon. It is a pearl of such inestimable
value, that there is no man that truly weighs it, but would (with the Merchant
in the parable) part with all he has rather then go without it. It is not
this, I say, that I do in the least design to speak against. But there are a
sort of persons in the world that are much to be blamed, who having once
espoused an opinion, having once been patrons of a cause, and abettors of a
faction, and having thereby procured the name of zealous and holy men, we may
as soon remove mountains as persuade them to renounce that cause, though never
so much convinced of the unjustifiableness of it; and all because (as they
phrase it) they shall thereby give scandal to the world, but, in plain terms,
it is because they shall for ever lose that name, and reputation they have
gotten for it. That this is the plain English of the business, whatever is
pretended to the contrary, will most evidently appear, if we may but look a
little back to what has heretofore passed. Time was, when most of our
dissenting teachers, might have kept their livings upon their conformity. This
favor was offerr'd to them (though but little deserving it) by our gracious
Prince upon his return to his undoubted rights. Upon this, how notorious is it,
that they met together to consult and debate upon it. They persuaded the
people, that they spent their time in fasting and seeking God to direct their
consciences, but we have more reason to think, that they were consulting their
own credit, and whether, upon their conformity, the people would not only
deride them but hate them too, for setting up those things upon deliberation,
which they before had rashly and unadvisedly pulled down. We can never imagine
that they could be strangers to the Government and Discipline of the Church,
unless we will make them of the number of those, who spoke evil of those things
they understood not. We can never imagine, that they could be ignorant of what
would be required of them, before they could be admitted into it. And
therefore, if it was so plain a business that there consciences would not
suffer them to conform, why did they not at very first profess it openly, and
tell the world as much without any more ado? and without so many meetings and
debates about it? No! no! they then thought (what some of them have plainly
enough declared since) that they did not scruple what we do, but only they
thought it unhandsome (i. e.) not for their credit for them to do it. But
surely, if it be better for a man, that has been overtaken in a fault to
confess it, and to do so no more, as I suppose they will none of them deny;
then is it better too for them to renounce those erroneous tenets, which
occasioned their former dislike of our Church, and to evidence that they were
mistaken by their free and open compliance with it. And this would be so far
from procuring shame, in the thoughts of all sober and considering men, that it
would be very much their glory. Let them call to mind the many examples of this
kind that have gone before them. Let them but peruse St. Austine's
retractations, and there they will find a copy which I could with they would
imitate and write after. Let them consider, whether a little false glory be of
weight enough, to be put in the scale against the peace of the Church. If they
have not an infallibility amongst them equal with that of Rome, they will
think, that they might be mistaken and deceived. Let them view that place of
St. Paul, and apply it to themselves, 1. Cor. 13.11. When I was a Child, I
spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a Child, but when I
became a man, I put away Childish things. If these and such like considerations
will not work upon them, to renounce and forsake their former errors, for fear
of losing their reputation, of being called wavering men, and time-servers and
the like; certainly they are of a quite different strain from the Apostles, who
rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for Gods sake, Acts
5.41. and are to be ranked amongst those timorous rulers of the Jews, ( John
12) Who believed on our Savior Christ, but because of the Pharisees, they did
not confess him, being lovers of the praise of men more then of the praise of
God. And thus have I now showed you what are the true causes and reasons of the
separation from our Church, and consequently of the disturbance of it is peace
and unity, as to the teaching and leading part of our dissenters.

I proceed now to speak of the second sort of our dissenters, those that
forsake the public assemblies, and so disturb the unity and peace of the
Church (viz) the well meaning, but ignorant and deluded vulgar.

As first of all, the first cause or reason of these persons dislike of our
Church, and consequently of their separation from it, is prejudice; whereby I
mean that which proceeds from education. It is certainly true, that nothing
makes a deeper impression upon us, nothing is more hardly routed out, then
those documents and instructions which we receive in our infancy and Childhood.

Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem testa diu

The vessel retains a gust or tincture of that liquor that was first put into
it. The first principles we imbibe are not commonly written in sand, to be
defaced by every blast of wind; but they are commonly as durable, as if they
were engraved with an iron pen in brass or marble. It is a common expression
amongst us, that possession is an eleven points of the Law. But sure enough,
that person that has the education and training up of Children in any
Religion, has odds enough against any other that shall come after him; for
while the wax was warm and soft, he clapped his seal upon it, and that
impression, we know, cannot easily be altered. Prejudice is so sore an evil,
that it will render the most convincing testimonies ineffectual. And of this
the Jews, in rejecting the Messiah, is an everlasting instance. There was not
so much as one single circumstance, either of time or place, of lineage or
descent, of Doctrine or miracles, which their own writings had foretold him by,
but he answered it exactly. But they having imbibed an opinion, that the
Messiah was to be a great temporal Prince, that should fight their Battles and
free them from all slavery; because they could not discover this in him, they
therefore became blind as to all other Characters. If then it fared so ill with
our Savior himself upon the account of prejudice, what wonder is it, if the
Church of England be despised and rejected too upon the same score? How
commonly has this Church (which is absolutely the best reformed Church
throughout the whole world) been branded with the odious names, of superstition
and Popery, from which (as I have showed) she is the most innocent and free?
How commonly have persons, in our late sad times, been trained up in an utter
abhorrence of her? How frequently have we found some persons so prejudiced and
incensed against her, that, if we go about to undeceive them, and to give them
better information, they will look upon us as their utter enemies, and they are
ready to cry out to us (as the possessed did to our Savior in the Gospel) what
have we to do with you? Are you come to torment us? altogether forgetting that
caution of St. John, 1. John 4.1. Of trying the spirits, whether they be of God
or no; and that for a very good reason which he has there laid down, because
there are many false Prophets that are gone out into the world. Most sad it is
to think that poor Souls should be so obstinate, and so resolutely unwilling to
hear good instructions, and that they should be thus afraid of those that mean
nothing but their good. They have been taught from their cradle to think ill of
this Church, and in that they think themselves wise enough, and who is he that
can be admitted to instruct them? But alas! this is that which will highly
aggravate their fault, and make it indelible. For upon this account it was,
that our Savior told the Pharisees, John 9.41. If ye were blind, ye should
have no sin, but now ye say, we see, therefore your sin remains. This then,
Isay, is the first cause or reason of these persons dislike of our Church, and
consequently of their separation from it (viz) prejudice.

Secondly, A second cause or reason of these persons dislike of our Church, and
consequently of their separation from it, is the want of Christian charity, I
mean charity for their Governors; which if it could once be received and
entertained amongst those many Gospel-graces, which they think themselves to be
the only possessors of, we might then have some hopes of seeing them come into
our Churches, and there to profess and hold, the same faith with us in the
unity of the spirit and in the bond of peace. Sure I am, that if we should go
into any of the separated congregations and confused assemblies, a great part
of that multitude could give us no good account of that concourse; if we should
question them about it: And if some of them should tell us, that they are there
met together to worship God, yet I am confident, that (like that uproar that
was stirred up by the Silver-smiths at Ephesus, Acts 19) the more part of them
could not tell, wherefore they should come to worship God here rather then in
the public and solemn assemblies. Perhaps some of them might tell us, that
there they have pure ordinances, and a true Gospel Worship, and that in our
Churches there is nothing but superstition and Popery, a mixed worship, and a
serving of God after the Commandments of men. But then, if we ask them further,
what they mean by superstition, and will worship, and by serving God after the
Commandments of men, and the like; they are as little able to give us any good
account, as the Child that is yet to learn his A. B. C. Like Parrots, they have
only learnt the expression and the found, but as for the true sense and meaning
of the words, that they are altogether strangers to. And to many of them, God
knows! are like to continue so; for their Rabbi's and Teachers will never
instruct them in it, for that would utterly spoil their trade; and they will
not learn it of others. And therefore could we but once press them to a
reception of that superexcellent, and truely-gospel grace, charity, how much
would it tend to the abating at least, if not to the utter eradicating all hard
conceits, either of our Church, or, of the Governors of it, out of their minds.
St. Paul the Apostle in the 13. Chap. of his 1. Epistle to the Cor. gives us a
very larg description, and a very high Encomium of charity; and amongst diverse
others, tells us, that these are its properties; to suffer long and to be kind,
not to behave it is self unseemly, not to be overhasty to think any evil, to
bear all things, to believe all things, to hope all things, and to endure all
things. And were it not, I say, for want of this, they would not thus despise
Government, and speak evil of those things which they so little understand. The
forenamed Apostle has taken all the care imaginable to prevent any such thing.
He has strictly commanded us, Heb. 13.17. To obey them that have the rule over
us, and to submit our selves. And as if he had foreseen, that men would be
ready to withhold their obedience to the commands of their Governors, under a
pretense, that the things they command are not plain and clear to them, and
therefore, for ought they know, may be unlawful. As if he had foreseen, I say,
this pretense, he has annexed a very strong reason, to enforce their obedience
to all things of this nature, which is this, for they watch for your Souls
(says he) as they that must give account. Which is as much as if he had said
more at large thus. If your Superiors do command and enjoin any thing that is
lawful, nay! suppose that it be in some measure doubtful whether it be lawful
or no, yet in all things of this nature you must be obedient. It is not a bare
conceit and fancy, that the thing commanded may be unlawful, that will excuse
your disobedience; for there is nothing less then a plain command of God to the
contrary, that can supersede the commands of your Governors. And because many
of you may be apt to be overmistrustful of the wisdom, of the sincerity and
integrity of your Governors, and so may be as apt to suspend your obedience to
them, till you your selves shall see a very good reason for the thing
commanded; do but consider that your Governors are placed over you by God
himself, that they watch for your Souls, their main business is to see that you
lead your lives in all godliness and honesty; Nay! consider further, that they
must all give an account unto God at the great and general audit, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be revealed, how they have acquitted themselves in
such offices and employments. And therefore you may not without the plainest
reason suspect their good intentions; whatsoever they define and lay down, they
define not only for you but for themselves too, they do not only teach others
but themselves also. And therefore if you had but common Christian charity for
your Governors, you would never thus deny obedience to their commands, nor
withdraw your selves from the communion of our Church, in which there is
nothing at all enjoined or commanded, but what is altogether agreeable with,
or, at least, no ways contrary to, the word of God. Again.

Thirdly, ult. Another cause or reason of those persons dislike of our Church,
and consequently of their separation from it, is (if I may so express it) for
want of a due use of their Christian liberty. This perhaps may seem a little
strange to some persons at first, because this is one of their great pleas, for
their not yielding obedience to their Governors in things indifferent (viz)
that their commanding and enjoining such things, does too much entrench upon
their Christian liberty, and would again entangle them in the yoke of Bondage.
But yet I question not but to make it good. And if they would but impartially
consult the true meaning of that Text, which they so commonly have recourse to,
Gall. 5.1. They would find that the liberty which the Apostle there speaks of,
is not that liberty which they challenge to themselves. That freedom which our
Savior Christ purchased for us, is a freedom from sin, freedom from the curse
of the law, freedom from the ceremonial Law of Moses, as Circumcision and
Sacrifices, and the like, and not in the least any freedom from paying our
obedience, to the commands of our Governors in all lawful and indifferent
things. And it is a wonder to me, that any man should be so much besides
himself as to think, that the least drop of Christ's Blood was so vainly spent,
as to purchase freedom for us in things absolutely indifferent (i. e.) in such
things as were in their own nature indifferent, concerning which there was no
command. For these were free before, and therefore free to be performed before
and after they are commanded, only the command is necessarily to be obeyed.
Their great scrupulosity and timerousness as to the use of such indifferent and
harmless ceremonies, and which God has no where forbidden, will rank them
amongst those nice Jewish Christians, of which the Apostle St. Paul speaks,
Colos. 2.21. Who cried out, touch not, taste not, handle not, and that too upon
the same account, after the Doctrines and Commandments of men. For God, I say,
has no where prohibited the use of them, and they have no other reason for
their not using them, but because those teachers which they have heaped up unto
themselves, do tell them, that they must not use them. And therefore we may
apply that saying of our Savior to the Jews, John. 5.43. unto these people,
and say, though your Governors come to you in the name of God, who has
entrusted them with the care of these things, and therefore they may very
lawfully enjoin them, yet these you will not hear; but if another come in his
own name, and tells you without any reason at all, that you may not use them,
him you will receive and hear. Thus they can suffer fools gladly; if another
man bring them into bondage, they can suffer it patiently enough; but if their
Governors command no more then what they may safely comply with, then they kick
and fling and will by no means endure it, then they cry out of a restraint of
their Christian liberty, whilst alas! they are the greatest slaves to the
Doctrines and commandments of other men. And thus I say, it is for want of a
due use of their Christian liberty, that makes them out of conceit with our
Church, and consequently to separate and divide from it. And now I have done
with my Text; and showed you (which was the main point of it) that it is a duty
highly concerning and much incumbent upon all Christians to endeavor the
safety, and to pray for the peace of the Church. And therefore, let us all, in
the conclusion, be persuaded, in our several places and stations, to use the
utmost of our endeavors thereunto. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right
hand forget her cunning (says holy David) and if I do not remember thee, let my
tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, Psalm. 137.5.6. verses. Let us not
forget her many enemies, especially those Edomites (be they Papists or others)
that cry out down with her, down with her, even to the ground. And as for such
as these, let us pray unto God, that he would abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound all their devices. And as for others, who may possibly
mean well, but are most miserably misled and deluded, let us pray unto God,
that it would please him to bring into the way of truth all such as have erred
and are deceived. And let us not forget to pray for our Governors too, let us
pray unto God, that it would please him to bless and keep the Magistrates,
giving them grace to execute justice and to maintain truth. And by so doing, we
may the better expect and hope for the preservation of our religion, and for
the prosperity and safety and peace of our Jerusalem, even so long till we
shall all come to the enjoyment of the heavenly Jerusalem, and to associate
with an innumerable company of Angels; till we shall come to the general
assembly and Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven, and to God
the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. Which that we all
of us may, God of his infinite mercy grant for the merits sake of his Son Jesus
Christ, to whom with the Father and the holy spirit, be all honor and glory and
praise now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A Letter Written to a Young Gentleman (a Roman Catholic) in Warwickshire.
SIR,
THE extraordinary kindness I have for you, as a Friend, and the care I have
for your Soul, as a Christian, together with your late importunity, for a few
Lines from me in reference to your Religion, has forced me to put Pen to Paper
in the performance of a Task, which otherwise I should hardly have been
persuaded to. I am conscious enough of my own inabilities, and I was Three or
Four days in suspense, whether I should comply with your desire or no. And the
greatest Remora was, the little good that I could promise to my self from such
an undertaking, and that upon a double account. First, in regard I knew you to
be Educated in the Romish Religion from your very Cradle, and so must needs
have sucked in such prejudices against the Protestants, as were not to be
rooted out but by a person of greater skill and strength then my self. And
Secondly, in regard of what I have already intimated, (viz.) my great inability
for it. But when I began to consider and recollect what great things God
Almighty (who turns the Hearts of the Children of Men as he pleases) has
sometimes wrought by weak Instruments, I presently resolved upon the work, and
then to leave the issue and success to him, who works in us both to will and
to do of his good pleasure.

Your former carelessness, and your earnest importunity of late, for some
satisfaction as to the Principles of your Religion, brings to my mind what I
have oftentimes been told of some Seamen and Mariners, such as (according to
the Royal Prophets expression) go down to the Sea in Ships, and do their
business in great Waters, who, though at other times they have been careless
and profane enough, even so far as to bid defiance to the Heavens, and to the
Powers above; yet when the Stormy Winds and Tempests have rose upon them, and
have threatened them with an inevitable Shipwreck and Destruction, have then
been all on a sudden roused and awaked, and have fallen upon their knees in
Prayer to that God, in whom before they hardly seemed to believe. You know (I
presume) the old Maxim, Similitudo non curr^t quatuor pedibus. And therefore
though it will not be accommodated to you in all respects, yet thus, I think it
may. I have often heard you highly applauding the Church of Rome, and so highly
extolling the goodness of the Romish Religion, as to seem utterly to dislike
that of the Protestants, and to give but little regard to any thing that could
or might be said, in vindication of the truth and purity of it. This indeed was
mostly, while the season was serene and calm enough toward those of that
Religion, and the Penal statutes that have heretofore been made against them,
but rarely put in execution. But since the discovery of a late damnable and
bloody Plot, of some at least, if not of most of the Papists in England,
against a person of a mild and Gracious Prince, even to the taking away his
life, and by that means to extirpate the Protestant Religion has alarmed the
higher Powers, and given them sufficient reason to inflict the utmost rigor and
severity of the Laws upon the whole crew: This may perchance have contributed
something toward the rouzing and awakening you too, to make some scrutiny and
search into the goodness of that Religion of the Protestants, that has
prompted them to so much mildness and gentleness toward you, and into the
Principles of that Religion of the Papists, which puts her votaries (both
Priests and Laics) upon such ungrateful, bloody and unjustifiable practices.
By what has already passed (upon this account) against those of your Religion,
we may nearly guess what will be further done. And surely you have but little
reason to think, but that those who shall refuse the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, when tendered to them, shall have the utmost severity of the Laws
inflicted upon them. And what those Laws are, I think you have no need of any
information.

Really Sir I hate an Hypocrite in Religion with all my heart, such (...) (as I
remember Mr. Gale calls them) that are for that Religion that makes most for
their interest, be it what it will. And I would never go about to persuade any
one to renounce, and forsake a good Religion, and thereby to hazard his soul
(which is more worth than a thousand worlds) to save an estate. And the great
Author of our Christian Religion has told us, that whosoever does not bear his
Cross and come after him, he cannot be his Disciple. But all that I would
persuade you to is seriously to enquire, whether that Religion you now profess,
be a good Religion or no. And let me tell you this, that such a zeal as puts a
man upon the loss of an estate, for the sake of that Religion into which he was
drawn, when he scarce knew the difference betwixt good and evil, and has been
ever since kept in the dark; and not permitted to search into the soundness and
goodness of it; as it is an unjustifiable zeal, because not according to
knowledge; so it is never to be expected, that it should be rewarded with
Houses and Lands in this world, or with Glory in the world to come. Be
persuaded therefore to enquire into the grounds of your Religion, before you
expose your self to such inconveniences, and losses for it is sake. Consult some
able conscientious Divines of the Church of England about it, and I am sure you
are not altogether a stranger to some, who are able and will be willing to give
you all reasonable satisfaction. It is a piece of natural justice, to hear both
Parties speak before we condemn either. ^^th our Law judge any one before it
hear him, and know what (...) does; said Nicodemus a Ruler of the Jews? But
truly I th^^ that the neglect of consulting the Writings of the Divines of the
Church of England, and the over-easie belief of whatever your Priests do buzz
into your ears, may justly expose most of your Religion, to the censure of
having too much partiality, and too little justice. But, Pray Sir, do but
consider the wonderful charms of Empire and riches, and to what horrid
impieties, they have sometimes hurried the greatest part of men. And why may
not most of those Doctrines, which the Church of Rome is so zealous to
maintain, be no other (for any thing you know yet) then what do altogether flow
from the mighty thirst after riches and Empire, which many of the Popes of Rome
have been eminently remarkable for? I think I could name some that have had
their sole rise and spring from thence, but that I study all possible brevity.
But however, let me mind you of consulting their Doctrines about Purgatory,
about Pardons and Indulgences, and those of deposing (as they call them)
Heretical Kings and Princes. And I am persuaded you will find, that the only
root from whence they did at first spring, was no other (whatever is pretended)
then that forenamed. The fire of Purgatory keeps the old Gentleman warm, his
Pardons and Indulgences fill his holinesse's Coffers: The saying Masses for the
dead, brings in so many good rents, that the Priests stand in no great need of
help from the living. This is the craft by which they get their wealth, and
therefore these Doctrines are the great Diana's amongst them. The Church of
Rome has at all times, ever since the Reformation, been charged by the Divines
of the Church of England, with that damnable sin of Idolatry. And if you could
be persuaded impartially, to peruse the late writings of the Learned and
wellread Doctor Stillingfleet, you would begin to suspect, that they of that
Church are not altogether free from it. Their praying to Saints, their
Doctrines of merits, their depriving the Laity of the Cup in the Holy Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, and many other such like things as I could name, are
clearly and directly contrary to the Holy Scriptures. And this too you would be
fully convinced of, if you could once be persuaded to read them. And to what
purpose were they written and delivered to the World, but that they might be
read? Do not therefore any longer suffer your Priests, to take away that Key of
knowledge from you, who will not enter in themselves, nor (by their good will)
suffer others, that are willing to enter. You had need to have an extraordinary
good opinion of those who keep you thus in the dark. For my part, should they
deal thus with me, I should very much doubt their honest intentions; and at
least conclude, that they looked upon me either as a Madman or a Fool. And
some expressions that have fallen from their Pens of late, makes me apt to
believe, that they have scarce any better thoughts of most Lay men of your
Religion. And surely were it not that they do think so, they would never have
gone about to impose upon them, such ridiculous fopperies and Pageant-like
ceremonies, so far from being grave and significant, and such as may become
Religion, that I have oftentimes thought, that as it was in Heathen Rome
heretofore, so it is in Rome Christian (viz) that your Priests have much ado,
to contain from smiling when they meet one another in the streets, to think how
easily they Gull and delude you. Were it not that I am unwilling to transgress
too much the bounds of an Epistle, I could say a great deal more (but nothing
more then what is true) against the Romish Religion. But in regard that it was
your own doings to put me upon this work, I hope you will the more readily
pardon me, if I do transgress. Nevertheless, there is but one thing more that I
shall at present speak of; And that is, to ask you, how you can possibly
fauster or entertain any good thoughts of such a Religion, as encourages and
prompts men to Assassinations and murders, and such like Hellish Artifices, to
propagate and uphold it? That some of your Religion have been lately, as well
as formerly, guilty of these things, is so plainly apparent, that nothing but
an unmeasurable store of considence can deny it. And for these things, the
Jesuits are noted throughout a great part of the Christian World; for England
has not been the only Scene where they have acted these kind of Villainies. The
bloody Massacre in Ireland (which is still fresh in the memories of many
living) that too in France, and another at Piedmont, and elsewhere, has
sufficiently made them known in those parts. And for these things, they better
deserve the name of Turks than Christians. And that all of that way, are not as
deeply concerned as the other, is owing more to a generous temper, and a
naturally mild and tender disposition, or such like, then to their Religion,
whose Principles, I am sure, if fully understood and followed, would put them
upon as great, and (if possible) greater impieties. But alas! the misery of it
is, they do not yet know the misery of the iniquity of the Church of Rome; for
if they did (as your Priests are well aware of) they would certainly be
affrighted at it is dismal sight, and utterly renounce all Communion with it.
Such Principles as lead to cruelty and blood are undoubtedly the Positions of
the Church of Rome; but they are not to be discovered, but at some certain
times when their cause is like to be promoted by them, nor but to some persons
whom they find to be the most savage and inhumane. They pick a jury for the
Trial, or rather, for the acting of their cause, out of the Butchers-roe. But
once again; is that Religion think you true and Christian that encourages
rebellion, and treason, and murder? Alas! God would have no men to speak or act
wickedly for him. Their Religion is vain, and their damnation will be just, who
do such apparent evils, under a pretense they may do good thereby. Surely,
these very things will make every sober, well-meaning Christian, to abhor and
detest them. Can that Religion be true and good, which will not suffer you to
be true and loyal to your King, and to yield obedience in all lawful things, to
the higher Powers, under whom God has subjected us? Can that Religion be true,
which will not suffer you to swear Allegiance to your Prince? or, if you do,
will afterward dispense with you for the breach of such an Oath; when the word
of God itself (which is more to be hearkened to surely than the Pope) has
commanded us to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of
God? Can that Religion be warrantable, which would deprive Princes of their
Power in the external Government of the Church, when the word of God has all
along allowed and approved it, as is plain throughout the whole Bible? The
Popes supremacy (which I find you highly favor) is an unjust usurpation, and
there is not the least intimation in the Scriptures for it; unless you will
admit of a Pasce oves, feed my sheep; or duo lumina fecit Deus, God made two
great lights, the Sun to rule the day, the Moon and the Stars to govern the
night, as sufficient proofs of it. And surely these texts will as little prove
the Popes supremacy as that text, Abraham begat Isaac, would prove the
unlawfulness of Non-residency. But did I say, that the Popes supremacy is an
usurpation? Why surely so it is, and especially here in England, where I could
never yet understand any good title he had to it. Whenever he had it, it was
got either by fraud or force, and therefore he might very well expect to lose
it, when the right heir should claim his own. The Pope, that strong man armed,
kept it by mere force and strength for a while; but at length came Henry the
Eighth, who being a Prince of courage and stronger than the Pope, threw him
out, and the Kings of England, his Successors, have all reason to see to the
keeping possession of that, that is one of the most precious Jewels of the
Crown. To be brief, Sir, I would earnestly importune you to consult the Oaths
of Allegiance and supremacy, which will (it is presumed) e're long be tendered
to you. And I verily believe that you can find nothing at all in either of them
but what may very safely be taken by all good Christians. And when you have
taken them, let me as earnestly importune you to keep them; for however some
may please themselves with the Popes dispensation, and think that that will
justify and excuse them, in the breach of those or either of those Oaths; yet
God himself has told us, that he will not hold them guiltless (i.e.) he will
severely punish and revenge himself upon those, who take his name in vain. I
have but one thing more to say, which just now comes into my mind, and that
will relate to an expression which (in my own hearing) came lately from you.
You was saying, not long since, that if you should change your Religion, yet
you would hardly do it at this time, because (as you then said) the world would
think, that you did it more out of fear then conscience. The very expression
(my thought) did portend some good, and put me in some little hopes of a
change. But I beseech you Sir, if you have any convictions wrought in you of
the goodness, of the purity and peaceableness of the Protestant Religion, and
of the quite contrary qualities of the Romish, take heed of smothering and
stifeling such convictions (though but for an hour) for that may tend to the
utter ruin of you both here and hereafter. Let no man refuse to hear, when God
Almighty calls. Never be afraid or ashamed to own and embrace that Religion,
which (if you live but up to the Principles of it) will render you a true
Servant to God, a loyal subject to your King, and a faithful friend to your
friend, though his persuasion in Religion be never so differing.

And let me tell you this Sir, that I could never yet persuade my self, that a
Roman Catholic ( quatenus Roman Catholic) could ever be reckoned as a good
Christian, a Loyal Subject, or a true Friend. And now Sir, that you may be no
longer a stranger, to the Pious Devotions of that Church, in whose Communion I
(as well as many others) should be very glad and joyful to see you, I have sent
you herewith, the Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments,
and other Rites and Ceremonies according to the use of the Church of England,
desiring you seriously to peruse it, and to accept of it, as a gift and present
from your Friend. In which Book, you will find the most Pious, Pethy, and
well-composed Prayers, which are made unto God (who is the only hearer of
Prayers) and not to the Saints, who are altogether ignorant of us, which are
made in the Name of Jesus Christ, there being no other Name given unto Men
whereby they can be Saved; which, in short, are such Prayers, that any one that
knows but the English Tongue, may readily understand, and thereby know, what it
is he begs of God, and that he does not ask for a Stone, when he intends Bread;
or for a Serpent, when he intends a Fish; which the ignorant People of the
Church of Rome, who say their Prayers in an unknown Tongue, cannot be assured
of.

Thus Sir I have answered your desire, in giving you some short Memento's of
the unsoundness of the Romish Religion. And if you require farther proof of it,
I will then refer you to the Writings of some of our Famous and Learned Divines
of the Church of England, and to which there was never any Reply yet made, that
could deserve the name of an Answer. And really Sir, it is no little evidence
of the weakness of their cause, when they have no other Arguments to defend it
with, than Daggers and Pistols. You see Sir, that I have answered your request
in bestowing a Sheet of Paper upon you, with what intent and design you put me
upon it, you know best. But if it was no worse then with what I Writ it, I may
then be confident of a favorable reception, and candid interpretation of these
few Lines, from him, who is, Sir,

Your unfeigned Friend, and Servant, etc.
December. 2. 1678.

