PROPOSAL FOR THE ACTUAL SURVEY Of all the Counties in ENGLAND and WALES: BY
Mr. ADAMS of the Inner Temple.
THE true measure of a Meridian Line, and the difference of Latitude between
the North and South Points thereof, has been the Enquiry of the best
Geographers in all Ages, being the only means from whence to calculate the
true Compass of the Globe of Earth and Water, supposed to be exactly Spherical,
and to know how many Miles do make a Degree in any Course, Sea upon a great
Circle.

And although the Experiments of our Countryman Mr. Norwood, between York and
London, and of Fernelius, Snellius, Riccioli, and the Eminent Picartus beyond
Sea, already extant in Print may be thought sufficient on this Subject, yet
(the first recommending his Essay to a more correct way of Measure then he
used, and all the others dissering in their methods, and disagreeing in the
resolution of the thing in Question, and in the adjusting of the Measures of
several Nations) the certain truth of this matter does hitherto remain
doubtful.

The said Mr. Adams for clearing this Important Problem, does intend to measure
a true Meridi^an Line, from the Town of Monmoth, situate upon the Southern
Borders of Herefordshire, to the Northern Borders of Cheshire, and to take the
exact Latitude of Monmoth, Hereford, Shrewsbury (...) Chester, and Warington.

He does fix upon this part of the Kingdom because (having formerly made,
Proposals for (...) actual Survey of Shropshire) he already has the
Subscriptions of above one hundred and fifty (...) the most considerable
Gentlemen in the said County; and the Survey thereof had been completed before
now, had not the finishing of his Index Villaris of all the Cities,
Marker-Towns, Parishes, Villages and Private Seats in England and Wales,
(distinguished by Symbols) and an Alphabetical Table of all the Nobility and
Gentry, now ready for the Press, hindered that Work.

And being of opinion, That a true Coasting-Line of the KINGDOM, together with
the said Meridian-Line will be a sure foundation to carry on the Survey
thereof, especially if such Meridian-Line be continued from Monmoth to the
Southern Sea on the Coast of Dorsetshire, and from the Northern part of
Cheshire to the Parallel of Barwick: and conceiving that such Survey may be
perfected, and large County-Maps engraved within the space of Four Years, to
commence from the 25 day of March next 1681. He hopes that the Gentry of this
Kingdom will be as ready to encourage this Design, as they were to Subscribe
for his Great Map of England, wherein the Computations and Measures of Miles
are entered in Figures.

In the MEASURE of the said MERIDIAN-LINE.
I. He will, with the assistance of an able Surveyor, measure a much greater
Stationary Distance then Picartus did, backward and forward, and, besides the
Chain and Wheel, will make use of Pikes screwed together, for the adjusting of
such Measure. II. That in taking the Angles of Position he will use the best
Instruments that can be gotten, and compare the way of Snellius by Pinnules, or
Common Sights, with that of Picartus, by Telescopes. III. To prove the Truth of
such Measure, he does design, That his Brother, William Adams of Longdon, in
the County of Salop, Esquire, (a person very well known in the said three
Counties of Salop, Chester, and Hereford, for his Ability and long Experience
in Survey) with the assistance of another able Artist, shall measure a
different Station with the same Exactness, and proceed in all things as is
before proposed, and that if his Brother measure from North to South, he will
measure from South to North. IIII. That, in taking the several Latitudes of
Places, he will use very large Instruments, and make the Observations double
and apart, and proceed therein as he shall be directed by the ablest
Mathematicians, whose Advice he desires, in an Experiment of so great
Importance and general use to all Mankind, but more particularly to the Trading
part of the World.
(...) Intends by two, or more, skilful Surveyors to take the true Circuit, or
Girth-line, of the ^hole Kingdom, from the Shore near Carlisle, in Cumberland,
to the Lands-end, in Cornwall, and (...) to the North foreland, in Kent, and so
to Barwick Bounds Northwards, and from thence, the Borders dividing England
from Scotland to the Place where the Measure did begin: Which being done, he
will divide the Kingdom into four Parts, and employ eight able Surveyors in
taking the Angles of Position of all the eminent Places therein, viz.

I. Two shall undertake the twelve Counties of Wales, and the County of
Monmoth, and shall begin their Survey from the said Meridian-Line. II. Two more
the Counties of York, Lancaster, Westmerland, Cumberland, Northumberland, and
the Bishopric of Durham. III. Two more the Counties of Derby, Nottingham,
Lincoln, Warwick, Worcester, Gloucester, Oxford, Bucks, Northampton, Leicester,
Rutland, Cambridge, Huntington, Bedford, Hertford, Essex, Norfolk, and Suffolk.
IIII. And the Two last the Counties of Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Dorset, Wilts,
Southampton, Berks, Midlesex, Surrey, Suffex, and Kent.
And as for the four Counties of Salop, Chester, Hereford, and Stafford, the
said Mr. Adams will (by God's assistance) within the space of 18 months perfect
the Actual Survey of three of them, and the County of Stafford is already more
then half done, by Mr. Gregory King, Rouge-dragon, Pursivant of Arms, being
assisted by Mr. William Gent, an able and experienced Surveyor, in so correct
(...) manner, that he doubts not but the Borders of Cheshire and Shropshire,
adjoining thereunto, when the same are sinished, will perfectly close therewith.

And besides, the said Eight Surveyors, who from the Tops of every Hill,
Steeple or other Emi^ent Place, shall take the true Bearings, and thereby put
all the Cities, Market Towns, Parish-Churches, Chapels, Villages, Hamlets and
Private Seats in their due Position, which he conceives to be the fixing of
about 40000 Points, he will employ thirty persons in the perfecting of the said
Work. Ten to make an Actual Survey of all the Rivers, Rivulets, Mears and
Standing Waters, and of the 800 Cities and Market Towns in England and Wales:
Ten more to measure all the Roads of the Kingdom: And Ten more to take the true
Circuit, or Girth-line of each County, and of all the Hundreds, Forests,
Chases and Parks therein, so that nothing may be omitted to complete the said
County-Maps.

But if in the measuring of the said Coasting-Line, it be thought requisite by
the King's most Excellent Majesty and the Lords of His Council, That the Sands,
Shoals, Rocks, Havens, Bays, Roads, Harbors, Ports, Soundings, Buoys,
Beacons, Sea-marks, etc. be accurately observed and set down, he conceives,
That the same cannot be done, without a convenient number of small Vessels
attending that Service, and which being for the common good of the whole
Kingdom, the charge ought to be defrayed by the Public Purse. But he cannot
compute the certain charge thereof without consulting able and experienced
Seamen.

And having now spent six years in the Geographical Study of this Kingdom, and
perusing all the Authors he could meet with, who have Mapped or described the
same, or any part thereof, and making useful Collections suitable to carry on
so great a Work, he now makes his Application to both the Universities for
their Advice in the Regulation thereof, and to the Nobility and Gentry for
their encouragement by Subscriptions, and to induce them thereunto, he makes
the following Offers.

I. He does undertake to publish an Account in Print of the true Measure upon
the Surface of the Earth, which will answer to a Degree in the Heavens, and of
the true Circuit of England and Wales, by the 25th, day of March, 1682. II.
That he will finish the Survey of the said three Counties of Salop, Chester,
and Hereford, by the 29th. day of September, 1682. and that each of the said
County Maps, and all his County Maps, with the Ornament thereof, shall be at
least two Foot deep, and three Foot long; and that he will therein insert all
the Towns, Villages, Private-seats, Roads, Rivers, Rivulets, Mears, Standing
waters, Forests, Chases, Parks, Woods, Hills, and whatever else shall be
thought useful for the perfecting thereof. III. That he will, by way of
Bordure, add an Alphabetical Table of all the Gentry of each County, and grave
their several Coats of Arms, larger then in Dr. Plott 's Map of Oxfordshire,
gratis. Provided, That due Information be given him of the Blazon of such
Coats.
THE PROPOSALS.
I. The Person who subscribes for any of the said County Maps shall have the
same pasted upon Cloth, well colored, and with Rowler and Ledge, for ten
shillings each Map, to be paid upon delivery: and if any Tradesman or other
Person will subscribe for five Maps, he shall receive six. II. But, forasmuch
as the Measuring of the said Meridian and Coasting line will put him to the
Charge of Eight hundred pounds or upwards, in preparing accurate Instruments
and employing a considerable number of Persons to assist him in that Work, he
makes it his Request, that such of the Nobility and Gentry who will encourage
that Design by Subscribing for the printed Account thereof, will, at the same
time, advance the Money by them subscribed, and he will allow the same in
County-Maps as the same shall be finished: and publicly acknowledge their
Favor, by printing therewith a List of such Encouragers.
The Proposals may be had gratis at the Shop of Mr. Pen, a Stationer, near the
Temple Church.

We whose Names are underwritten do each of us subscribe according to the true
Intent and Meaning of these PROPOSALS.
For the Printed Account-in the Second Proposal For the County of Salop For the
County of Chester For the County of Hereford For the County of For the County
of For the County of For the County of


