THE ADDRESS OF THE Nonconformist Ministers (In and about the City of LONDON)
TO HIS HIGHNESS THE Prince of ORANGE.
WEdnesday, January 2. diverse of the Dissenting Ministers in and about London,
that go under the Denominations of Presbyterial and Congregational, to the
Number of Ninety, or upwards, attended his Highness the Prince of Orange at St.
James's, being introduced by the Earl of Devonshire, the Lord Wharton, and the
Lord Wiltshire. Their Sense was represented by one of those Ministers to this
effect, viz.

That they professed their grateful Sense of his Highness's Hazardous and
Heroical Expedition, which the Favor of Heaven had made so surprizingly
Prosperous, etc.

That they esteemed it a common Felicity, that the worthy Patriots of the
Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, had unanimously concurred unto his
Highness's Design; by whose most prudent Advice, the Administration of Public
Affairs was devolved in this difficult Conjuncture, into Hands which the Nation
and World knew to be Apt for the greatest Undertakings, and so suitable to the
present Exigency of our Case.

That they promised the utmost Endeavor, which in their Stations they are
capable of affording, for the promoting the excellent and most desirable Ends,
for which his Highness had declared.

That they added their continual fervent Prayers to the Almighty, for the
Preservation of his Highness's Person, and the success of his future Endeavors
for the Defense and Propagation of the Protestant Interest throughout the
Christian World.

That they should all most willingly have chosen That for the Season of paying
this Duty to his Highness, when the Lord Bishop, and the Clergy of London
attended his Highness for the like purpose, (which some of them did, and which
his Lordship was pleased condescendingly to make mention of to his Highness)
had their notice of that intended Application been so early, as to make their
more general Attendance possible to them at that time.

That therefore tho they did now appear in a distinct Company, they did it not
on a distinct Account, but on that only which is common to them and to all
Protestants.

That tho there were some of Eminent Note, whom Age or present Infirmities
hindered from coming with them, yet they concurred in the same grateful Sense of
our common Deliverance.

His Highness was pleased very favorably to receive this Application, and to
assure them, That he came purposely for the Defense of the Protestant Religion;
and that it was his own Religion, wherein he was Born and Bred, the Religion of
his Country, and of his Ancestors; That he was resolved by the Grace of God
always to adhere to it, and to do his utmost Endeavors for the Defense of it,
and the promoting a firm Union among all Protestants.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultry, over
against the Stocks Market. MDCLXXXIX.


