A New JOURNAL OF ITALY, Containing What is Most Remarkable OF THE ANTIQUITIES
OF ROME, SAVOY AND NAPLES. WITH OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Strength, Beauty,
and Situation of some other Towns and Forts in Italy, and the Distance from
Place to Place; Together with the best Painting, Carving, and Limning, and some
other both Natural and Artificial Curiosities taken notice of,

By William Acton.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane. 1691.

TO My Worthy and Most Respected Friend and Master EDWARD HARVEY, OF Comb Nevil
in the County of Surry, Esquire.
Worthy Sir,
AS I had the honor to wait upyou in your Travels to Rome, so I had the
oppotunity of making some Remarks in our way thither, and from thence to
Naples; where the Antiquities are not less curious than what you saw in Rome it
self; which I here humbly present you with a review of in a piece of
prospective: Which, though it be done by an ill hand, yet it may help to
Commemorate to you most of the Remarkable Things you took notice of when you
was there. I had not room in this small Tract to mention any thing of
Politics, or Constitution of Governments in any of these Princes Courts or
Republics that we passed through, having no design at present but to point out
to you the way you Traveled, and the Distance from Place to Place, with
Observations made of the Antiquities of Rome, Naples, and other Places;
together with the Strength, Beauty and Situation of some other Towns and Forts
in Italy; the best Painting, Carving, and Limning, and some other both Natural
and Artificial Curiosities, which you your self took such particular Notice of,
that they cannot but remain still fresh in your Memory: However I have made
bold to present you with this Poor Assistance, which may serve instead of a
Lame Antiquary, if peradventure you should meet with any private Inducement, or
Obligation of Public Trust, to carry you again into those Parts. Sir, you will
meet with neither Polishing nor Trimming in it, but the same Plain Dress it had
on when you saw it first, which I humbly beg of you to take a review of, and to
give me the Assistance of your Memory whereinsoever you shall find me
deficient; And in so doing you will add to your Former Obligations a Remarkable
Favor never to to be forgot by,

Sir, Your Most Sincere, and Most Faithful Servant, W. A.

A New JOVRNAL FROM GENEVE TO ROME And from thence to NAPLES.
SIR, You may well remember when you left England and went to Paris in France,
there to carry on that Noble Education you Commenced at home, you entered your
self in one of the best Academies, and there continued near Two Years and an
Half; from whence, after a more than ordinary Improvement in the Liberal Arts
and Sciences, and other the Studies and Exercises of that Place; your Genius
led you to make a farther Progress in your Travels; And then you left Paris,
and set forward by the way of Lions for Geneve, where after you had passed some
time you resolved to go for Italy; so that taking your leave of Geneve, you
came to a little Town called Remille in Savoy, seven Leagues from Geneve, where
we lay the first night; within three Leagues of this Town lies the Lake of Ansi
and Town so called. The 18 th. we came to Chambery, five leagues from Romillie;
it is the Principal Town in Savoy, and where the Duke of Savoy formerly kept
his Court, where we staid Dinner, and the same night lay at Montmillian, two
leagues from Chambery, where we took notice of the Fortress or Castle of
Montmillian, It is partly built upon, and partly hewed out of a Rock, esteemed
the strongest that belongs to the Duke of Savoy. Lewis the 13 th, King of
France, lay 13 months before it, in which time (from three Batteries, whereof
one was on the further side of the River Isere, the other two on this side) he
shot into the Fort above Ten Thousand Cannon Bullets, and sprang Two Mines, all
which not answering his Expectations, and finding himself unable to take it,
although he had taken the Town that joins to the Fort, concludes a Peace and
raises the Seige. From Montmillian we came to St. Michel, thirteen leagues all
along upon the River Isere, or rather Arche, because it only bears the name of
Isere near to Montmillian, where we lay the 29 th.

The Thirtieth we came to dinner to Breamant, five Leagues more, and from
thence to Landbourg, where we lay that night, being two leagues from Bramont,
still upon the River Are.

Oct. 1. we hired Mules to carry us up the Alps by the way of Mount Senis, and
came to Ramasse being one league, from thence to the great Cross two leagues
more, which is the highest part of the Mountain that you go over, from whence
we came to Bossoline to dinner, which is about 12 miles more, from thence to
Villiane eight miles, where we lay that night. And the 2d* of Oct. we came to
Turin, being about ten or twelve miles from Villiane.

At Turin we saw the Duke and Duchess of Savoy, and the Princess his Sister,
that shoots flying so well; we took a view of the Dukes Lodgings, and the fine
Gallery of Pictures, the black marble Chapel that had been so many years a
building, and not finished when we saw it, is one of the finest things in
Turin; we saw the Church where they say is kept the winding Sheet of our
Savior Christ, besides several other fine Churches: Especially that of St.
Francis, in which there is a most noble Altar. One of the seven days we stayed
here, I happened, in my ramble about the Town to go into a Church, where I heard
a great deal of good singing by Eunuchs, and very good music; which being
ended, I found by the Peoples gazing and staring, earnestly to one part of the
Church, that there was something more to come, which was as follows; from a
corner of the Church, out of some Chapel, or Vestry, there came a great many
people with great wax lights in their hands, after them followed one of the
religious men of that place, with a great silver Cross, then followed all the
rest of the religious men singing, after them came four Trumpets sounding, then
the Image of the V. Mary followed, being carried upon a frame by four lusty
Fellows, like Porters, in blue Frocks: The figure was about the bigness of an
ordinary woman, carved out of wood, and very richly dressed, painted and
curled; wearing uppermost a long Robe of Cloth of Silver, with a Crown on her
head; in her arms she carried a little Image, well carved and finely dressed,
like a little boy, which represented the Savior, holding between his hands a
pair of Beads; as this Image passed through the middle alley of the Church, all
the people that could come near it touched it with their Beads, and those that
could not come near, by reason of the press, handed their Beads from one to
another that they might touch her Garment, from whence undoubtedly they did
believe, proceeded great Virtue: After they came out of the Church it was
carried in Procession through part of the City, the Trumpets sounding before,
and all people meeting it, or going with it, by kneeling, bowing and crossing
themselves, paid an adoration to it; to my great Astonishment.

About five miles from Turin there is a house of the Duke of Savoys, called the
Venere, very curious for Painting, Pictures and Waterworks; in the Gardens
there is several sort of Fowl, worth taking notice of.

About a mile from Turin, upon the side of a Hill, there is a fine Convent of
Capusin Friars; and a fine house called the Valentine, about half a mile from
Turin, upon the River Po: It was built by Madam Royal, the Duke of Savoys
Mother, and Sister to Lewis XIII. King of France.

The new Fortifications that the Duke is making about Turin, being all of
Brick, consisting only of Bastions and Curtains, are worth your observation.

The 9 th. of Oct. we left Turin, and went to Villeneufe, a little Garrison of
Fourscore men, ten miles from Turin, where we dined. The Garrison observing us
to be ten or twelve Horsemen in company, would not let above two at a time come
into the Town. From this town we went to Aste ten miles more, it being the last
town that way belonging to the Duke of Savoy, in Piedmont; it is indifferently
well fortified, and has four Regiments of Soldiers in it.

From Aste we came the 11 th* of Oct. to Alexandria, a great Garrison of the
King of Spain in Milonoise, twenty miles from Aste, from whence the same night
we arrived at Voltaggio, two and twenty miles more, where we were forced by
tempestuous weather, of Rain, Wind, Thunder and Hail; which did considerable
damage in those parts, to stay till the 13 th, and then set out for Genoua,
where we arrived that night, being twenty miles from Voltaggio.

In Genoua we saw a great many Churches, very rich, and their structures very
noble, being most of them within side crusted with Marble, and Marble Pillars;
we saw several Noblemens Palaces, but in particular, that of Seignior Dalbi,
where amongst other fine things, there is a Looking-glass valued at sixty
thousand Crowns; we saw the Doge, and his Palace, with the Armory, and what
else was most considerable.

Tuesday the 16 th. we went from Genoua by Sea, in Barks, small Vessels so
called, that row with four Oars; and lay the first night at a place on the Sea
shore called Ceste, being thirty miles. The 17 th. we took our Barks again, and
went by Sea to Lerish, thirty Miles more, where we lay the next day, the
weather being bad at Sea we quitted our Vessels, and hired Horses; and the
first night lay at Santa Pietra, twenty Miles, and thence to Luca sixteen
Miles, where we lay Friday the 19 th. and saw several fine Churches, in
particular, that of St. Frediano, where we saw the Coffin that Richard the
Third, King of England was buried in as he went a Pilgrim to Rome. In St.
Augustins Church they showed us a place, where a fellow having lost all his
money at Cards, and afterward having played away all the Clothes he had from
his back, in a great rage began to curse and to swear, and taking up a Stone,
in that mad fit threw it against the Image of the Virgin Mary, from whence
immediately the blood gushed out, upon which the ground opened and swallowed
him up alive. This story they report to you for a great truth. In another
Church they pretend to show you the first Cross or Crucifix that ever was made
after the Crucifixion of our Savior, and tell you the Story thus, that
Nicodemus having undertaken the business, and shaping his work in figure like
to a man, had finished the Crucifix save only the Head, which so puzzled him,
that he was not able to go forward with it: In the mean time, being wearied
with contriving that part of it, but without success, fell asleep, and after
some time being awakened from sleep, he found a Head by him sent from Heaven,
which he fixed to the rest of his work, and so finished the Crucifix* It is all
beset with Pearls, Diamonds, and other Precious Stones, wonderful rich: We saw
the Armory, where they say is Arms sufficient for twenty five thousand men. The
fortifications of the Town, which is very strong, consists of eleven Bastions,
a Lorillion or ear-fashion, with Half-moons upon the Curtins: there is planted
upon every Bastion sixteen pieces of Cannon.

The 20th of October we went from Luca to Pisa, ten miles, where we dined: We
saw there the Dome or Cathedral Church, of which the four great doors are all
of Copper, containing the History of the four Evangelists, represented by
Figures; hard by this Church, we saw in a kind of Tower, or such like place,
where all the Children are baptized, and where there is the finest Echo that
ever was heard, and in it a Pulpit of Marble that came from Armenia, so finely
carved that the value of it is inestimable. Hard by this you see the Leaning
Tower, so built, to the admiration of all that see it, for it hangs over so
much, that one would think it must needs sall, and yet it is believed to stand
as strong as if it had been built upright; so great was the Ingenuity of the
Architect. Near the great Church are the Cloisters to be seen, where upon the
walls is painted the History of the Bible: And in the middle of the Cloisters,
upon the right and left hand, there are two little square Courts, all of holy
Earth, they say brought from Jerusalem, wherein if you interr a body, all shall
consume to the Bones in four and twenty hours time.

From Pisa the same day we went to Leghorne, where the only thing worth taking
notice of is the Mould, where the Shipping rides safe: The Town is fortified
with Bastions and large Ditches. We went out of curiosity and saw the Jews
Synagogue in the time of their Devotions.

Tuesday the 23d of October we went from Leghorne and came again to Pisa, where
we dined, and after dinner went and saw the Physickgarden of the Great Duke of
Florence, in which there is a Gallery furnished with abundance of Curiosities;
whereof one that I took notice of was the Scull of a Man or Woman, with a great
piece of Coral growing to it; and also a small Anchor with several pieces of
Coral naturally fixed to it; both which things were so found in the Sea. We
went the same night to la Scala, a great Inn so called, where we lay, being
thirty six miles from Leghorne, and half way between Pisa and Florence.

The next day being the 24th of October, we arrived at Florence, 20 miles from
la Scala, where we saw the Chapel of St. Laurence, esteemed the finest of the
whole World, for the inside of it is all Precious Stones, and the Arms of every
City belonging to the Great Duke are all of Precious stone inlaid, round about
the Chapel; within side there is likewise the Statues of all the great Dukes
cut out in marble. First Francis, then Cosmus the I. and Ferdinandus I. Cosmus
II. Ferdinandus II. and Cosmus at present, Third of the name, and Sixth great
Duke. From this Chapel we went to the Dome or Cathedral Church, with the Tower
by it, whereof all the outside is finely wrought with Marble of diverse Colors;
we saw the great Dukes Palace and Gardens, in which there is a great many fine
Waterworks: The finest thing in Florence is the Gallery of rich Cabinets, and
the Chamber where there is all sort of curious Arms; there is a long barrel of
a Gun all of massy Gold, and several other great curiosities; we saw the Dukes
Armory, the wild Beasts, and some fine houses out of Town, where there is fine
Painting and Waterworks, chiefly in that of the great Dukes, called Pratilin,
six Miles from Florence, we saw besides abundance of fine Churches.

November the First we went from Florence to Pongebouce 22 miles where we lay.
The next day we came to Dinner to Siena, 16 miles: It is a Town belonging to
the Great Duke, almost as big as Florence, where we saw the Great Church,
whereof the Pavement is the finest in Christendom; and the Library with its
Pavement, deserves to be taken notice of: From hence we went to Torriniere 18
miles where we lay. The next day, being the 3 d of November, we lay at
Aquapendente 29 miles, from whence we came, and dined, the next day being
Sunday at Montefiatsco, Fifteen miles, where in a little old Church, under
ground, we saw the Tomb of a German Bishop, who, they say, killed himself with
drinking to excess the Wine of that place: The story runs thus, That the Bishop
traveling with his retinue to Rome, sent one of his Servants before upon the
Road to find out the best Wine, with a strict Command to write EST upon the
Sign, where the Wine was best; which accordingly he did, and at the first place
where he found the Wine to be good writ EST, which, when the Bishop saw,
concluding the Wine to be very good he stopped, and with all his Company went
in and remained there till he had had his fill of the Wine; then he went
forward, his Servant the Purveyor, being still before to find out the next
place of good Wine, which appeared to the Bishop before he had traveled much
farther, by a double assurance of EST, EST, which the Servant had marked upon
the Sign; There the Bishop stayed longer than he had done at the first place of
EST, finding the Wine to be much better. But at length, in hopes to gratify
his Appetite with a more delicious Wine than what he had met with, goes forward
on his Journey to Rome, his Servant going still before with the same Command of
providing still the best Wine with the Old Signal of EST; But before he had
traveled far he comes to this fatal place of Montefiasco, where the Wine was
so much better than any he had yet met with in his way to Rome, that he thought
it deserved the triple signal of EST, EST, EST, which accordingly was put upon
the Sign. The Bishop being not far behind, soon arrived at this Enchanted
Castle of Bacchus, where espying the Signal, immediately made an halt, and with
all his Company entered the place, where he found the entertainment so sweet,
and the Wine so bewitching, that he was not able to leave the place till his
life had left him, and then was carried out dead to his Grave, which was hard
by in the Vault of a little Church, with a large Stone upon it, and this
Epitaph or Inscription writ by the Purvoyer his man, in honor of his Master.

Est, Est, Est, propter est,
Herus meus mortuus est.
From this place we went to Viterbo, eight miles more, where we lay; it is a
very pretty town, and in most of the streets thereof there is fine Fountains.
From hence we went the next day to Capreole, twelve miles more, where there is
a fine house of the Duke of Parma, but going to ruin, here we dined and after
Dinner went to Monte Rossa, ten miles, where we lay; from whence the next day
being Tuesday the 6th. of November, we came to Rome, two and twenty miles more.

The Eighth of November we took our Jonrney for Naples, and came the first
night to Veletre, twenty miles from Rome, where we saw the fine Palace and
Garden of Cardinal Ginetto. From thence the next day we went to Piperno thirty
miles. The next day being Saturday* the 10th. of November we came to Fundi,
which is the better half way betwixt Rome and Naples. From this place we came
the next day, being Sunday, to Mola: Where in a great Orange Garden we saw the
Tomb and Grotto of Cicero, that famous Orator. Hard by Mola lies Caeta, where
there is to be seen a Rock, which they say cleft asunder at the time of the
Crucifixion of our blessed Savior. From Mola we came to St. Agothas; and from
thence on Monday night, the 12th instant, we arrived at Naples, which is some
32 miles from St. Agothas, where we saw several fine Churches; but in that of
St. Claires there is four fine Pillars, which they do assert were brought from
the Temple of Solomon at Jerusalem. At another Church we saw the Busto's, or
pieces of Statues, being the remainder of two Idols called by the names of
Castor and Pollux, they were formerly entire, and worshipped as Gods by the
Heathenish people, but St. Paul passing by that way as he was carried a
prisoner to Rome, it is said that these Idols fell down and broke to pieces,
and in their fall the Devil was perceived to go from them; who whilst they were
whole, served them for a voice, and did usually speak to those that worshipped
them. The Heads of these Idols they say some certain Prince has in keeping, for
a great curiosity. From hence we went to the Charter House, a Convent of
Religious men; the building is very fine, seated upon a high hill, near the
City, close to the Castle of St. Elmo, from whence you have the best sight of
Naples, and a prospect of the Mediterranean Sea, which is believed to be the
best in Europe.

Upon Wednesday we hired Horses and rid out of Town, passing through the Grotto
of Pausilinus, which Lassel in his Voyage of Italy makes mention of. It is near
a mile in length, cut, or rather bored through a great Rocky hill, by the
Emperor Lucullus. It is now used as a great high way leading into Naples;
wherein two Coaches or Carts may meet and pass by each other easily, though the
passage for near three parts of the way be very dark, without any light at all,
except the light of a small Lamp that hangs in a little Chapel dedicated to
the Virgin Mary, in the middle of the passage, upon the right hand, going into
the City. And because there may be danger in meeting and running against one
another in the dark, part of the way, when you hear any noise of Horse or
Coach, or the like, which you may easily do at a great distance, (for the least
thing in that Concavity makes a great noise) then you use these words, speaking
out aloud, (a la Montagna, and a la Marina) which signifies, Which way are you
to go, either to that side which is next the Mountain, or to that next the Sea?
by which one avoids the disasters that might happen by meeting in the dark.
From this Grotto, or high way, we came to the place called Grotto delcane, or
the Dogs Grotto: It is a little place concaved or hollowed in the side of a
little hill, hard by a Lake, or great pond of water; in which place a man may
stand upright, and go three or four steps in length and breadth; here we had a
Dog brought us, by a man that lives hard by, and that makes it his business for
gain to show the experiment to strangers; he takes his Dog, and holds down his
head within a Foot of the ground, for higher it is believed the Sulphurous
Vapors do not mount, as one may observe by a kind of green color that stains
the sides of the place, about a foot high from the Surface of the ground, and
not higher; and before you can count a hundred, if you count not too fast, the
Dog begins to stagger and reel, (the man then letting him loose) he soon falls
down, and struggling for life, dies away immediately; then the man speedily
takes him out, and washing him a little in the water of the Lake hard by, he
presently recovers; we tried, for our better satisfaction, the experiment upon
one of our own Dogs, and kept him in the said Grotto it may be half a minute,
or some such small matter of time longer than the first Dog, but too long to
recover him, for all our washing, and whatever else we could do, could not
bring him to life again.

About a mile from this venomous Grotto is the burning Mountains called by the
name of Sulpha terra, the principal matter that burns is Brimstone, mixed with
other Minerals: We were as near the burning part of it as we durst go, for the
smoke and fire was sometimes ready to choke us. But which was most to be
admired, was to see fire and smoke come furiously out, if you thrust but a
stick into that levelled part of the Mountain on which we walked, the hilly
part thereof being blown up and consumed with burning some time before.

From hence we went to Puzzeolo, a little Town near the Seaside, where we saw
the Academy or School of Virgil: and by this the Temple of Neptune: but there
is nothing remaining of either but old Walls, and the ruins thereof. From hence
we took a Boat and went by Sea to see the Sybillas Grotto, but by the way they
gave us an account of a Mountain we saw hard by, called Monta Nova, that about
134 years ago there was a curious Plain where the Mountain now stands, and in
it a little Town, whereof the people were grown to that excess of debauchery
and looseness of life, that in one nights time they were all covered with this
Mountain, which they believe to be the Judgment of God upon the wickedness of
the place. Others there are that say this Mountain was by the violent disorder
of combustible matter burning under ground, blown up from Sulpha terra before
mentioned, and carried to that place where it now stands, which is two miles or
thereabouts. Within half a mile of this Mountain you see the Grotto of Sybilla,
and the Lake Avernus, or Lake of Hell; at the farther side of which is the
Temple of Apollo. About half a mile from the Grotto Sybilla are the Hot Baths:
and very near to this place we saw the Tomb of Agripina, the mother of Nero; by
which stands the Ruins of the Temple of Venus and Diana: And from hence you may
see that place where Nero caused his Mother to be opened, whereof nothing
remains but the ruins, like unto a Rock in the Sea, some fourscore or a hundred
paces from the shore. We had not gone far from the Seaside, but going over a
little Hill we came into the ruins of what had been formerly a very fine
street, in which was kept the Saturdays Market of that great and ancient Town
called by the name of Baiae: Near the end of which street, in a Vault or Cave
there are several hollows or niches in the Walls, where formerly in Urues they
used to keep the Ashes of the dead. Hard by this place you see the Elysian
Fields, and the Dead Sea, where Charon the Ferry-man used to ply; and where
formerly Nero's Army lay imbarqued. And not far from hence we saw what some
call Piscina mirabilis, which undoubtedly had been built for some great end. It
is a very lofty building under ground, supported by forty huge Pillars of
Stone, or thereabouts; the plaistering of the Walls laid on about as thick as a
Crown-piece, of so excellent a composition, (whereof they say whites of Eggs,
which I refer to the Reader, was part of the Compound) is so very hard, that
the Rock it self cannot be harder. Here it is they say Nero kept fresh water
for the use of his Navy, that lay then in the Dead Sea. From this place we went
and saw the Cento Camarelle, or little rooms, very strangely contrived to keep
Slaves and Prisoners in.

From hence we took our Boat again, and returned to Puzzeolo, where one may see
the beginning of a Bridge, carried on at least a mile or two into the Sea; it
is reported to be the unadvised enterprise of the Emperor Caligula, who
thought to have made it over an arm of the Sea three or four miles long. The
same night we returned to Naples, and the next day being Thursday, we saw the
Sepulchers of Virgil, and of Sanazzaro. Upon Friday we took Horses and went to
the burning Mountain of Vesuvio, some seven miles from Naples Eastward. The
Heart or Substance of the Mountain is consumed by constant burnings, and
frequent Eruptions; so that it may be more properly called the Shell of a
Mountain, whose Substance is lost* or not unlike unto a Cup, whose brim or
brink, being near half a mile in circumference, one may in any place lean over,
and look down into the Concavity thereof, which is very deep, and at the bottom
perceive very well a young Hill growing up, or rather forced up by some
Combustible Matter underneath: This little Hill or Heap, which swells from the
bottom, grows every year bigger and bigger, and yet one may perceive it smoke
constantly, which it is believed it would not do if it did not burn. All the way
up and down this Mountain, you cannot avoid going up to the Knees in Ashes.
There is a Bed or Channel that lies dry from the top of the Mountain down to
the Seaside, which, they say, was made by a burning liquid matter, which the
Mountain spued up so fast, and with that violence, that it forced its way
there, and like an impetuous River run burning down a great way into the Sea,
whereof nothing remains now but that Bed or Channel, which has ever since
continued dry: four or five miles round* this Mountain you see a hard rocky
Cinder, which in Eruptions are thrown so far at least, up and down the Country
to the great damage of the Inhabitants. In the year 1631. was the last great
Eruption, in which they say there was no less than two thousand people killed
and hurt.

Upon Saturday we took a view of Naples again, and the next morning left that
place, in order to our return again to Rome, where we arrived the 22 d of
November, but took Frescata in our way, which is about 12 miles from Rome,
where we saw the Palace of Monte Dragone, and Aldobrandina, in these we saw
many fine Waterworks, among which the most considerable was that of the Organs.
The Cascade or fall of Water was so great and so violent, that in the very fall
it brought wind enough with it to fill the Organ Pipes, which were very
artificially placed in a little House close to the Cascade for that purpose,
and a Wheel which the Water turned round, having stops so conveniently placed
on it as to touch the Keys in going about, which caused it to play any tune as
they should think fit who had the ordering of it, and as loud almost as you
hear in any Church; we saw likewise the Figure of a Centaur with his Horn,
which by the help of the water he wound very loud; there was likewise a Satyr
playing upon Pipes, and the chirping and singing of Birds very delightful, and
all performed by the help of the Water; but which was more astonishing than all
this, was the great Grotto, or great Waterwork in form of a Grotto, placed
directly against the back part of the House: The coming forth of the Water is
like unto Thunder, and then falls to the ground like Hail, Rain and Mist;
Before we took our leaves of this place, we saw a fine Room, in which were
several Figures, playing upon diverse Instruments, representing the Muses, and
underneath it was the Wind Treasury, which we discovered by their opening to us
two or three holes about two Inches diameter made in the Floor of the said
Room, from whence the wind proceeded with so much strength, as to bear up a
Ball of Copper or Brass hovering very high over the hole.

Thursday the 29 th of November being returned to Rome, we went and saw St.
Peter's Church and the Pope's Lodgings, where we took notice of three or four
Rooms finely painted by Michael Angelo; the Gallery, Gardens, and Waterworks
are worth taking notice of.

Upon Saturday the 1 st of December we went to the Villa Burghese, belonging to
a Prince that bears the same name, where we saw abundance of fine Statues,
whereof the Gladiator and Apollo taking hold of Daphne are most worth remark:
These two last Figures being one entire piece of White Marble, representing
Apollo's pursuit of Daphne to ravish her, when she changes into a Tree, was
done by Seignior Bernin; the Painting is very good; the fine Gardens and the
variety of Waterworks is worth seeing: There is a Sea-Horse-Head, and an
Elephants Head worth taking notice of.

Sunday, the 20 of December, we went to St. Paul's Church, about a mile and an
half out of Rome, where we saw the Crucifix, that, they say, spoke to St.
Briget.

Monday we saw Prince Pamphilio his Palace, one of the Popes Nephews, about a
mile out of Town.

Tuesday we went from St. Peter's Church to the Inquisition, whose building we
saw, but they would not permit us to go into the Prisons: From hence we went to
the Church of St. Onestrio, where the body of Torquatus Tassus the Italian Poet
lies Interred; we saw his Study, some of his own Manuscript, the Cup he usually
drunk out of, and the Room he died in, in which there is now a fine Library.

From this place we went to the Queen of Swedens Palace, where there is most
excellent pieces of Painting done by the best hands, as Titio, Bonoretta,
Carraggio and others.

From thence we went to Farnesi's Palace, where we saw that Incomparable
Masterpiece that was brought from Rhodes, consisting of Seven Figures, to wit,
a Bull, a Dog, Three Men and Two Women; all these Seven Figures as big as the
Life, are cut out of one entire piece of Marble, and do all naturally join in
some part or other. The Figures do represent the History of Licus, King of
Thebes, who took to Wife Anthiops, Daughter of Nycteus, King of Ethiopia, whom
Jupiter defiled, putting on the form of a Satyr, whereupon Licus put her away
and married Dirce, who persuaded the King to keep Antiope close Prisoner, lest
she should return into his favor again, which accordingly was done; but
Jupiter, out of compassion, soon released her, and then she fled into the
Mountains, where she was delivered to two Sons, Amphion and Zetus, who after
they came to understand the injury done to their Mother by Licus and Dirce,
they took Dirce and by the Hair of the Head tied her to the Horns of a mad
Bull, from which cruelty, after she had suffered a long time, by the clemency
of the Gods she was delivered; but Licus they killed: Whereupon Appolonius and
Lauriscus, two of the most famous Sculptures of that age, willing to transmit
this Tragical Story to posterity, made this piece, as it is likewise reported
by Pliny in his 36 th Book and Chap. 5. which afterward amongst other
Antiquities was brought from Rhodes to Rome by Assinios Pollion, most famous in
the time of Augustus, and kept in the Baths of Antonius, Pius, Caracallus, the
Emperor, under Mount Aventin, and in the reign of Pope Paul the Third, named
Farnese, was found in the Ruins of those Baths, and by him put into order, and
placed where you now see it.

Over against this in a Little Palace of Seignior Pighinis, there is two of the
finest Statues of Marble that is to be seen in Rome, the one is Meleagre, or as
some say Adonis, the other is a Venus.

Wednesday we saw the Palace of Montalto, where there are a great many fine
Statues and curious Waterworks, in a most spacious and fine Garden. From hence
we went to Ludovisio's great Garden, where in one Apartment we saw a Bed of
inestimable value; it was all beset with Precious Stones, and by this Bed, in a
large Box, we saw a petrified man.

Thursday we saw the Palace of Cardinal Spada, and the Hospital where all the
Pilgrims that come to Rome are entertained for three days.

Saturdry we saw Prince Pallastrino's Palace, and upon Sunday we went to Santa
Croce in Jerusalem, one of the seven Churches, where they pretend to have a
great many Relics, as the Sponge that they offered to our Savior when he was
upon the Cross, some of the Thorns that he was Crowned with, one of the Nails
that fastened him to the Cross, and many other relics. Afterward we went to
the Church of St. John Latteran, which is esteemed the finest in Rome, next to
St. Peter's, and where they pretend to have the most relics; hard by this is
the Church of St. John in font, where Infidels and others that turn to the
Church of Rome are baptized.

Monday the 10th. we saw Cardinal Ghisi's Palace, where there is a most
admirable collection of Pictures, and the richest Portiers or Door hangings
that are in Rome, there was a very rich bed of wh te Satin, painted they say,
with the Juice of Flowers, so curiously that it took up five years time to do
it in:

Tuesday, we saw the Effigies of the King of France on Horseback, cut out of
one entire piece of pure white marble, by Cavalier Beruin; it was not then
quite finished, yet it seemed to challenge the finest thing of that nature that
ever was made: It was to be sent into France, so soon as it should be finished.

Wednesday, we saw the Cupola of St. Peter's, and went into the Ball which is
near seven Foot Diameter, and will hold ten or twelve men at a time completely.

The Church of St. Peter with the portico and thickness of the walls is one
Thousand and Fifty eight Palms in Length.

The breadth of the Church in that part that makes the Cross is six hundred and
seventy Palms.

From the Pavement to the twelve Apostles is two hundred and twelve Palms high.

The Cupola is one hundred and ninety Palms diameter, and six hundred and fifty
two from the Pavement to the Cross, that is fixed upon the top of the Cupola.

The Lanthorn of the Cupola, and the great Altar in the middle of the Cross of
the Church do measure alike, in height one hundred twenty six Palms and a half.

The Thursday following, we went and saw the little Palace of Cardinal Ghisi,
where there is a very pretty Armory, and many natural Curiosities, amongst the
rest the Cockatrices were worth remark: His fine Garden, and those many
Artifices by water, from which it is almost impossible to avoid being wet,
unless the Gardener be your Friend, were all very well worth our sight.

Friday the 14th. we were introduced by the French Ambassador, and admitted to
the honor of kissing the Popes toe.

Saturday, we saw the Prince Burgese's Palace which is esteemed the finest in
Rome.

Sunday, we went to the Church of St. Sebastian about three miles out of Rome*
it is one of the seven Churches, and where they tell you our Savior met St.
Paul, and conversed with him, and left his Footsteps for a mark thereof, if
you can believe as the Church of Rome believes; This rencounter of our Savior
with St. Paul was when he made his escape from Rome; besides the Footsteps of
our Savior, they show you under the Church, where in the times of Persecution
they used to hide the Christians, and bury those that they found dead, and
where the bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul are reported to be first interred.

Monday 17th. we began with the new Church of St. Nichola Tolentino, which is
well adorned with good Painting and a fine Altar.

From hence we went to Porta Salaire, or Collina, through which Hannibal and
Bremus King of the Galls entered, when they came to Rome; a little within this
Gate you see the place where they used to inter the Vestal Nymphs. We went
forward and came to Porta Pia, so called, from Pius Quartus Pope of Rome, in
whose time it was built, the workmanship was Michael Angelo Boneretta's, the
pretty Sabines that were ravished by the Romans, came in at this Gate.

From this Gate we went to the Temple of Sta. Agnese, it is about a mile beyond
the Walls of the City, where there is a great many fine Marble Pillars very
antique, and Candlesticks taken from the Temple of Bacchus, but the four
Porphery Pillars that bore up the great Altar are most worth remark.

Near to this you see the place they call Roma Subterranea, you go under ground
and are conducted into several narrow passages on the right and left hand, you
may see several niches and concavities in which were Skulls, and other Bones of
Saints and Martyrs which in the times of Persecution fled thither and died
there, and were buried, as our Author reported.

Near to this place is the Church of St. Constanza, heretofore the Temple of
Bacchus, in which you may see that Porphery Sepulcher either of Bacchus, or of
Constanza, as is believed; it may challenge the whole world for a Curiosity.

From hence we went to the Church of St. Victoire, where you may see the fine
Statue of St. Terraise, made by Cavalier Beruin, near to this is that of St.
Susanna, where the Painting is not much amiss.

From hence you may see the Tower or Church of St. Bernard, their Garden was
heretofore a Theater, opposite to which are the Baths of the Emperor
Dioclesian, by which you may take notice of eight great Marble Pillars which
bore up the Ruins of a most noble arched Fabric now partly converted to a
Church.

Not far from hence there is a little Church called Pudantiene, where you may
see that lovely Chapel of Cajeton, and in it admire that incomparable
Altar-piece, which represents the birth of our Savior and the three Kings
coming to worship him, made by Petrus Oliverus Romanus; the Mosaic work is
worth taking notice of, besides the fine Statutes.

Hard by this little Church you may take notice of the Bath of Agripina, the
Mother of Nero, now in the Ruins.

From hence we went and saw the pretty Church of St. Martin, upon Mount
Esquelyn, built upon the ruined Baths of Titus Vespasius: At the end of this
Church was the Tower of Nero, upon which he sat playing on a Harp whilst the
City of Rome was all in a flame of Fire.

From hence we went to the Church of St. Peter in Vincoli, where there is a
very fine Statue of Moses; and they say the last thing that was done by Michael
Angelo. I should have told you that it was between Porta Salaire and Porta Pia,
about three miles from Rome, where Nero the Emperor killed himself, to prevent
a most shameful death that was prepared for him.

Tuesday we went about three miles out of Rome to a place called the Three
Fountains, where there is three little Churches, one of them called St.
Athanasius, another St. Bernard; where they say lies abundance of the Saints
bones: and the third is called the Three Fountains, where they report St. Paul
was beheaded; and at the cutting of it off, they say the Head gave three leaps,
at each of which there broke out immediately a Fountain of Water: And which was
more wonderful, that the Water of each Fountain should have a different taste
from the other; the first to taste like Wine, the second like Milk, and the
third something near the taste of common Water; but I found no difference in
them but that they all tasted like other waters, but it may be it was because
there was wanting in me a Romish Faith. You may likewise see the Marble Pillar,
to which he was bound, as they say, when he was executed. In returning to Rome
we saw St. Paul's Church again, and the Crucifix that they say spoke to St.
Brigid, where in the Sacristie there are very fine Pictures done by Lanfranck.

In the wall of the City you may see the fine Piramid, or, as some say, the
Sepulcher of Caius Cestius; others say it is the Sepulcher of Remus. It was
finished in 330 days, which was but a very short time for so great a work.

Thursday after dinner we saw the Palace of Prince Justiniano, where there is
fine Statues and Painting. Then we went and saw the Popes gardens at Monte
Cavallo.

Friday, near the Church of St. Sebastian, which is some three or four miles
out of Rome, we saw the Ruins of the Pretorial Camp, or the place of Guard to
the Emperor Dioclesian: Near to this you may see the little Heathenish Temple,
that was erected in derision of Hannibal, for being forced to retreat without
taking Rome. You see also not far from hence the Circle of Caracallo from
whence was taken the oblique that now stands in the middle of the Piazza
Navona; from this place we went to the Fountain of the Nymph Aegeria, which
they say was built 800 years before our Saviors time: Returning to Rome again,
we went through the Porto Lattin, just by which we saw a little Chapel, where
they say St. John the Evangelist was put to death, by being put into a Cauldron
of boiling Oil. I should have taken notice of Capo di Bove, at the beginning of
this days Journey, it lying in the way, the remains of it is a great Tower
partly demolished, where the Sepulcher of Matella wife to rich Crassus,
daughter to Q. Metalla, surnamed Cretico, taken for having subdued the Cretes,
now remains.

Saturday, we went to Campidoglio, where you may see erected the Trophies of
the Emperor Trajan when he returned to Rome, victorious over the
Transilvanians. In the middle Court you see the copper Horse, vulgarly called
the Horse of Constantine the Emperor: In the Court called Conservatori, you
may take notice of the Head of the Emperor Domitian, the Head and an Arm of
the Emperor Commodus, the Tomb of Mamea the Mother of Alexander Severus, with
many other figures very ancient. The Apartments above Stairs are full of old
Statues and fine Painting, the Idol of Hercules, and the figure of a Wolf, with
Romulus and Remus hanging at the Dugs of it, are very antique and worth remark,
they are of Copper.

From hence we went to Mount Capitolin, hard by which you may see three fine
Pillars that remain of the Temple of Jupiter; on the top of which Pillars you
may take notice of a Stone with fine old carving on it, of those things which
do denote the use and intent of the structure; for by the Bullocks Head and
Horns dressed with Flowers, the Ax, the Sacrificers Knife, and Basin to receive
the Blood, and other things of this nature, one may easily believe the report,
that it is the remains of the Temple of Jupiter, where they used to Sacrifice
to that Deity. Near to this you see the Temple of Concord: And not far from
hence that fine ancient Pillar, upon which was set the Statue of Domitian the
Emperor; a little farther we saw the Dungeon where the Romans formerly used to
imprison the most notorious Malefactors, amongst the rest St. Peter and St.
Paul are said to have been kept here; they showed us a Pillar to which their
Chains were fastened, and close by it a little Fountain wherein, they say, the
Jailer and his Family were baptized after they were converted to the Christian
Faith. In this place stands now a little Church dedicated to St. Joseph, it is
at the foot of that great descent of Marble Steps where the Romans used
formerly to throw down the Criminals that were condemned to die: By this you
may see the Triumphal Arch of the Emperor Septimus Severus, erected against
his return from the Conquest of the Partheans, near to this is the Church of
St. Martin, where you may see his stately Sepulcher in a Vault, and his fine
Image of Marble upon the great Altar; they likewise pretend to show you where
his Body was found. A little way from hence is the Church of St. Francis, and
in it that noble Sepulcher, erected to his memory by Pope Innocent the tenth,
and another incomparable piece of Petrus Oliverus, which represents the entry
of Pope Gregory the 11 th into Rome when he came from Avignion: Behind this
Church formerly stood the Temple of the Sun and Moon; and near to this you see
the Ruins of the Temple of Peace, built by Titus Vespasius the Emperor; over
against this Temple are the Gardens of Farnese, in which there is a fine
ancient Statue of Agripina: This place was heretofore the Palace of Caesar,
begun by Augustus Caesar upon Mount Palatin.

Wednesday, the 2 d of January, we passed by the Church of St. Maria Maggiore,
which stands upon Mount Esquilino, and came to the little Church of St. Bibian,
where you may see her fine Statue, made by Cavalier Bernin; there is good
Painting in Fresco, done by Dietio Cortone; they show you a little Pillar of
Porphery, to which they say St. Bibian was tied when she was martyrized.

Near to Porta Palestina is the Temple of Bacchus, built by Augustus Caesar, to
the honor of his two Nephews, Cajus and Lisius; it is now vulgarly called
Galusia. From hence we went and saw Sancta Croce, which is one of the Seven
Churches, the Pillars thereof were taken out of the Temple of Venus and
Cupidon, which Temple was ruined by the Emperor Constantine; behind the great
Altar is the story of St. Helena, mother of Constantine, seaching for the Cross
of our Savior, done in Fresco by Perusino the Master of Raphael Vrbin. From
hence we went to the Temple of the Emperor Claudins, now called St. Stephens
Church; it is built round, and supported by abundance of fine Pillars; the
History of the persecutions of the Christians by the heathenish Emperors, from
the time of our Savior to Constantine the first Christian Emperor, is painted
round the Church.

Saturday we went again to the Campadoglio, where in a little Court going up
Stairs, one may take notice of four several pieces Carved in Stone, which
represent the coming of Marc. Aurel. in triumph to Rome. Above Stairs take
notice of the great Hall painted in Fresco by Joseph Darpin; in the next Room
is the Statue of Anthonio Column; and in the next to this the Head of Junius
Brutus that overcame the Tarquins, the Head of Mithridate an eminent Captain
against the Romans. In another room we saw the Head of Fabritius a brave
Soldier against the Pirots, and the Head of Simon that betrayed Troy. In
another Room we saw a fine Statue of a Cybilla; and in the other Apartments we
saw a fine old Statue of a Magician, and the Statue of Marios the great Roman
Consul, and the Nurse of Nero the Emperor, a fine figure. Near to the
Triumphal Arch of Septimus Severus there remains three Pillars of the Temple
that Romulus built to Jupiter, occasioned by a Vow Romulus had made when his
Army was routed by the Sabins, that if he should be able to rally his Army, and
defeat the Enemy, he would build a Temple and dedicate it to Jupiter, which
accordingly was done, and his Vow performed.

Not far from hence is the Temple of Anthonin and Faustin, now called the
Church of St. Laurence, where there is a fine Altar-piece, done by Pietro
Cortono: Hard by this is the Temple of Romulus and Remus, now the Church of St.
Come and Damian. And not far from hence we saw the Triumphal Arch of Titus
Vespasian, erected upon the taking of Rome: Not far from this you may see the
Triumphal Arch of Constantine, by some called that of Trajans, because most of
the best Figures carved in Stone, and what else is there most worth your notice
was brought from the Triumphal Arch of Trajan, to whose honor it was built
after he had subdued the Tyrant Maxanae: Near to this you may see the Ruins of
the Amphitheatre, where St. Igneas, a Disciple of St. Peter's, in the reign of
Trajan, was devoured by Lions. We went afterward a little farther, and saw the
nine Vaults where the water for the use of the Amphitheatre, as also for the
Baths of Titus Vespasian was preserved; some say they were first made to keep
water in for the use of Nero's Gardens. From hence we went to the little
Triumphal Arch of Septimus Severus in Forobauno, erected by the Merchants and
Goldsmiths, upon Stones where one may see carved the Ax, the head of the
Victim, and several other things that were made use of in their Sacrifices to
the Heathenish Gods. Hard by this stands an Antick-piece of square Building,
which has on every side a great Door built Arch-fashion, and twelve Niches,
formerly, they say, there was fourteen such Buildings which divided the City of
Rome into so many parts, to each of which there was a Governor* They say
moreover, that in the reign of Augustus Caesar they used to celebrate the
Feasts of Competallini in those places. First instituted by Servius Tullius, in
honor of their Domestic Deities. Near to the Rotonda, which is not far from
hence, there remains Eleven Fine Pillars of Marble of the Temple of Mars, built
by Marc. Aurel. after he had obtained the victory against the Moravies;
heretofore it was called Marcoman. From hence we went to the Palace of
Fierevante, where by the way we saw the Statue of Antonia, Grandmother to
Agrippina; and in the Palace Garden there is a Fine Figure of Esculapius, the
Sepulcher of Augustus, and the Vault where all his Family lie interred,
heretofore called the Mausol.

Monday we went and took a view of Trajans Colomn, esteemed one of the finest
pieces of Antiquity the World affords; all the most memorable and most noble
exploits of his Life are lively represented by incomparable Carving, quite
round the Pillar, from the top to the pedestal; the Model of which has been
lately taken by the French King.

From hence we went to Mont. Avantin, where we saw the Church and Convent of
St. Dominick's Order, it was heretofore the Temple of Juno; there is one thing
remarkable in it, a round Marble Stone, which they say the Devil threw at St.
Dominico when he was at prayers. Near to this is the Church of St. Alexis,
heretofore the Temple of Diana. From hence we went to the Isle of Tiber, which
lies between the Bridge of Four Heads, and the other Bridge called -- where the
Church of St. Bartholomew now stands, it was heretofore the Temple of
Aesculapius, the God of Physic. We went from hence to the Church of St.
Cicile, where we saw the fine Statue of Marble, made in the same manner, lying
as when her Body was found: Near to this there is another Church, where in a
little Chapel you may see a fine Altarpiece, painted by Hanibal Carasco, and a
fine Antic Tomb. From hence we went to the Church of St. Chrysogorio, which is
built upon the Ruins of an Hospital that Augustus Caesar had made for the use
of his maimed Soldiers. Near to this there is another Church called Sancta
Translaverie, heretofore an Hospital for the use beforementioned. From hence
we went to the place where St. Peter was martyrized, where there is now a
Church called by his name; there is in it a fine piece of Painting of the
transfiguration, done by Raphael Vrbin: This place was heretofore called the
Ganicul^.

Tuesday following we went to St. Peter's Church, and observed the four Statues
of Copper, which support St. Peter's Chair; in which Chair the Popes are
usually seated when the solemnity of Coronation passes on them; the two outward
figures represent St. Ambrose and St. Augustine, and the two inward St. Cyril
and St. Chrysostom; on the Right Hand of the Altar you see that incomparable
fine Statue of Marble made by Gulielmus Dellaporta; we went afterward
underneath the Church into the Vaults where we saw Otto the eleventh Emperor
of Germany as he was there entombed, with the Sepulcher of Carola Queen of
Jerusalem, Cypre, and Armenia; from hence we went into the Pope's Armory, where
they say are Arms sufficient for 65000 Men.

We afterward went to the Chapel, where we saw that excellent piece of
Painting, which represents the Day of Judgment, done by Michael Angelo, who
amongst other things that he had figured to be in Hell, puts in a Cardinal in
his Pontificalibus, which was drawn so near to the life, that whoever saw it
knew it to be the very picture of such a Cardinal, an eminent Man then living
in Rome, who they report came to see the Painting before it was finished, and
hastily rushing in at the door, over which Michael Angelo happened to be then at
work upon a Ladder, chanced to throw him down, which to be revenged of, he
paints the Cardinal in Hell, whereupon the Cardinal complians to the Pope, who
was then Leo X. of the great indignity done him by Michael Angelo, who had
placed him amongst the Devils in Hell; to which the Pope returned this Answer,
That he indeed was heartily sorry for it, and could have wished that he had
placed him in Purgatory, for there he could have fetched him out; but being
once in Hell, there was no redemption. So that the Cardinal remains there to
this day.

Friday, we went to the Baths of Anthonio Caracallo, Son to Septimus Severus,
from whence were taken all the Pillars that are now in St. Paul's Church, and
the Bull of Farnese before mentioned, together with the two great Marble
Vessels that stand in the Piazza Farnese; these Baths, they say, had 1500 Rooms
in them. In going to these Baths, between Mont. Palatin and Mont. Aventin, we
saw the Circle where the pretty Sibins were ravished.

From hence we went to the Church of St. Laurence, being one of the Seven where
there is abundance of fine Marble Pillars with other Stones finely Carved,
relating to Sacrifices; from whence one may conclude that it had formerly been
some Heathenish Temple: Upon the right and left hand going into the Church, you
may see two Ancient Tombs of Marble.

We afterward saw the Castle of St. Angelo, were the Popes Triple Crown is
kept, in which there is planted a great many Brass Guns, whereof it is believed
the major part was made of the Brass taken from the Pantheon, and one of them
made out of the Brass Nails only that were employed in the Brazen Work of that
Temple, so vast was the quantity of Brass found there.

From hence we went to the Palace of Medicis, where we saw these principal
Statues, (viz.) the Rotatore, being a Country Fellow that discovered the
Conspiracy of Cataline against the Republic of Rome. A Venus made by Cleomenes
the Son of Appolodorus of Athens, which heretofore they say was an Idol
worshipped in the Rotonda. The Statue of Marsias, who was flaid alive for
presuming to understand Music as well as Apollo. The Wrestlers in one entire
piece of Marble. Then in the Garden you see two great Vessels of Marble, taken
out of the Baths of Dioclesian the Emperor, and fourteen fine ancient Statues,
representing the Sons and Daughters of Niobe, that were all put to death by
order of Latona, Jupiters Concubine, according to the fiction of the Poets.

From hence we went again to St. Peter's Church, where we saw the head of the
Spear that, they say, pierced our Saviors Side, and a piece of the Cross, with
a Handkerchief that, they say, St. Veronnica gave him to wipe the Sweat from
his Face, when he was going to Mount Calvar loaded with the Cross; whereon is
to be seen plainly the print of a Face which, they say, affixed it self so to
the Handkercief as soon as our Savior had made use of it.

Monday the 21 th of January we left Rome in order to go to Venice, and lay the
first night at Rigneava twenty three miles from Rome, the next night we lay at
Ternit, twenty eight miles, and upon Wednesday we arrived at Foligne thirty
miles more; from whence on Thursday wecame to Valcemare twenty eight miles, and
the next day to Lauretta thirty two miles, where we saw the Holy House, now so
called, it being formerly (they told us) the proper Mansion House, or
Habitation of the Virgin Mary in Nazareth, when the Angel Gabriel saluted her
with the joyful news of her Conception of our Savior Christ.

It was first miraculously brought from Nazareth into Dalmatia, and from thence
by the Angels carried over the Gulf of Venice, and set down in Italy, where it
now remains to the great astonishment of all that see it, if they believe the
report: All that you see of this Holy House is no more than four Walls very
unartificially built, of an ordinary sort of Stone, much like unto our Brick,
which four Walls compose the four sides of a little ground Room, almost square,
which they call the Holy House; but some time since they have built over it a
very fine Church, and have very richly cased and adorned this Irregular Room
with pure fine Marble, curiously wrought and carved, much more to be admired
than the Holy House it self. In the Holy House there is a Wooden Dish, which,
they told us, the Virgin Mary did use to eat or drink in; and the Image of a
Woman carved in Wood, with a Child in her Arms, which they take to be the
Effigies of the Virgin Mary, with our Savior: They showed us likewise an old
Red Pet^icoat, supposed likewise to be what the Virgin Mary, in her lifetime,
did wear, because it was found upon the Image: There are several rich Lamps,
whereof ten are of pure Gold; and a very rich Cloth of Gold and Silver, beset
with Diamonds and other Precious Stones, for a Covering to the Image.

From hence they conducted us to the Treasury of the Order of this Holy House,
which without doubt is the richest in Christendom, for that innumerable
quantity of Precious Stones, as Diamonds, Pearls, Rubies, etc. too many to be
particularly mentioned, that they have there amassed together, likewise Vessels
of Gold and Silver in abundance: There is also one fine piece of Painting, done
by Hannibal Caratio; after this they showed us the Apothecaries Shop, whereof
the Pots were all Painted by Raphael Vrbin. From Lauretta we went on Saturday
the 26 th of January to Ancona fifteen miles, where the most remarkable thing
is the Triumphal Arch of Trojan upon the Mould, and St. Augustin's Church,
where there is some good painting, done by Pomerancia. It is a great Town well
fortified, with Cannon planted as well against the Sea, as against the Land.
From hence we went twenty miles upon the Adriatic Sea shore, and lay at
Senegaglia, a Town fortified almost in a square; heretofore it did belong to
the Duke of Vrbin, but now it is in the possession of the Pope. The next day we
went twenty miles more to Dinner at Pesaro, within five miles of this place we
went through a Town called Fano, where there is a Triumphal Arch erected to the
honor of Caesar, when he returned victorious over the French. From Pesaro we
went 25 miles more, and lay at Rimini, still all along upon the Adriatic Sea
side. It is a great Town, but very much ruined by an Earthquake, that two years
before shook down a Spacious Marketplace, with the greatest part of the
Buildings about it, which were very sumptuous; and the best part of the Town
was thereby destroyed, to the terrible amazement of all the Inhabitants,
whereof the greatest part made their escape when they first perceived the Earth
to tremble, and the Streets begin to rock, and by the violence of the
concussion ready to meet and touch a top, though some more careful than
prudent, to save their goods, were buried with them in the ruin of their
Houses; the greatest part of which still lies in heaps. The Chapel of St.
Anthony, which Lassel in his Voyage of Italy does say, proved miraculously the
real presence in the Sacrament, was likewise without any difference shaken down
with the rest; so that the historical painting, which should have informed us
concerning the Miracle, fell with the Chapel Walls. Near to this there is a
large Stone fixed, where they say Caesar made a Speech to his Army. From
Rimini, upon Tuesday the 29 th. we came to Ravenna, 35 miles, where we spent
the morning to see the Town, and first went to the fine Convent of Sancta
Vitalle, where we saw the Chapel of Galla Placidia, the Daughter of Theodosius
the Great, and Sister to Arcadia and Honorius, Wife of Constantius, and Mother
to Valentinianus the Third, all Emperors. Her great Marble Tomb is placed at
the upper end of the Chapel* And the two great Tombs of Honorius and
Valentinianus on each side of the Chapel; the two Tombs fixed in the Walls
going out of the Chapel; it is believed do acknowledge Arcadius, and the Nurse
of Valentinianus, for their being there erected: After we had seen this, we
went to the Church, where in going in, we took notice of a Marble Stone in the
wall, whereon were several very Antique Figures, curiously engraven,
representing a Bull led to the Sacrifice, with the Heathenish Priests
attending: There is likewise the Tomb of Justinian the Emperor, and over
against that John the Ninth, Archbishop of Ravenna lies: Under one of the
Altars you see the Tomb of St. Vitalle: Near the Church Door, and in several
places of the Town, several old Sepulchers are remaining: From hence we went to
the Church of St. Maria Maggiore, where there is abundance of fine ancient
Marble Pillars, and the Chapel of St. Orcicero, who after he was beheaded,
they say, carried his Head from the place of Execution, two hundred paces: We
went from this Church to the Rotonda, one of the greatest pieces of Curiosity
in all Italy; it was designed by Amalasunta, only Daughter to Theodoric, King
of the Goths, for a Tomb for her Father, and in the Year 526, was accordingly
built; a little before his death he caused a Pope and two famous Counselors to
be put to death: The building is round, but the Curiosity is in the Roof, which
is one entire Stone, near four foot thick, and thirty five foot over, or in the
Diameter that covers the whole Building, being concav'd like unto a Buckle; it
is to the the admiration of all that see it questioned, how such a Stone could
be got out of a Quarry, brought thither, and placed as it is. The Vass that
this King was put in, is of Porphyry, and was placed upon the top of this great
Stone in the middle, having round about the sides twelve Statues, representing
the Twelve Apostles; but at the siege of Ravenna, it was shot down, and is now
to be seen in the Convent of the Zocollanties, fixed in a Wall, conveyed
thither by some of the Town in the Year of our Lord 1564. We went next to the
Church of the Polonaries, supported by four and twenty fine Marble Pillars very
Antique; and in the Piazza or Marketplace, there are two more, whereon the
Statues of St. Vitelle and St. Apollinare, Protectors of the City, do now stand.

Wednesday, the 30 th. of January, we left Ravenna, and went to Fienza, 20.
miles, here it is they make the fine Earhen Ware; the next day we came to
Bologne, where we saw a great many fine Churches and Convents, to wit, that of
St. John in the Mount, in which there is very good painting, especially one
piece made for St. Cicilia by Raphael Vrbin, and another fine piece done by
Hannibal Caratio. In the Convent of St. Dominico, there is behind the great
Altar, a fine piece, done by Machael Angelo: The Tomb of St. Dominic is very
fine; in the Quire you see the History of the Old and New Testament, Carved in
Wood, very curiously done by Franck. Damiano, a Lay Brother, and a Lamp of
Silver, sent to them from the Indians about thirty years ago; they showed us
St. Dominic's Chamber for a great Curiosity. From hence we went and saw the
Silk Mills, which was well worth our trouble, and one or two Palaces, and then
we went to the fine Gallary of Aldovandino.

Monday, the 4 th. of February, we went from Bologne to Modene 20 miles, where
within four miles of that Town, near to the Great Road, is situated a strong
place called Vrbin the Eighths Fort; it is a square, fortified with Ravelins
and Demilunes, the best regular Fortification that I had then seen in Italy:
The Town of Modene is inconsiderable, the Fortifications of it are old and
decayed, but the Citadal may be taken notice of: We saw the Duke and his
Palace, in which there is nothing more remarkable than the Collection of
Pictures.

Tuesday we went from Modene, and lay eighteen miles off at a little Town,
called Cento, and from thence to Ferrara eighteen miles, where coming into Town
you may take notice of a Fort, which seemed to me to be a Pentagone very well
fortified; in the Town is the Castello, surrounded with deep Ditches of Water;
here the Popes Legate recides: They showed us a fine Colomn not finished*
whereon is to be placed the Statue of the Pope, that at present stands hard by
the Domo, which is a very old Church. The Benedictins is a fine Monastery,
where we saw the Tomb of Arioste the great Poet, and Author of Orlands Furioso.
Over against the Domo, you may take notice of two Statues, representing two
Brothers, one a Duke the other a Marquess, of the House of Este; one of them
delighted much in sporting and playing tricks, and had a House built for that
purpose, but now out of use. It became afterward a Proverb, when any one would
be playing the Fool, to say, (il Fratello del Duca e morto) which is as much as
to say (leave off Fooling.)

Thursday following we went to Dinner to Ravigo, the first Town in that Road
that belongs to the Venetians, 22 miles from Ferrara, where we passed the River
Poe, and the White Channel; after Dinner we went 15 miles more, to a Town
called Mont Selevie; not far from hence we passed the River Adige; and a Friday
morning we came to Padoue, ten miles, from whence the same day we took Bark,
and arrived at Venice the eighth day of February, where we staid three weeks to
see the Town; and the most remarkable thing there is, the Arsenal, in which
there is Arms for four hundred thousand men; there is a very great store of
Cannon and other instruments of War: Their Ports do abound in Galleys,
Galliots, and Men of War: We went into the Bucentore, a certain Vessel that the
Doge or Duke of Venice goes in when he performs the Matrimonial Ceremony
betwixt Himself and the Sea, by throwing in a Gold Ring: We saw the private
Armory, and the Treasury, which indeed is not to be admired after having seen
the Treasure of Lauretta: We went afterward to the Doge's Palace and the
Council Chamber, where there is good Painting; the Piazza or Place of St. Mark,
is very well worth ones particular notice, as also St. Mark's Church, where you
see the four fine Horses of Brass, brought from Constantinople, and the two
great Pillars of Marble near the Waterside: The Basrelief, upon the side of a
little Building joining to the Steeple of St. Mark's Church is very well worth
the taking notice of; then we went up to the top of the Steeple, from whence we
had a fair prospect over all Venice, which, I believe, contains more buildings
than Rome; but that which is chiefly to be admired, is its Situation and
Building in the Sea, so that one may go by Water and by Land almost through
every Street of this vast City. There is two Canals or Ports, by which the
biggest Ships may go in and out; the one is called Porto Lydo, the other
Malomoca: After we had gone round the City by Sea, and viewed it after that
manner, we took our leaves of it, and went again to Padoue, where we arrived
the first of March; we saw the Schools of Physic, Divinity and Law, etc.
called the Bo, and the Tomb of Antinor, Founder of Padoue, who lived fifteen
hundred years before our Savior Christ, upon Earth, it is erected at the
Corner of a Street; then we went to the Church of St. Anthony, where we saw the
fine Tomb of Alexander Contarini, General of the Venetians, and the Tomb of St.
Anthony, which is adorned with several fine Marble Figures, representing the
Miracles wrought by him in his lifetime and about twenty seven great Silver
Lamps. In the Quoire of the same Church there is about twelve pieces of Cast
Brass, so curiously wrought with all sorts of Figures, and other things
necessary to the design, that it gives you an Historical Account of several
passages in the Old Testament, and so much to the Life, that I cannot forbear
to make mention of one, which is the Story of Sampson and the Philistines, when
he destroyed so many of them by carcying away the Pillars of the House, and
letting the House fall wherein they were; it is so artificially done, that you
will hardly believe your eyes, but take the whole Fabric to be effectually
falling down. In the Cloisters to the same Church, there is a little Black
Marble Stone that covers the Bowels of the Old Duke of Norfolk, Father to the
supposed Mad Duke that we saw confined at Padoue: Right before this Church
stands the Statue of Gatta Mela, General of the Venetians, in Brass. From hence
we went to the Church of St. Justin, where we saw the Tomb of St. Luke, much
like unto an old wooden Chest, inchased with Iron; the Tomb of S. Matthias,
over against it on the other side of the Church, and under the great Altar, the
Tomb of St. Justin; at the upper end of the Quire there is a fine piece of
Painting, done by Paul Veronese. To this Church belongs a Convent, esteemed the
finest in Italy. Near to the Palace of the Great Captain, we saw the great
Hall, called Pallagio di Regione, and that remarkable Stone in it, called Lapis
opprobrii, whereon if any one comes and claps down his Breech, three times
together, he shall never be troubled, whilst he lives, for debt, but then he is
for ever after defamed, and himself and Family more ruined in their Reputation
and Honor, than if they had died in Prison for Debt. We went from hence to the
place where they Anatomize and Dissect the Bodies of Men and Women, which is so
conveniently built, that although it is much less than an ordinary Chamber, yet
there is room enough with Seats for two or three hundred Spectators.

Sunday, the 3 d. day of March, we went from Padoue to Vicenze 18 miles, where
about a mile out of Town we saw a pretty Palace, called the Rotonda; it is a
very fine Prospect and belongs to the Marquess Martio Capra; we also saw the
Garden and Labyrinth of Conte Valinerana, the Amphitheatre and Triumphal Arch
of Poladio, with what else was considerable. Tuesday the 5 th we went thirty
miles more, and came to Dinner at Verona, where the finest Tombs, and the
richest that ever I saw of Marble, are there erected to the honor of the
Family of the Scaligeres, who were formerly Masters of this Town; then we went
to the Amphitheatre, which is much like to that in Rome, but a more entire
thing within, for the Spectators Seats or Places which are the Circular Degrees
or Steps within side remain all whole, the outside is much more ruined than
that in Rome. From hence we went to Conte Juste's Garden, where you have a
prospect of the whole Town; I took notice of the Pine Trees in the Garden,
which are the finest I ever saw. From this Garden we went to St. George's
Church, where we saw two pieces of Painting, very much esteemed, done by Paul
Veroncse: It is thought that this Town is the biggest (except Venice) that
belongs to the Venetians; its situation is upon the River Adige.

Wednesday, the 6 th. we left this place and went to Mamoue 24 miles, the Duke
thereof and Duchess his Wife, are both of the Family of Gonzaga: We saw the
Town and the Dukes Palace, but nothing worth remark in either* for about forty
years ago it was plundered by the Germans, yet something remains in the Closet
of Natural Curiosities worth taking notice of, to wit, two or three Children
Mummies, one of them like to a Satyr, the other two very Monstrous, there being
but two Bodies, but to each Body Members for two Children; one of these Children
was a Male, the other a Female very discernable: There was likewise a Man
Mummy, he being about 360 years ago, a very Tyrannick Governor of this place,
was killed, and thus preserved for a detestable spectacle to after Ages. Of
several Cockatrices I had seen in our Travels, the biggest was in this place.
The little Hall painted by Gulio Romano of the Trojan History is worth taking
notice of. The Town of Mantoue is well fortified by Nature as well as by Art.
Ver^^a, the place I made mention of before this, is likewise strongly fortied
with thick Walls and deep Ditches. About five miles from Mantoue, in the road
to Brescia, there is a fine Palace, belonging to this Duke, called La Fontalla.
The same day being the seventh, we arrived at Brescia 40 miles, riding all the
way through a very delightful Country. The Town of Brescia is strong, having
good Walls and Ditches. The Castle that stands upon a little Hill has a great
many good Cannon in it, and commands the Town. About 160 years ago the French
were Masters of it, who with the assistance of some forces from Bologn made a
strong sally upon the Town, plundering, and putting all to the Sword; ever
since which time they have remained in Peace. The Townhouse was one of the
finest buildings in all these parts, but by an accident burnt the remains of it
is worth one's regard. The ninth we went from hence to Bergamo 30 miles, where
we lay that night, the next morning, being Sunday the 10 th we went into the
Town, which is situated on a Hill, and well fortified: This is one of the
finest prospects of Italy, we saw the Domo, and in it the Sepulcher of
Bartholomew Collione, late Patron of the Town; there are four fine pieces kept
locked up, some call it Painting, but others affirm it to be all but Wood
Inlaid, which makes the Pieces the more Curious.

After Dinner, the same day, we went to Le Fournaise 16 miles, where we lay
that night; it is but a Village, and lies upon the River Adda. The next day we
rode 14 miles upon the same Riverside, and came to Millan the 14 th of March;
and first of all we went to St. Paul's Church, and to that of St. Ceis^, in
both which there is good Pai^ting, chiefly in this last, where in the (...)
there is a fine piece done by R^phael Vrbin. In the Church of St. (...) they
show you a Brazen Serpent, whereof the Head and Tail, they tell you was part of
that Serpent that Moses caused the Children of Israel to set up for a remedy
against the plague of biting Serpents: The Body of St. Ambrose lies under the
Great Altar. In the Garden of this Convent they show you a Chapel, where they
say St. Augustine was converted to the Christian Faith, and another Chapel,
where they say he was Baptized. From hence we went to the Convent of St.
Victoir, where there is very good painting: These two last mentioned are
esteemed the finest Convents in Italy; then we went to the Church of St.
Eustorgian, where they pretend to show the Tomb of the Three Kings that came to
worship our Savior in Bethlehem, and the Sepulcher of St. Peter, who they say
was martyrized in a Wood betwixt Millan and Pavie. Then we went to the Church
of St. Laurence, built after the model of St. Sophie in Constantinople; it was
formerly the Palace of Maximilian the Emperor, there remains sixteen of the
old Pillars next the street, which I looked upon to be the greatest piece of
Antiquity of the whole Town; and in the Church there is nothing but the Tomb of
Placidia, Daughter to Honorius the Emperor that is worth your notice* The Domo
or Cathedral Church is the finest Fabric in Millan, and if one had a month to
spend there, one might see it every day, and yet find something to please ones
Curiosity, that one had not seen, or atleast taken notice of before,
notwithstanding it is not finished, nor do I believe ever will be. There is
about six hundred Marble Pillars belonging to the Church, and each Pillar they
say cost at least One Thousand Crowns; all the Walls of the Church are likewise
of Marble: In a little Chapel, under ground, we saw the body of St. Charles
covered with Crystal, very transparent, lying in his Robes, the same he wore
when he was Archbishop of that place, his Face, which looked black and
rottenish, had no covering, but lies always exposed to view; the Crystal Case
preserving it from Cobwebs, dust and other filth. From the top of the Church we
took a view of the Town, which is near as big as London within the Walls; we
saw the great Hospital, the Lazaretto or Pesthouse, both well worth taking
notice of. In the Cabinet of Settali, one of their their Canons there is a
great many curiosities both Natural and Artificial; what I most admired was
three large Unicorns Horns, which I never saw in any place before, nor till
then did I believe there could be any such thing in nature, but the Master of
the Cabinet was strongly of the opinion that they did belong to, and were taken
from Fish, and that there was never any such Beast seen to have such a Horn,
but that it was a vulgar error; each Horn was about six foot long, twisting
regularly from the root upwards, but falling from the Twist gradually as it
drew up to the spear or point, which was very sharp: The lower part or root of
the Horn being about ten or twelve inches circumference, which declining
gradually till it comes to a spear a top, renders it a very strong and
formidable weapon. The Horn is all very white; the whole Cabinet is full of
curious things, yet I think that Cabinet we saw at Lions in France does far
excel it. From hence we went to the Castle, it is a very regular Exagon, with
half moons; it is esteemed one of the compleatest pieces of fortification in
all Italy, and of great strength, upon every one of the Bastions is planted
twelve pieces of Cannon; there is a Garrison in it of about 500 Soldiers with
their Wives and Children* After we had seen the Castle, we went to a Palace of
the Countess of Smione, about a mile and a half out of Millan, where amongst
other remarkable things, you may take notice of the Echo, which was the best I
ever heard. There is a very strong wall round Millan, which is said to be ten
miles; the Library there is worth seeing.

From this place we came the 13 th to a little Village called Buffe^^lo 20
miles, it lies upon Navillio, a small River, and from thence the 14 th to
Vercelle 20 miles more: Then we came to the River Tissino 4 miles, and so to
Novarra 6 miles; this is the strongest place upon the Frontiers of Savoy that
belongs to the Milaneses: From hence we came to Vercelli 10 miles; this place
belongs to the Duke of Savoy, and is the first place of strength, near the
Frontiers of the Milaneses; One side of the Town is regularly fortified with
Bastions and Half Moons, hardly finished; on the North part of the Town the
fortifications are irregular, there being a great deal of the old walls still
remaining, however the Town is very strong. The 15 th we came to Dinner to
Ciliana or Sian 17 miles; and from thence to Chivas 10 miles, where we lay that
night at the Posthouse, from whence the next day, being Saturday the 16 th. of
March, we came to Turin 12 miles. The next day, Sunday, we went to Pignerol 16
miles; it is a strong Town, which the French King about 45 years ago took from
the Doke of Savoy. The Citadel wherein Monsieur Fouket, thatgreat Minister is
confined, is a very strong place, and like to be much stronger if they continue
to carry on the work of their fortifications. The Town it self is likewise very
well fortified, where at the Gate going in they obliged us to leave our Arms,
and to take a Soldier to wait upon us to the Governor for leave to see the
Town and Citadel, which was soon granted us. This place has a very great awe
upon the Duke of Savoy, the French being able by means thereof at their
pleasure to make an inroad upon that Dukedom.

From Pignerol we came to Villiane the Monday following 12 miles, and a bad way
over the Mountains; near to this Town we passed betwixt two small Lakes, called
by the Name of the Town* From this place we went eight miles farther, and came
to Busolino, the next day to Novalese six miles, which is the foot of the
Mountains on the side of Piedmont. From Novaleze, in the ascent of the Alps,
we came to la Ferier two long miles, from thence to the great Cross two more,
which is the least half to the top of Mount Senis; from the great Cross we went
five miles upon a Plain, which brought us to the Ra^asse (that is) the place
where we took Sledges, on which we slid all upon Snow from the top of the
Mountain to the foot toward France in so little time, that I forbear here to
mention, which which was two miles more, and that brought us to Lanebourg, from
Lanebourg to Bremont two leagues, where we lay on Tuesday night; from thence we
went to St. Michell five leagues, and so to la Chamber four leagues, all upon
the River Arch. Thursday we came to Maltaverne six leagues, and then to
Montmillian two leagues, and so to Chambrey two great leagues more. On Friday
we came to Remile five leagues, where we lay* From thence we came on Saturday
the 23 th. of March, new style, to Geneve seven leagues, where after we had
rested our selves for some time, we returned for France by the way of way of
Lions and then taking another road different ^^om what we traveled before, in
some short time arrived at Paris, where we stayed about a month, and then set
forward for England, to which place we returned after four years travl in
France, Italy, Swisserland, and through some of the Spanish Territories; but
then stayed not long before a voyage into France was again proposed, with which
you was pleased to comply, and so passed the following Winter at Mompellier,
going another way through France, than the way you had gone before* from whence
the next Summer, by another road we returned again to Paris, where I was
compelled to leave you. And the same time humbly take leave to Conclude this
short and rude Journal of your Travels in Italy.

FINIS.

