A LETTER In ANSWER to certain Quaeries and Objections made by a Learned
GALENIST, against the Theorie and Practice of Chemical Physic.

Wherein the right Method of Curing of Diseases is Demonstrated: The
possibility of an Universal Medicine evinced; AND CHEMICAL PHYSIC Vindicated.

By GEORGE ACTON Doctor of Physic.

Published for the benefit of such as languish under any grievous Distemper
without Cure.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid for Walter Kettleby, at the Sign of the
Bishops Head in Duck-Lane. 1670.

SIR,
HAD you not power enough with me to persuade me for your satisfaction, to
neglect my own, I should scarcely at this time have complied with your desires,
in answering your several Quaeries and Objections against both the Theorie and
Practice of Chemical Physic; for I find almost all the Galenists that are
either totally ignorant of Chemistry, or acquainted only with the Vulgar; such
as is that of Crollius, Hartman, Beguin, and their like, so riged opposers of
the more occult Philosophy of Hermes, Raymond, Lully, Basilius Valentinus,
Paracelsus, Vanhelmont, etc. that they cannot but protest against all their
Scholars and followers, as Heterodox, deserters of the Schools, and (to use
your own expression) Phanaticks and Canters of such a Philosophy, that were
Galen himself again living upon Earth, he would not be able to understand it;
and although for your own part I have no reason to believe you of the number of
those supercilious Opiners, that scorn to forsake an Error because vulgarly
received; yet I doubt whether the Truth in so plain a dress as I shall expose
it, may not startle you also. You are perhaps too tender of the Reputation of
Galen, for you ought not to think it any discredit to him, that had never seen
so much as common Distillation in his life, to be said not to understand the
profound and hidden Mysteries of Natural Philosophy, plunged in an Abyss
inaccessible and imperceivable by any possibility of Wit, without the help of
Fire; He well saw that the tenuous and ethereal substance of things, was of
greater efficacy than their grosser part, as he confesses in his 11 Book De
Simp. Med. Facul. Quae tenuium sunt partium, iis quae sunt crassarum plus
habent efficaciae etiamsi parem sortita fuerint facultatem, nimirum quia melius
penitrent; but he knew not how to separate the tennous parts from the
implication of the gross, which we do by the help of Fire. Whence I conclude,
that he (had he understood the Art of Chemistry, which in his time lay hid in
obscure Hieroglyphics in the Shrines of Egypt, would have left us both his
Physiology, Pathology, and especially his Method of Healing, quite different
from what it is; for it cannot reasonably be imagined, that so curious a
searcher into the hidden things of Nature, would have contented himself with a
bare rational Analysis of Bodies existing only in the Understanding, had he
been acquainted with the Encheiretick, resolving all bodies into Principles
subject to Sense, and fit for the use and manual operation of a skilful
Physician by the help of Fire. Your Ideal Analysis, by a progressive agitation
of the Mind, by which you find contemplation to end where natural composition
begins, leads you at last but into the dark Chaos of the Elements, and there
begets but this unprofitable conclusion; That because all things are by a
mental Resolusion ultimately resolved into the four Elements, therefore these
are the common Principles of all things. Now how much it may really improve any
man's understanding in the Art of Physic, to tell him all things are compounded
of the four Elements, more than in Ship-Carpentry, to tell him a Ship is made
of Timber, Iron, Hemp, and Tarr, I leave you to judge. We therefore, (in regard
the Elements are but remote Principles upon which only God and Nature can work)
have by the Resolution of Fire found out nearer Principles subject (as I said)
to Sense, and fit for the use of a Spagyrical Physician: these are Mercury,
Sulphur, and Salt, which being first separated and cleansed from all
heterogeneous feculency, then exalted (by the help of Fire) in power and
virtue, we can either use them severally, or conjunctly, according to their
virtues, and the curative intention of the Physician; And thus by the help of
Fire, we make Medicines easily curing those obstinate Diseases you esteem
incurable; By the help of Fire we understand the occult Hermetick and
Helmontian Philosophy; and by the help of Fire, with much study, labor, and
sweat (never by the bare reading of Books at your ease) may you also be
satisfied of the reality, truth, and excellence of that Physic which you now
profess (and I believe you) no more to understand, than the Cantings of
Gypsies. But now to your first Quaerie:

Whether it be possible to cure a Disease without a Remedy contrary to the
Disease, or at least to its Cause?

I answer with the Adepti in the affirmative, and say, Nulla fit sanatio per
contraria, quia Morbus proxime and primario consistit in Arbeo at substantiae
in esse (according to Aristotle) nihil est contrarium. It is not the corporeal
substance of the Brain, Heart, Liver, Spleen, etc. that suffers primarily, and
per se in their several distempers, though Idiopathical, but the Jusitous
Spirit governing the part, and disposing it to perform all natural, Vital, and
Animal Functions, which being hurt by the Error and depravation of the
Jufluous Spirit and Topic Ferment, the part necessarily suffers by accident,
Quia actio terminatur in corpus. Now the atonie of the Jufluous Spirit and
deviation of Ferments happens by ill air, Contagion, Malignant Influence,
poisonous Fumes or Odours inspired, or entering by the Pores, by Meat or Drink
hurtful either in quality or quantity, by Poison or Virulency of ill Physic,
by natural or accidental inequality of strength, by retention of Excrements of
the several digestions, by transmission from one digestion to another, before a
perfect Concoction in the former, etc. So then the right Method of curing
Diseases, is primarily by pacation of the Enormontick Spirit, and extinction of
Morbifick Idea's, and but a posteriori, by expelling the peccant matter
generated by the ataxie of the Spirit: But such a sedation of the Spirit cannot
possibly be procured by contraries; does not Fire burn most vehemently, when
constring'd by an extreme cold of the ambient? and hot water soonet extinguish
Fire than cold, because sooner penetrating its Pores? I could multiply
arguments against the Method of curing Diseases by contrary Remedies; but my
design is rather to recreate than tire you with too long a Letter.

To your next Quaerie, therefore, Whether we acknowledge four* Humors; and if
so, Whether various Distempers flowing from the depravation or excess of
various Humors, as Synochus simplex, of too much abundance of Blood;
Quotidiana Intermittens, of Phlegm; Tertiana Intermittens, of Choler; Quartana
Intermittens, of Melancholy; all putrefying in the first region of the Body;
and both Quotidian, Tertian, and Quartan, continual from the same humors
putrefying in the Vein, may be all cured by one Medicine?

In answer to this; First, We deny your Humors, as most repugnant to reason,
that under one act of Sanguification, and in the same Vessels, four different
Humors should be produced, and that naturally in sound and healthful Bodies
these Humors should be the efficient causes of future Diseases; For this were
to suppose Nature always to err, etiam in suis finibus. Sense likewise assures
us, that although there be a Liquor swimming upon Blood, emitted and cold, of a
yellow color, yet that it is not therefore yellow Bile; for that it is not
bitter to the taste: And though the Yellow Jaundies staining the whole Body
with a yellow color, and the Urine with a deep tincture of Red, seem ( prima
facie) to prove your Hypothesis of Humors; yet upon an exact Spagyrical
examination, you shall find the contrary; for if this tincture of Urine were a
flava bile, there must be found in it by Distillation at least some bitterness,
either in the Liquor that comes over, or in the Hypostasis, or Caput mortuum;
but there is found none, nor could a small quantity of yellow Liquor tinge a
large quantity of Urine with a color deeper than its own. So that we say,
Nullus in natura Humor noster, nisi Cruor, Latex, and Secundarius. Now
sometimes this Latex, sometimes the Chyle, from the Error and contagion of
degenerated Ferments, and pre-disposition of the matter, receives various
tinctures, and puts on the disguise of your supposed Humors. But granting you
a Quaternary of Humors, yet we deny them to be truly the efficient causes of
Diseases, for manente causa non tollitur Effectus; but very many Diseases we
see daily cured by Amulets; Plasters, Laudanums, Anodynes, Magneticks, etc.
without any evacuation of Humors at all; so then the truly Efficient and
conjunct Cause is Spiritual, and such a Medicine as can quiet the Archeus, and
reduce it to its natural state, shall easily cure all these Distempers, without
any regard had to the Purgation, or carrying away of Peccant Humors; for the
Jusitous Spirit being strengthened, and the local Ferments restored to their
proper Energy, your peccant Humors shall soon, by the power of these, be
either subacted and compelled into their genuine perfection, or driven out by
the ways most familiar and easy to Nature, truly acknowledged by Hypocrates to
be Morborum Curatrix; and in my Opinion, the reason why mere Galenists seldom
perform any considerable cure in obstinate Diseases, is for that they wholly
prosecute evacuation, and by that means oftentimes disable Nature, (especially
by Phlebotomy) from doing what she would be able oftentimes of her own strength
to perform, never aiming primarily and directly (but thus only by accident) at
the re-establishing of Nature; and no marvel, since this way of Healing is not
performable without the help of such Arcana as are only known to Chemists, and
of them, only to the Adepti, not every vulgar Professor of Chemistry. But you
urge a necessity (in the right Method of Healing) of having respect not only to
the expulsion of Peccant Humors, but also to the extinction of praeternatural
heat by cooling Medicines, and refocillation of cold, by heating ones; as for
Example, in the cure of Anasarcha, which you say is from an immoderate
refrigeration of the Liver and Veins; of a Fever, which is from a
praeternatural heat kindled first in the Heart, and thence diffusing it self
through the whole Body; of Bradypepsia and Apepsia, from the coldness of the
Stomach; of Boulimia, from an extraordinary heat of the Stomach suddenly
precipitating digestion, and causing almost a continual want of aliment; and
likewise in implicit and compounded Diseases that are contrary to each other,
as a hot Liver, and cold Stomach; whatsoever Medicines should by their heating
quality be proper in the Cure of Anasarcha, Bradypepsia, Apepsi, and cold
Distemper of the Stomach must in respect of that heat, be quite contrary in a
Fever, Boulimia, and hot Liver. I answer still with the Adepti; That Heat and
Cold (as I said of Hmours) are not the efficient Causes of Diseases, but the
Antecedent, and therefore though their consideration be Diagnostick yet not
Curative, non calor and frigus (says Hypocrates) sed acidum, acre, amarum,
ponticum, etc. sunt morborum causae. Heat and cold praeternatural, are indeed
an effect of the enraged vital Spirit, which being once quieted, the natural
temper presently returns; and as for the hot Liver and cold Stomach, which so
much puzzles you, that you know not which way to direct your curative
intention, as appears by your Method: Impliciti compositique morbi si
dissentiant, nec prorsus huic, nec illi, sed utrique mediocritate quadam
succurendum: which is in effect but a needless kind of despair of a Cure;
whereas I am able to assure you, that if for the future you can find out such a
Remedy as can re-invigorate the languishing tone of the Stomach and Liver,
restore their deviated Ferments, and appease the Archeus, which may be all done
with one Medicine, without any regard had either to the cold of the one, or
heat of the other, you shall quickly, safely, and pleasantly cure both; and by
the like Method, all other Diseases vulgarly ascribed to Heat and Cold. You
attribute Concoction to the Heat of the Stomach, and to the diminution of this
Heat, want of Digeston, and all Diseases happening thence; but that Heat is not
the efficient Cause of Digestion, seems manifest; For 1. Fishes digest without
any actual Heat, and to say that potential suffices, is scarcely consonant to
Reason, that a thing barely in potentia, should actu jam agere. 2. There ought
to be as many Degrees of Heat specifically different, as there are specifical
differences of Concoction, in the Stomachs of Animals of different species; for
whatsoever is produced specifically different, ought likewise to have the
efficient Cause of that difference specifically different, otherwise, Quidlibet
generetur a quolibet indifferenter, which I think no man will affirm. Besides,
What degree of Heat must we allow the Stomach of an Ostrich, easily digesting
Leather, Cloth, and even Nails of Iron? what degree of heat in Boulimia for the
Digestion of the coursest Food, in so large a quantity, and so fast, that the
Stomach is scarcely ever to be satisfied? Riverius confesses this cannot
possibly be from a more intense Heat, since Meat boiled in a Pot with the
strongest Heat that can be invented, and continued for many days, cannot by
this means be resolved into a Chylous Liquor, much less Bones, as in the
Stomach of a Dog in the space of an hour: I know you shift this off to a
peculiar faculty, but a faculty cannot act without an Instrument, so that you
are constrained to fly to the Idiosyncrasie of the part, which you teach to be
a certain proportion of first qualities; but of all the first qualities, Heat
is the most active, which nevertheless, as has been already showed, cannot have
the power of so sudden a liquation of Meats, so that after much struggling,
you are at last but where you began. We therefore ascribe the difference of
Digestions, not to Heat, but to formal proprieties, and the operation of the
specifical Ferments.

By what has been said, your Objections borrowed out of Helvetius, against the
possibility of an universal Medicine, seem sufficiently answered; Nevertheless,
take this Argument: Health is but one simple Homogeneal integrity of Life,
Nature but one, but one sole Spirit, the Governor and Moderator of Life, which
alone labors under Diseases, and is alone (it by a powerful Medicine
sufficiently strengthened) able to overcome all Diseases; why then may not one
Medicine, such as the Liquor Alkahest of Paracelsus, his Tinctura Lili ab
Electro Minerali, his Tinctura Lili Antimonialis, his Mercurius vitae, his
Mercurius Diaphoreticus dulcis and fixus, his Ignis veneris, his Corallatus,
his Elixir Proprietatis, or any other equal to these, be able to cure all
Diseases? and although I am not as yet so happy my self, as to be Master of any
one of these, yet in Confirmation of this Hetrodoxical Doctrine, I will
undertake (provided the Patients you shall assign me for the trial, will
faithfully comply in taking the Medicines, and carefully observe the order
prescribed them) to cure all sorts of Fevers how malignant and complicated
soever, with one Medicine; your distempers of a hot Liver and cold Stomach,
with one Medicine, and for the most part, Sanguine, Bilious, Melancholy, and
Phlegmatic Diseases, (as you esteem them) with one Medicine, which I hope will
make you change you Opinion of the necessity of curing Diseases by their
contrary Remedies. And as for those obstinate Diseases, whereof many are
esteemed by you incurable, and the rest seldom or never cured by the vulgar
Method, as the Dropsy, the Gout, Stone in the Reins and Bladder, Apoplexy,
Co^^u, Falling Sickness, Madness, Furor uterinus, Scurvy, French Pox, Small
Pox, Griping of the Gutts, of which so many hundreds fell the last Autumn,
Hysterica passio, with almost the whole Catalogue of Diseases, wheresoever the
vital Spirit, and tone of the part affected, are not so weakened, that no
Medicine can work its effects; to end the dispute between us, whether Chemical
or Galenical Physic be the most powerful and successful, and which of them the
most worthy of esteem by you, and all wise and unbyassed persons; Let there be
some of all, or the most of these Diseases put into my hand as soon as you
please, and if you do not find me by the help of Chemical Physic, to cure even
the hardest of them with less annoyance, less disturbance, less weakening the
Spirits and force of the Patient, and incomparably more expedition, safety, and
certainty, than your ordinary Physicians cure light and easy Distempers, let
me be no longer held by you worthy of Credit, or have any place in your esteem;
But if I do, (as by the Grace of God you will certainly find I shall) I doubt
not, but for the future you will give the preference to Chemical Physic, and
not think me in this guilty of vanity or ostentation, which I have made known
unto you out of the sincerity of my heart, inerrable experience, my love of the
truth, and (I hope) to the inestimable benefit of such as shall need and
require my help.

But you apprehend Chemical Medicines to be dangerous, as being many of them
extracted out of poisonous Metals and Minerals, as Iron, Copper, Tinn, Lead,
Mercury, Antimony, etc. and corrosive Salts, as Vitrial, Nitre, Tarter, Bay
Salt, etc. but you seem more especially to be affrighted at Antimony and
Mercury; and truly if you mean their vulgar preparations, (which nevertheless
you commonly make use of your selves,) such as are the Vitrum, and Flores
Antimonii, Crocus Metallorum, the ordinary Mercurius vita, Praecipitates and
Sublimates, I so much abhor them my self, that I detest the use of them. But I
have by me certain preparations out of and far more precious than Gold, with
which I know how to cure almost all curable Diseases in the body of man, and so
safe, that I give them commonly to little Children, without ever having found
the least harm or inconvenience in them; some of them Purge not at all, but are
Diaphoretick, Alexipharmacal, Balsamical, Restaurative, and Pacative: and those
that do, never cause any superpurgation, though the Patient by mistake should
take a double or treble Dose. Out of can I make many excellent Medicines,
whereof one particularly and especially cures the POX, though ever so full of
raging pains, Tophi, and Ulcerous exesions. Cut of Antimony, Basilius
Valentinus says, he knew how to make above 300 several preparations, whereof he
valued many as more precious and universal than potable Gold; Nevertheless,
esteeming himself yet but a Learner and Searcher into the innumerable Virtues
and Proprieties of Antimony. Quercitan says, there are in 600 Proprieties. Our
most Learned Roger Bacon made an Oil out of Antimony, which he affirms to be
little inferior not only in Medicine, but also in Transmutation of Metals, to
the great Elixir of the Philosophers. Of Antimony Paracelsus made some of his
most stupendous Arcana; as his Lili Antimoniale, his Mercurius vitae, with
which he could cure all the Diseases in the Body of Man, and says of, that as
it separates from Gold all Heterogeneous admixture and impurity, so does it
from the Body of Man all Diseases. And of Mercury, both he and Van Helmont made
their miraculous. Alkahest. is certainly the most precious Jewel in the whole
treasure of the Mineral Kingdom of Nature, from which alone it self borrows its
perfection. If I would now comunicate to you but what is known to my self that
am but a Scholar in the Schools of these two great Masters of Natural
Philosophy of the Virtues and hidden Mysteries of these two Minerals, I must
instead of a Letter, write a Volumn, which is at present far from my purpose
and your expectation. Now as to Saturn, Mars, Venus, which you likewise
apprehend to be dangerous; out of Saturn alone, Paracelsus professes himself
able to cure at least 200 several Diseases, out of he made his Ens Veneris, one
of his greatest Arcana, and says of, that he does, valida pugnacique manu
morbor quemplurimos etiam contumacissimos domittare, hear your Riverius in the
praise of in the cure of Hypochondriack Melancholy, Scurvy, most affectious of
the Liver and Spleen, Ulcers of the Stomach, Green Sickness, and many others.
At caeteris omnibus remediis palmam praeripit Sal Martis, quod obstructiones
aperit viscera corroberat, earumque calidam intemperiem emendat, etc. A certain
Physician you well knew, got more Fame and Riches than any of his time in this
Town, by means of a secret operative preparation of Steel, with which he really
performed many greater and more considerable Cures, than others equal to
himself in all other considerations. But you fill me with admiration, that you
should fear the corrosive quality of Vitriol, Tartre, Nitre, and Bay Salt, you
may draw a Menstruum out of Bread or Honey, that will dissolve Flints, and
Vlstadius out of Honey makes a dissolvant of Gold; would you therefore be
afraid of the use of Bread or Honey? you know the juice of Limons dissolves
Pearl and Coral, and yet most grateful and friendly to the Stomach; and why
should these Spirits tempered with the allay of other milder Liquors, ad gratam
aciditatem, be more dangerous? Indeed common experience shows you the contrary;
besides you ought to consider the difference between the hard Bodies of Stones
and Metals, and the softer Membranes of the Stomach, irrigated continually
with a Balsamic vital moisture: Aqua fortis that corrodes Stones and Metals,
whill not penetrate Wax. But to leave you no ground of suspicion, I can show
you how to make them freed from their corrosive aciditie, pleasant to Taste and
Smell, and highly exalted in Virtue. But this I confess is a great secret,
especially that of the Volatile Salt of Tarter, of which Paracelsus and Van
Helmont affirm, that it penetrates into the most inward and remote parts,
cleansing them from all impurity, instar saponis cuncta abstergens and omnem e
venis amurcam detergens, etc. But though you have obliged me to make this just
vindication of Chemical Physic, I would not have you think I either despise or
neglect the excellent use of Herbs, which I acknowledge with Van Helmont, to be
pentacula Divini amoris. Out of Animals and Vegetables I can make Medicines
that cure the Gout and Dropsy, with that certainty, as scarcely to miss two in
twenty. But indeed, as is our Method of Healing, so are our ways of preparation
very different from yours; You in your Decoctions consume commonly a third
part, sometimes half or more, in which consumption a great deal of the Spirit
and Volatile Salt of the Ingredients, which contains their highest Virtues, is
evaporated and lost; of the certainty of this loss, both your Smell and Taste
will bear you witness: We, on the contrary, so make our Decoctions, that the
whole virtue of the Crassis of the Plant is preserved without any diminution; I
leave it now to your self to judge whether you or we may reasonably hope for
the better success in this particular; the like difference is between your
Distillations and ours; you for the most part add water, or at least draw over
but the Phlegmatic part of the Plant, with some very small part of its Sulphur,
which gives it something of its natural smell and Taste, leaving nevertheless
almost all its Sulphur, and totally all its Alkalious Salt behind; so that your
distilled waters carry only the name, little of the virtue of the Plant from
which they are drawn: We first stamp the Herb, and draw its water, then cohobe
it so often upon the caput mortuum, till we have brought over its Sulphur, and
lastly calcine the remaining feces, and with the waters extract its own Salt,
and then Circulate them together; and thus are the Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt
united, which completes the virtue of the whole Plant, and compared to yours,
is worthy of the name of an Essence; this is indeed laborious and costly, but
in its effects largely recompenceth both. There remains yet an Objection
against Chemical Physic to be answered, which you offer not as your own, but
as received by common Report.

That Chemical Physic, though for the present it conquer many Diseases held
incurable, yet that afterward it shortens the lives of such as have been so
cured.

There is indeed such a senseless calumny current amongst Women, and the weaker
sort of Men industriously disseminated amongst them, by some hoping perhaps by
this art the better to keep up their own Esteem and Reputation, which otherwise
by their abilities they find themselves not likely to maintain. But to avoid
contention, let common Experience determine this difference between us. For my
own particular, I can faithfully assure you, that by Chemical Physic I have
cured my self of the Vertigo, and Gout, both in great extremity; it is now 4
years since, and I have not (I bless God) to this day relapsed again into
either, nor have I found any harm, but on the contrary, many benefits to my
health by such Medicines, tending in all probability to the prolongation of my
life; and if I had not grounded my esteem of Chemical Physic upon good reason
and sufficient experience, you might think me mad, to make desperate practices
upon my own Life. My Lungs are naturally so tender and weak, that had it not
been for Chemical Medicines, I cannot think I could have lived to see this day.
But inform your self further, and you shall find that those that have been long
accustomed to Chemical Physic, have preserved their Lives and Health much
longer, and more comfortably, than those acquainted only with your Druggs; for
consider impartially, how few escape death in contumacious Diseases by means of
Galenical Medicines, loathsome, tedious, and for the most part ineffectual; and
those that do, how slowly do they recover their color, appetite, and strength,
remaining long in continual fear and danger of relapse? such large quantities
of Physic as your slow Method requires, so depauperates the vital Spirit, and
oppresses Nature, that it may be known many times a year after, from what
Method they received their Cure: whereas we in the same Diseases perfect the
Cure quickly, with little Physic, and in small Doses, such as can hardly be
nauseous to the nicest and most delicate Stomachs; and in our whole scope, our
Method directs us not to enervate (as you do) but to erect deficient Nature,
not to extenuate, but reintegrate the languishing Spirit: and is it then likely
that Chemical Medicines taken from the hands of a skilful Chemical Physician,
appeasing and strengthening the Archeus, restoring the Ferments, which alone in
their entire vigor, are able to overcome all Diseases, as being the undoubted
Authors of transmutation, friendly and comfortable to Nature, should
nevertheless shorten Life? besides the evidence of Reason, I can testify out of
my own diligent Observation and Experience (and that fido animo) the contrary.
But I believe I need not take much pains to satisfy you in this particular, I
know you are too sharp sighted to be miss-led by such an Ignis Fatuus; on the
contrary, I rather believe you inclinable to acquaint your self fully with the
Theory, and manual operations of Chemistry, which though it cost you (as it
has done me) much Time, Sweat, and Money, yet if you prove equally successful,
I dare promise it shall never give you cause to repent you: for (I speak it
without boasting) I have by the help of this Art easily and quickly cured
Diseases quite desperate in the hands of very able and experienced Galenical
Physicians. Truly were not Chemical Physic incomparably more powerful and
safe, than Galenical, I do not see how I could excuse my self in leaving at any
time, the trodden, smooth, and easy paths of the vulgar or Galenical Method,
in which I am graduated as well as you, to follow those of the Chemical,
painful, costly, sublime, and so secret, that but a few have ever rightly
understood: -- pauci quos aequus amavit
Jupiter, hoc potnere --
At the worst can be said; surely he that understands both Physics, is likely
to perform more than he that understands but one; but I must not transgress the
limits of a Letter, let what has been said suffice for the present, till I
Print my Synopsis Medico-Chymica, which is almost finished, and I shall be
ready at our next meeting to give you further satisfaction in any thing: In the
mean time I pray do me that right to believe, that what I have said in
Vindication of Chemical Physic, has been without the least animosity, or
intention of prejudice to the Person or Practice of any man, purely in defense
of the Truth, and that whatsoever I have undertaken to do my self in my own
particular, the better to confirm you, I will by the Grace of God, whenever
you shall offer me the occasion, faithfully make good; and further, that I
shall unalterably remain upon all Trials.

Sir, Your faithful Friend and Servant G.A.
Silver-street near Bloomesbury Market London. March 4. 1669.
FINIS.

