A Modest Plea FOR THE CLERGY; WHEREIN Is Briefly considered, the Original,
Antiquity, Necessity. TOGETHER With the Spurious and Genuine Occasions of their
present Contempt.

Honor Sacerdotii, firmamentum potentiae. LONDON, Printed for William Crook at
the Green Dragon without Temple Bar. 1677.

IMPRIMATUR.

G. Jane. R. R. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris dom.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOSEPH WILLIAMSON, Principal Secretary of STATE,
and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. etc.
SIR,
I Do not here employ your Name either to rescue these Papers from contempt, or
to raise in the Reader an expectation of meeting in them something fit to be
offered to such a Personage; but out of great assurance that your Honor will
readily grant them your Protection, as being honestly designed for the
Vindication of that Order of Men, toward whom your Respects are constantly
manifested; and through the sides of whose Contempt both Church and State have
ever received their deepest Wounds.

If by this short Discourse I may serve God and the Truth, I have my End: but
shall think my Return full of Reward, if Your Honor shall please to approve
thereof, and give me pardon for the Address.

That you may long live to be under Our Gracious Sovereign, an happy Instrument
of Peace and Prosperity to this Church and Nation, is the hearty Prayer of,

Your Honor's most humble and most obliged Servant.

TO THE READER
I Have little hopes to charm the Reader with a Preface, and think it to as
little purpose to Court him into a favorable Opinion of the ensuing Plea. For
when I have said what I can, he will judge and think what he pleases. Let him
free me from the Errata of the Press, and I will stand to his Mercy for the
rest.

The Contents.
THe Introduction. Page 1. CHAP. I. Of the Name and Original, etc. of the
Clergy. p. 6. CHAP. II. Of the Antiquity of the Clergy: a rational account of,
and enquiry into the Institution, etc. p. 12. CHAP. III. Out of what Rank and
Condition the Clergy were elected among the Jews and Pagans: The respect shown
them, etc. p. 25. CHAP. IV. A brief account of the Institution of the Levitical
Clergy. p. 34. CHAP. V. Of the Institution of the Evangelical Clergy. p. 40.
CHAP. VI. Of the Spirits Agency in respect of the Clergy, etc. p. 48. CHAP.
VII. Of the Incommunicableness of the Offices of the Clergy. p. 55. CHAP. VIII.
How the Clergy in all Ages have undergone Contempt: The Character of their
Contemners, etc. p. 70. CHAP. IX. A Survey of the pretenses for the Contempt of
the Clergy: First want of Example. p. 79. CHAP. X. A Survey of the Pretenses of
the Contempt of the Clergy: Secondly, Idleness. p. 90. CHAP. XI. A view of the
Pretenses of the Contempt of the Clergy: Thirdly of Pride. p. 99. CHAP. XII. A
Survey of the Pretenses of the Contempt of the Clergy: Fourthly of
Covetousness. p. 107. CHAP. XIII. A Survey of some of the real Grounds of the
Contempt of the Clergy. p. 124. CHAP. XIV. A further Examination of the Grounds
of the Contempt of the Clergy, respecting their Condition in the World, and
Extraction. p. 136.
The Introduction.
IF there were not in man a natural desire to convey something of himself to
Posterity, and that his Memory might survive his Ashes; we had never heard of
the Egyptians expending their Treasures in Pyramids, nor of the Greeks and
Romans bestowing their Wealth and Care in Statues, Monuments and Inscriptions.
And this desire is so naturalized into all Qualities of men, that even the poor
Statuary expressed no less, when he so cunningly placed his Name in the Image
of his God, that it might last as long as that Masterpiece of his Art. And yet
men are not more ambitious of Memory than Fame: as is clearly to be seen in
those very persons, who though never so careless of a virtuous Conversation,
are yet mavelous greedy of that Reputation which is its natural appendage.

Nor can this be any matter of our Admiration, when it is duly considered, That
Reputation goes further than Power: and that men are serviceable, or otherwise,
according to the Opinion which is had of their Persons. For, let two men (says
that Oracle of the Chair and Pulpit) speak the same words, give the same
advice, pursue the same business, drive the same design, with equal right,
equal means, equal diligence, and every other thing equal; yet commonly the
success is strangely different, if the one be well thought of, and the other
labor of an ill report. So that he loses the chief advantage of his Cause,
who loses the good Opinion of his Person.

And though a good Opinion of men's Persons be of great moment in all ranks of
men, yet in none can it be of greater, than in the Clergy. For if we take our
measures from the things wherein they deal, the Credit of their Persons is very
highly considerable; because thereon, in a great measure, depend the success
and belief of their Office, and consequently the welfare of Religion; which
with no small numbers of men, has just so much Belief, as its Ministers have
Credit. And yet we see no Order of men, upon every slight and frivolous
occasion, so scornfully exposed as the Clergy; and that not seldom too for
doing those very things, which with equal Esteemers, ought to be the matter of
their Commendation and Reverence. For let Clergymen, with a zeal and
impartiality becoming their Function, press the due exercise of Holiness and
Virtue, and the forsaking those courses of vicious and ungodly Living,
wherewith so many are debauched; let them (following the method of the Gospel)
teach us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and our obligation to live
soberly, righteously, and godly all the time of our being upon Earth: let
Clergymen (I say) conscientiously pursue these and the like Instances of their
Office, and men commonly deal with them, as the Greeks dealt with their two
Gods, Hercules and Mercury, when they worshiped the one with reviling Speeches,
and the other with casting Dirt and Stones at his Image.

Now, when with not a little resentment I seriously consider, that the Contempt
of the Clergy is not the ruffianly and borish Humor only of the Rude and
less-Civilized, but even of many of those, who would be looked upon as the
Great Lights of Deportment, and the Refined and Philosophical Persons of the
Age (moved with this Consideration) I began to stagger in my good Opinion of
the Clergy, and to suspect there might be sufficient matter for the Tempest,
especially when I saw it raised against them by persons of too much seeming
Genteelness and Philosophy, to pour Contempt upon any without all just Cause or
Pretense.

And yet fearing to be seduced with popular Examples, and unwarily to imbibe a
groundless prejudice against that Order of Men, for which I have ever retained
so Singular a Reverence and Esteem: I thought it the most Christian and Manly
method, not to take upon trust a thing of so great Importance; but by a plain
and short research into the Circumstances of the Present Clergy, to try if any
thing might be met with to justify that Obloquy and Contempt which is heapt
upon them. And for a more methodical procedure, I have cast my Thoughts into
the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. I. Of the Name, and Original, etc. of the Clergy.
AS no Nation was ever yet read of, so infidel and profane, as to live without
all belief of some Deity, and profession of some Religion; so there was never
any Religion that had not Separate Persons to whom was committed the Power and
Care of prescribing, directing, and administering the Rites thereof, and whom by
an easy Figure we may call their Clergy. For the Name coming of Clerus,
naturally signifying a Lot, Patrimony, or Heritage, may inoffensively be given
both to the Jewish and Heathen Priests; whose attendance upon Religion was
their Subsistence and Employment.

But in the first times of Christianity the word Clergy was solemnly adopted
into the Family of Religious Titles, and made to denote the Church, (or whole
Body of Believers) which being Gods peculiar inheritance, was called his
Clerus, or Clergy. And this acception of the word is so well approved of by
some Modern Writers, that they wish the Fathers had still continued it in its
first Latitude, and that they had never appropriated that to the Ministry, as
being but a part of the Communion, which primitively belonged to the whole. And
yet Master Calvin, who seems most offended at this restraint of the word,
cannot deny its Antiquity; but confesses it to have been an ancient Mode of
speaking, to call the whole Order of Ecclesiastical Ministers by the Name of
Clergy.

But not to saunter away time in sounding of Puddles, it suffices our present
purpose to take notice, That those Provinces among the Romans over which they
set Procurators, Praetors and Proconsuls, were styled Cleri. And that in
allusion to this acception of the word, the Charge or Portion assigned by Lot
to Matthias, whither, as most conceive, he was to go preach the Gospel, was
called (...), the Lot of Ministry and Apostleship. And the several places
whither the Apostles went to plant the Gospel, were their (...), or Provinces;
which after they had converted them to the Faith, they were to instruct and
govern. But in this Government they were carefully to avoid the Exaction and
Covetousness notorious in the Roman Praetors, who minded nothing but to gripe
and squeeze wealth out of the people, therewith to enrich themselves: but on
the contrary to take care of their Provinces, as Shepherds of their Flocks;
using such moderation and clemency as might move the people to obey them, not
of constraint, but with a willing mind. And in imitation of these (...) of the
Apostles, some have conjectured that their Successors had Provinces allotted to
their Government and Instruction; and that from the same Cleri, the persons who
taught and ruled them, derived the appellation of Clergy. There is indeeed a
Learned Writer, who by no means can be induced to admit of these Cleri or
Provinces, but with many probabilities has labored to refute them, in the
Sixth Chapter of his Irenicum. But whether (...) does signify the Office, or
Province of Apostleship, does not at all concern our present purpose, seeing
that either of the two is enough to occasion the Name we speak of.

But besides this Roman account of the word, we have another from the Hebrews:
among whom that we render (...), signified those Portions which fell by Lot to
any in the division of an Estate or Country. Thus in the Division of Canaan,
when the Patriarchs received their (...), or portions in Land, God appointed
none unto Levi, but made himself his Lot and Possession. And when the whole
World was divived into Hebrew and Pagan, God choosing the former to profess his
Worship, he made them his (...), or people of his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 4.20. And
those of the Jews who believed the Gospel, are, according to St. Peter's
intimation, God's Lot, of whom he took possession, as of a Patrimony assigned
to his most holy Service. And after this also, such among the Believing Jews as
were ordained for the Ministry, were by way of Eminence called the (...), or
Clergy of God. Because when they were admitted to Holy Orders, they were set
apart and devoted to his Solemn Worship, and thereby became his more peculiar
Portion. Like those whom God, in Numb. 16. separated from the Congregation, to
bring them near to himself, to the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and
to stand before the Congregation, to Minister unto them.

And any of these notices of the word which have been already mentioned, I take
for a clearer occasion of its application to the Ministry, than that of David's
distribution of the Priests into several Courses. Which happened upon the death
of Nadab and Abihu, when there remained no more Sons to Aaron but Eliazar and
Ithamar. In whose two Families the succession of the Priests was preserved. At
which time David, according to the number of people in each Family, made his
Division. Now this Distribution being made (...), or by Lot, some have thought
that all those have from thence been called Clergy, whose Office was to
Minister in Holy Things.

But what ever was the occasion of the Title of Clergy, its first application
to the Ecclesiastique Ministry was Significant and Laudable, not to say Sacred
and Divine, and such as even Malice it self can make no Topic to traduce or
contemn those that bear it.

CHAP. II. Of the Antiquity of the Clergy: a rational account of, and inquiry
into the Institution, etc.
HAving considered the native signification of the word, which according to
Epictetus is the beginning of knowledge; the next thing by the proposed Method
to be examined, is the Antiquity of the Clergy; which is so redoubtable that it
may seem mere trifling to attempt its demonstration. For indeed the Antiquity
of the Clergy is to be placed among those Verities, which are more manifest and
known of themselves, than by all can be alleged for their Manifestation. And
therefore whosoever shall deny a matter of such evidence and universal
acknowledgement, as that now spoken of, he ought to be reckoned for a mere
Sceptick Wrangler, unworthy of confutation, and an enemy to the common
sentiments of all Mankind, which must suffer an absolute defection, and all the
impressions of Universal Nature and Religion be blotted out, ere that we now
speak of can be evacuated.

But yet when we seriously consider the unhappy genius of the Age wherein we
live, and that it is our hard lot to fall into those perilous times wherein
not only some inferior Points, but the whole frame of Religion is ready to be
brought in question, and to be thought no more than a mere Engine of
Government; we can scarce hope, upon this sad reflection, that the Institution
of the Clergy should meet with any higher estimate. And, I hope, it will not be
deemed mere Melancholy to imagine, That there is a race of men who will not be
coy and squeamish to make the Calling of the Clergy, as well as the Belief of a
God, to be wholly grounded upon some blind Tradition, set on foot by some
crafty Politic; who by the Doctrine of Obedience and Submission, daily
inculcated by this Order of Men, might be the better able to awe a silly
sheepish World: and to render it more tractable to his purposes.

But such as are so far taken with this fine Conceit, as to think that the
Institution of the Clergy is nothing but a blind Tradition broach't by some
cunning Statesman, I would have them to answer me without doubling, who was
the Author of this Tradition? When did it commence? How came these men to be so
wise as to discover and know that which for so many years already past, none
was able to find out? What was there to guide and instruct the World before
this blind Tradition? Who set this Tradition first on foot? and before it was
set on foot, was there no Clergy, or were they unnecessary? At what Period
became the Clergy useful? and why then and not before? But when the cunning
Statesman broach't this Tradition, by what means did he induce men to believe
him; and that too in a case which was clear contrary to their former judgment,
and to the judgment of all the Generations that ever went before them? Did he
compel them to it by force, and gain the day by dint of Sword? then where is
the Story of his Achievements? what Monuments preserve the memory of his
Battles and Victories? where and in what Era did this Mighty man live, who did
thus overawe the World?

But if the Politician moved men by Reason to believe him, we must needs grant
the Reasons to have been wonderfully clear and weighty, that could persuade the
whole World to come off from their old Opinion, and so far to part with their
Liberty, as to set over them an Order of Men, whom they knew from the design
and tenor of their Function, would fill their minds with fear and awe, and put
a curb upon their carnal Wills, restrain their darling Lusts, bound their
worldly Interests, obstruct the stream of their Natural Inclinations, and at
once abridge them of all their wonted Licenses. But if the Politician did move
men to receive the blind Tradition of a Clergy merely upon the account of the
reasonableness of the thing it self, then is this ground enough both to
acknowledge and respect the Function. But what did the Statesman design in
setting afoot such a Tradition? Had he any regard therein unto the good of the
World? Did he convince Mankind that a Clergy was truly necessary to the
Solemnity of Holy Rites, preservation of Religion, and to the promotion of the
Peace and Welfare of Government among men? If so, then tell me, did he say the
truth, or did he lie? If he said truth, then we ought to believe him, and
consequently to assert the Clergy upon the account of Truth: if he told a lie,
then is it for the good of the whole World to believe a lie. For if it be a lie
to say, That the Institution of the Clergy is nothing else but a blind
Tradition, set on foot by some crafty Statesman, on purpose to awe the World
by their Ministry, and to keep it Honest and Peaceable, Obedient and
Submissive, then is a Lie the foundation of all these Felicities. Or if it be
true to say thus, yet we are still to reverence the Clergy, because they are
the Channel conveying so many benefits to the World, etc. But to proceed.

That the foundation of all Religion consists in the belief of a God, is so
universal an Article, that even those Persons and Nations who differ most from
one another, and that too in no ordinary points of Religion, do unanimously
accord in this, That there is a God, whom we are bound to labor to please and
honor, and to fear to offend and provoke, out of a hope to be made happy by
him. And as to those who have opposed the Belief of a God, they have been so
very few, and commonly so vilely vicious, that the World has been greatly
weary of them, and thought them of so little Credit, that they could never
persuade it, that they were in earnest. But that their wicked lives tempted
them rather to wish that there were no God, than that any reason did convince
them to believe so. And as the best and wisest of men have agreed in the belief
of a God, and that Belief is the foundation of all Religion: so they have
likewise acknowledged, That Religion was to be expressed in the solemn worship
of that God whom they believed. And to the end that this Worship might be truly
Solemn, they likewise held, That it was to be publicly celebrated in appointed
places, at set times, in prescript forms, and by select persons. And we find
this last circumstance so universally observed by all Nations moderately
civilized, that it may seem to be founded in the Law of Nature, and to have had
none other but God for its Author. Or, if this were otherwise, how should it
come to pass that it is almost as easy to find a people without Souls, as
without some sort of Religion: or to find any sort of Religion without
reference to a God; or either Religion, or a God, without a Clergy or Separate
Persons to Negotiate the Holy Ceremonies? And not to meddle at present with the
Divine Appointment of Certain Men for the administration and defense of
Religion; we will conceive upon what grounds men herein, left unto their own
reason, might be induced to erect a Clergy, or to constitute an Order of men to
appoint and perform the public Solemnities of Religion, and to direct and
determine in emergent Cases.

And we may imagine that the first motive hereunto was a mature deliberation of
the natural importance and design of Religion it self; which was clearly seen
to bind men to a Solemn and Regular Worship of the Deity. Now this Worship
(they saw) could neither be Regular nor Solemn, if there were not select
persons to make it so; for things cease to be both, when they become Common;
and they must needs become Common, when vulgarly mixed and transacted with
profane, that is, Common Utensils. And what is not the least considerable,
those things are in great likelihood not to be done at all, or with no just
decorum, which are left arbitrary for any one to do. They considered likewise
the manifold indispositions usually accompanying the generality of Mankind,
whereby they were rendered very incompetent to handle things Sacred, according
to the dignity of their Nature, and intent of their Institution. They saw all,
That Holy matters were to be kept within a Sept, the more decently to secure
them from being unhallowed by the rude and undiscerning touch of the Vulgar.
For the Holy Offices of Religion are at the same time profaned that they are
made Common; which they cannot escape, if there be no distinction of Persons
observed in their Administration. Men in this affair might likewise argue from
a Parity of Reason; and that if it be for the credit and advancement of all
profitable Arts and Professions to be provided of such Professors, Officers and
Masters as may propagate, instruct, and excecute the same: then the like must
be granted to Religion, or else we must think it to be of less worth and moment
than Secular Professions, and that less is required to make a man Religious,
than a Pinmaker, and to give him a competent knowledge of the things of God,
than of making of a Horse-shooe.

Nor does it here amount to any valuable Objection, that the common right and
interest, which every one has in Religion, is sufficient to entitle them to
the public officiating the Solemn Rites thereof; for by the same reason every
one might gird on the Sword of Justice, and become a Public Minister of the
Laws, on pretense of the Common Interest which he has therein: the
consequences of which Hypothesis are so absurd and monstrous, that they carry
with them their own confutation.

But that which we may presume to have been most moving in this concern, was
the Consideration of the Common Nature of Mankind; which being far gone in
corruptions, is utterly unfit for, and unprovided of that Sanctity which is
required in Religious Addresses: upon which consideration it was deemed not
only safe and agreeable, but also necessary for this fallen condition of men,
that out of themselves some persons should be chosen, and by Holy Ceremonies
set apart, and as it were placed in a middle Station between God and the
people, on purpose to present God with the Peoples Petitions, and to bring down
his Blessings upon them. And though the bestowing of Gods Blessings depends
upon his own free act, and that the acceptance of such Petitions as are made by
such persons in behalf of the people, is to be known by such testimonies as God
is pleased to vouchsafe; yet that there is a necessity of such persons, who by
Holy Offices are thus to mediate for the people, is a thing God himself was
pleased to illustrate by an everlasting Example, when he sent his Son to take
our Nature, that he might be qualified to interceed for that Nature which he
had taken, and be fit to make nearer accesses unto that Seat of Mercy, which we
by reason of our great imperfections, were unfit to approach. And in this sense
he is styled, the only Mediator between God and man.

And I humbly conceive it was with respect unto this Consideration, that at the
designing of Persons for the Clergy, the Greek Church made this Prayer, (...),
etc. O Lord our God, who because man's Nature is not able of it self to approach
the Glorious Essence of thy Godhead, have in thy wise Providence and
Dispensation ordered us Masters and Teachers of like Passions with our selves;
whom thou have placed in thy Throne (or in the Ministry of thy Kingdom, the
Gospel) (...), etc. to offer unto thee a Sacrifice in behalf of the people,
etc. The contexture and occasion of which Oraison, I take for no incompetent
account of appointing men for the Clergy.

But not to enquire too minutely for the Reasons that at first might probably
induce Mankind to constitute peculiar persons for the Service of Religion, we
may conceive that all herein did not follow the same Light. But that some
Nations were hereunto persuaded by the more durable and regular principle of
Reason: Others, by an Universal Tradition, which will last as long as either we
reverence our Ancestors, or think not our selves wiser than all that lived
before us. Others no doubt, imitated herein some Nation, which they esteemed
wise, sober, and dis-interessed. But without any peremptory determination of
the Motive, we are most certain of the thing, and that ever since the Creation
a Deity, Religion, and Priesthood, do as mutually infer each other, as the most
natural Relations.

CHAP. III. Out of what Rank and Condition the Clergy were elected, among the
Jews and Pagans: the respect showen them, etc.
HAving thus briefly surmised some of the more probable inducements for the
Institution of a Clergy; we come next to examine what manner of persons were
usually made choice of for that Office; and what respect was given them, when
they were once therewith invested. And limiting this Remark to the Times
antecedent to our Saviors coming in the flesh, we know that all Religion was
then either of Jew or Gentile. And beginning with the Gentiles, we read how the
Sons of their Princes were educated for the Priesthood: That their Kings did
exercise this Office: That in their Sacrifices there was among the Romans a
peculiar Office assigned unto the King. And we find that when Numa, to give
more Splendor and Credit to Religion, established many sorts of Priests in the
City, fearing that in process of time the Kings might come to neglect their
Office about the Sacrifices, by reason of the weighty affairs of State, that
might otherwise employ them; he ordained the Flamens to supply the Kings place,
who bore the names of the severate Gods, to whom they were consecrate. And this
officiating of their Kings was thought so necessary, that when they were
banished Rome, one of the Priestly Order had the Name of King while he was
doing his Function, lest the people should suspect any thing to be lacking in
the worship of the Gods. Thus they preserved Royalty in Religion, when it was
cast out of the State: and how unwelcome soever it became among the uncertain
people, yet they thought it necessary to be preserved in the Priesthood, which
was generally so highly valued by the Romans, that it was accounted a singular
honor in their Genealogies, that some of their Family had been of the Clergy.
And of this Truth we meet with a pregnant instance in Agrippa, who writing to
Caius Caesar, and speaking of the Honor of his own Descent, he told the
Emperor, that some of his Ancestors had not only been Kings, but also admitted
to the Priesthood. We find likewise that that sort of Priests among the Romans,
called Augurs, were chosen out of the Patricii, who were the Nobility of Rome.

But suppose the Families out of which the Gentile Clergy were elected, had
been as mean as they were certainly otherwise, yet to those who were once
received unto that Province, they were careful to pay an esteem and reverence
suitable to the Sacredness of their employment; and to instate them with such
Immunities as testified they thought them not sit to be treated as the Vulgus.
Rationally concluding, That those whom they made choice of for the Service of
Religion, were to be raised above the common condition of men, and to be freed
from the Cares and Encumbrances of the World. And it will not be here greatly
impertinent to observe, that the white Vestments of the Heathen Priests
attested their Separation from the Vility of the Many: and, That the Ring,
Staff and Mitre, which were the Ensigns of their Office, were also known
Symbols of Authority and Honor. And yet in further testimony of the respect
the Gentiles bore their Priests, there was none, no not in time of War, that
durst offer them the least violence or abuse. Insomuch that it was gone into a
proverbial phrase for a barbarous and unnatural War, that it spared not the
Priests, but violated those very persons that carried the Holy Fire before the
Army. Tacitus somewhere speaking of the Priests, tells us, that they were not
molested with the sniffling Scorns of vicious and ill-bred persons, but by
certain Canons and Laws were secured from all outrage and disrespect.

And if any thing be yet needful for a further illustration of the Gentiles
carriage in this matter, it is summed up by Cicero in the Case of the Roman
Augurs: The right of the Augurs, says he, joined with Authority, is the most
excellent in the Commonwealth. And this I say, not because I my self am an
Augur, but because it is just and necessary so to speak. For if we enquire for
their Authority, what can be greater than to convene and dissolve the public
Assemblies, and appoint the Solemnities of Religion! What more magnificent than
to have power to decree when the Consuls are fit or unfit to hold the
Magistracy! What can be more religious than to give Institutes to the people!
And yet Cicero expressly affirms all these things to have been in the power of
the Augurs, Lib. 2. de Legib.

Nor are we to look upon the Romans to have affected Singularity in this
particular; for we find the Persians, Egyptians, and the great Lights of the
Gentile World, the Athenians, to have equaled, or rather surpassed the Romans,
in the veneration of their Priests, whom they made the Guides and Counselors
of their Kings, and Judges and Dividers in Secular Affairs. It were easy to be
numerous in Examples to this purpose, and by an Induction of all the Nations in
the World to prove this Reverence of the Clergy, whom we read in many Nations
to have lived apart from other men, and to have had their Adyta, or Secret
Places, as well as their Gods: the solitary Groves where they abode,
signalizing the separateness of their Function.

But if all this should be charged upon the Ignorance and Superstition of the
Heathen World, and therefore no more fit to be imitated than their Polytheism
and Idolatry; It will then import us in the next place to consider, what in
this case was the practice of the Jews, Gods own People, whom we cannot suspect
of Ignorance or Imposture, being herein plainly guided and instructed of God.
And first it is observable that among the Jews, the designation of persons for
the Guidance of Religion, was much more ancient than a Levitical Institution,
being practiced by them from the Beginning. For when Families made Churches as
well as Kingdoms, to be a Priest of the Most High God, or to officiate the
Matters of Religion was the Hereditary Honor, and Peculiar Prerogative of the
Firstborn, or Chief of the Family. For the selling of which Privilege Esau
purchased the odious Title of Profane. And when the Jews were blessed with a
settled Priesthood, they paid it all imaginable respect: beginning and
determining all their public Transactions at the Word and Decree of their
Priests, making the Honor of that Office, the Strength of their Authority, and
the Cause of their Arms, calling it a Celestial Dignity, a Heavenly and no
Earthly Inheritance. And the Testimonies of what I now speak, are so many and
known, that both the number and plainness will excuse the prosecution.

Nor were the ancient Jews more careful in their respect, than in the choice of
their Priests; for we read in the Sacred Story of one of their Kings, that it
was reckoned in him for a great sin, that he made Priests of the lowest of the
people, which were not of the Sons of Levi. He consecrated whosoever had a
mind, without bearing any respect either to Probity of Manners, or Honesty of
Descent: and that passing by the Line of Levi, he took those who had neither
Right nor Title to the Priesthood. And what was yet more wicked, some are of
opinion that he was guilty of what the Canon Law now calls Simony, by selling
the Offices of the Priest to those who would give most for them.

And having thus briefly intimated the practice of both the ancient Jew and
Gentile, in relation to their Choice and Reverence of their Clergy, If we
should now draw down the Enquiry to the modern and present State of the World;
we shall find no Nation so savage and uncivilized, as not to have some Officers
of Religion, whom they treat with Civility, and make considerable in the
Interest of their State and Government. The present Jews and Mahumedans would
furnish us with Store of Matter to this purpose, if it were not already (in two
late Treatises concerning them) done to our hands.

Now, what has been said will enforce us to one of these Conclusions, Either
that the Rites of Christian Religion are more cheap, ordinary and common than
those of the Jews and Pagans, Or those Separate Persons appointed to celebrate
those Rites must have our Esteem and Reverence. To say that Christian Religion
is not the most Divine Mystery that ever came into the World, and that all the
parts thereof are in themselves the most excellent and sublime, and to men the
most beneficial and agreeable, that ever were made known upon Earth; is as
false as its greatest Adversary, the Father of Lies. And not to render due
regard unto those who are known to be the true Ministers of Christian Religion,
is either to think them less worthy than the Pagans thought the Ministers of
their idolatrous Ceremonies; or to show our selves less Civil, than the
greatest Barbarians.

CHAP. IV. A brief account of the Institution of the Levitical Clergy.
THere is nothing more material in the Circumstances of Religion, than that men
should be ascertained that their Spiritual Guides have their Commission and
Calling from God: because a doubting thereof must unavoidably prove no small
prejudice to their Authority and Success. And upon this Consideration it will
be necessary to enquire into the first Institution of the Clergy, to the end
that if we find it to be no less Divine, than we have found it to be Rational,
the Sacred Honor of its Original might be sufficient to justify and assert it
against all contempt.

And looking back to the first Dispensations of Religion, we find the
Priesthood to have been ambulatory, and the Holy Offices consigned to the
Firstborn, or Chief of each Family. For the Priesthood did not begin in Aaron,
but was translated and conferred upon his Family before his Consecration. For
those young men of the Children of Israel, which offered Burnt-offerings, and
sacrificed Peace Offerings of Oxen unto the Lord ( Exodus 24.5.) as they were
Priests, so without question they were no other than the Firstborn to whom the
Priesthood did belong. But as soon as God began to constitute a Church, he
began also to fix the Priesthood, and appointed Aaron to minister the Public
Services. And during the Levitical Dispensation the Succession of the
Priesthood was continued in Aaron's Posterity, and the High Priesthood tied to
the Line of his Firstborn, the rest of his Posterity being simply termed
Priests, or Priests of the Second Order.

Now, what is here chiefly to be taken notice of, is Aarons Call to the
Priesthood, which we are assured was from God. So that neither Aaron did at
first, nor any after him could legally, take this Honor to himself: But all
were called of God. And this Truth we find miraculously attested in the sudden
and fearful destruction of those who undervalued the Priests, and factiously
usurped their Office. It Is true Aaron's Priesthood was but temporary, and at
the appointed Season to expire and determine; yet as long as it did continue,
it was lawful for none but those of his Line to undertake it: Because God had
so ordained. And this Divine Ordinance of the Priesthood was such an inviolable
observation, that even Christ, when he came to give himself an Offering and a
Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling Savor, and by the Oblation of his own
Body made an atonement for our Sins: when Christ, I say, became an Aaronical
Priest, and put an end to that sort of Priesthood: when he also became a Priest
according to the Order of Melchizedeck, which lasts for ever; both were by
Divine Appointment. As the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews distinctly
argues out of the Second, and the Hundred and tenth Psalm. But here it is
worthy our remark, that Jesus was anointed with the Unction of Aaron to the
Sacerdotal Office, and not called after the Order of Aaron: for it is evident
that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing
concerning Priesthood, ( Heb. 7.14.) or, that no Priest should come of that
Tribe. But Jesus was made a Priest after a more ancient Order, according to the
Prediction of the Psalmist, The Lord has sworn and will not repent, Thou art a
Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedeck. But though he were of another
Order, yet whatsoever Aaron did as a Priest, was wholly Typical, and to be
fulfilled in the Messiah, as he was a Priest. To which he had a double Title,
the one of Primogeniture, as the First-begotten of God; the other of Unction,
as being anointed unto that Office.

Now, if Christ did not glorify himself to become an High Priest; if as Man,
he did not advance himself to that Dignity, but was thereunto advanced by God;
then is the Priesthood an Office to whose undertaking more is required than
personal Abilities, and which none of right can undertake, but either by Gods
immediate or mediate Call. For though the meetness of the Person ought to be
looked upon by men, yet we cannot prescribe unto God, or tell him who are fit
to be heard by him in behalf of the people, or whom he ought to entertain in
Religious Addresses. Nor are we able to yield a reason from the nature of the
thing, why God should accept of Aaron more than of Abiram, or the mediation of
any one man for many, except the free pleasure of him that makes the choice.
But to return: If the more solemn Institution of the Clergy bear date only from
the Consecration of Aaron, yet it plainly appears to be Divine, or of Gods own
appointment; and during the time of the Mosaical Economy, was so Sacred and
Inviolable, that none could invade it under a gentler Penance than Sudden
death, or a Leprosy. And long before this too, I mean before the erecting of
the Tabernacle or Temple, and Institution of Priesthood, when God was served
within Private Walls, and the right of Priesthood in every Family was annexed
to the Primogeniture, so that the Firstborn was Priest: we read but of one,
contrary to custom, who aspired unto it, whose ambition therein would have been
utterly inexcusable, if the whole disposal of the matter had not been from God,
who loved Jacob, but hated Esau, and made the Elder to serve the Younger, Romans
9.12, 13. But though the Levitick or Aaronical Priesthood was of Divine
Institution, yet being wholly Typical, and consequently to determine, and
because it is already past and gone; we are next to enquire into the Nature
and Constitution of that Clergy which succeeded it.

CHAP. V. Of the Institution of the Evangelical Clergy.
WHen the Great Fulfiller of the Law, (even the blessed Author of our most
Holy Faith) in a most excellent manner made good that Title; and being dravving
to the last Stage of his life, and together with it to put a full end to the
Mosaic Dispensation, and abolish both the Sacrifice and Priesthood in that of
himself: When (without a Figure) the immutable Clergy of the Gospel was to
succeed into the mutable Clergy of the Law: he called those Apostles, of whom
at first he made choice, and gave them Power to erect and constitute a Church,
and to transmit such Powers unto others as were proper for the continuance
and propagation of the same. Now, the Commission which Christ gave to the
Apostles to impovver them to this end, is the chief thing to be considered; and
we meet with it at large, as it was signed by our Savior immediately upon
his Ascension, in S. Matthew. 28.

18. All power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth.

19. Go ye therefore and teach (or, make) all Nations (Disciples,) baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and
lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World.

In which words Christ first asserts and declares his own Commission;
shovving his Apostles that what he did, was not the result of his own
private judgment, but the exercise of that Authority which was given him of
his Father: who had consigned unto him a full Power of ordering and disposing
whatsoever belonged to the Church, of which he was made the Prince and head
upon his rising from the Grave; and by virtue of that relation stood obliged to
provide for the preservation and increase thereof. But how this should be
done, is the doubt to be satisfied. For Christ in his own Person could not
make this provision for the Church, because as to his humane Nature he was
shortly to remove to Heaven, and there to abide until his coming to judge the
quick and dead. Now whatever a man cannot do in his own person, must be done
by deputation, if it be done at all. And therefore Christ by his Ascension
being become incapable in his own Person to take this care of the Church, he
deputed his Apostles thereunto, appointing them in his Name and Stead to
perform all those Offices, which were required to the Establishing and
Advancement of the Gospel. Giving them also power to depute others to succeed
them in the same Care, and to deliver down the same Power, successively to
the end of the World. And to the end that the Clergy might not be thought to
expire in the Persons of the Apostles, nor they to have died without
Successors in the Ministry, Christ promised upon his Departure, to be with them
unto the End of the World. Which words we will take for granted to have been
spoken to the Apostles as they were the Clergy, or Ministers of the Gospel:
and that they were not limited exclusively to their Persons, but in them did
belong to the whole succession of the Clergy. For hovvever the Apostles might
be with Christ, he could not be personally with them, so much as unto their
death, much less unto the end of the World, being so shortly upon the speech of
these words, to ascend up into Heaven; whereof they themselves were
Undeniable Witnesses.

It is likewise duly to be considered: That Christ by his promise [lo, I am
with you alvvay, even unto the End of the World] intended some benefits to the
Church, which should be of no less continuance than the Church it self, and
that the Apostles were to be the first dispensers of those benefits. And if it
be demanded what these benefits were? it may (from the Text) be safely
replied that they were the several functions of the Clergy, to which the
Apostles were Commissioned; viz. Preaching, Baptism; Administration of the
Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, the exercise of the Censures, etc. All
which were to end with the Apostles, or they were not: If they were to end
with the Apostles, then has the Church ever since the death of the Apostles
been without these Offices, which amounts to no less than that there has been
no Church since their Decease. Or, if they were not to end with the Apostles,
but have always been, and are still to be exercised, unto the end of the
World; then it cannot be denied but there ever have been, and ever must be fit
Persons, who like the Apostles must have a just power to dispense these
Benefits, or exercise these Offices. For no less can be conceived to have been
intended by Christ in his promise of being with the Apostles always, Even unto
the End of the World. And we shall have no temptation to suspect this
Interpretation of the Promise, when we shall consider, first, that by the End
of the World, That State of affairs is to be understood, which began exactly at
Christ's Resurrection; when all power was given him in Heaven and Earth; which
was to continue to the end of the World, or his coming to Judgment. Next, that
the promise made unto the Apostles had respect unto this State: and therefore
the Benefits promised, namely, Preaching, Baptism, etc. were to endure unto the
full determination of the same.

Thirdly, That seeing Christ could not possibly be with the Apostles
personally, nor they upon Earth, Unto the End of the World: There must be some
other way to verify Christ's presence with the Apostles, and their being in the
World unto the End thereof: both which seem to be employed in the Text. As to
Christ's presence with the Apostles, it is unanimously concluded of the Vicaria
presentia Spiritus, in Tertullians phrase, or of making the Holy Ghost his
Vicar, in sending him to be with the Apostles upon his ascension into Heaven.
Which mission of the Spirit cannot be meant of that that happened at Pentecost,
when he sat upon them in bodily appearance, and inspired them with such
extraordinary gifts as were needful for those first times of the Gospel: such
as the gift of tongues to enable them to Preach to all Nations in their own
Language, and of other Miracles, to confirm the truth of their Doctrine, and to
move men to believe it. For if the promise of Christ's being always with the
Apostles, were to be understood of this mission of the Spirit upon them, then
it would follow, that Christ were still to be thus present with the Church, and
that extraordinary gifts did still continue, or that he who promised, were not
faithful. And therefore it is necessary that we understand Christ's being with
the Apostles, of his giving them the Holy Ghost to instate them with Powers,
not only in their own Persons to plant and govern the Church, and to perform
all the Offices of the Clergy relating thereunto; but also to ordain others
unto the same Functions, and to give them Authority to do the like Unto the End
of the World. So that by this promise made of his presence with the Apostles,
Christ provided for a successive Clergy, in whom the Apostles were to continue,
or the Ordinary Ministry be preserved, unto the Consummation of all things.

And we have no reason to be jealous of this sense of our Saviors Words, when
we find it universally agreed upon, that one great end of sending the Holy
Ghost to the Church, was the sanctifying and setting apart of Persons for the
Work of the Clergy, and to convey a standing Authority of Ordination of meet
persons to mediate between God and the people: to pray for and bless them in
the Name of Christ: to help their Infirmities by composing for them a Liturgy
according to the Pattern of the Apostles, of whose Liturgy several passages do
yet remain. And the Holy Ghost does still empower the Church to Ordain and
Consecrate Persons for the Ministerial Office, for the Edifying of the Body of
Christ. Who when ordained, are bound to take heed to themselves and unto all
the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers, to feed the
Church of God.

CHAP. VI. Of the Spirits Agency in respect of the Clergy, etc.
HAving endeavored to demonstrate that the true sense of Christ's promise, In
being with the Apostles, does respect that Authority that the Holy Ghost gave
them, for appointing a settled Ministry in the Church, while militant upon
Earth: In subserviency to our present purpose it may not be unuseful to
observe, That among all those Offices which the Holy Ghost performs for the
Church, there is none wherein he seems to be more interessed, or to have a
greater agency, than in the qualifying and separation of Persons for the
Priesthood. Which work indeed is so peculiar to the Spirit, and so necessary
for this purpose, that even the Great Pastor and Bishop of Souls became not a
Preacher of his own Gospel, till he was thereunto Anointed and Consecrated by
the Holy Ghost. Luke 4.18. And when the same Great Bishop Ordained his
Apostles, it was according to the tenor of his own Ordination; As my Father
sent me, so send I you; and to show wherein the Similitude consisted, he
breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, John 20.21, 22. Which
clearly implies, that as at his Mission from his Father to his Office, he was
Anointed, or Consecrated by the Holy Ghost, which visibly descended upon him at
his Baptism, when he entered upon his Ministry: So when the Apostles had their
Mission from Christ, and were to enter upon their Ministry, they also were
Consecrated by the Holy Ghost. Which they received not only to gift, and enable
their Persons, but also to empower them for their Office: as is undeniably
evident upon the account of the words immediately following [Receive ye the
Holy Ghost] which actually instate upon them the Power of the Keys.

It Is true, after they had thus received the Holy Ghost, and were Commissioned
to all the Offices of the Clergy, the Apostles were not immediately to fall
upon their Execution, but were bid to stay at Jerusalem, till they should
receive such Miraculous Gifts, by the visible descent of the Spirit, as should
render their entrance upon the Ministry more solemn and remarkable, and their
performance thereof more efficacious and convincing: That men seeing the
Wonders done by the Apostles, none might have the least occasion to doubt of
the truth of their Doctrine, or their Authority to Preach it.

But not only in Christ's Authorizing the Apostles for the Clergy, but also in
their Authorizing others, and so forward; the work is still ascribed to the
Holy Ghost. As to the Apostles the matter is evident in the Case of Barnabas
and Saul, whose separation of them to the Ministry, is attributed to the
Spirit. And we find the same verified of the Presbyters of the Churches of
Asia, and in Timothy the Bishop of Ephesus. Of whom it is said expressly, The
Holy Ghost made them Overseers, Act. 20.28. Which (according to some) may
signify two things. First, their Ordination to the Ministerial Office,
attributed to the Holy Ghost, as to the Original, by whose descent upon the
Apostles, they were Authorized to Communicate this Authority, to give
Commissions to others, who were to succeed them in the Dignity and Office of
instructing and governing the Church. Secondly, it may signify the Act of
Designation, Election, Nomination to the Ministry, which at that time was done
by the Special Revelation of God, and might properly be attributed to the Holy
Ghost. And after this latter manner Matthias was chosen to succeed Judas in his
Office; and Saul and Barnabas for the work. Act. 1.24. Act. 13.2. And if we
have recourse herein to Church Story, we shall find how that the Apostles
Ordained none of their Converts till they were Tried and Approved by the Holy
Ghost. And that when St. John was returned into Asia, he ordained every where
such as were signified by the Spirit. And we are generally told by the Greek
Fathers, that the primitive Bishops did not make Clergy of their own Heads, but
by the order and command of the Spirit. Which being understood according to the
distinction now mentioned, leaves no place of doubting of the manner or reality
of the Spirits concernment in ordaining men for the Clergy; especially when it
is considered, that all the sorts and degrees of Primitive Ecclesiastics, are
ascribed to the Appointment of the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 4.11.

And we have no ground of surmising that the Holy Ghost has quitted his
Interest in this great Concern; but rather to believe that he does still
preside at Holy and Regular Ordinations. Which are that Ecclesiastic
Generation, whereby the Clergy is propagated, the Apostles still survive, and
Christ is still present with them. And we have no reason at all to doubt but
that the Spirit does as Truly, though not so Visibly, assist at the present
Ordering of Ministers, as he did at the separation of Barnabas and Saul: and
that Christ is as really present by the same Spirit, as when he breathed Him
upon the Apostles, and thereby gave them Authority for the Work of the Ministry.

And to this purpose we are to understand our own Church, when she bids the
Persons to be Ordained and Consecrated, Receive the Holy Ghost for the Office
and Work of a Priest in the Church of God, now committed to thee, by the
imposition of our hands, etc. And, Receive the Holy Ghost, for the Office and
Work of a Bishop in the Church, now committed to thee, by the imposition of our
hands, etc. The Holy Ghost in both forms is, I doubt not, to be taken in the
same sense, and imports no more, but the conferring of Authority for the
Execution of the Offices there Specified. Which Authority being conveyed by
that we call Orders and Consecration, is fitly expressed by the same words,
which were used by our Savior in bestowing the same power upon the Apostles at
his sending of them forth to Preach the Gospel, and gather and constitute a
Church.

I have not as yet met with any thing considerable relating to the Forms of
Ordination used in the Ancient Church, but I suppose they were all agreeable to
that our Savior used at the Ordination of the Apostles. But the Form of
Ordination being only of Ecclesiastical Institution, the Churches might
inoffensively vary therein. In the Greek Church the form was to this effect:
The Divine Grace, which always heals our Infirmities, and supplies our wants,
does create or promote N. the Venerable Deacon to be a Presbyter, the Presbyter
most beloved of God to be a Bishop. In the Western Church they use another
Form, wherein they confer upon the Presbyter the power of Consecrating the
Elements in the Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist, and of Binding and Loosing.
Our own Church has a Form peculiar to her self, yet much resembling the old
Greek Form, mentioned by St. Clem. in his Constitutions, Lib. 8. c. 16. Wherein
the power of Preaching also is conferred upon the Presbyter. And though I am not
able at present to give a full account of all the Ancient Forms of Ordination,
yet it suffices our purpose, that none was ever yet met with, wherein the
Original and supreme power of Ordaining is not attributed to the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. VII. Of the incommunicableness of the Offices of the Clergy.
THough what has been said renders the Holy Ghosts Interest and Agency in the
Separation of men to the Calling of the Clergy, to be undeniable, yet there are
still some who opine the Ministry to be a thing of Labor rather than Honor,
and to which Abilities, without Authority, are sufficient; by which position
the Concern of the Spirit must be wholly evacuate, as to yielding any orderly
power and certain Method of attaining unto the Sacerdotal Office. And though
the Socinian and Enthusiast are the more known and professed Assertors of this
Conceit; yet it is much to be feared that all Contemners of the Clergy are
sowr'd with the same leaven. For if they were thoroughly persuaded of the Divine
Right of the Clergy, and that none can take that Honor unto himself, unless he
be called of God, or by Gods appointment; this one thing might be Charm enough
both against Contempt and Usurpation of the same. And men would scarce be so
hardy as to invade or blaspheme this Calling, when they saw it would involve
them in the guilt of Sacrilege and Irreligion. But unto those who would lay
that Holy Function Common, which God has placed within a Sept, and leave the
Priesthood open to all that will enter it, without further Ceremony, than
getting up and Ride: to the sober Consideration of such men, I would humbly
recommend the ensuing particulars; to the end they may return to a better mind.

And first let them duly consider, how that St. Paul setting down the Nature of
the Church, has styled it the Body of Christ. Where he means not a Similar
Body, such as Fire, Air and Water, where all the parts are alike and perform
the same Office; but a body consisting of diversity of Organs for several
Faculties and Operations; such a body as is not one Member but many, knit
together with Unity and Charity, as with a Band of Health. St. Aug. Lib. 1.
Cap. 16. De Doctr. Christian. The whole fourteenth Chap. of 2 Cor. is inspired
to this purpose, and designed to manifest, that in the Church of Christ, it is
as monstrous and impossible for all to be Clergymen, or Teachers and Governors,
as for the body of a man to be all Tongue and Eye. And that it is as
preposterous and destructive for all promiscuously to thrust themselves into
the Ministry, as for the Members of a man's body to desert their Natural
Situation, and all to press into the same place. The same Apostle has likewise
termed the Church a Building, Ephesians. 2.21. wherein the Stones have their several
and separate places, all being employed neither in the Foundation, nor the
Corner; which similitude relating to the Congregation of Believers, implies
they were not all to bear the same Office. It Is true, that Christians in
general are styled a Royal Priesthood, and a peculiar people, and a chosen
Generation, 1 Pet. 2.5.9. Yet it is also true, that this was affirmed of the
Hebrew Nation ( Ex. 19.6.) at the same time when God had among them his
Levites, Priests and Highpriests: And therefore can be now no more of
privilege; and therefore no more Argument, to make all Christians properly
Priests, than it did the Jews: among whom the usurpation of the Priesthood was
punished to admiration. But the words of St. Peter are a clear insinuation of
the excellent privileges procured by our Conversion to Christianity; and that
like the Priests under the Law, who spent all their time in Sacrificing, and
Religious Offices; so we should be constant in the service of God in the
public Assemblies; which he requires of us, as he did the Sacrifices of the
Levitical Priests. And in respect of that freedom which true Believers have
obtained from Sin and Satan, and that liberty wherewith they are invested by
Christ: as also in regard of that daily service they are to pay him; they are
said to be Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. So that from these Texts, such
as would entitle all to the Sacerdotal, may also instate them with the Regal
Office.

But without a Figure; The choice of Persons for the Clergy and the incommunity
of that Function, is such an express Doctrine of the Scripture, that it may seem
no less superfluous to prove, than it is Sacrilegious to gainsay it. And if we
duly weigh the words of the first Commission, as they occur, Mat. 28. they
supersede all further confirmation of what we now speak. For they so plainly
fix the Ministerial Offices, and make them such, appropriate and Authoritative
Acts, as that none but the duly ordered can be blameless, and undertake them.

But besides all this, if according to some men's Fancies, Abilities be all that
is requisite to make a Clergyman; then it is but prudent and reasonable to
make due enquiry into those Abilities, and to be duly informed of their Nature
and Reality. Now, what Abilities soever any man can pretend unto, must either
be Infused or Acquired. If men assume unto themselves the Priests Office,
merely upon the pretense of Infused Abilities, or Extraordinary Gifts; then it
is just to put them upon the proving such pretenses by that sort of Testimony
which was ever required in such a case: And to make them show their
Extraordinary Gifts, by Extraordinary Works: For if these pretenders are to be
credited upon their own bare word, how easily will it then be for every bold,
facing, confident Fellow, to rub his Forehead, to pretend to Extraordinary
Gifts and Abilities, and so cozen the World, belly the Holy Ghost, (from whom
all such real Gifts do come) and consequently to destroy all Order in the
Church.

But if these Abilities are acquired, be they never so excellent, yet they must
undergo Trial and Examination, lest they should be but fancifull and
presumptuous; and when found in the greatest perfection whereof they are
capable, yet they can of themselves no more make a Clergyman, than a Judge of
Assizes, or any Secular Magistrate; which is a Power conferred upon Abilities.

The next thing which ought herein soberly to be considered, is the Charge
undertaken by the Clergy; which all acknowledge to be no less than the Cure of
Souls. For we cannot suppose the great Shepherd of the Sheep who loved them so
well as to lay down his life for them, would after his departure, leave them to
wander up and down, without any to guide or feed them. But that upon his own
Decease he committed them to a chosen Clergy, at whose hands he at last will
exact an account of their souls. And this his Care we find instanced in that
strict command he laid upon Peter to feed his Sheep and Lambs. Which the
Apostle faithfully executed himself, and exhorted his fellow Ministers to do
the like, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. Now if those who are so forward to take upon them the
Ministerial Office, would maturely revolve that it brings with it a Charge of
Souls, of which one day they must give an account; this might perhaps not a
little cool their heat: and the due apprehension of the weightiness of the
burden, would allay the presumption of their Abilities. Nor will it less
deserve their Consideration, that if all have a Right to the Ministry, then
have all a Right to be maintained by it, which St. Paul proves by the Law of
Moses, forbidding to muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn; by the Law of
Natural Reason, allowing unto the Plowman, and Thresher, the hopes of receiving
the due Fruits of their Labor, and Rewards of their Pains: and he concludes
that upon terms of common Equity, they who labor for the good of others in
things Spiritual, ought in reason to be rewarded and maintained by those for
whom they labor. And as the Priests under the Law, lived of the things of the
Temple, and were allowed for their attendance upon the Altar, a Portion of the
Sacrifices which there they offered; even so the Lord who has the free
disposal of all men's Estates, has given an Assignment to those that Preach the
Gospel, of so much out of their Auditors Substance, as may decently maintain
them. And therefore according to the Apostles arguing, we must deal worse with
the Clergy, than with our Oxen, Plow-men, and Threshers, and violate the Laws
of God, Nature and Reason, if we deny them a Right to be maintained by the
Ministry, to whom we grant a Right to discharge it. And that double honor
all^tted to the Elders who labor well in the Word and Doctrine, is understood
by some, of Respect and Maintenance, and by all, of an ample allowance, 1 Timothy
5.17. And this is an Argument which will make men at least so provident, as not
to admit more to be Preachers, than they are willing and able to maintain. And
we must own it for a singular piece of bounteous Wisdom in the Almighty, to
settle a subsistence for the Clergy, that without the Interruption of Worldly
Cares they might attend to Reading, Exhortation and Doctrine. And when God left
out Levi in the Division of the Land, it was highly to his advantage, for in
stead of a Twelfth part God appointed him a Tenth, and that too upon such
terms, as made his Portion much more considerable than any of his Brethrens.
And by this allowance the Priests were not only freed from the distracting
troubles of the World, but also enabled to the obliging Offices of Charity and
Almsdeeds; and not only apt to teach, but also given to Hospitality. Which are
still loudly called for at the hands of the Clergy, even by those who grudge
them those Revenues, without which they will be able to do neither. But I leave
this, to return to our men of great Abilities; whom I heartily request, to
employ their parts in helping the weaker brethren, by the Methods of Peace,
Submission, and Charity: but if nothing will serve them but the Offices of the
Priesthood; and that either through Envious Faction, or mistaken Zeal, they
will be fingering the Hallowed Censor and the Holy Fire, I then leave them to
the Consideration of their Ancestors, Corah and Vzziah, for Instruction or
Affrightment.

In the last place, I would gladly have those who would have all without
distinction to perform the Offices of the Clergy, to consider the many
inconveniences which will unavoidably befall both Church and State, Religious
and Civil Government from such an Enormous Principle.

First, As to the Church and Religion, the liberty of letting men, presumptuous
of their Abilities, to take upon them to become Teachers, will prove the ready
way to make even Preaching it self, which some account the All of Religion, to
become weak and Contemptible; by being exposed to all the incongruities,
follies, dotages, and impostures of the Ignorant and Confident, and of the
Crafty and Deceitful: and make the Scripture it self, the foundation and rule
of Religion, hourly liable to such freakish and wild Expositions, as will make
it most unlike it self, and least able to be that for which it was designed:
Even a complete Rule of Faith and Conversation, Truth and Holiness. And that
there is more than a possibility of what I speak, those have sufficiently
informed us who have expounded Scripture out of its Senses, and have so
Commented the Laws thereof till they have in them no manner of Obligation. Who
have made the Creation of the World an Allegory, the Redemption of Man a
Metaphor, and Heaven and Hell but a Trope. And if we were to trace all the
Heresies from the time of Simon Magus down to our own, we shall find them to
have risen from making Gods Word to speak according to the Interest and Passion
of such men, as had once got into their hands the liberty of teaching the
people. Men have generally heard of Julians contrivance to ruin Christianity,
and that it was a granting all the Sects thereof a liberty of Assembling when
they pleased, and teaching what they would. Vt quisque nullo vetante Religioni
suae serviret intrepidus, (Ammianus Marcellinus Lib. 22.) to give every one,
who pleased, a liberty to promote their own opinions, and serve the Interest of
their Sect. Now it cannot be hoped that where Religion is settled in the
greatest Purity and Truth, it should there continue long in that State, if
every one without danger of punishment may falsify and corrupt it. And how this
will be prevented where all that please may preach, I am not yet able to
imagine.

And as this Indiscrimination of Teachers will thus expose Religion to
perpetual Corruptions; so will it have but little better influence upon the
peace and safety of the State. For when every one has a liberty to Teach what
and whom he pleases, we may conclude from the natural Pride of men, they will
desire to raise a Sect and become Head of a Party. Over whose Consciences when
they have once got a competent Power, it will not be long till they will have
both their persons and fortunes at their Devotion. And their Gathered Churches
will be soon trained into an Army, there being no fitter materials of New
Troops, than New Proselytes. Who being employed in the first warmth and
briskness of their Zeal, will not stick at any Attempt tending to the
Advancement of their Way; and to the removal of whatsoever obstructs their
design. And though the pretense of all this be Conscience and Zeal for the
Lord, the Removal of Abuses, and The public Welfare; Yet every Malc-content
will help to increase the Cry, and all the Sons of Ambition, Covetousness, Envy
and Revenge, will empty themselves into the Faction. And those who least Care
for Religion, will yet make it their pretext to ruin that which is
Established, and therewith the State. The sad truth of which Observation
dear-bought experience does every where attest.

Now, if this levelling of the Clergy, by granting to every one that lists
leave to invade their Office, will inevitably prove fatal both to Religion and
Government, Church and State; it will then be the best Policy and most certain
interest to maintain the Priesthood in its primitive Esteem. And seeing too
that the Calling of the Clergy is of Divine Authority, it must needs render all
pretenses of contemning it upon the Account of its Original, Atheistical and
Blasphemous; and all Usurpation thereof, Sacrilegious and Profane.

And having in the antecedent Discourse offered at something of Apologetick in
behalf of the Clergy in General, by proving the Divine Authority, and Catholic
Esteem, of their Calling: So the succeeding Sheets design a more particular
Apology for the present Clergy of this Church. Which may be plainliest done by
answering the spurious, and setting down the real occasions and grounds of
their Contempt.

CHAP. VIII. How the Clergy in all Ages have undergone Contempt: The Character
of their Contemners, etc.
BEfore we enquire into the Pretenses which are commonly brought for the
Contempt we speak of, it will be expedient to consider, that the despising of
the Clergy has been the unhappy carriage of other Ages as well as our own.
Which is a thing so deplorably manifest, that we need not much insist, either
upon its proof or declaration. For if we soberly consult the Oracles of God,
they will yield us undeniable attestations, that to Contemn the Stewards of
Mysteries, is a disease so Epidemical in respect of time, that it may seem to
have been intailed upon the several Generations of Mankind, as Gehazi's
Leprosy was upon his Children. For if we begin with Enoch, who was but the
Seventh from Adam, and the first Clergy the Scripture mentions, though he was
one, whose upright Conversation obviated all Exceptions, as Walking with God
and pleasing him; and one who became an Example of Religiousness to all
Generations: Yet for all this, he in his own Person met with Obloquy and hard
Speeches, and prophesied of men who would so treat the Clergy until the
Consummation of all things. Upon whom God at last shall send his Holy Myriads,
infinite Armies of Angels to take Vengeance.

Nor did it fare better herein with Noah, notwithstanding that he also Walked
with God and pleased him, and was a pledge of the World, and a preacher of
Righteousness: And so wanted nothing to recommend him to the respect and
reverence of his Age. Yet for many years he was so far despised, that none took
notice of his Sermons, unless to deride and pervert them. For we read not of
any who were reclaimed by his preaching, but that all remained in as much
carnal Supineness, obstinacy and disobedience, as if Noah had never told them
of their imminent danger and destruction by a deluge; and by his building of an
Ark, given them a sensible demonstration of what he foretold. For they ate and
drank, and followed their old trade of taking strange Women to their Wives, and
regarded not till the Flood came and swept them all away. If I might here
insert Moses among the Priests, because he was sent from God to preach
deliverance to Israel, we shall find him every where vilified and contemned.
The first Essay of his Message was entertained with a petulant questioning of
his Authority; Who made thee a Judge over us? And through the whole Sacred
Legend of his Life, we find him continually opposed and spoke against by
Conjurers, factious and gainsaying Zealots, and the humorsome and uncertain
multitude. And as to the first High Priest, the behavior of Corah and his
adherents toward him, is a sufficient testimony and illustration in this case.

And letting pass the Ancient Patriarchs, who had no part of their life free
from Contumelies and Reproaches; if we look into the times of the Prophets, we
may learn the Lot of them all, from that of Jeremy, who was mocked, jeered, and
droll'd upon, merely for being a Prophet of the Lord. But we need not fasten
upon Particulars, because we find by the general account given of the Prophets
sufferings, that they were no less than cruel Mockings and Scourgings, Bands
and Imprisonments, and the most exquisite kinds of Martyrdomes; being
destitute, afflicted and tormented.

Nor were the Clergy better dealt with in the times of the Gospel: For in the
years of its greatest efficacy, when the Apostles preached it with the purest
zeal, noblest industry, wisest courage, and in the true Evidence and
Demonstration of the Spirit, they were traduced for the vilest Offenders, and
accounted no better than the offscouring and Laughing-games, Catharmata ac
Ludibria (as a Modern Apologist) of the whole World. We find one of them stoned
to death by those, who were not able to resist the Wisdom and the Spirit by
which he spoke. At one place a Sorcerer, at another a Mechanic, and at a third
a sect of Restless Fanatics revile St. Paul. At Ephesus the Tradesmen impeach
him, in Asia a sort of vile Apostates utterly deny his power; and we cannot be
ignorant, how Reverendly the Apostle was treated by the Virtuosi at Athens,
when they called him (Spermologus) an empty, idle, talkative fellow.

But the one example of our Savior ought to supersede all other in this
Concern, who was despised and rejected of men, and not esteemed of in the
World; whose kindred said he was beside himself, and many said he had a Devil
and was mad: who by some was called Inchanter, Sorcerer, and by others
Samaritan, Beelzebub, Glutton, Drunkard: And to accomplish their slander of his
Credit, they unjustly Scourged and most Cruelly Crucified his Person, and put
him to open shame. And to leave them without any color of reply, they acted
all this Villainy against Christ, when he was preaching the Glorious Gospel of
Salvation; and therein laying down such rules of Life, as were more enlightening
of the mind, more advancing of humane Nature, and more directly tending to the
Introduction and Settlement of Piety, Justice, and Good Will, among men, than
was contained either in the Law of Moses, or the Institutions of Philosophers.

Now if the Prophets, Apostles, and Our Lord himself, were vexed and
interrupted with Rebukes, Revilings, Despites, Contumelies, etc. whilst they
pressed the World to believe and practice the Truth; it is then abundantly
clear, that the Contempt of the Clergy is no new Invention, nor to be wondered
at as the Monster of the present Age; but that it has ever been the practice
of Unreasonable men. For there is no place or time to be met with, since the
planting or growth of Religion, wherein its Ministers have not by some been
contemptuously entreated. And we have no great hopes to meet herein with
amendment, who live in those latter days, in which St. Peter, St. Paul, and
St. Jude, with one mouth assure us; that there should not only be a departure
from the Faith, but also Scoffers and Cruel Mockers, both of the Gospel and its
Ministers; and a Race of Ungodly men who would make the Gospel it self matter
of Obloquy and Shame to those who preach it. Of which sort were those
Miscreants, who put St. Paul upon the Apology: I am not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ: for it is the power of God unto Salvation, to every one that
believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

And therefore the present Clergy ought not to repine or murmur to see
themselves so badly dealt with by the World, when they shall be so far
recollected as to consider, that after the same manner it has also dealt with
the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself. And it is enough for the Disciple
that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord: If they have called the
Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call those of his
Household? The most that a Disciple or Servant can aspire to, is to come to his
Masters perfection. Whom if the World has reviled under the most hateful and
ignominious Titles, it is but Reason for his Ministers to expect to be
proportionably dealt with, in their respective Orders and Places. And as Christ
exhorted his first Clergy not to despond or be terrified by any thing should
befall them, but on the contrary to be Courageous and Undaunted in their
Ministry: So the Regular Clergy of our own Church, ought not to let their
present contempt damp their Spirits, depress their Courage, dishearten their
industry, or weaken their hands in the Work of the Lord. For duly considered,
this does altogether oblige them to a more signal care, that through this Cloud
of Ignominy and Contempt, their innocence may break forth as the Light, and
their just dealing as the Noonday. And with a greater zeal they should now
assert the Sacredness and Honor of their Calling, against the Affronts and
Prejudices of an unpropitious and gainsaying World.

It Is true, the contempt we speak of is able to vie Antiquity with the best
things; but the Persons that now use it have no more cause to glory in this
Antiquity, than in murder and lying, which are no less Ancient than the Old
Serpent. Nor will they have greater Reason to vindicate themselves upon the
Quality of their Predecessors; when they shall see them to have been persons of
Corrupt Judgments; Factious, Schismatical, and Apostates. Men of the greatest
Vices, and basest Interests; of the worst Principles and most ill-govern'd
Passions; Rash, Inconsiderate and foolish in the Things of God. Raging Waves of
the Sea, foaming out their own shame. The rest of whose Character may be made
out of St. Jude; one main end of whose Epistle was to acquaint the World what
kind of persons those are who Speak evil of Dignities, or deal contumeliously
with the Clergy. And St. Peter speaking of the same Subject, describes the
Contemners to be a bold, insolent sort of men, 2 Pet. 2.10, etc.

CHAP. IX. A Survey of the pretenses for the Contempt of the Clergy: First want
of Example.
THe first Pretense which with greatest speciousness and plausibility, is
brought to adjust the contempt of the Clergy, is the faultiness of their
carriage. For this being once surmised, we quickly find them reflected upon,
with a Physician Cure thy self; pluck the Beam out of thine own eye; thou that
teach others, why do thou not teach thy felf? Thou that say another
shall not steal, do thou commit Sacrilege? Turpe est Doctori, etc. Such as
these are the usual Topics whence Contempt is poured upon the Clergy in
general, especially by those who by an Uncharitable Synecdoche impute unto all
the failures of a very few: making the whole twelve to be unfaithful, because
one of them betrayed his Master. And yet were this accusation as true, as it is
manifestly otherwise; and that the Clergy were as ill-govern'd men as those
usually are who despise them: Yet those who reflect men's bad examples (when
they may possibly happen) to the prejudice of their Calling, seem either not
rightly to understand, or not duly to consider what that is, which with so much
noise they make use of.

For if they did either clearly apprehend, or maturely weigh, the nature and
importance of Examples, they would certainly confess, that the Bad are utterly
to be avoided, and the Good ^ever to be made the Rule and measure of our
Actions. but that the best Examples are chiefly to be looked upon, as helps and
furtherances, Spurs and Incentives to well-doing. And that when we grow dull
and unactive, flat and drowsy in our duties, we may rouse and awaken our
selves to a greater Vigor and Fervency, by reflecting upon the Zeal and
Industry of others. It Is true, Example is a very short and plain way of
Instruction; but it is true also, that as our actions at the last shall be
Examined, Tried, and Sentenced, so they are now to be Directed, only by Divine
precept. He therefore justly incurs the imputation of obeying Man rather than
God, who in this case follows Example and not the Cammandment. Those who upon
this account assault the Clergy with no less clamor, than I am afraid
ill will; seem not always to be men of so much justice and ingenuity, as to
afford that good example, they so loudly call for. Notwithstanding that every
one from the Spade to the Scepter, are as much obliged to an Exemplary
Conversation, as those of the Priesthood. For as to the influence of Examples
it is proportionably the same in all Ranks of Men, and at the great impartial
Audit accounts thereof, will undoubtedly be exacted without respect of Persons;
and the people as strictly reckoned with as the Priests. The quality of Persons
can make no Alteration in the Nature of things, nor render that a Vice or
Virtue in one man which is none in another. And when men of any Rank or
Condition, high or low, become defective in that Exemplariness of Life, which
the quality and relation wherein they stand, require from them; then I conceive
that all those Coals may be heaped upon their heads, which with so great
impetuousness are cast upon the Clergies.

It will also highly import those who Contemn the Clergy upon the account we
now speak of, to be soberly careful lest by giving too much to their personal
concernments, they make not the power and efficacy of Gods Ordinances to depend
upon the Holiness of those who dispense them. And if in some measure men were
not tainted with this Error, they would fix their eyes upon God and his
Institution, and look upon the Ministers of his Word and Sacraments, etc. as
the Greek Church did (in the Euchologue already mentioned:) wherein she
praises God, that of his infinite Condescension he has given them Masters and
Teachers, not only of the same Nature and like infirmities with themselves, but
also of like guilt and under the same Condemnation. And we have no small
obligation to be truly thankful to the Almighty, that he has placed in the
Ministry of the Glorious Gospel, such to offer Spiritual Oblations and
Sacrifices in behalf of the people, as have a sense of their Infirmities; and
who in themselves know the burden and subtilty of sin. To whom our Access might
be the more free and easy, and whom we are to value according to their Office
and Employment. For who is Paul, or who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom we
believe? Even as God gave to every man. Paul may plant, and Apollos Water: but
neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters; but God that
gives the Increase. If the eloquent Apollos, or learned Paul, live the holy
lessons they teach, it is their Crown and Praise; and likewise of great moment
to the people, who out of weakness and infirmity, are hardly brought to believe
the truth of that Doctrine, which is not attested by the Example and Practice of
those who preach it. But still the water is the same, and as full of cooling
and refreshment, whether the Pipe be of Lead or Gold that conveys it. The Jewel
suffers no diminution in its real worth or value, because it is lodged in a
wooden Casket. And the Gospel of Christ is still the power of God unto
Salvation to every one that believes, though never so great unworthiness
attend their Persons who declare it.

It fares with Christ's Ambassadors, as with those of Earthly Princes, whose
deportment, though it sink below their Character; yet that does no way evacuate
the power of their Commission, or render ineffectual what according to their
Masters Order they transact in his Name. And that this is the plain Case of the
Clergy, we may learn from the Blessed Author of Christianity, in Mat. 23.2, 3.
And if God, whose ways are past finding out, should set over us as Bad Guides
as those our Savior there speaks of; men who live not at all according to
their own Prescriptions: yet we are to respect their Office and Doctrine, and
not their Actions and Manners; to observe and do what they teach, but not to do
after their works: and to laud and praise God, that he has so far considered
the frailties of men, and worth of his own Ordinances, as not to tie the
Efficacy thereof to anything in their Dispensers, but to his own Institution.
St. Augustine (in his Prologue to his Books of Christian Doctrine) observes, that
Paul, though at first he was instructed by Advice from Heaven, was afterward
sent to a Man to receive the Sacraments, and to be joined to the Church: And
that though (...) Angel declared the approbation of Cornelius's prayers and
Alms-deeds; yet he was not to rest there, but to send to Peter, both to
receive Baptism from him, and to be instructed what he was to believe, Hope
and Love. If all things should have been transacted by. Angels, how mean and
abject would this have rendered the Condition of men! Or, if God should not
vouchsafe to speak to Men by Men, how could that be true, that Man is the
Temple of God (1 Cor. 3.) seeing Responses are not given out of that Temple,
but that all man's instruction should immediately sound from Heaven? Charity
which does bind men with the Bond of Unity, and as it were mix and blend
minds together, would have no occasion or opportunity for this excellent work,
if there were nothing that one man might learn of another, but that all were to
be done by Angels. And the same Father justly makes it a singular Act of Divine
Wisdom, to send the Eunuch to Philip, or appoint men and not Angels to
instruct the Church, to constitute Teachers of our own Passions, and to
dispense this heavenly treasure out of Earthen Vessels; that the whole
excellency of the power might be of God. But to proceed: Grant that the Clergy
were as faulty in their Conversation as we are willing to represent them, yet
this may move us to reflect upon our selves, and to consider, whether it may
not be our own fault, that our Spiritual Guides are so faulty; and that if we
are fallen under the inconvenience of bad Shepherds, whether it is not because we
deserve no better. For when God told Israel that he would give them Pastors
according to his own mind, who should feed them with knowledge and
understanding, if they would cease to be disobedient Children, and turn from
the evil of their ways, Jer. 3.13. He plainly showed, that the way to have
faultless Teachers, was to reform our selves; and to endeavor to deserve
better at Gods Hand, if in this Case he deals strictly with us. However we
cannot but surcease to contemn our Pastors upon the account of their failings,
unless that we are either innocent our selves, or being guilty can be content
to be despised upon that Score.

But yet seeing that a worse Use is made of the Clergies, than of any other
men's irregularities; and that we are generally prone to follovv them in the
steps that are foulest: And seeing that there is a Set of Men who are not only
curious to Observe, but greedy to suck up the very dregs of their actions; and
who strive to imitate their Spiritual Guides, as the Greeks did their Orators
and Philosophers, only in their Weaknesses and Imperfections: Seeing likewise
that men are apt to make choice of the vvorst part of the Example, and to take
more notice of one single miscarriage, than of a thousand good actions: And
what is yet more deplorable, seeing that contrary to all sobriety and duty,
not a fevv are forvvard to expose the Nakedness of their Fathers; and contrary
to all equity and justice, (as in the Case of Eli's Sons) to abhor the service
of God, for the faults of the Priest: After these considerations, I cannot be
so blinded with affection to the men I speak of, as not to think it their
bounden duty to give all diligence to shovv themselves patterns of good works,
Incorruptness, Gravity, and Sincerity, and to be Examples in Word, in
Conversation, in Charity, in Faith, in Purity. That in so doing they may both
save themselves, and them that hear them. And at the same time make those
ashamed, who speak against them, as having no evil to say of them, or lay to
their Charge. And as for those (as doubtless some there may be) who do
otherwise, I would (in the sense and Language of the Holy Ghost) they were even
cut off. But as for mine own part, when I see him that binds up my wounds to be
careless of his own; that he walks in darkness, by whose Candle I am
enlightened; or that he becomes a Castaway, who is the Instrument of my
Salvation; I will pity his Condition, and use his Ministry as God has
appointed: leaving him to receive as he deserves, and to stand or fall to his
own Master. For I dare not reproach the hand, be it never so Leprous, by which
I am helped to Cleansing: nor insult over their wanderings, by whose directions
I walk aright. And though the miscarriages of my Guide be never so heinous, I
shall neither answer nor be punished for them, if I have no way contributed to
their Commission.

CHAP. X. A Survey of the Pretenses of the Contempt of the Clergy: Secondly,
Idleness.
WHat has been spoken in the Antecedent Chapter, may both help to rectify a
common and usual mistake concerning Examples in general; and also suggest a
little more Sobriety to those who so eagerly manage the supposed want thereof
in the Clergy, to their irreparable Disparagement. Because it lets them see how
that every tittle of their Argument may recoyle upon themselves. And how we all
(Caeteris paribus) are as much obliged to an Exemplary Conversation, and
wanting it are as much to be blamed, as those from whom we so rigourously
exact it.

But because we are herein to deal with men, who usually esteem all serious
consideration mere dullness and drudgery; it cannot be hoped that what has been
spoken should prove much Operative upon them; or, that if it should happen that
the Contemners should be so far moved with what has been said, as to quit
this first pretense of their Contempt; yet their great desire to finish what
they have begun, will quickly furnish them with other Pretenses. And here it
will be easy to suppose them assaulting the Credit of the Clergy with the old
accusation of Idleness. Which I confess is a vice of so debasing a quality,
that it may justly lessen the Reputation of any man who therewith is infected.
And it is likewise so inconsistent with the Work (or Office) of the Ministry,
that I am persuaded there is none of that Calling, can thereof be guilty; or at
least not to that degree, which a Maligning World would render them.

For if we may suppose the present Clergy to be men of so much understanding as
to know the Nature of Idleness and Industry: That according to a Prophet of
their own, There is nothing more troublesome to a good mind, than to do
nothing. That Idleness is no less devoid of comfort than of profit. While both
are the gen^^n incomes of Industry. That besides the furtherance of their
Estate, the mind does both delight and better it self by Exercise. That it
fares with most as with the man after Gods own heart, whom no temptation durst
assail, while he was taken up with business of importance, and the public
Cares of State, etc. When this and infinite more, becomes the matter of a
Clergymans thoughts (or indeed of any) he cannot but have all Idleness and
Sloth not only under a jealous but a detestable aspect.

And yet its sordid Nature does not render it fitter for our avoidance than its
Consequences; which though to all are very pernicious, yet to none more than to
the Clergy. As may be collected from those fearful Comminations so frequently
denounced against such Pastors, as through their Idleness destroy and scatter
the Sheep of Gods Pasture. To whom the Lord says expressly: I will visit you
for the wickedness of your works, and the Remnant of my Sheep will I gather
together, and bring them to their Folds, and I will set up Shepherds over them
that will feed them. And the threatening reaches all those Shepherds, who take
more care to feed themselves than the Flocks: who eat the Fat, and Clothe
themselves with the Wool, but look not to the strengthening of the weak, the
healing of the sick; to bind up the broken, to bring home again that which was
driven away, and to enquire after that which was lost. All which Sheep the Lord
has sworn to require at the hands of such careless Shepherds. As may be seen
in Jer. 23. and Ezekiel. 34. A great part of which Chapters was inspired to this
purpose. To this may be added St. Paul's advice to the Asian Clergy, Act. 20.28.
Take heed to your selves and to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has
made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his
own blood. And 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall judge the quick and the dead, when he appears in his Kingdom: Preach
the word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with
all lenity and diligent instruction. Now, if it be safe for us to presume the
Clergy both to read and weigh those dreadful Menaces, so frequently uttered
from God, by the mouths of his Prophets, against Sloth and Carelessness in his
Messengers; or those many earnest Exhortations of the Holy Apostles for its
prevention and amendment; we may Charitably conclude, that they will not dare
to take part therevvith, not only for fear of man's Contempt, but the consuming
Wrath of God.

And if we may further presume, that there is so much understanding yet left
in the Clergy, as to enable them to apprehend the greatness of their Task, and
how it is no less than to raise up the fallen Kingdom of Christ, and to demolish
that of Satan, etc. and how that the fruits of so doing are no meaner, than the
saving of their own souls, and theirs too of whom they have taken the charge,
and one day must give an account. If we may yet further presume, that the
Clergy do in some tolerable manner comprehend the importance of those several
Titles, with which the Holy Ghost has invested them; and how that they are as
so many Memorials and Monitors of Labor, Diligence and Care. In short: if we
may presume the Clergy, like other men, to wear their eyes in their heads, and
apprehend and consider such obvious and plain things as we now speak; it may be
hoped, upon the stock of common ingenuity, that they will never suffer
themselves to run to moss, or let Gods House drop through by reason of the
Idleness of their hands; or endure to see the Flocks depending upon their
feeding, to grow cold in their zeal, drooping in their Courage, fainting in
their Spiritual Strength, and infeebled in all their Graces. And all this to
please a Vice which is unmanly in it self, foully derogatory to the honor of
their Calling, contradictory of their Titles, and in Them of more dreadful
Consequences, than it can possibly be in any Other.

In the last place, if we may suppose the Clergy to remember, and make
conscience of that promise of Faithful diligence which they made to God and the
Church, when they were received into Holy Orders; this alone will be sucffiient
effectually to bind them to bend their whole Endeavors, without fraud or
Sophistication, to the due discharge of their Office. Being well assured that
small benefit will accrue to the Church from their Abilities, if they be not
Faithful. For the Clergy cannot be ignorant that their Sufficiency without
Endeavors to do that good which their Place requires, is no better than
wrapping the Talent in a Napkin. Industry with lesser Parts is more serviceable
to Religion, than great Learning without it. And an Idle, is little better than
a Blind Guide. And being persuaded that these things are the matter of the
Clergies serious meditation, I cannot imagine they should ever be guilty of that
Idleness which so malapertly is laid at their door. But I am rather induced to
believe that that which in them bears this Odious Name, is nothing else but the
regular performance of their duty: partly occasioned by their Carriage, who
prefer the pleasing of some men's Caprices before the observation of their Rule.
In which rank it may be no great iniquity to place all those, who make all
other parts of the Church tributary to the Pulpit. By which they have
occasioned a Capricious sort of people to conclude all Public Service to be
preaching, and to esteem all those to be dumb dogs, who open not as often as
they please, and in a sense different to the Apostles, preach the Word in
Season and out of Season. But as for mine own Part, when I observe our Clergy
to pray, preach and Catechize as the Church injoyns and directs them: when I
see them careful to sort and feed their Flocks according to their Age and
Condition, giving to every one his portion in due season, and with fidelity,
prudence and industry, observing the Rules of their Sacred Function; I cannot
but think those men to be forsaken both of all justice and ingenuity, who now
contemn them upon the score of Idleness. But if there be any who are herein
delinquent; it were more justice and generosity to give a Catalogue of such
Drones to those who have an undoubted Power to make them Labor, or Vnhive
them: And that the Righteous be not as the Wicked.

CHAP. XI. A view of the Pretenses of the Contempt of the Clergy: Thirdly of
Pride.
I Shall not here attempt any Philosophical Discourse either of the Nature or
Causes of Pride. All that concerns our present Enquiry falls under either the
contrariety that it bears to the practice and command of Christ, or the danger
and odiousness thereof in his Ministers.

And as to the first of these, it is so apparent in the Holy Gospel, that none
thereof can be ignorant who is not an Utter stranger to that inspired System of
Christianity. For we plainly find therein, how the Blessed Author of Our Faith
shows favor to none but the humble, nor will admit any to be of his retinue,
who has not first learned of him to be Meek and Lowly. And Christ speaking of
that Prelation and Government which was to be in his Church, he sufficiently
intimated that he would not have it to be like that of the World. That is, not
a Government whose Dominion is Despotic; the Coercion imperious; the Laws
externally Compulsory; and the Titles big and swelling. But on the contrary he
has insinuated how that he would have the Government of his Church to be
paternal and persuasive, and the Laws to be full of Admonition, and the Titles
of the Governors to be significative of Affection and Labor, of burden and
humility: and the Highest Dignity, a meek Ministration, and a Laborious
Employment. And when the Apostles fell into an Ambitious quarrelling which of
them should be greatest, Christ checked their Pride, and gave them this
Everlasting Rule of Clerical deportment; He that will be Greatest among you,
let him be your servant. And we need come no nearer to discover the Odiousness
of Pride in Christ's Ministers, seeing both by his Example and Precept he has
thus recommended to them the clear contrary. And certainly Christ would have
those who for their Greater Dignities in the Church are styled Stars, and
Angels, to imitate the one, by appearing less for their greater Height; and the
other, who though Peers of Heaven, yet approve themselves Ministering Spirits to
the poorest of Gods Servants upon Earth.

And the same Rule of Clerical Deportment, laid down by our Blessed Savior, is
no very dark intimation, that the Clergy are in danger to fall into this sin.
And we want not reason to be hereof suspicious, when we consider that Pride
being an internal Vice, is apt to make impression upon those Notions and
Speculations of the mind, wherein the Office of the Clergy renders them more
egregiously Conversant. For as Pride took up its first seat in a Spiritual
Being, so it has ever since acted with greatest vigor in Spiritual
Concernments, and been most liable to Spiritual Persons. In whom it can never
happen without working a less mischief than Strife and Contention. And indeed
it seems impossible to be otherwise, seeing Pride naturally exacts it self
above Competition, and superadds disdain and revenge to actuate its other
Motions. As was seen in his Case, who being denied a Bishopric sought to be
revenged upon Episcopacy. And as Solomon's Arraignment of Pride for the Mother
of Contention, is true in the General; so it is more especially true of those
Contentions, wherewith the Church in any Age has been afflicted: There being
none to be met with wherein Pride, under several appearances, has not been a
principal Actor. And without all further Enlargement, I am sufficiently
inclined to believe, upon the account of what is now suggested, that there is
no Clergyman will venture to give the least Entertainment to a sin, which is
fraught with so much mischief. For how tolerable soever this Vice may seem in
men of another Character; yet it can never hope for any good Construction in
their Carriage, who are his Ministers, among whose wonderful works none was
more Stupendous than his own Humility.

And therefore that which most commonly and with greatest assurance, some men
call Pride in the Clergy, seems to be nothing else, but a keeping themselves
from those Promiscuous Familiarities, which experience and reason tell them,
are apt to be attended with Contempt and Disrespect.

Now, if upon their Separation to the Work of the Ministry, the Clergy betake
themselves to a Reverend and Pious Reservation, as men professing Retirement
from the World above others; if out of a Conscientious apprehension that an
undifferenced Conversation with the Laity (of what Rank soever) is altogether
contrary to the Calling of the Clergy; if out of fear that a too free Communion
with the people will lessen their Authority, and rebate the force of their
Instructions and Reproofs, when there is most need to deliver them with the
greatest Vigor and Power; if foreseeing that this Communion (I now speak of)
may engage them if not to commit, yet often to connive at those things, which
they ought altogether to rebuke; and that it is one Engine to break down that
Veneration, which is the Fence to their Function against all Popular Rudeness
and Encroachments: if some (I say) of these Considerations, or all in Consort,
shall justly move the Clergy to such a Religious distance and Retirement from
the Conversations of the World, as the Inconsiderate may call Pride; they ought
with great satisfaction to bear the imputation, and to account it their Crown
to be contemned upon this Score. Especially when they shall consider that their
Carriage herein is agreeable to the Canons, Constitutions and decrees of the
Ancient Church, and to the Canons and Injunctions of our own; and no way
clashing with the Rules of a prudent and Charitable Conduct. As to our own
Church, She commands all Ecclesiastical Persons, not to resort to any Taverns
or Alehouses, for any other cause, than for their honest necessities. And that
after their Meals they shall not give themselves to Drinking or Riot, nor spend
their time idly by day or night, at Dice, Cards, or Tables, or any unlawful
game. But at all times, as they shall have leisure, to hear or read some part
of the Holy Scriptures, or employ themselves with some other honest Study or
Exercise. Always doing the things which appertain to honesty, and the Profit of
the Commonwealth. Ever having in their mind, that they ought to excel all
others in purity of life, and to be Examples to the people to live well and
Christianly. And there was also a time when the Clergy of this Nation was
forbid to keep Hounds, Accipitres and Falcones, etc. And as concerning the mind
of the Ancient Church in this particular, it is sufficiently apparent in those
Canons, which forbid the Clergy secular Sports and Recreations; and all such
Correspondencies, Entertainments, and Familiarities with the Laity, as were not
the Product of their Office. And this was done not out of any supercilious
moroseness to restrain, but out of a wary foresight to revere the Clergy. To
whose profession they saw nothing was more contrary than a too great
indifferency of conversing with the people whom they were to instruct. With
whom they must not hope long to enjoy that Credit and Reverence (due to their
Order,) which is founded upon the Gravity, Abstinence, Sobriety and Reservation
of their Persons, if they license themselves that secular Freedom which we now
plead against. I have observed a Numerous Clergy in the Roman, and not a few in
our own Church, though of no greater Parts or Virtues than others, to have
secured to themselves a great share of Veneration, chiefly upon the account of
a cautious Retreat from the Usages and Liberties of the Many.

CHAP. XII. A Survey of the pretenses of the Contempt of the Clergy: Fourthly
of Covetousness.
THE last Pretense of the Contempt of the Clergy, which we shall take notice of
in this discourse, is their Covetousness. And this imputation usually arises
from a prejudiced consideration of the Clergies carriage, First, in looking
after the Incomes which are appointed for their maintenance. Secondly in the
frugal management of those Incomes. And lastly, in their seeking after
Preferments.

And first, those who Contemn the Clergy for Covetousness, because they are
diligent and careful to look after the things which are allotted for their
subsistence, may manage the same Argument with as much Justice, though perhaps
not so much speciousness, against all those who are studious to reap the due
fruits and benefits of their Places, and Professions; though they have not (all
things considered) so great an obligation for so doing, as the Clergy. Whom we
must needs confess to be the Stewards of Gods Patrimony, as well as of his
Mysteries: and that in both it is required of them to be found faithful. To
which attribute they will have but small reason to entitle themselves, unless
they be exactly vigilant to preserve those dues, rights and profits, which the
Laws of God and the Land, have made accrue to the Church, and not to suffer
that to be cunningly embezel'd, unjustly defalk'd or Alienated, which the
Bounty and Religion of pious Ancestors devoted to the support and maintenance
of the most Holy Worship. And if the Clergy shall be thought covetous because
by just and amicable Methods they are diligent in the preservation of that
wherewith they are entrusted: and that out of a due sense that the burden of
Sacrilege is already too heavy upon the Nation, they labor to prevent its
growing heavier, by saving men from that most execrable sin, from which none
can be free who endeavor to defraud the Church, and which not a few are ready
to do, if not studiously prevented. Now, if this be the Case of the Clergies
Covetousness in the first instance thereof, let it be left to him That judges
righteous judgment.

Nor can they with any better color brand, As Covetous, the Clergies wary and
frugal management of their incomes, so long as they are merciful to their
power; and that their Alms are cheerful, and their hospitality charitable;
though they never meddle with those secular Entertainments, and expensive
Correspondencies, to which the occasions of their Office and expressions of
Charity do neither oblige nor invite them. And if the Clergy according to the
best and Ancientest Canons, secure the interest of the poor in the goods of the
Church, reserving unto themselves only such a portion thereof, as may suffice
for their own sober maintenance, and to make honest provision for their
Families, and not tenaciously to hoard them up for no better purposes than
either to gratify a covetous humor, or to furnish out a Worldly pomp and
parade: or what is not much better, to enrich a Relation, that in the next Age
if not sooner, will Contemn their Extraction, and vilify the Function, by which
they were raised. But on the contrary, if the Clergy are conscientiously
careful not to dissipate the Spiritual Patrimony in any needless profusions,
idle curiosities, unclerical splendour, or any thing disagreable to that
Christian Austerity, and Rigor, which is ever to be expected in that Calling:
But shall with a Religious providence, and Charitable Frugality, endeavor so
to husband that Holypittance whereof they are not the Proprietaries but
Stewards, as to be just, and Charitable; they ought upon these terms neither to
be censured nor despised as Covetous. Which is an imputation never to be
fastened upon any Who do justice, and love mercy. And we must think that Order
of men we speak of, to be wonderfully devoid of conscience and ingenuity when
they are guilty of any egregious failures in the things now mentioned.
Especially when they shall perceive them to be so equitable in themselves, so
answerable to the nature of their Calling, and so strictly enjoined by the laws
of the Church, and so highly recommended by all the learned and pious of their
own Character and Profession.

As to the Goods of the Church, we know, they are frequently styled the Goods
of the Poor; and the Ancient Church was so careful to maintain them in that
state, that she allowed not a Bishop to bestow them upon their nearest
Relations, further than to help them as they were indigent, lest they should be
said to prey upon the Churches Incomes. I must take care (says St. Augustine)
lest the estate of the poor (which belongs to the Church of Hippo) be given to
the Rich. In which matter I have hitherto quit my self well. For I have kindred
which call themselves Noble, who come to me being a Bishop (one while with
Menaces, and another while with Flatteries) to move me to confer something upon
them because of our Relation, and yet through Gods grace I do not remember that
I ever enriched any of them. Enough to this purpose is to be met with in the
Canons concerning Ecclesiastical Discipline, and in those Authors who have writ
De Eccles. Repub. I have been told that a late Bishop of this Nation in his
Epistle to Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, (set before his Mysteries of
Christian Religion) does impute the late Sacrilege committed in this Land to
the spending of Churchmeans in an un-church-like manner, and that this was done
by the Clergies converting them to their private uses, or otherwise
misimploying them. And therefore (says he) God justly takes them away and
permits Sacrilege; we our selves having first offended in the same kind. For
certainly Church-means should have relation as well to the uses as to the
persons; and a Churchman in mispending them commits Sacrilege. And I find it
likewise expressly affirmed by a Divine of Singular Learning and Piety (in his
just weights and measures) that for any degree or order of the Clergy to
increase their Estates out of Church- goods, was in the better and purer times
of Christianity, a thing which the Canons did not only prohibit, but make void.
And that the Canons, from the Canon of the Apostles, to those at this day in
force in the Church of Rome, disable the Clergy to dispose of Churchgoods by
Will and Testament. In the 25th Session of the Council of Trent, and in the
first Chapter concerning Reformation, among many other things very worthy of
remark, the Synod expressly forbids the Bishops to augment the incomes of their
Kindred and Familiars with those of the Church. According to the Canons of the
Apostles, prohibiting the Goods of the Church, which are Gods, to be given to
Relations; but if they are poor, to deal with them as with the rest of their
rank; and not to dissipate them for their sakes. Imo quam maxim potest, eos
sancta Synodus monet, ut omnem humanum hunc erga fratres, Nepotes,
propinquosque carnis affectum (unde multorum malorum in Ecclesia Seminarium
extat) penitus deponant. And what is said of the Bishops is also to be
understood of the rest of the Clergy. It Is true where the Clergy (as in our own
Church) are authorized to marry, the Case seems to be otherwise; and the Church
as she has given them leave to marry, must also give them leave even out of her
own Revenues, to make provision for their Wives and Children. But this does not
abrogate but only relax the Canons: and the married Clergy are herein to
express a singular moderation; and so to provide for Wife and Children out of
Churchgoods, as not to extinguish the interest of the poor therein. For I
humbly conceive that it is no small mistake in any Clergymen to imagine, that
having out of the Goods of the Church soberly disposed of their Children in the
World, they should also labor to raise them Estates, and strive in their own
Port to equal that of the higher Laity. With whom the Canons never intended
them a greater conversation than arose from the Tenor of their Function; and
requires that their chiefest Hospitality should respect the relief and support
of the Indigent and Necessitous.

As to the last instance of Covetousness in the Clergy, which respects their
eager hunting after Preferments and Promotions in the Church, which the best
and wisest have ever esteemed a notable blemish in them, it surpasses my
abilities to vindicate, and is against my conscience to excuse. And therefore I
shall deeply lament, what I cannot redress; and humbly beseech Almighty God to
restore those to a better mind, who herein are guilty. And that some are
guilty in this particular, seems undeniable upon that general complaint made
against that multiplicity of Church-preferments wherewith not few are ever
surcharged. Ridente fanatico, nec dolente Papista: Or rather indeed to the
distress and injury of those Clergymen, who would esteem it a good Vintage, to
have but the gleanings of their Brethren; and think themselves well provided
for, if they had but one of those Numerous preferments which are so venturously
piled upon such, as are no more laborious in the Word and Doctrine than others.
But I shall forbear to enlarge, lest I should be mistaken in this particular;
and only make it my humble Supplication, that the Canons, respecting the Clergy
in this Affair, may impartially be considered by them: to the end, that their
manifest opposition to this enormous practice, may through God, somewhat
contribute to its amendment; or at least so far open their eyes, as to let them
see the utter inexpediency, if not unlawfulness of what they do.

That which we call Pluralities in this Church, has long time been complained
of as a thorn in her side; which some of the Reverend Fathers the Bishops, have
very lately been projecting to pull out. But in stead of the Extirpation of
Pluralities, I could wish they were well pruned; for till their abuses be
retrenched, and they be restored to their first design, they will scarce be
capable of any conscientious Apology. And it is to be hoped that those
corruptions which tract of time and negligence of some, may seem to have
brought upon the first Concessions thereof, might for the future be prevented,
if three or four obvious things were duly taken notice of. As

First, That those unto whom the granting of dispensations is committed, or
which otherwise have any stroke in the disposal of such Preferments as
appertain unto Learned Men, would bethink themselves what it is to respect any
thing either above or beside Merit: considering how hard the World takes it,
when to men of commendable Note and Quality there is so little respect had, or
so great unto them whose deserts are very mean; that nothing does seem more
strange than the one sort, because they are not accounted of, and the other
because they are. It being every man's expectation and hope in the Church of
God, that the only purchase of greater rewards should be always greater
deserts, and that nothing should be able to plant a Thorn where a Vine ought to
grow.

Secondly, That Honorable Personages, and they who by virtue of any principal
Office in the Commonwealth, are enabled to qualify a certain number, and to
make them capable of benefices and faculties above others, would not suffer
their privileges to be abused, contrary to the true intent and meaning of
wholesome Laws, by men in whom there is nothing notable besides Covetousness and
Ambition, Ignorance and Idleness.

Thirdly, That the Universities would bestow their degrees not as mere
kindnesses by way of Civility, but as favors which always imply a Testimony
given to the Church and Commonwealth, concerning men's sufficiency for Manners
and Knowledge. Considering that upon the credit of this Testimony sundry
Statutes of the Realm are built, and that it is so far available that nothing
is more respected for the Warrant of Diverse men's Abilities to serve both in
Church and State. And if the Universities shall violate that Religion wherewith
this Testimony ought to be given, they do not only disparage themselves, if it
be known; but also involve those in error, who deem it a thing uncivil to call
the Credit of their Testimony in question, by doubting either of the Manners or
Abilities of those, upon whom they have conferred their Degrees. And therefore
are never to be granted to any one without due Caution and Advice.

Fourthly, That the Indulgence of Pluralities be restored to its first design,
by being allowed only to men of Note; to signify and reward Eminent Services
done for the Church; and to encourage a more remarkable progress in Virtue and
Science. Ends shamefully neglected in the present Indulgence of Pluralities, if
we consider who they are who most bountifully enjoy them.

In the last place, it would not a little help to the removal of the scandalous
abuses crept into the Indulgence of Pluralities, if those who are so forward to
enjoy it, would remember what in Duty and Conscience toward God and the Church
they are bound to perform. For they cannot be ignorant that those to whom
Plurality of Chuch-preferments is granted, are bound to requite that Grant by
an industry answerable to that Plurality, and that they are to excel as much in
Labor, as in Dignity and Benefit. And therefore unless they faithfully answer
the Churches expectation, in bending their labors to sow as well as reap, and
to make their pains as far to exceed their Brethrens, as their Preferments and
Incomes: in a word; unless they perform those Offices to which the very
accpetance of plural Preferments and Benefices do formally bind, let them be
well assured (says my pious and learned Author) that the Honey which they eat
by fraud, shall turn in the end to Gall; and that which was nutriment in the
mouth, shall prove gravel in the bowels. And though their subtle and colorable
dealing herein may not be taken in the walk of humane justice, yet He, the
Sacred Image of whose Wisdom appears in the Laws of men, will at last severely
punish it. And now the only Apology that can be made for the Clergy in this
concern, will be their own speedy endeavors to grow innocent; by avoiding all
those things for the time to come, which may occasion offending. And using no
Methods in the obtaining Church- benefices, but such as are just, ingenuous and
Canonical. And waving all those privileges which, contrary to the primitive
Canons, give leave to hold Church-preferments in more Dioceses than one. An
abuse (as one has well observed) brought in by the Papacy, when the Sea of
Rome, seeking Benefices all over Christendom, granted privileges to dissolve
the Ancient Discipline, on purpose to enrich themselves and their Favorites.

But this which is now spoken, has no design to lay Covetousness, and therewith
Contempt, at the door of any, who are studious first to deserve, and next to
obtain, Plural Preferments upon the terms we have now mentioned: Nor yet to
blame those whom the scantiness of their present Fortunes move to seek for
larger, on purpose to enable them to perform more singular services for God and
the Church. But what has been said, respects those especially who look not to
be furnished with such qualifications as are supposed by that Indulgence of the
Law; which they so hazardously make use of, to their own Spiritual danger,
detriment of the deserving Clergy, and Reproach of the whole profession, etc.

And though what has been already suggested, may with unbyassed judgments,
suffice to evince the falsness and iniquity of their carriage, who pretend
Idleness, Pride and Covetousness in the Clergy, to be the reasons for which
they are moved to Contemn them: Yet we may safely suppose that those who are
most active in this Contempt, would be no otherwise, though the Clergy were as
blameless therein, as the Stars and Angels to which they are compared; and in
particulars as innocent, as was once the man without a Navel. For where the
Credit and Reverence of the Ministry is once concerned, it is not what they
are, but what prejudice represents them. And besides all this, the Contemners
know themselves herein to be safe; while they are not ignorant how the
Fortitude of the Clergy is wholly passive, and that they are naked of all other
Weapons but Prayer and Patience. And indeed what but Lowliness and Meekness can
become his Substitutes, who being reviled, reviled not again; and who enjoined
his Proselytes in general to recompense Evil with Good, and Cursing with
Blessing? So that these Contemners finding themselves out of danger not only of
Duel and Challenge, but also of Recrimination and Reviling, they heroically
manage their province of Disgrace and Contempt: whetting their tongues, and (in
a harsh Metaphor) then wounding therewith by Reproaches those whom they know
will never answer them at that Weapon. And indeed these Contemners, falling
under the Clergies Christian consideration, will be found fitter objects of
their Pity than Anger; and more proper to be prayed for than reproach't. And I
doubt not but the Clergy do zealously pray for their Contemners, as their Great
Master did for his Crucifiers -- Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do.

CHAP. XIII. A Survey of some of the Real Grounds of the Contempt of the Clergy.
HAving made this brief research into the more usual and trodden pretenses of
the contempt of our present Clergy, and found them to be but mere pretenses,
arising chiefly from Prejudice and Mistake; The next part of our Province is to
enquire into such grounds of this Contempt, as seem more genuin and real. Not
that I suppose any true reason can be rendered why the Clergy as such should at
all be contemned, any more than God and Christ, who share with them in the
Contempt: according to St. Luke 10.16. etc. 1 These. 4.8. But that the true
grounds of this Contempt are not the Personal Lapses of the Clergy, as is
pretended, but the Nature and Management of their Function.

As to the Nature of their Function, it is well known to consist in turning men
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God; and to teach all
those who undertake Christianity, to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and to live soberly, and righteously and godly all the time of their being here
on Earth. And as to the management of those things wherein the nature of the
Ministry consists, it ought to be zealous and impartial; for as the Clergy are
the Stewards of the Divine Mysteries, they are by that Title obliged to be
faithful, which they cannot pretend to be, should they cry peace, peace, to
those whom they see in open Hostility against the Prince of Peace. But their
Carriage must be like Balaam's, whom though a false Prophet, a houseful of Gold
and Silver could not have hired to go one jot beyond the command of the Lord.

Now when the present Clergy shall pursue the Duties of their Calling with that
Integrity and Faithfulness which God requires at their hands, ill-governed men
usually deal with them, as Ahab with the Prophet, who with a Loyal Sincerity
foretold the great Disasters should befall him for his wicked Conversation. We
read of Herod's listening to the austere Baptist (and of the many good things he
did at his exhortation) and how he had him in no small Veneration) till he told
him of his filthy Association with another man's Wife. And S. Paul met with no
other interruption in his Discourse, till he came to a close reasoning of
Continence before him who lived in unlawful Concubinage. And long before this
too, we find a Friendly and Pious Advice turned to the Reproach of him that
gave it. As in the case of Lot, whom the filthy Sodomites accused of
Pragmaticalness, because he meekly advised them to desist from that more than
brutal Violence and Impurity which they designed against his Angel-Guests. And
it was the malicious Supposal of the Jews, that if respect was given to Christ's
Person, it would so credit his Doctrine, that all would be in danger to believe
it; and to prevent this, they sought to beat down his Reputation by calling him
Drunkard, Glutton, Madman, and Deceiver of the People. And so unreasonable are
Lust and Sin, and so charmed therewith are men's hearts, that those who by the
Powerful Countercharm of Gods Word are willing to disinchant them, are no
better treated than Christ by the Demoniack, who when he came to cure, cried
out, that he was come to torment him.

The Gospel is quick and powerful (Vital and Operative) piercing even to the
dividing of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, and able to discern
the Thoughts and Intentions of the Heart. And when by this its Ministers rip up
those Secret Corruptions, in whose Concealment and Fruition so many seem to
have placed their Heaven and Felicity, it will be easy to foretell what great
respect they are like to meet with, especially in an Age in which most
Offenders are of the same humor with those Beaux Esprits, or Virtuosi in
Cicero, who were not vexed that they offended, but took it very haniously to be
told thereof. And when again by the same Gospel, which is a light that makes
all manifest, the Clergy discover to the Consciences of the Wicked the Shame
and Nakedness of their Vices; not being able to endure the Tortures naturally
arising from such a Detection, nor to deny the truth thereof, nor yet daring
openly to blaspheme the Instrument of the same Detection; their only refuge is
to lessen both the Efficacy and Credit of the Gospel, by lessening the esteem
of those who preach it. But too rightly apprehending that Gods Word, and his
Ministers are such near Allies, that the disrepute of the one falls upon the
other.

Now, when the Clergy (according to their Obligation) go about to cut the wings
of Pride, and to take off the wheels of Lust: to decry those sinful Courses,
which corrupt Nature most magnifies: and to propagate those Virtues to which
these Contemners have the greatest Antipathy and Averseness. When (in a word)
the Clergy zealously recommend to our most Cordial Practice those very Duties
which we most dislike, they cannot hope by this way to procure any great esteem
with those against whose Vices they thus directly set themselves. But on the
contrary, they are to expect to be looked upon as the greatest Enemies by all
such, whom they thus tell the truth. And indeed it has ever been the Policy of
the Malicious to lessen their Credit whose service they would render
insuccessful, and to imbibe mean thoughts of all those who interrupt them in
their Vices. But without driving this particular any further, it is undeniably
evident to the World, that one main cause of the Clergies Contempt may be
resolved into that Apology Christ upon the same occasion made for himself, viz.
The World hates me because I testify that the works thereof are evil.

Nor does that part of the Clergies Function, consisting in the instruction of
all men in their respective Duties, occasion some of them more obloquy, than
the execution of the Sacred Discipline does others. For this latter having a
direct aim and tendency to suppress our darling sins, and to put us to shame
for their Commission; we labor to beat it down with the same Engine, that
those Factionists in Numb. 16th used against the Priesthood, namely, as a thing
useless and unnecessary: they indeed did so, upon the pretense of their own
Sanctity; but we upon the score of our Stubborness.

I know alas! the Power of the Keys, Excommunication, or Church Censures, are
become very contemptible, and sunk so low in some men's opinion, that they rise
not above the Estimate of Artificial Fire or mere noisy Thunder. But yet in
their Original Institution and Primitive Practice nothing was more high and
dreadful, and it was looked upon as a great mercy in God, and a singular honor
for the Clergy, to confer upon them no less a power than to deliver obstinate
sinners over unto Satan, to take full possession of their Souls, and to
sentence them to the everlasting pains of Hell: and likewise, a power to
release penitent souls from the Chains of Darkness, and Bondage of the Devil,
and to restore them to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; whereby they
are made Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven. And yet this power, whereof Angels
would be ambitious, Christ conferred upon the Clergy, when he said unto his
Apostles, Whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whose
soever sins ye retain they are retained. And as these words give a power of
public exclusion out of the Church for Scandalous Enormities, and readmission
into it upon Repentance, it undoubtedly belongs to the Governors of the Church,
as they are purely Clergy, and to none else whatsoever: as is evident from the
first Collation of this power in St. John 20.22. And the exercise of these
Censures is so much the work of Church-Governers, that St. Paul calls them the
Weapons of their Spiritual Warfare, by which they cast down imaginations and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bring
into Captivity every thought to the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. And
this Power in its first derivations was executed with signal Severities, such
as this Age will hardly be induced to believe; and that too when there was no
Temporal Sword to assist these Spiritual Weapons. But it is not easy to advise
what ought to be done in such a State of the Church as ours is, wherein the
enormities of some give them a sort of impunity, who having separated
themselves from the Church, are also in their own esteem at least, got out of
the power of its Censures. And as to many of those who stay within the Church,
through a long forbearance of this Rod, they are grown too Heady to be brought
under Correction. And both Principles of Liberty, and a long Uncorrected
wickedness are ready to dispute all Ecclesiastical Restraints, and would rather
have no Church at all, than one with Censures. But as this does no way evacuate
the Power, so neither should it rebate its Exercise; but it ought to be the
more prudently asserted, being thus unjustly gainsaid. However it will not
unbecome such as are chiefly concerned in the management of the
Church Censures, by no lukewarm execution thereof to suffer them to be looked
upon as mere Bruta fulmina, and no such proper remedies to cure the Offenses in
Christianity, as they are pretended. And if Religion could but get such
countenance by a watchful menage of Church Censures, as to strike the open
sinners with fear of being turned out of Christian Company, and to be avoided
as unfit for conversation; if not Conscience yet Reputation would in a great
measure restrain them. Not to be thought Fit Company for Christians, would
surely make them scorn their Vices; and Shame, one designed effect of the
Censures, would prevail upon those by whom nobler Motives are Contemned. We
need not be told how the Censures of the Church were not only laid aside in the
Vastations of the Arrian Heresy and Persecution; and before that in
Diocletian's days against the Lapsi: but we find that things were come to that
extremity in St. Paul's time, that he was reduced to his ((...)) I would they
were even cut off that trouble you, Gal. 5.12. Sedition and Schism were grown
so obstinate and spreading, that neither his Power could reach, nor his methods
cure them; and he was only able to Excommunicate the guilty in a Wish, and cut
them off in Desire. And much of the same distemper seems to be spread through
our own Age; for though the necessity of the times, interest of Religion, and
welfare of the Church, loudly call for the severities of Discipline; yet there
appear no small discouragements against it, whether we consider the Popularity
of Vices, or the Power and Greatness of the Vicious: especially when we see
that they whose Lives and Judgments are chiefly to be cured with the Censures,
have either had the reins so long upon their Necks, that they are grown too
Headstrong for Discipline; or they have adopted such Principles as serve to
adjust their Obstinacy, and enable them to withstand both Christ and his
Church. And in this profligate State of Affairs, chiefly occasioned by the late
and long overthrow of Government and Discipline, it is no easy matter for
Church-Rulers to proceed. However we ought to be so far from contemning them
upon this score, that it is our bounden duty humbly to bow our knees to the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would direct and strengthen the
Reverend Fathers of Our Church, that they may support and keep up the small
remainder of that Ecclesiastic Discipline, which Schism, Atheism and
Profaneness, have not yet quite trampled under foot. And that by their paternal
endeavors the whole Discipline may in some good measure be restored to its
primitive Efficacy and Credit, and so be able to accomplish the Ends for which
it was at first designed.

CHAP. XIV. A Further Examination of the Grounds of the Contempt of the Clergy,
respecting their Condition in the World, and Extraction.
ANother occasion of the Clergies contempt may be imputed to the indiscreet
measuring of their Credit according to their outward Fortunes, which generally
being but small their Veneration is proportionate. For men deal herein with the
Ministers of the Gospel, as the scoffing Jews dealt with its Blessed Author,
when they judged of him according to secular Circumstances, and weighed him in
the false Balance of the World. Is not this the Carpenters Son? and they were
offended at him. Their Probe pierced no deeper than the Skin, and their
judgment of Christ being only according to the outward appearance of his
Person, it could not be Righteous. They saw the Messiah to be destitute of
external Royalty and Grandeur; that his Administration was not Lordly and
Imperious, but humble and persuasive; and his Carriage not Big and Haughty, but
Meek and Lowly; and that he wanted those exterior accoutrements, wherein they
expected him: and which the blind world does still esteem only worthy
Admiration and Regard. And it was upon these terms that they rejected the Lord
of Life, and prefered one who murdered, before one who came to save them. And
the condition of present Circumstances renders the Allusion but too obvious.
For we find the same objections brought by some to vilify the Clergy, which
were urged against Christ. And Extraction or Genealogy, which of all things is
in it self the most insignificant, if there either be, or want personal worth,
is by some warmly made use of in this Contrast. But the Clergy need not herein
to Apologize, while there are other things that ennoble besides Parentage and
Patrimony. For among wise Persons Learning was ever thought a sufficient Title
to Nobless and Secular Eminence. And A. Gellius affirms, that not only
excellency of Extraction and great Fortunes, but also Learning makes Noble. For
coming (says he) to visit Fronto Cornelius, as he was lying sick of the Gout,
I found him lying upon his Scimpodium Graeciense, circumundique sedentibus
multis Doctrina, aut Genere aut Fortuna Nobilibus viris. And the Lawyers affirm
expressly that if a Legacy be given Pauperi Nobili, the Executours may give it
to a Doctor. And the respect given to letters, has occasioned the dispute for
precedence between Knights and Doctors of the Law, as may appear both by the
Comparison that Tully makes betwixt Lucius Murena a Knight of Rome, and Pub.
Sulpitius a Lawyer (either of them standing for the Consulship) in his Eloquent
Oration for Murena, and many other disputes arguing the Case to and fro. And in
foreign COuntries where the Civil Law is in Credit, it is still disputable;
though this precedence is not so dubitable among us, where the professors of
the Civil Law are shut up (says Doctor Ridley) into a narrow corner of their
Profession. I produce this, only to show that Learning and the degrees of the
Schools (which are still supposed to be in the Clergy) have ever been thought
as fair Titles to the advantages of Secular Opinion and Honor, as any other.
But as for such as would lessen the Priesthood for the meanness of their
Descent who bear it, they would do well to consider, that the Laws of the Land
render a Fills des prestres, or Baseborn, incapable of that Sacred Office,
unless by the interposition of the Royal Prerogative. And that in the Ancient
qualifications of those who were to be admitted to Holy Orders, all Bondmen,
Accomptants, and men distorted or deformed in body, as also Bigamists, were
excluded. Next, that in all Orders of men it is the Office, Authority and
Calling, that are chiefly to be looked upon. In respect of all which the Clergy
are undeniably as considerable as any Rank of men whatsoever. And lastly, that
Learning and Manners, are chiefly required for admission into Holy Orders. It
is true, that eminence of Birth gives no small luster to the Clergy, and when
Persons of Quality enter upon the Priesthood, they become as greater Stars
which brighten up the less. And though Birth and Descent, etc. be
inconsiderable in respect of God, yet Virtue, Learning and Religion are rendered
more Illustrious when therewith accompanied. And though likewise the Sacerdotal
Office be in it self, and alone, sufficient to give Credit and Repute to the
lowest Descent of men, who duly undertake and discharge it: yet it is no little
Honor and Felicity for the Church, not only to have Kings for her
Nursing-Fathers, but also Nobles for her Priests. But yet still none are either
too High or too Low for Holy Orders, whose Graces and Abilities qualify to
undertake them. And albeit those are more to be honored who besides Virtue and
Learning bring into the Clergy Eminence of Parentage, yet those are not to be
contemned who come without it. There being enough in the very Nature and
Original of the Office, to procure them respect and reverence who bear it. Whom
according to St. Paul, we are to esteem very highly in love for their works
sake. Or, to pay them all possible respect for the pains that they take among
us. 1 These. 5.12, 13.

But if to what has been already spoken, all the real grounds of this Contempt
be not reducible; then what is wanting may be too justly resolved into the
decay of Reverence to Religion and Obedience to God. And now it is not Virtue,
Piety, Learning, Industry, Justice, Liberality, nor all that can be imagined to
fit the Clergy for respect, that can procure it them with those who have thrown
off all Loyalty to God and Reverence to Religion. Against whom it is vain
otherwise to Apologize, than with Tears and Prayers.

But there are yet two things more, which (in regard of present Circumstances)
are accessory to the Contempt we speak of. The first is the carriage of
Dissenting Teachers, who by ungentile Arts labor to lessen the esteem, and
therewith the serviceableness of the Orthodox Clergy. Who contrary to their
Pretenses of greater Conscientiousness, blow into the heads of their Unwary
Sectaries, that all but themselves are such a Monstrous Clergy, as would
affright you to mention. And indeed the infusing their Proselytes with spiteful
and uncharitable prejudices against the Regular Clergy is one main engine
wherewith they so closely insinuate themselves into Their affections; with whom
the strength of their own Credit chiefly consists in weakening that of their
Brethrens. The guilt and injustice of which Carriage is so open to the World,
that there is no need further to animadvert. And though methinks better things
might be expected from men who pretend to make such conscience of Their ways;
yet I could wish that only Dissenters were herein to be faulted: and that among
the conforming Clergy themselves, none were to be met with, to increase the
cry, and speak evil of the things they understand not. Which certainly is their
unhappiness who either by their own opinions or by squint reflections upon
those of others, occasion many to grow jealous that all the Conforming Clergy
are not so Orthodox as we believe. Which Carriage in those who would be
accounted both, is both so un-Christian and unpolitick (as being foully
derogatory to the Sacred Rule they profess, and tending so greatly to the
inhancement of their Contempt) that it may seem strange any one should thereof
be guilty, who are either truly Pious or Considerate. And if any who reading
this intimation, by reason of their own Consciousness shall take it to
themselves, I humbly pray God it may turn to their amendment.

Another sort of men egregiously assisting to this Contempt are, the Roman
Missionaries, who though not so sollicitous as the former to bespatter the
Persons of our Clergy, yet what is more for their purpose, they labor to make
void their Orders (and thereby their whole Service) by instilling into their
easy proselytes a belief, That ever since our departure from Rome, we have
been without an Ephod and without Teraphim: all Priesthood properly so called.
And though this perhaps may neither be practiced upon Vulgar Persons, nor at
all come within their Cognizance, yet it is more than probable that they deal
and succeed herein with those, who are able to bring most damage to our Church,
and advantage to their own.

And thus having with that plainness and brevity, which was at first designed,
given you an Essay both of the Real and Pretended Grounds of the Contempt of
the Clergy; I have as it were only worded the Disease, so that it should be our
next task to prescribe something in order to its Cure. And though according to
present Circumstances, this may seem to be placed next to impossible; yet it is
to be hoped that it would not a little contribute to mitigate and allay the
fury of the Distemper, if both Lay and Clergy would seriously lay to heart what
has I hope with Medesty and Conscience, Truth and Integrity been already
mentioned. And what I have now to speak more upon this Unwelcome Subject, shall
be by way of very short address unto three sorts of Persons, who are herein
more especially concerned.

And my first address shall be to the Magistrate that he would not suffer the
Clergy to be contemned, if not for the sake of their Function, yet for the
Peace and Safety of the State. For if by an atheistical supposal it should be
granted, That Religion is but a mere Engine of Government, or a politic
invention devised to awe the people into subjection and obedience, and thereby
very proper to turn the affairs of the World: yet that Religion may be able to
effect these purposes, there is a necessity of distinct Persons to instill into
the people a belief and fear of the Invisible Powers, and this dismal
apprehension of a future State, or the World to come. And to show them how that
these invisible Powers have decreed and appointed that all sorts of Persons
should be subject to the visible higher Powers upon Earth; and how that they
will certainly and fearfully punish all such as do otherwise. So that it now
becomes the interest of the Magistrate to assert the Credit and Authority of
those upon whose Ministry so much of the common welfare depends. And to take
care that Persons thus employed, have such a Veneration and regard shown them,
as may render them competent to perform these good Offices for the State. If
the honoring of Religion brings Greatness, and the vilifying thereof ruin, to a
Nation; and that Religion cannot be honored, where its Ministers are despised:
then let those who bear any tolerable Goodwill unto the Land of their Nativity,
take heed of making but a Mock of that Carriage which may prove no less fatal
to its happiness, than it did to the Jews; in whom God punished the Abuse of
his Messengers with the Desolation of their Temple, and irreversible Dispersion
of their whole Nation.

When Princes granted to Clergymen Authority to hold Consistories, it was
because they thought it uncomly for them to follow matters of Suits abroad, to
the great distraction of their Prayer and exercise of Divine Service. As also
that they might have a more speedy and better dispatch before a Judge of their
own Learning, than before a Judge of another Profession. And that their suits
and quarrels should not be divulged and spread abroad among the Lay People, to
the great discredit of their whole Calling. And we read that in Criminal
matters, Princes anciently so much tendered the Clergy, that if any man among
them had committed any thing worthy of Death or open Shame, he was not executed
or put to public disgrace, before he was degraded by the Bishop, and his
Clergy; and so was executed, and put to shame, not as a Clerk, but as a
Lay-Malefactor. Which respect toward Ecclesiastical men, 'twere well it were
still retained, both because (says a Great Civilian) the consideration thereof
is reverent and worthy the dignity of the Ministry, whose Office is most
honorable; and also for that it is more Ancient than any Papistical immunity;
and let me add also, because it highly tends to the honor and advancement of
Religion, and consequently to the strength and safety of the Commonwealth.

And though instead of bearing any such reverence to Gods Ministers, the
present Age seems to reckon it among its Wonderful Accomplishments to contemn
Them; yet if ever the sad effects thereof fall under the mature and serious
consideration of the Magistrate, I doubt not but the sense of his own and the
public safety, will awaken his endeavors to set shores to that inundation of
miseries which from an uncontrolled vilifying of the Officers of Religion will
naturally flow, and unavoidably break in upon, and deluge the Land.

My next address is to the Contemners themselves: whom I would heartily request
to consider, how their vilifying the Clergy is contrary to the general practice
of the World: There being no Nation so utterly savage and uncivilized, whose
respect to their Priests does not rather incline to excess than deficiency.
Next I would humbly beseech them to revolve how their Carriage herein is wholly
opponent to that Common Equity, which obliges us to yield All a respect
agreeable to the Estimate the Laws of the Place have put upon the Office they
bear. And here I cannot but likewise suggest who those are whom they contemn;
and how that in every Spermologus, or idle, babbling, talkative Clergyman, (for
so the Wits of Athens called St. Paul) there is an Ambassador of Christ. 2 Cor.
5.20. And all know an Ambassador sustains his Princes Person, and negotiates
his affairs. And that the King is said, in our usual discourse, to do that,
that his Ambassador does in his Name. And the respect or affront done to an
Ambassador, interpretatively is done to the Person, whom he represents. Which
is all applicable to the Ambassadors of Christ, for what They do, He is said to
do; and the dishonor done to them, God takes as done to Himself (1 Samuel 8.7.
They have not rejected you, but they have rejected me) and our Savior told his
Disciples, when He Commissioned them to Preach in his Name, He that receives
you, receives me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent me, Mat.
10.40. He therefore that despises them, despises not Men, but God. 1 These.
4.8. According to that usual saying among the Jews, Every man's Messenger is as
himself. And give me leave to tell you (who are the Contemners of Christ's
Ambassadors) that they are more deserving of your respect than Those of Earthly
Princes, as representing a Master, whose Power and Greatness, as much excel
that of Secular Kings, as God does all the Sons of Men. For they are the
Ambassadors of the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 2.7.

They are likewise entrusted with greater Secrets than those of State, even
with the Great Mystery of godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, which had been
hid from all Ages, and which the Angels desired to look into. They likewise
were not, as other Ambassadors are, sent to particular Nations, and upon
particular Concerns; but unto all the World: and upon a Message of no less
importance than to make up the grand Breach, and to reconcile God and Man. And
we may still observe that they have no other design upon us, than to open our
eyes, and to turn us from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God. That we may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that
are sanctified by Faith that is in Christ. And seeing that this is the
undoubted tenor of the Commission they receive for their Ambassy, and that
they negotiate nothing but the welfare and happiness even of their Contemners,
this might move them to retract their Contempt upon the sole account of its
injustice and Disingenuity. For what can more worthily bear that imputation,
than to deal ill with those, who wish us no worse than to be Eternally happy:
and who with the same devotion and integrity endeavor our Salvation as they do
their own? Indeed if they went about to abridge us of any Honest comfort or
delight; or of what is either agreeable to our Rational Nature, or soberly
conducing to a healthful and comfortable life: If they instructed us to cast
our Wealth into the Sea, when there are other ways enough to save us from being
drowned: If they forbad us any thing, but what will do us hurt; or enjoined us
any thing but the practice of those Virtues which have ever been justly
accounted the best Trials and Exercises of Brave and Generous Spirits; and
fittest to keep Men from Sinking into Bruits. Then we might have some color to
invert the Scripture, and to revile them for their Works sake. But being
clearly ascertained of the contrary; and that they manage their Office
according to its genuine design, namely, to save their own souls, and the souls
of them that hear them: We cannot without the privilege of Lunacy, and scandal
of Ingratitude, either expose their Persons, or vilify their Function. As for
mine own part, it has ever hitherto exercised my wonder, that men should run so
far Counter both to God and themselves, as to despise those whom God will
honor; and undervalue those who are so serviceable to them in their highest
concern, and principal interest.

But leaving these men to cure this their distempered Carriage toward the
Clergy, with a considerate reflection upon the baseness and ungentility of so
doing; I will conclude these tumultuary Papers, with a short application to
those Reverend Persons, to the assertion of whose Honor they are really
intended.

And here I would not be thought to be one of those who are Wiser than their
Teachers; an imputation not possibly to be avoided, if I should go about to
instruct them. My purpose therefore is in this place to perform the Office of
an humble Remembrancer; and to mind those Reverend Persons, (to whom in all
Submission I make this Address) as far as possible, and it in them lies, to
give no occasion to their Enemies to speak evil of them. And though I know you
have no Locks upon their hearts, nor Bits in their mouths, but that their
thoughts are free, and their tongues are their own; yet you want not ways
conducing to their Restraint, and to silence the Obloquy of such unreasonable
men: Namely,

First, A prudent care that no egregious misgovernment of your Persons render
your Calling less acceptable; but laboring that in all things your Holy Office
may be adorned with an answerable Conversation. For it is the well governing of
your selves that will embolden you in the reproof of others miscarriages, and
give Authority to your Doctrine. And by doing the same things you teach, you
shall give an undeniable attestation that they are not so difficult in
themselves, nor humane Nature so far weakened and depressed, but that all the
Duties of Christianity may be performed. But if like Mercurial Statues, you
never move a foot toward the place to which you direct others; this may create
in the Laity a sturdy suspicion, that the whole matter is but a holy Cheat. Let
your own breasts then be the first Proselytes of your Doctrine; and let your
Ministry first manifest its power in making your selves good. Non aliter
viventes quam vivendum praecipientes: which was neglected by those
Philosophers, who (says Seneca) deserved so ill of Mankind. Always remembering
how ill it becomes Divines to be like those Philosophers in Epictetus, who were
(...), Factis procul, Verbis Tenus; as A. Gellius makes the remark. Lib. 17.
Chap. 19.

Chaucer in the Prologue, to his Canterbury Tales, gives the Character of a
Religious and Learned Priest. Which being not wholly impertinent to that we
speak of, I have here inserted in his own Language and Meter.

The Parson.
A good manne there was of Religioun,
And was a poor Parsone of a Town:
But rich he was of holy thought and work,
He was eke a learned manne and a Clerk,
That Christ's Gospels truly would preach;
His Parishens devoutly would he teach.
Benign he was and wonder diligent,
And in adversity full patient;
And soch one he was proved often sithes,
Full loath were him to curse for his tithes;
But rather would he yeven out of doubt
Unto his poor Parishens all about,
Both of his offering and of his Substance,
He couhie in little thing have suffisaunce.
Wide was his Parish and houses fer asonder,
But he ne left neither foreign ne thonder,
In sickness ne in mischief for to visit,
The ferdest in his Parish, much or lite,
Upon his feet, and in his hand a stafe:
This noble example to his sheep he yafe,
That first he wrought, and afterward taught,
Out of the Gospel he the words caught,
And this figure he added eke thereto,
That if Gold rust, what should Iron do?
For yef a Priest be foul, on whom we trust,
No wonder is a leude man to rust;
And shame it is, if a Priest take keep,
To se a shitten shepherd, and a clean sheep:
Well ought a Priest, ensample for to yeve
By his cleanness, how his sheep should live.
He set not his Benefice to hire,
And let his sheep acomber in the mire,
And run to London, to Saint Poules,
To seken him a Chauntrie for souls:
Or with a Brotherhede to be withold:
But kept at home and kept well his fold,
So that the wolf made him not miscarry,
He was a shepherd, and not a mercenary.
And though he holy were, and virtuous,
He was not to sinful men despiteous,
Ne of his speech dangerous ne digne,
But in his teaching discrete and benign,
To drawn folk to heaven, with fairness,
By good ensample, this was his besinesse.
But he were any person obstinate,
Whether he were of high or low estate,
Him would he snibbe sharply for the Novis,
A better Priest I know no where non is.
He waited after no pomp ne reverence,
Ne maked him no spiced Conscience;
But Christ's lore, and his Apostles twelve,
He taught, but first he followed it himselve.
And though the excellent Chaucer, as appears by his writings, met not with
many of this Character; yet the History of those Times represents the
Religiousness of the Clergy (especially the Regular) and the peoples Reverence
toward them to have been highly commendable. And that the Clergy served God in
continual prayer, watching, fasting, and preaching the word of life; despising
the Commodities of the World, as things that were none of their own; being
content with so much thereof as might serve their necessities; living
themselves according to what they taught others. For which the people had them
in a mavelous Reverence, freely imparting to them of the chief of their
Substance. And in so doing conformed to the primitive Rule and Practice of
Christianity.

It was St. Paul's Exhortation to Timothy, that he Should take heed to himself
and to his Doctrine: And the former advice seems to have been equally necessary
and important with the latter. For the loose and ill-govern'd life of a Divine
does usually more hurt, than his preaching does good: there being nothing does
more effectually imprint the Lessons of Holiness and Virtue upon the people,
than the exemplary Conversation of their Teacher: the later having ever had a
greater force upon The Many than the Former. And indeed it was the signal care
of the Apostles To live as they preached, that at first made Christian Religion
so successful and prevailing in the World. And none could reasonably doubt of
the Truth of that Doctrine, and necessity of those duties, in whose
conscientious belief and performance, the Preachers thereof were such Fair
Examples. Remember what Christ said to your Holy Predecessors, when he was
training them up for the Ministry: Ye are the Salt of the Earth; but if the
Salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good
for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under Foot of men. Mat. 5.13.

The position of the Syriack Scholiast translated out of the Syriack Language
by D. L. has these words upon Levit. 4.3. If the Priest that is anointed, etc.
In the Greek, if the high Priest, he who is anointed, shall sin, so as to make
the people to sin (i. e.) they imitating him, and offending in the same kind,
the whole Congregation shall offer an Oblation, a young Bullock for his sin. i.
e. All the people when they offend offer the same Oblation only, which the
Priest did when he offended. And therefore it is said, that the transgression
of him who stands in an high place, ought to be reputed, as if it were the
sin of all those who stand under him.

And if a Ruler shall sin, his Oblation is less than that of the Priest, or
that of the Congregation all together: nor was he sprinkled with blood seven
times, by reason of his Prerogative of Honor; and though in some respects the
Prince himself be less than the Priest, and the people do far exceed him in
Number; yet he is greater than any one of the Congregation, and therefore every
one of them offending offers a Female, but he a Male-kid, Levit. 4.22, 23,
24. The design of inserting this position will not need to incur the mark of
Impertinency, when it is considered to whom upon this occasion it is addressed.

And as that which I have now rudely suggested, will prove one infallible
method to secure your Esteem; so it will likewise furnish you with courage in
the discharge of your Function. For nothing does so much animate the reproof of
another faults, as a Nil conscire in the Reprover. And seeing it is your
unhappiness to live in an Age, wherein Vice is arrived at that Assurance and
Power, that it may seem no small piece of Valor to be Virtuous your selves, or
to counsel others to be so; there appears all imaginable reason that courage
draws you out to assault and batter the strong holds of sin, and to conflict
wickedness in High Places. And when your Courage is the Child of your own
Innocence, it will infuse a mavelous vigor and spirit into every Branch of
your Office, So that you may speak and exhort, and rebuke with all Authority.
And present Circumstances being duly weighed, your Case will plainly appear to
resemble that of Ezekiels, when God said unto him, Ezekiel. 2.6.

Son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though
Briars and Thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among Scorpions: be not
afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they be
Rebellious, etc.

Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead
strong against their foreheads, etc. Chap. 3.8, etc.

And give me leave to shut up all with commending to your Consideration, the
sharp and known invective of that excellent Heathen against the vicious
Philosophers, in the second Book of his Tusculan Questions. Quotus quisque
Philosophorum invenitur, qui sit ita moratus, etc. Artemque Vitae professus
delinquit in vita, etc. He is like a professed Grammarian speaking barbarously,
or a scurvey Singer vaunting of his skill in Music. Nothing being more absurd
and ridiculous than to be defective in the knowledge of that in which a man
professes himself to be a Master, etc.

Ad majorem Dei Gloriam.

FINIS
Books Printed for William Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, 1677.
THE Complete Vinyard, Or an excellent way for planting of Vines according to
the German and French manner, and long practiced in England. Wherein is set
forth all the ways and Circumstances necessary for planting of a Vinyard, the
Election of the Soil, the Situation thereof, the best way for Planting,
Pruning, Turning, Translation of the Ground, etc. The Fashion of Wine-presses,
the manner of Bruising and Pressing of Grapes, and how to Advance our English
Wines, by W. Hughes, 8o.

2. The Complete Measurer, Or, an exact way of Mensuration, by which may be
measured both Superficies and Solids, in whole Numbers and in Fractions, in a
more plain and easy way then ever Extant, by Thomas Hammond, price 1 s. 8o

3. Praxis Curia Admiralitatis Angliae, Authore Fransc. Clark, 8o

4. A Description of Candia in its Ancient and Modern State, with an Account of
the Siege thereof, begun by the Ottoman Emporor in the Year 1666, continued
1667, 1668, and surrendered 1669, in 8o. price 1 s.

5. The Deaf and Dumb man's discourse, A Treatise concerning those that are born
Deaf and Dumb, containing a discovery of their Knowledge, and the Method they
use to manifest the Sentiments of their minds, together with a Tract of the
Reason and Speech of Inanimate Creatures, particularly the wonderful
understanding of the Elephant by G. Sibscota.

6. The Life of that Famous and Learned Philosopher Renatus Des Carts, 8o.
price 1 s.

7. Epigrams of all sorts, by R. Fleckno.

8. The Imitation of Christ, 24o. price 1 s.

9. An Answer to Mr. Furgesons Book. Entitled, Justification only upon
Satisfaction; Wherein he is friendly reproved, etc. Together with a discourse
of the End of Christ's Death, considered as a Ransom, by J. Knowles 8o. price 1.
s. 6 d.

10. Thomas Hobbs his three Papers presented to the Royal Society against
Doctor Wallis. 4o.

11. Sir Henry Blunts Voyage into the Levant, 12o.

12. Hobb's Roselum Geometricum, 4o.

13. Greek Testament, Printed by J. Redmain. 8o.

14. Darlings Carpenters Rule made Easy. 12o.

15. The Flower Garden: Showing how to order and increase all sorts of Flowers,
whether by Layers, Slips, Off-sets, Cuttings, Seeds, etc. Also how to draw a
Horizontal Dyal as a knot in a Garden. To which is added a Treatise of the
Roots, Plants, Trees, Shrubs, Fruits, Herbs, etc. Growing in his Majesty's
Plantations, by William Hughes.

16. The Elegant and Witty Poems of Doctor Corbet, late Lord Bishop of Norwich.
12o price 1 s.

17. Boccalin's Advartisements from Parnassus, Translated into English by the
Earl of Monmouth, Fol.

18. Ogleby's Virgil in English, with Pictures and Annotations. 8o.

19. Gee's Steps of Assention unto God, Or, A Ladder to Heaven. 24o.

20. The Court of Curiosity, Being the most Witty and Facetious Fortune Book
that was ever published in English, with a most Judicious Interpretation of
Dreams drawn from the Wisdom and Doctrine of the Ancients; As also a Treatise
of Physiognomy, All written in French, since Translated (for the Excellency of
them into Spanish, Italian, High Dutch, Low Dutch, etc. And now out of French)
into English. The second Edition much improved and explained in 12o. price 2 s.

21. Lux Mathematica, Author Thomas Hobbs, 4o. price 5 s.

22. Principia and problemata aliquot Geometricae ante desperata, Nunc breviter
explicata and demonstrata. Author Thomas Hobbs price 2 s.

23. The American Physician, Showing all the Virtues and Uses of all Roots,
Herbs, Trees, Fruits, etc. in the English Plantations in America, price 1 s.

24. Shaft's Great Law of Nature of Self-Preservation, Examined and Vindicated
against the Abuses in Mr. Hobb's Leviathan, 12o price 1 s.

25. Calliopes Cabinet Opened and Reviewed, Wherein all Gentlemen of what
Quality soever, may be informed how to adorn themselves for Funerals,
Feastings, and other Heroic Meetings. To know all the Places, Degrees, and
Destinctions of Honor, the Titles due to all Qualities, precedence of Kings,
all the Orders of Knighthood, etc. With a Dictionary or Explication of the
Terms in Heraldry. The signification of Devices, and Charges in Armory and
Coats, etc. The second Edition enlarged by J. Salter, 12o price 8 d.

26. A New Collection of New Poems, Written by several Persons. Never before
Printed, Octavo, price 1 s. 6d.

27. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena. (The Native Country of Her Royal
Highness, the Duchess of York) containing the Origin, Antiquity, Government,
Manners and Qualities of the people. Also the Temperature of the Climate, with
the Nature and Fertility of the Soil, Quarto, price 6 s.

28. Brevis Demonstratio, The Truth and Excellency of the Christian Religion
Demonstrated by Reason. To which is added a short discourse concerning the
Truth of Christian Religion, by way of Question and Answer: Published at the
desire of some Learned Men; 12o price 10d.

29. The Memoires and Rare Adventures of the Life of Henrietta Sylvia Moliere,
the First Part Written in French by her self, and since Translated, 12o price 2
s.

There is going to the Press and will very suddenly be Published, the 2d, 3d,
4th, 5th, and 6th Part of the before mentioned Memories, etc. Which does
complete that Excellent and true History.

30. The Lives of Doctor Don, Sir Henry Wolton, Mr. Richard Hooker and Mr.
George Herbert, Written by Mrs. Ha. Walton, Octavo.

31. Nomenclatura, Greek, Latin, and English.

32. A Collection of Apothegms, New and Old, by the Right Honorable Francis
Bacon, Baron of Verulum and Viscount of St. Albanes, 12o price 8 d.

33. Mary Magdalens Tears wipt off, Or, the Voice of Peace to an unquiet
Conscience.

34. Parthenissa: A Roman, written by the Earl of Orrory, Fol.

35. The Primitive Institution, Or, A Seasonable discourse of Catechizing;
Wherein is shown the Antiquity, Benefits and Necessity thereof to heal the
Distempers of the Church. By L. Addison D. D. one of his Majesty's Chaplins, in
12o price 1 s. 6d.

36. The Present State of the Jews, Wherein is contained an Exact Account of
their Customs, Secular and Religious, to which is annexed a summary discourse
of the Misna, Talmud, and Gemara, by L. Addison, D. D. And one of his Majesty's
Chaplains in Ordinary. 12o price. --

37. The Illiads and Oddesses of Homer, Translated out of Greek into English,
By Thomas Hobbs of Malmsberry, With a large Preface concerning Heroic Poetry,
Written by the Translator, with the Life of the Author, 12o price 6 s.

38. A Supplement to Mr. Hobbs his Works, Printed at Amsterdam in two Volumes:
This making the third Volume, Quarto, price 10 s.

39. The Golden Rule, made easier and plainer then it is in any of our Books of
Arithmetic, By C. H. Gent. Octavo, price 3d.

40. De Mirabilibus pecci Carmon. By Thomas Hobbs, price 6d.

41. Euterpe Revived, Being Epigrams on the most Eminent Person of Quality now
Living, price 1 s.

42 The Grounds of Soveraignity and Greatness, Quarto.

43. Camera Regis, Or, A short view of London, containing the Antiquity, Fame,
Walls, River, Bridge, Gates, Tower, Cathederal, Officers, Courts, Customs,
Franchises, etc. of that Renowned City, Collected out of Law and History, by I.
B. Esquire Barrester of Lincoln's End, Octavo.

44. A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of (...) found drowned in a Pit not long
ago, Octavo, price 1 s.

45. A Sermon preached at the Bishop of Chichesters first Visitation. By Will.
Howel, Quarto, price 6d.

46. The Historians Guide, in two Parts, price 1 s.

The Chronology of the World from the Creation to this time. Secondly of the
most principal Actions in England, from 1600 to 1675, Octavo, price 1 s.

47. A True Narrative of the Circumcision of Mustapha, Eldest Son to the
present Emperor of the Turks.

Seven Plays lately Printed, viz. 1. The White Devil, Or, Vittoria Corombona,
Quarto. 2. The Old Troop, Or, Monsier Raggou, Quarto. 3. Catalines Conspiracy,
Quarto. 4. The Amorous Gallant, Or, Love in Fashion, Quarto. 5. The Mock
Duellist, Or, French Vallet, Quarto. 6. The Wrangling Lovers, Or, The Invisible
Mistress, Quarto. 7. Tom Essence, Or, The Modish Wife, Quarto.


49. The Jurisdictions, or the Lawful Authority of Court Leets, Court Barons,
Court Marshalsea, Court of Py-powder, and Ancient Demesne, etc. By John Kitchen.
To which is added a Choice Collection of special Writs. By R. Antrobus and
Thomas Impey.

50. Scarrons Comical Romance, Or, A facetig Company of Stage Players,
Interwoven with diverse Novels, rare Adventures, Amorous Intrigues, written
Originally in French by the Famous Witty Poet, Mons. Scarron, and now turned
into English, Fol. price bound 6 s.

51. A Letter about Liberty and Necessity, written to the Duke of Newcastle. By
Thomas Hobb's of Malmsberry, with Observations on it, by Doctor Benjamin Laney,
Late Bishop of Ely, 12o price 8 d.


