A Brief RELATION OF THE Surprising several ENGLISH Merchants Goods, by DVTCH
Men of War, their carrying them into Zealand, and there condemning them for
Prize, upon no other score or account, but that they were English Men's.

By Edward Adams of London, Merchant.

Hor. Ep. lib. 1. Per mare, pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes,
Impiger extremos currit Mercator ad Indos.
LONDON. Printed in the year, 1664.

To the Courteous English Reader.
Kind Country Man,
IN the late scribbling age, having cast my eye upon several Books, Pamphlets,
or what else they might be called, (things in Print) and considering the
Contents, I have often thought the Authors could have no other ground or design
for exposing them to public view, but a strong desire to be seen in Print.
Believe me, I am not troubled with any such ambitious Itch: No, it is ill luck
presses me to the Print, to make relation of my friends and own mishap; which
may be esteemed the greater, in that it fell in a time when I and all our
English World were joval and pleasant, in that merry month of May wherein his
sacred Majesty returned to his Kingdoms, and great part of it on the day (when
my self and many thousands more were attending on his Princely train) before
his return to his Royal Palace of White Hall, viz. 28. Maii 1660. Expect not
from me any neat, polite discourse, (for I am as bad a Polisher, as a
Politician.) I shall only present thee with a bare relation of matter of fact,
and my design of making it public, is two fold, respecting thee, that by what
thou see to have happened to my friends and me, thou may be admonished to be
very cautious and wary how thou have to do in any design of Trade and
Commerce, where the Dutch have any pretense of Concern or Interest, and bonum
est fugienda aspicere alieno in malo, And my self, to beg the benefit and help
of thy good Counsel for my future demeanor, whether I shall be farther active,
and if so, how to proceed; or merely passive, sitting quietly still, and
bewailing the latter loss with the former; for I have been at a very great (it
may seem incredible) expense in Zealand, Holland, and some here, in seeking
restitution of (or satisfaction for) our unjustly surprised and detained Goods.
I said I would present thee with a relation of matter of fact. Know therefore,

That having done some service to the King of Portugal, my Partner Abraham
Jacob, an English Merchant resident in Lisboa, in the latter end of the year
1658. procured a license for sending a Ship to the Brazil, in the Interval of
fleets, (for by our Articles with that Crown, English ships, or ships fraighted
by English men, may go in company of their Portuguez fleet to Brazil, and
freely trade there) and by reason of the war with Spain no English Ship of
considerable burden arriving in the Harbor of Lisboa that would embrace a
freight for Brazil, he was forced to make use of a French ship (not out of
choice or kindness to that Nation, to give French men employment; but merely in
absence of English men) that accidently put in there, and wanted a freight, One
of thirty four Guns; this Ship was hired by the said Abraham Jacob, and in the
beginning of the year 1659 dispatched away for the Rio de Janeiro in Brazil,
with a very considerable Cargazon of Goods from himself, besides what was laden
by several other English Merchants (and some by Portuguesses) residing in
Lisboa.

This Ship belonged to St. Mallo, was called the Golden Sun, commanded by one
Nicholas le Bretoa du Pre, and returning for the Port of Lisboa, the place of
her discharge, laden with Sugars, Hides, Brazil wood etc. on the two and twenty
day of May, 1660. near the Rock of Lisboa, was met by four Flushing men of
war commanded by Tousain le Sage, Philip Ros, Albert Janson, and Mattyas
Q^arts, who haled her, and were informed she was a French Ship belonging to St.
Malo; nevertheless they commanded the Captain out of her, who knowing them to
be Dutch men of war (and though he could have made considerable resistance,
yet) yielded, without making any the least opposition, not doubting but that
they would have soon cleared and released him, because that by the Treaty of
Marine concluded but a few years before between the French King, and the States
General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, it was provided for and
agreed on, that a free Ship made free Goods, and that any French Ship might
freely Trade, and carry into any Port or Country in amity with the Crown of
France, (though the inhabitants thereof should be in open Hostility and War
with the States of the Netherlands) any (and all manner of) Goods and
Merchandises, not only such as belonged to Nations and Persons in amity and
confederation with the said States, but also the proper Goods, and Merchandises
of those people that were in Hostility and War with them, as aforesaid. But
the Commanders of the Men of War, or Capers, (for so are they called in
Zealand) thought not themselves obliged to the observance of any Treaty of
Peace, or Law, or Justice; and therefore instead of permitting (as they ought
to have done) the Ship to follow, and proceed in her Voyage, they set on shore
many of the Ships Company in Portugal, and took possession of the Ship, and
sent Her and her Commander accompanied by one of the Men of War for Flushing,
where arriving, the French Commander addresses himself to the States General,
and demanded to be restored to the possession of the Ship and Goods, according
to the Articles of Marine aforementioned, and reparation for the damage
sustained, by being seized on and brought in thither, and was assisted therein
by Mounsieur de Thou, then at the Hague Ambassador from the French King, who
was the same Person that concluded the said Treaty of Marine; and a short time
after I received advice and information from my Partner Abraham Jacob, and from
Robert Carre, Christopher Trenchard, William Peachey, Thomas Bostocke, and
William Trussel, English Merchants resident in Lisboa, of their several
interests aboard the said Ship, and their Procurations or Letters of Attorney
for looking after them, and procuring satisfaction on their behalf; whereupon I
humbly represented their case to his most Sacred Majesty our Sovereign, who was
graciously pleased immediately to send his Letters to the States of Zealand,
requiring and pressing them to cause a restitution to be made of such part of
the Ships lading as belonged to his Subjects aforenamed, and his Majesty used
an expression enough not only to have won upon, but to have commanded any
ingenuous natures; For, he said, he would look upon such a restitution, as an
Action demonstrating their willingness of holding amity and confederacy with
him: This Letter was dated 5th. of July 1660. and a few days after I delivered
it to the States of Zealand, who were at that time assembled at Midleburg. They
seemed to be very glad to receive a Letter from his Majesty of Great Britain,
being the first they ever had from him, (at least since his happy Return to his
Kingdoms.) But refused to return answer, at least by me, telling me, it was not
their custom to Write to any Prince without the Order of the States General;
or at least first making them accquainted therewith. But their resolution was
recorded, of which they ordered me a Copy, the Translation whereof is as
follows.

Extract out of the notes or resolutions of the Honorable States of Zealand.
The 2d. of August 1660.
BY which being deliberated upon the Contents of a Letter from the Kings
Majesty of Great Britain, writ in favor of some Merchants of London, who
pretend that several Merchandises laden for their particular Accounts aboard
the Golden Sun, whereof was Master Nicholas le Breton, and taken at Sea by
private Commissions of this Province and brought to Flushing, Is resolved that
the aforesaid Owners or Interessed shall address themselves to the Lords of
the Court of Admiralty residing here, with full assurance, That in this cause
of reclaiming and following of their Goods, they shall receive all possible
expedition and just Judgment.

Agrees with the above mentioned notes or resolutions. Peter de Huybert.


This Answer or resolution was an invitation or introduction to a Lawsuit,
which I was very much averse from entering into, well knowing what bad success,
some of our Country men had had by such like proceeding in Zealand, neither
could I obtain a resolution, or Order, that in case of making due proof of the
Property, I should have the English Interest cleared and restored to me. But
several Merchants and other Persons, as well Natives as others residing in
Zealand, men that were not concerned with the Capers, but rather abhorrers of
their proceedings, (and some such are there, though many are interessed with
them) with whom I happened to have discourse, understanding my case, were of
opinion that would consequently follow; and the rather because his Majesty of
Great Britain appeared in the business, and the Goods being then in esse, and
entire, therefore they encouraged me to proceed according to the States answer
or resolution; however I was resolved first to advise with my friends in
England, and being in my return, a passenger with me in the Packet Boat, one
Vandersteen a Native of Zealand, but had a pretense to some Lands in Ireland,
of his own accord (hearing my name) and knowing somewhat of my business in
Zealand, told me undoubtedly I should have good success therein, for that the
States of Zealand in a Letter they had written in his behalf to his Majesty of
England, took notice thereof; That part whereof that concerned me, I got copy
of, and translated is as follows.

The Lords States of Zealand have (upon the recommendation of his Majesty of
great Britain) very earnestly recommended the cause of Edward Adams, Abraham
Jacob, Robert Carre, and other Merchants, to the Lords of the Admiralty in
Zealand residing at Midleburg, That to the said Cause should be given a short
and prompt expedition of Justice, with the which the interessed friends shall
be assured of due satisfaction, as in Justice and Equity* shall be found to be
due: Done in the presence of John Ed. M. 7. August 1660 new style.

This and the Resolution also proved in the End but a decoy and delusion, to
entice and drill us into further Mischief and inconvenience, for the manner of
the Zealanders, is to get what they can into their power, and then seek and
cast about for arguments and specious pretenses to palliate the detaining it,
and seldom or never do they part with any thing though ever so unjustly taken
unless compelled thereto.

Upon conference and advising with friends here in England, 'twas thought fit
we should Prosecute our Claims in the Admiralty of Zealand, according to the
States direction, and chiefly for this reason, That we could not have any
great cause of complaint, or make out an aggrievance whereupon to beg relief
from his sacred Majesty our gracious Sovereign, till we were denied Justice
there, it not being known, but that they would decree to us our Goods with
damages; and withal being informed, that the Lords of the Admiralty could if
they pleased in short time bring the cause to sentence, their custom being to
sit in Court 3. days in a week, I therefore gave order for proceeding with a
Claim before them, in the names of my several friends interessed, And for
proof of their property did refer to the Evidence in the possession of the
Capers, as the Commanders Book, the Bills of lading, Invoices and Letters of
Advice, of which they had second and third Via's also, and my friends, as yet,
none at all, for it happened that a few days after, viz. on the 27. or 28. May
old style, the three remaining Capers, or Men of War, near the place where the
4. surpised the Golden-Sun, met with the ship Experience of London, Commanded
by one John Kingsman, coming from the Port of Bahia in Brazil, whom they also
surprised, (aboard which ship my friends aforenamed had Goods likewise to the
value of 1200 l. ster. and upwards, and in her company took 2. Portuguesse
Vessels that came from the Rio de Janeiro (the same Port whence the Golden Sun
was laden) and in them 2d. and 3d. avizo's of what had been laden for account
of each particular person respectively aboard the said ship, Which (by command
of the Lords of the Admiralty) being brought before them into Court, there
appeared there were consigned unto them aboard the said ship for their own
accounts 271. Chests and 11. Fechos Sugars, all (except some few) whites,
((...)) worth 5000 l. ster. which was afterward confirmed, and made out by such
like Evidence which came to my friends own hands from Brazill.

When I began to follow my Claim, I soon found the Adverse parties that
appeared against me were very great and powerful persons in Zealand, viz.
(besides the Commanders of the Men of War, who had alliance strong enough
there) the whole West India Company of the Netherlands, as Granters of the
Commissions, Everard Gyselinck who was at the same time Burgo Master for
Flushing, and consequently one of the States of Zealand) Jacob Van Hoorne, --
Everson of Flushing, and several other considerable persons as Owners and
setters out of the men of War; And the Capers of Flushing are esteemed men of
such desperate inclinations, and so impatient of being demanded to give account
of, or restore ought they have any way got into their power, that hardly could
I get any One to follow in my absence my Claim against them.

And there was a whispering of a suspicion went up and down the world, as well
in Zealand as other parts, That the Lords of the Admiralty themselves were
concerned (as well as other great men of that Country) in setting out men of
War, Whether they are so concerned or not, I will not say; My charity is such,
as rather to believe the Negative. But they seemed to be pretty strongly allied
to our Adversaries (if not by consanguinity or affinity) in affection, That
whatsoever they moved for, was granted, though ever so equitably, rationally
and forcibly impugned by our Advocate. Take one Example among others: (long
before they gave sentence) By virtue of a Joint Procuration I I proceeded
jointly 2. or 3. Months in one claim, Then the Capers and other our
Adversaries move for a separation of causes, or claims, for each man to claim
a part, which was a mere dilatory design to increase and multiply Expenses,
thereby to deter those whose interest was small from looking after it,
because the remedy might prove worse then the disease, the charge for following
the claim of one Chest being as great as for one hundred. Our Advocate pleaded
the Motion was unreasonable, urging there was in the claims no difference of
case; That the persons claiming were all English men, all residing in one
place, the Goods they claimed only such as appeared to be consigned to them for
their own account, that they were laden in one Port, in one ship, and consigned
to one Place. And added, that 'twas the part of Judges to abbreviate and
contract (not multiply) suits; withal remembered to them, that the States in
their resolution had promised Expedition, And therefore prayed the Lords of the
Admiralty not to grant the Motion; But notwithstanding they did: not declaring
in this, (as in no other point) the ground for their Decree, which they say is
their custom, reserving that to themselves, stat pro ratione voluntas. I put
it to my Advocate, and others residing in Midleburg, to deal plainly with me;
in telling me in their Opinions what ground or cause our Adversaries could have
for making, or the Judges for granting the Motion? who ingeniously confessed
they knew none, but what I have already set down; a design to deter those
whose interest was small from making their claim, fearing the remedy to be
worse then the disease. And indeed that design was gratifyed with success, for
the expensive and dilatory process consumed more then the value of some men's
sugars claimed, though sentence had been pronounced in their favor, yet could
I not avoid proceeding in such a claim, for I let it lie, and went on with the
most considerable, but our Adversaries brought it on, and moved that I should
proceed therein, or they be dismissed therefrom. I then moved the Court for
Order for one cause to be proceeded with, (which they should appoint) offering,
that according to the success of it all the rest should be concluded, and to
this the Fiscal confented, (The Fiscal is a person concerned in all claims of
this nature, he proceeds Ex Officio, Appears in right of the Province, and his
office is somewhat like to that of his Majesty's Attorney General in England)
But the Capers refused to join with him; Neither would the Lords of the
Admiralty enjoin them to comply, so that of One Cause they begat Six: And
before I could proceed further I was forced for every cause to give security
for the costs, which must be done by a sufficient Inhabitant of the Place.

The 12. October 1660. st. n. was appointed for a public sale of the whole
Cargo of the Ship Golden-Sun at Flushing (the French Commanders 23. Chests
excepted) where I was present, and addressed my self to the Lords of the
Admiralty, desiring the Goods I claimed might be likewise exempted from the
sale, till the causes were determined. But they answered me, they should be
sold with the rest in Usum jus habentium. Then I moved that the Contents and
Quality might be noted and set down a part, which I confess they granted, and
to that purpose sent a Messenger with me to the Officers of the West India
Company; who had the management of the sale. But they answered, 'twas not to be
done, the Goods being mingled in Lots with others, so they made sale of them
before my face (a comfortable spectacle) and promiscuously set down the
Contents with other goods, as not doubting of a sentence in their favor, or
dreading ever to be called to account for them.

By some little discourse I had with our Adversaries and others of that
Country, I found there seemed to be put by them some difference between English
men, living in England, and those residing beyond Sea, especially in Portugal,
though they have liberty to make such residence only by virtue of Articles of
peace made between the Crowns of England and Portugal. To remove any such
obstacle, should it be offered, and appear to be valid, I procured a second
Letter from his Majesty, wherein (being informed by some persons of Honor, who
in the time of their Exile, came to have knowledge of the persons interessed,
That they were not only loyal subjects, but to have sincere affections to his
Majesty's service) He was graciously pleased to declare that Edward Adams,
Abraham Jacob, Robert Carre, Christopher Trenchard, William Peachey, Thomas
Bostock, and Will. Trussel, were not only his subjects, but that he also looked
upon them meriting his protection, as well as any others soever of like quality
inhabiting any part of his Dominions. This Letter was not presently delivered,
but was thought fit to be reserved for some more opportune time, which was
judged to be when the causes were ready for sentence, and then it was
presented, but to small effect, for they slighted it; And the Capers stuck not
publicly to say, That the Secretaries framed Letters, and his Majesty signed
them without ever reading or knowing what they contained. The French Commander
at the same time went on with his claim, demanding his ship, the Freight, and
23. Chests of Sugars in particular, and the whole Cargo in general according to
the Articles of Peace.

The Cargo according to the Commanders book, was 1100. Chests and Fecho's of
Sugar, 1000. Hides, 4000 l. of Vigonia Wool, some Boxes of Balsome, a parcel of
Jacaranda Wood, Whale fins, and some Tobacco.

Upon his pressing whereof, the Lords of the Admiraltie-asked him one day in
Court, what he would do with the Cargo should it be restored him? To which he
made answer, That he would carry and deliver it at the proper Port of his
Discharge, according as he stood obliged by Charter party and Bills of lading,
at which the Lords smiled, As if it were a ridiculous thing for them to be
thought obliged (by any tie whatsoever) to give sentence for the Capers to part
with a good Booty once got into their possession.

During the transaction of these affairs, the States of the United Provinces
sent their Ambassadors to the Court of France to renew their Alliance with the
French King, who (being informed from his Ambassador at the Hague of their
non-complyance with the former Articles) refused to treat with them, till there
were justice done his subjects according to the Articles of Marine, which was
concluded at the desire of the States themselves. Whereupon the Ambassadors
writ to the States desiring the cause of Le Breton may be judged, who thereupon
Order the Lords of the Admiralty of Zealand so to do; But they notwithstanding
for a while deferred it, till new complaints were made, then they give
sentence, viz. on the 24. September 1661. stilo novo. Decreeing to the French
Commander his Ship, Aparrel, Furniture, etc. Freight, and 23. Chests of Sugars
which belonged to him and Company, with 2000. Gilders Damages. And the same day
condemned the English men's (some whereof were Fraighters of the ship) goods for
prize.

The French man not contented with his sentence, finding the sum ordered for
damages to be too little, demands further reparation in matter of damage: which
by means of the French Ambassador at the Hague, is made known to the French
King, who commanded Monsieur de Lionn a Minister of State in France, to
signify to the Dutch Ambassadors, that in case of non satisfaction for Le
Bretons ship, he would grant Letters of Reprisal. Whereupon they again writ to
the States General touching that particular; Who order the cause to be brought
before the Judges appointed in case of appeal at the Hague, and a review thereof
without charge to him, and to that end dispatch their Messengers into Zealand,
where the States had a meeting extraordinary about it, who give for answer,
that they cannot consent to a review, because the Fatalia were past (which are
4. Months after the sentence pronounced, within which time the review ought to
be desired.) But this being upon a Point extraordinary, to prevent Letters of
reprisal, a second Messenger was dispatched, who returned with a Better answer,
And upon the review is decreed to the French Commander 12000. Gilders more for
damage, over and above the former 2000.

The French Commander recovered his Freight according to Bills of lading which
belonged to us the Fraighters, which was more then was due to them by Charter
party by 910 l. Flemish, so that with what he had formerly received from us,
and was disbursed for his account, He was indebted to us 1440 l. Flemish, for
which (he refusing to account with us) we desired we might make an Embargo, or
Arrest in the hands of those who were appointed to pay him money, and in this
request we hoped to succeed (because it might be a mean for them to keep
something in their hand, which was a thing they love to do, as being in that
kind naturally tenacious;) But in this neither were we prevailing, for they
were resolved not to gratify the English in any motion, or at least durst do
nothing against. the French, they telling us they could not permit one stranger
to sue another, so the French man marched off with flying colors, carrying all
away with him, as well some of our as his own money. And the English remained
forlorn. And by what has been here related, which is nothing but undeniable
truth, it plainly appears we are truly unfortunate English Merchants.

Our Goods were condemned as Prize, but as I have already said, they tell us
not wherefore; they never declaring the cause or ground of their sentence,
reserving that in their own breast; so that we are ignorant where the Gulf lay
that devoured, or the Rock that split us: But by what we gathered by common
discourse with persons in Zealand, and some Occurrences, we may guess it to be,
because the persons claiming were for the most part resident in Portugal; for
an English man that was passenger upon an English ship which they had taken
coming from Brazil had Goods (being of no great value) restored him. And this
is founded upon an Order or Edict made for their own people that none of them
living in Portugal shall trade to Brazil without their license, or if they do
their goods being taken in company of Portuguesses shall run the like fate with
them, and this was made for prevention of their Subjects coloring Portuguez
Goods: (it is evident we colored no Portuguez Goods, claiming only what was
consigned for our own account, and this by evidence of their own producing, and
all was under 300. of 1100. Chests and Fecho's which the ship brought.) And say
they, persons living in any part ought not to enjoy two Capacities or
Privileges. To that we gave satisfactory answer, (Besides what his sacred
Majesty has been pleased to write on our behalf) That we enjoyed no Privilege
the Portuguesses did, but resided in Portugal by virtue of the Articles of
peace concluded between the Crowns of England and Portugal, and for such were
owned and certitifyed by his Majesty's Consul. If they will have pass for
Curant, that what Sanctions and Edicts are made by them for regulating their
own people, must be obliging to the Subjects of other Princes, it is right Hogan
Mogan; But the plain English of it is, That the King of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, must not treat of or conclude peace with a Foreign Prince, or
provide for the increase of Trade and privileges of his own subjects without
asking the States of Holland leave.

I humbly represented our case to his sacred Majesty and his most Honorable
Privy Council, making a Summarie relation of what had passed, which his
Majesty and their Lordships taking into their consideration, did Order, that
the Commissioners who are to treat with the Dutch Ambassadors, do insist upon
our satisfaction, in like manner as is done in claims of any other of his
Majesty's Subjects.

I also represented our aggrievance to the Honorable Committee of Parliament
appointed to consider of the Trade of the Nation, where I made out our losses
sustained by the surprizall of the Ships Golden Sun, Experience
aforementioned, (and two English Ships more taken by the Dutch a little after,
called the Falcon, and St. John Baptist) to amount unto 8000l. ster. But (like
a bad accomptant,) I omitted to set down the interest, which for 4. years at 6.
per Cent. comes to 1920l. Besides which I have in the tedious vexatious suits
expended 780 l. 12 s, 3 d. Flemish, besides what is to be set down for my
friends pains who assisted in the solicitation, and I have endeavored all
good husbandry, having been sometime thought to be too penurious. And now may
be seen the effect of the full assurance of expedition promised us, viz. a Suit
of 14. months, (which if I had pleased might have been 14. years, I could have
procured consent of parties,) and for the just judgment we should receive, our
Goods condemned for Prize, but upon what score, subintelligitur. The French
man's Ship which, by the Universal custom and consent (if not Law) of Nations
(to say nothing of their particular Obligation) ought to have made free Goods,
with 23. Chests of Sugar granted free, with 14000. Gilders for Damages.

Thus Courteous Reader, I have done with my sad tedious story, and crave thy
pardon for exercising thy Patience so long therewith, begging as formerly the
benefit of thy Counsel. But before I take my leave I must speak one word in
vindication of my profession (at least of my own particular) from an aspertion
which seems to be cast upon it. There is a rumor flies up and down the world,
that in this present conjuncture of affairs, the Merchants are great
incendiaries to a War with the Dutch, and if there happen one, 'twill be
called the Merchants War, which I suppose is a great mistake; for to me it
seems not rational for any intelligent Merchants to be forward to that War, the
maine dispute and decision whereof must be argued at Sea, the place where he is
most concerned, and to the inconveniences and hazards attending such a War the
Merchant of all other persons is most obnoxious. If any such Merchants there
be, that are so Warlike, and promise to themselves great gain by Trading in
troubled waters; I do declare my self to be none of them, I do confess I am
for satisfaction for the unreasonable usage and injuries done my friends, and
me: nay I have been, and am very earnest and zealous for it, I say I am for the
Rem, but modum acquirendi I wholly submit to his Sacred Majesty (whom God many
years preserve in peace) and his Great Council.

Farewell. Edward Adams.

FINIS.

