THE NECESSITY OF The pouring out of the Spirit from on High UPON A Sinning
Apostatizing People, set under Judgment, in order to their merciful Deliverance
and Salvation.

As it was Delivered in part, upon 21. 9. 1678. being a general FAST throughout
the united Colonies of N. E.

By WILLIAM ADAMS, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Dedham.

Luke 19.41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City and wept over
it, saying, If thou had known even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.

Luke 13.35. Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. And verily I say
unto you, Ye shall not see me, until the time come when ye shall say, Blessed
is he that comes in the Name of the Lord.

Psalm. 14.7. O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Sion I when the
Lord brings back the Captivity of his People, Jacob shall rejoice and Israel
shall be glad.

BOSTON; Printed by John Foster. for William Avery, near the sign of the blew
Anchor. 1679.

To the Reader.
THat these Churches once flourished, with much spiritual prosperity, under a
glorious dispensation of the Spirit and grace of God, by the saving
administrations of his word and worship, and that with full demonstration of
his special grace and favor; we ought to commemorate, unto his praise and
glory, and our own present shame and confusion. That now we are a people in
extreme danger of perishing, in our own sins, and under Gods Judgments,
(unless God shall please in an extraordinary way, of Sovereign mercy to save
us) is the most humbling consideration of our present sad condition. That all
ordinary means (in that extraordinary way of improvement which God has of late
set us under) have been altogether ineffectual, unto a general and saving work
of reformation; makes it (at least) a fearful question, whether our degeneracy
and apostasy may not prove Judicial, and so perpetual: a question which will
not admit of a comfortable resolution, until God shall pour out his Spirit from
on high upon us. That Sovereign promise of the donation, and effusion of the
Spirit, and so of the dispensation of saving grace (as it has been unto the
Churches in all Ages, under their deepest defection,) So it is unto us the main
stay of our faith, confidence, and comfort, and that which gives some present
reviving, unto our languishing hope; of the resurrection of Religion in these
Churches. That God does at present so far suspend the accomplishment of this
promise, and so far withold his Spirit and grace, it is, the just, yet most
dreadful punishment of that most sinful abuse of it; and general
unprofitableness under the means of grace, and of that resisting his Spirit;
and rejecting his Son by unbelief and disobedience unto the Gospel which is
found amongst us, and is sadly signal of the gradual cessation of the work of
Conversion, and of the further execution of Gods wrath, both by external and
spiritual plagues and Judgments. How much that blessed work does already fail;
the decaying and dying state of Religion, and of these Churches, does evidence
by woeful instance and experience, there being little more left, then a name to
live, and those things which remain so ready to dye; That so many sinners, do
seem to be given up Judicially, unto the still growing, and prevailing sins of
the times, which both in their nature and working are so utterly inconsistent
with the progress of the work of Conversion, does make the considgration of our
present case much the more lamentable: especially-considering that such sinners
do remain under a secret, sovereign influence of Gods vindictive Justice;
whence the word in the Ministry is become a savor of death unto death in them
that perish. What remains then; but that we do most enixly endeavor; (in
whatsoever we may, or can possibly) to approve our selves a people more
hopeful; as to Conversion, Reformation, and Salvation; laboring practically,
and savingly to understand, even we at least in this our day the great things
of our temporal, spiritual, and eternal peace, and welfare, least they should
be hidden from our eyes, because we know not this time of our visitation. How
is it then the most important concernment of all unconverted sinners, to take
heed unto themselves, that they do not (as heretofore) hinder their own
Conversion by abusing and loosing their special day and seasons of grace, or by
yielding up their Souls unto the power of sin and Satan, in those ways of
sinning, wherein their hearts will be hardened against the power and working of
the word, and Spirit of God, unto positive unbelief and disobedience, unto the
Gospel, against light, and so by giving up themselves unto deep security, in
their unregeneracy, and unto spiritual Apostasy, from that common grace which
they may have received and that past ordinary hope of recovery, Heb. 6.4, to 8.
But that sinners do redeem this present time unto a constant attendance upon
the Ministry of the word; and a most diligent improvement of all means of
grace, and operations of the Spirit, crying earnestly unto God, and waiting
instantly upon him for the application of Christ, and salvation in a saving
work of grace; and that under a sense of their extreme necessity thereof,
crying out as they when pricked in their heart, Act 2.31. what shall we do? and
as he, Act. 16.30. what must I do to be saved? How severely also then are all
such persons to be reproved and warned as the most dangerous, destructive
Enemies, unto both the temporal and spiritual welfare, and prosperity of this
people, and of these Churches, feeking the utter ruin and destruction both of
the present, and succeeding generations; who make it their business, to hinder,
obstruct, yea, utterly to destroy the work of Conversion, by upholding the sins
of the times, opposing the duties of the times, corrupting the Souls of others,
with error, heresy, libertinisme, and licentiousness, weakening the hearts and
hands of those who labor in the work of Christ, for the salvation of Souls, by
all means crossing and counter-working the whole work of Reformation: such do
declare themselves to be full of all mischief, Children of the Devil, and
Enemies of all righteousness, Act. 13.10. and incur that woe pronounced by
our Savior, Math. 23.19 Therefore all those who would approve themselves to be
true friends to the work of Christ in the promotion of his Kingdom, the
propagation of Religion, and the Salvation of Souls, ought to labor most
intensly in their several places, by all means with all their might to promote
converting work, especially amongst the Rising Generations: Godly parents and
Masters, heads of Families, by the constant exercise of the worship of God; in
the life and power of it, by daily instructions; admonitions, and all kind of
religious education, by the right, and full improvement of Family government,
training up Children and Servants in the nurture and admonition of the Lord,
and this with sincere desire, and fervent prayer, for their Conversion.
Churches by upholding a powerful dispensation of the word and all Ordinances,
and a full supply of all provision in the house of God, especially a full and
complete Ministry, according to Christ's appointment, that all means may be used
and all duty performed toward the Children of the Covenant, and the rising
Generations, which is necessary unto their Conversion; that they may not perish
in their unregeneracy, through the neglect of that duty, and want of help to
discharge it fully, which is, and is yet more likely to be the sad case of
these Churches: O let us pray the Lord of the harvest, to thrust forth
Laborers into this great harvest. The Ministry by travailing in birth with
Souls till Christ be formed in them, and by the full and saithful discharge of
duty as Laborers together with God in that work; wherein therefore they are to
labor in a way of dependence upon Christ for assistance and success, and that
both publicly and privately, in all ways, and by all means, to gain and bring
home Souls to him, as that which is the great end of their ministrations,
wherein notwithstanding they are under great discouragement at present, from
the diminution of that grace and blessing which might make their labors more
effectual unto the work of conversion. The godly and religious Magistracy, by
the improvement of civil Authority, in a way of full and direct subverciency
unto the work of Christ, the progress of which is the highest and most saving
good and end of government, unto a Religious people; who are in the most happy
and prosperous estate, when the Mountains bring peace, and the little hills
Righteousness. Truly then it is high time for all orders, degrees and societies
of men in New England, by faith in prayer, to seek the Lord until he come and
rain righteousness upon us, until he open Rivers in high places, and fountains
in the midst of Valleys, and make the wilderness a Pool of water; and the dry
Land Springs of water, until he pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods
upon the dry ground, 'till he pour out his Spirit upon our Seed, and his
blessing upon our Offspring, until he send us the great promise of his Spirit,
in the accomplishment of it, by pouring out of his Spirit in a general,
plentiful dispensation of converting grace upon us, our Children, Familyes,
Churches, this whole people, both the standing and the rising Generations:
Which would be a blessed Refurrection, and as life from the dead unto us. It is
much for our encouragement that in this our perishing condition, God has by
his Spirit in the Ministry of many of his Servants, proposed this great
promise; expressing his own gracious disposition to open and apply it, in the
saving grace and blessing of it, and withal pressed us, from the consideration
of inevitable destruction, without a full and perfect salvation by the
application of it, and furnished us with all Arguments of faith, to labor and
prevail with him in prayer for the obtainment of it: which also is the more
solemnly observable, in that God has providentially ordered the labors of
diverse of his Servants, in this same great and most necessary subject to be
published at this time, as a Testimony unto this Generation, what their main
work and duty is; whereby he has showed us what is good, and what it is that
the Lord does require at our hands. God grant that it may not be rejected, and
so be left upon Record, as a Testimony against this Generation to condemn it,
the more deeply, under the aggravated guilt of total and final Apostasy

The Reverend and worthy Author of these Sermons, having been through the
abundant grace of God sanctified, and separated from his youth, unto the
Ministry, he has had a more early call into that work, wherein he has been
more happy then most of his fellow Servants; and being himself coaetaneous
with, and amongst the choicest of the first ripe fruits of this young
Generation; his Soul has labored, and does labor, with the more fervency, of
holy and sincere love to, and zeal for, the salvation of their Souls: modesty
and humility being inherent in him as gifts, both of nature and grace, it would
be too much an injury to him, to give his work deserved commendation: It shall
therefore suffice to say, that the powerful and (we hope) saving impression
which it had in the ministration of it, upon the hearts of the hearers, is a
Testimony of divine approbation and commendation: the suitableness and
seasonableness of the Subject unto this time, and the necessity of this people,
the copiousness, and (yet withal) conciseness of the method (it being
expressive of so much of the general message which God is sending unto his
people, and of that which the Spirit is now speaking unto these Churches in so
few Sermons) does render it the more fit, and useful for the public. The
motion of the Spirit of God upon the hearts of those pious and judicious
hearers, who have (we believe) been thereby moved with a godly zeal for the
saving good of the Generation to desire, request, and undertake for the
publication of it; does promise it Patronage from Heaven. The special promised
presence of our Lord Jesus with this his Servant, for his assistance in the
Ministry of his word, as also in the whole course of his ministration, is a
singular token, and pledge of his special grace and favor, unto that precious
Church in, and unto which he is called to minister. The Lord make them more and
more thankful, profitable, and fruitful, and prosper his work with them,
granting unto them more clear and full discoveries of his mind and will
concerning their duty in order thereunto, that they may stand more perfect and
complete in all the will of God; and be more fully replenished with his
spiritual and gracious presence; enriched with all the gifts and graces of his
Spirit, and settled (together with all our Churches) under the saving
dispensation of the Covenant of grace, strengthened unto steadfast perseverance,
in the faith, obedience, and order of the Gospel, unto the end.

Which is the prayer of

Your Servants for Christ our Saviors sake. Samuel Torrey. Josiah Flint

REader, The old Plea, The Authors absence from the Press, being still of force,
occasions this further desire of thee, viz. that before thou read thou will
with thy pen mend these following faults.

Page 4. l. 8. for, as in, read and. l. 34. r. Isai. 29. p. 5. l. 12. blot out
once. p. 8. l. 4. r. enumeration. l. 5. r. when. p. 10. l. 27. for sit, r. set.
p. 11. l. 16. r. fiercer. p. 15. l. 32. r. Scale. p. 16. l. 33. r. the things.
l. 37. r. an abundant. p. 17. l. 16. for to have. r. and have. p. 18. l. 13. r.
affect. p. 20. l. 18. r. sight. p. 23. l. 3. after Estates r. or. l. 5. after
serious, r. as. p. 24. l. 2. r. set. p. 25. l. 13. r. those. p. 28. l. 22.
place the comma after selves. p. 30. l. 14. for may, r. must.

Other lesser mistakes there are, as misquotations in figures, mispointings,
especially in interrogative points, which are sometimes omitted, and sometimes
where they should not be, and mispellings in some words where the sense is
plain, all which a little candor in the Reader will easily mend.

Isai. 32.13 --.18.
Ver. 13. Upon the Land of my People shall come up thorns and briers, yea, upon
all the houses of joy in the joyous City.

Ver. 14. Because the Palaces shall be forsaken, the multitude of the City
shall be left, the Forts and Towers shall be for Dens for ever, a joy of wild
Asses, a Pasture of Flocks;

Ver. 15. Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the Wilderness
be afruitful Field, and the fruitful Field be counted for a Forest.

Ver. 16. Then Judgment shall dwell in the Wilderness, and Righteousness remain
in the fruitful Field.

Ver. 17. And the work of Righteousness shall be peace, and the Effect of
Righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever.

Ver. 18. And my People shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure
dwellings, and in quiet resting places.


IN the beginning of this Chapter there is a Prophesy of the righteous and
prosperous reign of a King, whose Subjects shall live in a comfortable and
happy condition under his government, things and persons shall be called by
their right names, a wicked man shall be called a wicked man, a good man owned
for a good man, and every one treated rightly, and all things managed
righteously, every person and thing handled according to their true merits,
ver. 1, to 9. And this King is by some taken to be Hezekiah. Engl. Annot. But
by others Christ, under whose reign especially all these things are
accomplished. Jun. in loc. Christ does indeed always rule, but there is at
some times a more eminent and powerful administration of his Kingdom, wherein
there is a more visible and plenary fulfilling of the things here spoken of,
and to some such time may this Prophesy have respect.

In the latter part of the Chapter the Prophet discourses of those troubles
that were to come upon the Land of his People, before their establishment in
and under the prosperity formerly described.

And 1. He begins with a solemn warning and Exhortation to all secure careless
ones to be awakened by their misery coming, and to break off their evil
courses, and to betake themselves to humiliation, lamentation, and so to
Reformation, if thereby they might prevent, or at least moderate the Judgment
impending over them. Ver. 9, to 13. Rise up ye Women that are at ease, hear my
voice ye eareless daughters, give ear unto my Speech: Many days and years
shall ye be troubled, ye careless Women, etc. Tremble ye Women that are at
ease, etc. Would careless secure Men and Women be awakened by warnings given,
much of their sorrow might be diverted. Had we sinful and foolish People in
New England been wise in season, and taken those solemn warnings have been
given us, much of that sorrow and misery which we have felt, and do feel in
War, sickness, and other shakings might have been escaped. 2. He declares
(seeing they had not by Repentance diverted Gods Anger, but were secure) their
settlement under a dispensation of Judgment, and the continuance and process
of their miseryes to a determined period, at which there should be a great turn
and change of Gods dispensations toward them, ver. 13. to 19. read. 3. In the
two last Verses, whether read by themselves, or joined with the foregoing, he
describes the blessedness and security both of their persons, and enjoyments,
upon and for whom this change is wrought, however it sare with others: when
sorrows come down upon others they shall be secured. The expressions here used
being probably metaphorical. Vide Sanctium in Pol. Synop.

In the Text we have 1. A declaration of the settlement of this People under a
dispensation of Judgment, and the process of Judgments and miseries upon
them. How troubles and sorrows should come, grow upon and overspread them, ver.
13.14. Upon the Land of my People shall come up Thorns and Briars] Thorns and
Briars may be here taken literally, and so the expression denotes the great
devastation and depopulation should be made in the Land. They may also be taken
metaphorically, as Ezekiel. 28 24. There shall be no more a pricking Brier to the
house of Israel, nor any grieving Thorn of all that are round about them. So
that by Thorns and Briars coming up upon the Land, we may understand pricking,
grieving, pinching, and disquieting troubles falling upon the Inhabitants of
the Land. Upon all the houses of joy] They are called houses of joy, because
they were at present full of mirth and merriment in them, as misdoubting no
trouble near, Eng. Annot. in loc. And upon all these should sorrow come: Their
troubles should spread among, and over them universally, and take away their
mirth and turn it into mourning. In the Joyous City] City, in a Collective
Sense, for Cities, the several Cities throughout the whole Land of Judah.
Annot. And these were joyous or revelling Cities, given to case, delight and
pleasure, abounding with much Luxury, whose profane joy and revelling should be
followed with distress. Because the Palaces shall be forsaken, the multitude of
the City shall be left,] There should be great desolations made in the places
of their dwellings both for convenience and delight: And great diminution of
their numbers, mortality and misery lighting upon them. The Forts and Towers
shall be for Dens.] Their places of strength, munition, defense and safeguard
being deserted and lying waste, should become Receptacles and Dens for wild
Beasts to lie down in. For ever,] or, for a long time, As the word (Gnolam) is
often used. Designat continuationem vel durationem non perpetuam semper, sed
longam and non interruptam per aliquod tempus, and continuatam ad insignem
aliquam periodum. Spanhem. A Joy of wild Asses] These and other wild Creatures
should range, run at large, play and disport themselves there, where sometimes
dwellings and Castles were. A Pasture of Flocks] Cattle should graze in those
places that were sometimes inhabited, they being left desolate. These and the
like miseryes should be, continue, and grow upon them, being set under
Judgment.

2. The Period of these miseryes. Till which they should be continued, and
proceed; viz. until the Spirit should be poured out upon the People, and the
gracious Effects of it obtained in them v. 15. until the Spirit be poured upon
us] By Spirit here which is said to be poured out upon them, we may understand
not so much the Person of the Holy Ghost (Not here to speak of the personal in
dwelling of the Spirit in all the Saints, as 2 Timothy 1.14.) As the saving gifts
and graces of the Spirit, by the donation of which, persons are enlightened, and
regenerated, sinners converted, and Saints more and more sanctified. And by
pouring out of the Spirit, we may understand a plentiful effusion, or giving
forth of the gifts and graces of the Spirit to the sound Conversion and through
Sanctification of a People. The dispensation of the Spirit in all the gracious
and saving operations thereof is expressed by giving the Holy Ghost, Joh. 7.39,
This spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive: for
the Holy Ghost was not yet given. And by pouring out the gift of the Holy
Ghost, Act. 10.45. On the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy
Ghost. By the Spirit being poured out upon them therefore is intended, a
plentiful and abundant measure of the communication of the gifts and graces of
the Spirit unto them, and this was the determined period of their miseryes. See
more of this in M. I, Mather his Sermon on Isai. 44.3. Qu. 1, 2. where these
things are directly and fully spoken too. From on High] from God above, Father
and Son. And the Wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be
counted for a Forest.] I shall not trouble you with reciting the various
Expositions given of this as in the parallel place, in Isai. 29.17. but only
lay down and improve that, which comparing them with the Text, and one with
another, I take to be most probable. What is therefore expressed in the latter
part of this Verse, we may take to intimate the immediate effects or fruits of
the pouring out of the Spirit wrought upon, or in those upon whom it is poured.
And they are two, 1. The Conversion of the unregenerate. And the Wilderness be
a fruitful Field, i. e. Those that have been as a Wilderness, barren and
unfruitful, bringing forth no fruit to God, but wild fruits of sin, they shall
be changed, tilled, converted and made fruitful, to bring forth fruits of
holiness unto God. 2. The admirable fruitfulness and increase of grace in the
godly; And the fruitful Field be counted for a Forest, i.e. They that have a
Principle of fruitfulness in them, and did bring forth fruit before, yet now
upon the pouring out of the Spirit upon them shall receive such abundance of
grace, and be so eminent in the acting of it, that what they did before shall
be accounted as the fruit of a barren Forest, in comparison of what they do
now. Such a difference shall there be in their fruitfulness before and after
the pouring out of the Spirit on them. Or the meaning may be The fruitful field
shall be counted for a Forest, i.e. Those that were before fruitful fields
shall upon the pouring out of the Spirit fructify so incredibly, that they
shall seem rather to be a Wood, a Forest, a Thicket, then fields of Tillage,
(by an appropriation of such expressions as are sometimes used concerning the
incredible fertility of some Fields in grain and fruits, unto the exceeding
great fruitfulness of persons in grace and spiritual, and holy actions) And so
the Sense is the same as before. Vide Angl. Annot in Isai. 25.17. and Calvin in
Pol. Synops. Crit. Ibid.

3. The great turn and change following upon the pouring out of the Spirit, v.
16, 17, 18. Then shall, etc. The immediate Effects and fruits of the pouring
out of the Spirit were expressed in the former Verse: The mediate or more remote
effect and consequent of it, is here expressed to be, the restoration and
multiplication of sure mercies and blessings upon them in the Particulars
mentioned in these verses. And they respect either.

1. Their Sanctification, as a holy and heavenly Conversation. v. 16. Then
Judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, i.e. in illis qui olim Desertum erant.
Forerius in Pol. Synop. Crit. in Loc. Those that were as a wilderness before,
untilled, unt aught, unregenerate, and unsubdued to the will of God, being now
converted, shall give heed to Judgment, equity, righteousness, honesty and
piety; abandoning all ways of profaneness, debauchery, dishonesty, injustice,
intemperance and impiety which before once they lived in. And righteousness
remain in the fruitful field] Ergasia five exornatio effectorum Spiritus Dei
in Sanctis: erunt, inquit, fructus spiritus in arvo, i.e. Ecclesia Dei,
Justitia, etc. Jun. in Loc. Christians, Professors who have given up their
names to Christ shall be studiously careful to hold fast righteousness,
sincerity and uprightness in all their carriages and actions toward God and
man, being plain-hearted, right-down, fair and square in all their dealings:
behaving themselves in all things holily, justly and unblameably, being
harmless, and without rebuke, putting away all semblance of dishonesty, unjust
dealing, unfaithfulness, untruth, encroaching, covetousness, double-dealing,
unsteadiness, shifting, winding, turning and whatsoever else is unworthy the
vocation wherewith they are called. And these sure are blessed and happy times,
when there are such fruits of sanctification so generally and universally
appearing. Or,

2. Their Glorification, which concern the felicity and blessedness of their
lives. And they are either,

1. Inward and spiritual blessings, Peace, Quietness and Assurance v. 17. and
the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever. There shall be peace. Soulpeace. Peace with
God, and the testimony of that peace in their Consciences: whenee an holy
serenity and calmness of soul, the peace of God which passes all understanding
keeping their hearts and minds through Jesus Christ: a religious composure of
mind, resting quietly upon God alone, and depending on him with confident
assurance of receiving protection (and all good) from him. English Annot. in
Loc. Or,

2. Outward Blessings, peaceableness in their habitations, security and
quietness in their dwellings, v. 18. and my people shall dwell in a peaceable
habitation, and in sure dwellinge, and in quiet resting places. They shall have
peace, safety, quietness and rest round about, together with all the blessings
of such a merciful and heaven-born peace. Nor is it absurd or immethodical to
rank this outward peace of the Saints under glorification; for it is to them a
real freedom from misery and evil of punishment, wherein they experience the
good will and kindness of God, and therefore is a part or degree of
Glorification begun. Huc pertinet [ad Grorificat. inchoat. scil.] paterna illa
Dei Providentia, quae Fidelibus invigilat somper in bonum, Ames Medui l. 0 c.
30. th. 30.

For the timing this Prophesy in the Text, concerning the pouring out of the
Spirit, and the effects and Consequents of it, it is variously fixed by
Expositors, as, to the restitution of the Jewish state after Sennacheribs
defeat to the Jews return from the Babylonian Captivity: to the times of the
Messiah in general; and to some particular time or times under the Gospel, and
that either already past, or yet expected. That this Prophesy in the Text does
respect some particular time mainly and principally, is without doubt: But what
that time is, Scriptura prophetica sapius impletur. See Mr. Increase Mather his
Sermon on Isai. 44.8. p. 6.
I shall not make it my work to enquire or determine. It may suffice to the
present purpose, that there is a general truth in the words; and that this
Scripture may be and is in its proportion and measure fulfilled at other times
besides that to which it has a more particular and principal respect; and that
there is such a dependence of our freedom from evils, and obtaining of
mercyes upon the Spirits being poured out upon us as is expressed in the Text. It
is written for our learning, and so we may improve it; and to this I shall
apply my self.

In treating of these words, I shall not endeavor to draw out all the single
observations from them that might be, but only to take up the general scope of
them in this one Doctrine, viz.

Doct. When God has once set a People under a dispensation of Judgment, their
miseryes will be like to proceed, till there be the pouring out of the Spirit
from on high upon them to their sound Conversion, and then there will be a
restoration and multiplication of sure mercyes and blessings upon them. This is
the sum of the words, and as brief as I can well give it. This Doctrine may
be further opened in these Propofitions;

Prop. I. God does sometimes set a People under a dispensation of Judgment. As
this People here. The Lord in the way of his Providence exposes them to
Judgment, sets them in the way of misery, sorrow and calamity lighting upon
them, follows them with evil: The general course of his dispensations toward
them is afflictive: He does as it were set them as a mark to shoot the Arrows
of his anger and displeasure at, Lam. 3.12. He has bent his bow and set me as
a mark for the Arrow. He marks them our for Judgment, they are a people of his
anger, a generation of his wrath, Jer. 7.29. he sets himself against them, he
sets his face against them, Lev. 26.17. And I will set my face against you. He
is sore displeased with them, and sets himself as it were with an angry
countenance to punish their sin: He engages his Power and wrath against them,
Ezekiel. 23.25. And I will set my Jealousy against thee, and they shall deal
furiously with thee. He watches over them for evil, Jer. 44.11, 27. Behold I
will set my face against you for evil; Behold I will watch over them for evil.
The Lord does as it were set himself to watch his opportunity to bring evil
upon them, is against them on every side, and sets himself to afflict them.

Thus God sometimes sets a People under a dispensation of Judgment: And that;
because they have set themselves in a way that is not good. They set themselves
out of the way of holiness, and in the way of sin, and hence God sets himself
in a way of Judgment, Lev. 26.23, 24. If ye will not be reformed by these
things, but will walk contrary to me: then will I also walk contrary unto you,
and will punish you. Gods setting himself against a People is, because they
have set themselves against God.

And 1. They have set themselves against his Command. They have rebelled
against him, and broken his Laws, and cast his words behind their backs. Hence
God in setting himself against a People sets their sins in the light of his
Countenance, Psalm. 90.7, 8. We are consumed by thine anger: and by thy wrath
are we troubled. Thou have set our iniquityes before thee: our secret sins in
the light of thy Countenance. It is because of them, their sins, that God
carries it in a way of displeasure toward any, Ezekiel. 14.7, 8. Thus the Lord
gives an account of his doing thus and thus with his People, because they had
sinned so and so against him, Hos. 7.2. compared with 12.13. In the second.
Verse; They consider not in their hearts that I remember all their wickedness:
now their own doings have beset them about, they are before my face. Then
follows a particular numeration of their sins, to ver. 12. And in the 12 Verse,
it follows; Where they shall go I will spread my Net upon them, I will bring
them down as the Fowls of Heaven: I will chastize them as their Congregation
has heard. Woe unto them for they have fled from me: destruction unto them,
because they have transgressed against me. So Ezra 8.23. His power and wrath is
against all that forsake him.

2. They have set themselves against his Reproofs. Upon a Peoples falling into
sin and backsliding from him, the Lord is wont to reprove them for their sin,
give them warning of their danger, and call them to return: But when they will
not hearken to entertain his reproofs, or embrace his Counsels, then are they
set under Judgment, Hos. 11.6, 7. And the Sword shall abide on his Cities, and
shall consume his Branches, and devour them, because of their own Counsels. And
my People are bent to back sliding from me: though they called them to the most
High, none at all would exalt him. Though God may punish for a single breach of
his Command, yet he is not wont to cause his Judgments to abide, unless there
have been a refusal of divine reproofs, Prove. 1.24, 31. Because I have called
and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded: But ye have
set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof. I also will laugh
at your calamity, etc. God gives this expressly as a Reason of his giving up his
people to Judicial dispensations, Psalm. 81.11, 12. But my people would not
hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me: So I gave them up.

3. They have set themselves against his mercy and compassion whereby he would
have saved them. God exercises a great deal of lenity toward a sinning people,
and shows much compassion toward them, waiting and using means with much long
suffering that they would return and be saved as being loath to give them up,
Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? Psalm 78 42. But he being full of
compassion forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not: yea many a time
turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath. But when Gods
love, grace, pity and compassion is abused, then his wrath arises and is set
against a People, then he gives them up to Judgment, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. And
the Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes
and sending: because he had compassion on his People and on his dwelling place:
But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his
Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was
no remedy. Hos. 7 1, 13, 15. When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity
of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria. Though I have
redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies against me. Though I have bound and
strengthened their Arms, yet do they imagine mischief against me. Thus for these
Reasons does God set a People under a dispensation of Judgment.

Prop. II. The misery of a People once so set under a dispensation of Judgment
will be like to proceed and be growing. Their affliction will rise higher and
higher. Their sorrows abound more and more. Their sorrows and miseryes will be
like to increase and grow.

1. Extensive. extensively. They will be like to be of great extent, to be
universal or at least general; To extend to all kinds of misery and to all
persons.

1. To all kinds of misery, Psalm. 16.4. Their sorrows shall be multiplied that
hasten after another God: As they may be said to do, who cast off the true God
his fear and service. All kind of misery will be like to fall upon them. The
Lord reckons up various kinds of miseryes which he threatens to bring upon his
disobedient sinning people, Lev. 26.14, to 39 And they are expressed as such as
should be rising and growing, from one degree to a seven times greater, if the
first did not reclaim them, ver. 18. I will punish you yet seven times more for
your sins. Which rise of punishment is four times expressed within the compass of
these verses. And in Jer. 15.3. I will appoint over them four kinds, says the
Lord. And in Am. 4. Many kinds of affliction are mentioned which God had
brought upon his obstinate and impenitent People.

2. To all persons: All shall feel something thereof more or less. Text, ver.
13. Upon all the houses. The hand of God will fall heavy every where. Judgment
come upon all quarters, there will be no corner or place for escape, Exek.
21.15. I have set the point of the Sword against all their gates, etc. The
Clouds of Gods Judgments which at first were small and little will be like to
spread and grow thick upon such a people, till even the Heavens be dark over
them, Isai. 5.30. And in that day they shall roar against them, like the
roaring of the Sea: and if one look unto the Land, behold darkness and sorrow,
and the light is darkened in the Heavens thereof: Which way soever they look,
upwards or downwards, on this side or that, there shall be trouble and distress
encompassing all of them as men in a Fog. There shall be universally trouble on
Earth and anger from Heaven and no appearance of case or relief to such a
People, Jer. 45.5. Behold I will bring evil upon all flesh says the Lord. and
12.12. The Sword of the Lord shall devour from the one end of the Land even to
the other end of the Land; no flesh shall have peace.

2. Intensive, Intensively. Their miseryes and sorrows will be like to grow
more intense and sharp, pinching and distressing, to have more and more of
divine anger in them, and so be more hard to be borne, and fill those under
them with anguish and vexation, Isai. 8.21. And they shall pass through it
hardly bestead and hungry: and it shall come to pass, that when they shall be
hungry, they shall fret themselves. Their necessities and distresses shall be
such as shall make them grow extremely impatient and exceedingly disquieted,
ver. 22. behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish: and they shall be
driven to darkness. Many words of the same notion are heaped up to express the
great extremity of their distresses. Eng. Annot. The Lord will make more and
more wrath appear in his Judgments upon such a People, make his Arrows in their
hearts sharp, cutting and piercing, Psalm. 45.5. Thine Arrows are sharp in the
heart of the Kings enemies. He will put bitterness in their cup, fill their
Souls with bitterness, make their affliction and so their condition bitter, 2
King. 14 26. The Lord saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter,
Lam. 3.15. He has filled me with bitterness, he has made me drunken with
wormwood. Expressions denoting the sharpness and extremity of their affliction.
When God is sit in a way of Judgment against a people, he will make the end
and issue of that dispensation a bitter day, Am. 8.10. And I will make it as
the mourning of an only Son, and the end thereof as a bitter day.

Thus the sorrow and misery of a people set under Judgment will be like to
grow more general and more and more bitter and pinching. And that,

1. Because God is set against them as an Enemy; Ezekiel. 15.7. And I will set my
face against them, they shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall
devour them: and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I set my face against
them. It is impossible but that they should sink more and more, whom God in his
anger has set himself against, Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thine heart endure, or can
thine hands be strong in the days that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord have
spoken it and will do it. Gods being against us is enough to make every thing
to be hurtful to us. There is no standing before him when he is angry, nor can
any creature give us relief, Psalm. 76.7. Thou even thou art to be feared: and
who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry? Jer. 10.10. At his wrath
the Earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide his
indignation, Job. 34.29. When he hides his face, who then can behold him?
whether it be done against a Nation, or against a man only. If God give charge
to the contrary, no creature can afford us any relief.

2. Because there are not waters of true repentance brought to quench Gods
anger? Or, there is not a turning and returning unto God. Gods anger against
such a People, as he has set himself against in Judgment, it is as a burning
flame, and it will as the flame of fire rise and grow higher and fie^er, unless
prevented, quenched and removed by unseigned Repentance and reformation: Which
though not efficiently causal, yet qualifies the Subject for the receiving of
the Mercy which God for his own sake will bestow through Christ, Isai. 66.15.
For behold the Lord will come with fire, and with his Chariots; like a
Whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire,
Isai. 5.24, 25. Therefore as the fire devoured the Stubble, and the flame
consumes the chaff: So, etc. Therefore is the Anger of the Lord kindled
against his People, and he has stretched forth his hand against them, and has
smitten them, and the Hills did tremble, and their Carcasses were torn in the
midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand
is stretched out still. The reason of this continuance of Gods anger is
directly given, Isai. 9 12, 13. where the same words are repeated; For all this
his anger is not turned away, etc. and the reason plainly given; For the people
turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts.
So long as there is not repentance and reformation in a people there is no
likelihood that Gods wrath should be pacified by Judgments formerly inflicted:
but rather that there will be a procedure to further, greater and sorer
Judgments: For when the Sovereign God has once taken a people thus into his
hand, it is likely in reason that he will have his will of them or bring them
very low, mend or mar them, bow or break them, Lev. 26.23. And if ye will not
be reformed by these things: and ver. 27, 28. And if ye will not for all this
bearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me: then I will walk contrary unto you
also in fury.

3. Because where there is not repentance and reformation under Affliction
there will be an increase of provocation. The Lords expectation is frustrated,
and thereby will he be provoked: Besides such who thus frustrate Gods
expectation they will grow more hardened in sin and security by affliction, if
not more bold to sin, Zeph. 3.7. I said, surely thou will fear me, thou will
receive instruction: so their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I
punished them: but they rose early and corrupted all their doings. And this
will be like to continue and increase their affliction, Hos. 13.2, 3. And now
(postquam moniti fuerint and castigati, Rivet. After they have been warned and
chastned) they sin more and more. Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud,
and as the early dew it passes away, as the chaff that is driven with a
whirlwind out of the floor, and as a smoke out of the Chimney. By which four
similitudes, the greatness and certainty of their calamity is denoted, and that
that flourishing prosperity which they hoped for should come to nothing.

Prop. III. The miseries of such a people will be like to proceed till there be
a pouring out of the Spirit from on high upon them to their sound conversion.
Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high, etc. Text. ver. 15. If God
has once so far taken a people in hand as to set them under a dispensation of
Judgment, there is no grounded hope of their deliverance and release in mercy,
till God do in a gracious manner pour out his Spirit upon them, or wonderfully
work a saving change in them, and among them by the effectual operation of his
holy Spirit: Till abundance of grace be given forth for the procuring and
effecting of their found conversion.

The Spirit is given or poured out for that end that there may be Conversion.
And that either,

1. The Conversion of sinners, which is expressed in the Text by, the Wilderness
becoming a fruitful field, Psalm. 51.13. Sinners shall be converted unto thee.
The Lord sends down his Spirit for this end to convince, awaken, convert,
regenerate and sanctify sinners, Joh. 16.8, 11. to open their eyes, to turn
them from darkness to light and from the power of Satan unto God: This is the
work of the Ministry, Act. 26.18. which works effectually only through the
power, presence and assistance of the Spirit accompanying of the same. It is
the work of the Spirit efficiently to deliver sinners out of the power of
darkness, and translate them into the Kingdom of the dear Son of God: to make
them of unholy, profane, proud and vain; serious, humble, holy, pious and
conformed to the image and will of God: to love those things [of God] which
they have not loved nor regarded; and to hate and abandon those things [of sin,
world and vanity] which they have loved and set their hearts upon, 1 Cor. 6.11.
And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Or,

2. The Conversion of Saints and Christians. Which is expressed in the Text
according to the interpretation given, by; the fruitful field being counted for
a forest. Peter was converted before Satan fifted him and made him deny his
Master, for says Christ; I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not: But
he must be converted again and therefore Christ says to him; When thou art
converted strengthen thy brethren, Luke 22.32. though the relative charge of
state in believers is but once wrought, it is wrought at once and continues for
ever, and the real change in their persons by sanctification is perfect in its
parts, yet this latter admits of degrees: It is so wrought in the believer as
that it needs constant carrying on in this life: and it may so decay as to need
to be done over again, and so the Christian to pass under the work of
Conversion again, a second time. Hence David prays when he had as it were lost
the work or effect of former Conversion, that God would create in him a clean
heart, and renew a right Spirit within him, Psalm. 51.10. Apprehending himself
deprived in a manner of that holy disposition and power of godliness, which God
had formerly wrought in bm, asi before he begged for pardon, so here for the
sanctification of Gods Spirit. The word Renew I conceive has reference to his
former piety which he found greatly decayed in him, wherewith he desires to be
established again. Jackson in loc. Now this is the work of the Spirit to renew
the work of Conversion, and carry on the work of grace in believers. He is
given for this end, for the furthering the work of grace and holiness in
believers in renewed and more strong acts of repentance, says and obedience:
to make them more free from sin end pollution, more and more conformable to the
will of God in all things, more abundantly fruitful in every good work: to
enlarge them in duty: and to make their faces and conversations to shine, that
they shall in good carnest be engaged for God, his service and glory.

Hence when the Spirit is poured out upon a people, All, or the generality of
them, or at least very many among them will be either enquiring for, or walking
in the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, Jer. 50.4, 5. In those days,
and in that time, says the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they and
the children of Judah together, going and weeping; they shall go and seek the
Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward.
Which last expression may intimate their sincere intention and fixed resolution
to go on in the way they enquired after. To set ones face, is to fix the
Affections and actions without declining to any other way. Wilson Christ.
Diction. Such a people will be bound for God, having received the Spirit of God
every one will go bound in the Spirit to the performance of his duty and the
glorifying and honoring of God. They shall be signally carried out in seeking
Gods face and doing of his will. There would appear a right and full bent of
Spirit for God in persons, doing all sincerely in the name and in an
evangellical manner exactly according to the will of the Lord Jesus, heartily
giving thanks to God and the Father by him, Col. 3, 17. The Spirit of God and
of holiness will breath and be manifest in them: There will be a godly sorrow
and mourning for sin in All, Ezekiel. 7.16. But they that escape of them shall
escape and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them
mourning, every one for his iniquity. A hearty grief that they have displeased,
dishonored and provoked God by their sin: And a sincere and earnest care and
endeavor to repair the honor and glory of Gods Name by future holy obedience.
These are the immediate effects and fruits of the pouring out of the Spirit.

And till the Spirit be thus poured out and these gracious effects of it in
some good measure obtained to the Conversion and Sanctification of a people
under Judgment their misery and sorrow will be like to procead and continue.
And that,

1. Because the profaneness, unbelief and impenitency of sinners, and the
unholiness and unfruitfulness of Christians are the causes of these sorrows and
miseryes. And as till the causes be removed there is no probability that the
effect should cease, Josh. 7.12. neither will I be with you any more, except ye
destroy the accursed from among you. So in order to the removal of these from a
people, the pouring out of the Spirit from on high upon them to their sound
conversion and sanctification is the grand expedient. And therefore till this
be they will remain a generation of Gods wrath: His anger will not be like to
be turned away from them till this work be wrought in and for them.

2. Because till the Spirit be in some measure poured out upon them they will
not be fit for mercy. They will not duly acknowledge nor improve it, but
profane and abuse it. Till by the gracious work of Gods Spirit in them they be
brought to a compliance with his will, they will not be in a posture to receive
mercy: They will not carry it aright under mercy, Psalm. 106.8.13, 21.
Nevertheless he saved them for his Names sake, But, they soon forgot his works,
they waited not for his Counsel. They forgot God their Savior, which had done
great things. And therefore there is little probability that God will bestow
Salvation upon such a people.

3. Till then they will be provoking God, Though the Lord be striking them they
will certainly be adding new provocations, Jer. 5.3. Thou have stricken them
but they have not grieved: thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive correction, they have made their faces harder then a rock, they have
refused to return, Isai. 57.17. For the iniquity of his Covetousness was I
wroth and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the
way of his heart. After this manner will they certainly do, till Sovereign
grace heal them; till such time as there be a gracious effusion of the Spirit
from on high upon them to change, convert and sanctify them. And therefore
notwithstanding all the evil God has done unto them, it will be probable that
his Anger will not be turned away, but his hand stretchout still against them.

Prop. IV. When the Spirit from on high is poured out upon a People to their
sound Conversion there will be a restoration and multiplication of sure mercyes
and blessings upon them. Though such a people were under affliction and
expressions of divine displeasure before. The Seal of Gods providence would
then turn toward them and there would be a remarkable, glorious and happy
change among them, Text, ver. 16, 17, 18. Then there should be a new face and
aspect of divine providence upon them, and the clouds of divine displeasure
would blow over. What before was taken away or withheld from them should be
then restored or given, and what mercy they want, bestowed upon them. They
should have mercyes and blessings indeed, that are worthy the name of
blessings, store of sure mercyes and blessings.

1. There would be great holiness. Holiness would abound: There would be
Holiness to the Lord as it were engraven in bells and pots, Zech. 14.20.21.
Holiness would be conspicuous both in persons and actions. Judgment and
righteousness would dwell and remain every where both in the wilderness and in
the field, Text, ver. 16. Then Judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and
righteousness remain in the fruitful field.

1. We should then see sinners studying and following after Holiness.
Christians might then see those ignorant profane, wicked creatures, whom they
now with grief behold or hear of, that they mind nothing but their vanity,
their pride, excess, intemperance, disorder, who now will not be persuaded to
pray, to read, or hear the word of God with diligence, reverence and obedience,
who will be profane, wanton, intemperate, negligent, irreligious, who will do
any thing but what they should, and every thing that they should not: But then
we might see them serious, humble, attentive to what is good, acting in the
fear of God, diligent and studious to know the will of God, careful to please
God, fearful of displeasing him, circumspect in their actions, Christian in
their behavior, adorning the doctrine of the Gospel, denying all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and living soberly righteously and godly in the world, Tit.
2.12. Isai. 32.4. The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge. [Such
as were heady and inconsiderate, as fond and foolish persons usually are, shall
then be better advised, and by attending to the word of God, come to understand
aright the will of God. And the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to
speak plainly.] Men by their religious speech and communication, at which they
did but stammer, when they assayed ought before, shall now manifest the inward
alteration and change of their hearts. Engl. Annot. There are many who having
little or nothing of Religion in their hearts, little or no discerning or taste
of things of the Spirit of God. when they are put upon it to speak of any
spiritual matters, or to perform any religious duty, they do miserably stammer,
sumble and falter, they cannot speak, or but very brokenly, though it may be
they can speak fast enough and are of voluble speech in other things: But were
there abundant effusion of the Spirit upon these, it would loose their tongues
and make them able to speak distinctly, understandingly and feelingly of
spiritual and holy things, Isai. 29.18. And in that day shall the deaf hear the
words of the book: and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out
of darkness. Those that were deaf to all the calls and warnings of God by his
word and rod, they would not hearken; that were blind, that could not, would
not see, notwithstanding all that glorious light of Gods truth was held forth
before them; they shall be recovered of those their former maladies, and by the
Spirit of God effectually working with his word, they shall come to have their
cars and eyes opened, to understand the truth and will of God, to give all
credit, and yield all obedience thereto, and shall be brought out of that
spiritual mist and darkness wherein they were before involved. And Isai: 29 24.
They also that erred in Spirit shall come to understanding, and they that
murmured shall learn doctrine. Such as were wandering out of the way of
understanding into ways of error and wickedness, and were ready to murmr, be
impatient and discontented to have their hearts rise against any that went
about to stop them in their evil courses, and thence were ready to quarrel or
speak untowardly of the messages or messengers of God, these shall come to
themselves and set themselves to seek wisdom and understanding, to learn the
doctrine and will of God, and shall betake themselves to, and walk in the ways
of wisdom. More passages to the same purpose we have in Isai. 35.5, 6.7. Then]
when by the foregoing afflictions, Gods people being now fitted for mercy. God
shall be pleased to afford it. The eyes of the blind shall be opened.] Those
that were spiritually blind before, shall now being enlightened, see, conceive
and understand, both the mystery of Godliness revealed in Gods word, and his
mercy and goodness manifested in his works. And the ears of the deaf shall be
unstopped:] They shall now listen to the word of God speaking in his book and
by his messengers, that had no list to hearken to either before. Then shall the
lame man leap as an Heart,] Men shall be cured of such spiritual defects in
their Souls, whereby they were disabled unto sincere, upright, constant and
cheerful walking in Gods ways. And the tongue of the dumb sing.] Those that
have least tongue, or had no tongue at all, to ought that is good, yet shall
they for joy sing and chant out the praises of him, that had done so great
things for them. For in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in
the desert.] A type of the spiritual watering, whereby such persons and places
become fertile and fruitful, that were barren of all grace and goodness before.
And the parched ground shall become a Pool, and the thirsty Land springs of
water: In the habitation of dragons where each lay shall be grass with reeds
and rushes. The same thing in other terms. Engl. Annot. Thus do these
Scriptures hold forth to us the great alteration that should be wrought in
sinners by the pouring out of Gods holy Spirit upon them. One might then see
them lamenting and abandoning their former folly and vanity and minding heaven
in good earnest, acknowledging and confessing their iniquity, begging pardon
with great earnestness, flying to Jesus Christ, relying on him, and faithfully
endeavoring to live the life of Christ, to exalt him by a gospel becoming
conversation. Oh what a wonderful sight would this be to see such dead bones
live! How would this effect and ravish the hearts of those that are good? How
would the heart, even the heart and reins of godly parents rejoice, when the
heart of their children shall be thus wise and their lips speak right things?
Prove. 23.15, 16. What think you of this, you whose hearts are mourning for the
dissoluteness of, or at least that you can see no more of godliness or
hopefulness in your children? You are now often ashamed, and your face waxes
pale, with care, fear and distress for your poor wandering children: but if you
could once see them thus the work of Gods hands, being formed, molded and
fashioned for God, how full would your hearts and mouths then be of the praises
of the holy one of Israel? How would you sanctify and glorify him? Isai. 29.22,
23: Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale: But
when he seeeth his children, the work of my hands in the miast of him, they
shall sanctify my Name, and sanctify the holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the
God of Israel.

2. We should then see Christians perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Making Religion their business. Studying to keep all Gods commandments and
ordinances blameless, and to do all those things that are pleasing in his
sight. Laboring to be eminently holy both in their religious and civil
actions. Careful to prepare and dispose themselves to wait upon God in his
service; conscientiously rising up to meet with God in the attendance on his
Ordinances; Humbly, reverently, religiously, attentively waiting upon God, that
one might see that the service of God is heartily intended by them, and that
communion with God is sincerely breathed after by them in duties and
Ordinances. Then we might hear them full of heavenly, spiritual and lively
discourse, sweet and savoury words and speeches flowing from the good treasure
and abundance of the heart; See them edifying, teaching and admonishing one
another, Col. 3.16. considering one another, exhorting and provoking to love
and good works, Heb. 10.24, 25. Then you might see sweet agreement, affection,
cordialness, faithfulness and peaceableness among brethren, bearing and
forbearing one another in love. Then you might see Christians amiable and
exemplary in their civil conversation; not in the least seeking to defraud or
go beyond others, not unsteady in their words or promises, not conforming
themselves to the world, or the customs or manners thereof, not disorderly,
not proud, not froward, not unmerciful, not churlish, not intemperate, not
ungrateful, not worldly, nor any way (at least not so many ways) unbeseeming
in their carriages or actions; but carrying an even thread of holiness and
spiritualness throughout the whole of their conversation: Herein exercising
themselves to have a conscience altogether void of offense both toward God and
toward man, with a single eye and exactly minding the Rule in all their
carriage toward both Oh what desirable times would these be when piety and
holiness should thus flourish! When those many and grievous and too just
complaints as of the profaneness and dissoluteness of many unruly and
ungoverned persons, so of the unchristian and unworthy carriages of Professors
in many respects should cease and be no more to be found: And the glory of God,
the honor of his Name and esteem of his Ordinances and ways should be highly
advanced by the holy and amiable lives of all his Servants! This would be the
consequent of an abundant gracious effusion of the Spirit upon a people.

2. There would be great happiness. Happy would the people be that were in such
a case. Their condition would be exceeding comfortable. And that,

1. In the enjoyment of inward peace, quietness and assurance. Text, ver. 17.
And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever. They should be kept in perfect peace, Isai.
26.3. Their Souls settled in quiet assured apprehensions of the grace and favor
of God to them, enjoying that great peace which they have that love the Law of
God without any offensive disquietment. There should not then be such dismal
horror feizing the Souls of poor creatures, as now does the Souls of some poor
wretches that have hardly minded they had Souls to save till death has awakned
them. There would not then be such doubtings, discouragements, difficulties,
temptations, fears and faintings in persons laboring under Soul perplexities:
But it should be well with their Souls, and they might walk up and down in the
light of Gods countenance, Psalm. 89.15. they should experience the tokens of
Gods favor toward them and be gladded therewith, Psalm. 21.6. Thou have made
him exceeding glad with thy conntenance, Psalm. 6.7. Thou have put gladness into
my heart. Whatever outward troubles and forrows they meet with in the world,
yet they should have inward peace, and be singularly supported, comforted and
carried through all outward distresses, Joh. 16.22, and ye now therefore have
sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice. As the sight of
Christ after risen from the dead to his disciples comfortless and distressed
upon their Lords crucifixion filled their hearts with solid and stable joy
which none could take from them: So the fight and gracious presence of Christ
by his holy Spirit with his afflicted Servants will eminently support and
rejoice their hearts under all their sorrows, when he shall provide them with
the grace of the holy Spirit; And this Diodate understands by Christ's seeing
his Disciples again, in the Text now quoted. Hence is it spoken of the Servants
of Christ, that they are. As sorrowful yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6.10. And
not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, Romans 5.3. I am filled with
comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation, 2 Cor. 7.4. They have
the peace of God which passes all understanding keeping their hearts and minds
through Christ Jesus, which eats out all their care, fear and disquietment,
Phil. 4.6, 7.

2. In the enjoyment of outward peace and quietness with the blessings of it.
God would give his people, were they rightly spirited for God, his work and
service, peace and rest round about. Text, ver. 18. And my people shall dwell
in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places,
Isai. 48.18. Oh that thou had hearkened to my Commandments! then had thy peace
been as a River, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea. The Lord would
give great prosperity to his people, were they sanctified and filled with the
graces of his holy Spirit, at least what and how much would be good and best
for them. He would order their outward conditions for their good and comfort:
They should have his protection and blessing, and if that were best, security
from temporal evils, Psalm. 91.9, 10. Because thou have made the Lord, which is
my refuge, even the most High, thy habitation: There shall no evil befall thee,
neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. Enemies open or secret should
not prevail, nor their attempts prosper, because the Lord of Hosts himself
would be their defense and safeguard, Isai. 31.5. As birds flying, so will the
Lord of Hosts defend Jerusalem, defending also he will deliver it, and passing
over, he will preserve it, Zech. 12.9, 10. And it shall come to pass in that
day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.
And I will pour upon the house of David and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem
the spirit of grace etc. Judgments that are destructive should cease and be
removed from them, Psalm. 85.1, 2, 3. Lord, thou have been favorable unto thy
Land: thou have brought back the Captivity of Jacob: Thou have forgiven the
iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their sin, Selah. Thou have taken
away all thy wrath: thou have turned thy self from the fierceness of thine
anger, Psalm. 91.3. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler:
and from the noisome pestilence. And all convenient and comfortable mercyes and
blessings should be conferred upon them, Psalm. 85.12. Yea, the Lord shall give
that which is good: and our Land shall yield her increase.

1. USE. Hence learn, That all Gods Dispensations are of exceeding great
weight. There is no one of Gods Providence, especially that concern the body
of a people, and more especially his people, that is inconsiderable. The
condition of a people is much altered by the pouring out or withholding of
Gods Spirit: it is of very great concernment in what manner the blessed God
carries it to a people, whether in a way of anger or favor. Love or
displeasure in the dispensations of Gods Providence, has an efficatious it
fluence to the weal or woe of any. If the Lord be with a person or people in
the way of his gracious dispensation, they will be blessed and magnified
exceedingly. 2 Chronicles. 1.1. and the Lord his God was with him, and magnified him
exceedingly. Psalm. 65.4. and 144.15. But if God forsake and depart from them
their case will be wosull. Hos. 9.12. Yea, woe also to them when I depart from
them. There is a powerful and irresistible officacy of Gods Providence whether
merciful or afflictive upon his people, It will work upon them: His favor
will raise, his anger will depress and sink them. His dispensations are no vain
things, Psalm. 30.7. Lord by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand
strong, thou did hide thy face and I was troubled, Job. 34.29. When he gives
quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he hides his face, who then can
behold him? whither it be done against a nation, or against a man only.

USE 2. Learn hence, to be sensible of the misery and danger of our case, whom,
as we may justly conclude, God has set under a dispensation of Judgment. And
there being such weight in Gods dispensations we had need be sensible hereof.
The righteous and holy God seems to be now weary of repenting concerning us, as
he has oftentimes done, and not to act toward us as formerly: When his hand
has been upon us heretofore he has repented and not stirred up all his wrath,
As, Psalm. 78.38. But he being full of compassion forgave their iniquity, and
destroyed them not, yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir
up all his wrath. And Psalm. 106, 44, 45. Nevertheless he regarded their
affliction when he heard their cry. And he remembered for them his Covenant and
repented according to the multitude of his mercyes. But now God in his
providence seems to be speaking in the same language to us as to them, Jer.
15.6. Thou have forsaken me, says the Lord, thou art gone backward: therefore
will I stretch out mine hand against thee, and destroy thee, I am weary with
repenting. The Lord is exposing us and laying us open to Judgment, setting us
in the way of misery, watching over us for and following us with evil. And our
condition seems to be somewhat like what is expressed, Job. 30.15, 19. Terrors
are turned upon me: they pursue my Soul as the wind: and my welfare passes
away as a cloud. And now my Soul is poured out upon me: the days of affliction
have taken hold upon me. The hand of God is gone out against us and
notwithstanding all that is come upon us, his anger is not turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still. The Almighty (though admirably just and holy) is
dealing bitterly with us, Psalm. 60.3. Thou have showed thy people hard things:
thou have made us to drink the wine of astonishment.

1. Misery and distress grow general and universal. As Job. 30.14. They came
upon me as a wide breaking in of waters: in the desolation they rolled
themselves upon me. The Lord is compassing and afflicting us on every side, As
Isai. 29.3. I will camp against thee round about, etc. Affliction comes up as
it were from all quarters and makes its way to all places and persons almost
more or less. In our late and present troubles of sword, sickness and mortality
there is scarce any but seels some thing whereof they are ready to complain,
either in person, estates, relations: And fears of what may yet come by this or
the other means, are even ready to amaze the hearts of all that are so serious
to consider any thing. So that there is an eminent accomplishment upon us at
this day of that solemn word in Ezekiel. 21.15, 16, 17. I have set the point of
the sword against all their gates, that their heart may faint; and their ruins
be multiplied. Ah it is made bright, it is wrapped up for the slaughter, Go thee
one way or other, either on the right hand or on the left, whithersoever thy
face is set. I will also smite my hands together and I will cause my fury to
rest: I the Lord have said it.

2. God hears not our Prayers, i.e. Our public prayers or prayers for the
public. There is no time so bad, but God hears the prayers of his dear
Servants (though they may not always be able to perceive it) that watch and
keep their garments, which they make to him for grace and mercy to their own
Souls, Ezekiel. 14.14. Though these three men Noah, Daniel and Job were in it,
they should deliver but their own Souls: though their own they should deliver.
But public petitions put up for public deliverance, help and mercy, seem to
be thrown by, not to be received or granted. And this is an Argument of a
dispensation of Judgment. God is wont when he favors his people to be nigh to
them in all things that they call upon him for, Deuteronomy. 4.7. But when he sets his
sace against them then he denies audience to their prayers, Jer. 14.12. When
they fast I will not hear their cry. He forbids his faithful Servants to pray
for them, Jer. 11.14. Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up
a cry, or prayer for them: for I will not hear them in the time that they cry
unto me for their trouble. And if the eminentest of his Servants do pray for
them, he will not hear them, Jer. 15.1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before
me, yet my mind could not be toward this people. The Lord does as it were
abscond, withdraw and conceal himself from such a people that he may not be
found by them: seems to cover up himself that their cry and prayer may not come
at him to trouble him in that which he intends not to do, Lam. 3.8, 44. Isai.
29.1, 2. Let them kill Sacrifices: yet I will distress Ariei, and there shall
be heaviness and sorrow. And after this manner is the dispensation of God to us
at this day. And therefore oh that we could see that we are in a bad case that
we were indeed sensible of the misery and danger of our condition being thus
set under Judgment! It is our great misery that nothing will a waken us. How
foolish are we, what sottish Children? Shall God break us to pieces, make us to
go backward, to stumble and fall, and be broken, and snared and taken, and stop
his ear to our cries, and shall not we be affected with our misery? Oh that we
could hold up our hard hearts to be broken by the powerful hand of a gracious
God Lord smite these Rocks! Make us sensible! Make us relent! Make us mourn
under thine anger!

USE 3. Hence see a reason of the continuance and growing of our sorrows. We
are set under a dispensation of Judgment, and the Spirit is not yet poured out
from on high upon us. And therefore no wonder if our troubles grow more
extensive, numerous and general; and more intense, sharp and piercing. God has
in just anger set himself against us, and we are not yet turned and set for him
by the effectual pouring out of the Spirit upon, and working of it in us. For,

1. How little kindly and sincere mourning for sin is there among us? That is
one special effect of the pouring out of the Spirit on a people that have been
rebellious; They shall look upon him, whom they have pierced and mourn, Zech.
12.10. They shall mourn for their abominations and for their neglects of
Christ. But how little of this mourning do we hear of amongst us in these
days? Men and Women are heart whole, though there be much guilt upon them, and
it may be their corruptions are yet whole and entire in them: They can do this
and that evil and neglect this and that duty, and yet not mourn. There are many
poor creatures can rejoice in their sins: But, Alas; how few are in bitterness
for them? where are the persons that sow in tears, that go forth and weep
bearing precious feed, as Psalm. 126.5, 6. Many are apt to make their moan for
want of health, want of peace, want of money, etc. But how few are there that
lament and mourn truly for want of a broken heart, for want of pardon of sin,
the favor of God and his grace? Were there more of this, there would be hope.
As is the Proverb; Corn sown in a flood comes up like a wood: Were there this
sowing in floods of tears of true repentance, we might then hope for an
abundance of the fruits and graces of the Spirit and the blessings accomyanying
them to follow. But, alas! how low are our hopes from this ground?

2. How little activity and delight in the service and worship of God and
reaching after Communion with God therein is there among us? how dull, cold and
unspiritual are most in the work and service of God? Now the Spirit is a
quickening Spirit, and if that were poured out on us we should be lively,
active, and vigorous in the service and worship of God, Joh. 6.63. It is the
Spirit that quickneth. We should serve God with utmost intention and affection,
we should be never better then when in his presence reaching after communion
with him. As David, Psalm. 27.4. and 42.1, 2. But alas how little is our beart
drawn out to, and strength put forth in the house, worship and Ordinances of
God! we drive too heavily, we either want wheels, or oil to our wheels.

3. How little of a praying frame, of a spirit of grace and supplication is
among us? Where the Spirit of Christ is, there are these Abba's, those
groanings that cannot be uttered, Gal. 4.6. God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father, Romans 8.26. The Spirit it self
makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. Where there
is any good measure of the Spirit there is liberty of access to God, there will
be freedom of pouring out the the heart before God and strong wrestling with
God, holy importunity and taking the Kingdom of heaven by violence. But alas
how little is there of these things? Our prayers are too cold, dead, formal,
lifeless, insipid and wordy only. How little of a melting frame in our prayers
and humble brokenness therein, and how little vehement breathings of Soul
after, and strong actings of faith upon the Lord Jesus therein? How little of
patient and painful wrestlings with the Lord in them? How little of earnest
looking after prayers, and believing expectation, and waiting for a gracious
answer of them.

4. How little studying and practicing of Holiness is among us? Little of a
Gospel-becoming conversation. Were the Spirit of God put within us it would
cause us to walk in his statutes and keep his Judgments and do them, Ezekiel.
36.27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them. We should then live holy
and amiable lives, our light would shine before men and so give occasion of
much glory to God. But how do we walk at all peradventures with God in our
conversation? We are too uncertain and uneven, if not unholy therein. This is a
thing confessed by most. Oh that it were lamented and reformed by All*

5. How little breathings of love to God, his ways, Ordinances and Saints are
among us? Were the holy Ghost in the gifts and graces of it given to us in
plentiful manner, the love of God would be shed abroad in our hearts, it would
be much there, Romans 5.5. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the
holy Ghost which is given to us. We should entirely love God and dearly love
his word, Saints and ways: The bent and stream of our affections would be
turned this way. But alas! How low does our affection run to God, to his house,
to his word, to his Ordinances, and one to another. How eager are we in our
pursuits of other things? but after these not so earnest.

It is too too evident that of these things mentioned there is too little among
us, but of their contraryes too much: There is too much boldness in, and
impenitency for sinning; too much neglect of, formality and deadness in prayer;
too much of weariness in and under, and listlessness to the worship and service
of God; too much heedlessness, carelessness, unholiness and profaneness in
conversation; too much loathing, slighting, undervaluing and disregarding of
God his word, Ordinances and Saints: Which plainly show our want of the pouring
out of the Spirit: And hence is our trouble continued and growing.

USE 4. Learn to observe the motions and breathings of Gods Spirit that we may
discern the signs of the times. We are from this Text informed that the pouring
out, or withholding of the Spirit, has a great influence to alter or dispose
the frame or manner or state of times and dispensations: And therefore this
dispensation of God concerning his Spirit is a special sign of the times, a
sign for us to know the times by, or to understand what the work of God is, or
is like to be in the times we live in. It is the duty of Christians to labor
to discern the signs of the times, for want of which our Savior blames and
sharply reproves those, Math. 16.3. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of
the sky, but can ye not discern the signs of the times? Luke 12.56. But how is
it that ye do not discern this time? That was the time of the Messiah and his
coming; of which there were special signs by which they might have apprehended
and understood it, had they been wise and diligent to have marked the same. The
signs of any times they are those visible appearances of Gods providence
whereby God leads us to discern that which is more inward as to his purposes,
intentions and expectations. By these signs we may be led to observe or
understand what God intends with, or to a people in such or such a time, which
way the providence of God is at present working, or like to work toward such a
people, what God is doing with or among them. Now the Spirit of God in the
pouring out or withdrawing of it, being a special eminent and remarkable sign
of the times, by a wise and prudent observation of the motions and workings of
that, we may be signally led to this discerning of the times. And therefore let
all Christ's disciples take due notice and observation of this matter. And
consider particularly,

1. What movings of the Spirit there are in the Souls of men and women in these
times. What solemn awakenings and sound convictions wrought by the Spirit in
the hearts of finners: what wooings and allurings to draw their Souls unto God:
What noise there is, rushing and shaking caused by the wind of the Spirit among
the dry bones. Do we see them coming together bone to his bone, and standing up
on their feet from the dead? Is the Spirit of God striving, mightily shaking,
powerfully and irresistibly working upon the hearts of secure sinners? Does it
force them to cry out of their sin and misery, wretched and woeful condition?
Does it terrify them from persisting in, or meddling with iniquity? Does it
humble and make them look about them with greatest care and solicitude how
they may do to escape the wrath of God and to obtain Salvation? Are these
workings of the Spirit upon the hearts of smners in these times? Speak you who
still remain unregenerate! Is the Spirit of God still dealing with you by
awakening, warning and not letting you alone to go on in sin, and alluring you
by love to Jesus Christ? Or has it done striving with you in that solemn
manner and moving upon you in that winning way which formerly it has done,
whereby it made you sometimes to listen to its motions? Have you got the
mastery of the Spirit by frequent resistance, that now you will not be jog'd or
moved by it? Or has the Spirit rever thus moved upon you? Will you let us know
how it is with you in this matter, that we may the better understand what God
is doing or about to do? If there be these movings, awakenings and allurings of
the Spirit in the Souls of men and women in any considerable measure among us,
it is a good sign: But if not, it is surely bad.

2. Consider, what presence of God is with his word in the dispensation of it,
and what workings of the word there are upon and in the hearts of hearers. What
impression the Word of the Gospel labored in, takes: Whether it tends to
hardening or softning whether it be a seed sown upon good ground, or as seed
thrown by the way side, or has only some lighter impressions. Particularly,

1. What subduing of hearts and wills is wrought by it, What strong holds
pulled down, what vain refuges discovered, what sinful pleas taken off thereby?
Do we see those that are Enemies to Christ falling down before him when he
rides forth conquering and to conquer by his word? Psalm. 110.2. The Lord shall
send the Rod of thy stringth out of Zion. The preaching of the Gospel,
accompanied with the mighty working of the Spirit of Christ, is the Rod of
strength, or the strong Scepter whereby Christ does mightily subdue and govern
his people, Jacks. in loc. And where there is a presence of the Spirit
accompanying the dispensation of the Word, it will subdue hearts.

2. What heart-breakings and Soul-meltings there are under the Word of God? How
does the hammer of Gods word wielded by the Spirit break the rock in pieces?
Jer. 23.29. Is not my word like a hammer that breakth the rock in pieces? Does
the word divide betwixt the joints and the marrow, pierce to the discerning of
the inward thoughts and intents of the heart? Do men and women sit trembling
under the hearing of Gods word? Are their Souls plainly and wholly laid open to
be wounded and bealed by the word of God? Does the word move and work kindly
and sweetly upon the heart to persuade, to draw, to instruct, to correct, to
awe, to unite the heart to God? Does it fully unravel our own woven webs,
kindly humble us and make us fall all to pieces, as in our selves that we have
no kind of thing to take to; and does it sweetly allure and work up our hearts
to an earnest, hearty and thankful devolving the whole weight and concernment
of our restless, helpless Souls upon the everlasting Arms of a tender and
gracious Father in Christ Jesus? Does it bring us to clasp about a strong,
gracious and faithful Redeemer and Savior, as who will hold there and not let
him go, because else we shall perish? Or is it so that the heat of Gods word
dispensed will not thaw or melt our frozen hearts, how often soever they are held
to this fire? Is not my word like as a fire, says the Lord?

3. What affection there is to the word of God. What love to, longing for and
desire after it. Is it the delight, joy and rejoicing of persons to be hearing,
reading and practicing according to the holy word of God? Is it as it was with
David, Psalm. 119.97. Oh how love I thy Law! Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the heart pants
after the waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee O God. My Soul their steth
for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God? Psalm.
84.2. My Soul longs, yea, even faints for the Courts of the Lord, Psalm.
122.1. I was glad when they said unto me; Let us go into the house of the Lord.
Or are we little affected to, and our hearts little drawn out after the word of
God.

3. Consider, What tenderness of heart and heart-smiting for sin there is among
us? Where there is much of the grace of the Spirit the heart will be tender,
and such a man's heart will smite him upon every offense against God, and upon
every appearance of his anger. As Josiah's heart was tender and he humbled
himself before the Lord upon the hearing of what God speak against Judah, 2
King. 22.19. And David's heart smote him upon his inconsiderate rash actions, 1 Samuel 24.5. and 2 Samuel 24.10. Now what of this heart tenderness, and grief, and
mourning for sin and Gods anger is there among us? Does the least transgression
or miscarriage wound and grieve the Soul? Is a vain thought a trouble? Is an
hypocritical frame or inclination a grief? Any appearance of evil disquieting,
that the least corruption cannot be born without crying to God for deliverance?
Or can persons bear away with lighter and lesser evils, and it may be grosser
miscarriages also? Let sin go without lamenting, or bewailing it, or being much
concerned about it? be loose in their lives and ungirt in their Religion, and
yet full peace?

4. Consider, What lively vehement outgoings of Soul to God in prayer there are
among us. What of humble and holy access, freedom and familiarity with God in
seeking him. Do persons (even Christians) freely, easily and as it were
naturally pour out their Souls to God? Can they by Faith take hold of God, and
wrestle it out with him, and not let him go till he bless them? The spirit of
grace is a spirit of supplications also, Zech. 12.10. Or is it so, that many
neglect calling upon God wholly, others do it, in hypocrisy, many in mere
formality, and even Christians themselves find it exceeding difficult to get up
their hearts at any time to any earnestness, or suitableness in this duty?

5. Consider, what concernment of Soul there is for the glory and work of God
among us. Are we deeply engaged in, heartily taken up about, and diligently
laboring in the promoting of Gods work, and procuring of his glory? Is it our
chief care and principal endeavor that the work of Christ may be upheld,
continued, and transmitted to posterity? Is every one in his place and capacity
thoughtful and careful about this in good earnest, that it may be done? Or are
we no whit or little concerned about the glory and work of God among us? Are
not our own concernments minded more? If we can look to our selves, let Christ
look to himself and his work, as the Apostle complains, Phil. 2.21. All seek
their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's. Are there few upon whose
hearts does rest the care and solicitude what will become of the Lords work?
It is the property of such as inherit any good measure of a true Gospel spirit
to seek the glory of God.

These are some of the motions and operations of the Spirit which we are to
observe in our selves and others, and by which we may be directed to discern
the times, what God is doing or about to do, and what is like to become of us.
When these things shall be, we may look for good times: If there be much of
these things there is good hope: if little, little hope: if none, no hope: Only
we may here, as always elsewhere, reserve to God his absolute Sovereignty in
working. Be we never so bad, he may of his Sovereign grace save, or at least
spare us: Or be we never so good, he may of his Sovereign power and dominion,
and in perfect Justice also, hold us under affliction in this life. But
according to ordinary dispensation we may expect that he will be with us as we
be with him. As the working of his Spirit is in us, so the presence of his
mercyes and blessings will be with us, his presence or absence will be much
according as our spirits are working toward or from him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The
Lord is with you, while ye be with him: and if ye seek him, he will be found of
you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. So Psalm. 18.25, 26, 27.

If any shall say; Then (setting aside what God in his Sovereignty may do) We
hope it will go well with us, It is probable it will so; For there are sure
these workings of the Spirit among us. In Answer hereto I shall only add that
it will be needful to consider these things further.

1. Whether these workings of the Spirit, supposed among us, may in any sense
be said to be general. That there are some few, here and there one that keep
themselves close to God and have a good measure of the Spirit breathing in
them, for whose sakes we fare the better, is I suppose beyond question. But
whether there be a sufficient number to obtain the sparing or saving such a
place of light and means as New England is, at least without the feeling of
more sorrow first, may yet be a question. For I am ready to take this for
granted, that the same number of righteous persons that might save a sinning
Sodom, would yet not be enough to save a sinning Israel. And that because of
what the Lord says, Am. 3.2. You only have I known of all the Familyes of the
Earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.

2. Whether those workings of the Spirit that appear among us be for the most
part effectual and saving. Whether they be not mostly or in great part common
and ineffectual, and so issue only in formalities. It is the inward saving and
effectual operation of the Spirit that gives us grounded hope of the
expectation of sure mercyes and blessings.

3. Whether the breathings and workings of Gods Spirit are more or less among
us then when we were first set under a dispensation of Judgment. If they be
less, yea if they be not more, there is little likelihood that we should be
delivered from under that Judgment. For it is not probable that that should
remove anger, which was not sufficient to keep it off. If the want of such and
such graces and fruits of the Spirit has brought us under the Lords
displeasure, the same defect will sure be like to continue us there. This
therefore must not escape our consideration, what difference there is betwixt
us then, and now. That there is more sin, and that iniquity abounds more, since
Gods hand has been out against us, I think is the general observation of all
that take notice of any thing: According to that, Zeph. 3.7. I punished them:
but they rose early and corrupted all their doings.

4. Whether the workings of the Spirit are now growing or decaying among us. If
there be more and more of this gracious work of the Spirit breaking forth
daily, it is well: But if it grow more rare, and less and less, and the loss of
good men and women, in whom the Spirit of God eminently was, is not in some
good measure made up by the resting of the same Spirit upon others rising up in
their stead, our case looks threatening. But I shall say no more in this matter.
Who is wise and he shall understand these things? prudent and he shall know
them? For the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them: but
the transgressors shall fall therein, Hos. 14 9.

USE 5. Of Exhortation.

1. To all such among us as have any Interest at the throne of grace earnestly
to pray that God would pour out of his Spirit upon us from on high. Let Gods
favorites among us be earnest in crying unto God in this matter. If there be
any strength for wrestling with God left, improve all the Interest you have
with God and with his Son that you may prevail for this blessing.

For Motive, Consider,

Mot. 1. It is the manner of, and is becoming to Gods people to supplicate and
wait upon him for all their mercyes. It is meet we should receive all our
special blessings from God upon our knees. Thus Gods Servants have done, Psalm.
123.1, 2. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the heavens.
-- Our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us. We
must not expect to receive any signal mercy unless God say the word, and that
in answer to our earnest prayers. What ever mercy God bestows on his people he
will be sought to by them for it: When he has any mercy to bestow on his
people he is wont to stay till his people ask it, though it is God that puts it
into their hearts to ask it. Hence we are bidden in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving to let our requests be made known unto God,
Phil. 4.6. We must ask the Father in Christ's name for all. And therefore for
this great blessing of the pouring out of the Spirit there is all reason that
we should wait upon God by humble prayer. As the Apostles were commanded to
wait at Jerusalem for the promise of the Father, the sending down of the
Spirit, Act. 1.4. and most or much of that time they spent in praying, ver. 14.
These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication. And this no
doubt was a special or main part of their prayer, that God would accomplish his
promise in the actual pouring down of his Spirit.

2. Nothing else is like to do us good, unless God will pour out his Spirit on
us. We have had experience of the inefficacy of means upon us to bring us into
order and to a good frame.

Much and frequent instruction and warning by the word has not done it. We
have been taught: what people this day in the world more? It may be said of us,
as Zeph. 3.5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof. -- every morning does he
bring his Judgment to light, he fails not, The word of the Lord has been to
us, precept upon precept, line upon line; We have been in that respect planted
in the house of the Lord: But have we not been as the fig tree, barren Or as
the Lord speaks of his Vineyard, Isai. 5.4. Wherefore when I looked that it
should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?

Judgments have not done it. We have been under many: But yet may it not be
said of us after all, as of them, Am. 4. Yet have ye not returned unto me says
the Lord? How true is it of us; The people turns not to him that smites
them? We have not received correction but refused to return.

Deliverances do not do it. We have been respited. And when we have seen there
has been respite, have we not been secure still? As it was said of Pharaoh,
Exodus 8.15. But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart
and hearkened not.

Renewal of strokes has not done it. After respite and deliverance granted God
has taken us into his hand again. But alas! that it should be too truly said
of us, We set not our hearts to this also. So that there is little or no hope
till this be, till God by his Spirit work a saving through change in our
hearts. Truly we are grown so irrational as to spiritual concernments, that it
is not Gods working upon us only in a rational way that will reclaim us, or
bring us to his will: There must be in a more then ordinary manner the real
energetical operation of his Spirit in us to make us other men and women then
we are first.

3. An universal languishing in the inner man is and will be upon us for want
of this pouring out of the Spirit. You your selves Christians by your own
confession are not so capacitated to the exercise of grace and duty for want of
this. Things go hard with your Souls. Those things which remain are even ready
to die. As Rev. 3.2. Faith, love and other graces they are as it were under a
Consumption, very feeble and languid. Iniquities prevail, corruptions get loose
and waste the strength and vigor of the Soul: And will not you stir up your
selves to pray for the Remedy? This is lamentable, Isai. 64.6, 7. We all do
fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us away: And there
is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to take hold of
thee. And how do sinners pine away in their iniquities not regarding God nor
their own state and condition whilst they are without the effectual strivings
of the holy Spirit with them? Will you not pity them and earnestly pray for
this healing Remedy to be given to them? Can you see your own Souls pining, and
others Souls perishing, and not be importunate with God to put forth his hand
to revive and save respectively? what will become of faith, holiness, love to
God, his word, Ordinances, ways and one another, unless God be pleased to pour
out his Spirit on us?

4. The work of Christ is like quickly to ly by, unless this be. If God do not
graciously appear to give forth his holy Spirit, the work of Christ will be
like ere long, and it may be not long first to fall to the ground for want of
persons spirited to manage it and carry it on. And can you be willing to see
that day, or that it should come though you do not see it, and not improve the
utmost of your interest with God to prevent it? Are you Christ's, and not
concerned that the work of Christ should, or should be in danger to lie by?
Indeed we are like to run all to confusion and misery, if God do not
wonderfully and graciously appear this way to work for us, to revive us by his
Spirit, to set us into, and keep us in that order which is according to his
will. There is therefore absolute necessity of the effusion of the Spirit for
the continuance of Gods work and glory among us.

5. This will be our great security against the expressions of Gods anger,
Ezekiel. 39.29. Neither will I hide my face any more from them: for I have poured
out my Spirit upon the house of Israel, says the Lord God. And so it will be
our security in the enjoyment of all blessings and mercies. Indeed it is the
only sure way we have to all, or any good. The nearer God the greatest good is
to us, the farther sin the greatest evil will be from us; and there will be
peace, quietness and rejoicing in the favor of God, and in the gracious effects
of it.

6. It will be for the great honor of Christ. By the pouring out of the Spirit
is manifested the efficacy of his Redemption, and the end and fruit of it
obtained, which redounds to his honor. It is a great evidence of the power of
Christ's Redemption and demonstrates him to be a strong Redeemer, when there is
of the travel of his soul to be seen, and his people are made willing in the
day of his power, and hence is he glorified. Joh. 17.8, 10. I have given unto
them the words which thou gave me: and they have received them, and have
known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou did
send me -- And I am glorified in them. And will not you pray that Christ may be
honored in his subduing the hearts of men to himself, that this crown of Glory
may be set upon his head?

7. You have a promise to improve of Gods pouring out his Spirit. This is that
which the Lord has spoken that he will do, especially under the Gospel, Isai.
44.3. I will pour my Spirit on thy Seed and my blessing upon thine offspring.
So Joel 2.28.20. Whence you have a bottom for faith to rest upon, an argument
to plead in prayer for your children of the rising generation. You are the
Lords people, and to such God in these promises gives hold to be taken of
himself in this matter. Beg therefore that God would fulfill his own word,
accomplish his own promise.

Object. But it may be some will say; These promises and so the Text also
respect the latter times, and Gods pouring out his Spirit upon the Jews at
their conversion, and bringing home; And therefore what improvement can we make
of them for our times?

Sol. If it be granted that they do respect a signal dispensation of God to the
Jews in the last times, yet that hinders not but that there is many a like
dispensation of God in accomplishing these promises under the Gospel.
Prophetical Scripture is often fulfilled. And though there be in special one
grand accomplishment of Scripture Prophesies and promises: yet there are also
many Specimens, beginnings of fulfilling them, partile accomplishments, like
dispensations of Gods providence, wherein those prophesies and promises are
fulfilled in their measure and degree. And so this Prophesy and promise of Gods
pouring out his Spirit, however it may have its full and complete
accomplishment in some particular glorious time hereafter: yet there has been
a glorious accomplishment of it already in the Apostles times, as we are
informed, Act. 2.16, 17, 18. But this is that which was spoken by the Prophet
Joel; And it shall come to pass in the last days (says God) I will pour out
of my Spirit upon all flesh, etc. Yea, and it is fulfilled in a degree wherever
the Gospel comes with power. Yea, further it is observed by some; that, There
is no particular Church where the light has shined but has had its special
times, some solemn day of the pouring out of the Spirit, before the Sun went
down; Which may be observed either at the first breaking up of the Gospel, or
at some remarkable time and change of her condition; Whence a great tack of
Souls to Christ has followed, besides the reaching of the Conscience, and
stirring the affection of many others under a common work of the Spirit, which
usually goes along with solemn times. Fulfilling of the Scripture, page 142.
Edit. 2. Oh therefore pray that New England may have such [or another such] a
solemn day, before her Sun go down.

8. It is necessary to evidence that you have the Spirit that you be earnestly
desirous to have more of the Spirit, and that both for your selves and others.

9. If Christians would in good earnest set to pray for this there would be
good hope that the Spirit would be poured out upon us. The Lord is not wont to
say to his people, seek, or to stir them up to seek him in vain, Isa. 45.19. I
said not unto the Seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. and 30.19. He will be very
grasious unto thee at the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it, he will
answer thee. More encouragement to instant prayer for the pouring out of the
Spirit, see in Mr. I. Mathers Sermon on Isai. 44.3. page 14, to 19.

By all let Christians be persuaded to lift up the hands which hang down, and
set to prayer, with a deep sense of our want of the Spirit, with a Soul
humbling sense, that we have so grieved the Spirit, as thus to forsake and with
hold its gracious operations from us: and also with faith and expectation that
God will do this for us for the sake and upon the account of Christ: And then
we might hope that it would go well with us, and that that should be
accomplished in us which is prayed for by the Psalmist. Psalm. 90.14, 15, 16,
17. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice and be glad all our
days. Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and
the years wherein we have seen evil. Let thy work appear unto thy Servants: and
thy glory unto their Children. And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon
us, and establish thou the work of our hands upon us: yea, the work of our
hands establish thou it.

Exhortation 2. To All, to labor that the Spirit may be poured out upon them,
that they may hoth have the Spirit, and a plentiful measure of the graces of
it. Let every one endeavor to get the Spirit for himself, and so there would
be a general pouring out of the Spirit. Would we be free from misery, would we
be happy, make this our busmess. Let all unregenerate persons rouse and stir up
themselves, and take the Kingdom of heaven by holy violence. Sue and strive by
all means that the saving graces of the Spirit may be given to you. If we would
have the Spirit poured out upon us, upon our persons, we must be in the way of
waiting for it. And O that we could use utmost diligence and endeavors in this
thing! It is a matter of most eminent and everlasting concernment. I might here
urge those two things hinted in the Text, The misery of being without, and the
blessedness of having the Spirit poured out upon us. which comprehend all can
be said. But more particularly by way of motive, consider.

Mot. 1. If you have not the Spirit you are none of Christ's, you have no
Christ, you are Christless persons, and have no more to do with the Son of God
in your present state, as to any propriety in him, then the Devils had, Luke
8.28. You may talk of Christ, and it may be profess him, but you have no right
nor interest in him, Romans 8.9. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he
is none of his. The Spirit is the bond of union on Christ's part, and it is the
Spirit which works Faith in us which is the bond of union on our part: whence
Christ dwells in his people by his Spirit. Where therefore the Spirit of Christ
is not, there is no union of that Soul to Christ, no faith wrought in the
heart, and so no Christ dwelling in that soul. And now seriously consider what
it is to be without Christ, to be none of his.

1. It is to have no pardon of sin. No Christ, no forgiveness. You are yet in
your sins, under the guilt of them, and can have no pardon so long as you are
without Christ. All the sins that ever you have committed, they stand on file
against you, and you must answer for them. You lie under the heavy load of the
guilt of innumerable evils, the which, if you had any sense, might-make your
hearts to fail at the thoughts of it. Psalm. 40.12. For innumerable evils have
compassed me about, mine iniquityes have taken hold upon me, so that I am not
able to look up: they are more then the hairs of my head, therefore my heart
fails me. It is enough to make the heart of any person to fail indeed, to see
the load of all his sins lying upon him unpardoned. What a dreadful thing is
it for us who have been Transgressors from the womb, endless in acting of sin,
to have all our sins to answer for before God, Job. 9.3. If he will contend
with him, be cannot answer him one of a thousand. We cannot give a satisfying
Answer for one single sin of a thousand: But we must answer, that is, we must
be called to an account for them all, if they be not pardoned, and pardoned
they are not, if we have not Christ. In him pardon is to be had, Romans 3.25.
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God. But pardon is no where to be had without him.

2. It is to have no favor with God. No Christ, no favor in Heaven. The heart
of God will never be toward any that are not in Christ, and that continue out
of him. The world is at enmity with God, and reconciliation is only to be had
in Christ Jesus. God will enter into friendship with, or show favor to no
person but by the means and mediation of his Son. And therefore if thou art and
continuest without Christ, God does and ever will look upon thee as an Enemy,
thou shall find no favor in his eyes. He that made thee will not have mercy on
thee he that formed thee will show thee no favor: There will never be other
then anger in the face and heart of God toward; We are all by nature children
of wrath and Enemies, but they who are gotten into Christ they are thereby
reconciled, Col. 1.2, 22. You that were sometimes alienated and Enemies in your
minds by wicked works, yet now has be reconciled, in the body of his flesh
through death, etc. But for others the wrath of God abides on them, and there
it will abide to Eternity, for they can have no favor, if they continue out of
Christ, Joh. 3.36. He that believes not the Son, the wrath of God abides on
him.

3. It is to have no Salvation. No Christ, no Salvation. Whatever else men may
have, if they have not Christ, they can never be saved, Act. 4.12. Neither is
there Salvation in any other, for there is none other Name under Heaven given
among men whereby we must be saved, Joh. 3.36. He that believes not the Son
shall not see life. Poor creature! what do thou dream of Heaven, happiness,
eternal life and glory and have no Christ? All thy hopes will prove to be but
vain dreams, and will in the end vanish, 1 John 5.12. He that has not the Son
of God has not life.

4. It is to be reprobate, i. e. disapproved, disallowed and rejected of God,
Jer. 6.30. Reprobate [or refuse and rejectea] silver shall men call them,
because the Lord has rejected them, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know you not your own solves
how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates. They who are without
Christ, though they may not be Reprobate, as the word is opposed to Elect; yet
in their present state and as to what appears they are no better then those
that are reprobate. And continuing under Gospel enjoyments without getting into
Christ is a fearful symptom of everlasting Reprobation.

5. It is to be Satan's. If thou art none of Christ's, thou art the Devils. The
possession of men in the world is divided betwixt Christ and Satan. What Christ
possesses not are under Satan's power and tyranny. Know therefore that if Christ
has no possession of thee, thou art possessed of the Devil. Most lamentable
tidings I bring to all unconverted sinners, you are possessed by the Devil: you
are in the hands of that cruel Enemy of Souls, in the paw of that roaring Lion
who goes about seeking whom he may devour. Is it not a dreadful thing to have
the body possessed? See Mark. 5.2, -- 5. There met him out of the Tombs a man
with an unclean Spirit. -- And always night and day he was in the mountains
and in the Tombs, crying and cutting himself with stones. But how much more
dreadful is it to have the Soul in the Devils possession? Ah sinner! Have thou
any reason to laugh and be merry, to enjoy one good hour, whilst thou art
under the hand of so cruel a master and murderer of Souls as thou art? He has
his will upon thee, 2 Timothy 2.26. Who are taken captive by him as his will. The
evil Spirit works in the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. He trades there;
In some he keeps open shop, setting forth his wares before the world in those
abominations and villanyes by them committed: In others he deals more
underhand, he does not appear so openly, but yet he is at work in the heart of
every child of disobedience. Every sinner is the Devils factor, and erelong
unless thou withdraw from his service he will pay thee thy wages. Every
Christless sinner is under Satan's power: Hence when persons are converted, they
are turned from the power of Satan, delivered from the power of darkness, Act.
26.18. To open their eyes and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, Col. 1.13. Who has delivered us from the power of
darkness.

Thus remember and consider that if you have not the Spirit of Christ you are
none of Christ's, and if none of Christ's, then what and whose you are.

Mot. 2. If you have not the Spirit you are worth nothing. The true worth and
value of men is according to what of the Spirit of God is in them. And
therefore Pharaoh judged right of Joseph on this account that he was an eminent
man, a man in whom the Spirit of God was, Genesis 41.38. But if you are without
this, whatever rate you may value your selves at, or others may value you, you
are indeed good for nothing.

For, 1. You know nothing of that which is only worth the knowing, and to which
all other knowledge ought to be subservient. You know nothing of the things of
God and his Kingdom, of the mysteries of union and communion with God in
Christ. Speculative knowledge you may have, but practical saving knowledge you
have none, for the true saving knowledge of these is only attained by the help
of the Spirit, which you are without, 1 Cor. 2.11, -- 14. We have received the
Spirit which is of God that we might know the things that are freely given to
us of God -- But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. You have little reason any one of you, he that knows
most, to boast of, or be lifted up with your knowledge, for you know nothing as
you ought to know. The God of this world has blinded the minds of them that
believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image
of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4. And therefore whatever you may
imagine, or speak, or reason concerning spiritual things, it is but even as the
blind man's imagination, discourse and reasoning concerning Colors: It is very
ignorantly: You do not really understand any thing about them. Si Christum
nescis, nihil est si catera discis.

2. You can do no good thing. You have no ability to perform any good action.
We are all naturally so impotent that we can do nothing that is good unless we
have the Spirit to help our infirmities, Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also
helps our infirmities: Which you have not. We cannot take any step in a right
path without the manuduction and leading of the Spirit, Romans 8.14. For as many
as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Psalm. 51.12. Uphold
me with thy free Spirit: But you have no such guide. All spiritual life and
every action of life it comes from the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.11. and without
it nothing is to be done: And therefore let me tell you who have none of the
Spirit of God, you never did any thing well in your lives, not any thing that
God will accept.

3. You have no good in you. All the good that is or ever was in fallen man, it
is wrought by the Spirit of God. And therefore if you have none of the Spirit
of God, you have no real good in you. You may have these and those good natural
dispositions, and some shows of good, but as for any spiritual, saving good
that will abide the trial when God shall judge what is good and what is bad,
you have none of it. And therefore it may be said truly of you (whatever you
may think of your good heart, etc.) your heart is little worth, Prove. 10.20.
The heart of the wicked is little worth. It is little worth indeed, for it is
worth nothing. Hence is it said, Psalm. 119.119. God puts away all the wicked
of the Earth like dross: they being of no worth. Thus you see you are worth
nothing, good for nothing, if you have not the Spirit of God in you: But they
in whom the Spirit of God dwells, they are the excellent upon the Earth, Psalm.
16.3. They are Gods Jewels, Mal. 3.17. In that day when I make up my Jewels.

Mot. 3. If you do not get the Spirit of God to be in you, you will be like to
be guilty of New-Englands ruin. I speak now to the Generation coming on upon
the Stage; if you or a considerable number of you do not take care to be right
spirited for God, that you may duly manage his work and carry it on, and serve
the God of you Fathers with a perfect heart and willing mind, you will be like
to destroy and lay this pleasant land desolate, your irreligion will be an
occasion thereof, Psalm. 107.34. He turns a fruitful land into barrenness for
the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Your sin, your degeneracy, your not
owning and worshipping God in Spirit will provoke God to lay it desolate, and
then it will be charged upon you, you will be reputed guilty of it, as being
you who have done it, Zech. 7.11, -- 14: But they refused to hearken, etc. --
for they said the pleasant land desolate. There is the fault and there will it
be charged. And what a dreadful thing will it be to have the spoiling of such a
blessed work as God has here begun, to ly at our door?

Mot. 4. While you are without the Spirit of God you are in extreme danger. You
go in jeopardy of your lives, the lives of your Souls every hour. If this night
thy Soul should be called for, what would become of thee, who have none of the
Spirit of Christ? Assuredly Christ will say of you; I know you not, depart from
me ye, workers of iniquity. And then how fearful would your condition be? There
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. This is the danger you are in while the
Spirit is not given to you. There is but a step betwixt your Souls and eternal
death. Sentence of condemnation is past upon you already, Joh. 3.18. He that
believes not is condemned already. Hell does as it were gape for you, your
condition is extremely perilous. Did sinners know in what danger of the lives
of their immortal Souls they walk in every hour they are without the Spirit of
Christ, they would never sing care away with vain mirth and pastime, or please
themselves with some show and formality of Religion only. Oh the fearful
amazing security of men and women that can sleep quietly and take their ease
upon the brink of eternal misery!

Mot. 5. Consider, you know not how little time you may have for the getting of
the Spirit. And therefore labor to get it quickly. It is certain you have but
a short time to work in, but how short is uncertain. We have seen and see daily
how suddenly they are cut down, by the Sword, and now by this sore disease God
has sent among us, who in probability might have lived many days. These
especially are times wherein none can promise himself continuance of life. Thou
have this day an opportunity of hearing the word of the Gospel, and it may be
may be something moved by it; But who knows but that some of us here may
never have another? Oh that the present time could be improved by us all to
strike the stroke for Eternity! The present time is only ours, and to know and
improve that, is our wisdom and duty, 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold, now is the accepted
time, now is the day of Salvation. If we now improve it, it shall be a day of
salvation to us, Heb. 3.15. While it is said, To day, if ye will hear his
voice, barden not your hearts. If we neglect making out after the Spirit to
day, we know not what shall be on the morrow, Jam. 4 14. None knows what a day
may bring forth, Prove. 27.1. Another day may bring the impenitent sinner into
eternal flames. God tells us that his Spirit shall not always strive with men,
Genesis 6.3. And if the Spirit of God have once done striving with us, then the
time and hope of our getting the Spirit is past and gone also. Now therefore
while time and the day of grace lasts look about you lest the opportunity be
lost and you be undone for ever.

If any shall now ask; How shall we do to get the Spirit of God poured out upon
us and dwelling in us? There is a great deal of duty incumbent upon us in this
respect. We must not sit still and say, It is not in our power to get the
Spirit: God expects that his word should stir us up to careful endeavors, that
we should up and be doing, if so the Lord will be with us. If we sit still we
are sure to perish, but if we stir up and set our selves to seek him, who knows
but the Lord may help us so to seek him as that he may be sound of us?
Something therefore of our duty in order hereto I shall endeavor to set before
you in these following Directions. And the same course is to be taken for the
obtaining an increase of the graces of the Spirit.

Direct. 1. Labor for a serious considerate frame. Duly to pender and weigh
things especially matters of Eternity. Seriously mind what your state, what
your danger, what your work is. That is the woeful bane of many a Soul they do
not consider, Isai. 1.3. My people does not consider. They do not thoroughly
think of things, some slight notions and workings they may have about them, but
it is not to purpose. I believe there are many who think they are converted,
and have the Spirit of God, who never set themselves to purpose to think what
conversion was, what sin is from which they should convert; what God, Christ
and holiness is, to which they should convert, and what it is to have the
Spirit of God. It is a dreadful Judgment of God upon Gospel sinners, that in
seeing they see not, they have some flighty sight and apprehensions of things,
but they do not see them really and to purpose: They know every thing almost
about Christianity, but they feel nothing, and so indeed know nothing. Did men
and women see things really, and consider things serionsly and to purpose, we
should have other manner of endeavors for the Spirit, for Conversion and
Salvation then there are. It would be a good step if sinners could get their
hearts set upon, and their thoughts seriously busied about, those matters that
lie betwixt God and their Souls; and take up right and through apprehensions of
those things which are of spiritual and everlasting concernment. Hence is it
wont to be said; Consideration is half Conversion. A giddy slighty generation
that can scarce be serious or fixed in any thing, that cannot get their hearts
fixed seriously to think of things, especially of a spiritual nature, are not
like to be a converted generation, to he the subject of the pouring out of the
Spirit. We must therefore labor to set our hearts to the words of God, to feel
them in through meditation that they may be our life? " One Truth felt in
Meditation is worth a world. Mr. Mitchels Let. Hence David Psalm. 39.3. My heart
was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned. A religious pondering
frame would greatly make way for the presence of the spirit of grace in the
Soul, Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways and turned.

Direct. 2. Be sure not to resist or quench the Spirit. When the holy Ghost is
moving upon, or toward you, beware of opposing or stifling its motions: As
they did, Act. 7.51. Ye Stiff necked and uncircumcised in heart and cars, ye do
always resist the holy Ghost. If persons will always resist the holy Ghost,
when it is moving toward them, how should they come by it to be partakers of
it? Hence are we so expressly charged, 1 These. 5.19. Quench not the Spirit. If
when the Spirit moves by the word, or moves in your hearts to leave sin, to
follow God and after holiness, if now you withstand, refuse or neglect to
attend its motions, you are not like to obtain the Spirit. If you will not give
entertainment to the Spirit of God, nor embrace its motions, how can you be
like to receive it? Therefore be very attentive to embrace its motions and obey
them: Hearken diligently to his Counsel and Commands. When the Spirit of God is
knocking at your hearts, and stirs your hearts to accept of him and of his
graces, (which he is willing and ready to work in you) by no means neglect them
or slight them, but lay hold of them presently, as one of the greatest mercyes
that God is intending toward you; bless him and cherish them, and beseech him
to go on with his work in your Souls; Do not reject any work of the Spirit,
neither grieve him by neglecting his good motions: Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my
Reproof: behold, I will pour out my Spi^^^ unto you, I will make known my words
unto you. Sedgwick on the Covenant. p. 641.

Direct. 3. Remove all prejudices against the Spirit out of your hearts. Our
hearts naturally are full of prejudice against the Spirit and the ways and
workings of it, of which we must labor to get them cleared. There are those
things wont to be mentioned ( as in the Author but now quoted, p. 639) wherein
we are apt to take up prejudice against the Spirit. 1. Against the humbling
work of the Spirit. 2. The mortifying work of the Spirit. 3. The sanctifying
work of the Spirit. 4. The Derisions that besal men for the Spirits sake. That
which I have especial reference to here is that we should get removed all
prejudice against the mortifying and sanctifying work of the Spirit. Beware of
being offended at the way of walking in the Spirit for the strictness of it, as
if it were too straight to be restrained from these and those flesh pleasing
actions, and to be tied to these and those religious duties and services. Be so
far from looking upon these as unreasonable, as that on the contrary you may
account them most equitable, and indeed most pleasant: As Prove. 3.17. Her ways
are ways of pleasantness. And account that it is your naughty heart only that
makes you think them tedious and irksome. By all means get your hearts
reconciled to those ways, in which the Spirit of God leads those he dwells in,
that you may from the heart account those happy who by the help and grace of
the Spirit can and do walk in them, and that you should account it your own
greatest happiness if you could obtain to have and walk in the Spirit, and in
all the ways thereof, and that every way and work of the Spirit of God may be
very precious and desirable to you. They are the most excellent, glorious,
profitable and desirable ways and works, and it is the perverseness of man's
heart and will that makes them at any time seem otherwise: which perverse
esteem of them we must labor to get rid of.

Dir. 4. Get your hearts pressed with the intolerable load and burden of sin,
of which you can no way be eased but by the presence and help of the Spirit of
God. Never rest nor be quiet till you come to see the intolerable, infinite,
endless evil that is in sin, to be sensible that it is an unsupportable
burden. That is the reason why many are so little concerned about obtaining
the Spirit of God to help and relieve them; they are not duly sensible of the
dreadful burden and load of their sin that lies upon them. They have some
lighter convictions and humiliations it may be for some grosser sins, but they
are not deep, soaking, nor through enough: They are not sick unto death of
their sin, and hence they do not look for, or not very earnestly for the
Physician. It may be they have some physic of their own, something compounded
in their own Kitchen, some course or work of their own, that they account will
do the deed, expiate for their sin, and preserve them from perishing; and so
they look no further. Or if they do look out to this great Physician of Souls,
it is only to get some directions what they may do themselves for themselves,
and they themselves will get it, work it and administer it, and so they rest
still upon their own doing: They are not brought so low in themselves, as
utterly and for ever to despair of their own strength and skill to recover
themselves, and hence they do not yield themselves wholly and fully to be
healed by the Spirit of Christ, they do not see such need of it. Labor
therefore by all means to see clearly the deadly wound that sin has given you,
and to have your hearts broken all to pieces under the sense thereof. So long
as you are whole in your self, or think you can make your self whole, you will
see no need of the Physician: But if you be thus sick, heart sick of sin, you
will then feel an absolute need of the Physician, you will then prize and look
after him, Math. 9.12. They that be whole need not a Physician, but they that
are sick. Sit not down at quiet till sin become most exceeding bitter. Go on
humbling to be humbled, and to see such intolerable evil in sin, and to be so
burdened with the wrath of God lying upon you for it, as it may make sin
everlasting ly odious to you, and force you to fly for refuge, to lay hold on
the hope sit before you, and to have strong consolation there. Mr. Mitchel Lee.
Do not shun sorrow and mourning for sin: Of necessity you must be troubled for
sin in this life or in Hell, and it is far better to come mourning to God for
sin here, then to go mourning from him for his Judgment hereafter. If we be
indeed cast down for sin and be in extreme bitterness of Soul about it from the
sinfulness of it, and its contrariety to God appearing to us, then we shall be
fit objects for the Spirit who is the comforter to manifest his gracious work
upon, Isai. 57.18. I will lead him also and restore comforts unto him and on
his mourners. Penitential mourners for sin stand fan in the way to be comforted
by God. Thus it is said the Spirit of the Lord was upon Christ for this end,
Isai. 61.1, 2, 3. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has
anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me to bind up
the broken hearted, to preclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound: To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and
the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn: To appoint unto
them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning. If we do not feel sin to purpose (as it is to be feared few in these
days do, whatever common convictions many have) there is little hope that we
should have this blessed Comforter sent to us, to take up his abode with us.
Mourning for sin cannot be too much, if it raise the price of Christ in the
Soul, and draw out a more earnest desire of the applying work of the Spirit to
be wrought in the heart.

Direct. 5. Cry mightily to God for his Spirit. Ask this boon of Heaven. When
you feel an utter want of the Spirit of God in you, then run, flee to the
throne of grace and let your Soul cry out to the living God for this mercy.
Tell the Lord in humble manner what need you have of his Spirit, what your
misery is without it, and earnestly beg of him that he will give you his holy
Spirit, to work faith, repentance and all other graces in you. And for your
encouragement consider what Christ says, Luke 11.13. If ye then being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your Children: how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? and Prove. 2.3, 4, 5.
But you will say; We cannot pray without the Spirit.

Answ. But yet go and present your selves before God, and spread your case
before him as well as you can. Bemoan your wants, your inability to good, your
insensibleness of your misery: Plead as well as you can for mercy, for the
bestowing of his Spirit upon you: Who knows but when you are endeavoring,
seeking and striving, God may give in his holy Spirit to you, and help you to
pray to acceptance with him? It is our duty to wait and let God take his time
and way to work. But be sure to pray and that with great earnestness from a
deep sense of your distress and danger, that God will speedily help you, Psalm.
70.1. Make haste, O God, to deliver me, make haste to help me, O Lord, Psalm.
143.7. Hear me speedily, O Lord, my Spirit fails: hide not thy face from me,
lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit. It must be with humble and
earnest prayer on our part, that the Spirit of God will come into our Souls, if
ever it come there, Look therefore to the Infinite mercy of God in Christ to
help in this matter.

Direct. 6. Be exceeding diligent in the use of all means, especially in
attending upon the word of God for the obtaining of the Spirit. As we must
pray, so we must use all due means with praying over them. Seek for the Spirit
wherever there is hope it may be found in all those ways which God has
instituted for the giving forth of grace, mercy and good to the Souls of men.
Let Sabbaths be observed, Ordinances attended, meditation, self examination,
prayer, secret, Family and public prayer, reading the word of God; And
especially the Ministry of the word: Oh wait there; By that, the word of God
dispensed, the Spirit is pleased to convey himself. The Gospel is called the
ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. We read of those upon whom the holy
Ghost sell while they were hearing the word, Act. 10.44. While Peter yet spoke
these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word. The
Galatians Gal. 3.2. received the Spirit by the hearing of faith, i.e. the word
of faith which the Apostles preached. Therefore attend diligently to the
Ministry of the Word, pray before you come, pray when you go from hearing of
the word, that it might be a blessed means to conveigh the Spirit to you: And
when you come to the word attend with all your might, hear as for your lives,
do not heedlesly let slip any one Sentence without your careful attention.
Expect, wait, long, look when, by what sentence, by what word spoken God will
let in his spirit into your Souls. Oh if persons would set themselves in good
earnest to attend upon the word of the Gospel, as the word of God, as the
Ministry of the Spirit, who knows what God might do for them? Let the word of
God be precious, if ever you would have the Spirit of God with you and in you.

Dir. 7. Enquire seriously and consult with those that have the Spirit of God.
If you have any serious christian friend you can open your heart to, be plain
with him, and beseech him to be plain with you. Enquire the way of the Spirit
from those who have had experience thereof, Jer. 50.4, 5. In those days and in
that time says the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they and the
children of Judah together, going and weeping: they shall go and seek the Lord
their God: They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward. Where
you meet with difficulty in the way seek for instruction: Listen what others,
what Christians of approved godliness and experience say concerning the way of
the Spirit of God in their Souls, if so be that you thereby might go forth by
the footsteps of Christ's flock, and find him whom your Soul seeks after. This
is the direction the Lord gives to her, Cant. 1.8. If thou know not, -- go thy
way forth by the footsteps of the flock. It is of exceeding use for persons
whose desires are intensly set after the Spirit of God to be opening their
hearts, and conferring seriously one with another about the same. Oh the holy
breathings of the Spirit that have many times been kindled in the Souls of
persons when they have been seriously and sincerely conferring concerning the
things and ways of the Spirit of God!

Direct. 8. Continue seeking, striving and waiting in the use of all means till
you find, till the Spirit be poured out from on high upon you. If the Lord do
not come and give his Spirit to you presently, yet take heed of giving over, or
slacking your endeavors. Many being some way or other rouzed, for a fit are
very earnest, but not finding the Spirit of God to come quickly, they give
over, they are soon cooled, and content themselves with their former
formalities in the exercises of Religion. Take heed we do not cast away our
Souls here: How many, many perish here! Rosolve never to give over seeking and
waiting till God be gracious to you, and pour out his Spirit upon you. If God
give you not the holy Spirit to be your Comforter, resolve never to take
comfort, but ly down in sorrow. Let nothing divert you from this seeking, let
nothing satisfy you till you have found the thing you seek for, Hos. 6.3. Then
shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord. Importunity and constancy may
at last prevail, Luke 11.5, -- 10. -- Yet because of his importunity, he will
rise and give him as many as he needs, etc. and Luke 18.1. And be spoke a
parable unto them to this and that men ought always to pray and not to faint.
The Lord Jesus spoke these things to encourage to importunity and constancy in
prayer. And for the prevalency and good effect of this we have the famous
example of the woman of Canaan, Math. 15.22,.-28.

Direct. 9. Make this the business of your lives. Look upon it as the main
thing you came into the world for. Lay out the strength of your Souls about it.
Drive on this as if you had nothing else to mind or do: Make this your work to
get the Spirit of God to be in you, and all other things subordinate and
subservient to this. Do not think that for a sinner to obtain all the gracious
operations of the Spirit in himself, to get a due sense of sin as most odious
and loathsome, and to rest his Soul upon Christ as most precious, and to show
forth all the blessed fruits of the Spirit in his conversation, is a work
easily or quickly done: And yet you must not rest till you come to this, till
there be the apparent, manifest, full breathings and operations of the Spirit
in you. As Mercy is not like to come to us till the Spirit be poured out upon
us from on high: So let us wait and labor till the Spirit be poured out upon
us, fingly and generally, that the wilderness may become a fruitful field, and
the fruitful field be counted for a Forest, and so those mercyes and blessings
which are consequent to this may be derived down to, and settled upon us. For a
close, let every sincere one, whose heart is upon the work and glory of Christ,
heartily and earnestly join with the Psalmist in that prayer and profession of
his, Psalm. 53.6. O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! When God
brings back the Capivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall
be glad.

FINIS.

