THE Moors Baffled: BEING A DISCOURSE CONCERNING TANGER, Especially when it
was under the Earl of Teviot; By which you may find What METHODS and GOVERNMENT
is fittest to secure that place against the Moors.

In a LETTER from a Learned person (long Resident in that place) at the desire
of a person of QUALITY.

LONDON: Printed for William Crook, at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar.
1681.

Prospect of that Innerpart of Tangier, with the upper Castle, from South-East.
depiction of Tangier

(...) The Bookseller to the Reader.
of the Moors, I refer him to the Present State of the Jews in Barbary: The
Life and Death of Mahumed: or the first Estate of Mahumedism and West-Barbary.
I hope if this be acceptable, to get from the same Author the continuation to
this day, and the present State of the place; which he is well able to do.

William Crook.*

A DISCOURSE OF TANGER.
SIR,
TANGER (of which you command an Account) was of old so various in her
fortunes, that History scarce knows in what shape to draw her Picture. And
whether it happen from the early and frequent change of her Inhabitants, or
from the want of Records, or from her own great Antiquity, Historians seem at a
stand to give a clear account of her Genealogy. Procopius Caesariensis derives
her Pedigree from the Phoenicians, ascribing to that ancient People the Honor
of her foundation. But that inquisitive Antiquary had no surer ground for this
Conjecture, than the two suspected Pillars, found out not far from Tanger,
which in Phoenician Characters are said to have an Inscription to this purpose:
Nos fugimus a facie Josuae filii Nave. Others again are of opinion that the
Posterity of Phut, the Son of Cham, were the first Inhabitants of this City and
Country, because there is a River still bearing that name.

But not to spend time in Conjectures about her Original; When Rome was famous
for Conquests, and Mauritania was brought under her yoke, Tingis (now Tanger)
was thought worthy to give the name to Mauritania Tingitana: And under the
Romans was of so great esteem, that Claudius made her a Colony, calling it
Traduct a Julia. When this City had the happiness to become Christian, it was
made a Bishops See. And we read of one Marcellus, casting away his military
Girdle for the sake of Religion, here suffered Martyrdom in the time of
Dioclesian.

But the glory of this ancient City began at length to decline with the Roman
Greatness, and to languish like many other limbs of that overgrown Empire. For
when the Vandals broke into Barbary, Tanger became their slave, and endured
their cruel Tyranny, till that great Captain Belisarius forced them thence, and
restored it to Justinian. In which happiness she remained till Osman the third,
Caliph of the Saracens, conquering Barbary, took her from the Romans, and added
her to the Kingdom of Fez.

Under this sad change both of Government and Religion, Tanger continued, until
Alphonso redeemed her out of the hands of those unjust Possessors, peopled her
again with Christians, and made her the Stage of many heroic Actions: his
Incursions into the neighboring Country were little Conquests, frequently
baffling the Moors, and so long spoiling their Flocks and Herds, till at last
enraged by such continual plunders, they raised a numerous Army, and with
thirty six Guns (as some report) advance to besiege Tanger, but were violently
repulsed, say some; others say, fairly treated off by the Portuguezes: In whose
possession (to the envy and anger of Spain) Tanger continued, till it became
English. The circumstances of which Alteration are so well known, that it were
superfluous to relate them.

The Earl of Peterborough (her first English Governor) after some easy
oppositions, having taken possession of Tanger, met with difficulties on all
hands: The Moors grew jealous of their new Neighbors, chiefly because they
were more numerous than their old, and their valor more renowned. Gayland
(chief Governor of the adjacent Country) though at first he entertained the
Earl with overtures of Peace, yet he took all occasions to try the English
metal. Several times he encountered, and overcame some of our unwary parties;
which gave no less discouragement to ours, than heart to his own Soldiers. But
to show how things thrived under that Noble Personage the E. of P. is not the
design of this Paper. But yet the face of affairs was not of the best
complexion, if you will believe a Letter at that time writ to England, telling
us, That the Soldiers were eaten up of wants, cowed with their frequent
misfortunes, possessed with an opinion the Moor was invincible: that nothing
was so terrible to them as an Alheic and Cymiter: that the Gates had been for a
long time locked up, etc. Victuals, Clothes, etc. scarce, and even not to be
had, etc. But what relates to the first condition of Tanger, upon its becoming
English, I leave you to collect out of the Narrative (you desire) of the Earl
of Tiveot; in which, if I exceed the Laws of Lettering, your command is my
Apology.

The Earl of Tiveot, upon the leaving of Dunkirk, where he had been Governor,
was by his Majesty appointed to go in the same Character to Tanger; where he
arrived May the first, 1663* and forgetting the wearisomness of a tedious
Voyage, and waving the Ceremonies of Reception, the afternoon of his arrival he
spent in viewing the stores of Provisions. How he found them, need not be
mentioned; for the hungry looks of the Soldiers, and their exclamations for
Pinchgut-money (that was the word) declared, that Tanger for a long time had
kept a niggardly house; and that either her Plenty or Liberality had been but
little.

But the provident Earl (remembering how the Heduans negligence to bring in Corn
for the relief of the Roman Army, had like to have cost Caesar his fortunes
against the Helvetians) had made preventions of the like mischief; and so
ordered things, that Tanger should still be provided with such considerable
abundance, as that an ordinary accident should not reduce her to want. Which
careful foresight nothing could hinder from being effectual, but the negligence
of the Victuallers. I examine not the state of other Stores; yet however he
found them, his care was to make them rich. And other Commodities which were
scarce to be purchased at any rate, were within a short space after his arrival
to be had at very considerable prices.

Every day brought the Earl new troubles; and the more he considered, the more
he apprehended the hardships of his New Province; which made him often protest,
That if he had foreseen what he was to encounter, nothing but the Command of
his Prince could have obliged him to an undertaking wherein he was to wear out
the remains of his strength and age in that thankless Office, the mending of
faults.

He that has seen what difficulties accompany the restoration of a body to
strength, and to secure it from relapsing, after some emacerating disease has
reduced it to a sort of breathing Skeleton; how every stone must be cut and
measured, hewn and polisht, that goes to mend those decays of Nature; and how
at last any little mistake may pull down what has so long been a patching; he
may by some faint resemblance be able to conjecture how much watchfulness and
industry was necessary to recover the health of a body Military, whose belly
was shrivel'd with hunger, hands nasty with idleness, and whose very heart was
broken with ill success. Besides, who knows not but that after-games in
Courage, are as dangerous as those in Reputation?

Such was the condition of Tanger, that it would scarce admit of consultation;
something was instantly to be done. And the Earl, who had Tack Time for his
Motto, would not suffer a minute thereof to slip through his fingers, or the
least opportunity to be eaten up of delay. Dangers appeared on all hands;
naught heard of but Anakims; and some, either to dissemble their own Cowardice,
or to dishearten the present Undertaking, as likely to disparage former
proceedings, preached up the Moors Valor as uncontrollable, and that their
cunning was beyond defeat. Others, who rather wished the Earl's safety than his
honor, and loved Tiveot better than the General, strongly dissuaded him from
going out of the Gates: And others again prophesied his coming short home, if
he ventured far abroad: Most thought the City in no security but under Lock and
Key; and as men fallen in love with their prison* nothing by them seemed so
much feared as enlargement.

The Earl gave every story the patience of his ear, and without betraying the
least token of daring considence, or drooping despair, he began gently to
compose the affairs of the Garrison. First he viewed the number of his Forces,
which with 400 Recruits brought with him, would not amount to the number which
the Muster*rolls had promised in England. A thing that cost the Earl no small
resentment, who knew the dangers of false Musters, especially where there was
no Fortifications but Men.

The second day after his arrival, he reduced the Irish Regiments into one, and
took care to transport the Reformed, having first discharged their Arrears: His
next act of Justice (for the former was no less to his Majesty's service) he
opened the City-gates, and in person all alone took a view of the ground next
the Walls, marking the best Grass for Hay, and the fittest places to essay a
Fortification: whence he returned safe with this intelligence, That nothing but
Sweat and Blood was to water his Laurels; that he was to proceed with the
industry of the Ox, and not with the force of the Lion. The Horse he commanded
out to forage; setting others to mow and make Hay; whereby the want of that
provision was quickly well supplied, and also many places made bare, which by
tallness of the Grass made them more convenient for the Enemies Ambush.

The fourth day after his arrival, having reduced the English Foot to one
Regiment, he marched them out of the Gates.

Upon the fifth, being Tuesday (a day auspicious to the Earl, and solemn to his
entrance upon any considerable affair) he began a little Redoubt in a place
where the Enemy used to lay their Ambush, and from whence they might command
some part of the City-Walls. This Redoubt proceeded so well, that within few
days it was finished, with Lines and Trenches. In the mean time the Earl in
person every night laid Perdues to prevent Surprisals; it being the Moors
custom to plant their Ambuscade a little before day. And now began the Garrison
to express their resolution and courage in undergoing the difficulties and
hardships of Military Discipline, not fainting under the tedious travels which
attend great and warlike designs, until the Earl had finished five Redoubts,
and forced Gayland into a Truce.

The Roman Empire (says Appian) was raised to its greatness, not by fortune,
or good luck, but by Valor, patience of want and hardship: And Tanger could
not have arrived at that State in which Tiveot left it, but by Sweat and
Watchfulness, without yielding to danger, or giving place to Ease. The generous
diligence of his Officers and others, did much alleviate the Earl's Travels:
for they disputed not his Orders, but even seemed to flatter him in an emulous
execution of his Commands, ever praising their happiness to serve under a
General, who wanted neither Wisdom nor Justice, to value and reward their
Merits.

The first Redoubt being finished, about the 7th of June, the Earl laid the
foundation of a second, more considerable for Size, Situation, and Strength,
than the former. In the building of this, he was daily interrupted by the
Moors, who meeting in Parties, gave continual Alarms. And it conduced not a
little to the Earls success in these first Essays, that Gayland was marched
(with the main Body of his Army) against Saly, which as yet was under the
command of Abdalla Ebn Mahumed Ebn Abebeker, vulgarly called the Saint. But
being advised of what was doing in the Fields of Tanger, Gayland marched back in
great haste, and with all the Forces he could raise, advanced toward the Earl,
who upon June 15. was luckily informed thereof by a Negro; who running away
from Gayland, made Tanger his Sanctuary. The Negro's Tidings of Gayland's being
in the neighboring Woods and Valleys with his whole Army, was the next day
confirmed by another Moor. Whereupon the General ordered his affairs
accordingly, and put himself in such a posture as he judged fittest to receive
an Enemy, whom success had made confident and hardy.

The next morning, being Sunday, the Earl (contrary to his custom) stayed from
Church, in expectation of the Moors: But that subtle wary people would not
raise their Ambushes, laid close to our Lines, till they saw our Reserves drawn
off. Nor was this done, till a Party of Horse had first discovered the Ground;
which returning, confidently affirmed, No Enemy was within two miles of the
City. The Earl (trusting the Report) about midday retired to the upper Castle;
where he was no sooner entered, but the Moors, swift and sudden as Lightning,
were fallen upon our out-Guards, and begun to storm Pole-fort, then but half
built; but it was so bravely defended with Hand-Granadoes, that the Moors were
soon forced to forsake their Attempt. The ground about the said Fort, and the
several Avenues, were thick sown with Galtraps; a Grain which seemed the more
strange to the shooless Moors, in that they reapt it with their feet. The
Grenades and Galtraps so cooled their impetuousuess, that they were wary for
the future how they came near the Forts and Lines. In this first Engagement
with the Earl, the Enemy expressed great Resolution and Courage. One of them (a
stout brave fellow) pursued some of the English to within forty paces of the
Gate, and had not ('it is like) staid there, if not stopped by Death. The General
would very gladly have taken him alive, to know of him what opinion or fate
made him so desperate, as to throw himself into dangers, which in humane reason
he could not hope to overcome.

The Moors being driven from their Attacque of the Fort, possessed themselves
of the Lines: fixing thereon three Colors, which according to their Military
Laws, their Soldiers were bound to defend. The Earl with several Officers and
Reformades pressed them out of the Trenches, and with such excellent Conduct
managed the Dispute, that in two hours not one of the Enemy could be met with.
Few English were this day killed or wounded, but in running away. And the Moors
being very careful to carry off their slain, left but seventeen behind them.
The fight being ended, as too violent to last long* the Earl took this occasion
to salute Gayland with the following Letter in Spanish.

To the most Excellent Cidi Hamet El Chader Ebu Ali Gayland, Governor of
Arzilla, Alcazar, Tetuan, etc. whom God preserve.
THE King of England, my Master, having honored me with the Government of this
place, I hoped for no less Courtesy from your Excellency, than you used to my
Predecessor. But instead of giving me the Parabien, you have disturbed my hour
of Eating, which according to your own Customs, ought to be secured from Visits.

Yet notwithstanding what is past, if your Excellency incline to a better
Correspondence, either by Peace or War, you shall find me no less inclined.

Valuing my self upon the Laws of a Soldier, I will take care to bury those of
yours which you left dead in the field. Or if your Excellency please to inter
them after your own manner, you have leave to fetch them off. God preserve your
Excellency the many years I desire.

Tanger the 14th of June, 1663.

This Letter was kindly received by Gayland, and the next day answered in
Spanish, thus Translated.

I Received your Excellencies of the 14th Current, wherein you complain I have
not given you the Welcome. But I knew not you were come into these parts: For
persons of your Quality and Character, use first to give notice of their
coming; and not to dispose of any thing in another Land, as your Excellency
has done in mine.

I gave order to my Vassals, that, occasion offering, they should give good
Quarter to all belonging to your Excellency, as they did to the Soldier they
took the other day; whom I charged should be well Treated.

As to your Correspondence, I much esteem it; and as to what has formerly
passed, it was the fault of the former Governor, as you may inform your self.
I expected no less humanity from your Excellency than you showed toward the
Slain; for which I highly thank you. God grant your Excellency the years I
desire.

The 15th of June, 1663. POSTSCIPT.
IF your Excellency shall please to send Person or Persons to Negotiate, this
shall serve for Seguro, that they come with my Servant. God preserve you.




The Earl received the Letter with good Respect; and having very Courteously
entertained the Messenger, he dismissed him with this Answer.

YEsterday I received your Excellencies Letter, by the hand of your
Domesticque, who brings back this. And if there has been any fault on my part,
in not observing the Rites of your Country, it was a sin of ignorance, for
which your Excellency has sufficiently chastized me.

I much esteem the good Quarter which your Excellency commanded to be given my
Soldier. If my fortune give me the like occasion, I will repay it with
Interest.

As to a Peace and good Correspondence between the King my Master and your
Excellency, there wants nothing but a disposition on your Excellencies part to
have it effected. And if your Excellency desire, I will send you Persons fit to
Treat about it. God preserve your Excellency many and happy years.

Tanger the 16th of June, 1663.

But these Overtures of Friendship pausing a while, the Earl in the interim
(with signal diligence) pursued the Building of Forts. The time he could spare
from being in person at that work, he spent in settling and composing things
belonging to the Town and Port. All emergent differences he decided according
to their fresh Circumstances; which he did with such speed, that Contests were
as soon ended as known; and with such general satisfaction, that none disgusted
his Decisions, save some humoursome Palates, which could relish nothing but
what they cooked themselves. But the Earl was not much moved with such
Carriage; though he would soon resent their dis-ingenuity, whom he saw ready to
contradict what was apparently just, because it suited not with their Caprices.

And ere I go further, give me leave to step back to June the 5th, to acquaint
you how at that time Two Messengers came from Saly, sent by the Saint to
congratulate the Earls coming to Tanger, and to solicit his assistance in
relieving the Castle of Saly, reduced to a want of all sorts of Provisions; and
to settle a fair Correspondence. One of these Messengers was a French Renegado,
of a facetious humor, and quick apprehension; the other a strict zealous Moor,
of a grave and reserved Carriage, and of a very obliging Conversation. The
success of the Earl against their Enemy Gayland, gave these Messengers cause of
great joy. The serious Moor would often rebuke the Earl for exposing his person
to such evident hazards. After several days friendly Entertainment; at their
request, he sent them back in a Ship of his own, appointing several Gentlemen
to wait upon them to the Saint; To whom he made such Presents as he judged most
suitable to his want. How much the Saint was delighted with the Earls
generousness, both toward his Ambassadors and himself, you may perceive from
this ensuing Letter, Englished out of Arabique.

In the Name of God Gracious and Merciful, whose Blessings be upon our Lord
Mahomed and his Family.
To the Mighty, Honorable, Glorious, and most 'Excellent Lord and Governor of
Tanger, the Earl Tiveot.
GOD perpetuate your Excellencies Honor and Glory, and vouchsafe your
perseverance in Grandeur and Felicity. Happiness unto you, and let the odours
of a glorious Name continually breath out their fragrancies, and let God
continue and prosper both you and your Estate agreeable to your wishes.

To advise us of your abundant love, and especially generosity, there came to
us the worthy Gentlemen your Servants in their Ship, with the Honorable
Commanders of it, the Consul and the Captain; and they behaved themselves
amongst us like Men, touching your command which they observed, and
accomplished our desires according as we expected in the going forth of our
Men, they returning home to us in health and safety; so that we now re-enjoy
their company according to the best of our wishes. And let God in our stead
largely reward and recompense you, who have so highly obliged us herein.

Your Messengers staid with us for some days, till we had performed some of
their desires; so that we send along with them two excellent Horses, and of the
best sort that has been in our time, one whereof was for our own Riding, and
the other is of the same breed; likewise forty good choice Beasts, both Bulls
and Cows, and a flock of about fourscore Sheep, as a Present to your
Excelleney, which out of your Grace and Favor we desire you would vouchsafe to
accept from us. For the deserts and merits of your Honor, God alone can
recompense.

We gave also to your Legates two special Horses, and a few Cattle as the time
permitted, and they likewise bought some Horses as the time served, and then
departed from us well contented. But we are always with you in that inviolable
love and friendship, which neither distance of place, nor length of time shall
ever dissolve. And as for our Country Barbary (blessed be God) all of it that
is Loyal, and in Obedience to us, whether Mountains, Plains, or Cities, you
have free passage into them in Love and Friendship, to Converse and Trade as
you please, and to manage all your affairs. And this will be of great advantage
unto us, if it please God we live, and the General take the Castle of the
Port*Town, and the Rebels return wholly to their Obedience, and then you shall
not apologize for us, or excuse us in any Service we can do you. But we request
you to excuse us at present, as to the rest of your desires, being assured that
we cease not to encounter and fight those Enemies which have broken Covenant
with us, that so they may shortly (if God please) return to their Allegiance.

And we entreat you to grant our Servants the Inhabitants of the Port, your
best assistance in what ever they shall need of your help and supply. And
whatsoever of our Consorts shall come to you, we beseech you not to be wanting
in your care toward them.

But the most earnest and important business which concerns us to mention to
you is, for a great Ship to lie at the Port between us and the Enemy, on
purpose to cut off all Relief by Shipping from the Enemy: and pray let it be
hastened, with its Fraught, Provision, and all other necessaries. This is our
chief business, which we entreat you to accomplish, according to our desires.
And any of your Ships that shall come to this Port, shall drive away whatsoever
Merchant-ships they find there, and seize their Goods. For the only thing we
are wanting in, and in need of assistance, is this business of the Merchants.
Thus we have given you the full of our desires in what we have written. And let
God accomplish all your desires. Farewell.

Written the third day of the week, being the twenty fifth of the Month
Dulhevil, the last Month of the 1073 year of the Hegira. The Servant of God,
who trusts in him, Abdalla ebn Mahamed ebn Abcbeker, of Blessed Memory.

The Superscription, To the Chief of the Nobles, Lord and Governor of Tanger,
the Earl Tiveot, whom God preserve.

The Earl divided himself between the Affairs of the Town and Camp, acting in
the one a Judge, in the other a Captain. Every day brought him from Gayland a
Present or an Ambush; and amidst the little Truces, he still made himself
fitter for War. There appeared betwixt him and Gayland a sort of Amicable
Hostility; and it was easy to conjecture, that nothing but the want of a
handsome reserve of Honor, kept them from contracting a Friendship. And though
the stripes both each day received, prepared them more and more for a
compliance, yet that which hastened Gayland thereunto, was the Earls success on
July the 16th, which was thus:

The Earl having at the utmost Lines placed a (St. Malo's) Guard of Dogs; upon
Wednesday about two a clock in the morning, July 15. 1663. they discovered an
Ambush of the Enemies Horse. Upon notice whereof, all the Troopers were ordered
to Mount: Eight of which the Earl commanded to ride directly to the place of
Ambush; himself with the rest being close by to succor them. But it so
happened, that the Moors finding themselves discovered, were already upon the
march, and with an undaunted resolution Charged the Earl. The Engagement was
very sharp; and had doubtless proved very bloody, if both sides had not
willingly parted upon the appearance of the Moresco Foot; who alarmed with the
noise of this Combat, came down in great Numbers from the Neighboring Hills.
Upon this the Earl Retreated, and in all have Manned the five Forts he had
erected, furnishing them with Provisions; and commanded the Horse to Embody
within the Lines, and to be ready to succor the Forts in case they should be
Attackt.

The Enemy presently posted themselves. Those that came against the upper
Castle, having the advantage of a Westerly wind, set the grass on fire, already
scorcht with the Sun; the smoke of which, seconded with a Mist from the Sea,
hindered the playing of our Greatguns; and gave the Moors opportunity to advance
unseen, within Musket shot of the Walls. But the wind changing to the East,
gave us the advantage it had given the Moors. The Enemy as they were wont,
fixed several of their Colors upon our Lines, which they were soon forced to
fetch off. About six at night their whole Army drew off, and after a
Consultation of the chief Officers, Gayland instantly sent his Treasurer with a
White Bandrol, offering terms of Peace. The Treasurer having (according to
their manner) in very few words delivered his Message, presently returned,
promising to come again next morning; which he accordingly did, and brought
with him a Letter of great Courtiship, wherein Gayland magnified his happiness,
in that he hoped to have a friendship with so brave an Enemy.

A personal Interview was concluded to be betwixt Gayland and the Earl; only
the place was disputed* Gayland proffered to come into the Town: but to outdo
that bravery, the Earl resolved to Treat with him in the Head of his Army.
Which contrary to the Sentiments of his Officers, he did that afternoon. And a
Tent being pitched without the Lines, and furnished with rich Chairs and Carpets,
Gayland drew up his Army about it; and the Earl attended with Twenty of his
Guards in rich Coats, rode thither to meet him. When he came to the Tent,
Gaylands Brother was there ready to receive him: after came Gayland with his
chief Officers. And being now met, (without any Ceremony) they instantly tell
upon Proposals of Peace, which Gayland promised should be effected by the
Agents he would send the next day. The Enterview was concluded with a Banquet,
and all parted with great satisfaction.

The next morning according to Gaylands promise, Commissioners came with full
powers to conclude a Peace* On July 21. the Articles of Peace were signed by
the Earl, who sent Commissionersto have the same done by Gayland at Arzila. The
Commissioners returned July 23; and on the 26th, after a general Muster, in the
Evening the several Companies took up their usual Posts; and with Small-shot
and great Guns, the Earl commanded to salute the Peace: which was also done by
the Frigates in the Bay. Gayland also the same night caused Bonfires to be made
upon the more eminent Hills round about. And now nothing appeared but marks of
satisfaction and friendship. Gayland and the Earl continually complemented one
another with Letters and Presents; and affairs were so wisely managed, that the
English and Moors seemed to differ in nothing but Religion.

Affairs being now reduced to that condition, which but a few days before could
scarce have been hoped for, the Earl prepared to see England. But by reason of
some intervening business, he put off his journey until August the 27. 1663. On
which day he went aboard the Foresight, which weighed Anchor the next Morning.
But ere I proceed in the Narrative of the Earl, I must not omit to tell you,
that betwixt the conclusion of the Peace, and his going to England, he took all
opportunities to caress the Moors; giving leave also to several Gentlemen of
the Garrison to visit the Country under Gaylands Seguro. By which means he
became the better acquainted with many things tending to the Interest of his
Government. He also in the interim sent a Present to the Sheck of Anjerah, who
received it with great satisfaction, as the following Letter demonstrates, writ
to the Earl in Arabique; and being first made Spanish, is here Englished.

In the Name of God the Greatest of all Great ones, whom we worship and serve,
and none other.
To the most Excellent Count Tiveot, Captain General of Tanger, the Just and
Valiant, greeting, and desiring that he may have Health and Prosperity, which
we value much.
WE received the Servants of your Excellency in our Country, for whom we have
done what we are able, and have commanded our Vassals to guard them to Tanger.
The Present mad us by your Excellency we kindly receive. God augment your
Honor and Happiness.

In all that is required at our Hand, let it be upon our Head, that we serve
you with much willingness; being that we are made Friends, we esteem your
Friendship much. My Son and Couzens greet your Excellency, desering God that
you may have Health.

Subscribed Almocadem Cassian Shat.


This Shat was Father to one of Gaylan's Wives, numerous in Alliances, and
reported to be an Andalusian, or of the Race of the Moors banished Spain. He
has hereditary to his Family the Command of Anjera, which is a large Cavila
adjoining unto Tanger.

At the same time the Governors of Tituan made their Congratulations also,
declaring their great satisfaction in the Peace, as appears by the ensuing
Lines, rendered out of Spanish.

Most Excellent Sir,
WE know not how to signify to your Excellency the content we received from
your Excellencies Express, but by affirming to your Excellency that our joy was
doubled, to have your Excellency for our friend, and that upon all occasions
both in word and deed, we will serve your Excellency: which shall be found true
as occasions shall offer, according to your Excellencies pleasure; and we
assure you, that if your Excellency advise us in any thing of your pleasure, we
will do it willingly, lovingly, and friendly. For of old we had Amity with all
the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, how much more with a Prince so
Illustrious as your Excellency*

We here by our Seals bind ourselves to maintain and preserve Peace and
Friendship with all the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, without any
contradiction.

And so your Excellency may send or give leave to Merchants, Captains, and
Mariners, for to come to this Port, and all shall be Treated with Peace, Amity,
and Courtesies, by all those that are under our jurisdiction. God preserve and
augment your Excellencies Life and Health.

Tetuan, Sept. 16. 1663. Signed Ahmed Ben Abdelcrim El Naqsis Refaq alah. Ahmed
Ben Aissa El Naqsis Refaq alah.



But ere I proceed, give me leave to acquaint you with the Earls singular
carefulness to carry an equal hand in all Controversies that happened betwixt
the Christians and those Jews that were residing upon the place* He was no
stranger to the ill nature of the later, and how it was their Interest to
favor the concerns of the Moors: as being (the most of them) born amongst
them, and greatly sympathized in their Customs. Besides, many of them were only
come to Tanger to Trade, having left their Wives and Children in the Moors
Dominions. But besides that, both by Nature and Religion, he was inclined to an
Impartial Justice; he knew that to do otherwise, would soon open the Mouth of a
clamarous Jew, loudly to traduce him to the Moors. And thereby instill an ill
opinion both of his Person and Religion.

His second care was to remove from the Moors all suspicion of any intended
Invasion of their Country, with which they seemed sturdily possessed. To this
end, he let them plainly and sincerely know, That the King his Master had not
sent him to Conquer, but to Rent their Land: That the chief design of his being
sent thither, was not to make War, but to settle a Peace: and to promote such a
friendly and safe Traffic, as might conduce to the advantage of both. By
which Declaration, seconded with Practice, the Earl attained to such an esteem
with the Moors, that they would name him with a sort of Veneration. And
understanding that he was one grown old in Military Attempts, they concluded
that he was a person destined for great Achievements; and that his very
Reputation fought in his Soldiers. Upon his going for England, I heard the
Illustrissimo's of Tetuan passionately wish his speedy and safe return to
Barbary. Which was also desired by Gayland, as you may collect from the
following Letter sent by him to the King.

Sacred Royal Sir,
HIs Excellency the Earl of Teviot having signified unto me his intended Voyage
into your Kingdoms, I could do no less than accompany him with my Letters, and
to signify unto your Majesty the Peace he has concluded with me in your Name.

I have found his Excellency so valiant a person, and of so Noble a Breast,
that I could not but answer him with my best Respects. I now give your Majesty
to understand, that I am ready to grant your desires in all things that shall
offer for your service. That this was not done before, must be imputed to the
want of a capable subject.

I hope through the favor of God, that the Peace we have made will bring
considerable advantages to your Majesty's Affairs in these parts. I doubt not
but his Excellency will receive ample Rewards for his well-doing.

If any part of our Dominions will yield ought that may be useful to your
Majesty's Service, send and command, for it is at your disposal. And it shall
be one of the greatest happinesses I can offer, to give you to understand our
delight therein. God grant your Majesty large felicities, and preserve you.

Arzila, Sept. 10. 1663.

The Earl being arrived in England, he was by important concerns of his own,
invited to take a Journey into Scotland, his Native Soil; which journey, as
every thing else, he performed with so great celerity, that he returned to
Tanger on the 14th of the following Month, which was precisely eight days
before the expiration of the Peace. The same Evening that he Landed, he removed
not from the Waterside at Tanger, till the Horses brought for Recruits were
boated ashore.

The next day he saluted Gayland by Letter, who upon the receipt thereof, sent
a Propio to congratulate the Earls safe arrival, and to let him know, how that
out of Civility and favor to him, he had granted the Lieutenant-Governour a
continuation of the Peace for two Months, without any variation of the first
Articles.

The Earl returned Gayland thanks; but withal assured him, That it was not in
his power to prolong the Peace beyond the first conclusion, unless he was
permitted to Fortify, as he was ordered by his Master. But that in honor to
the Lieutenant-Governours Agreement, and to show his respect to Gayland, he
would make good every particular of the Articles that were for the Moors
advantage.

Gayland here upon asked (and was granted) fifteen days space to consult with
his Grandees, and gave the Earl to understand, that during that time he might
follow his Fortifications without interruption.

Jan. 23. Gayland sent in his Secretary to let the Earl know, that if he would
have the Peace prolonged, they were to come to New Articles. The Secretary was
a Spanish Renegado, of a bold, not to say insolent discourse. He spoke highly
in his Masters behalf, and in a braving Language Hectored the Earl so loudly
with Gaylands Greatness and Puissance, that he was forced at last to bid him
tell his Mighty Master, that if he came within his Lines, he would send him to
beg pardon for his Trespass of the King of Great Britain.

The fifteen days granted Gayland for Consultation being ended, he sent a Son
of the Sheck of Anjera to confer with the Earl, who told him, the Mahumedan Law
forbad them to suffer the Christian to erect Fortifications in their Country;
and that if the Earl would not desist from that work, he was not to expect any
longer continuance of the Peace. To which Message the Earl made no other reply,
but that the Sword should decide whether Mahumeds Law or his Masters Orders
were more powerful: That he would neither take nor give Quarter: That he would
observe every tittle of the Articles, and so lay the breach of Peace at
Gaylands door. And so the War was declared by beat of drum through the streets.

The next day the Earl set upon Building of Fort- Charles, on the Hill next the
Upper-Castle; whose situation was advantageous, not only to secure a
considerable quantity of ground for the service of the Garrison, but also to
discover the Enemy at a great distance. And if he had lived to complete what he
there designed, I believe no Force would have overcome it, but that of a
Famine. He had scarce finished one half Bastion, when on the last of February
1663, Gayland with his whole Army came against it: the Fight lasted two days,
in all which time the Trenches were so well contrived, that we lost but one
man. On the second days Combat, Gayland commanded his Standard to be fixed in
the very Mouth of the Fort, and even dared the Earl to touch it. And the
greatest part of the day being spent in pelting at one another, in the Evening
the Earl commanded a Squadron of Horse to fetch off the flanting Standard; who
having bravely done it, it was set up upon the half-Bastion: which was no
sooner perceived by the Moors, but they immediately marched off, seeming much
perplexed at this disgrace.

After this the Moors appeared no more, but in smaller Parties* On March 13,
the Earl with his Troops had a severe Encounter with some of their best
Cavalry, and was hard put to it to come off with Honor. On March 27, 1664. he
counter-ambusht a strong Party of Horse, which was seconded with a Reserve of
Foot. After a short dispute the Moors ran, and were pursued by the Earl, until
the Woods and Rocks compelled him to desist. Two of their slain were brought
off, one of which had several things about him that spoke him to be a Person of
Condition. This happened upon a Sunday: L. A. Chaplain to the Garrison having
read Prayers, and preached in the Generals Tent, (which was never omitted) the
Earl commanded the two dead Bodies of the Moors to be decently washed, and
shrouded; and so laying them on two Biers, sent them with a White Flag to their
Friends. The Earl on Horseback, and the Troopers in Military Order, attended
the said Corpse to the very Margent of the ground that was granted him by
Gayland in the time of the Peace, where the Moors with a White Band-roll
received them. They expressed great tokens of their thankfulness for this
Humanity; by which the Earl (as he designed) greatly upbraided that barbarous
Butchery exercised by the Moors upon the Bodies of those unhappy English that
fell into their hands.

These Successes of the Earl much abated the Moors frequency and Resoluteness
in Ambuscades; but had no other influence upon him, save the encouraging of his
Cares, which yet for all this were very much dashed, by a want of Materials to
carry on the intended Hornwork, etc. The snarling old Duke of Medina Celi,
angry at, and envying the Earls proceedings, denied him Pratique in Spain, as
to the things he most needed; which constrained him to send to Portugal for
Lime, etc. and though it was there to be had, yet the distance was so great and
hazardous, that it was very difficult to fetch it. But if he had been
sufficiently furnished with Materials to carry on the Fortifications, in a few
Months he would have made Tanger strong enough to defy the Force and Cunning
of the Moors. And besides that this lack of Lime, etc. hindered the work, it
also gave occasion to the Earl to venture too much abroad, and put him upon
that fatal Action of May the fourth, 1664, the thoughts of which are so
unpleasant, that you must pardon me, if I totally pass it over in silence.

Thus you receive what you have so often requested; and what I have writ, is
only an innocent Narrative of the more remarkable passages betwixt Gayland and
the Earl of Tiveot. They all happened in the space of six Months, the Earl being
little longer Resident in Tanger. And if we may divine by what he did in so
short a space, what he would have done had he lived; we may safely conclude, he
would have made Tanger as famous an English Colony, as it was once a Roman. But
all was crushed in his unfortunate death. And while I reflect upon that signal
cautiousness he used in all other Adventures, I cannot but wonder by what Star
he was led to that which was his last.

Having now given you a short Account of the Antiquity of Tanger, and of what
happened there upon its first becoming English, I leave you to your own
Deductions. And shall trouble you no further, than with an intimation of the
Earl of Tiveots Opinion of the Town, Fortisication, and Mole.

As to the first, he thought its Situation so healthy and pleasant to live in,
and so advantageous either to annoy or protect all Traffic into the
Mediterranean, that he wondered it had so long continued in the lazy possession
of the Portuguezes, and that neither Europe nor Africa should attempt its
Conquest.

But though he much admired the Situation of the place, yet he greatly
disliked its Strength: and in the condition he found it, he thought it
altogether undefensible. For notwithstanding that the Mole, when come to
perfection, would secure it on that side next the Sea; yet that side of the
Town next the Land, he saw to stand in bleeding need of Fortification; on which
he was so intent, that he seemed deaf to all things besides. That we call
Charles-Fort, he intended, if possible, to make impregnable; and to erect
another Fort over against it, to agree with it in Strength, and to Communicate.
Pole-Fort he also designed to be made as strong as the other; because it looks
into and Commands the Town. He likewise had begun a Bulwark on that part of the
Town next the Sand-hills, which if finished, would have commanded both them and
the Strand toward old Tingis, and have also guarded the watering place for the
Ships. As to smaller Forts upon the Out-lines, (of which he had built some, and
intended more) though he never thought they would be able long to withstand an
Enemy, yet he fore*saw they would serve a while to divert him.

As to the Great and Magnificent Enterprise of the Mole, he judiciously
approved it: yet saw it would be laden with difficulties, continually subject
to disasters, and that it would exhaust a vast Exchequer. He was not very
forward to have the Mole begun, till the Town was so well Fortified, as that it
might bid defiance not only to the Moor, but every other Enemy. For he knew the
world would grow very jealous of so great and important a work. And what Prince
(save our own, whom God preserve) would not labor to have it disappointed, to
prevent that powerful Influence which it was like to have upon the most
advantageous Trade in the World? etc.

Forgive me, Sir, if sense of growing tedious renders me abrupt; And that my
love to Tanger makes me shut up all in this humble request, viz. That you would
improve your Post for the preservation thereof. Which I shall not despair of,
when I see a second Tiveot sent to remove all the Scruples of that naturally
jealous people, the Moors; by assuring them how His Majesty intends nothing but
a just, friendly, and lasting Commerce: and that he is so far from taking from
them any parcel of their Fields by violence, that he is ready to give them
satisfaction for so many Acres as may suffice the Conveniences of his City and
Garrison of Tanger, and enable him to complete the Mole, and suitable
Fortifications, etc.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by William Crook, at the Green-Dragon
without Temple Bar.
Divinity.
BRevis Demonstratio: proving the Truth and Excellency of the Christian
Religion by Reason; recommended to the Press by many Eminent Divines in London.
Twelves. An Answer to Mr. Fergusons Doctrine about Christ's Justification and
Sanctification; with an Account of the ends of Christ's Death and Passion,
considered in a rational way: by John Knowles. Octavo. The Primitive
Institution: or, a Seasonable Discourse of Catechism; wherein is showed the
Antiquity, Necessity and Benefits thereof; together with its sutableness to
heal the Distempers of our Church: by L. Addison, D. D. Twelves. A Sermon
Preached at the Funeral of a Man found drowned in a Pit; wherein sudden death
is considered. Octavo. A Sermon Preached at the Bishops Visitatation, at
Chichester: by W. Howel, Rector of Fittleworth. Quarto. The School of
Righteousness: A Sermon Preached on a Fast Day before the King: by Dr. W.
Sandcroft, the present Archbishop of Canterbury. An Excellent Discourse of
Usury: by Sir Robert Filmer. Twelves. A Modest Plea for the Clergy; wherein is
considered their Original, Antiquity, and Necessity; together with the true and
false grounds of their being so much neglected and slighted: by L. A. D. D.
Octavo. The Imitation of Christ: or, the Christian Pattern: by Tho. a Kempis.
Twenty fours. Dr. Gees steps of Ascension unto God: or, a Ladder to Heaven,
being Meditations and Prayers for every day in the week, and other occasions.
Twenty fours. Hug. Grotius Catechism, in Greek, Latin, and English, with a
Praxis on the Greek words. Octavo. The Spirit of Prophecy; a Treatise to prove
(by the ways formerly in use among the Jews, in the trial of pretenders to a
Prophetic Spirit) that Christ and his Apostles were Prophets; together with
the Divine Authority of Christian Religion and the Holy Scriptures, the
insufficiency of Humane Reason, and the reasonableness of Christian Faith,
Hope, and Practice, asserted against Mr. Hobbes his Leviathan, and Mr.
Cliffords Humane Reason: written by the direction of Dr. Peter Gunning, Bishop
of Ely: by W. Howel Rector of Fittleworth in Sussex. Octavo. The King-Killing
Doctrine of the Jesuits, delivered to the French King, concerning the
re-establishing of the Jesuits in France: written in French, but now Translated
into English. Quarto. Justifying of Faith: or, that Faith by which the Just do
live, briefly described; to which is added, An Abstract of some Letters about
the Excellency of the Common Prayer, against Mr. Baxter, etc. Octavo. A Sermon
Preached upon the fifth day of November, by Dr. G. Hascard, D. D. Rector of St.
Clements Danes, and Chaplain in ordinary to His Majesty. Quarto. A Sermon
Preached before Sir James Edwards Lord Mayor of London, at the Election of Sir
Robert Clayton to be Lord Mayor for the year ensuing: by G. Hascard D. D. and
Chaplain in ordinary to His Majesty. A Sermon Preached before the Right
Honorable Sir Robert Clayton, Lord Mayor of London: by Tho. Mannyngham, Fellow
of New-Colledge in Oxford.
History.
A Voyage into the Levant: by Sir H Blount. Caesar's Commentaries, with Mr.
Edmonds his Obserservations upon it: in Folio, Englished. Heylins Cosmography
in four parts: in Folio. Sir Tho. Herberts Travels, with Additions. Folio. A
description of Candia, with an account of the Siege, and the Surrender of it
into the hands of the Turks. Octavo. Calliope's Cabinet, wherein all Gentlemen
may be informed how to order themselves for Feasts, Funerals, and all Heroic
Meetings; to know all degrees of Honor, and how all degrees are to take place;
with a Dictionary of Herald-Terms. Twelves. A Diseourse of the Dukedom of
Modena; containing the Original, Antiquity, Government, Manners, and Qualities
of the People: Also the Temperature of the Climate, the Nature of the Air, etc.
Quarto. The present State of the Jews; wherein is contained an exact account of
their present Customs, Secular and Religious: To which is added a discourse of
the Misna, Talmud and Gemara, by L. Addison, D. D. The Travels of Ulysses;
Translated by Tho. Hobbes of Malmsbury, Twelves. Camera Regis, or the present
State of London, containing the Antiquity, Fame, Walls, River, Bridge, Gates,
Tower, Officers, Courts, Customs, Franchises, etc, of that City; by J. B. Esquire
Octavo. The Circumcision of the Great Turks Son, and the Ceremony of the
Marriage of his Daughter, sent from the English Ambassador. Folio. Scarrons
Comical Romance; or a facetious History of a Company of Stage Players,
interwoven with diverse choice Novels, rare Adventures, and amorous Intrigues:
written in French by Monsieur Scarron; and now done into English. Folio. The
Wonders of the Peak in Darbyshire, in Latin and English, by Tho. Hobbes.
Octavo. Parthenissa, a Romance, written by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Orrery. Fol. Clelia, an excellent new Romance, complete, in five parts. Folio.
All Homers Works, Translated into English by that great Master of the Greek and
English Tongues, Tho. Hobbes of Malmesbury. Twelves. Together with the Author's
Life. The Life and Death of Mahumet, the Author of the Turkish Religion; being
an account of his Tribe, Parents, Birth, Name, Education, Marriage, Filthiness
of Life, his Alcoran, first Proselytes, Wars, Doctrine, Miracles, Advancements,
etc. By L. Addison D. D. and one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary: Which
Book will give you full satisfaction about the Moors also. A true declaration
of the horrible Treasons by Will. Parry, Dr. of the Civil Laws, against Queen
Elizabeth; his Trial, Conviction, and Execution for the same. The Historians
Guide, or England's Remembrancer: being an account of the Actions, Exploits,
etc. and other most remarkable passages in his Majesty's Dominions, from the
year 1600 to 1679. showing the year, day and month each action was done. An
Historical Narrative of Heresy, and the Punishment thereof, by Tho. Hobbes of
Malmesbury. Fol. Mr. Hobbes his Life, written by himself in a Latin Poem, and
now Translated into English, Folio the same is in Latin, in Quarto.
Poetry and Plays.
The Elegant Poems of Dr. Corbet, late Bishop of Norwich. Melpomene, or the
Muses delight; being new Poems and Songs written by the great Wits of our
present Age. The Consinement, A Poem, with Annotations upon it, Octavo. White
Devil, or Vittoria Corombona, a Tragedy. Old Troop, or Mounsieur Raggon, a
Comedy. Catilines Conspiracy, a Tragedy. Amorous Gallant, or Love in fashion, a
Comedy. Mock-Duellist, or French Valet, a Comedy. Wrangling Lovers, or the
Invincible Mistress, a Comedy. Tom. Essence, or the Modish Wife, a Comedy.
French Conjurer, a Comedy. Wits led by the Nose, or the Poets Revenge, a
Comedy. Rival Kings, or the Loves of Orondates, a Tragedy. Constant Nymph, or
rambling Shepherd, a Pastoral. Counterfeit Bridegroom, or defeated Widow, a
Comedy. Tunbridge-Wells, or a days Courtship, a Comedy. The Man of Newmarket, a
Comedy.
FINIS.

