Mr. ADAMS's SERMON BEFORE THE HOUSE OF COMMONS November 5th, 1696.

Veneris, Sexto Die November. 1696.
ORdered, That the Thanks of This House be Given to Mr. Adams, For the Sermon
by him Preached before This House Yesterday at St. Margaret's Westminster: And
that he be Desired to Print the same: And, That Mr. Rowney and Mr. Harcourt do
Aquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell. Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, AT St. Margarets
Westminster, November the Fifth, 1696. BY J. Adams, Rector of St. Alban
Woodstreet, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed by Sam. Bridge in Austin-Friers; for Thomas Bennet, at the
Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCVI.

A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, etc.
3 cap. DANIEL 28. v. Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said; Blessed be the God of
Shadrach, Meshec and Abednego, who has sent his Angel, and delivered his
Servants that trusted in him; and have changed the Kings word, and yielded
their Bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any God, except their own
God.


THE Occasion of these Words must be too well known to be Repeated in all its
Circumstances. Nebuchadnezzar being Returned from a Victorious Expedition which
he had made into Egypt; Vain upon his Success, and therefore forgetful of his
Dream, and Daniel's Interpretation of it, or perhaps, in Contempt of both, sets
up an Idol near Babylon, and makes a Decree, That whoever did not Worship it
should be burnt alive.

But these Three Jews refusing to do so, and persisting in their Refusal with a
Holy Constancy, he falls into a Rage, commands that the Furnace should be made
Seven times hotter, and that they should be thrown into it immediately.

But, How vain is the Rashness of successful Pride! or the cruelty of boundless
Power! when opposed against the God of Heaven and Earth, and when employed
against such as Trust in him; He sends his Angel and delivers them, and this
Miracle turns their Enemies Heart; makes him acknowledge his Error and their
Virtue in that They yielded their Bodies, and changed his word; Exposed
themselves to Death, and made him change his Opinion, upon their wonderful
Deliverance, and join with them in the Praise of the only God.

I heartily wish, That they who have exceeded the Cruelty of this King, in so
many barbarous Conspiracies against this Nation, would but imitate him in this
last particular, and be moved by the Wonders of our Deliverances, to confess
their Error, and to Give God the Glory.

But alas! We are not like to find anything of this: The same Spirit which they
were of when they engaged in that Bloody Enterprise, from which our
Forefathers were Delivered this Day, is still working; and tho it breaks out
now and then, like subterraneous Fires, and Disappears again, is not
Extinguished; nor like to be so (while Ambition or Superstition will be still
supplying new Fuel) but with the General Conflagration.

This makes this Solemnity necessary upon a double Account, not only to make us
Grateful for what we have received, but to make us Watchful against the same
Dangers hereafter.

In order to both, I shall Discourse of these Words in this manner.

1. I shall consider the particular Cause of the great Danger which these Men
were brought into, namely, For that they would not serve nor worship any God
except their own God.

2. I shall examine the Pretenses of Religious cruelty, not only as to such
extremes, but also, as to any kind of Violence offered to our fellow
Christians, upon the account of Christianity; and show, that this is
proportionably unjust and unreasonable.

3. I shall make some Reflections upon these Jews Deliverance, and Compare our
own with it.

And having said something upon each of these, shall conclude all with the Duty
of Thanksgiving, which is the Design of these words, and the Business of this
Day.

1. I am to consider the particular Cause, for which these Men were brought
into this great Danger; namely, for that they would not serve nor worship any
God except their own God; But the Injustice of requiring this of them must
appear at the first Glance; because it was not only contrary to Natural Reason,
but also to that Law which God himself had Revealed to their Forefathers.

There is no one that has any Conception of God, but must allow him to be
Infinite in all his Attributes. But Infinity implys Unity; there cannot be more
than one All-Mighty or All-Wise; than one first Cause of all things; or, than
one Supreme Governor of them all. Therefore, if this Being is but one; Divine
Worship must be due to Him alone: To give it to any other Object, would be the
making that, God; and not only the most provoking Affront to the Great Creator,
but the Confusion of all Belief, and the Corruption of all Morality.

This made God forbid the Jews the serving any of the Gods of the Neighboring
Nations, under such severe Penalties, upon any pretenses of Miracles
whatsoever; particularly, 13 Deuteronomy. 1, etc. If there arise among you a Prophet,
and give a Sign or Wonder to entice you to serve other Gods, and it shall come
to pass, thou shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet; but he shall be
put to Death. If thy Brother, thy Son, thy Daughter, the Wife of thy Bosom, or
thy Friend which is as thy own Soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us serve
other Gods; thou shall not spare nor conceal him, but thou shall surely kill
him. Since this then, was not only against Reason, but Revelation: Since God by
so many Prohibitions, Cautions and Threats, proved Himself to be Jealous in
this Particular; the refusal of these Jews was not only Lawful, but highly
Commendable, and the Death they were Exposed to, upon this Account, Barbarous
and Unjust.

It cannot be denied, but the Dangers which this Nation has been Exposed to so
often; from open Violence, but more from basest Treachery, has been upon this
very account. One of the greatest Differences which we have with the Church of
Rome is, because we will not serve nor worship any God except our own God. This
is one of the most profitable Absurdities that is sheltered under
Infallibility. And therefore our Refusing of it, and the Reasons why we do so,
always provoke them in the highest manner, and makes them fly to Cruelties
instead of Arguments: As if Image Worship could not be supported, any other way
than by the same Barbarities that it was brought in at first.

But the Obligations we have to continue in this Refusal with unshaken
Constancy, are greater than these Jews had, as Rising not only from the Laws of
Nature, and of Moses, (which is still in force, as to this particular): But
also from the Law of Christ: The Merits of his Death, the Prerogative of His
Intercession being extremely weakened by this; and the Conditions of the
Gospel-Faith in Him alone, and Repentance through Him only, overthrown.

Therefore, as God showed his Approbation of these Jews Refusal, to worship
Nebuchadnezzar's Image, by the Miracle he wrought in their Deliverance: So, I
doubt not, but he has showed so many Wonders in Delivering this Nation so
often, for its Constancy in the same Refusal; tho in all other respects, most
unworthy of the least of His Mercies.

II. I come to Examine the Pretenses of Religious Cruelty, not only as to these
Extremes, but as to any Violence offered to our fellow Christians upon the
account of Christianity; and to show, that this is proportionably unjust and
unreasonable.

The Pretenses of all Religious Cruelty may be reduced to these two; either to
Promote Gods Glory, or our Neighbors Good; but this is not proper for either
of these purposes:

1. Not proper to promote God's Glory: by this, I take to be meant, one of
these two things; The improving that Notion of God which Men may have by the
Light of Nature; or, The making his Revealed Will to be more readily embraced
by them.

As to the first of these: If we consider Mankind in the State of Nature,
without any Improvement of his Reason, or Advantage of Revelation. We may
suppose, That while they wandered about in a Wild and Savage Manner, they were
not very solicitous about the Worship of God. But when Self-Preservation began
to be Alarmed by some Evil which they suffered, it forced 'em to acknowledge
some Superior Being.

As Fear was the chief Cause of this, so their Worship was Cruel, and their
Manners (which are always influenced by the Nature of Religion) Barbarous. But
when they began to Settle into Societies, and to Converse with one another;
When in the leisure of Peace and Plenty, they reflected upon the First Cause of
the Benefits which they enjoyed; and from the Contemplation of God's Goodness
in his Works, rose gently to the Discovery of his Goodness in his Essence; then
Love grew the Principle of their Glad Obedience. And accordingly their Worship
was Bloodless and Cheerful, and their Manners Innocent and Indearing.

So that the Improvement of Humane Nature consists in the Notions of Goodness
in the Divine, and Gods Glory was manifested to the World. Not only, by such
worthy Conceptions of Him, but also, by the mild Influence which these
Conceptions had upon men's Minds and Actions.

But if, when Men had got thus far by the Light of Nature, any one should have
started up, and pretended to have offered Violence to his Neighbor; to have
afflicted, tormented, nay murdered him, by a particular Commission from God
himself, and in order to his Glory; then Love must have given place to Fear
immediately, and Humane Nature turned Wild and Savage again: And either have
Renounced all Belief of a God; or imagined Him to have been so Dreadful a
Being, and Worshipped Him in so Barbarous a manner, as would have been far worse:
For as Plutarch says, Would it not be more for the Honor of the Gods? Plut.
(...).
For the Scythians and Carthaginians, who offered Men upon their Altars, to
have denied their Being altogether? than to Teach, That they delighted in such
Sacrifices? Had the Titans prevailed against Heaven, and Usurped the Government
of the World; What other Victims but these, would they have required of us?
Such are the Sacrifices which every Rash Enthusiast offers; and so, much more,
do some Zealots detract from Gods Glory than Atheism it self.

But if in the next place, Violence is intended to promote the Gospel. How
Contradictory and Absurd is this! This is to Recommend Love by Hatred, Mercy by
Cruelty, and Forgiveness by Destruction.

That which distinguishes the Gospel so gloriously, is its being so admirably
disposed to beget Love and Peace, Justice and Charity among all Men. Here
Forgiveness is improved into Beneficence, and Humanity exalted into Charity:
Here Injuries are returned with Pravers, and Curses with Blessings: Here all
our Duty is summed up under those two sweet Commands, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength, and
thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Love alone is the fulfilling of this
Law; And this is made by our Blessed Savior, the Particular Distinction of his
Followers, By this shall all Men know that ye are MY Disciples, if ye love one
another. The Pharisees taught, That it was lawful to hate Enemies, and
preferred the observation of the smallest Duties, before the works of Justice
and Mercy. The Cynicks renoune'd all Humanity; the Stoics reckoned Compassion
an Infirmity, and if they Revenged not Injuries, it was out of Pride, not
Humility; because they looked upon it below their Affected Grandeur, to be
disordered by them; not because they forgave them: All other Sects were
deficient in this particular.

But Christianity improved Humane Nature into the likeness of the Divine; And
therefore our Blessed Lords Disciples were to be distinguished from the whole
World, by their loving one another. And what Examples of this did our Great
Master leave us! How did he go about doing Good! Healing the Sick graciously!
Instructing the Ignorant gently! and Reproving the Wicked calmly! And after
innumerable Injuries of Contempt and Violence, with what Meekness and Patience
did he Die for the Sins of the whole World. And after all this, shall men dare
to impoverish, imprison, murder their Brethren, in the Name of this JESUS!
Shall they in this Saving Name, which was used of Old, only to Heal Diseases,
and Cast out Devils, Form so many Conspiracies, Execute so many Massacres,
Spill the Blood of so many Thousands! as they have done in Piedmont, Hungary,
Germany, Ireland, England! All the World over.

Alas! When I consider those Arts of Cruelty, those elaborate Tortures, and
studied Deaths, those Ruins of Cities, Subversions of Kingdoms, and Murders
of Princes, which have been done in this Blessed Name, and all this pretended
officiously, for his Service, and the promoting of his Glory: I cannot but
represent to my self the Lamb of God, the Prince of Peace, turning away from
such Spectacles of Horror, saying, Who has required these things at your
Hands? Ye know not what Spirit ye are of, the Son of Man did not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them.

This was the design of our Saviors Coming; the Spirit of Peace and Love is
that which we ought to be of; and which is so sweetly diffused through all the
Gospel, and was so effectual in promoting it against the Wit of Athens; the
Power of Rome; and the General Prejudice of the whole World. But if men,
instead of this, will be guilty of such Cruelties upon the account of
Christianity, this must be so far from recommending it, that it is enough to
make the Name of Christ blasphemed among the Gentiles; and to cause every one
that suffers under it, or that beholds such Sufferings, to persist in their
Errors more stubbornly, as will further appear, if we consider:

2. The other Pretense of Religious Cruelty, which is, to promote the Good of
our Neighbor: But not only these Extremes of which we have been speaking, but
all kinds of Zealous Violence, are improper for this purpose.

This is generally disguised under the specious Pretense of Zeal. But true Zeal
ought first to be employed upon our selves. When men become Examples of
Fervency in their Piety, and Mortifications in their Obedience or Repentance,
then they most effectually contribute both to Gods Glory, and their Neighbors
Good. Zeal is as necessary to the life of Devotion, as the Natural Heat is to
that of the body. But then it is apt to become Feverish, and disturb the Brain.
It often renders our own good Actions, hasty and imperfect, tho surprising at
first sight: As Plants that are forced by artificial Heat, come before others
indeed, but bring not with them their natural Smell or Taste. But generally it
affects to show it self at our Neighbors Cost; it blazes outward, like
Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace, and destroys whoever comes in its way, tho its own
Friends.

But holy and innocent Zeal! innocent and therefore holy! shoots out its Flames
directly toward Heaven, and casts a Light upon all that are round it; but such
a Light as is for their Comfort and Direction; such a Light as God Himself is,
when he shines out upon the humble Penitent, in the reviving Glory of Goodness
and Mercy; Not a devouring Flame; not a consuming Fire.

The Promises, that, He that saves a Soul from Death shall hide a multitude of
Sins; that, He that turns many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for
ever and ever; make many very earnest to bring over others to their Opinions,
and to use Violence to this purpose; but No Man is crowned except he strive
lawfully: It is not enough to be zealous in any matter, unless we observe those
Rules and Conditions which God has prescribed to us. And if Men really sought
their Neighbors Good, as fervently as they did their own, they would find,
that Violence is not only against the whole Design of the Gospel (as has been
shown;) but also against their own Defign of convincing their Neighbor.

For Religion must be a free Consent of the Soul; and can be acceptable to God
only as it is Voluntary. He requires Truth in the inward parts; and that we
should Love him with all our Hearts, with all our Minds, etc. But how can this
be without full Conviction; and how can full Conviction be wrought, but by
gentle Usage, calm Reasoning, and good Example: The Will can never be forced to
give a sincere Assent, after all the Violence that can be offered; But Reason
upon the appearance of any Force, is apt to Contract it self, and prepare for
Resistance; both because Truth may justly be suspected, if it comes in so
Hostile a manner; as also, because it cannot have leisure to examine What is
Truth, when the Business is grown to be Self-preservation.

Besides, All Error, considering the Vanity of Mankind, is of a nice and
tender Nature: It requires a great deal of Management and Address, to make
People own that they are in the Wrong, Especially in matters of Religion. But
if instead of this, Violence is offered, and men's Interrest, Liberties or
Lives, are any way touched by Persecution; not only Conceitedness, but Anger
and Revenge confirm the Error, and make it sink deeper in the sullen Sufferer:
And when People are once brought to suffer, this will rather disperse than
suppress the Error, (as some Stains spread the wider, the nearer they are held
to the Fire.) For Constancy in Suffering gives Reputation to the Cause,
whatever it is; because every one can judge of Courage, Meekness and Patience,
tho few of Truth; and Pity (in a Good-natured Nation especially) softens the
beholders into a liking of the Sufferer; and brings him by degrees, to Excusing
and Defending him; and at last, insensibly, to the Embracing his Opinions.

Therefore the utmost that we can expect from Force is an outward Compliance;
and that either from timorous People; or from such as will not prejudice their
Interest for any Religion in the World; of which there are too many! Violence
may extort perhaps, Confession from the Mouth, but will not hinder Curses, at
the same time, in the Heart; it may fright People into counterfeiting, but not
persuade 'em into believing; and after all the Industrious Cruelty of
Inquisitions or Dragoons, there will be Jews in Spain, and Protestants in
France, as Prostrate as any at the Elevation.

But one particular Reason against the Rashness of Zealous Cruelty, or any
General Violence, is, because the Good should not suffer with the Evil; this
was a Consideration of that Importance, that our Savior left ample
Instructions concerning it, 13 Matthew. 29, 30. where he positively forbids the
gathering of the Tares, lest they should root up the Wheat also; and his Orders
in this matter are, that they should Let both grow together till the Harvest.
This (as St. Chrysostom. upon the place) was to forbid Wars, Blood and Slaughter
upon the account of Heresy; for if People will take up Arms to murder
Heretics, many innocent Men must suffer with them. This is so plain, that it
touched one of the Boldest Conspirators in this Days Treason; and made him
consult his Confessor upon it: And tho the Jesuit gave it against our Savior;
yet no Protestant sure, can doubt which he ought to follow.

For these Reasons, no Religious Cruelty; no Violence of Zeal is proper to
promote Gods Glory, or our Neighbors Good: But on the contrary, Unreasonable
and Unjust.

But tho these are the usual Pretenses, yet the true Causes of all Extremes of
this kind, are of another Nature. I shall instance in two or three, which may
most immediately concern us.

I. The first is, the Pride and Haughtiness of Power: there is no doubt but
Nebuchadnezzar's Fury was inflamed to such a height, to see his Decree slighted
by none but these Three Jews, his Slaves, his Captives; he was concerned for
his own Honor as much as his Idols: the same Temper which makes men Peevish
and Passionate when they cannot get the better in private Disputes, breaks out
into Persecution, when it meets with Power: True Zeal is the fervency of Love,
and therefore beneficial; but counterfeit Zeal is nothing but the fervency of
Pride, and therefore destructive.

And there is no question but Disdain that so small an Island as this, should
be able to confate and oppose 'em so long, has exasperated 'em to such a
degree: For tho the Cause of God, and Religion is pretended, all the
Conspiracies against this Nation, have been owing chiefly, to the Pride of
Supremacy, and the Indignation of Infallibility.

II. Another Reason of this is, the endeavoring to recommend our selves to
Man, rather than God: It Is usual for Men to engage in some Party, to further
their Ambition, or Interest, and then something extraordinary must be done, to
show their Fidelity to that Party. This is a very general Corruption, and a
great Reason of that Prejudice and Passion, that want of Charity and Union, or
rather, of that increase of Division and Bitterness among us. For since all Men
cannot be of one Opinion; He that is eager to approve himself to some
particular Number, must needs do it at the others cost: Therefore tho the
Service of God, and the Good of Mankind is pretended never so much; we may be
assured, that whoever is Cruel and Barbarous for his mistaken Neighbors sake,
for his suffering Saviors sake, is so only for his own sake, and that it is
some other God which he serves and worships, besides the true God.

III. The last Reason of this, which I shall mention at present, is, An Opinion
that such Violence is meritorious for the Expiation of former Sins. This is one
of the strongest supports of the Supremacy. For if a Prince is known to have
been of a Vicious Life, and can be made sensible of this by his Confessor, it is
but pointing him out such or such Heretics, and their Destruction, shall be
his Pardon; and inferior Persons are made use of to the same purpose,
proportionably.

But is there any other Atonement for Sin than our Redeemers Sacrifice! Or
shall Man make use of the Blood of Christians and Subjects to this end, instead
of Faith and Repentance? Alas! what Extremes may a misguided Conscience be
driven into! and how dreadful is Sovereign Power! when made use of to atone for
its own Guilt, and whetted on by Superstition and Revenge for this Purpose!
Blessed be God! That we learn this, rather from others Sufferings than our own
Experience!

These are the true Causes of Religious Cruelty, and the barbarous effects of
Zealous Violence, tho others are pretended: But there are lower degrees of it,
upon the account of lesser Differences, which are proportionably unwarrantable,
and whoever persecutes his Brother for Opinions, not dangerous to Government,
not destructive of good Manners, not detracting from the Divinity of our
Savior, or the Authority of Gods Word, is greatly mistaken, and under
Condemnation.

That Jesus! who died for us all, recommended us to one another, by the
strictest Obligations of Mutual Love; and his Apostles enforced the same
continually, commanding us, to bear one another burdens, and to let our
Moderation be Known unto all Men; and unless this mind be in us, which was, so
remarkably, in Christ Jesus, I cannot see with what Confidence, we can contend
for his Glory, or presume to be called by his Peaceful Name.

But tho Persecution is so faulty, and Moderation so commendable, they are not
always presently distinguished, being extremely disguised by Cunning and
Hypocrisy, according as Men have occasion to raise Anger, or move Compassion.

Persecution is the Cry of all Monstrous Opinions when they first Crawl out
into the World; if any thing is Vented, tho never so destructive to the
Fundamentals of Government, or Christianity, it begins with an Invective
against Persecution; and tho the whole Treatise has nothing but Falsehood and
Insolence, concludes with the Praise of Moderation.

Sometimes the just Condemnation of Criminals is called Persecution; sometimes
the corrupt acquitting of 'em Moderation. Sometimes Constancy to the Plainest
Articles of Faith, is reckoned a Sign of a Persecuting Spirit; sometimes
Indifferency as to Religion, whether there be any such thing at all, an
Argument of a Moderate One.

But if there is any such thing as Religion, Indifferency must be an Error,
whenever that is really in danger. But Constancy to it can never be so, if not
injurious to our Neighbor.

A good Man ought to believe truly, as he professes; and to act steddily as he
believes; and yet he ought, at the same time, to have Charity toward others,
who profess the same Faith, tho not exactly in the same Manner. Let our
Constancy then be softened by our Charity; and let our Charity be supported by
our Constancy; so shall our Zeal neither languish into Indifferency, nor fret
into Persecution; and so shall we be at the same time, just to our Neighbor,
and faithful to our God.

I have been the more particular upon this Head, because the Pretenses or
Mistakes of Zeal and Religion, were not only the Occasion of the Barbarous
Conspiracy detected so Providentially this day: but have been made use of too
often, to the great misery of this poor Nation.

III. The Third thing I Proposed, was to compare the Greatness of the
Deliverance mentioned in the Text, with our own. God sent his Angel, and
delivered his Servants that trusted in him: The great Reason of this here
mentioned is because they trusted in God. When the Tyrant threatened these Three
Jews with so cruel and sudden a Death, v. 15. with what undaunted Resolution do
they Reply immediately, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful (very solicitous)
to answer thee in this matter: If it be so, our God whom we serve, is able to
deliver us from the burning fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy
hand, O King! But if not (if his Wisdom shall not think fitting to do so) Be it
known unto thee, O King! That we will not serve thy Gods, nor Worship the
Golden Image which thou have set up. There are few Instances of such Constancy,
such entire Trust in God as this was; and this acknowledging of his Providence,
this submitting to his Will, made God send his holy Angel, to Deliver his
Faithful Servants in so miraculous a manner: But their and our Deliverance is
to be measured best by the greatness of the Danger which they were Exposed to;
Bound Hand and Foot; Thrown into the midst of a Fiery Furnace, whose Heat was
so violent, as to slay those who were designed to be their Executioners; and
yet had Power over nothing about 'em, but their Bonds, to restore 'em to their
Liberty.

The Parallel may be drawn very like, between this and our own Case. The
Deliverance was almost as Wonderful: They alone, who designed our Destruction,
perished; and our Liberty, from their Bonds, grew greater than before. But
their Cruelty far exceeded that of this Heathen Tyrant, because so Base, so
Treacherous, and extended not to Three Captives only; but to The greatest
Assembly in the Christian World.

And here I am at a loss how to express my self! fot fear of seeming to fall
into the mistaken Zeal which I have condemned; or to want that Charity which I
have endeavored so much to recommend. But alas! What words can be found to
show our Charity, when an Action is so very foul in its own Nature, that the
bare mention of it, must look like Invective. Let they themselves then, be
Judges of the matter; Let us put it friendly, to any one of them, and see what
they may be supposed to say, to Defend it, to Excuse it, or to Evade it.

Cau they deny the matter of Fact? Were not the Instruments of Death found
ready? Did not the Wretch that was to give the Fatal Blow, Triumph in the
Design? Did not many of them Die despetately, to prevent Public Justice, and
others Confess it? And can it after all this be Questioned? Well would it be
for them, if any one of the Miracles which they have boasted of, for a Thousand
Years past; had a Quarter of this Evidence.

But perhaps they will say, That these were only a few Private Persons, Madmen
and Enthusiasts, and therefore the particular Crimes of such, ought not to be
laid upon the Whole Body of that Communion.

I doubt not, but that there were many then, and are now of that Persuasion,
which heartily abhor and detest such Contrivances. But as to the Madness of
these Men, or its being a private Undertaking. No Madman is entrusted with
Treachery of such Importance; no Enthusiast can carry on such a Series of
Subtilty and Cunning; for tho such People are the best Executioners, upon such
Occasions; yet the Springs that move 'em must be of another kind, and did reach
farther than was then discovered, as was plain from the General Expectation
among all the Papists abroad, of some extraordinary Action in England about
that time.

The Massacre at Paris may perhaps, be called a Tumult at a Public Solemnity,
or allowed to be a piece of Cruelty of State, or the unjust revenge of an
injured Prince; to shift it off from the Church of Rome. But he that sees the
particulars of that bloody Transaction, Painted Triumphantly in one of the
Chief Rooms of the Vatican, with Inscriptions upon each part, and the Admiral
Coligni named directly, cannot deny (be he never so partial) but that the Court
of Rome, highly approves, and encourages such Tragedies, if they are not
contrived or managed there.

But again, it may be said, That tho this Fact was true, yet it is the part of
Charity, to make the best of Errors, and not to aggravate 'em, and inflame
Revenge. I grant this, where the Evidence is doubtful, or where there is
Repentance; But where there is neither of these, Enormous Crimes are to be made
Public, not to inflame Revenge, but to awaken Caution. Besides, this is
necessary to the Fullness of our Praise; How can we give God Thanks without we
Know the greatness of the Mercy received; or how can that be known, without
laying open the Greatness of the Danger from which he has delivered us? Or, how
should this be done? without showing the bloodiness of their Cruelty, and the
baseness of their Treachery, that were Engaged in it.

To Soften and Disguise such an Action, to make the best of such a Wickedness,
is to make the worst of Gods Goodness. Yet notwithstanding these
Considerations, Let 'em but acknowledge the Crime, let 'em but own, That
several Jesuits and other Papists, had contrived and prepared to murder their
King, their Princes, their Nobles, and many Handred of the Chief of the Gentry,
of their own Country, in a moment, Upon the Pretense of the Christian Religion.
Let 'em, I say, but Confess this plain and impartial Truth, and then let the
Sophistry of their Jesuits, and the Zeal of all their other Orders, make the
best of it, as much as they please.

But let us turn away our Eyes from these frightful Objects to those more
delightful; let us leave the Cruelty of Man, to contemplate and adore the Mercy
of God.

We have seen for what Reason we were exposed to such Danger; we have examined
the Pretenses of Religious Cruelty, and shown the Injustice and
Unreasonableness of it, and we have considered the Greatness of our
Deliverance: What remains now! but to offer up our Praise and Thanksgiving;
that Sacrifice so delightful to Man, and so Acceptable to God, for that He sent
his Angel, and delivered his Servants.

Blessed then be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for Preserving
the Church of this Nation, from the several Attempts of all its Adversaries;
particularly, that of This Day, to be in after Ages, the Ornament and Defense
of the Reformation.

Blessed be the Guardian Providence of these Kingdoms, which has preserved the
Excellent Constitution of Parliaments, as the happy Mean, between the Extremes
of Liberty and Power, as the Security of our Rights as Englishmen; and of our
Religion as Christians. For had this been abolished in the Destruction
designed, as on this Day, both had been lost for ever.

For Rome is Infallible in Temporals as well as Spirituals; Arbitrary Power is
Civil Infallibility, as Arbitrary Doctrine is Ecclesiastical.

Blessed then, Ever blessed be the Watchful Goodness of our God! O may the
Mercies of this Happy Day, (which have received so vast an increase of late!)
Spread by degrees through all our Calendar! and every moment of time be fatal
to such a Cause.

To conclude, May the frequent Deliverances which we have had, increase Our
Trust in God; and at length, influence our Actions by a Practical Gratitude.
May the Dangers we are still in from the same People, increase our Union; and
make us more constant to our Holy Religion; and more exact in our Obedience to
our God: Remembering always, That the chief End of this, and all our other
Deliverances, was That we should not Serve nor Worship any God, except our own
God.

FINIS.

