ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Translator, by the Author's Advice, r^trench'd, from the former Pa^^ of
this Treatise, certain obscu^^ and Metaphysical Passages which may be seen in
the (^riginal. In doing which he ha^ cut off, rather superfluous an^ useless
Branches, than any m^terial or necessary Part, a^^ has rendered it more
agreeabl^ and fitted to every Capacity.

April 29. 1694.
THE ART OF Knowing One-self: OR, An ENQUIRY into THE Sources of MORALITY.

Written Originally in French, By the Reverend Dr. ABBADIE.

In Two PARTS.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, for Henry Clements, and John Howell,
Booksellers, 1695.

TO MY MUCH Esteemed Friend, Mr. HENRY LEVET.
I SHALL not excuse my Adventure, by extolling this Author's Worth, lest I
should seem both Unjust, and Impertinent: For should I go to enumerate his
Praises, I might fail of rendering him all that is his Due; and to repeat his
Fame, whom the World sufficiently knows, and this very Work not a little
commends, would be foolishly Vain and Impertinent.

I hope, by my pouring his fragrant Essences, into a new Vessel, they are
better exposed to the Sense of my Countrymen, and have not Lost much of their
genuine Odor: However I am pretty well assured, That the Majesty of the Sense,
will shine through the Meanness of my Expression; and that, so, whilst it gathers
new Praises to its Author, 'twill obtain, at least, a Pardon for me.

It Is not my Design, in presenting you with a Treatise of this Kind, either to
Inform your Mind, or Reform your Manners; since I doubt not, but you already
understand the Rules for Knowing Your-self, and carefully Transcribe 'em into
Practice: I offer it to you as a Part of that Homage, which all Men Owe, and,
those that Know you, justly Pay to your real Merit; and particularly as a Token
of Gratitude, to that Generous and Friendly Temper, which I always Admired, and
frequently Experienced in you.

As you have hitherto, even in Prosperity, freely embraced an useful Knowledge
of your Self, as related both to God, and the World, surely the Heavens will
see no Reason to Frown upon you, with whom their Smiles have been so
prevailing, and that they never may, is the hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant, T. W.

THE TABLE Of The CHAPTERS.
The First PART.
CHAP. I. WHere we give a general Idea of the Vileness and Misery of Man, which
are the first of his Qualities that occur to our Mind. Page 11 ^hap. II. Where
we endeavor to know Man, by considering the Nature and Extent of his Duties.
Page 24 ^hap. III. Where we continue to make certain Reflections upon the
Decalogue, considering it as an Expression of the Law of Nature, accommodated
to the State of the Israelites. Page 32 ^hap. IV. Where we show the Extent of
the Law of Nature, by considering it in the Gospel, and with Relation to the
Immortal Man. Page 39 ^hap. V. Of the Moral Strength of Man, or the Motives
which he finds in himself, to determine him in his Actions. Page 43 Chap. VI.
Where we explain, what Effect the sense of Immortality is capable of working
upon our Heart. Page 4^ Chap. VII. Where we continue to show, wha^ the Sense of
our Immortality can work upon our Heart. Page 6^
The Second PART.
CHAP. I. WHere we enquire after the Source of our Corruption, by handling the
first of our Faculties which is the Understanding. Page 9^ Chap. II. Where we
continue to show, that the Source of our Corruption is not in the
Understanding. Page 10^ Chap. III. Where we search after the manner how the
Heart deceives the Mind. Page 10^ Chap. IV. Where we consider the mutual
Illu^ons, which pass between the Heart and the Mind, and how GOD alone destroys
'em by his Grace. Page 11^ Chap. V. Where we continue to search for the Sources
of our Corruption, by considering the Motions and Inclinations of the Heart.
Page 12^ Chap. VI. Where we examine the Faults ^ Self-love. Page 12^ Chap. VII.
Where we show, that Self-love kindles all our Affections, and is the genera^
Principle of our Motions. Page 13^ Chap. VIII. Where we continue to show, that
Self-love is the Principle of our Affections. Page 147 Chap. IX. Where we
consider the most general Inclinations of Self-love, and in the first place,
the Desire of Happiness. Page 166 Chap. X. Where we consider the Cheats, which
Self-love puts upon it self, to correct the Defects, it finds in the Happiness
it aims at. Page 180 Chap. XI. Where we consider the general Inclinations of
Self-love, the Second whereof is a Desire of Perfection. Page 193 Chap. XII.
Where we treat of the general Vices which flow from Self-love, and first of
Pleasure. Page 201 Chap. XIII. Where we continue to consider the diverse
Characters of Pleasure. Page 209 Chap. XIV. Where we treat of the general
Disorders of Self love, and particularly of Pride. Page 221 Chap. XV. Where we
examine all those Irregularities, which are Ingredients of Pride. Page 227 Chap
XVI. Where we consider the Second Irregularity of Pride. Page 237 Chap. XVII.
Of the Third Irregularity, which goes to make up Pride, which is Vanity. Page
240 Chap. XVIII. Where we continue the Characters of Men's Vanity. Page 252
Chap. XIX. Of the Two last Characters of Pride, which are Ambition, and the
Contempt of our Neighbor. Page 265
BOOKS lately Printed by Leonard Lichfield, and Sold by Henry Clements, John
Howell.
A Defense of the Christian Sabbath. Part the First. In Answer to a Treatise of
of Mr. Thomas Bampfield: Pleading for Saturday-Sabbath. Price 1 s. The 2 Edit.

A Defense of the Christian Sabbath. Part the Second. Being a Rejoinder to Mr.
Bampfield's Reply to Doctor Wallis's Discourse concerning the Christian
Sabbath. Price 1 s. 6 d. Both by John Wallis, D. D. And Professor of Geometry
in the University of Oxford.

An Essay on Grief: With the Causes and Remedies of it. Price bound 1 s.

Poems on several Occasions, Originals and Translations. Price 1 s.

Guilelmi Oughtred Aetonensis, Quondam Collegii Regalis in Cantabrigia Socii,
Clavis Mathematicae Denuo Limata, sive potius Fabricata. Cum aliis quibusdam
ejusdem Commentationibus, quae in sequenti paginae recensentur. Editio Quinta
auctior and emendatior. Ex Recognitione D. Johannis Wallis, S. T. D. Geometriae
Professoris Saviliani. Octavo.

The ART of KNOWING ONE-SELF: Or, An Enquiry after the Sources OF MORALITY.
MORAL Philosophy, or the Knowledge of Manners, is the Art of regulating One's
Heart by Virtue, and of rendering One-self Happy by Living well.

This Science, which the Ancients called by the Name of Wisdom, and which One
of them boasts of having brought down from Heaven, has not always been Treated
of, either in the same Method, or with the same Success: For it seems to have
taken the Tincture of the different Prejudices of Men, which every Time has
produced, and of the diverse States, through which their Mind has passed.

Paganism, in general, had taken from it its Force, its Motives, and its
Examples. It Is easy to conceive, That Men did not find themselves very much
dispo'sd to Live well, by the Motives of a Religion, which they looked upon as a
Collection of Ridiculous Dreams, and a prodigious Complication of Fictions,
that were Incredible even to the grossest of the Vulgar.

Juv. S^t. 2. Esse aliquos maneis, and subterranea regna,
Et contum, and stygio ranas in gurgite nigras,
Atque una trans^re vadum tot millia cymba,
Nec pueri credunt, nis^ qui nondum aere lavantur.
The Philosophers, who made Profession of a more refined Doctrine, have
nevertheless not made a much farther Progress in this respect: For some of them
have not had any true Idea of the natural Dignity of Man, whom they took
delight to confound with the Beasts, that they might with an equal freedom
plunge themselves without scruple in the Ocean of Pleasure: Others have waver'd
on this account in perpetual Uncertainties, which permitted them not to
establish their specious Precepts upon very certain Foundations.

Even the Morality of the Stoics, the most pure and sublime of all, as they
themselves imagined, has not been without some Defect: It could Elevate Man,
but failed to Humble him. One may say of all these Philosophers, what was said
of One of them, who despised the Vanity of the Others with too much
Ostentation. They Trampled upon Pride, with a yet greater Pride. They
acknow^edg'd the Defects of Humane Nature, that ^ey might lay hold of an
Occasion to extol their own Wisdom that had freed 'em from ^em, and renouncing
such a Life as other ^en led, they dared prefer themselves be^^re the Greatest
of their Gods.

The Morality which springs from the Old and New Testament has Characters
alto^ether opposite to those we have just now ^emark'd: It has certain
Principles; it fol^^ws the Light of Truth; it is supported by ^ost powerful
Motives, and most perfect Ex^mples; it considers Man as coming from ^OD,
returning to GOD, and having no ^ss than an Eterni^y in view: It lifts up ^an
abased by his Passions, vilified by Su^erstition, and degraded by the Infamy of
his ^pplications; and which is admirable, it ^ises him in such a manner as not
to puff ^m up with Pride, and humbles him so as ^ make him lose nothing of his
proper Dig^^ty: It divests him of his Pride, by com^unicating to him real
Glory, and raises his ^xcellency in forming his Humility by this ^ivine
Commerce of our Souls with GOD, which Religion acquainted us with, in which GOD
descends quite to our lower ^egion, without losing any thing of His ^randeur,
and we mount up to GOD with^t remitting any thing of that Abasement which we
owe to his Presence.

This Science, which not only teaches us* to Live well, but also to obtain an
Eternity of Happiness by Living well, is so Important a part of Religion, that
GOD was not willing it should be in our Power to pretend the Ignorance of it.
And whereas we have no other means of attaining to the Knowledge of most
things, but either by Reason, Sense or Faith, He was willing that the Morality
of His Gospel should be known after all these ways: Faith makes us embrace it
because Jesus Christ and the Apostles have taught and practiced it; the inward
Sense o^ Conscience makes us approve of it, because ^ satisfies, raises and
comforts us: Reason a^ last gives its Suffrage unto it, because it contains
nothing but what is Comformable to the Maxims of good Sense, whether in the
Principles whereupon it is established, or in the Rules which it prescribes
unto us.

GOD goes almost the same way to Work when the Soul is to be Nourished, as he
doti^ when the Nourishment of the Body is performed. He does not only give us a
Facult^ of Reasoning, to provide for the Subsistenc^ of the latter: For although
this Rational Faculty be necessary, yet it is not sufficient t^ determine us to
take the Aliments, that a^ designed for our Preservation, in such a Regularity
as is requisite to make them produc^ their Effect. He thought good to add the
Faculty of Sense, whereby we perceive the^^ Aliments to be agreeable; and the
Faith we ^ave in those who fed us with 'em before ^e were capable of making an
Enquiry into ^m our selves. For the Author of Nature, who knew how inconvenient
it was to send Men to Eat and Drink, so as that they ^ould have known by
Reasoning how the ^liments are changed into Chyle, the Chyle unto Blood, the
Blood into Flesh, Bone, etc. and how the Effluxes and Wastings of Cor^oreal
Nature, which are caused by Tran^piration, are repaired by Nourishment, ^^ought
fit to engage Men to take their Food ^y a more Compendious way, which is that
^f Sense; whereunto may be added the ^aith they have in their Parents, the
Imita^^on of whom, is to them a Natural Reason, which saves them the
Discussion, and par^^cular Enquiry.

It may likewise be said, That were it ne^^ssary for Man to know, by Reason,
the ^^mortality of his Soul, his End, and his Du^^es, which are the most
general Principles (...) Morality, in order to capacitate himself ^r the
Performance of the Duties it enjoins, would be requisite he should be a
Philoso^^er before he can be an honest Man. GOD, ^ho is the Author of Religion,
as well as of nature, has therefore abridg'd and shortened ^r way in this
respect, by Exhibiting to us, ^ro' Faith, the Principal Truths of Mo^^lity, and
by giving us a Taste of them through Channel of Sense: For the Faith we have in
Jesus Christ tells us, that we ought to be Conformable unto him in time, in
order to partake of his Glory in Eternity; and Conscience makes us perceive, in
the Piety which it prescribes unto us, an agreeable Feeling, and a Divine Taste,
which engages us to practice it.

But as Reason is not useless to the Conservation of the Body in Nature,
neither is it so to the Sanctification of the Soul in Religion; it supports
Faith, and confirms Sense.

They who desire to know Morality by Faith, need but read the Gospel: They who
desire to know it by inward Sense, need but search for it in their own Hearts,
with the help of Revelation, which GOD directs them unto; and the Conjunction
of these Two Methods will not fail to furnish them with all the Principles of
the Science of Living well.

But it is to he hoped, That no One will blame our Design in this Writing, of
Conducting Men by Reason, as far as it shall be possible toward that End,
whereunto Religion conducts us by Faith, and Conscience leads us by Sense.
Reason, as well as Faith and Conscience, is a Gift which GOD has bestowed upon
us: Its Lights do assuredly proceed from the Father of Lights, the Author of
every excellent Gift; and I know not what better use we can make of our Mind,
then by employing it in the Consideration of what is of greatest Importance and
Concernment to us.

This Study is none of the shortest, in order to the pure Learning of these
Duties; but it is extremely proper to nourish the Gratitude, which we ought to
bear to the Author of our Being; to confirm the Faith we have in Jesus Christ,
and to remove from the Incredulous this haughty Prejudice, That our Morality is
calculated only for such Persons as have not Wit enough to avoid Deception: And
lastly, To elevate our Mind and Heart, by showing us the Ways of GOD, in the
Inclinations of Men, and the Duties of Man in the the Ways of GOD.

We shall see, through this Meditation, the Divine Relations that are between
Nature and the Gospel; and that Reason leads us to the Confines of Religion. We
shall learn, that Natural Light, when it is pure and exempted from Prejudices,
does of it self conduct us to the most sublime Duties of Man, and represent
unto us his lofty Destinies, and the Glory of his Condition.

We shall endeavor to say Nothing but what relates to the Principles of our
Faith, which we will evince to be the same with those of Nature, as far as they
concern the Knowledge of Manners; and if we be obliged at first to insist upon
abstract Truths, we shall do this no farther than as they conduct us to
sensible Truths. In a word, We will search not only after Truth, but also for
Advantage and Profit in our Discoveries, remembering the Design of the Science
which we treat of.

Indeed Morality being to our Soul the same that Physic is to our Body, and
having for its End and Scope the curing us of our spiritual Maladies, it must
apply it self principally unto Two Things: First, to know the Evil, and
afterward to search for Remedies that may effect the Cure. These two Designs
do divide Morality, but they are too vast, and would lead us too far, wherefore
we confine our selves to the former, waiting till Providence put us in a way to
handle the other.

We do here search for the Knowledge of Man, but not as Physic, Anatomy,
Metaphysick, Logic, Medicine, which consider him as a Corporeal Being, or
simply as a Spiritual Substance, as an Animal, or as a reasonable Animal. We
shall consider him only as a Creature capable of Virtue and Happiness, and
which finds it self in a State of Corruption and Misery. Not but this respect
under which Morality obliges us to consider our selves, engages us to borrow
from some of these other Sciences, certain Principles, which we shall take from
what is most evident in them. For in order to have a perfect Knowledge of the
Corruption and Misery of Man, it is necessarily requisite we should have some
Knowledge of his Nature, his End and his Excellence. But if what we have to say
on this subject, seem in some places somewhat Abstract, above the ordinary
Capacity of Men, it ought to be remembered, that we treat of the Sources of
Morality; and if it be perceived that we do not always accomodate our selves to
vulgar Opinions, it must be considered, that this is not a fit place for
respecting Prejudices, since we write merely to disentangle the Confusion of
our Idea's, and to justify by Reason that which we perceive by Sense.

This Work must therefore be divided into Two Parts. In the First, We will show
what Man is, to what is Obliged, and for what he is Able; that is to say, We
will treat of his Nature, his Perfections, his End, his Duties and natural
Obligations, his Strength, Motives and Objects, that may principally determine
him in his Actions.

In the Second, We shall treat of his Irregularities in general and particular,
we shall search for the Original of his Corruption, we shall consider the
Rivulets flowing thence, we shall view the Force of his Applications, the
Extent of his Passions, the Principle of his Vices, and all along we shall show
the Rule, in order to make known the Irregularities; and we will justify the
Greatness of our Fall, by showing the Degree of our Rise and Elevation.

May GOD, who is the Master of Minds, purify mine by his Grace, to the end,
That I may say nothing but what refers to his Glory, and is conformable to the
Holy and Eternal Truths of his Gospel. Amen.

The FIRST PART. Wherein we Treat of the Nature of MAN, of his End, his
Perfections, his Duties, and his Strength.
CHAP. I. Wherein we give a General Idea of the Vileness and Misery of Man,
which are the First of his Qualities that occur to our Mind.
IT is certain, That Man seems to be a very inconsiderable Being, when we judge
of him through the Prejudices of the Senses: We are not far from finding him
incapable of Virtue, when we consider his Vileness; and incapable of Happiness,
when we reflect upon his Misery.

The Smallness of his Body is the first that occurs to the Eyes; the Scripture
dedenotes it, by telling us, That Man has his Foundation in the Dust, That he
dwells in a Tabernacle of Clay, and That he is consumed at the meeting of a
Worm: And Nature moreover so clearly represents it to our Understanding, that
it is impossible for our Pride to contest or dispute it. It Is true, That as we
are accustomed to measure every thing with Relation to Our Selves, we use to
look upon our selves as the Center of Perfection, and to think the Bodies that
surround us, either too great, or too little, according as they are more or
less proportioned to the Bulk of our own: But you need but only change your
State, and view things with other Eyes than your own; or consider them in a
sense of Opposition, in order to disabuse your self on this account. Go up a
Mountain, and tell how big those Men appear who stand in the Valleys beneath.
Suppose the Heavenly Bodies were Animated with such a Mind as yours, and that
they had Eyes to look upon you; pray what would your Body seem to them: Or
compare the Dimensions of this Body to these vast Spheres, wherewith you are
environed, with these moveable and luminous Worlds, which the Hand of the
Creator seems to have planted round about you, to convince you more thoroughly
of the Smallness of this Tabernacle of Flesh which you inhabit. The Infirmity
of Man is proportioned to his Smallness, and his Meanness to his Infirmity; and
the one, and the other, was in the Mind of the Prophet, when he cried out,
speaking to GOD, Will thou show thy Strength against a Leaf which the Wind
carries away: Or, in the Mind of the Psalmist, when he said, by a kind of
Hyperbole, fraught with Sense and Truth, That if Man should be weighed with
Nothing, we should find that Nothing would turn the Scale.

We may indeed say, That Nothing does encompass Man on every side: By the Time
past he is no more, by the future he does not yet Exist, by the present he
partly is, and partly is not. In vain does he endeavor to fix the past by
Memory, and to anticipate the future by Hope, that he may stretch the present
to a greater length. He Is a Flower that springs in the Morning, spreads at
Noon, and withers in the Evening. Man, considered in his various States, is a
Creature constantly Miserable; Who, as an Ancient very well says, Meets with
Sin in his Conception, Labor in his Birth, Pain in in his Life, and Despair of
an inevitable Necessity in his Death.

All his Ages bring him some Infirmity, or some particular Misery: Infancy is
merely an Oblivion and Ignorance of One self; Youth a durable Passion, a long
Madness; and Old Age nothing but a Death, languishing under the Appearances of
Life, with so great a Troop of Infirmities is it attended.

There are few things round about him but what do put him in Mind of his End,
he discovers the Principles of his Death, which he dreads above all things,
both in the Air which he breaths, in the Aliments which he receives, and in the
Sources of his Life, which consumes and gnaws away its own Bowels: And such is
his Fate, that after having shunned the greatest Dangers, Fires, Shipwracks, and
Diseases, he at last finds all these pretended Deliverances terminated by
Death. His Body is the Center of Infirmities, his Mind is filled with Errors,
and his Heart with irregular Affections: He suffers both by the Consideration
of what is past, which is Irrevocable; and of the future, which is Inevitable.
In vain does he desire to stay himself a while, that he may have leisure to
Taste some Pleasures which present themselves in his Way: Time is like a
Whirl-pool, which carries him away, inexorable to his Regrets and Complaints.
When we are alone we cannot endure the View of our selves, and of the Necessity
that is imposed upon the Pleasures of the World, of passing away in a Moment.
United with others in Society, we do but multiply our Selves, as I may so say,
into other selves, in order to a greater Participation of the common Misery of
Mankind.

It Is a very grievous thing to a Creature that loves it self so well, to behold
it self continually Dying, and to perceive Life no more than proportionably as
it loses it. Infancy is Dead to make way for Youth, Youth for Ripeness of
Years, Ripeness of Years for Advanced Age; and this latter for extreme Old Age:
We are Dead in respect of those many well-belov'd Persons whom we have lost,
and in respect of many Pleasures and Advantages, which following the Fate of
the World, are consumed away by their own proper Use, no Relick thereof
remaining unto us, but only a slight Remembrance, which is incapable of
yielding us any Satisfaction, and is very proper to vex and torment us.

Suppose the Life of Man were very long and durable, yet the appendant
Happiness of it would be inconsiderable; and were the Felicity, which we meet
with here in these lower Regions, as full as it is Defective, yet 'twould be
very insignificant, seeing it must be cut off at last by the fatal Sword of
Death. What then will this be, when we are convinced of the Deceitfulness of
these Advantages, and of the shortness of Life, which is such, that to speak
the downright Truth, It Is hardly long enough to give us time to regulate our
Affairs, to take leave of one another, and in a fit manner to make our Will?

Man, who is naturally convinced, of these Truths, enquires after Means of
solacing himself at these Calamities, to which the Quality of Man exposes him;
therefore he avoids the Representation of himself, to his own View, and the
putting himself forward under this Quality. He would fain be looked upon only
as a Being invested with certain external Advantages, which make the difference
of Conditions, and the distinction of Persons: But if there be so much Dignity
in Man, as Religion represents to us, there would be a Thousand times greater
Grounds for Valuing himself upon the Qualities which we have in common, than
upon those which characterise and distinguish us. And if, on the contrary, the
Possession of these external Advantages were so Honorable as the World would
make us believe, Man in himself must needs be a very trivial and inconsiderable
Being; which we cannot think without betraying not only the Honor of our
Nature, but also the Sentiments of our Vanity.

Methinks we may give this Definition of the Worldling, who to cure or comfort
himself at his Poverty and natural Misery, loves to cloth himself with
Imaginary Goods: A Phantome that walks among such things as have only an
Appearance. I call a Phantome, not the Man of Nature, compounded of a Body and
Soul, which GOD has framed, but the Man of Concupiscence, compounded of the
Dreams and Fictions of Self-love. I call the Things which have only an
Appearance (and this after the Psalmist) the Advantages which the World seeks
after with so great Passion and Ardour, these great Vacuities taken up with our
own Vanity, or rather these great Nothings, which occupy so great a space in
our extravagant Imagination.

When we endeavor to Annihilate and Destroy this Phantome of Pride and
Concupiscence, which we discovered in Man, it is not our Design to subscribe to
the Eternal Arrest of our Misery and Vileness.

Let us make a deep Search into these Appearances, which seemed at first so sad
and dismal, and we shall find some Reason to comfort our selves: but in order
to discover that which we desire, we must search for Man in Man, and not in
these external Differences which Concupiscence seeks after with such a
passionate Desire: For it is not the design of GOD to raise one Man, or a
certain Order of Men, to a proper and particular Happiness. Concupiscence
deceives in the very first Step it makes you take in your Search of the Supreme
Good. You enquire after a particular Happiness, a distinguished Glory, so much
the worse for you if you chance to find it, since the true Good whereunto you
ought to Aspire, is a common Felicity which should be participated by an
Infinity of Creatures, that ought to make up the Family of GOD.

Having considered the Man of Concupiscence, who made himself, let us now
conconsider the Man of Nature, who is the Work of the Creator, and to that end
take a Survey of the Faculties of his Soul.

We shall not insist upon the Faculty of Imagination, which, properly speaking,
is nothing but a Collection of weak Sensations, that do still subsist in our
Soul, by occasion of the Traces which outward Objects left in our Brain: A
Collection, I say, of Sensations, which the Soul disposes and afterward makes
use of in the Perception of other Objects.

But we cannot sufficiently admire this Intellect of Man, which rectifies the
Senses, corrects the Fancy, purifies and enlarges Bodily Perceptions, which
unites together various Ideas in the Judgment it frames of Things, and various
Judgments in Discourse; which weighs, compares, examines, enquires, and by the
Relation it finds between Things, makes the Dependence of Arts, Sciences,
Governments, and produces all the Wonders of reasonable Society.

Is it not a piece of Extravagance to say that this Intellect has for its
Principle a natural Motion, that it is nothing but a mere Congeries of Atoms,
which agitated after a certain manner, obtain a new Situation? Does any Man
clearly conceive that an Atom without going beyond the Confines of the Body,
runs through the Earth and Heavens in a moment, that it goes every where without
being moved, in a more noble and wonderful manner than if it were moved? Can
one Portion of Matter have the Knowledge of others, and afterward know it self,
Act upon it self, reflect not only upon it self, but also upon its manner of
Acting, upon the Manner of this Manner, and upon the Reflection which it makes
upon this manner in Infinitum? Can a parcel of Atoms, included in I know not
what little Pipe, judge of the Model of the Universe, the Design of the World,
and understand the Wisdom of the Creator? Is it a property of this Thinking
Motion, not only to put these Atoms into Motion, but also to represent that of
the Celestial Bodies, which are only in the order of possible Things? Have
these Atoms, whose jumbling and clashing is a Thought, this admirable Faculty
of being able, as often as they meet and justle, to hit only the general Degree
of Being or Substance, without hitting the Individual in this Motion, which
Thought we term, Precision.

Did we ever hear of a Motion, properly so called, without a proper Translation
of one Body from another; like Thought, which goes from the Time past, which is
no more, to the future, which is not yet come; and from that Nothing which
preceded our Being, to that Annihilation which terminates the Hopes of the
Incredulous.

The Mind of Man is not only above the Condition of Matter; but, which is
Admirable, it has a kind of Infinity in its Actions, for it flies from Object
to Object, and multiplies them in Infinitum: It Is never wearied with Knowing,
and although its Perfections be really limited, since it does not know all
Things; yet certainly its Excellency is in some Sense unlimited, since it can
know all Things successively.

As the Mind of Man is never wearied with Knowing, so his Heart is never
wearied with Desiring, and such as is our Abyss of Knowledge, such is the Abyss
of our Desire. This Ambitious Prince, whose Heart was greater than the
Universe, of which he was Master, had not in the Bottom more vast and elevated
Inclinations, than are hidden in the secret Dispositions of every One of us;
and the Heart of an Hero is not different from any other Man's. He that dwells
in a Cottage wants nothing but Prosperity, and great Occasions, to inspire him
with Wishes for new Worlds to Conquer.

When a Man is oppressed with Poverty, a Supply of Things necessary is the utmost
Term of his Wishes. After he has possession of those Things which Nature
requires, he demands Things necessary to State and Quality, when he has arrived
to that Pitch of Grandeur, he has obtained all that his Heart seems capable of
Desiring: Yet still against the Dictates of Reason, he forms new Desires.
Behold the Masters of the World, who after having been at a Height of Greatness
above other Men, wish for the Condition of Beasts; this they cannot but desire,
though they are never like to obtain it.

Such is the Excellency of Man, that it shows it self even in his most shameful
Irregularities: For I do not imagine, that this insatiable Desire of our Heart
does originally spring from our Corruption. Men are to be blamed for applying
themselves with too great Earnestness to the Research of Worldly Goods, but
they have good Reason for not placing their Contentment in finite Enjoyments,
who are designed for the Possession of the Supreme Good.

It must needs fall out thus, For we see that in Nature every Thing is
satisfied with those Goods that are proper to its species. The Fish are
contented with the Water they swim in, Birds are satisfied with flying in the
Air, the Beasts of the Field obtain the End of their Desire, when they have met
with such Grass as serves for their Nourishment: whence then does it come to
pass, that Man has so little satisfaction in Temporal Advantages, if these be
all that fall to to his share? Shall we believe that the Wisdom of the Creator
is inconsistent with it self precisely in this? Has it not had a competent
Knowledge, either of the Nature of Worldly Goods, as incapable of yielding us
Satisfaction, or of the Nature of our Heart, as incapable of being satisfied
with 'em? Or rather, does it not proceed from this, that having known the Goods
of the World, our Heart, and the natural Disproportion between them both, GOD
has framed things after this manner, because he reserved our Soul to himself,
that he might fill it, satisfy it, and answer by his Excellency and infinite
Beatitude, the infinite succession of our Thoughts and Desires: Or, if you
will, the infinite Enquiries of a Mind, which searches for the Knowledge of all
Things, because it is designed for the Knowledge of GOD; and the infinite Desire
of an Heart, which is not satisfied with the Possession of any particular Good,
because it is designed for the Possession of the supreme Good, which includes
all the others.

The Nature, Perfections and End of Man, do make up what we call his Natural
Dignity; but all this depends upon the Eternity of his Duration. We should reap
but little Profit from being Spiritual in our Essence, did not this Idea
include that of Immortality: But 'twould be extravagant to imagine, that
because whatsoever is dissolved perishes, therefore what is incapable of
Dissolution does perish also. What do I say? Extention is not lost though it
acquire other manners of Being, and the Body of Man after Death does not cease
to be a Body by being turned into Ashes, Flesh, Clay, Worms, Vapor or Dust.
Death, in its proper No^ion, is a Destruction of the Organs, or ^ Dissolution.
If therefore it does not anni^ilate the Body, whose parts it separates one from
another, how shall it annihilate this Mind, this Intelligence; which is neither
Extension, nor Motion, nor Union of ^arts, and evidently bears no relation or
^imilitude to any of those things that are ^usceptible of Dissolution?

The Perfections of Man do also depend upon his Immortality. In vain should we
and a kind of Infinity in the Sensations of ^he Soul, diversified in Infinitum
according ^o the Diversity of outward Things which ^ccasion them; in our
Imagination, capable ^f assembling innumerable Images for giving ^s a
representation of Objects; in our Mind, which is never wearied with Knowing,
and ^n our Heart, whose Desires are boundless; ^f being made only for Time, and
to endure ^ut for the space of some Years, we could ^ave but a limited Number
of Sensations, ^ould exercise our Imagination but during a ^ery short time,
could have but a succession ^f Thoughts, proportioned to the brevity of ^ur
Life, and at last possess but a transient and finite Happiness. For no less
than an ^nfinite succession of Duration, bears a pro^ortion to this infinite
succession of Percep^ions, Thoughts and Desires, of which Man ^nds himself
naturally capable.

Let us then conclude, That it is in the Immortal Man, that we discover the
Nature, the Perfections, and the End of Man, which make up his natural Dignity.

But as the Nature and Perfections of Man have given us a prospect of his End,
so his End informs us what are his Duties and natural Obligations, which we
shall consider in the following Chapter.

CHAP. II. Where we endeavor to know Man, by considering the Nature and Extent
of his Duties.
OUr Duties flow from Nature, and owe not their Birth to Education, as some Men
imagine. To make out this we need but suppose Two Principles: The First is,
That we naturally love Our selves, being sensible of Pleasure, hating Evil,
desiring Good, and taking care of our Preservation. The Second is, That
together with this Propensity to love our selves, Nature has given us a
Faculty of Reason to conduct and guide us. We love our selves naturally; this
is ^ sensible* Truth: We are capable of Reason* this is a Truth of Fact. Nature
inclines us to make use of our Reason for directing this Love of our selves,
this most necessarily rises from the Principles of this latter, it being
impossible for us to love our selves really, without employing all our Lights
to search for what is agreeable to us.

Now from thence, that Nature orders us to search for our own Good, it follows
that Man cannot be said, without an evident Contradiction, to be void of Duty
and Law. We must grant an Essential Difference be^wixt Moral Good and Evil,
since the former consists in obeying the Law of reasona^le Nature, the other in
breaking it.

This natural Law in general, may be di^ided into Four others, which are its
par^icular Species; the Law of Temperance, which obliges us to avoid Excesses
and De^aucheries, that ruin our Body, and injure ^ur Soul; the Law of Justice,
which inclines ^s to render unto every Man his due, and ^o by others as we
would they should do by ^s; the Law of Moderation, which pro^ibites Revenge,
knowing that we cannot do (...) but at our own Cost, and that to respect ^n
this case the Rights of God, is to take ^are of our selves; and lastly the Law
of ^eneficence, which engages us to do Good ^o our Neighbor.

It Is certain, that the Immortality of Man ^akes the Perfection and Extent of
these ^our kinds of Laws. He, who knows himself under the Idea of an immortal
Being, will not place his End in those Pleasures, which the Author of Nature
affixes to that, which causes the Preservation or Propagation of the Body. We
shall not desire to injure other Men, if we do not only fear a return of
Justice in this Life; but if moreover we dread the doing to our selves, by that
means, an eternal Prejudice. Whosoever is buisy'd as he ought, about his
Natural Dignity, which undoubtedly raises him far above the Abuses he can
possibly receive, will be so far from satisfying himself at the Expense of
God's Glory, that he will hardly conceive any Resentment, how ill soever he be
dealt with. Lastly, if this Natural and Temporal Communion, which we have with
Men in Society, be capable of producing any mutual Benevolence, which is
intended and increased according to the Degree of the Temporal Commerce we
entertain with them; what Motives of Love and Beneficence do we not discover in
the Idea of this Eternal Society, which we ought and can have with them?

Thus the Natural Law is in Man; but the Perfection and Extent of this Law is
in the Immortal Man.

But these Four kinds of Laws do constitute what we call the Law of Nature,
which is the most Ancient, most General, most Essential of all, and the
Foundation of the rest. It Is the most Ancient, Seeing that the Love of our
selves, and Reason, are antecedent in us to all manner of Inclinations and
Laws. It Is the most General, For there have been many Men, who never heard of
Revealed Right; but never did any come into the World without this Law, which
inclines 'em to search for their proper Good. It Is the most Essential, For this
is neither the Jewish nor Christian, simply taken, it is the Law of Men: it
does not belong only to the Law, or simply to the Gospel; but to Nature, in
what State soever it be. Lastly, it is the Foundation of all the rest.

This plainly appears if we consider, That all other Laws are nothing else but
the Law of Nature renewed and adapted to certain Conditions of Men; you
discover the Natural Law, in that which God gave to our First Parents: The
Legislator does there suppose that Man loves himself, seeing that his Law is
grounded upon Promises and Threatenings. Good and Evil are set before him; he is
enlightened to know the one, and the other: He is engaged to the Acknowledgment
and Gratitude, which Nature it self prescribes to us. God requires an Homage of
him, in token of those many Favors he bestows upon him, and this Homage
consists in abstaining from ^he Fruit of One only Tree; the Duty of his
preservation is prescribed to him, In the Day thou eatest thereof thou shall
surely dye the Death. As also the Law of Justice, for what is more just, than
to yield to the Creator the Empire and Dominion over his Creatures, and not to
gape at the use of his Creatures whether he will or no. This then is the Law of
Nature accommodated to the Condition wherein Adam was at that time placed.

Indeed he could not be as yet prohibited the use of Idols, which were unknown
to him: nor Blaspheming the Name of the Lord when he had but just began to
Bless it: nor to rest one Day of the Week, who was to rest always: nor the
Killing his Neighbor, that was not yet in Being: nor committing Adultery, when
there was but one Woman in the World: nor Stealing, when he was Master of all
Things: nor bearing false Witness, when he could bear it against no one but
himself: nor Coveting, since all Things were his own.

But when Men were multiplied upon the Earth, as their Condition changed, God
from time to time made new Editions of this Natural Law, and gave it to Men
under another Form, because it was to be proportioned to their particular
Circumstances; for which Reason it must not be imagined, that when we say the
Decalogue contains the Law of Nature, we mean, that it includes nothing else
but these simple and common Principles, which are to Guide the Conduct of all
Men. I confess indeed, the Decalogue is the Natural Law renewed and fresh drawn
to the Eyes of the Israelites: but withal it is certain, that it is the Natural
Law accommodated to the State of the Israelites at that time. The following
Observations will set this Point beyond all doubt.

The Israelites had been delivered from the Egyptian Captivity, whence the
Legislator covers and shrouds himself, as it were, with this Benefit, in order
to draw them to the Obedience they owe to him: I am the Lord thy God, who
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage, thou shall
have none other Gods, etc. It Is plain that this Motive has not the same Force
upon the Heart of those Men who did not partake of this Deliverance; 'twill be
to no purpose to say, that though they did not all partake of the Temporal
Deliverance of the Israelites, yet have they been Spiritually delivered from
the Egypt of Sin. Mystical Senses are good in a simple Doctrine, designed to
instruct: but are of no use in a Precept, which requiring an exact Obedience,
cannot be conceived in Terms too precise or too proper. And again, what a
number of People are there in the World, to whom God has certainly given the
Natural Law as well as to other Men, who yet have never heard of the
Deliverance of the Israelites, by the Ministry of Moses: and who consequently
cannot find an Emblem of their Spiritual Deliverance?

2. The Israelites being in a Desert, where they could have no other Drink but
Water, nor other Meat but Manna, had no need of any Instruction or Precept to
incline them to Sobriety, by making them to avoid Drunkenness and Gluttony. No
other reason can be given of this, why the Lawgiver has not forbidden this kind
of Intemperance in the Decalogue, which has always passed for a Capital Vice.

3. The Canaanites, who had incurred the Displeasure of God, and born the
Punishment of their own Sins, did nevertheless seem accursed outwardly and
interpretatively, as the Schools speak, by occasion of the Crime of Cham, who
discovered his Father's Shame, and was punished by this Prophetic Malediction,
which presaged the Ruin of Canaan's Posterity, The Son of the Impious One. It
cannot be denied, but that the Decalogue manifestly alludes to this in the
Fifth Commandment, conceived in these Words: Honor thy Father and thy Mother,
that thy Days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. It Is
certain that by the Land must be understood, not the Land of the Living in
general, but this Land which had been allotted to the Israelites; which
evidently appears from this Expression, which the Lord thy God gives thee: And
doubtless the sense of the Law is, That they ought to avoid the Crime of Cham,
who became fatal to his Posterity; and endeavor to obtain, by an opposite
Conduct and Behavior, the Benediction of God, who is able to confirm them in
their Possessions.

4. It Is certain, that Nature teaches us to Consecrate a part of our Life to
the Service of God: For since we receive from him every moment of our Duration,
Gratitude and Justice require us to Dedicate some of them to Him; and
particularly to set apart some certain Seasons for Piety and Devotion. But to
observe the Seventh Day, and to extend the Observation of it even to Beasts, is
an Injunction that bears no relation to Nature, but to the Condition of this
People at that time. God was not willing the memory of the Benefit of the
Creation should be forgotten, through neglect of observing a Feast that had been
instituted with a design to perpetuate the Remembrance of this great Event.

It appears by all these Characters, That the Law of the Decalogue does not
differ from the Law of Nature, as to its Essence and first Principles; but only
as to its manner, and the Extension which were requisite to be given it to
adapt it to the Condition and Exigencies of the People of Israel. This is
evident from a general Observation which may be made upon this Subject: namely,
That the grand Motives, which support the Precepts of this Law in general, are
Temporal Benedictions and Maledictions, Motives, which the Sovereign Lawgiver
employed to make himself obeyed; he who could menace Men with eternal
Punishments designed for the Wicked, and promise to those who observed his Law,
an eternal and most happy Life; how does he come to suppress these powerful
Motives, these dreadful Objects, or at least to declare them but darkly and
confusedly, whilst he takes all the Force of his Promises and Threats from the
greatness of Bodily Goods and Evils? It Is because he proportions his Law to
that present State of the Israelites, the Time being not yet come for clearly
revealing Life, and most Blessed Immortality in Jesus Christ, who among other
Characters of his Divine Vocation was to have this of a clear and abundant
Revelation.

CHAP. III. Where we continue to make certain Reflections upon the Decalogue,
considering it as the Expression of the Law of Nature, accommodated to the
State of the Israelites.
THe first Precept, which it contains, is of so great Importance, that it seems
of it self to be a Compendium of Morality and Religion. It includes a Command
and a Prohibition; the Command is to love God with all our Heart, with all our
Strength, and with all our Mind; the prohibition is, not to have any other God
before the Lord.

For the better understanding of this precept, it is to be observed in general,
that a Man may love Three ways, by Sense, or by Reason, or by Sense and Reason
both together. To love by Sense, is to love One for the Good he does us, or for
the Pleasures he creates to us. To love by Reason is to love Perfection for
Perfection's sake. To love by Sense and Reason too, is to love One both upon
the account of the Merit and Perfection wherewith he is endued, and of the Good
which he does, or is capable of doing us.

Love of Reason seems not essentially to differ from Esteem, and it imports no
more than an Esteem, interess'd in the behalf of the Object esteemed, which
searches for Occasions of doing it Good, or wishes it Well. Thus we love
extraneous and remote Desert, such as no way relates to us; but as we shall see
hereafter, Love of this Character is rarely to be found.

We love our selves on the contrary by Sense, and not by Reason. The Love of
our selves precedes the Judgment which we make, that we ought to love our
selves; and though we should propose a thousand Arguments against this
Inclination, yet for all that, we should not cease to love our selves.

Lastly, God loves Himself both by Reason and Sense; by Reason, because He
knows His proper Perfections; by Sense, because He tastes His infinite
Beatitude: And in like manner we are obliged to love Him both by Reason and
Sense; by Reason, because he is endued with all Perfections; by Sense, because
He communicates to us all the Goods we can enjoy and possess. God seems here to
demand the Love of Sense; He does not say, I am the God of all Perfections,
etc. But I am the Eternal, thy God who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt,
etc. And it is remarkable that this Character is common to all His Revelations,
which he addresses to Men upon Earth: this is to manifest Himself unto them,
clothed with some of His Benefits, that He may win their Heart by an
Acknowledgment and Gratitude. He was served in the Old World under the Name of
God who is, and who is the Rewarder of them that call upon Him. He was
afterward known under the Name of the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob.
After that He gave His Law by declaring Himself the Lord who had brought this
People out of the land of Egypt. Afterward a Prophet declares that the Time is
come, in the which Men will no longer say, the Eternal is He who brought His
People out of the Land of Egypt; but the Eternal is He, that has brought up
His People out of the Country of Babylon. Lastly, so soon as the time for Man's
Redemption is accomplished, God is no longer called by any other Name, than the
God of Mercy, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

They therefore are very much mistaken, who fancy it is an Offense against God
to love Him any otherwise than for the Love of Himself, and His intrinsic
Perfections; and that there is no interested Motion in our Heart but what is
Criminal. In order to refute these Speculations, we need but make reflection
upon the Conduct of God, who not only consents that we should love Him by the
Motives of the Good which we find in the Possession of Him: but also wills and
proportions His Revelations to this Design; and it may likewise be said, that
we glorify the Supreme Good, when we desire it ardently, and feel no Repose or
Joy but in Communion with it.

This grand Precept may be proposed to the Mortal Man, to confound and baffle
him, by showing him the Impossibility he lies under, of fulfilling the Divine
Law; but it is the Immortal Man alone, that is capable of fulfilling this Duty.
It Is not the dying Man that perceives himself under great Obligations to God:
but the Man that subsists to Eternity. And it is not in a heap of perishing
Favors, but in the Assemblage of incorruptible Goods that we find the Motives
of such a Love and Gratitude, as are worthy of God.

So also the Man of Nature, considered as a Man that has short and transitory
Relations to other Men, neither can nor ought to love others so much as
himself. Were we obliged to love an indifferent and unknown Person, with the
same degree of Affection that Children love their Parents, certainly the whole
World would be a Scene of Disorder and Confusion. We ought to love our Children
more than Persons that are indifferent to us; now as it is the Love of our
selves, that makes this Inequality and this Variety of our Affections: it
follows that there is an Original Law of Nature, which dictates that we should
love our selves more than other Men.

But the immortal Man has other Views and Obligations; all the diverse kinds of
Proximity and Relation, which respect this Life, disappear and vanish at the
prospect of the Relations of that Eternal Society, which we are to enjoy. A
Temporal Neighbor whom Nature points out to us, is not so considerable as the
Eternal Neighbor which Faith discovers in him. But some persons love
themselves to such an exorbitant Degree, that it is in no wise convenient they
should be affected with the same Love if others as of themselves. For pray tell
me, of One should say to a Man, I wish you were Ungrateful, Blind, Passionate,
Revengeful, Proud, Voluptuous, Covetous, that you might take more Pleasure and
Enjoyment in the World, would he not have Reason to think that either we dote,
or have a Mind to make him a very course Compliment; and yet this would be to
love our Neighbor, as we love our selves.

If we would love our Neighbor as our selves, we ought to love him with
Relation to Eternity. None but the immortal Man is in a Capacity of observing
this Precept strictly and well.

Perhaps the Question may be asked, whether, when the Law enjoins us to love
our Neighbor as our selves, it means that we should love by the Motives of
that Love we bear to God, or of that which we have for our selves?

I answer by distinguishing still betwixt Rational and Sensual Love; when we
love our Neighbor with a rational Love, it is certain that the Motives of this
Love ought to proceed from the Love we have for God. When we love our Neighbor
with a Love of Sense, or sensual Love, the Motives of Love should proceed
purely from the Affection we have for our selves. Thus it may be replied, that
we ought to love him by both these Motives, and the Law of the Decalogue seems
to confirm us in this Opinion: for it puts the Precept which refers to our
Neighbor, immediately after that which refers to God, to teach us, that the
One depends upon the Other; and that we are obliged to love our Neighbor with
the same kind of Affection that we bear to God: And on the other side, it calls
him, whom it recommends to our Love, by the Name of Neighbor, to intimate to
us, that we are concerned to love him, because he is a Person that belongs to
us.

Reason tells us, That God, being the supreme and infinite Beauty, is Amiable
for his own Sake; and that all things become so for the Love of him. It
therefore requires us to love Objects according as they stand related to God.
The Experience we have of our own Being, accompanied with Joy and Delight,
obliging us to love our selves in the first place, Nature teaches us to love
Persons according to the degree of Proximity and Relation which they have to
Us. These two Laws are not opposite to each other; the One, as I may say, is
the Law of Reason, the Other is the Law of Sense; the one is the Instinct of
the mortal and perishing Nature, the other of the immortal and incorruptible
Nature; the one relates to the short and transient Society, which we ought to
have one among another; the other to the Eternal Commerce and Friendship we
ought to have in God.

CHAP. IV. Where we show the Extent of the Natural Law, by considering it in
the Gospel, and with Relation to the Immortal Man.
IF the Law of Moses were the Law of Nature, accomodated to the Condition of
the mortal Man, and to the State of the Israelites in particular; the Gospel is
the Law of Nature, accommodated to the State and Relations of the immortal Man.

This sufficiently appears from the different Genius and Conduct of the two
Oeconomies* Under the Economy of the Law, God seems to make no farther
Manifestation of Himself, than to break through Walls, open the Abysses of the
Earth, inflame Mountains, send down Fire from Heaven, menace the Body with his
Judgments, or to execute the Arrests of his Justice upon the perishing Nature;
but, under the new Dispensation of Grace, we see Persons animated with the
Spirit of God, contemn the Injury of the Elements, and the persecution of Men:
suffer with so great Constancy as if they suffered in a Body which was not
their own; transported with Joy in the midst of consuming Flames, and
triumphing to see the Dissolution of that Compound, which is so preciously and
carefully preserved by other Men, because they are supported and encouraged by
the Idea of Eternity, whereof the Divine Mercy has given them a distinct
Knowledge. Not but the Law of Moses includes some Relation to Eternity; for
this Law had at least the Shadow of good things to come: also it cannot be
denied, but that the Gospel supposes the Idea's of Man's Vileness and
Mortality; for it includes all our Remedies and Consolations against it: but
thus much is true, that the Law of Moses regards the present Life directly, and
Eternity indirectly, whereas the Gospel regards Eternity as its principal
Object, and the present Life indirectly. As for Nature, that is equally
discovered under both Oeconomies. The Gospel, if I may so speak, is hidden in
in Nature, Nature in the Gospel: but we must here understand the immortal
Nature, and that will put us in a way to unravel some Difficulties, which might
possibly entangle and perplex us.

Indeed it seems contrary to Nature to love our Enemies, to look upon Adversity
as a Blessing, and Afflictions as a subject of Joy, and so far to yield up the
Cudgels to Justice, as to render not only as much, but even more than it
demands, which are Maxims of the Gospel.

I confess all this goes against the Grain of the Corruptible Nature, which
measures every Thing according as it stands related to this present Life: but
it is far from being opposite to the Interests of the immortal Nature, which
values not Time, and exerts all its Actions in a prospect of Eternity.

Our Enemies are an Obstacle to the establishment of our Fortune in the World;
but nothing except the Hatred we may possibly bear them, is an hindrance to our
Salvation; and this is the Thing which the immortal Man considers, he despises
those little Reasons of Hating, which Concupiscence suggests to our Heart, and
regards those eternal Relations we have to Others in God, who is our common
Father, as the most powerful Motives of the Love we have for our Neighbor.

Plenty and Prosperity charm such a Heart as has limited the utmost of its
Hopes and Pretensions to the transitory World; but the immortal Man finds in
that State so much more subject of Fear as there is more of Sense, he dreads
these imaginary Goods which buisy us, and never satisfy; these lively
Sensations which hinder the Knowledge of his real Interests. He looks upon
Prosperity as the Reign of the Passions, which seduce and misguide us. He Is
persuaded that Afflictions, by depriving us of these agreeable Sensations, do
but only chase an infinite Troop of Impostors from the Territories of our Soul.

And he does not think that Worldly Goods deserve our Envy, and to make us
rival each other in pursuing them; especially when Religion assures him, that
these Hatreds and Contestations which are occasioned by the corruptible World,
are capable of doing him an Eternal prejudice: For which Reason, though Man has a
Right of demanding what belongs to him, God having for this End established
Tribunals in Society, which would be but an union of Robbers, and a succession
of Murders and Villainies without the Exercise of Justice; yet the prudence of
the immortal Man permits him not to exact his Rights with rigor and severity,
when he sees but the least probability of injuring, by that means, the
Interests of his Soul. Whence we may conclude, That the Morality of the Gospel
is but purely the Expression of the immortal Man's Heart: but we shall have an
Opportunity to speak more of this elsewhere.

We have seen, that the Perfections of Man roll upon his Immortality, which
alone can render him capable of Happiness; and we have just now seen, that this
Immortality founds the Extent of our Duties and Obligations. We proceed to show
that it is this also that makes the Strength of our Soul, or the Weight that can
determine us to well-doing.

CHAP. V. ^f the moral Strength of Man, or the Motives which he finds in
himself, for determining him in his Actions.
HAd God been an Enemy to Man, He would have fixed Pain to all those Ob^ects
whereunto it pleased Him to fix Delight and Pleasure; he could have done One as
easi^y as the Other: and then Man would have ^een his own Enemy, whereas now he
is naturally a Lover of himself.

For it needs must follow, by an essential Consequence, that he who feels Pain,
hates ^t; and if this Pain be constant and insepara^le, he hates his own Being,
as knowing very well that unless he existed, he should not ^ndure this Pain.
It Is very easy to conceive, That the damned Spirits hate themselves, for their
Punishment; and that, though Self-love has been in this World the Source of their
Corruption, Hatred of themselves becomes hereafter Instrumental to their
Punishment. Moreover we conceive that it is impossible to have a Sense of
Pleasure, without loving it, and wishing the preservation of this Self which is
the Subject of it. Pleasure makes (...) love our Existence, because without our
Existence this pleasure cannot subsist. Thence it follows, that 'twas in the
power of God, when He formed Man, either to make him love, or not love Himself,
since it depended upon His Will to affix, or not affix Pleasure to certain
Objects.

Thus the Love of our selves is in it self a natural Inclination; it is Nature
that causes us to love Pleasure, and hate Pain; and it is Nature that makes us
love our selves. This Inclination does not wait for intellectual Reflections to
give it Birth in our Soul; it precedes all our Reasonings. The Stoics have
justly deserved to be scorned and ridiculed by all posterity, if they really
held those Opinions, which are usually attributed to them. They pretended that
the way for a Man to be Wise, was to put off Humanity; this at the first dash
was a very great piece of Extravagance: but they failed no less in conceiving a
kind of Infirmity and Baseness in the most natural Spring of our Heart.

Secondly, Self-love is an Inclination most Divine in its Original: We love our
selves for this very Reason, because God has loved us. Had God hated us, we
should likewise hate our selves; therefore it is unreasonable and groundless to
cry down all those Actions which Self-love excites us to, as if they were so
many Crimes and Infirmities: according to the dangerous Morality of some, who
have pretended to annihilate the Excellency of all the Virtues upon this
principle, That they all proceeded from the Womb of Self-love, and were
grounded merely in Interest, a very bad Consequence; since Self-love is an
Inclination of a most Divine and Heavenly Extraction. Lastly, the Love of our
selves is a necessary Inclination, it must not be imagined, that our Soul is
indifferent to tend or not tend toward that, which it judges advantageous and
profitable; these Indifferences of Free Will are the Dreams and Fancies of
those who have not sufficiently studied Nature, or are not willing to have the
Knowledge of themselves.

But God has thought fit to mingle Knowledge and Sense together, that the
former might regulate and guide the latter; and the latter might fix the
former. Had Man no other Faculty but Reason, we should Err in our Thoughts, and
spend our selves in vain Speculations, applying our selves to know every thing
else, but what would be of greatest Concernment to us. Sense is therefore
designed to fix this Intellect, and confine it principally to those Objects
which concern it. Were there nothing else but Sense in Man, he might indeed
then have such propensities and desires as this Sense should produce: but would
fail of Light and Direction for finding out those Things to which these Desires
do naturally tend, and the Love of pleasure being blind and misguided, would
throw him down into a thousand Precipices; wherefore Reason is designed to
regulate Sense.

Reason is the Soul's Councellor: Sense, i^ as it were, the Force and Weight
that determines it. And these Forces are greater or lesser proportionably to
the Difference^ of Sense. In the Comparison we make of them, the Soul considers
not only what excites in it present, but also what is capable of creating to it
future Pleasure. It compares Pleasure with Pain, the present Good with Absent,
the Good it hopes for, with the Dangers to be endured; and determines it self
according to the Instruction it receives in these various Enquiries: its
Liberty being, as I may so speak, no more than the Extent of its Knowledge, and
the Power it has of not choosing, after having made a deep Scrutiny, and
thoroughly examined.

The Case being thus, it is easy to judge, that it is either present Advantage,
which consists in an actual Sense of Pleasure; or future, which consists in
whatsoever can hereafter caress us with Delight, and render us Happy, or
preserve our Happiness by preserving us our selves; that makes all the Strength
of our Soul for determining it self in its Designs and Conduct.

This Strength is very small, when included within the Circle of worldly
Objects. The Power we have, as Men, for avoiding Covetousness will consist in
the Fear of injuring our Honor by the sordidness of Interest; the Power we
have to hinder us from being Prodigal, will consist in the Fear of ruining our
Affairs, when we aspire at gaining a famous Reputation by our Liberalities. The
Fear of Diseases will make us resist the Temptations of Pleasure; Self-love
will render us moderate and circumspect, and even through Pride we shall appear
humble and modest. But this is only to pass from one Vice to another; if we
would give our Soul strength enough to rise above one Infirmity without
relapsing into another, we must excite and stir it up by Motives not taken from
the World. The prospect of Time may cause it to pass from Disorder to Disorder;
but the bare view of Eternity includes such Motives as are proper to elevate it
far above the Region of all its Infirmities. None but this Object touches and
sanctifies, because this alone mounts us high enough for totally renouncing the
World. We have seen some Preachers, of a sublime and lofty Eloquence, work no
Effect, because they did not well understand how to interest and engage the
Immortal Nature; and on the contrary, we have seen a very mean Talent touch and
affect all the World by inartificial Discourses, because they shot the right
Mark, and said hold of Men by the Motives of Eternity. Motives, which repeated
a thousand ways and sometimes very grossly and unpolitely, have won the most
enlightened and purified Souls, because they take them by what is greatest and
most weighty in them, and most considerable in all external Objects. The
Motives of Time have but a limited, but the Motives of Eternity have as it were
an infinite Strength, which is suspended merely by our Corruption.

Hence it follows, that as Self-love is the general Source of those Motives
which determine our Heart, so it is Self-love, as it looks toward Eternity,
that makes all the strength we have to raise ourselves above the Confines of
the World. There is no better way to justify this last Truth, than by seeing
what the sense of our Immortality is capable of working in us, what Influence
it has upon our Motions and Actions, and of what use it is in our Heart. This
we proceed to examine at large.

CHAP. VI. Where we explain what the Sense of our Immortality is capable of
working upon our Heart.
WE certainly see, that whatsoever comforts, raises and satisfies us, takes its
Birth from this Original; it is only in the Idea and Sense of our Immortality,
that we find true and solid Consolations against the Fears of Death, as it is
easy to show by considering this Object every way.

The Idea of Death includes Six others: an Idea of Desertion or Leaving, an
Idea of Necessity, an Idea of Solitude, an Idea of Destruction, an Idea of
Judgment, and an Idea of Misery. The Idea of Desertion or Leaving imports, that
we leave All, and all leaves us. This Idea mortifies and afflicts Self-love,
because it represents to it the rupture and disappointment of its Applications
and Desires. It beholds its loss of the Time present, and a Curtain is drawn
upon the Future; and indeed, I confess, Man has very good reason to be afraid
till the Curtain is, as it were, drawn back by Repentance; and he can assure
himself of the Remission of his Sins, without which, he is incapable of any
Comfort either in Life or Death; but when he has made his Peace with his God,
which he may know by the State of his Heart and the Sentiment of his
Conscience, he certainly ought to have quite different Ideas of Death: what he
regrets and bemoans is of very small Moment, if he compare it not only with the
glorious Eternity, promised him in the Gospel, but also with his own natural
Excellency. He ought to make it a Matter of the greatest Wonder, that a Mind,
which by the inviolable Inclinations of its Nature flies up to Infinity, should
so long buisy it self with the Trifles of this Life; and one may say, without
adding an Hyperbole to this Mind, that if it has lost any thing, it is Life, and
not Death, that ought to bear the Blame. Life has involved it in the Loss of
many precious things, its Sanctity, the sense of God's Love, etc. and to
retrieve its Damage, has given it nothing but Shows and Appearances, but Death
will advantagiously indemnify and repair its Loss, provided it depart in the
Lord.

Death deprives us of our Five Senses; whereupon Self-love makes this
Resentment, That if it be a great Affliction for a Man to lose his Seeing or
Hearing, it is a much greater to lose all his Senses at once: but Self-love is
mistaken, for we are so far from losing all our five Senses, that it is certain
we do not really lose one of them: we don't become incapable of Seeing, Hearing
and Speaking; It Is not the Nature of Things, but the free Institution of God,
that has affixed these Perceptions of our Soul to the Organs of our Body, to
which they had naturally no more Relation, than to the Matter which is hidden
in the Center of the Earth, howsoever Men may be prejudiced in this Matter.
Would we say such a Man has lost his Sight, the natural Disposition of whose
Faculties God should have so changed as to have ordered that his Eyes should
have no more Privilege than the rest, and that all the parts of his Body
should be capable of Seeing? This is the Idea of a Man that loses one way of
perceiving, and sees this infinite Abyss of Sensibility, which is naturally in
him, adequately filled.

These Losses which prejudiced Nature imagines it is at by Death, become so
much the more sensible as they are unavoidable, and imposed by a fatal
Necessity, which cannot be resisted. Men have always looked upon ^his Necessity
as a dreadful Misery; the ir^egular Inclination they have to love forbid^en
Things with so much the greater ar^our, which caused One to say, Define vitiae
^rritare, vetando, augments and increases their Love of Life, by the
Impossibility they and themselves under of extending its Li^^its, and makes 'em
look upon Death with ^o much the more horour, as they are unca^able of avoiding
it. But had the Wisdom ^f God imposed upon Men the necessity of ^iving, as it
has the necessity of Dying, we ^ay be almost assured that in time they would ^e
as much afflicted and troubled at the ^houghts of their Immortality, as now
they ^re at those of their Mortality. Now the ne^essity of Dying makes them
attend more to ^^e Pleasures than the Crosses of Life; but ^^en the necessity
of Living would cause ^^em to apply more regard and attention to ^^e Evils,
than to the Agreements and Plea^^res of Life.

Our Soul assuredly owes a great part of its Repugnancy, and Unwillingness to
leave the Body, to Custom and Prejudices; to see this, we need only reflect
upon our past Life, remark and muster up together all its Pleasures and
seriously ask our selves, whether all that countervails our past Grief and
Trouble? On one side, what if it pleased the Author of Nature to endow a Soul,
which is formed to animate a Body, with a most distinct Knowledge of the
Dignity and Perfections of its Nature, the Grandeur of its End, and the
Nobility of its Extraction; and on the other it were informed distinctly of all
the Infirmities, of all the base and painful Dependances which it goes to
espouse, by espousing this Body, pray would not the very first Moment of its
Life certainly seem the beginning of Death? So for this reason 'twas necessary
that the confused Sensations of Nature, which alligate and fasten us to Life,
should precede the distinct Ideas which are proper enough in themselves to free
and loosen us from it, and that the former should be naturally of greater Force
and Activity than the latter. For though God would not have us be excessively
fond of Life, yet the Author of Nature was obliged to interess and engage us in
the Preservation of Corporeal Nature, without which there would be no Society.

Death has two very different, and also very opposite Aspects, as we consider
it with reference to the Soul. For Life and Death may both be said to make the
Debasement and Glory of Man. Life makes the Glory of the Body, and the
Debasement of the Soul; it is by Life, that the Body is extended to the just and
natural Proportion of its Parts. Life gives it Health, Strength, Agility,
Beauty, and makes, in a word, all its Perfections. But Life causes the
Debasement of our Soul, it confines it to such Objects as are no ways related
to its natural Excellency, it makes this Mind buisy it self in trivial Affairs,
and place its whole Concern in the management of a Family, a Field, a Vineyard,
and the most abject and sordid necessities of the Body, as if this immortal
Mind was made for no higher and nobler Employment, but to prolong for some
Moments the Duration of this frail Machine, to which it is united.

If Life makes the Glory of the Body, and the Debasement of the Soul, Death may
be said to make the Glory of the Soul, and the Debasement of the Body. The Body
falls, but the Soul rises up and soars, as it were, to its native Heaven. The
Body consumes, and in process of time relapses into Dust, but the Mind extends
and enlarges it self like a Divine Sphere, which becomes greater and greater
proportionably to the nearness of its Approach to God. The Body is deprived of
its former Motion, the Soul acquires such Knowledge as it had not before. The
Body mingles it self with the Earth, the Soul is reunited to God.

The Debasement, which ensues upon Death, lights upon an insensible lump of
Matter. A Carcass, gnawed by devouring Worms, endures no Pain, it smells not
those noisome Odours it exhales, is not terrified with the surrounding Darkness,
nor is out of Conceit with it self, even when it is nothing else but an horrid
Miscellany of Blood and Dirt, of Bones and Putrefaction. It Is an Illusion and
Cheat of prejudiced Nature, that makes us affix our proper Ideas and
Perceptions to such Objects as do only occasion them.

Matter, when deprived of Life and Sense, is placed in its natural State; this
is no Imbasement or Degradation to it; all the seeming Dishonor and Turpitude
is merely in our Fancy. But the case is not the same, in respect of that
Imbasement and Degradation to which Life exposes us. This is not the natural
State of such a Soul as ours; and doubtless the Author of Nature had never
abandoned it to such a Condition but upon the account of Sin: Man indeed would
have lived, but his Life would have been more Noble and Excellent. It Is a great
mistake to pretend, that Man's Death commences the Punishment of his
Corruption. Life has already punished criminal Man by those sad Dependances,
which alligate and confine the Thoughts, Cares, Desires and Affections of so
great and noble a Soul, to the support and preservation of this sordid Mass of
Clay, which we term our Body.

Yet such is the Imbecility and Weakness of Man, that he would needs fancy
himself Debased where really he is not; and is not willing to perceive himself
Debased where really he is so. An imaginary Debasement frightens and terrifies
him, and yet he cannot see a proper and real Debasement.

But what if the Body be truly Degraded, so the Gain of the Soul does
infinitely preponderate the Losses of the Body? Are we so weak as to think,
that our Happinessness is so confined and fixed to certain Affairs,
Possessions, Offices, Households, and a certain Circle of Persons, with whom we
have Society, as that we cannot be Happy without all these things?

We have almost the very same Notions of Death, as Children have, when they
fancy they shall be weary with abiding in the Grave; and not dare to be alone
in the Abyss of surrounding Darkness. We terrify our selves with our own
Phantomes and Chimaera's, we make such a Confusion of our proper Perceptions
with the Grave, which is their Object, that we are ready to imagine and resent
that Horror in the Sepulcher, which is merely a Creature of our own Fancy, and
exists no where else but in our own Soul.

We should not fear this pretended Solitude, and apparent Privation which
attend Death, if substituting the distinct Ideas of Reason, instead of the
confused Perceptions of Nature, we would consider that by Death we are not
deprived either of the Subject, or the Cause of those Delights which this World
may have afforded us. For the Subject is our Soul, which still remains; and the
Cause is GOD, who is immortal and immutable. The reason why we regret and
bemoan the loss of the Sky, Earth, Elements, Society, is because we invest
these Things, with those agreeable Sensations which they occasioned; not
considering that we carry away with us the Colors, Cloth, Paint and Pencil
which are necessary for drawing this admirable Picture; and that if God fail us
not, we can nev^r want any thing.

Nor ought the Idea of Destruction, which is included in Death, to trouble us
any more than this Idea of Solitude, which we have been speaking of. It Is true,
Death seems to destroy Man several ways. In his account it destroys the World,
it being certain that the Sun, Moon, Stars, Air, Earth, Sea, although they be
not absolutely Annihilated in themselves, may yet be said to be annihilated in
respect of him, seeing that he cannot enjoy any longer Use of them. Man is not
annihilated in himself, but in the Nature which he admires, and which perishes
as to him; in the Society he has been used to, and which ceases to be any
longer in his Account; in his Body, the Instrument of his Pleasures, which
perishes and moulders away in the Dust of the Grave. Let us see whether there
be any thing Real in either of these Three kinds of Destruction.

First then, external Things cannot be said to be annihilated both in
themselves, and in respect of they. Use; for how do we know but the same
Institution in kind may still remain and be in Force, though the manner of it
cease. Indeed there is no great likelihood of our having such kind of
Sensations after Death, as we had during our Life; for it is no longer necessary
that these Sensations should be proportioned to the Condition and Preservation
of a Body, which in respect of us, ceases to subsist: The design which the
Author of Nature has had of engaging us in the Preservation of this Body, by
the Pleasure which the Aliments excite in us, being accomplished, and come to
its intended Period, we easily conceive, that there being no longer Pleasure to
be excited in us by Aliments, Tasting has no place after Death, and is not a
proper Faculty for the Enjoyment of the other World, unless God affix it to
other Objects for different Ends. But methinks Hearing and Seeing being not
only designed for the Preservation of the Body, but also for the Search and
Pursuit of all that may nourish the Admiration and Gratitude we bear to the
Creator, we have no reason to believe, that these Sensations are terminated by
Death. Indeed, I own, we shall not see by the Motion of the Optic Nerve; but
yet we may be said to see for all that. For pray, what has the shaking of the
Optic Nerve common with the Perception of Light? These things have no natural
Relation to each other; and if we see Light and visible Things, by the occasion
of the Optic Nerve, moved after a certain manner, nothing hinders but we may
have the same Sensations, by the occasion of the Ethereal Matter, which used
to agitate the Optic Nerve; which may be said proportionably of Hearing. But
suppose we should not have these very Sensations, what does that signify, since
we shall certainly have Others, and those of a more noble and elevated Kind?
For as by losing the Body we shall not be deprived of any thing but what
confined and degraded us, we ought not to fear that our Soul will lose any
thing of the Purity and Excellency of its Operations, by disentangling it self
from the Embraces of Matter.

It Is neither our Duty nor Interest to meddle, and spend our Conjectures about
those things, which God thought fit to conceal from our Knowledge: but, I
believe, 'twould not be a piece of too great Boldness and Presumption to
conjecture, That as the Imbasement and Vileness of Man during this Life,
consists in having his Reason subjected to Sense; so the Glory, that will
follow Death, consists in a perfect submission of Sense to the Empire of
Reason. Indeed at present, as the Soul is descended from Heaven to inhabit a
Tabernacle of Clay, it buisies not it self in enlarging its Views, or extending
its Lights: but on the contrary, it is employed in ^^cking and confining 'em,
that it may not di^dain to use them in preserving the Body. But then, as the
Soul will take its flight from these lower Regions, to its Heavenly Station,
where it will have no longer need to care for the Support and Preservation of
the Body, but its whole Business will be to glorify God; 'twill no longer
bestir it self to limit and confine, but to purify and enlarge its Knowledge,
in order to render it more worthy of God, about whom it will be conversant.

The second Destruction we apprehend in Death is no less Imaginary; for though we
see the Links which tied us to Society dissolve and break, yet we ought not,
for all that, to think we shall be exempted from all manner of Friendly
Obligations. The Society of Spirits does very well countervail the Society of
Bodies, whatever weak and prejudiced Nature may think of it. And when we shall
put off these Eyes and Ears, which are designed for our Commerce and
Conversation with Men, we solace our selves with this Lenitive, That we shall
undoubtedly acquire other ways of Sensation and Knowledge, by virtue of another
Institution, proportioned to our future Condition.

Lastly, I grant that One, who still lives in this World, and is deprived of
the Members of his Body, is to be pitty'd. But when a Man is transported into
another World, sees another Economy of Objects, what should he do with these
Senses, which have indeed some Relation to this present World, but not to his
glorified State? The Mischief arises from hence, That in the ordinary Idea we
have of our selves, we attribute too much to the Body, and too little to the
Soul; whereas following the distinct Ideas of Things, we cannot ascribe too
much to a Spirit, nor too little to Matter.

And here I durst advance a Maxim, which will seem a very great Paradox:
Namely, That although, according to the confused Notion we have of these things,
Death be more capable of humbling us than Life; yet according to the distinct
Notion, and in the reallity of the Thing it self, Life is a more humbling and
debasing Object than Death.

Death humbles the Grand Seignior, the Prince, the Monarch: but Life humbles
the Man, which is more than all that. Death snatches from us the props and
supports of our Vanity: but Life in the Debasement, to which it pulls us down,
suspends in us most of the Sense of our true Grandeur. Death brings the Body
down into the Grave; but Life, as it were, calls down our Soul from Heaven.
Death puts a Period to our secular Commerce with Men; but Life suspends that
natural Commerce we ought to have with God, and which our Heart perceives to be
the End for which it was made. The Pursuivants of Death are, Darkness, Worms
and Putrefaction, whereof we are not sensible: Life is totally made up of
Weakness, Baseness, Infirmities, Disgraces, of which we are sensible.

Wherefore we are certainly prejudiced and mistaken, when we terrify our selves
with the Ideas of Desertion, Necessity, Solitude, Destruction, which are not
really included in the Image of Death; but herein indeed we do not mistake,
when we dread the Judgment of God, which accompanies Death; for certainly this
cannot but seem terrible to a Conscience that feels it self laden with the
Weight of a multitude of Sins, and pray where is there a Man, that finds not
himself in this Condition, if he reflect but never so little upon his past
Life? This Moment truly is dreadful, upon which we conceive all Eternity to
depend; but it is certain that, even in this, the Heart of Man suggests to it
self many Cheats and Illusions. It fancies the Moment of Death to be the Price
of Eternal Life: And considers not, that it is not this Instant, but its whole
Life which God requires; that this moment has nothing more pleasing to God
than any other; and that its whole Importance consists simply in this, That it
is the concluding Moment of Life: And Lastly, That it is not this Moment that
contracts and covenants with the Divine Justice, but all the Time we past in
our Impenitence.

The Sentiments therefore of our Immortality, our Perfections, and our End,
will harmonize and agree together admirably well; and with the other Sentiments
and Inclinations of Nature, and the Principles of Religion, which God has given
us for our Consolation, against all the seeming Frightfulness and Horror of
this King of Terrors.

CHAP. VIII. Where we continue to show, what Effect the Sentiment of our
Immortality can work upon our Heart.
CErtainly the Idea of our Immortality can never be too present to our Mind,
for our Comfort and Consolation, amidst this eternal Circle of those sad and
dismal Objects which compass us about; and those public and private
Calamities, which the Severity of God has varied so many ways, to give Occasion
to the sweet Variety of His Deliverances and Consolations.

After all, what signifies it that we are infirm and mortal in our Bodies? This
State cannot last long. Why should we embarass and perplex our selves with
Cares and Solicitude for the short Futurity of this transient Life? Have we
not another Futurity in View, which very well deserves the principal Care and
Occupation of our Heart and Mind? What need we value the Menaces and Threats of
the World? What can it do to us? It may indeed crush our Body into Atoms, but
cannot destroy us. What if the Frame of the World perish, Nature decline and
shake, the Elements corrupt and decay, what if our Body be converted into Dust,
Worms or Vapor, what if it descend again into the Womb of its Mother Earth, or
be dispersed into the fluid Air; the Ruins of the World will not crush and
destroy our Soul, nor dissolve that Divine Principle, which is in its own
Nature incapable of a Dissolution? We think the Body, which clothes us, is
Our-self: This is a mistake; this Clay is not Our-self, nor ever will be. God
indeed will re-establish and raise it in Honor, to serve for a Tabernacle of
that Spirit, which was its original Guest and Inhabitant; but this Union will
not be with the same Submission and Dependence: The Soul will not then follow
the Condition of the Body, but the Body will be adjusted, as far as is
possible, to the State and Nature of the Soul; and as the Soul was once
debased, even to the mean Condition of the Body, so as to fly God, and bend its
Inclinations to Earthly Things; the Body will now be desirous to elevate it
self to the State of the Soul, so as to decline and quit all Earthly Cares, and
to betake it self to a joyful Celebration of the Glory of God in the Heavenly
Choir.

Certainly it is not to be wondered, That the Gospel administers more Comfort to
us, I will not say, than Humane Wisdom has ever done; but yet much more than
the Law, as Divine as it was: This is, because it clearly reveals to us Life
and Immortality, which are the only Objects that are capable of satisfying such
a Mind and Heart as ours, and so have Divine Relations to our Nature: But as
this Obj^ct affords us all imaginable Comfort under the sense of so many
Miseries that continually surround us; so it yields us whatsoever may elevate
and truly raise us.

The Sentiment of our Immortality, joined with the Consideration of that Glory
and Happiness, which Religion promises, elevates us more than the World; more
than the so much boasted Wisdom of Philosophers; and even more than all those
Virtues which have fallen within the Verge of Humane Knowledge.

Here we discover the Grandeur of the Passions, the Grandeur of the Mind, to
whose Empire they are Subject; and the Grandeur of Virtue, which regulates the
Mind. I say, we do in this View discover the Grandeur of the Passions, and no
Man need be offended at this Expression: For though the Passions be in some sense
great Infirmities, yet may they truly be said to be ingrafted upon the natural
Dignity, and Excellency of Man.

Hatred, Fury, Anger, which are such criminal Passions, and by which we equally
contradict the Rules both of Humanity and Christianity, proceed, if you
observe, from an Opinion of our proper Excellency, ill-directed and accompanied
with the Illusions of Self-love, which makes us conceive an Excellency in our
selves exclusively to those, that have offended us; as if our Enemies were not
Men as well as we. That this Sense of our natural Excellency is in all Men,
appears from hence, That even those Persons, who are least of all esteemed in
the Minds of Others, do notwithstanding this, esteem and value themselves, and
so receive a kind of Domestic Consolation at their public Infamy and
Disgrace, from their own Conceit.

We don't here pretend to justify all the Extravagancies of a Man, pufft up
with Presumption, who prefers himself before those, to whom he justly owes
Respect and Veneration; No, by no means, I know there is an Excess, and a
criminal Excess in this Disposition of Heart: But perhaps this Excess may not
consist in that wherein Men fancy it does: And to declare my Opinion; the
Irregularity proceeds not so much from this, That Men esteem themselves too
much, but that they value themselves at too low a Rate. I say, that they value
themselves at too low a Rate, and do not esteem themselves enough, because they
think they are preferable to other Men, who have the same Nature and
Perfections. A Man that values himself upon any exterior Advantage, that
distinguishes him, seems by that very Thing to renounce the Perfections of
Humane Nature, which are common to him, with the rest of Mankind. Such a Man's
Condition is much like Nero's, who being in a Capacity of valuing himself, upon
the Character of Emperor, aspired at the Glory and Credit of seeming a good
Coachman. Nothing certainly is so noble in Man, as Man: He may be said in some
Sense to despise himself, that would set a Value on himself principally by
those Advantages, which make the Difference of Conditions, and Distinction of
Persons in Society; since this is to despise what is most of all estimable in
his Nature. We must here reverse the Ways and Methods of Pride, as Pride seems
desirous of reversing and overthrowing the Methods of Providence: External
Advantages ought to be an Occasion of rendering to God the Homage that is due
to him, and not of derobing him of what is his Right.

Those who have Capacities and Opportunities of soaring above the level of
their Brethren, don't much value or mind these Things: But when Fortune, as
they term it, or the Injustice of Men has dispossessed 'em of these Advantages,
Nature does not fail 'em; and having no longer a Sense of this imaginary
Grandeur, which drew its Original from outward Things, they still are sensible
of their natural Grandeur and Excellency, whose lawful Effect ought to be this,
To make 'em endure, with a generous Indifferency, the Contempt and Scorn of all
the World; but which notwithstanding, through an Effect of their Corruption,
serves to render 'em inflexible; and to sow in their Soul, which does not
deserve it, the Seeds of a discontented Pride, which though commanded by Fear
to hold its Peace, yet upon the least Opportunity of appearing, bursts forth,
and shows that in whatsoever Condition Men happen to be, they are no more
tractable to bear the Contempt of a King, than of a Beggar.

The Grandeur, at which Pride aspires, consists in two Things: First, to extend
and enlarge, and then to continue and perpetuate it self; to enlarge it self,
maugre the narrow and limited Condition of Corporeal Nature; and to perpetuate
it self, maugre the Fate of temporal Things, which are allotted so short and
transient a Duration.

It Is not requisite to show, that our Vanity fails of obtaining these two Ends
at which it aims. This sufficiently appears to every Man, since the Enlargement
of Conquests is but an Enlargement and Extension of Injustice, rather than
Excellency; and the Marbles which seem to perpetuate our Glory, do for the most
part, but eternize our Vanity.

But Nature and Grace are more happy than Corruption. Nature expands and
spreads Man, as it were, over all the Universe, by affixing his Senses to
outward Objects, and making, by that means, the Majesty, Beauty, Magnificence
and Value of all those parts of the World, which raise in us the greatest
Admiration and Wonder. Grace extends Man to yet larger Dimensions, through the
Commerce it procures him with God; and on the account of Immortality, we are
not careful to make an imaginary Enlargement, when we have a real One; nor
buisy and torment our selves, that we may live in the Memory of other Men,
being assured of Living eternally in our selves and God.

So Death appointed and designed by God, to confound the Designs and Intrigues
of our Pride; this Minister of his Majesty and Justice, which makes him so
signal a Reparation and Satisfaction for the Insolency of our desire, to
glorify our selves even in despite of his Will, does but confirm us in the
Sentiment of this Elevation of the Man, who follows Nature, and is attended by
Grace.

This is a vain Piece of Grandeur, which accompanies a Prince when seated on
the Throne, but attends him not in the Bed of Infirmity; which stands at his
Elbow during Life and Health, but disappears and vanishes at the moment of
Death; which is seen by us, but not by the Eyes of his own Mind. All the World
remarks, and sees in him the Master of other Men, whilst he discovers in
himself, a Man wearied and afflicted, and presently yielding to the Laws of
Mortality.

Wherefore I will not cloth my self with Goods, Riches, Possessions, Offices,
Dignities, Glory, Knowledge, Eloquence, memorable Actions, Applause, to
aggrandize and augment the Phantome of Pride, and to appear more Great and
Excellent than the rest of mankind: But I Will cut off the Tumor, the forced
Grandeur and unnatural Extension, by removing the Objects of Concupiscence, and
keeping my self at the common Level: I shall get more by this humble Equality,
than a proud and haughty Preference would ever have done: I Will invest my self
with all the Splendors of Heaven, and Beauties of the Earth; with the Blessings
of Grace, and the Treasures of Nature, that I may render all these things to
their bountiful Donor; and find, in this very Restitution, such a Glory as I
never could meet with in all my Usurpations. I shall elevate my self above all
outward Things, by the distinct Idea of my own Perfections, whereof they are in
no wise capable; but, like a Ball, I shall rebound so high, only that I may
descend and fall lower in his Presence, who is the Author and Fountain of all
my Perfections, and who is also able infinitely to vary and diversify the
Sentiments of my Excellency, and his own Bounty.

Ambition thinks to be advanced to a lofty Pitch, and to elevate it self beyond
an Equality with other Men, because it puts us in a State of commanding them;
and indeed it is in the right of it, according to the System of Pride, which
measures the Price of those Advantages, it possesses, merely by the Degree of
that Elevation, to which they raise it beyond the common Level of Men.

But in the first place it is certain, that Humane Authority gives them not an
Empire and Dominion over the Mind of their Fellows: Though perhaps they
themselves think otherwise, supposing that those exterior De^erences and
Submission, we give them, seem ^o be addressed to their Person, whilst ^hey are
really directed to their Fortune. They who judge best of this Matter, re^pect
the Order of God, and the Methods ^f his Wisdom, in their Elevation and
Pre^erment. They submit their Bodies to Prin^es and Rulers, because they submit
their ^ouls to God: Yet they, who govern the ^ody, don't, for all this govern
and reign over ^ouls. They are Esteemed if they deserve it; ^f they are worthy
of Contempt, they are ^espis'd and slighted; and this too with so ^uch the
greater Delight and Pleasure, as Men are vexed, and grated at that which
sub^ects, and makes 'em crouch under. So that ^o' Fear obliges 'em to respect
and reve^ence the Authority established for their own ^nterest, and Religion
makes 'em regard the ^rder of God, yet still there remains, in the ^ottom of
their Heart, a secret Disposition (...) murmur and grumble at this lawful
Ele^ation, which makes Men so precipitate and ^ash in the Judgments they pass
upon their ^rinces; and that they excuse not the least ^p in their Masters,
through the secret Aver^on they have to Dependence and Command. ^astly, it is
certain that Empire is not sound^d in any natural Prerogative, which some Men
may have above Others; for which ^eason the Custom of fixing Temporal ^randeur
to Birth, has been wisely and prudently established; this is undoubtedly done
to manage the Pride of other Men, who would suffer too great Mortification, did
all the Preferences, we are obliged to make of Others before them, for the good
of Society, proceed from a Preference of Merit and Desert*

It seems in this, that God has thought fi^ to take Measures in the Tablet of
his Wisdom, to hinder Man from yielding to the Temptations of Vainglory; for
he was willing the confused Perceptions of our Nature should affix the Glory of
the World to external Objects, and that it should not be in the power of our
distinct Ideas to revoke and call us back from this Error; and to teach us
that the chief Perfection and Excellency of this Glory arises from the Wom^ of
our own Essence, without knowing that it is God, who immediately produces it in
us.

We discover in the Principle, we have established, not only the Grandeur of
the Passions, but also of the Virtues.

It Is not necessary, in order to make this out, to give you an exact Catalogue
of them: We need but consider 'em confusedly, as they occur to our Imagination.

Temperance is a Venue, which undoubtedly elevates and raises Man; but
Temperance can have no solid Basis and Supports, unless from the Motives of his
Immortality, and the eternal Felicity to which he aspires. I confess, Reason of
it self is capable of ^eaching us to beware how we injure our Health, and
become our own Enemies, through Excesses of Debauchery; but this Consideration
does not lead us very far, since Intemperance consists not simply in Excess of
Plea^ure, but also in making even but a moderate Use of forbidden Pleasure. The
only thing ^apable of raising us to this high Situation, ^t which we ought to
be, in order to abstain from unlawful Pleasure, is the Consideration of
Eternity, for which we are made.

Nor has the Justice which is commonly practiced in the World, any greater
Eleva^ion and Excellency, since it imports no more but the fear of a Return of
Injustice and Retaliation, and we are apprehensive of ^njuring Others merely
through fear of enda^aging our selves: this Exercise of Justice ^s not to be
blamed in the base and limited Views of Mortality; but when a Man is Just
because he is filled with the thoughts of E^ernity, he is willing to confine
himself to ^uch an Interest and Concern as deserves his Care and Application,
we may say that he is ^quitable without Fault or Infirmity, and that his Virtue
is Uniform, and always ^ike it self.

Dis-interestedness passes for a Sport of Self-^ove, which takes Advantage by
an apparent Renunciation of small and inconsiderable Things, to arrive with
more surety to a greater Utility and Profit. This holds true of the Politic
and Artificial Dis-interestedness of a Worldly Man: for including all his
Pretenses and Advantages within the narrow Limits of this Life, how can we
conceive that he desires not those Goods which other Men pursue, or rather who
does not see that he seems to turn his Back to Fortune, with a Design to meet
her more infallibly another way. The Case is far otherwise with a Man that
considers himself in reference to Eternity; if he be interested, it is with an
Interest so great, so sublime and lofty, that he may be so far from being
ashamed to own it, that indeed it is this, that makes all his Glory and
Perfection. As he is Immortal, it is Honorable for him to take his flight
toward the Coasts of Eternity, and prosecute all those things with Disdain and
Contempt, which are capable of diverting and putting him out of that Road. In
this State he resembles a great Monarch, who blushes when surpised in base and
sordid Occupations, and is cautious of seeming concerned in trivial and
inconsiderable Affairs, being called, as he is, to so great and important
Imploys, and obliged to roll none but vast Designs in his Mind.

Liberality has ordinarily but a mere show of Dis-interestedness. A liberal
Man values that, which he bestows, but he has a yet greater Value for the Glory
of Bestowing; and is also desirous of ^btaining sacred and inviolable Rights
^ver the Hearts of those, whom he fa^ours with his Benefits. The usual
Libe^ality is but a sort of Commerce, and a Gen^eel Traffic of Self-love;
which making an ^utward Appearance of obliging Others, ^oes but oblige and
gratify it self, by win^ing and gaining them to its own Interest. ^ll this
holds true in the Sphere of tempo^al Goods, wherein the Worldling supposes
himself to be; in this Circle of corruptible ^bjects, Concupiscence gives
merely with a ^esign to receive; it never will go so far as ^o impoverish it
self by its Gifts. But ele^ate your selves above these corruptible Ob^ects, and
you will discover another World, which rendering, what you saw before, mean and
contemptible in your sight, will put you ^n a Condition to give, without any
hope of ^estitution from Men.

You are very careful to hide the interest^d Views of your Heart, because on
one side ^ou are sensible of what you are, and on the ^ther you know the
Vileness of those Ob^ects, about which you are conversant. Do ^ut become
capable of this infinite Interest, and you need not endeavor to conceal it. ^n
Heart opened to the Embraces of Heaven ^as no need to disguise it self; all it
has to ^o is, to know it self, to act upon that Prin^iple, and to set out it
self in its native and ^al Hue. The Shame, which confounds us, when Men look
hard upon us, proceeds not from this, That we know our selves too well, But
that we know not our selves enough.

Such is Bashfulness, the most polite and reasonable of all the Virtues: Or
rather the Artificial Disguisement of our Intemperance and Pleasure, which though
suffering us even with delight to think of those Pleasures, of which we do not
speak without trouble and uneasiness, has the Care of regulating our Desires;
as if Corruption consisted rather in Expressions than Thoughts.

This Virtue, as Defective and False as it is, springs from a very good Source;
it certainly rises from a sense of our natural Excellency. Had Nature designed
us for none but Animal Actions, as we conceive Beasts to have no other End, we
should be as far from Blushing, as they, at those Actions which bear a
Character of our Conformity and Likeness to them: But Immortal and
Incorruptible, as Naturally we are, it is hard, That, notwithstanding that State
of Vileness and Ignorance, to which Sin has reduced us, we should not see
something of that Dignity which does so nobly Distinguish us; and consequently,
that we should not have some sense of Shame, at any Thing which seems to Vilify
and Degrade us.

But Lastly, this Virtue, as we have already said, does not rise very high,
when we exercise it only by the confused Sentiment of Nature and Education: If
you desire it should purify your Heart, as it does your Tongue, you need only
go out of this Horizon of Vanity, and ascend to the Throne of God; who is the
Principle and Source of ^our Immortality. The Commerce you will have with him,
will so elevate and raise you, that, without any Difficulty and Violence,
you will feel your self disposed and inclined to ^enounce all unworthy and
ignoble Affections. Certainly it is not the Property, of the Carnal and Animal
Man, to Blush at the Vileness of Nature; it is the incommunicable Property of
the immortal Man, to be Confounded at this: The Shame indeed, of a Worldling,
may aspire at gaining the Esteem of other Men, by an affected Purity; but the
^mmortal Man, seeks for Grounds where upon to Value himself, if he fear that he
shall not be in a Capacity of valuing himself in the View of his Perfections.
Indeed, Debauchery ^ncludes a Doubt of One's true Condition: Consummate
Intemperance is the Prostitution of a Soul, that renounces its own Dignity, and
implies, That a Man becomes a Beast by renouncing Shame, and abandoning himself
to Sensuality.

Much the same is to be said of Modesty, as of Bashfulness: Were the
Approbation of Men a sufficient Reward, we should have no Reason to conceal and
cloak our Design of attracting it, nor the Joy wherewith it caresses and
tickles us; but as the Instinct, that persuades us of our Excellency, secretly
convinces us, That this Esteem is too trivial and inconsiderable for limiting
all our Pretensions, it is not to be wondered, if we take care to hide our
Desire of being esteemed, or the Esteem and Value we have for our selves: Yet
if we look somewhat closely in the Matter, we shall find, that most commonly
there is nothing but Falsehood and Hypocrisy in this Virtue, as it is usually
practiced in the World. Men that seem Modest when they are praised, are not so
when they are Blamed and reprehended; This is no wonder, for that Virtue cannot
be of any great Force, which ows its Original to our Infirmity; and we are not
raised very high, when we fall down again to the Center of our Vanity, which
makes an apparent Grandeur and real Debasement. The Modesty, which springs from
the Knowledge of our immortal Condition, and consequently of our Situation
above the Sphere of that Esteem, which ties and confines us to temporal Things,
has a much greater Forcc and Elevation: It seems almost indifferent to Praise
and Dis-praise, and is ready to put 'em in an equal Balance; and makes us
Esteem and Value none but those Things which relate to this grand Eternity;
which is the Rule, whereby we measure the Price and Worth of all other Things:
And as we see, that Persons very Eminent, or who are so at least in their own
Conceits, seem more capable of Modesty than others; because their real, or
imaginary Elevation and Advancement, places 'em above the Sentiments of the
Vulgar sort: So may we more truly say, That One well instructed by the distinct
Ideas of Nature, and the Promises of Religion, concerning the lofty Destinies
of Man, has no great Temptation to be transported and dazzled, at what Degree
soever of Prosperity, and temporal Glory he finds himself Advanced.

To this I add, That Humility, which is the very Soul of Modesty, and all the
other Virtues, cannot proceed from any other Source, than a sense of our
Natural Excellency. Whilst you make light of Man, as Man, you can Esteem only
those weak and mean Advantages, which make the Difference of Conditions, and
the Distinction of Persons; and consequently, cannot but contemn and despise
those, who fail of these Advantages; deal with 'em Disrespectfully, prefer your
selves before 'em, and Advance, as it were, above their Lowness, which is the
most dangerous Character of Pride: But if you are persuaded, that Man is the
principal Thing, which deserves Esteem in Man, you will respect in your
Neighbor, whatever is common to him with you: And though the Order of Society,
which is that of GOD Himself, establishing a mutual Subordination assures you
of his Submission, and external Homages, yet will you have for him an inward
Respect and Veneration, as he has for you; and discover through these narrow
Dependances, which make you his Superior, an Original and Eternal Grandeur,
which renders him your Equal in that, which you look upon, as the most
estimable Part of your Nature.

Then indeed we may conceive Man to be moderate, in the Abundance of temporal
Goods, constant in Adversity, and magnanimous in all Conditions; though the
Moderation, which Worldlings make a show of, in the highest Elevations of
Earthly Pageantry be but a secret Desire of seeming Greater, than those things
which raise 'em: The Moderation, of the immortal Man, is purely a Sense of his
own Excellency, which truly raises him above all those things that seemed
capable of raising and advancing him. It Is the Property of Pride to disguise it
self, that it may hide the Disproportion betwixt what a Man is, and what he
believes is in the World. Piety, which looks on those things as Atoms, which
seem like vast Colossus's in the World's Eye, need but bear it self up in the
Height of its natural Situation, to see under its Feet the vain Pomp of Humane
Grandeur; and the equally vain Multiplicity of Disgraces and Calamities, which,
like a Whirlwind; agitate and toss this Lump of Clay, and reverse these
Tabernacles of Dust. The Worldling can put on an affected Constancy, to make
People think him stronger than Adversity; and that this Fortitude places him
above the reach of bad Fortune: This Sentiment becomes not a Man that includes
all his Remedies in Time* but is fitly placed in his Breast, who finds himself
made for Eternity: without a counterfeit and feigned Magnanimity, Nature and
Religion do sufficiently raise him for making him patient under all
Afflictions, and constant without Affectation.

Such a Man can fill, and adequately answer, the Idea and Model of the highest
Valor, when his Vocation calls him to expose his Person to the Dangers of War;
and to let Men see what they never yet saw in the World, A Man valiant by
Reason, and stout without external Cultivation and Discipline His Fortitude
will not owe its Force to Stupidity, which hinders him from reflecting on what
he does; nor to Example, which obliges him to follow in Danger, the Steps of
other Men; nor to Worldly Concerns, which bid him not flinch and give Ground,
where Honor calls; nor lastly, to an heap of Considerations, wheh may serve as
a Veil to hinder him from seeing the impendent Danger: The immortal Man exposes
himself to Death, because he very well knows that he cannot Dye.

The World cannot produce One Heroe^ since all its brave Men are either fearful
of Death, or owe their Intrepidness to their own Infirmity: Thinking to be
Valiant, they cease to be Men; and going to look Death in the Face, they lose
the Sight of themselves; but the immortal Man exposes himself, because he
understands and knows himself.

Though we cannot find a true Hero in the World, yet we cannot but love those
who appear to be such: Heroism in that Man's Principles, who includes all his
Hopes in the World, is a mere Extravagance; yet we cannot choose but admire
those Persons who bear this Character: This undoubtedly proceeds from a Sense
of our Grandeur and Dignity, which teaches us confusedly, and without the
admission of Reason to these Mysteries of the Heart, that Man is above all. We
are inwardly pleased and delighted to see a Fellow quarrelling with Fate and
Fortune; we love to see him raised above Dangers by his Valor, and above all
Applause by his Modesty: we would have nothing shake his Stoutness and Courage,
and though we cannot bear, that his Pride should despise us, yet we love he
should despise all the Injuries of the Elements, the Persecution of Men; and
show himself greater than all those Things, which seemed capable of pulling
down his Crest. Constancy suits not with a perishing Man; but agrees with, I
know not what, confused Sense of our Grandeur, which finds nothing too Great
for its vast Capacity.

Hence undoubtedly sprung that Idea of a Wise Man, which the Stoics vainly
endeavored to answer: For truly their Paradoxes in the Principles of One, who
believes not an Eternity, are highly Extravagant; yet however Extravagant they
may be, they excite a kind of Admiration in our Heart, which we use not to have
at Things purely impossible. We should laugh at that Man's Folly, who should
fancy he had Wings to fly with; and indeed the Notion of a Sage, who pretends
he is raised above all adverse Events, and yet casts not his Eye beyond the
Limits of Mortality, is no less unreasonable and senseless; yet we find in this
Sentiment, something not altogether displeasing, which our Soul insensibly
admires: This undoubtedly proceeds purely from this Cause, That these Paradoxes
agree, and suit with a confused Sense of our natural Dignity; which forsakes us
not, though it be usually unknown.

This Sense is disguised and hidden, in the midst of the apparent Infirmities,
and Baseness of our Nature, as Diamonds are in the Entrails of the Earth,
mingled with Dirt or Dross* and as these must be purified and cleansed to give
'em their native Luster and Brightness, and to know their Value or Worth: so is
it necessary to purify this Sense, of our natural Excellency, by the Ideas of
Religion, that we may see its Beauty and Perfection.

The Christian mantains these Paradoxes, and fills the prodigious Vacuity of
these Maxims: All of 'em become reasonable upon the Principle of Immortality,
provided they be rightly understood.

If they tell us the Wise Man is without Passion, we shall find, that this
Character suits with the Immortal Man; provided, that by Passion you mean the
Alteration, which usually attends the Passions, as these Philosophers, seem to
have done: For how can a Man that is made for Eternity, if he act conformably
to the exact and true Knowledge, he ought to have of himself, be very much
embarass'd and perplexed, with Cares and Passions, which wholly relate to Time?
Placed, as it were, upon a lofty Mountain, he hears, with a serene and
undisturbed Mind, the Wind blow; the Thunder roar, and the Lightning Clouds
burst under his Feet: If few Men enjoy this Tranquillity and Regard, with a
generous Indifferency, the Goods and Evils of this Life, it is because they are
too ignorant of their immortal Condition; whereof even Nature gives 'em an
obscure Glimpse, and a confused Information: Or, because they cannot keep up in
that lofty Situation, to which Religion advanced 'em. All this shows, that
there is no complete Wise Man; yet this does not hinder us from concluding,
that it is the Character of a Wise Man, to live without Alteration; and that we
find this Character more or less perfect, according as a Man remembers what
himself is.

If the Wise Man ought to be sufficient to himself, may we not very well apply
this Idea to the Immortal Man; who cannot percieve his true Condition of coming
from, and returning to God, without being assured, That Worldly Objects, which
hinder him from knowing his true Original and End, are far from satisfying his
Wants? For this Maxim must not be understood, in a Sense exclusive of God;
without whom we are Nothing at all: But in a Sense exclusive of the World;
without which, it is true, we both are, and are Happy. I confess that he, who
has fixed all his Desires upon Earthly Objects, cannot live without Company and
Conversation; without that, he is plunged in the Ideas of the Misery and Vanity
of all temporal Things: He cannot Live, unless he be diverted from the Thoughts
of Death; he cannot Dye, unless he see those Persons, who still buisy him with
the Thoughts of Life: His Prosperity and Fortune become insupportable, unless
those Persons have a share with him, who divert his Mind; hinder it from
thinking of the fatal Necessity that is imposed upon him, of seeing it speedily
come to a Period. A weak and silly Creature, that stumbles into a Precipice,
and to retard its Fall for a Moment, lays hold of any thing it can catch by;
but he is surpised with falling down, maugre these vain Supports, into the
inevitable Abyss, which he sees before him. The Immortal Man has no need of
making these Disguisements, in order to obtain Consolation and Comfort, and
keep the Possession of himself: He affixes, even to Death, an Idea of Glory and
Excellency; which makes him look upon all that with Anger and Vexation, which
diverts his Thoughts from this Object: He Is never better pleased than when he
considers the glorious Condition of his Soul. The Farrago of temporal Goods,
seems to him like an Heap of Dust thrown into his Eyes, to hinder him from the
Enjoyment of his own Perfections; whatsoever diverts, and pleases the Heart and
Mind of other Men, is a Burden to him; because it keeps him from meditating,
and thinking of his real Happiness. This Paradox therefore is not at all
Extravagant in the Mind of that Man, who knows and loves himself as he ought;
if it fail of Truth, this is to be imputed to our Weakness and Infirmity, and
nothing but our Error and Folly do render it Unreasonable and Senseless.

Let the Wise Man command and govern the Stars, be raised above Fate, and more
happy and perfect than Jupiter himself; these Expressions are so much the more
Excessive, as they seem Impious and Wicked; but we may put a favorable
Construction upon them: And certainly if the immortal Man be said to be raised
above the Stars, above the Concatenation of natural Things, and those Heroes,
who, after their Death, were set up for Gods; or, even those Gods, so much like
weak and sinful Men, which Paganism invented, it is no more than what is true.
We know the Stars, though they know not us; we owe them Nothing, but they are
beholding to us for the glittering Luster of their Perfections: And, I dare
say, it is more Natural, that they should be in a State of Dependence upon us,
than we upon them; and though it pleased the Author of Nature, that they should
make a necessary Impression upon us; yet it is not for their Glory, but our
Advantage, that he established this Order in the Universe. The Sun rules over
the Day, and the Moon the Night; but God alone rules over Man: And his
Prerogatives are excellently confirmed by Religion, when it teaches us, That
God made him Master over the Works of his Hands, and King of the visible World.
If Fate be a Connection of external Objects, and second Causes, it can have no
power over Man; because these Objects perish and come to an End, but Man does
not. If Jupiter be a God, guilty of Ambition, Injustice and Intemperance, the
Idea of this pretended Divinity is much more ignoble and inferior than that of
a Man; whom the sense of his Immortality and the Grace of God, elevate and
raise far above Pride, Interest, and the Pleasures of this Life.

The immortal Man is as invincible as the Stoics Sage was represented to be.
How should his Courage be pulled down, to whom the Dangers o^ this Life, seem
no Dangers at all; nor the Miseries of this World, real Miseries?

But the Worldling cannot choose but be weak and cowardly; his Infirmity
appears even through those outward shows of Magnanimity and Strength, which he
affects, merely to dazzle the Eyes of his Spectators, and Admirers; and that he
may reap this miserable Satisfaction, of making it be said, That he acted his
Part very well upon the Theater of Humane Life; which is the whole Reward of
this Master of the World, who took so much Pains to raise himself above the
common Level of Mankind. The World cannot give us an Instance of a steadfast
Constancy: The Courage and Resolution of Heroes is but a machinal Virtue, which
is defeated and vanquished by the Disorder of the least Spring. He that so
proudly defied the Gods and Fortune, in the midst of Dangers, at the Head of
Armies, trembles at the Thoughts of Dying in his Bed: He dared a Death,
accompanied with Noise and Tumult; but cannot away with the Prospect of a quiet
and peaceable Departure. The Philosopher, that hugged himself, and rejoiced at
suffering a Thousand illustrious Misfortunes and famous Disasters, cheered up
and solac'd by their Approbation, who admired his Constancy; yet conceives a
kind of Despair, when reduced to Adversity, in a private Corner: But though the
Worldling be necessarily weak and cow-hearted, the immortal Man can hardly
avoid the Character of Constancy and Valor; all the Infirmity he has, proceeds
merely from the Regards and Opinions of Men, and temporal Society; which make
the whole Strength and Courage of the Heroes of the Age. He Is troubled to see
People crying about him; the sympathising of Others, with his pretended Misery,
casts him down, and calls him back, as it were, from Heaven, to these gloomy
Regions: In Solitude and Retirement, he finds himself advanced above outward
Accidents, and the Opinions of Men; he can freely say, what a confused Notion
of Man's Excellency, caused a Heathen Poet to utter: Si fractus illabatur Orbis,
Impavidum ferient Ruinae.


And may cry out with Him, whom Religion had much better instructed: Who shall
separate me from the Love of Christ? Shall Oppression or Anguish? O Death,
where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? He that thinks to get above
Disgraces and Adversity, by standing upon other Men's Heads, is mistaken: He
must return back again, by the way that he came, to find what he hitherto in
vain searched after. It Is not Pride, that with its forced Distinctions and
eternal Constraints, can render him steadfast and constant; but Humility must do
this, by reducing him to that natural Equality of Perfection and Excellency,
which is common to all Mankind; who have the same Original and End of coming
from God, and returning to God.

But if our Comfort and Elevation be grounded in the Sense of our Immortality,
it is from thence likewise, that our real Satisfaction and Contentment proceeds.

Our Heart is a kind of devouring Fire, which mounts up higher and higher, and
never says, it is Enough: Give it all it can reasonably ask, 'twill but still
form new Desires; if it be Master of the Universe, 'twill either, like
Alexander, Wish for new Worlds to Conquer; or will grow out of Conceit with its
proper Grandeur, like those Roman Emperors, who, when come to be Lords and
Masters of Mankind, dis-relish and nauseate their Puissance and Greatness; find
an extreme Disproportion betwixt the Good they have obtained, and the Ardour
wherewith they desired it. Though Masters of other Men's Fortune, they are not
content with their Own; they miss of the Fullness of their expected
Satisfaction. Tiberius had need be an Emperor, to go and Cloister up himself
in the Isle of Capreae; and take full Draughts of those infamous Pleasures,
whose Ragoo consists in singularity and excess of Crime! His being simply a
Man, without the Character of Emperor, was sufficient for this: Nay, he need
not be a Man to entitle him to this; he must put off Humanity, and by a
monstrous Debauchery, descend even below the Condition of Beasts: But the
Reason of it is, Because those Excesses of Pleasure, were the Despair of
Ambition. He was forced to descend so low, because he saw no possibility of
rising higher than he was: For the Heart of Man can never rest. These famous
Deboches had always a Fancy, That Happiness consisted in outward Grandeur; when
they are mounted to the height of that, they presently disabuse themselves, and
see their Error: Then, like the Conqueror of the Persians, They believe that
another kind of Greatness is required to make a Man Happy; or wearied with the
Fatigues of Grandeur and State, they betake themselves to the Fruition of
Pleasure: They endeavor to repair the Time they have lost, and to regain, by
Singularity, what they lose in Duration; but in a while they become more out of
Conceit with Pleasure than Greatness, and Ambition calls 'em back to their
former State; as appears in the Case of Tiberius, who after having given up the
Empire to his Favorite, that he might with more Quiet and Tranquillity taste the
Excess of Sensuality, is at length tempted to quit his Pleasures for the sake
of the Empire; the Cares of which he again finds fault with, after the Death of
Seja^s; being as much discontented at Rome, as he was at Capreae, always having
an insatiable and restless Heart.

This Picture represents the Heart, not only of Tiberius, but of all Mankind;
who are in a perpetual, and, as it were, necessary Tossing and Agitation,
whilst they fix themselves upon Worldly Objects. God has endu'd Man with a
Capacity proportionable to his Immortality; Namely, an infinite Capacity. It Is
therefore impossible he should be satisfied with corruptible and transitory
Goods; what is finite can by no means fill him: But persuade him once of his
Immortality, and give him Goods Eternal, like himself, and you will presently see
him contented and satisfied. Having endeavored to know the Nature, Duties, and
the most powerful Motives, or moral Force, which naturally determine the Heart
of Man, 'twill not be amiss, in the next place, to pass to the Consideration of
his Irregularities; the Spring of which we shall consider first, in order to
know the Rivulets that flow from it.

The End of the First Part.
The SECOND PART. Where we Enquire after the Source of our Corruption, and
Treat of Self-love, of the Force of its Applications, the Extent of its
Affections, and Irregularities in General and in Particular.
CHAP. I. Where we Enquire after the Source of our Corruption, by handling the
First of our Faculties, which is the Understanding.
I Don't take the common School-Distinction o^ Understanding and Will, Mind and
Heart, Reason and Appetite, to be proper for disentangling and clearing our
Ideas; but we must be forced to follow this too much received Custom: We call
Understanding, Mind, or Reason, the Soul, as it knows; that is, as it
conceives, judges, reasons, remembers, reflects and methodizes its Knowledge.
We term Heart, Will, or Appetite, the Soul, as it has the Affections of Love,
Hatred, Desire, Fear, Joy, Hope, Despair, or any other of the Passions. I think
we shall not be much out of the Way, if we define the Mind, the Soul as it
knows; and the Heart, the Soul as it loves: For as Conceptions, Judgments, and
Discourses, are but different Modes of Knowledge, so it is certain that Desire,
Fear, Hope, and in general all other Affections, are only Modes or different
Manners of Love; but this is not to be insisted upon at present.

Our Business here is to know, Whether the Original Source of our Corruption,
be in the Mind, or in the Heart: Whether the first Spring of our Evil, be in
the Knowledge of our Soul, or in its Affections. We answer, That it is not in
the Mind, because then the Mind would have been ordered to conduct and regulate
it self, by the Dictates of the Heart; whereas we see the Heart has been
ordered to regulate it self by the Mind. For 'twould be unreasonable, that what
is less Corrupted, should be guided by that which is more irregular and
disorderly; and that the Source of our Corruption, should be the Rule of our
Conduct: and indeed were it so, A Man would not be obliged to steer and guide
himself by his Reason, 'till he should have been assured, that God had
extraordinarily enlightened him; and he must wait for an Enthusiasm, and
immediate Inspiration, before he could have Right to act in the Quality of a
Rational Creature.

Also the Holy Scripture always attributes the Offuscation, and Darkness of the
Mind, to the evil Affections of the Heart: If our Gospel be hidden, says St.
Paul, it is hidden to them that perish, whose Understandings the God of this Age
has blinded. It Is easy to conceive, That by the God of this Age, he means the
Demon of Concupiscence: And upon almost the like Account, our Savior said to
the Jews* How can ye believe, seeing that ye seek for Glory one of another?

Certainly, were the Mind the Original of our Depravation, 'twould always, and
in all Circumstances, have its natural Obscuration and Darkness; 'twould be as
blind in the Study of the Sciences, as of Religion, and 'twould succeed no
better in knowing such Objects, as are indifferent to it, than those, which
interess and concern it. When an Eye is covered with a Web, or closed up by an
Obstruction, it is not in a Condition to see one Object, more than another; but
when its Darkness proceeds from the Obstacle of Clouds* Fog, or any exterior
Veil, it is easier for it to perceive distant Objects, and 'twill see very
clearly when the extraneous Impediment is removed, without receiving any Change
or Alteration in it self. So say we, if the Understanding were in it self
naturally darkened, 'twould be as liable to Error in its curious and needless
Enquiries, as it is in those which import and concern it; for its Darkness would
be Uniform, and always the same: But because it is covered only with Fogs and
Mists, which rise from the Seat of the Affections, no Wonder if its Obscuration
ends, so soon as the Heat of Passion ceases.

This is a common Matter of Fact* One that has a Rectitude of Mind, and
Exactness of admirable Reason, for apprehending what is most abstruse, and
intricate in the Sciences; who knows when to doubt and suspend his Assent to
things that are Dubious; to affirm true Things, and deny False; to have a
simple Opinion of probable Things, to demonstrate those that are Certain, who
will not mistake True for False, nor one Degree of Truth for another; will no
sooner have a Point of Interest to manage, but his former Rectitude of Mind
forsakes him; his Reason bends to the Humor of his Desires, and Evidence is
confounded with Utility and Profit. Whence proceeds this Darkness? From the
Objects? No, For these Objects are easier and clearer, than those of the
sublime and lofty Sciences, which he so well-penetrated and understood. Is it
from any natural Defect of the Mind? No, From this much less than the other:
That has reasoned perfectly well touching Matters of Speculation; and put it to
Discourse of secular Concerns, provided they be not its own, but another Man's,
'twill reason about 'em with the same Exactness.

But if after you have carried the Mind of this Man, from the Objects of the
Sciences, to the Affairs of Life, you call it again from thence, to the
Consideration of the Truths of Religion, you will perhaps find his Mind yet more
obnoxious to Falsehood and Illusions: Because a greater Interest, does also
produce a greater Error. Such a Passion as Interest, is of very great
Prevalence and Force, in obscuring the Light of Reason, but yet those Passions,
which directly oppose Reason, are more capable of producing this ill Effect:
For, it is not, as Men commonly imagine, the Degree of Darkness, which is
originally in the Understanding, that causes the Number of our Passions; but
it is the Number and Vehemence of the Passions, that cause this Degree of
Darkness in our Understanding.

But were the Understanding originally Darkened, it would not be remedied,
unless by a new and extraordinary Infusion of Light, which is contrary to
Experience: For the Understanding of a Sinner, that betakes himself to a strict
Repentance for his Transgressions, is not filled with other Ideas and
Knowledge, than he had before: I mean, according to the ordinary Course of
Things. A Man indeed, after his Conversion, has the Ideas of God, Salvation and
Eternity, he is convinced of his own Mortality, and the Frailty of Humane
Things: He looks upon Piety, as a most proper Means, for procuring Repose and
Tranquillity in Life; Consolation and Comfort in Death, and a Glorious
Resurrection from the Grave. But yet he was fully persuaded, of all these
Truths, before his Repentance: (For I suppose he Sinned not in Incredulity.)
Wherefore he cannot be said, to have acquired any new Knowledge; but to have
transcribed that Knowledge into Practice, which before was merely Speculative.
And our Savior does partly testify this, in declaring to his Enemies, That the
Degree of their Knowledge, aggravated their Blame. Indeed the want of Light
excuses a Man from the Faults he commits, when this Privation is necessary and
voluntary: For is any One to be blamed, for not seeing that which 'twas
impossible for him to see? Nor can we excuse him, whose Blindness we suppose to
be voluntary, and willful. He that is deceived and mistaken by reason of the
Heart, and not through any natural want of Light, sees and not sees: He has
Knowledge enough to perceive, that he follows not his own Light; and this seems
the only Means of reconciling two Expressions of the Holy Scripture, which
appear very Contradictory: For one while it accuses the Sinner of Ignorance,
Folly, Stupidity, Blindness, of walking in Darkness, of not knowing what he
does; another while it blames him for Sinning against his own Light; for
resisting the Truth which enlightens him; for being condemned by his own
Thoughts, and reprehended by his Conscience. All these Expressions are true,
and only seem to be opposite: The Sinner does both see, and not see: He sees by
the Understanding, which God has given him, capable of knowing and making use
of the Truth; he is Blind, and does not see, by his Heart, which evaporates and
sends up, to the Seat of the Superior Faculties of the Soul, continual Fumes
and Clouds, which obnubilate and darken the Understanding.

I am not ignorant, that the Schools use to make a Distinction, betwixt two
sorts of Knowledge or Light, that they may solve this Difficulty: viz.
Speculative and Practical; they draw this Definition from their Effects:
Speculative Light, which goes no farther than simple Contemplation, does but
^loat, as it were, in the Understanding; whereas, what they call Practical
Knowledge, does not stop at the Mind, but takes a farther Descent, down into
the Heart; gains the Will, makes it self Mistress of the Affecti^ns, and
inclines us to Practice, whatsoever it orders and appoints: But it must needs
be owned, that this Distinction leads us not far in the Discovery of Things;
seeing it imports no more than this, That we have some Knowledge that is
operative and useful, and other that is dead and inefficacious.

If we look narrowly into this Point, we shall find, That Knowledge is
ordinarily either Speculative, or Practical, according as it concerns, or not
concerns our Heart. When we consider Truth, in the Sciences, we have usually no
more than a Speculative Knowledge of it; but considering it in the Objects,
which interest and concern us, as in the Affairs of civil Life, or Points of
Religion, we hate it, or love it, according as it is agreeable, or disagreeable;
and it determines us to Action, or Aversation, according as it bears one, or
the other of these Characters: Hence you see, that the Practical Truth of the
Schoolmen is that, which has some Force and Efficacy; but Truth draws its
whole Force from the Heart.

The Case is much the same, with the Light of the Understanding, as with that
we behold in Nature: It enlightens all things, but of it self moves not any
thing: It has Luster and Brightness, but no Strength; It can conduct and guide,
but not support and hold us up. When none but Reason speaks, we shall look upon
its Decisions as mere Dreams, as dry and barren Truths, which are good for
nothing, but to be plunged into Oblivion; we shall look upon 'em as the
importunate Councels of a Pedant, that wearies and vexes ^s with unseasonable
Advices. Were Men determined in their Actions by Reason, Philosophers would be
more prevalent, in Perswaing, than Orators: For the former have a just and
exact Reason, a severe Judgment, which weighs, and examines, and makes just
Comparisons of all Things; whereas the latter do often abound in Fictions,
Lies, Figures, which would be but pompous and splendid Impostures, did not
Necessity it self justify these Excesses of Speech; and were not Men agreed in
mitigating and allaying their signification: But because they are determined by
their Affections, it falls out quite contrary to Reason, that Orators are
commonly much more successful, in Persuading, than Philosophers: It Is because
the Soul does not balance, and weigh the Reasons, but its own Interests; and
considers not the Light, but its own Utility and Advantage.

Good attracts our Love, Evil our Aversion; pure Reason does neither of these,
but only as it represents the Objects to us: And here, by the By, we may see
the Error of those, who place Man's Free Will in the indifferency of his Soul,
to pursue, or not pursue the Good which is presented to it. Certainly this
Indifferency is no where else, but in the Imagination; it is not in the Objects:
Good is not indifferent to its being Good, nor is Evil indifferent to its being
Evil; nor is it in the Reason, for this is not free to assent to that which
seems False, nor to reject what is True: It Is not indifferent* to judge, that,
what it apprehends to be Evil, is Good; nor that, what seems Good, is Evil. The
Soul is not indifferent to love or hate, what it apprehends as good and
agreeable; for if so, 'twould be indifferent to love or hate it self, which is
against Nature.

CHAP. II. Where we continue to show, that the Source of our Corruption, is not
in the Understanding.
IN saying, That the Corruption of the Understanding, proceeds from the Will,
we don't mean, that all our Ignorances and Errors, without exception, are
derived from our Affections: For as to the former of these, certainly all Kinds
of Ignorance, are not to be looked upon as Defects. It Is not the Property of
Men, or Angels; or in General any Creature, how Perfect soever, to be
Omniscient: This is the Character of the Supreme Being, and infinite
Understanding, which governs and rules the Universe. In General, we should not
make any matter of that Ignorance, which proceeds from either of these Reasons,
That our Nature is too finite and limited, and the Object too sublime; or, from
the shortness of our Life, which will not permit us to attain the Knowledge of
all Things, etc. For Mortality is not a Crime to our Body, nor is our Soul to
be blamed for not being Infinite.

Neither the Ignorance of the Mysteries of Nature, nor of the Secrets of
Providence, can be looked upon as the Corruption of the Understanding. Jesus
Christ was the Mod^l and Pattern of Perfection, and yet as Man, He had not the
Knowledge of all Things, for He was ignorant of the Day of Ju^^ment. The
Ignorance of our Duties, of our Sins, and of the Benefits we have received, is
that, which makes the Corruption of our Understanding; this Ignorance proceeds
not from want of Light, and can bear no Apology or Justification; nor are
speculative Errors to be thought Vices of the Understanding: So far are they
from it, that they have often remained in Souls, which GOD had enlightened by
His Revelation, after an immediate and extraordinary manner: For it does not
appear, that either Moses, or any of the Prophets, had other Ideas of the Sun,
Stars, Earth, etc. than what were obvious to the Vulgar sort; and indeed, 'twas
not requisite, that GOD should make those Men Philosophers, by his Revelation,
whom He designed for the Instruction of the most simple and illiterate Persons.

Its no matter, though the Vulgars are mistaken, in apprehending the Stars like
Flamboys: But it is a great exorbitance and excessive Fault for those Sages, who
have such exact Ideas of the Magnitude of the Heavenly Bodies, yet to look upon
Eternity, GOD, and Religion, as but so many Points, or rather so many Shadows
and remote Appearances. Our Reason may be enlightened, though it has the former
Prejudice; but if it has the latter, it must needs be blind.

But it is very easy to justify the Mind, and to make it appear, that it is not
the original Fountain of our Corruption, by examining its different ways and
manners of Knowing: For, to begin with the simple Conceptions of our
Understanding; no Idea in our Soul is Evil as such, or as it represents an
Object to us. The Objects of Pleasure, Glory, nay, and of Sin it self, have
nothing Criminal in themselves, seeing we are permitted to know these Objects;
the same may be said of the Judgments, and Discourses of the Soul. Nor are the
first Notions Criminal, seeing that they are of so clear and so easy Evidence,
that the Mind no sooner begins to exercise and use its Reason, but it presently
apprehends 'em. Discourse is a kind of acquired Knowledge, which will never
deceive us unless the Heart interpose and mingle it self with it; For it is an
usual saying, that Common Sense never deceives; to denote that Man Reason's
well Naturally.

Yet, by the way, it is to be observed, that, among our different kinds of
Knowledge, Ideas have more Force to determine our Will, than the Judgments, or
Discourses of the Mind; this is true Generally speaking: The reason of it is,
because our Notices, as we have already remarked, have no Force of themselves;
but borrow it all from the Affections of the Heart. And hence it comes to pass,
that Men are never very successful in Persuading, unless they interpose, as it
were, a mixture of Sense among their Reason or Knowledge. Now none, but a
remote Good, can be mingled with Reasons; for seeing you are obliged to use
Reasonings and Discourses, in order to make it known, it appears, that it is at
some Distance off: Whereas an Idea, or simple Perception, partaking of the
Quality, and being either pleasant or unpleasant, according to the Disposition
of its Object, makes you of it self actually feel and perceive that which
Discourse makes you only expect and wait for.

But yet this is not the Source of the Evil. The Irregularity proceeds from
this, That spiritual Ideas don't make near so great Impressions upon our Soul,
as Corporeal Ideas, which entered in by the Channel of Sense; whereas by right
they should make a much greater, since the Perception of our own Soul ought to
be more vivid and lively than that of external Objects, and the experience of
spiritual Things should more nearly touch and affect us than the Knowledge of
the Senses, which concern us only in outward Objects. Corporeal Ideas seem to
be designed for no other Purpose but for the good of the Body, which they
conduct and guide, whereas Spiritual Ideas ought to direct our Soul, and lead
it to the Sources and Fountains of its Happiness; so that as much as the Value
of our Soul exceeds that of the Body, so much are Spiritual Ideas Naturally
more important, than Corporeal, and as they are more necessary, so ought they
Naturally to make a greater and more lively Impression.

As Ideas are a kind of internal Sense, being pleasant or unpleasant, according
to the Character of the Things they represent, because they partake of the
Quality of their Objects; it is no mistake to say, that they belong in some sort
to the Affections or Sentiments of the Soul, which are either Corporeal, as
Sensations, or Spiritual, as the Affections of the Heart; so though we say the
Corruption of Man arises from hence, That Corporeal Ideas make too lively and
strong Impressions upon the Soul, yet this does not contradict our Principle,
that the Corruption of Reason proceeds from that of the Heart.

CHAP. III. Where we Enquire after the Manner, how the Heart deceives the Mind.
THis Imposture of the Heart, which deceives the Mind, proceeds from voluntary
Inapplications, affected Distractions, beloved Ignorances, from Errors,
occasioned by the ardent Desire we have to Cheat our selves, and from this
Inclination, which removes and alienates our Mind from all that is Afflictive,
and firmly binds it to all that is pleasing and delightful.

The first Thing then, which the Heart does, is to fill us with unprofitable
Objects, that it may distract and divert us from those, the Consideration
whereof would be more important and useful to us, though the sight of 'em seem
afflictive and unpleasant. We find, among Others, two Ideas in our Soul, which
we fear and dread above all the rest; which are the Ideas of our Misery and our
Duty* The Idea of our Misery comprehends that of the Frailty of the World, of
our own Mortality, our Sins, the Justice of GOD, our Vices, Infirmities, and of
the Shame, which naturally follows 'em. The Idea of Duty includes a Thousand
Obligations, which are painful to such a voluptuous Soul as ours, troublesome
and disagreeable to an Heart affected with nothing but Pleasure, mortifying to
Pride, and intolerable to Self-love. Hence the most trivial Occupations, the
most insipid Diversions, the most infructuous Knowledge, the most unacceptable
Employments, become the Object of our Application or Enquiry, as if they were
capable of rendering us Happy. Nothing seems delightful but what unsettles and
distracts us. Any thing that passes the Time away merrily and insensibly, and
plunges us in the Ignorance of our selves, charms and allures us. The Gamester
spends his whole Life in a continual Transport from Joy to Sadness, from Hope
to Fear; if any one should hinder him from the turbulent Succession of his
Thoughts and various Agitations, he would certainly deprive him of the whole
Pleasure of his Life: But you need not wonder at it; this Agitation and Hurry
buisies and employs him, and that is enough. He thinks himself Happy, if he can
but be dispensed with from Reflecting upon his Misery: His Hope flatters him,
even when he Loses; and his Soul is always so flexible to any pleasing
Prospect, that when he Wins, he believes he can never Lose; and when he Loses,
he fills himself with Hopes of Winning. The Case is the same with the diverse
Professions of Men: Good and Evil follow by turns in that Path, and are
connected to it, as we know too well by Experience; but our Soul is constant in
applying its Regard to nothing else, but what tickles and flatters it; and if
it chance to meet with an Evil, instead of the Good it expected, it forms to it
self an imaginary Felicity, made up purely of its own Chimera's and Illusions.
Give an Ambitious Man what he demands; place him in the Rank he aspired at, yet
he will hardly reap any other Advantage, than to be able to conceive farther
Hopes, and to put upon himself new Cheats and Impostures. We love and delight
in War, not as it is an hazardous Profession, that often exposes us to Danger;
or as it is incommodious, by putting us to suffer great Hardship, but because it
buisies our Mind and Heart, by the extreme Variety of the Objects it presents
to 'em; and in some measure answers this eternal Agitation of our Soul, which
flies and shuns the Sight or it self, and seeks after Subjects for new
Illusions, wherewith to feed and divert it.

You don't think how remarkable the Illusions, and Impositions of the Heart are
in the Affairs of civil Life. We first deceive and cheat our selves, and
afterward, if possible, other Men. Don't trust my Sincerity, my Honesty, nor
my long experienced Fidelity: Indeed I have Maxims of Equity and Rectitude in
my Mind, which I use to regard; but the Corruption of my Heart makes a
Play-Game of these general Rules. To what purpose do I respect the Law of
Justice, if I do it no farther than it stands with my Pleasure and Convenience;
and if it be in the Power of my Heart, to persuade me of the Justice, or
Injustice of a Thing? Don't put any Confidence in it; the Virtue and Justice,
by which I have attracted a great Name, and Reputation through the whole Course
of my Actions, are not really in me, they only make an outward Appearance, to
the end that Men may trust and confide in me; whilst Injustice lies in the
Bottom of my Heart, to put Reason upon Action; and absconds and hides it self,
that it may catch and surprise you with more Facility and Ease. But the
greatest Mischief of it is, that one Illusion breeds a great many others: For
as an Heart, interested to pre-occupy and prejudice the Mind, to its own
Advantage and Concern, in opposition to the Truth, makes use of a multitude of
probable, but false Reasons, in order to support its Pretenses. The Soul, which
affects its Reasons, considering 'em with Pleasure, often re-collecting 'em and
turning their best side outward, comes insensibly to take the Degree of its own
Application for the Degree of their Evidence, and then it receives 'em as
infallible Maxims, makes 'em a Source of Prejudices, which being false, yet
constantly supposed to be true, become to it a perpetual Fountain of Error and
Illusion. Moreover, when in any Concern we are prejudiced against a Man for our
own Interest and Profit; the Hatred we bear to his Pretension, makes us condemn
all his Reasons, and any that are Kin to those which he employed in defending
his Cause; as we see the Aversion we have to an Enemy will make us hate even an
indifferent Person, if he do but any way resemble him; and I leave any Man to
guess, what Influence these Prejudices afterward have upon our Actions and
Conduct.

But to return to our Distractions, and voluntary Inapplications: I think
nothing is more extraordinary, than the Carriage and Proceeding of Democritus,
who after having judged the Affairs, and Common Pleas of the Abderites, for
many Years, with such Uprightness and Ability, as put the whole World in
Admiration, considering the Meanness of this Occupation, and willing to enjoy
and live to himself, abandoned Humane Society, and retired into a Desert, that
he might diligently follow the Study of Wisdom, and the Knowledge of Himself;
where Hippocrates thinking to go and Cure him of the F^lly, with which People
fancied him Cr^s'd and Sick, finds him buisy'd and wholly taken up in
ridiculing the Extravagancies of Mankind. He that dares support the View of
himself, exceeds the Character of an Hero. Indeed our Philosopher's Retirement
from the World made Wise Men esteem him, which he valued much more than the
injudicious Opinions or the Vulgars: Perhaps his main Design, even in this, was
to acquire a Reputation and Fame. It may be he thought the Approbation of the
Abderites, was not Considerable enough to satisfy his greedy Thirst of Vain
Glory; if so, his Solitude was not so great as Men imagined: He left the
Society of the Abderites merely for the sake of better Company; and he retired
into the Wilderness with a Design of being more visible, and conspicuous to the
Eyes of Mankind.

What can be less reasonable than this saying of Cyneas to Pyrrhus, which
History relates as a very wise Speech, Rest without going so far: Does he
imagine it is so easy a Thing for a Man to rest himself; Pyrrhus might more
easily Conquer the Romans, subdue Italy, Sicily, and Carthage, than overcome
the natural Repugnance of his Heart to Quiet and Repose, which this importunate
Fellow advised him to, thinking it might hinder him from going out of the
Territories of himself.

Most of the Philosophers, finding the Study of Man so painful and laborious,
betook themselv^s to dry and barren Contemplations of Nature; which charmed 'em
on one side, because they buisy'd and employed their Mind; and on the other,
because they signalized and distinguished 'em: For, by the way, it is an Error
to imagine, that our Soul loves Truth purely for its own sake. No Truths are
more evident and certain, than those which are obvious to the Knowledge of all
Men; yet none seem more indifferent. How comes this to pass? It Is because
Truth, as such, seems not Amiable, but only as it is capable of distinguishing,
and raising us to Fame and Reputation.

But if the Sages themselves are cully'd and imposed upon, by the Effort of
their Passions, it cannot be imagined that those, at the lower End of the
World, are exempted from this Voluntary Darkness of the Heart. Every Passion
has a particular Imposture: The Passions heretofore formed a Religion exactly
suited to their own Humor; namely, the Pagan. Indeed they could not prevail
quite so much in the Sunshine of Christianity: Yet they endeavor it the
utmost they can; and though they have not been completely Successful, they have
very near the matter shot the Mark they aimed at: So prodigiously do they
disguise the Religion, which our Savior Christ brought into the World, and
which declares open War against the whole Circle of the Passions. It Is certain
that every Vice has its Morality: There Is a Morality of Interest, Pride,
Pleasure, Revenge, etc. According as these Views imprint their Maxims in the
Understanding. No wonder at this, seeing that when Truth appears to enlighten
us, the Heart rejects, and sends it away with such a kind of Speech as Felix
did Paul: Go thy way now, and when I have a convenient season, I Will send for
thee: But the Heart takes a course to darken the Luster and Clearness of this
Truth; for that it may not hear its Voice, it fills it self with the Noise and
Clamor of the World; and to wave and divert the Consideration of what it is
most highly concerned to know, it employs it self wholly about a multitude of
Objects, that are utterly unprofitable, and not worth knowing.

Sometimes it is forced to make a Comparison of two Objects, One whereof is the
Object of a lawful and reasonable Desire, the Other of a Temptation and
Irregularity: It must needs side with one or the other. Reason is called to judge
and pass Sentence; but with how great Partiality does it execute this Office?
Where the Object of Duty has Ten Degrees of Evidence, the Soul will perceive
scarce Two; it discerns not the rest, because a clear Manifestation often
requires a particular Search, which it dreads, and never makes but with regret
and unwillingness. On the contrary, the Object of the Temptation appears in its
full Luster, this it turns every way, takes a distinct View of all its Faces
and Appearances, because such a Consideration as this, fixes its Application
with Delight and Pleasure; the Soul is Inventive in discovering such Reasons as
favor and countenance its Desire, because each of these Reasons excites in it
a sensible Agreement and Delight; but on the contrary, it is very slow and dull
in apprehending those which oppose its Inclination, though never so obvious and
plain; because it is troubled and mortified at finding that, which it does not
seek, and can never have a very good Opinion of that, which it does not
receive, but with Regret and Uneasiness.

Thus the Heart breaking off, and disappointing the Reflections of the Mind as
often as it pleases, and carrying away its Thoughts to the Interest of its
Passion, respecting merely its own Pleasure, and Advantage in its Comparison of
Things, voluntarily omitting what opposes its Desires, having but languid and
frozen Perceptions of Duty; conceiving on the contrary with all possible
Attention, Delight and Ardour, whatsoever favors its Inclination: no wonder,
if it make sport, and put tricks upon the Light of the Mind; and if we judge of
Things, not according to Truth, but the Biass of our own Propensities.

CHAP. IV. Where we Consider the mutual Illusions between the Heart and the
Mind, and how GOD alone destroys 'em by his Grace.
IF the Heart corrupt the Mind, the Mind, in like manner, filled with false
Prejudices, may be thought to corrupt the Heart, by communicating its Darkness,
and nourishing it with its own Errors.

It Is easy to conceive, that in this State, the Corruption of Man, cannot be
Cured by natural Remedies: For in this continual Circle of Illusions and
Deviations, which make the Mind deceive and impose upon the Heart, whence can
there be any Light and Rectitude? If you would enlighten the Reason of Man, the
Affections presently reject the Evidence you bring; if you go to correct the
Exorbitance of the Affections, you find you cannot do it, but by showing the
Soul in what Errors and Precipices it is perplexed and engaged; which is
impossible to be done, unless it be enlightened. Thus nothing but Reason can
correct and reform the Heart, but Commerce with the Heart cannot enlighten the
Reason; what Remedy can there be found for this Disorder? Rack your Invention,
set your Wit and Fancy to work; you will find no other Cause capable of producing
this Effect, but GOD Himself, acting by his Grace.

If the Case be so, it is reasonable to suppose that GOD, who so perfectly knows
the Origin of our Malady, begins the Cure by correct^ng that Faculty which is
productive of all the rest. We have already said, That the first Root of this
Disorder is grounded in this, That our Imagination acts in a more vigorous and
lively manner than our Reason; that is, Corporeal Ideas make a vivid and strong
Impression upon our Soul, whilst Spiritual Ideas seem weak and languid. It Is
easy to conceive, that in order to re-establish our Soul, in its due State of
Rectitude and Uprightness, it is requisite that God should so bring it about, by
his Grace, that the Spiritual Ideas of Duty, Virtue, Eternity, etc. may make a
stronger and more lively Impression than they used to do; and that on the
contrary, the Images of the World, of Pleasure, Delight, and in General of
sensible Goods, may seem but dull, and almost imperceptible.

God does the first, by fixing in the Mind Spiritual Ideas, afterward by
rendering 'em pleasant and agreeable; and Lastly, by extending and enlarging
'em Grace fixes in our Mind good Ideas, just as Melancholy fixes sad and
dismal Notions in the Soul* Let a melancholy Person use his utmost endeavor,
to chase from his Mind horrid and afflictive Ideas, they will still return, and
haunt him wherever he goes. So those salutary and good Ideas we speak of, being
fixed by Grace, in vain will our Corruption strive to remove 'em, they still
return, present themselves again, repress and bridle Concupiscence, stop its
Exorbitances; nay, and sometimes prevent, even the Reflections of our Mind: For
we see, an Honest Man exerts good Actions, as it were by Instinct, and without
Premeditation. Because, though not perceiving it, he follows the Ideas which
Grace has fixed in his Understanding. God enlarges Spiritual Ideas, by fixing
'em in our Mind, through His Grace; that is, He makes us consider Spiritual
Objects in their just Proportion and natural Form Whence it is to be observed,
that the Ideas of Piety, having a kind of Opposition to the Ideas of the World,
the one cannot be enlarged, without the others be contracted and limited. The
Idea of Time, hides that of Eternity, the Idea of Eternity, extremely
abbreviates and contracts that of Time.

As it is the Pleasure, which Self-love causes us to take in considering the
Ideas of the World, that enlarges and fixes 'em in our Imagination; the Soul,
to the utmost of its Power, magnifying and eternizing whatsoever is agreeable
and delightful to it: So may we suppose, that Grace causes the good Impression,
which Spiritual Ideas make upon us; that is, it fixes and enlarges 'em, by
accompanying 'em with a certain Sense of Consolation and unspeakable Joy, which
the Scripture sometimes calls the Joy of the Holy Ghost, and sometimes, the
Peace of God which ^a^seth all Understanding.

As the Mind, applied by our Passions to Corporeal Ideas, may be termed the
Intellect of the Mortal Man; so the Mind, applied by Grace to Spiritual Ideas,
may justly be called the Intellect of the Immortal Man. There is an extreme
Difference betwixt these Two, the One is almost continually bewildered in
Errors, the Other is almost exempt from Error: For as our Errors, at least
those which are of dangerous Consequence, have their Source in the Violence of
the Passions, and these Passions cannot but be very moderate in One, who is
conducted by the Views of Eternity, and not of temporal Things; we may judge,
that he is not subject to those Illusions, which commonly cheat and deceive us.

The Immortal Man, finding himself Glorious in his own Nature, most Happy in
the State proposed to him by Religion; and elevated far above Time and the
World, by Nature and Revelation, has no reason to shun the Prospect of himself,
nor fear being afflicted by considering his End.

No Diversion relishes with him, at least not such as pleases the Worldling's
Palate; for he seeks, not only the Refreshment of his Body, and Recreation of
his Mind, (in this Design there would be nothing unreasonable) but he searches
for all that may buisy his Thoughts, and bar him from taking a View of himself;
which appears from this, That even after Repose and Ease, he still reaches
after farther Divertisements, and is so charmed and caressed with the Enjoyment
of 'em, that he cannot be given up, and retired to himself, for a Moment,
without great Anxiety and Disquietude, which proceeds from hence, that the
Weight of what is Past, which is no more in his Account, but an Object of
Trouble and Regret; and the Future, which he looks upon as an Object of Doubt
and Uncertainty, combine together to crush his Heart with their Gravity and
Burden, and plunge it into the sad Reflections of an inevitable Misery: But
the Immortal Man conceives all those things as Vexatious and Afflictive, which
are capable of diverting and carrying him away from the Confines of himself;
and is fretted and troubled at those importunate Veils, which intercept the
sight of his own Grandeur; and at those Objects, which suspend the Joy he
perceives in the perfect Knowledge of himself.

Affection cannot impose upon the Immortal Man, his Passions are moderate,
seeing that he cannot long enjoy and partake of those things, which bear so
little Proportion to the Extent of his Duration; blameless and untainted, he
casts his Eyes on Earthly things, because he consider's 'em all with
Indifferency.

He is not pre-possest with Pride: A Man is not very careful to raise himself a
great Name in a Place, where he is to sojourn but for a very short time: Nor
with Interest; his Reason does not show it self partial for his Lucre and
Profit, seeing he is in View of an other Interest, to free him from all other
Prejudices.

And certainly right Reason and Prudence may be said to be proper to him alone;
though a Man be Cunning and Ingenious to heap up Riches, to Conquer or Govern
Provinces, yet if his Knowledge reach no farther, he is still no better than a
Fool: Indeed he has framed the Edifice with a great deal of Reason and
Dexterity, but he laid its Foundation upon the Sand.

Worldly Men are Wise enough in the Choice of those Means, which they employ to
bring about the Ends of their Designs; but are irrational and senseless in
choosing the End which they propose. The Immortal Man is as Wise in the Choice
of the End, as of the Means; and consequently Exactness of Mind, Uprightness,
Reason, Judgment and Prudence, are proper to none but him.

The Gospel affords us an illustrious Example, of this Elevation, in the Person
of Jesus Christ; in whom we discover, not only an Immortal Man, but the Prince
of Immortality: It Is equally surprising and admirable to find in him a God,
crawling on the Earth, and conversing with Men; and a Man, enthroned in the
Kingdom of Heaven, and raised above the Region of all Temporal things. Consider
but the simple and plain Manner, in which his Disciples relate his Doctrines,
Actions, and the diverse Circumstances of his Life, and this will persuade you,
that they had not a Design to make a flattering Description of their Divine
Master: For certainly these poor Men, were not sufficiently skilled in the
sublimity of Manners, for successfully broaching a fictitious Portraicture of
Him. Yet must it withal be granted, that the History of our Savior, though
compiled without the Affectation of Study, and Elegance of Art, carries with it
such a Loftiness and Elevation of Style, as was never known before his
Appearance: For he is the first that Acts, and Speaks like an Immortal Man, and
teaches us to steer, and conduct our Lives, by the Views of Eternity. He seeks
not any thing that may distract, and take him off from the Duties of his
Charge, or divert him from meditating and thinking of himself; he spends the
Day in instructing the Multitude, and the Night in Praying to GOD. That which
Men use to covet and desire, is an Object of his Contempt and Disdain; he is not
Ambitious of any Man's Esteem; nor does he eagerly follow great Men's Heels,
with hopes of Benefaction and Preferment: He uses not a sordid Indulgence, nor
a false Complaisance to any Rank, or Condition whatsoever. He has been said to
have had the Knowledge of Nature, for no other End but only, that he might
understand how to take Emblems from it; which he makes use of and employs to
lead Men to God. Those are not his Friends which have a temporal Relation to
him, but those that are related to him in God; that is, who are truly his
Disciples, and do the Will of his Heavenly Father: He measures the Wisdom and
Folly of Men, not by their Craftiness and Ingenuity in the Things of this Life,
but by a Dexterity and Wisdom, which tends to the infinite and incorruptible
Good. His Desires, Fears, Anger, Thoughts, Discourses, Works, Occupations and
Studies, stop no longer at the Confines of Time then it is necessary, in order
to separate and loosen Men from it, but are all directed to Eternity.

And doubtless though the intimate Commerce he has, with his Eternal Father,
should not fill his Mind with supernatural Lights; yet his own Sanctity, which
disengages him from holding Commerce with Creatures, would be sufficient to
secure him from those Illusions and Cheats, whereby Men are commonly inveigled
and deceived.

Having now considered the first of our Faculties, and seen that the original
Source of our Corruption is not in the Mind, we must in the next place consider
the Heart, which is the Soul as it loves, or the Seat of the Affections.

CHAP. V. Where we continue to search for the Sources of our Corruption, by
considering the Motions and Inclinations of the Heart.
AS there are first Principles, or Notions in our Mind, which are of an
infallible Truth and Certainty, and the Foundation of natural Light, which is
so far from deceiving, that it puts us in a Way to return from our Errors; so
in our Heart, there are certain primary and radical Affections, which are
necessarily Lawful: Sentiments, without which the Nature of Man cannot subsist
and which are not only exempt from all Corruption in themselves, but also
serve, when rightly directed, to reclaim us from our Vices. Such is the natural
Love of Esteem, and of Our-selves, the Care of our Preservation, the Desire of
Happiness.

These Passions are good in themselves, ^eeing they naturally relate to the
Good of Man: There are Two sorts of 'em, the One are termed, by the Schoolmen,
Prosequutivae because they incline us to Good; the Other Adversativae, because
they remove and avert us from Evil. But yet as they tend to our Advantage, by
the Design and Intention of Nature, through an Effect of our Corruption, they are
perverted to be instruments of our Damage and Prejudice; which happens, when
false Goods excite in our Heart real Affections: When we are but coldly bent,
toward that which deserves the whole Application and Study of our Souls; and
on the contrary, we desire with all the Ardour imaginable, such Goods as
deserve but a moderate and indifferent Affection: For then we reverse the Order
of Nature, change the End into the Means, and the Means into the End; are rash
and precipitate in our Actions, err in our Conduct, and a mere shadow of Good
makes us lose the original Source of it; and running after Appearances we miss
the Truth. Hence proceed all our Vices and Disorders, in enquiring after which
we must spend some time, since it is they that make the Corruption of the Heart.

Now as we search for the Source of our Irregularities, we must not insist upon
any particular One, unless it has an Influence upon all the others. It Is
evident, that the Root of our Natural Evil, consists not in a peculiar
Disposition of the Temperament, seeing that those who are of quite contrary
Temperaments, are corrupted for all that: Nor is Interest the Principle of our
Evil, since that has commonly something in it incompatible with Pride; neither
is Pride, seeing that is in some sort repugnant to Interest.

Yet it is certain, that there is something, wherein the Vices are opposite, and
something, wherein they agree: They are, in some respect opposite, seeing that
one serves as a kind of Remedy for the other; and they agree in some respect,
since the Soul, after it has fallen into one, has a further Inclination after
another, which seemed of a quite contrary Nature.

This Truth will appear more plainly, if we, as it were, Anatomize and Dissect
the Heart, by entering upon the Consideration of all its particular Passions.
Robbery springs from Injustice, Injustice from Interest, Interest from an
Excess of Self-love: Obstinacy is nothing but a strict Adherence, which
Self-love make us have to our own Fancies and Opinions. Pride is a mere
Drunkenness, and Intoxication of Self-love, which represents us to our own
Imagination greater and perfecter than really we are: Revenge is but a desire
to defend our selves against those that hate us, or to reap a kind of
Self-satisfaction by punishing those who have offended us. In a word, Take a
through Survey, and Consideration of all the Vices, and Passions of Man, and
you will find they terminate in Self-love: It Is this, that gives 'em Birth;
forasmuch as all the Motives of Vice have this Foundation, That we seek for
every thing which flatters and relates to this Me, which is the first Object of
our Knowledge and Affections: Upon this depends, either their Life or Death;
for when two Passions violently Combat, Fear, for instance, and Revenge, the
Soul retires into its own Tent; and makes use of no other Counsel, but that of
Self-love, to know which side it ought to take; and according as Self-love
judges, or not judges, Revenge to be necessary, it pronounces in Favor either
of Resentment, or Moderation: So that as Self-love first produced these two
Passions, so likewise it foments and causes the One to live, and continue to
the Prejudice of the Other. Now what else can we say of that Passion, to which
all our irregular Inclinations tend, in which all the Vices terminate, by whose
means they both Live and Die, which stops and suspends their Career, but that
this general Disorder, is undoubtedly the original Fountain of all the others;
and what we called the primitive Root of our Evil and Corruption?

And, which may serve to confirm us in this Opinion, at the same time we
perceive all the Vices flattering and caressing Self-love, we find all the
Virtues unanimously opposing it. Humility debases and pulls it down; Temperance
mortifies it; Liberality, as it were, robs it; Moderation discontents it;
Fortitude exposes it; Magnanimity, Piety and Zeal sacrifice it.

And indeed Self-love is so essential an Ingredient, of the Definitions of the
Vices and Virtues, that without it we cannot have a ^ight Conception, either of
the one or the other. In general, Vice is a Preference of One-self, before
other Men; and Virtue seems to be a Preference of others, before One-self; I
say, it seems to be so, Because in Effect it is certain, that Virtue is only a
more noble, and rational Mode of Loving One-self.

Now here there is a seeming Contradiction in our System, For on One hand
Self-love appears to be the Principle of our Irregularities and Disorders; on
the Other, it is certain, that the Love of Our-selves, is a Qualification for
the Discharge of our Duties. Corruption draws its whole Force from Self-love;
and GOD on the other side derives from it all the Motives, He makes use of, to
incline us to the Study of our Sanctification: For to what purpose, would he
have made Promises and Threatenings, were it not with a Design to interest
Self-love.

This Difficulty presently vanishes, after we suppose the same thing, touching
Self-love, which we have already said of the Affections of the Heart in
general: Namely, That they have something of innocent and lawful which belongs
to Nature, and something of vicious and irregular, which is attributed to their
Corruption. It Is an Advantage of the French Tongue, that it can distinguish
betwixt L'amour propre, and L'amour de nons memes; the former signifies
Self-love as it is vicious and corrupted, the latter denotes this Love as it is
lawful and natural.

Now our present Enquiry being after the Sources of Man's Corruption, our
Design here engages us to examine, wherein the Disorder of Self-love consists.
This Query is no less considerable for its being singular: And I dare say, that
few Questions in Morality and Religion, are more important, as I hope will
appear by the following Discussion.

CHAP. VI. Where we Examine the Faults of Self-love.
SElf-love can sin but only Two ways, either in Excess or Direction; its
Irregularity must consist either in this, That we love our selves too much, or
that we take not a right Method in showing this Love to our selves, or in both
these Faults together.

Self-love does not sin in Excess, as appears from this, That we are permitted
to love our selves, as much as we please, so it be with good and real Love:
Indeed to love One-self, is to desire One's Good, to fear One's Hurt, and to
search for One's Happiness. Now I confess, that many times our Desire and Fear
are too great, or we are too eagerly addicted to our Pleasure, or that, which
we look upon as our Happiness: But you may observe, that the Excess proceeds
from the Fault that refers to the Object of your Passions, and not from the too
great Measure of the Love of our selves; which appears from hence, That you
both can, and ought to have an unlimited Desire of the Supreme Good, and a
boundless Fear of Extreme Misery: And 'twould be a Vice for us to desire an
infinite Good, but with a finite and limited Appetite.

Truly, were Man obliged to love himself, but to a certain Measure, the Vacuity
of his Heart ought not to be infinite; and were not the Vacuity of the Heart
infinite, it would follow, that he was not made for the Possession and
Enjoyment of God; but only for the Fruition of finite and limited Objects: Yet
we are taught the contrary, both by Experience and Religion. Nothing is more
lawful and reasonable, than this insatiable Desire; which even, after the
Possession of worldly Advantages, makes us still reach after the Supreme Good,
which no Man ever found in the Objects of this Life. Brutus, who made a
particular Profession of Wisdom, believed he should not be mistaken, if he
searched for it in Virtue; but as he loved Virtue for its own sake, whereas
indeed it has nothing amiable and laudable but in Relation to GOD; guilty of a
Genteel and Spiritual Idolatry, was no less mistaken then those who sought for
Happiness in Temporal things; and at his Death was obliged to acknowledge his
Error, when he Cried out: O Virtue! I own that thou art nothing but a
miserable Phantom. etc.

Wherefore this insatiable Desire, of Man's Heart, is not Evil in it self:
'Twas necessary Men should be endu'd with this Inclination, to qualify and
dispose 'em for seeking after GOD.

Now what in a Figurative and Metaphorical Idea we term an Heart, that has an
infinite Capacity, a Vacuity which cannot be filled by the Creatures, signifies
in the proper and literal Notion a Soul, that naturally desires an Infinite
Good, that desires it without Limits, and cannot be satisfied till it has
obtained it. If then it be necessary, that the Vacuity of our Heart, should not
be filled with created Goods, it is necessary that our Desires should also be
infinite; which is as much as to say, that we ought to love our selves without
Measure; For to love One-self, is to love One's Happiness.

And as we may be truly said, not properly to love the Creature, when we love
it infinitely, because then we place the Creature upon the Throne of the
Creator, which is an Idolatry of the Mind, and most dangerous of all; so also
may we be said, not to love God as our Supreme Good, when we love him but
finitely, and conceive but moderate Desires after him; for then we debase God
to the Condition of the Creatures, through an Impiety of the Heart, no less
Criminal than Idolatry.

Whether we look upon God as our Sovereign Good, or represent him as a Being
infinitely Perfect, it is certain that our Application and Adherence to him ought
to be unlimited; and to this End the Creator ^lac'd a kind of Infinity in
Man's Knowledge and Affections, to capacitate him, in some measure, for the
Enjoyment of this Infinite Good

I know very well, that our Nature being finite, is not capable, exactly
speaking, of forming Desires intensively infinite: But though these Desires be
not infinite in this Sense, yet they are so in another; for it is certain, that
our Soul desires according to the whole Extent of its Powers; that if the
Number of Spirits, necessary to the Organ, could be multiplied in Infinitum,
the Vehemence of its Desires would increase proportionably; and that though the
Act it self have not an Infinity, yet the Disposition of the Heart has, which
is naturally insatiable.

I own, if we loved our selves by Reason, we might conceive, that Self-love
would be in a limited Measure in the Heart: for we don't find in our Mind an
Infinity of Reasons for loving our selves: But the Author of Nature, whose
Wisdom judged it not requisite, that Men should be Philosophers, in order to
take care of their Preservation, thought fit that we should love our selves by
Sense; which is so true, that it is not even conceivable how we can feel Delight
and Joy, without loving this Self, which is the subject of it; so that as there
is an unlimited Variety, and an Infinity of Degrees, in the Joy we are capable
of tasting, so in like manner, there is not any measure or bounds in the Desire
of that Happiness, in the which this Joy essential^^ ^^ters; nor consequently,
in the Love of our selves, which is the Principle of this Desire.

I also grant, That had Man been made to be a Rival of the Deity, he would not
be obliged to love himself without Measure; because then Self-love would stand
in Competition, and interfere with the Love of God* But Man naturally loves
himself, with so great Vehemence, merely that he may be capable of loving God.
The unmeasurable Measure of Self-love, and these kind of infinite Desires, are
the only Links that tie, and unite him to God; since, as I have already said,
finite and moderate Desires are capable of binding Man's Heart to none but the
Creatures, and we don't properly love God, but only a Chimaera, which we form
to our selves instead of God, when our Love of him exceeds not a Mediocrity.

And indeed, it is a great Error to oppose Self-love to Divine, when it is well
regulated: For pray, what else is it, duly to love our selves, but to love God;
and to love God, but duly to love our selves? The Love of God, is the right
sense of the Love of our selves, and that gives it Life and Perfection. When
Self love is diverted, and carried to other Objects, it no longer deserves the
Name of Love, it is of more dangerous Consequence than the most cruel and savage
Hatred; but when it is converted toward God, it falls in, and mingles with
Divine Love.

And certainly, Nothing is so easy as to demonstrate, beyond all Dispute, what
our Enquiries have taught us in this Matter. I demand, for instance, Whether
the Blessed Above, who undoubtedly love themselves neither too much nor too
little, seeing that they are in a State of Perfection, can love God with an
infinite Affection; and yet not perceive the Joy, arising from the Possession
of him? I would know in the next place, Whether we can feel Joy and Delight
without loving One-self, proportionably to this Perception?

Why then should we trouble our selves with such vain and contradictory
Queries, As whether the Saints love God, better than themselves? I had as live
they would ask me, Whether they love Themselves, better than Themselves: For these
two Expressions have in reallity the same signification; and not to love God
is, in some measure, to hate One-self.

To let you see, that this is but mere Punning and Quibling in words, we must
divide the Love of God into two Sorts, a Love of Interest, and a Love of pure
Friendship, as Divines call it. I understand this latter to have no Intercourse
at all with Self-love, according to the common Notion of it; but I would know,
which of these two Kinds of Love you mean, when you ask me, Whether the Love,
we ought to have of God, be not greater than that of our selves: If you
understand, by the Love of God, Love of pure Friendship, whose only Object is
Known-Perfection, I answer, that this Love cannot be compared with the Love of
our selves, which is of quite another Nature; since, as I have already said, we
love not our selves by Reason, but Sense; and Corporeal, or Spiritual Pleasure,
naturally engages us to love our selves, even before we are capable of making
Reflection. But if by the Love, we ought to have for God, you mean Love of
Interest, which is tied to him as our Supreme Good, you don't apprehend, that
you oppose the same thing to it self; seeing that to love One-self, and the
Sovereign Good, is all one; and does not make two distinct species of Love, but
are one and the same, considered under different Respects, namely, in reference
to its Principles and its Objects.

It therefore appears, That the Irregularity consists not in this, that we love
our selves too much, seeing we are allowed to love our selves, as much as we
please, with Relation to the Supreme Good: But herein lies the Evil, that we
take a wrong Method, in exerting this Love; that is, we love our selves with
relation to false Objects.

Self love, simply taken, is innocent and harmless: It becomes corrupted, when
it is diverted toward the Creatures; and Holy, when converted and steered
toward God. Pursuant to the foregoing Doctrine, we may distinguish Three
Hearts in Man; the Heart of the Man, the Heart of the Sinner, and the Heart of
the Faithful: The Heart of the Man is the Soul, as it naturally loves it self;
the Heart of the Sinner is the Soul, as it loves the World; and the Heart of
the Faithful is the Soul, as it loves God. The Natural Heart is essentially
included in the other Two, and the natural Love of our selves, which is the
Principle of all our Affections, the Mobile that actuates either Grace or
Corruption, and receives either the Love of God, or the World. The Heart of Man
loves. The Heart of the Worldling loves Vanity. The Heart of the Faithful loves
the infinite, and eternal Good. The first is the Heart of Man, the second the
Heart of the mortal Man; the third is the Heart of the immortal Man.

CHAP. VII. Where we show, that Self-love kindles all our Affections, and is
the general Principle of our Motions.
I Said before, that Self-love is the Principle of all our natural Affections:
For all our Desires, Fears and Hopes, are the devoted Servants, and Offspring
of Self-love.

I confess, the Affection we have for other Men, sometimes causes us to Desire,
Fear and Hope: But what is the Principle of this Affection, but the Love of our
selves? Do but thoroughly consider, and weigh all the Sources of our Friendship,
and you will find they are reduced to Interest, Gratitude, Relation, Sympathy,
and a delicate Agreement of that Virtue with Self-love, which makes us think,
that we love it for its own sake; whereas indeed, we love it merely for the
sake of our selves, and it wholly terminates in Self-love.

It Is from hence, that Relation borrows all its Rapture, and Strength, for
kindling our Affections. We love our Children, because they are our Children.
Were they another Man's Children, they would be indifferent to us: Therefore we
don't properly love them, but the Relation which links us to 'em. It Is true,
Children don't love their Parents, with the same Degree of Affection, as
Parents do their Children; though these two Affections seem to be founded upon
the same reason of Relation, but this Difference proceeds from another Cause,
Children see themselves Die in the Person of their Parents; and Parents, on the
contrary, see themselves Revive in the Person of their Children: Now nature
inspires us with the Love of Life, and Hatred of Death. Also Parents behold in
their Children, as it were, other selves; but other selves subject, and
dependant upon 'em: They think it an Happiness to have brought 'em into the
World; they consider 'em with Delight, because they consider 'em as their own
Workmanship: They are exceedingly pleased, at having sacred, and inviolable
Rights over 'em. This is their Magistracy, Royalty, and Empire: But the same
Pride, which causes the Parents to love Superiority, makes the Children hate
Dependence. Nothing lays so heavy a weight upon us, as a Benefit when it is too
great; because it depresses us to too great Submission: We look upon it as a
delicate, but very strong Chain, which links our Heart, and constrains our
Liberty. This is the Mystery of that common Maxim; Blood never rises: But as
there is a Relation of Blood, Profession, Religion, Country, etc. the
Affections are infinitely diversified, according to these various Respects: But
woe be to Relation if it be combated by Interest: For Interest will infallibly
get the better: That tends to us directly, Relation only by Reflection. Hence
Interest is always more strong and prevalent, than Relation; but in this, as in
every thing else, particular Circumstances very much alter the general
Proposition.

What we commonly experience, That no Hatred is more violent, than that which
happens between those who were formerly very great Friends; is to be imputed to
almost the same reason. It Is because these Persons found either Profit or
Pleasure in loving one another. This interested their Self-love: but when they
come to change their Sentiment, the Motives of Love join themselves with the
Motives of Hatred; they revolt and rise up in Arms, both by reason of the Idea
of the Wrong that is done 'em, and of the Pleasures of that Friendship which
they renounce; and they suffer, not only by the Hatred, which is kindled, but
also by the Affection, which is extinguished; which excellently confirms our
System, and shows, that there is no Affection kindled in our Heart independently
from Self-love.

We shall be further convinced of the Truth of this Opinion, by considering,
not only, that Relation is a Source of Friendship; but also, that our
Affections vary and differ, according to the Degree of Relation, that we have
to those Persons, who are the Object of 'em. The Quality of Man, which we all
bear, makes this general Benevolence, which we term Humanity, Homo sum, humani
nihila me alienum puto. It Is certain, that if there were but only Two Men in
the World, they would have a tender Affection for each other; but this general
Relation being mingled and confounded, with the infinite number of those
different Relations, we have one among another, it happens, that this natural
Affection, which it first produced, is lost in the rabble and throng of the
Passions; which so great a Variety of other Objects produce in our Heart. We
don't see in our Neighbor the Quality of Man, whereby he resembles us, whilst
we see in him a Rival, an Emulator, and Enemy of our Welfare and Prosperity (as
we are of his;) A proud Man, who esteems nothing but himself; who by the Luster
of his Qualities and Accomplishments, attracts the Esteem and Attention of the
World, and puts us in Obscurity and Dis-repute; and who by his Passions is
continually buisy'd in circumventing us, and encroaching upon our Properties:
But no sooner has Death unclothed his Person of these odious Relations, but we
find in him that general Relation which made us love him; never thinking him a
Man, till he ceased to be a Mortal, and then at last, willing to enroll him in
the Number of our Friends, when Death has retrenched him from the Society of
the Living.

The Relation of Country, usually inspires Men, with a kind of Benevolence,
whereof they are insensible whilst they dwell in their own Nation; because this
Relation is weakened, and too much divided, by the Number of those that have a
Title to it; but becomes very sensible, when two or three Natives of the same
Country, happen to meet in a strange Climate: Then Self-love, standing in need
of some Supports and Consolations, and finding 'em in the Person of those, whom
a parallel Interest, and like Relation ought to inspire with the same
Disposition, never fails to make a perpetual Attention to this Relation; unless
it be prevented by a more powerful Motive of its own Interest.

Relation of Profession, commonly produces more Aversion, than Friendship; by
the jealousy it causes Men to have one of another: But that of Conditions, is
generally accompanied with Benevolence and Love. It Is no wonder, that Grandees
have no great Affection for ordinary People; the reason is, because looking
with the Eyes of Self-love, they see them at a great distance off; they look
not upon 'em as Neighbors; they are very far from perceiving this Proximity
and Nearness, whose Mind and Heart are wholly concerned about the Distance,
that separates and removes 'em from other Men; and who make of this Object the
Delights of their Vanity.

Yet must it be granted, That Relation of Blood, is usually more prevailing
than any other: though it be a common Saying, That a Good Friend is better than
many Parents; and this be true in it self, yet it is certain, that Men naturally
prefer their Parents before their Friends, and especially upon any great and
important Occasion: The Reason of it is, because they consider their Parents as
necessary Friends, that can by no means be dis-united from 'em; and their
Friends as voluntary Parents, whose Affection reaches no farther than their
Pleasure. Now though free and unconfined Friendship be of greater Obligation than
necessary, yet it is not regarded as such by the Eyes of Self-love: It may
indeed inspire us with a greater degree of Gratitude, but cannot so much touch
our Interest.

The Barbarous Constancy that appeared in Brutus, when he caused his Children
to be Killed before his Eyes, is not so Dis-interested as it seems to be: The
best of Latin Poets discloses the Motive of it in these Words; Vincet amor
Patriae, laudumque immensa Cupido.

But he has not dis-entangled, and laid open all the Reasons of Interest, which
caused the apparent Inhumanity of this Roman. Brutus was like other Men: He
loved himself above all Things in the World; His Children were guilty of a
Crime, that tended indeed to Rome's Destruction and Ruin, but much more to
Brutus's. If Paternal Affection excuses Faults, Self-love aggravates 'em
whenever it is directly wounded. Rome undoubtedly owes the Honor of Brutus's
Exploits to the Love of himself; and his Country accepted the Sacrifice which
he Offered to the Idol of his own Affection; and rather Infirmity than true
Fortitude was the Motive of his Cruelty.

Interest is the Sovereign Empress of Souls, we seek it in the Object of all
our Applications; and as there be various Kinds of Interest, so may we
distinguish a Variety of Affections, which Interest causes in Society. An
Interest of Pleasure, causes Gallant Friendship; an Interest of Ambition,
causes Politic Friendship; an Interest of Pride, causes Noble Friendship; an
Interest of Avarice, causes Profitable Friendship. Generally speaking, our only
Motives of Loving Men are either Pleasure or Profit; but if these different
Interests happen to be all united together, to kindle our Affection for a
Person, then we are presently his very humble Servants, and stick to him as
close as a Burr.

The Vulgars, who declaim against interested Friendship, understand not what
they say: Their Mistake lies in this, because generally speaking, they know but
one sort of Interested Friendship, which is that of Avarice; whereas there are
as many Kinds of Interested Affections as there are Objects of Desire. Moreover
they find fault with Men for Loving by Interest, and that this is the main
Principle and B^ass of their Affection and Kindness; not apprehending, that to
love by Interest is to love One-self directly; whereas to love by any other
Principle is to love One-self only reflexively: They don't perceive, that Men
find fault with interested Friendship in the Heart of another, but never in
their own. Lastly, They think it criminal and blamable for a Man to be
Interest^d; not considering, that it is Disinterestedness, not Interest, that
ruins and destroys us. If Men would offer us Goods that are great enough to
satisfy the Desires of our Soul, we should do well to love them with a Love of
Interest; and no One ought to blame us for preferring the Motives of this
Interest, before those of Relation, and every Thing else.

Even Gratitude it self, so highly valued in the World, and so much commended
in Morality and Religion, cannot claim an Exemption from this Traffic of
Self-love: For in the main, what difference is there betwixt Interest and
Gratitude? No more but this, That the latter is conversant about a past Good,
the former about a Future. Gra^itu^e is nothing but a delicate Return o^
S^lf-love, when it finds it self obliged: It Is in some sort an Elevation and
Advancement of Interest. We don't love our Benefactor, bec^^se he is amiable;
Gratitude, at least of it ^el^, goes not so far as that: We love him because he
loved us.

But to explain more particularly this Comparison between Gratitude and
Interest, we'll (...), that the Affection produced by Gratitude is more Noble,
and that which is caused by Interest is more strong and prevalent: The former
respects the Time past, which is no more; whereas Interest has the Future for
its Object, of which it would make its best Advantage. Gratitude loves even
without Hope; but Interest hopes and expects. Gratitude loves the Benefit for
sake of the Intention; but Interest loves the Intention for sake of the
Benefit. Lastly, the Idea's of Gratitude, having Reference to the Time past,
are commonly ranged among antiquated, abstract Ideas, and such as have no very
prevailing Influence upon our Soul; whereas the Ideas of Interest respecting
the present Time, are sensible and lively, and such as more particularly import
and concern us.

It Is also certain, that for this very reason, there is some kind of Opposition
betwixt the one and the other; because all Men are as naturally Ungrateful, as
they are naturally Interested. Ingratitude is always proportioned to Interest,
because the more the Soul attends to the Idea's of the present, so much the
more it loses of that Application and Attention which it ought to have for what
is past: And in this respect the same is to be said of Dis-interestednes^ as of
Gratitude; Namely, that it consists very often in an outward Appearance, and
seldom rises in the Heart of Man, unless Interest it self give it Birth, or
causes him, as sometimes it falls out, to endeavor to make a Show of it.

CHAP. VIII. Where we continue to show, that Self-love is the Principle of all
our Affections.
THe lively and real Perception we have of a Benefit, at that very Instant when
it is bestowed upon us, never fails to produce a kind of Gratitude in our Heart,
which Mark wears out by little and little with the Memory of the Kindness
received; because it is repugnant, and goes against the Grain of the Heart, to
think often of those Things which put us in a State of Dependence and
Submission; the Case is not the same in respect of those Favors we have
bestowed upon others; as they give us a Title to the^ (...), Friendship and
Gratitude: And, in a (...), pull 'em down to ^ kind of Subjection (...); we
revolve and think of 'em with Pleasure and Delight. Whence it comes to pass,
that we are much more inclinable to love th^se that are beholding to us, than
those to whom we our selves are beholding. They who think to insinuate and
creep into great Men's Favor, by laying Obligations upon 'em, are often
frustrated in their Design: For certainly the only way to obtain their Love is
for them to oblige others, and not for others to oblige them. Their Pride,
which is increased by the Complaisance that Men use to 'em upon the account of
their Greatness, applauds it self at the Thoughts of having done you a
Benefaction: It considers with delight the Obligations you owe it, and by that
means inclines the Heart to have a Kindness for you: But it is dangerous to do
very great Services, when our whole Design is to insinuate into the Favor of
those whom we oblige. I tremble to think of this great Service, said a Courtier
to a Noble Man, who told him he should never forget the Obligations he owed
him; and he was in the right of it: Great Obligations do oftentimes prove great
Offenses, and at least it always happens so then, when either we cannot or will
not acknowledge 'em.

Shall I tell thee Araspe? He served me too well,
Increasing my Power, he has robbed me of all.
But though the Heart has its reasons to forget Benefits, yet has it others for
making as if it remembered 'em. Gratitude is a Virtue very highly esteemed; the
Appearances of it are fine, and attract Respect; and a Heart accustomed to
traffic in outward shows of Virtue, to make a Commerce of vain Glory, at the
cost of Sincerity, by seeking not what is in it self Estimable, but what is
valued by Men's Opinions, is diligent in affecting an Appearance of Gratitude,
when it can by this means lay hold of the Estimation of Men. Also Gratitude is
very subservient to the Designs of Interest; because it is a Means of drawing
new Benefits^ It Is a Pleasure, say they, to oblige such a Man, he has a sense
of the Kindness one do him. Gratitude mounts us as it were above the Benefit
received, when it is prompt, active and desirous to show it self; this is a fine
and delicate Policy of an enlightened Self-love, for avoiding the suspicion of
Ingratitude; because this Vice is a Mark of a sordid Baseness, and as it were a
forced Homage which we do to a Benefactor. Ingratitude though it think of him
with great Uneasiness, being obliged to confess whether we will or no, that we
are under his Dependence, and owe him more than we wish we did. Moreover it is
very natural to a Man to let People see, by his Carriage toward a Benefactor,
that he deserves the Benefit. Lastly, we are very glad to be delivered from the
Remorse which attends Ingratitude; which Remorse is more biteing, and more
natural than that which is consequent upon the Violation of Justice; for though
Injustice be repugnant to Reason, as well as Ingratitude, yet certainly it is
more opposite to the Dictates of Self-love to be Ungrateful, than Unjust; and
doubtless that Remorse is greatest which arises not only from Reason, but also
the Love of our selves, when its Laws have been transgressed.

Sympathy, which we observed to be the ^ourth Source of our Affections, is
Twofold* A Bodily Sympathy, and a Sympathy of the Soul. The Cause of the former
is to be searched for in the Temperament, that of the latter is to be sought
among the secret Spring, that actuate and move our Heart: And indeed it is
certain, that what we believe to be a Sympathy of Temperament, proceeds
sometimes from the hidden Principles of the Heart* For what reason, pray, do I
hate such or such a Man at first sight, though I have no Knowledge of him? It Is
because he resembles some Person, that has offended me, this Resemblance
affects and strikes upon my Soul and excites an Idea of Hatred, though I reflect
not upon it. How come I, on the contrary, to love an unknown Person as soon as
I see him, without informing my self either of his Merit, or unworthiness? It Is
because he has some Conformity or Likeness either to my self, my Children,
Friends, or in a word, to some One that I have an Affection for, and without my
making any distinct Reflection, awakens an Amor which laid dormant in my
Heart. You see then how much Self-love is concerned in these mysterious and
hidden Inclinations, which one of our Poets describes in this manner: Some
se^ret Knots, some Sympathies we find,
By whose agreeing Ties Souls are Conjoined.
But if after having spoken of Bodily Smypathies, we would make an Induction of
Spiritual Sympathies, we should find, that to love Men by Sympathy implies no
more, but to (...) their Conformity, and Likeness to (...): this is to enjoy
the Pleasure of loving (...) selves in their Person; this charms the Heart,
that it can safely commend it self, without offending against Modesty; this
Ad^^^^age Men obtain, when they seem to have (...) great Affection for certain
Persons, the Principle of which Love, is because they res^mble 'em. We don't
only love those that are naturally like us, but also those that have an
artificial Resemblance of us; and make it their Endeavor to be our Imitators.
Cato, as Proud and Austere as he was, took it not amiss that Favonius imitated
him: and perhaps the most stiff and uncomplaisant Man in the World is so weak
and flexible, as not to be quite out of Conceit with this indirect Method of
flattering and caressing his Self-love. Not but a Man may indeed hate those who
don't imitate him well: No person cares to be ridiculous; it is more Eligible to
be o^^^s. Thus we never like those Copies, those Ridiculousness reflects upon
the Original.

But if you would know why one Gallant does ^o^ love another, or why one Learned
Man (...) not always just to another; it is easy to give you an Answer: The
reason is, Because a Motive of Conformity does not countervail a Motive of
Interest, and the mutual Hatred of Rival^ is proportionable to the
Accomplishments which they discover in each other. The Heart, as I said before,
considers the Profit* and not the Light; and it is not Reason, but the Love of
our selves, that determines us in placing our Affections. Even our Love ^f a
Virtuous Man is not to be excepted from this Rule, who notwithstanding fails
not to be beloved even by those who are not like him, for Vice is forced to pay
Homage to ^his Virtue; they esteem and respect him*

-- Qui pectore magno
Spemq, metumque domas, vitio sublimior omni,
Exemptus Fatis, indignantemque refellis.
Fortunam, dubio quem non in turbine Rerum
Deprehendet suprema Dies, sed abire paratum
At plenum Vita, etc.
Tu, cujus placido posuere in pectore sedem
Blandus Honos hilarisque tamen cum pondere Virta^,
Cui nec pigra Quies, nec iniqua Potentia, nec spes
^mproba; sed medius per honesta and dulcia limes
Incorrupte fidem, nullosque expert Tumultus,
Et secret palam qui Digeris Ordine Vitam,
Idem Auri facilis Contemptor and optimus Idem
Condere Divitias, opibusque immittere Lucem
H^c longum florens Animi, morumque juventa
^acos aequare Senes, and vincere praesta.
Stat. Lib. 3. Sylvar. Let Men examine themselves by this Portraiture, and I Am
sure they cannot choose but love the Original; and upon what Principles can
this Affection be founded, which Men have naturally even for those Persons,
whom they are not careful to resemble.

I answer, that there be very few, who have bid a final Renunciation and Adieu
to Virtue, and who don't think, but that they shall be Virtuous one time or
other, though they are not so at present. I add, that as Vice is essentially
Odious, so Virtue is essentially Amiable to Self-love: The reason is, because
Vice is a Sacrifice of other Men, which we Offer upon our own Altars; and
Virtue is a Sacrifice of some Pleasure, or ^^attering Profit, which we O^fer to
the Good of other Men.

Moreover it is observable, that the Objects which act upon our Soul, have a
twofold Relation to Self-love, certain particular Correspondences which
vigorously move and b^ass it* such is the Correspondence of Interest or
reciprocal Friendship: For as this reason of ^oving regards us, and none but
us, it is I, that ^^d an Advantage in loving this Man, and (...) Me he loves,
and not another: No wonder then, if this particular Agreement obliges me to
have a particular Adherence and Application to him: But besides this, there are
cert^in general Relations, which an Object may have to our Heart; which happen,
either when any One does us a Kindness for the Good of the whole Society,
whereof we are Members, or when we find our selves obliged by the general
Inclination which a Man appears to have toward doing Good, because it is
possible we may some time or other be the Object of it; or when being
accustomed to love one certain Beneficence, which is profitable to us in
particular, we also come to love Beneficence in general, and all those Persons
to whom we apply its Idea: Only it is to be observed, that as particular
Agreements and Relations produce lively and vigorous Affections; general
Agreements, as not concerning or interesting our Soul, but at a Distance, and a
great way off, excite only a frozen and languishing Friendship, which partakes
much more of the purity of Esteem than the Ardour of Affection. All the
Virtues, at least in this general manner, favor and countenance Self-love.
Your finest Descriptions of Virtue are grounded upon the secret Agreements and
Correspondences they have to us* as may be seen from the Example of these fine
Expressions, in that Portraiture of Virtue, which we just now observed. Cui nec
pigra Quies nec iniqua Potentia,
Nec spes improba --
These Lineaments of Virtue are Amiable, because they flatter and caress
Self-love: There be others which are rather productive of our Esteem, than our
Love; because they are more Dis-interested: -- Qui pectore magno
Spemque metumque domas, vitio sublimior omni.
Virtue, when it has not these delicate Agreements with Self-love, is only
Es^imable: But we render it more Amiable when we represent it as interesting
our Heart.

How should we choose but be in Love with Clemency; it is very ready to pardon
our Offenses: Liberality, to do us good, Beggar's it self: Humility never
controuls, but submissively yields to our pretensions Temperance respects our
Honor, and not our Pleasure: Justice defends our Rights, and renders us our
Due: Fortitude protects; Prudence conducts; Moderation spares us; Charity does
good to us etc.

You Will say perhaps, what do these Virtues signify to me, they do me no Good?
It may be they don't Benefit you at present, but were you under other
Circumstances, they might do you a Kindness: The suppose a Disposition of doing
you Good, when an Opportunity is offered; have you not experienced, that though
you never expect the Succor or Protection of a Rich Man, yet you cannot avoid
having a secret Consideration and Respect for him; which proceeds, not from
your Mind, for that often despises the personal Qualities of such a Man, but
arises from the Love of our selves, which respects in him even the simple Power
of doing you a Kindness.

But if Self-love makes you have a Veneration and Esteem for a Person, whom you
are assured you shall never be the better for, merely by considering in him the
bare Power of doing you a good Turn, is it at all to be wondered at, that this
same Principle causes you to love One, who by his Virtue is disposed to be
Beneficent to you, though you very well know that he cannot actually exert this
Inclination?

Say we then, that the Heart has its Abstractions as well as the Mind; and as
this knows how to define Good in general, though ^t can draw more to the Life in
our Imagination any particular Good: So the Heart loves these general
Conformities and Agreements of Objects to it self, though particular ones do
infinitely more affect and touch it; and it cannot but think well of a Virtuous
Man, by reason of these delicate Relations, Virtue has to Self-love. This is
beyond all doubt, because your Love of the Virtues increases proportionably to
their Relation and Agreement to you. We have naturally a better Opinion of
Clemency, than Severity; of Liberality, than Economy and Thriftyness; though
they all equally partake of the Nature of Virtue; which can be for no other
reason, but because our Affection is not altogether Dis-interested, and we love
in it the secret Relations it has to our selves.

But the Vicious and Exorbitant are not to be exempted from the Number of
those, who are thus enamored with the Beauty of Virtue. On the contrary it is
certain, that ^p^n the very Account of their being Vicious, they are obliged to
have a greater Affection and Opinion of Virtue. Humility levels, and smooths
the Way for Pride; and therefore it is loved by an haughty Spirit: Liberality is
diffusive, and free in Giving; and therefore cannot displease an Interested
Person: Temperance does not rob you of your Pleasures, and therefore must needs
be agreeable to a Voluptuary, who would not willingly have either Rival or
Combatant. Could one think, that the Affection, which Worldlings* testify
themselves to have for Virtuous Persons, should spring from so ^thy a Source;
and shall I make bold to advance this Paradox, That our own Vices are often the
Causes of our loving other Men's Virtues: Nay more than that, I dare say, That
Self-love bears no small Part in the most pure Sentiments, which Religion and
Morality give us of God. Divine Love is commonly distinguished into three
Species, A Love of Interest, a Love of Gratitude, and a Love of pure
Friendship. Love of Interest, according to the Vulgar Acceptance, falls in
with Self-love* Love of Gratitude, as we before observed, is derived from the
same Source with that of Interest; Love of pure Friendship seems to rise
independently from all Interest and Self-love; yet if you look narrowly into
the Matter, you will find, that it has in the Bottom the very same Principle: For
first, it is observable, that Love of pure Friendship, rises not all at once in
the Heart of a Man, whom we instruct in points of Religion. The first ^tep to
Sanctification is a Detachment, and ^nhampering from the World; the Second is,
to love God with a Love of Interest, by giving up our selves wholly to Him,
because we consider him as the Sovereign Good; the Third is to have a due
Acknowledgment and Gratitude for his Benefits; the Last is ^o love his
intrinsic Perfections? It Is certain, that the first of these Sentiments
disposes and makes way for the Second, the Second for the Third, and the Third
for Fourth. We cannot thoroughly consider, what a great Unhappiness and Misery it
is, to abandon and forsake God, without desiring his Communion, by Motives
taken from our Interest. We cannot love God as the Principle of our Joy and
Felicity, without a grateful Acknowledgment of Benefits received at his Hands.
It Is natural, and even necessary, that he who loves God as the Supreme Good,
and as his great and eternal Benefactour, should attend with Complacency and
Delight to the Consideration of his adorable Perfections; that this Meditation
should excite in him Joy and Satisfaction, and so bring him to love God in the
View of his Excellencies and Virtues. Now all the previous Dispositions to this
last Affection, which is the Noblest of all, being taken from Self-love, it
follows, that neither the pure Friendship, which is conversant about God, does
^se independently from it.

Also Experience teaches us, that among the Virtues of God we particularly love
those, which have the nearest Agreement and Affinity to us. We love his
Clemency more than his Justice; his Goodness than his Jealousy; his
Beneficence, than his ^mensity, etc. Of which there can ^o other reason be
given, but that even this pure Friendship, which seems to have for ^ts proper
Object the Divine Perfections, derives its principal Force from the Relation of
these Perfections to Our Sel^es. Were there any entirely pure Friendship
toward God in our Heart, wholly ^empt from the Commerce of Self-love, it would
necessarily spring from Known Perfection and Excellency, and not from our own
Affections. As Self-love would not produce, so neither could it destroy this
Friendship. Yet the Devils know the Perfections of God without loving Him; and
Men before their Conversion know the Virtues of God, though it cannot be said that
they have for him, in that reprobate State, the Affection which we term pure
Friendship; and consequently there must be some other Motives of this Love,
besides Known Perfection; if Light be not sufficient to kindle it, it must rise
from the Flame of some Affection of our Heart; since Affections and Knowledge
are the whole Contents of our Soul. Perhaps you will say, that in order to
capacitate a Soul for conceiving this Love of pure Friendship, it is not
requisite that Self-love should directly produce it, but only that it may not
oppose and hinder it: But I say, if Pure Friendship arises from Known
Perfection, and nothing else be required to produce it, the Opposition of
Self-love is insignificant; and as the Love of our selves cannot derobe God of
these Perfections, nor hinder our Soul from knowing 'em, so neither can it
obstruct the Birth of this pure Affection.

Whilst we consider God as a Judge, as a terrible Executioner of Vengeance, and
as standing ready with a Thunderbolt in his Hand, we may indeed admire his
infinite and adorable Excellencies, but cannot conceive an Affection for Him.
And it is very certain, that could we but any ways Evade even this Admiration of
God, we should be very cautious in applauding him with it, for in this State we
regard him as our Enemy, and render to him no more but what we needs must. And
whence can this Necessity of admiring God proceed, unless it spontaneously
arise from Known Perfection? If then we conceive pure Friendship to have
precisely the same Source with Admiration, that is to say, if we conceive it to
have no other Origin but Known Perfection, we may safely conclude that pure
Friendship will arise in our Soul, beyond all Possibility of any ^mpediment
from Self-love, as well as Admiration.

Twill be to no purpose to make a wild and indefinite Answer, that it is the
Corruption of our Heart, which renders us incapable of loving God purely for
his own sake, and his intrinsic Perfections, whilst we suppose him not to love
us. This is to run into a Labyrinth of Generalities, for avoiding the distinct
Ideas of Things. For our Corruption does not hinder the Admiration of our Soul,
it being certain that the Devils, who far exceed us in Wickedness, admire God,
though they are at the same time conscious of his being the Object of their
Hatred and Aversion; so neither can this Corruption hinder pure Friendship, if
that, as well as Admiration, derives its Birth from Known Perfection.

Nothing will better confirm this Truth, than by seeing what is the Use of Faith
in Religion. So long as Men live in a State of Ignorance, which makes 'em
imagine that God looks upon 'em with Indifferency and Disregard, they in like
manner seem to have but indifferent Sentiments of the Deity, such were the
Pagan Philosophers. Whilst Men think they are the Object of God's Hatred, they
detest and abhor the Divinity. The Romans, who had already kindled the Fire of
their Sacrifices, to give Thanks to the Gods, at the false Report of the
Recovery of Germanicus, run into their Temples with Fury and Rage; when they
hear the too true News of his Death, they drag their Images in the Dirt, throw
'em into Tiber, and signalize their Grief by a Specimen of Impiety. All Men
seem to have the same inward Disposition which the Romans outwardly showed, and
the Violence which they ^s'd to the Images, is an Expression of what Man would
be willing to execute upon God, when he thinks him his Antagonist and Enemy.

No sooner does the Gospel resound in the World for the Consolation of Men;
but, as the Testimoines of the Divine Love to Mankind are every where
manifested, so likewise Men's ardent Love of God becomes universally
Conspicuous, Faith, which assures us of this immense Charity of God, is there
looked upon as the Key of our Heart, and the first Degree of our
Sanctification; to this the Scripture attributes our Salvation. When Faith has
thoroughly persuaded us that we are the Objects of God's Love, we are
sufficiently disposed to affect and love Him.

But as our Affections essentially spring from Self-love, our Hatred and
Aversions proceed from the same Original. We hate Men by Interest, when they
are our Competitors in the Pursuit of Temporal Goods. We hate one that is
Intemperate, because he would rob us of our Pleasures; we cannot endure an Ambitious
Man, because he takes the upper-hand of us in Preferment and Honor; nor can we
love a Proud Man, because (...) contemns and tramples us under Feet; nor a
Miser, because he hoards up the Riches that might possibly come to us; nor an
Unjust Man, because he oppresses us. We don't only hate those who actually
prejudice and injure us, but even those that have an Inclination to hurt us,
though they want fit Occasions, or some Impediment hinder 'em from exerting their
Malice. Our Hatred reaches as far as a Man's Power of doing us an Injury: For
which reason Power and Authority are many times the Incentives of Aversation
and Ill Will; and as there are few Persons in the World but meet with some who
either actually do 'em a Mischief, or would at least, if it laid in their
Power, or were it for their Interest; it must be owned, that secret Motives of
Hatred do perpetually enter in our Heart, and that nothing is more dangerous
than the Temptations to which we are exposed on this Account. Indeed we are
oftentimes Enemies to one another when we are ignorant of it. We many times
both love and hate the same Person, because Self-love considers him under
different Respects: And it happens that we really hate those, whom we think to
be the Objects of our best Affection: and sometimes those, whom we have all the
reason imaginable to love and esteem; which appears from this, That in all
their Disgraces and Misfortunes, there is something that does not wholly
displease us. This unjust and unnatural Sentiment which the Vail of Pride hides
from our Eyes, proceeds from these two Principles: Namely, That we Our selves
are not the Objects of this Disgrace, (which is a Reflection that Self-love
instantly makes) and that we see a Man degraded and pulled down, who in regard
of his being a Man, cannot fail to rival us upon some Account or other; a
Sentiment, which is changed into Compassion, when either Death, or some
irrecoverable Adversity, finally exempts him from the Number of those, who
pretend and aim at the Goods, which are the Objects of our own Desire.

But Hatred is a turbulent Passion, which puts the whole Body into a violent
Commotion, and all whose Effects are so sensible and obvious, that it is the
most faithful Mirror for discerning the Degree of Vehemence which attends all
our other Affections. If you would know how much you love Vain-Gl^ry, it may be
your Heart gives you a false Intimation; do but only consider the Violence of
the Hatred, which you conceive at One, that has offended you in point of
Honor; this is the just Degree and Measure of it; this Mirror is your safest
Guide for discovering and fathoming the Bottom of your Heart.

We hate by Interest, Persons, Things, and Words. If seeing an Abyss under our
Feet, we are put into Horror and Consternation, it is the Image of our
Destruction appearing before us, that causes this trembling Motion; and Reason
is not so strong and prevalent as to correct and allay that Fear, which a too
lively Idea of our own Destruction exhibits to our Conceit. Many People cannot
forbear swooning when they see the shedding of Man's Blood: this proceeds not
so much from a weakness of Temperament, as an infirmity of the Heart.
Whatsoever represents to 'em the Ruins of Humane Nature, threatens their
Self-love; and that which imbues the Fancy with Blood, draws a livel^ Picture
of Death in the Soul, and conducts it to that inward Recess by mere ^nt of
Conceit, where Reflection shuts the Doors against it.

CHAP. IX. Where we consider the most general Inclinations of Self-love; and in
the first place the Desire of Happiness.
THe first Inclination of Self-love, is a Desire to be Happy* and I believe,
that in the Main, these two Expressions do but signify the same Thing under
different Ideas. For what else is it to love One-self, but to desire Happiness,
and to desire Happiness, but to love One-self? Truly he must be a very nice
Subtiliser, and Mincer of Things that can find any Difference. As therefore the
Desire of Happiness cannot be too Great, and it has always been reckoned a Crime
t^ pursue a false, and not ardently to affect a real Felicity; it follows that
we are not to be blamed for loving our selves to Excess, but for taking a wrong
Method in exerting this Love.

All Men most certainly agree in the general Idea, Desire, and Sentiment of
Happiness.

The Diversity of Philosophers Opinions, touching the Nature of Happiness, is
not really so Great as at first it seems to be. All their Sentiments are
reduced to Epicurus's, who placed the Essence of Beatitude in Pleasure; which
will appear very reasonable, provided you separate pure, noble, durable,
^ertain Pleasure from sensual, which has quite opposite Characters; and you
distingui^h betwixt Happiness and its Foundations, which Men have been pleased
to confound t^gether, that they might cavil and contra^ict one another, merely
through a mistake in the Notion of Happiness: For Boethius defines Happiness, The
Absence of all Evils, and the Possession of all Goods: You must observe that
his Design was to define a perfect and complete, not a defective and imperfect
Happiness; and yet this is to define Happiness by its Foundations. The Absence
of Evils i^ necessary indeed to keep us from being miserable, but does not
render us happy. The Possession of Goods is the Foundation of our Happiness,
but not Happiness it self; for what would it signify to have 'em in our Power,
if we have not the Perception and Fruition of 'em? That Fool of Ath^ns, who
thought that all the Ships which arrived to (...) belonged to him, tasted the
Happiness (...) Riches without possessing 'em; and it may (...) the real
Owners of these Vessel^ poss^s^d 'em without any Fruition or Pleasure, ^eing
intoxicated with their insatiable A^rice, or afflicted with Disquietudes* which
infallibly attend the Possession of Temporal Goods: Wherefore it is not the
Possession, generally speaking, but the Sentiment and Fruition of the Goods, we
are possessed of, that constitutes our Happiness.

So when Aristotle places Happiness in the Knowledge and Love of the Supreme
Good, its plain that his Intention was to define Happiness by its Foundations,
otherwise he would be under a gross Mistake; for if you separate Pleasure from
this Knowledge and Love, you would find that something more would be required to
make you happy: And on the other Hand, if you suppose a lively and durable Pain
to be conjoined with this Knowledge and Love, you would see that we should
certainly be Miserable.

The Stoics, who thought Happiness consisted in Wisdom, were not so senseless
as to imagine, that the Satisfaction, wherewith this Wisdom inspired 'em, was
to be separated from the Idea of Happiness: Their Joy proceeded from the
Drunkenness, and Infatuation of their Soul, which applauded it self at a
Fictitious Constancy. Felix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere Causas,
Atque Metus omnes and inexorabile Fatum
Subjecit Pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari.
All Men in general are necessarily agreed in this Principle, and I wonder the
Schools should set 'em at Variance about it. The Covetous Man feeds himself
merely with Hopes of enjoying his Riches, and of tasting the Pleasure of
possessing 'em: Indeed he never truly enjoys his Wealth, but it is his Delight
to hoard it up, and that is his whole Fruition. The Ambitious Man's aim, in
seeking after Dignities, is to be raised in the World above the Level of his
Brethren* And the Revengeful would never make any Retaliation, did he not hope
to find Satisfaction in Vengeance.

This true Maxim is not opposite to the Religion, and Morality of Jesus Christ;
for he says, that he did not come to destroy, but to perfect Nature. He does
not oblige us to renounce the Love of Pleasure, but proposes to us more pure,
more noble, more spiritual, more certain, and more lasting Pleasures, than
those which the World promises: And he defines Happiness by its Sources; This
is Life eternal, to know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou
have sent. And he very well knows, that Happiness essentially consists in Joy,
and unspeakable Pleasures: For it is a Feast, new Wine, a River of Delights,
Torrents of Peace and Joy, etc. which Expressions, under the Emblem of temporal
Pleasures, inform us of the eternal Pleasures of Paradise.

Men's Idea of Happiness, assuredly proceeds from a sense of Pleasure. The
Vicious seeks after the Pleasures of Intemperance, Vainglory, Revenge,
Ambition: On the other Hand, the Virtuous Man pursues the Pleasures of Virtue;
namely, of Moderation, Beneficence, Temperance, of Conscience and Piety.

He that should pretend to strip Virtue, of the sense of Joy and Pleasure,
would certainly discourage our Heart; and though possibly we might esteem; yet we
should not study and labor after it.

I confess, that all Men don't relish the same Pleasure; some are for gross,
others for delicate, others for lively, others for durable, others for sensual,
others for mental, and others for cordial Pleasure; but all, without exception,
are for Pleasure.

So say we, that all Men agree in their general Desire to be Happy: They may
renounce all their Affections, but they will never renounce this Inclination,
which is the primitive Source of all the others. It Is Happiness that Poor and
Rich, Young and Old, Covetous and Liberal, Temperate and Voluptuous do all aim
at: This Happiness is the Pleasure which they conceive; and from the infinite
Diversity of this Pleasure, there arises a prodigious Variety of Passions and
Applications.

The Irregularity consists in this, that Men would fain taste and enjoy their
Happiness, before they have obtained it: They wait not for the direction of
Reason, to conduct 'em to the Haven of Beatitude: They begin with desiring to
possess it, as if they had regard to no other Pleasure, but what they actually
perceive. These Disciples of the Senses, want not Tutors to instruct 'em, in
the Art of Voluptuousness; who tell 'em: Non est, mihi creed, sapientis,
dicere, vivam:
Sera nimis Vita est crastina, vive hodie.
Mart. L. 1. Epig. It Is no great Wonder, that the most elevated Genius's of the
Heathen World, knew no other Good but the present; and exhorted Men to enjoy
the Delights that offered themselves, for fear of losing 'em by Delays: But
it is very much to be wondered, that they, who have the Knowledge of Eternity,
should be capable of the same Extravagance.

The Pleasure that constitutes our Happiness* must have other Characters. In
the first place, it is requisite it should be spiritual: Can one that tastes, and
enjoys Bodily Pleasure, be in a State of Happiness, if his Soul be, at the same
time, filled with the Remorse of Fear and Sadness? Secondly, It must be
durable: Momentany Pleasures, are more proper for rendering us miserable, than
happy; because not only the Fruition of 'em is transient, but they leave a
durable Regret behind 'em.

And certainly Duration is so essential to Happiness, that I dare say, even the
Felicity of Paradise would be inconsiderable, were it possible for it to pass
away in an Instant; and that the Felicity of this lower World, would be worth
looking after, were it but capable of lasting to Eternity: For the former, though
it be never so great and transcendent, would be swallowed up with the frightful
and melancholy Thoughts, of our going to lose the Foundation of an infinite
Joy; the Latter would be supported by a Comfortable Hope, which connecting
together an Infinity of Ages, would make up that Deig^ht in the Duration of
these Goods, which they wanted in Quality.

Nothing is finer in Speculation, than this Description which a Latin Poet
gives of Temporal Happiness. Res non parta Labor, sed relicta,
Non ingratus Ager, Focus perennis,
Lis nunquam, Toga rara, Men's quieta,
Vires ingenuae, salubre Corpus,
Prudens simplicitas, pares Amici,
Con^ictus facilis, sine Art Mensa,
Nox non ebria, sed soluta Curis;
Non tristis Thorus, attamen pudicus,
Somnus qui faciat breves Vmbras,
Quod sis, esse velis, nihilque malis,
Summum nec metuas Diem, nec optes.
Mart. L. 10. Epig. But though this Definition of Happiness appear so reasonable,
as it had been Dictated by the Oracle of Wisdom her self; yet but an
indifferent Knowledge of Man's Heart, and his natural State, would suffice to
show its Faultiness in many Respects.

In the first Place, it is made up of such Goods, as for the most part, are not
in our Power, Res non parta Labor, sed relicta, non ingratus Ager, Focus
perennis, Lis nunquam, ^ires ingenuae, salubre Corpus, somnus qui faciat breves
Umbras. For who can give himself an Estate, and cause it to descend from
Father, to Son; or render his Field fruitful, or avoid Brangles with injurious
Persons? It Is not in our Power to sleep securely, to have a healthy and
vigorous Temper of Body, and yet Nature it self teaches us, that Happiness is
in some measure in our Power: For why should it have engraven, upon the Heart
of Man, a Desire to be Happy, if he were incapable of arriving to that End? But
Men mistake in this Point, because they don't understand a double Language,
which Nature speaks to 'em, in this respect. For on one Hand, by showing 'em so
many Goods, which they naturally desire, and which are not in their Power, it
plainly declares to 'em that Happiness is not in their own Breast; and on the
Other, by inspiring into 'em so natural a Desire of Happiness, as that they can
never deface, or put it off, in what State soever they be, it teaches 'em that
they are notwithstanding capable of obtaining that End.

But to return to our Poet, I add, that this Description of Happiness is not
made up of Goods, sufficiently noble and excellent; certainly it is not much
above the Condition of Beasts, of which it may be truly said, that their Goods
come by Succession; that their Riches are not got by Labor, that the Earth is
fruitful to 'em, and that they fail not of Clothes agreeable to their State,
made by the Hand of Nature; that they want not Health, Strength and Rest, that
their Simplicity is prudent, and though they seem incapable of Reflection, yet we
see 'em most Ingenious, and Discreet in the Sphere of those Objects, which
their Interest obliges 'em to know; namely, for the Propagation of their
Species, and Self-preservation, that their Life is pleasant and sedate, that
they live without Trouble and Disquietude, that their Cups are not mingled with
the Wormwood of Suspicions and Jealousies, that they are not troubled with
Lawsuits; and, which is most of all considerable, that they neither fear nor
hope for Death: So that Beasts come very near to the Enjoyment of that
Happiness, which is represented to us, as the most perfect and complete of all.
Strange! What a Misery then is it, that we are born capable of Reason, that the
Quality of Rational, should bar us from pretending to that of Happy; that the
Degree of our Perfection, should make the Degree of our Misery; that Beasts
should be happy, for not being Men; and Men should be miserable because they
are not Beasts! Certainly this can never be true: Nature is too Wise in all
other Things, for being so imprudent in this Particular; and unless Men are
willing to degrade themselves, and to disparage the Excellency of their Nature,
they must needs acknowledge a Sovereign Good, which may be found, and does not
cheat our Desires* but is not to be met with in the Objects of this Life, which
will always deceive our craving Appetite.

Moreover, the finest Strokes, in the Poets Description of Humane Felicity, are
contradictory: For if a Man be so far Happy, as to be satisfied with his
Condition, and not to desire a better, how can he choose but fear Death, which
puts a fatal Period to this Beatitude? And, if what it Deprives us off be so
trivial and inconsiderable, as that we neither desire nor fear to Die, how is
it possible we should be contented with that Condition? This Fellow spoke at
random: He thought there was nothing in these Verses; Quod sis, esse velis,
nihilque malis,
Summum nec metuas diem, nec optes.


A Man content with his Condition, and not fearful of Death, is the
Philosopher's Stone in Morality. Besides, these Ideas destroy one another, they
annihilate the Nature of Man; who, as we have seen before, necessarily loves
himself beyond all Limits: His Love of Happiness stays not at a Mediocrity, and
consequently he cannot be satisfied, but in the Possession of an Infinite Good:
He dreads Misery above all Things; and for that Reason cannot but fear Death,
till he is assured of his Immortality.

Also this is one of the greatest Defects of that Happiness which Men search
after; or the Pleasure, which they so ardently pursue, that the Foundations of
it are uncertain; it depends upon a Thousand Causes, which are not in your
Power. What Reliance can you have upon the Health of a Body, which every thing
threatens with Ruin and Destruction; and what Tranquillity can you build upon
this, if you behold the Image of its Death in every outward Object; in the
Aliments, that nourish you, in the Air which you breath, in the Contagion of a
sick Person, whom you visit, in an Insect, that stings it, and in a multitude
of other secret Causes, which we can neither prevent, nor avoid? Who Will assure
me of the Possession of my Riches? Who Will secure me of the Preservation of
those Friends, whom I love and delight in? Who Will protect me and mine from the
Accidents that are so ordinarily incident to Society.

The Fourth Defect of this Humane Felicity is, that it is not only corruptible,
but also transient and fading: It Is of a much shorter Duration than the Term of
our Life. Sleep, which locks up our Senses, exhausts a good part of it; nor
does it last so long as this Moiety of Life, which we pass in Reflection and
Awake; for we are not continually buisy'd with tasting Pleasure. Nay, it
subsists not so long as the Presence of those Objects which first give it
Birth; it lasts but for the momentany Passage, from Privation to Enjoyment. We
perceive some Delight indeed in the Pursuit, but this Joy expires with the
Acquisition: The greatest of temporal Goods, after we have possessed 'em, but
for two Days, don't very much affect and please us. This Happiness seems to
consist in the Satisfaction of Desire, which makes us not Happy, either in Life
or Death; but only at the instant of Extinction or Annihilation* The most
excellent Wisdom of Nature thought fit to let us know, that worldly Goods are
not wholly to be neglected, seeing it has affixed Delight and Joy to the
Acquisition of 'em: But withal it would teach us that our Souls ought not to
acquiesce in this Enjoyment; since we no sooner commence the Perception of this
Pleasure, but it presently vanishes, and cheats our Desire.

The Fifth Defect of Humane Felicity consists in this, That our Happiness has
always a mixture and allay of Misery. Every Good brings some Evil at its Heels:
Impia suo Dulci, melle venena latent.

Ovid. L. 7. Met. And I know not how it happens so, consequent Calamities bear
a proportion to precedent Blessings.

Vt rebus loetis par fit Mensura malorum.

Idem. L. 1. Eleg. The last is, that this Happiness does not fill the Capacity
of our Soul, nor answer the ardent Eagerness of the pursuit, so that finding an
extreme Disproportion betwixt the Good we have obtained, and the Ardour
wherewith we pursued it, we find our selves tantaliz'd and starved, as it were,
in the midst of Plenty.

Though Self-love delights not in thinking of all those Things, which may show it
the Vanity of its Applications, yet certainly it has a Glimpse of all these
Defects, in the Happiness it reaches at. It Is conscious, that sensual Pleasure
is the Happiness rather of Brutes, than of Men: It owns, that a solid and
substantial Happiness, must necessarily be durable: It denies not, that a
certain Felicity is preferable to that, whose Foundations are uncertain. It
perceives, that in order to make a Man happy, this transitory Pleasure, which
lasts no longer than the instant of Acquisition, ought to be fixed and stayed
in its Career. It grants, that true Felicity, should be commensurate to the
Appetite of our Soul.

Wherefore right Reason commands us to search for other Sources of Happiness:
But the present Delight which interests it, and seduces the Understanding, by
tying it rather to the inquest of Pleasure, than Truth, takes it off from
executing that Design; its own Illusions still serve it after the old Rate; If
they fail of Objects, they take the Place of Qualities, and set up themselves
for Powers or Habits. When Man cannot obtain such a temporal Happiness as
satisfies his Reason, he makes his Reason knock under, and condescend to
satisfy his Pleasure. The prejudiced Mind gives an extravagant, and undue
Character to these false Goods; and here it is most of all admirable, to see
what a prodigious Ascendant the Heart has over the Mind. For to disguise
abstract and speculative Truths is no great Matter, but to disguise sensible
and experimental Truths, is a Thing that gives us a special Evidence of the
Force of our Corruption: To see this we proceed in the next place, by unfolding
the most hidden Mysteries of Self-love.

CHAP. X. Where we consider the Cheats, which Self-love puts upon it self, to
correct the Defects, which it finds in the Happiness it aims at.
SElf-love perceiving, that worldly Happiness is too gross and impure to
satisfy our Mind; and that indeed, it is not fit an Happiness, enjoyed by none
but the Body, should satisfy the Thirst of the Soul; seeks how it may
spiritualize and refine Corporeal Pleasures, in order to cheat and impose upon
us, by making us think, that they are equally satisfactory to the Soul and
Body: Hence Self-love has been pleased to tie, unto this gross and carnal
Felicity, the Delicacy of Sentiments; the esteem of the Mind, and sometimes
even the Duties of Religion, by conceiving it as Spiritual, Glorious and Sacred.

For as to the first of these, who would not be amazed to see the prodigious
number of Thoughts, Opinions, Fictions, Writings, Histories, which sensual
Pleasure has caused to be invented. Muster up together all the Tracts, that
have ever been written about Morality, which is the Science of Living well; and
compare 'em with those, that have been made about the Pleasures of
Intemperance, and you will find a great Disproportion between their Number.
Considering these Actions in their natural Hue, there appears in 'em a sordid
Baseness, which dis-heartens our Pride; namely, the vile and abject Conformity
they have to other Animals. Now what Course can be taken to elevate, and render
'em worthy and becoming the Grandeur of Men? Why, the ready way is to
spiritualize and refine 'em, to present 'em for an Object of the Delicateness
of the Mind; make 'em a Subject of fine and delightful Sensations; to make some
sport of 'em to the Imagination, and turn 'em agreeably to the Humor, by the
flourishes of Eloquence and Poetry: And lastly, to employ all the Faculties,
and Lights of the Rational Principle, to make the Delights of a Voluptuous Body
go down glib and pleasantly into an haughty Soul. I express my self according
to the Vulgar Prejudice, for truly speaking, the Body has not in it self any
Perception or Sensation. Hence Self-love has also tied an Esteem and Respect to
the most shameful Debasements of Humane Nature. Pride and Pleasure are two
Passions, which though they spring from the same Original of Self-lov^, yet for
all that, there is some Difference and Opposition betwixt 'em. Pleasure
humbles, whereas Pride exalts us: The former engraves us with the Image of
Brutes, the latter with the Picture of the Devil. Also these two Passions have
many a Combat and Duel in our Heart; but the Heart can by no means approve of
this Conflict, being a Friend and Well-wisher to 'em both, and all most equally
sensible of the charms of Glory and Pleasure: It must bestir its Stumps to make
a Reconcilation, and to bring this about, it takes one of these Methods, either
it transports Pleasure, if I may so speak, to the Confines of Pride, or Pride
to the Region of Pleasure. If it renounce sensual Pleasure 'twill search for a
greater in the acquest of Esteem; and so Pleasure is wholly indemnify'd: Or, if
we take a Resolution to satisfy its Thirst of sensual Pleasure, 'twill apply to
it the Credit of Esteem; and by this means Pride is solac'd at its loss.

Were there but one only Man of this Disposition of Mind, he would not easily
succeed in his Design; but Men unhappily meeting together, they understand one
another, and having the same Inclination, they willingly agree to consecrate it.

This is a Ragoo to Pleasure, which renders it much more exquisite than the
Glory which Men's exorbitant Fancies have tied to it: But it is yet better
seasoned, when we regard this Pleasure, as an Ordinance of Religion. A
debauched Woman, that would make People believe in the Heathen World, that she
had a God for her Sweetheart, had a more sensible Relish of intemperate
Pleasures; and a Zealot, that takes his Pleasure, or executes Revenge, under
the shelter of some sacred Pretext, tastes in Pleasure a more piquant and
delicious season than is Pleasure it self.

Thus the Humane Felicity, of which we are speaking, may be divided into two
Parts, Gross and Sensible, which is as it were the Matter of it; and a more
refined and delicate, which we'll term its Form. It Is certain, that as all the
Perceptions of Joy and Pleasure, which this World affords us, aggrandize and
enlarge the Matter of this Happiness; so all the Illusions and Tricks, which
Self-love puts upon us on this account, to make it appear either reasonable,
glorious or sacred; all the false Discourses of Men, who are continually
speaking of the Objects of their Desire; all the unhappy Idea's of Education,
which administer infinite Occasions of deceiving us in this respect, all the
naughty Lectures, and impious Studies, a thousand Prejudices, and false Maxims,
serve to augment and increase the Form of it, and to transplant this vain
Felicity, into the supreme Seat and Escurial of our Soul, which sprang up
before in the meanest part of its Royalty, by the occasion of Sense.

These are the Measures, which Self-love takes against the first Defect, which
it saw its pretended Happiness; but it is not defective only in this: It Is
likewise so much adulterated and mixed, that it renders us rather Miserable,
than Happy; and in this, Self-love is pleased to put another Trick and Cheat
upon it self. For fearing lest our earnest Attention, to the Defects and
Emptiness of worldly Goods, to their appendant Misery and Incommodities, might
disabuse us in this Matter, it diverts our Consideration from whatsoever is
most capable to represent that Misery to our View, which attends the Goods and
Enjoyments of this World: It finds a pretty hard Tug of it; for how should it
go beyond experimental and sensible Proofs? But yet for all this it fails not
of good Success, by reason of Men's extreme Desire to put a merry Trick and
Cajole upon themselves.

To understand the whole substance of this Matter, you must know, that as the
Present, how sweet soever it appear to us, and though we have never so great an
Inclination to sacrifice all for the Sake of it, yet notwithstanding seems too
narrow and limited to a Soul, which loves to aggrandize and extend its Bounds
by Imagination; it most commonly intermingles the Past and Future in the Idea
of our Condition; not the Past and Future as they are in Reality, but such as
our Soul would have 'em be. Our State therefore seems to us an Assemblage of
Goods which both follow and precede us. By the Remembrance of Pleasures already
enjoyed, we bring back the past to present; and by the Ideas of Temporal Goods
we hope to enjoy, we anticipate the Future. If we would carry a direct and
steady View over all these Differences of Time, we should find in the past,
what we meet with in the present; namely, Goods mingled with the Bitterness and
Gall of a great many Evils. For the Good we have possessed was not more pure
and unmingled, than what we now possess; and what we are like to possess
hereafter, will not differ from what we before enjoyed: But as the Soul loves
to think of nothing else, but what delights and tickles its Fancy, it happens,
that it retains the Ideas of these Goods which it formerly possessed, because
these Conceptions are agreeable and pleasant; and it forgets the Ideas of the
Evils intermingled, because such Thoughts are attended with Melancholy and
Sadness, unless the past Evil seeming Good to us, because we are delivered from
it; for this reason also draws in our Mind a delightful Image: As for the
Future we know it only by Hope; now Hope has not Evil, but Good for its proper
Object: The past and future, one whereof is no more, and the other is not yet
come, Occupying a large Space in our Imagination, and always presenting
themselves in the Livery of their Pleasures, and never in the mourning Weeds of
their Misery: No wonder, if by degrees, a bright Idea of Happiness be formed in
our Mind; which can hardly be destroyed by the Sense of our Misery. Our past
Delights do still remain; the Applauses, which recompensed our Merit, seem
really present, because Pride has drawn 'em to the Life, in the Tablet of our
Imagination: And what if we could add future Advantages to present, and obtain
their Fortune, who are Objects of our Envy? Thus by a second Disorder of our
Imagination, which has the same Source with the first, we frame to our selves
an Idea of those Goods, which being in another Man's Power, are become the
Objects of our own Desire; an agreeable and flattering Representation, because
we see not the Troubles which attend 'em, but only cast a Glance upon their
specious and glittering Outside. So that the Idea of our own Condition, and
other Men's, the pleasant Images of the Past, and a thousand Hopes, whose
Object are the Uncertainties of the Future, continually occurring to our Mind,
whereas the Evils of the future are perceived but now and then; no wonder if
the Soul get Drunk with this Folly, and a thousand Experiences fail of
reclaiming it from its Errors and Illusions.

This Blindness is sometimes so bold and daring, as to regard this Felicity as
built upon sure and stable Foundations. This Truth appears by the Speech of
him, whom the Son of God represents feeding up himself with certain Fancies of
a Happiness, which he was presently to be deprived of: My Soul, said he, Eat,
Drink and take thy Ease, we have Goods laid up for many Years: Presently he
hears a terrible Voice, saying to him, Thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be
required of thee, and then whose shall all those Goods be which thou have laid
up?

But lastly, Man is not so Blind but that he can see the End of this Happiness,
which so enchants and bewitches him; he knows the World will not be a perpetual
Fountain of his Pleasure, because it consists of corruptible Objects; and he is
not ignorant, that himself shall not always be in a Capacity of enjoying
worldly Delights, forasmuch as he is not Immortal. For want of this perpetuity
of Sentiment and Fruition which he cannot obtain, he endeavors to perpetuate
his Memory; and so he saves what he can from the Shipwreck of temporal Things;
but yet all that he saves, does not countervail his Labor: For what is Man's
Glory after he is Dead? It is, says an Ancient, a prosperous Gale after a
Shipwreck; And certainly nothing is more Vain, than all those Means, which
Self-love has invented to eternize our Glory. Urns, Tombs, Pyramids,
Mausoleum's, Theaters, Temples, Cities dedicated to the Memory of famous
Personages; Poetry and Eloquence, Painting and Engraving employed to preserve
some Ideas of their Virtue, or certain Lineaments of their Visage, cannot avoid
the Fate of corruptible Things; and as they are unable to perpetuate
themselves, they cannot be capable of eternizing their Objects: This would be
but to perpetuate Shadows, and how should they perpetuate the Sensation? Nos
quoque floruimus, sed Flos fuit ille caducus. I think we should not be guilty
of a greater Extravagance, if by the Effort of our Desires, we should at length
be brought to doubt of our Mortality, than whilst by the Seduction of our
Heart, we search for so vain an Immortality. I know indeed, that no Man
seriously denies himself to be subject to the Fate of Death; but yet scarcely
any Man perhaps tells himself in earnest, that he shall Die: For though these two
Terms have too true a Relation, yet no one is willing to join 'em together; and
if we do happen to consider 'em, it is with a Design to dis-unite and part 'em.
We shall be apt to consider Death, without considering our selves; or our
selves without considering Death: We never love to connect those Ideas both
together; and certainly nothing can be imagined, let Men think what they please
of it, more extraordinary and more uneasy to the Heart, than the Conjunction of
these two Sentiments in our Imagination.

Yet this is not all; Self-love undertakes to fix the Pleasure, which rises
from the Acquisition of temporal Goods: with this Design it seeks to have a
frequent Enjoyment of the Good it possesses, whether by Thought, representing
it to its Mind as often, and in as lively a manner as is possible; or by
endeavoring to invent new Methods of enjoining the Pleasure, whereunto it is
accustomed. 'Twas a great Extravagance in Caligula, to propose the making his
Horse Consul, to have him led before the Senate in Consular Robes, and the
Bundles of Rods carried before him: But this Extravagance, which so much grates
and contradicts the Mind, was a Feast of Delights to such an Heart, as being
used to Supreme Power, and scarcely perceiving it now, found out a Means of
giving it self an Air of Novelty, by the singularity of its Gust, and the
Fantasticalness of its Capricio. Caligula, in his Folly, had the Pleasure of
seeing how much other Men were subject to his Dominion.

Lastly, Self-love, which one would think ought to be dis-abus'd of the
excessive Opinion, it conceived of temporal Goods, when it sees what a great
Vacuity they leave in our Heart, yet puts upon it self a further Illusion: For
finding that this Measure of temporal Goods, which it has obtained, cannot
render it Happy, it pre-possesseth it self with Thoughts of finding that
Happiness in the Quantity, which it could not meet with i^ the Quality of these
Advantages. Thus a Rich Man, who ought to have dis-abus'd himself as to the
Vanity of Riches, by the Experience he makes of 'em, feeds himself with a
Fancy, that he shall be Happy when he has made a further Augmentation of his
Treasures; and as the Degrees of temporal Prosperity are not limited, no wonder
if, in what State soever he be, he form a Succession of new Desires.

And because our Soul sees, that worldly Goods are less considerable by their
Reality than Fictitiousness, it is so Ingenious as to deceive it self in this
too; it covets the Esteem of other Men, and would fain be thought happy by the
Mind's of the Multitude, that it may hereafter make use of this Esteem, to
cheat and warrant it self of Happiness, upon the Word of those that, don't know
us. Oh! It Is a brave and delightful Object, for a Grandee to behold the
covetous and interested Rabble cringing at his Heels, whose Officiousness
plainly shows what Opinion they have of Greatness. This persuades him, that he
is not mistaken in thinking that his lofty Elevation rendered him Happy: And if
the inward Experience he has of his Condition, does not suit with his
Conception, he suspends the sad Reflections of his Mind* and says to himself,
that doubtless so many Persons who esteem him Happy cannot be mistaken; and
resolves to be satisfied with his Condition, maugre all the Sense and
Experience of his Misery.

I very well know, that Men many times discouraged by some Danger or present
Misfortune, which m^kes a lively and deep Impression upon their Heart, dislike
their own Condition, and envy other Men's: But this Dislike is quickly over, it
vanishes with the Object which gave it Birth, and pleasant Ideas succeeding in
the place of sad and unpleasant, which had struck, and as it were* wounded our
Soul, by rushing impetuously into the Mind; then we see none but the best side
of our Condition, and reassume the Bent of our former Designs. This is what
one of the most Facetious Wits, of Augustus's Time, expressed with a great deal
of Plainness and Elegance in one of his Satyrs.

Qui fit Maecenas, ut Nemo, quam sibi sortem
Seu Ratio dederit, seu sors objecerit, illa
Contentus vivat, laudet diversa sequentes?
O fortunati Mercatores, gravis Annis
Miles ait, multo jam fractus membra Labor.
Contra Mercator, navem jactantibus Austris:
Militia est potior: quid enim? concurritur: horae
Momento cita Mors venit, aut victoria laeta.
Agricolam laudat Juris, Legumque peritus,
Sub Galli cantu Consultor ubi, Ostia pulsat.
Ille datis Vadibus, qui rure extractus in Vrbe^ est*
S^^os felices viventes clamat in Vrbe.
And certainly it is not greatly to be wondered, that other Men's Conditions
seem better than our own in the Eyes of Self-love, seeing that we feel the
Pressure of our own Evils and Miseries, but not of theirs; and their Enjoyments
appear without any Allay of Unhappiness and Trouble, because we see but the
mere surface and outside of their Condition. But lastly, whether it be the
Idea of those temporal Goods, which we our selves possess, or the Image of
other Men's Goods, that so advantagiously Prejudices and Bigots us to the
Esteem of worldly Enjoyments; it is certain that our Conception of 'em is very
extravagant* and herein Men commonly place their Supreme Good.

For to do this, it is not necessary that our Mind should expressly and
distinctly judge the World to be the Sovereign Good; nor yet that our Mouth
should openly pronounce so in plain Terms. Man is naturally too Glorious and
Proud to think or speak very gross and sensible Absurdities; but he loves the
World so much as to say it in his Heart, though not in his Mind.

But 'twill not be amiss to continue our Consideration of the most general
Inclinations of the Heart, which proceed from Self-love: For we shall easily
know the Rivulets, after we have thoroughly discovered the Springs.

CHAP. XI. Where we continue to consider the general Inclinations of Self-love;
the Second whereof is a Desire of Perfection.
HAppiness and Perfection are the Two general Goods which Man naturally
desires, but not without some Dependence and Subordination to each other; for
he desires not Happiness for the sake of Perfection, but Perfection for the
sake of Happiness. Man cannot be thoroughly contented, whilst the Idea of his
Imperfections is fresh in his Mind. This obliges him to disguise 'em, as much
as is possible, and to get rid of 'em, unless by renouncing his Defects, he
renounce a part of that Pleasure, wherein he placed his Happiness.

Indeed the Mind always passing Sentence in Favor of the Applications of the
Heart, oftentimes leads us into Errors, by confounding Vices with Virtues,
Defects with Perfections. The Aethiopians count the Blackest People the most
Beautiful, but in Europe, and the other parts of the World, the Whitest are
esteemed the most handsome and fine. It Is not so easy, as some may think, to
decide which of 'em is in the wrong. Just so stands the case with the Qualities
of the Soul. Vivacity and Sprightliness, which pass in some Countries for very
great Excellencies, are counted in others most essential Imperfections.

And certainly it is a very difficult Matter, to make this just Discernment
betwixt Defects and Perfections, amidst the Darkness and Prejudices which
attend our Corruption; it is not sufficient, that we consult public Opinion,
for Men oftentimes agree together to consecrate their common Infirmities, and a
Propensity, in which they sympathize and agree, they most frequently judge to
be worthy of Esteem, or at least not to be rejected and despised. Drunkenness
in some Countries is counted a very scandalous Vice; in others it passes for a
modish Infirmity, and is not thought an essential Crime.

Wherefore it is no hurt for Men to suspend their Judgment, touching what is
termed Vice and Virtue, Perfection and Imperfection, till they have had Time
and Leisure to consult the clear and distinct Views of their Mind, or of
Religion, which is a yet shorter way to the Knowledge of our real Duties.

Now for putting us in a way to make this Discernment, it is to be observed,
that GOD differs from the Creature in this, that he is a Being invested with
all Perfections: So that we may affirm him to have either Formally or
Eminently, every Good that falls under our Knowledge, or deserves our Esteem;
that is, he possesses these Qualities and Perfections, either in the highest
Degree, or other Perfections which are equivalent to 'em.

But as for the Creature, it cannot pretend to be endu'd with any Perfections,
but what belong to its Species. It Is not necessary a Stag should have Wings,
it is enough for him that he has Swiftness for his share. Birds have no use for
Fins, Wings are sufficient to their End of Flying.

Now in this, Men are under a double Failing: First, for pretending to have
such Perfections as are in no wise due to their Species. Secondly, for
renouncing those which do really belong to 'em, and very well suit with their
essential Perfections; for they give their Body more than is its due, and
deprive their Soul of what it justly challenges. The former they endeavor to
perpetuate and enlarge: They would fain procure it a kind of Eternity, whereof
it is incapable, and a sort of Grandeur, or rather Immensity, which by no means
suits with its Condition.

But Men lie under a yet greater Failure, by being unwilling to enter within
the Confines of themselves, or to take a Survey of their own Nature; falsely
imagining that the Quality of Man includes nothing but Baseness and Misery;
they are not very eager in the research of those Perfections which are due to
this general Quality, but aspire at an Exemption from this common Condition, by
the help of those external Goods, and foreign Relations, which distinguish 'em
in Society.

They leave off searching after the Perfections which belong to Man, and pursue
those of a Magistrate, an Artist, a Scholar, a Burgess, a Gentleman, a
Grand-Seignior; they no longer place their Honor in what may perfect or adorn
Humane Nature, and enrich the Mind, this immortal Essence, and lively Image of
the Deity: But in that, which is capable of making 'em succed and excel in
their Profession, though never so mean and sordid in it self, or of putting 'em
in a Condition to maintain, with Credit, the Grandeur of that public Station,
wherein the Circumstances of their Life have placed 'em.

Hence it appears, that Men use to measure the Perfection or Imperfection of
their Qualities and Endowments, merely by the Relation they have to that State
wherein they suppose themselves to be, and to which Self-love and Pride advance
'em with a Design of gaining a famous Reputation. A professed Scholar does not
stand upon points of Valor: And a Soldier seldom concerns himself with
Scholarship. Tell the former that he is a Man of no Courage, he will but laugh at
you; but make the same Reproach to the latter, you will move his Choler, and put
him in a Rage: The Reason is, because Learning is no Qualification for a
Soldier, nor Valor for a Scholar. But this is to be understood when Self-love
fixes the one in the Station of a Scholar, and the other in that of an Hero;
for it many times happens that a Man, through an incentive of Pride, affects to
appear, what we term, Omnis homo, and then the Maxim changes with the
Supposition.

It cannot be expressed, how many false Prejudices spring from this Original.
Injustice, Debauchery, Fury, make use of this Occasion to consecrate
themselves. The ordinary Theft, or Burglary, suits not with a private Man's
Fortune and Condition, whose Neck is forced at last to pay for his Crimes; and
therefore this is counted a base and unworthy Fault: But grand Robberies, such
as the Conquest of Cities, and Provinces, do outwardly match and agree with the
Greatness of a Potentate, and these therefore pass for Heroic Enterprises.
Horror and Infamy necessarily attend the ordinary Murder, which is subject to
the Rigor of the Law, and consequently comports not with the Interest of
private Persons, whom the Laws retain and keep within the bounds of Duty: But
an unjust War, which includes an Infinity of Murders and Robberies, if happy
and successful, is an Object of the greatest Esteem and Admiration.

Not to say, as some have done, that Injuries are consecrated by their
Greatness, and that Excess is the Glory of a Crime: This Opinion would be
somewhat extravagant; but yet we may safely say, that this fantastical
Inequality of our Prejudices, touching the very same Things, proceeds from an
Habit, we have gotten, to judge of Qualities merely by their Relation to the
State and Condition of those that possess 'em. A Woman is branded with Shame
and Disgrace for being misled and abused, and yet he who is the Author of this
Seduction, makes it a Motive of his Vanity: This prejudice is assuredly very
extravagant; yet the Disorder is founded upon the Maxim we have established.
Men are thought to have a thousand Topics, whereupon to build an Esteem and
Reputation; all the Fountains of Glory lie open to their Appetite. A Woman is
limited in this respect; She can neither govern States, command Armies, nor
make a successful progress in Arts and Sciences, at least according to the
ordinary Course, and for the Generality; and the Examples of the contrary are
too few to lay any great stress upon: But she can be Honest and Modest, for
which reason nothing is more Honorable in a Woman than Chastity. Also that
Empire of Beauty, which the World esteems the Glory of Women, fails of adding
the same Honor to Men, who are naturally designed for other Purposes, than to
make themselves Amiable, and display some Skill in throwing the Darts of Cupid.
And sometimes it happens that a Vice well placed, passes for a great Virtue;
and a Virtue ill placed, is thought a great Vice. Prodigality becomes Alexander
very well, who being Master of the World has, in his Custody, the Treasures of
it. Frugality suits very well with Hannibal, who supports his Armies by a
Miracle, when blocked up in Italy on every side. Even Cruelty it self, which at
another time would in no wise become him, agrees with the Circumstances of that
Condition.

But Wisdom, Prudence, Honesty, Fidelity, etc. being Qualities which suit with
all States and Conditions, no wonder if the greatest part of Mankind are
equally concerned about 'em: They don't endeavor to obtain these Virtues as
being worthy of Man, but as they match and agree with their States and
Interests.

They seek for true Judgment and Prudence, because it is the Reality, and not
the bare Appearance of these Virtues, that serves their turn, and promotes
their Advantage; but they usually content themselves with a mere show of
Honesty, because they think that outward Appearances of Sincerity, are more for
their Ends, than the Virtue it self.

Men have sufficient reason to hate Hypocrisy, and to be angry at this
Imposture of Vice, which seems desirous to make Fools, both of God and Men, by
an execrable Traffic of Appearances, and affected Outsides: But to speak the
downright Truth, Hypocrisy is a Vice which seems common to Mankind. All Men
study to appear, as may be most for their Advantage.

It Is a mistake to imagine, that there be Hypocrites or Dissemblers of none but
Devotion; there be Hypocrites of Honor, Constancy, Valor, Liberality; and
there be more that counterfeit themselves in civil Life, than who put on a
Vizard in the Church.

It Is pretty to see two Fellows, that scrape Acquaintance, or are going to swap
Wares, take each other for Cullies and soft-Heads; and neither say nor do any
thing but what is to carry on the Design of Cheating. Men affect a show of
Complaisance, Politeness, Probity, Honor, merely to be thought really endowed
with these Qualities.

All this assuredly proceeds from a too short View of Self-love, and lest we
should Err, and go out of the way, it is necessary to return from the Road we
went in before, to search after Man, whom we desired to avoid; and taking for
Perfection, not whatsoever distinguishes us in the World, but what suits with
this natural Equality of Perfection and Excellency, which we have in common
with other Men; to consider our selves not in Our selves, but God.

The Perfections belonging to the Mortal Man are very inconsiderable: But those
of the Immortal Man are all worthy of Admiration; he need not put on the Mask
of Hypocrisy to counterfeit himself to the Eyes of Mankind: He need only
renounce the Fallacies of his Pride, the vain Prejudices of the World; and take
off the Veil which intercepts the prospect of himself, to find that he is
advanced above the Sphere of Admiration.

Even the Passions of Men set up for real Perfections, when they have their
just Extent in the Immortal Man; and if you narrowly observe, you will find that
the Baseness we conceive in these Affections of our Soul, proceeds from the too
narrow Limits, where unto Concupiscence and Self-love have confined 'em: Give
the Soul Liberty to take its whole flight, let it act with the full extent of
its Powers, and you will find it is a Divine Sphere, that grows bigger and bigger
the nearer it comes to GOD.

CHAP. XII. Where we Treat of the general Vices which flow from Self-love, and
first of Pleasure.
THere are Three sorts of Goods, whereunto Self-love is principally applied the
Full, which is of it self sensible, and this is Pleasure: A Second, which is
Desirable for its own sake, but becomes not sensible of it self, this is
Esteem: A Third, which is neither sensible nor desirable for its own sake, and
has only (as the Schools speak) a Goodness of the Means, and this is Riches;
to which we must add a Fourth Good, which seems to include all those
beforementioned, namely, Dignities; which according to the ordinary Notion Men
have of 'em, are a Compound of Pleasure, Glory and Support, in order to lead a
commodious and agreeable Life.

The love of Pleasure is Natural, that of Esteem is Lawful, the Desire of
Riches has nothing Criminal in it self; But all these Inclinations immediately
commence Vices, when they become headstrong, and cease to be directed by the
Dictates of Reason.

Self-love applied to irrational Pleasure, is termed Voluptuousness; as it
irregularly pursues Esteem, it has the Name of Pride; and when it is conversant
about Riches, desiring 'em with an excessive Ardour, it is termed Covetousness:
Lastly, Self-love eagerly aspiring at Dignities, beyond the measures of right
Reason, and the Tenor of Justice, is called Ambition: But as worldly Goods are
reduced to Pleasure and Glory, so the most general Disorders of Self-love are
reduced to Voluptuousness and Pride, an Examination of which will be the
Conclusion of our present Enquiries.

Pleasure may be considered, in reference either to the Person, who is the
subject of it, or in reference to Society, or GOD; for it is undoubtedly
necessary in these Three respects. It Is by Pleasure that the Author of Nature
has engaged our Soul in the Preservation of the Body; we should omit to repeat
the use of Food, had it not an agreeable Taste. It Is Pleasure that puts us upon
mutual Commerce, whether in Oeconomical or Political Society, since the Union
of Men, and even the Propagation of Mankind, is to be ascribed to this
Sentiment. Lastly, it is the Pleasure we find in loving, and being loved by God,
in hoping for his Blessings, in receiving his Benefits, and in having a sense
of his Peace and Favor, that incites us to have our Conversation with him.

Hence it follows that Pleasure is Criminal, either when it is opposite to the
Good of the Man, who is the subject of it; or to the Good of Society, or the
Commerce we ought to entertain with God.

The embittered Pleasures, which for a momentany Delight, cost Men very durable
and lasting Torments, are to be ranged in the first Order. As the Goodness of
God manifestly appears in this, That he has affixed Sentiments of Pleasure to
Food, and other things which naturally relate to the Preservation of the Body;
so his Justice becomes most sensible in the rigorous Punishment and Scourge of
Incontinence. But we ought not to look only upon that Voluptuousness, which
afflicts the Body, as contrary to Man; the same Judgment is also to be passed
upon that which weakens or dis-composes the Mind.

Moreover Pleasure is to be thought Criminal, either when it tends to destroy
Society, or disturb the mutual Order of it. Such are the Pleasures which are
founded upon Insincerity and Infidelity, which establish in Society a Confusion
of Family and Children, and which are attended with Suspicions, Distrusts, and
many times with Murders, and Attempts upon the most sacred and inviolable Laws
of Nature.

Lastly, That Pleasure is to be esteemed Criminal, which God has forbidden,
either by his natural Law, which he has given to all Men, or by a positive Law;
as also such Pleasure as weakens, suspends or destroys our Commerce with him,
by too much confining and fixing us to the Creatures.

Upon this Principle it is easy to see, what Judgment ought to be made of all
the different kinds of Voluptuousness, and to examine all their Characters. In
general, as it is a natural and fundamental Truth, that the Corruption of the
best Things is always worst, so it is certain, that by how much more important
and necessary any Pleasure is to Man, in the natural and regular use of it, so
much more dangerous and criminal is the Abuse of it.

The Pleasure of Seeing, Smelling and Hearing is perhaps the least Blameable of
all; because we don't destroy our Being, injure any Man, or offend God,
generally speaking, either in beholding agreeable Objects, in smelling
delicious Odours, or hearing melodious Harmonies: I say, generally speaking,
because there are infinite Circumstances, which may render these Pleasures
Criminal, though they seem never so innocent in themselves. A Man is to be blamed
for having such an eager Desire after public Spectacles, Smells, or Music, as
to neglect his own Affairs, omit to fulfill the Duties of Society; or lastly,
for being taken off, by the continual Use of Pleasures, from the spiritual
Commerce which he ought to have with God; not to mention those many dangerous
Pleasures which are involved in the first. We think many times to pursue the
Pleasure of Sight, in our fine Walks and magnificent Houses; Yet all this while
our Bent is after the Pleasure of Pride and Ambition, saying almost the same
thing to our selves as the Assyrian King did in his arrogant Heart: Is not this
Babylon, the great City which I have built by the Power of my Might?

It Is easy to conceive that Gluttony is a more criminal Pleasure than those we
have been speaking of; it destroys the Health of the Body, debases the Mind,
calling it down from those sublime and lofty Contemplations, to which it
naturally tends, to the sordidness of Sensuality, which makes it a Slave to
Banquets and Tables, as if they were the Sources of its Happiness; Atque
affigit humi Divinae particulam Aurae.

But the Pleasure of Excess in Eating, generally considered, is not near so
Criminal as Drunkenness; which not only impairs the Body, and debases the Mind,
but dis-composes our Reason, and suspends us, for some time, from the glorious
Character of Rational Creatures: A Man by this dangerous Pleasure, mortgages
his Reason, and becomes responsible for all the Misdemeanors, which this
Deprivation may occasion him to commit; so that as there is no Vice in Nature,
but may possibly ensue upon this loss of our Understanding, Drunkenness may be
said to involve and comprehend all other Vices.

The Pleasure of Love produces not quite so sensible Irregularities, but yet
it is of no less dangerous Consequence. Love is a kind of Drunkenness, and
infatuation of the Mind and Heart of One, who gives up himself to the swinge of
this Passion; this is the Intoxication of the Soul, as the other of the Body.

The former is guilty of an open Extravagance, exposed to the sight of all the
World; the latter Dotes in reality, though he seem to have the Use of his Reason:
Also the former renounces only the Use of Reason; whereas the other renounces
at once both his Mind and Heart. Notwithstanding I must own, that thus far the
Disorder of Drunkenness is much more sensible, and perhaps, really more
enormous.

But when we come to consider the Opposition of these two Passions, to the Good
of Society, and our Conversation with God, we find irregular Love to be, in
some sort, more Criminal than Drunkenness; because this occasions in us but a
transient Disorder, whereas the other is attended with a continued and lasting
Exorbitance. Moreover, Love is oftener the occasion of Manslaughter than Wine.
Drunkenness is sincere and open-hearted, but the whole Intrigue of Love is made
up of Artifice and Infidelity: Lastly, Drukenness is a short Fury, which
withdraws us from God to serve our Passion; but irregular Love is a perpetual
Idolatry.

Self-love is not wholly confined to the pursuit of corporeal Delights, but it
has a Hundred ways of mingling 'em together to highten the Gust, and increase
their Relish: Most Arts are the Servants of Pleasure, they are exercised in
mixing Colors to delight the Eyes, Odours and Essences to please the Smell,
Instruments, Tunes and harmonious Sounds to flatter the Ear. We make voluptuous
Miscellanies of Colors, Sounds and Odours; these we make use of to raise and
set off the Pleasure of Feasting, and this with all those other agreeable
Objects, we make instrumental to yet more vicious Delights: And this sensual
Pleasure is so considerable in the Eyes of Men, that when they have a Mind to
raise themselves Credit and Esteem, they think there is no fitter way for it,
than to flatter the Senses of their Associates and Visitants. They love to have
rich and gaudy Ornaments to please the Sight, fragrant Essences to flatter the
Smell, a fine Voice and skill in Music to charm the Ear. All these are the
Ingredients of Men's Esteem; we confound Pleasures with Perfections, and think
nothing Excellent but what diverts us.

Though this Pleasure seem so much the more Criminal, by how much greater space
it takes up in our Soul, and so much more dangerous as it is common to all
Mankind, yet indeed I am not of their Mind, who, by Subtleties and nice
Speculations would dispute the natural and lawful Use of the Creature; and
fancy that either all Pleasures are equally sinful, or that none of 'em can be
tasted without a Crime, unless we have at the same moment an explicit Intention
of referring 'em to the Glory of God. This Opinion is extravagant, there being
infinite Occasions of taking honest and innocent Divertisements, though we find
no positive Relation they have to the Glory of God. It therefore suffices, that
we use 'em with Gratitude and Thankfulness to the Creator, and not desire to
spiritualize and consecrate those things which are not capable of such a
Refinement.

CHAP. XIII. Where we continue our Consideration of the diverse Characters of
Pleasure.
THe Generality of Men acknowledge but one kind of Voluptuousness, which is
that of the Senses; they reduce all to Bodily Intemperance, and don't see that
in the Heart of Man there are as many different sorts of Voluptuousness, as
there are varieties of Delight for it to abuse; and as great diversity of
Delights as there are Passions, which move and agitate our Soul.

Covetousness, which seems willing to deprive it self of the most innocent
Pleasures, and to adopt in their place none but Labor, Fatigues, Disquietudes
and Fears, fails not of its Pleasure for all that, which retrieves the loss of
that Sweetness it renounces. Populus me sibilat, says the Miser described by
Horace, at ego mihi plaudo ipse domi, dum nummos contemplor in Arca. The power
of enjoying temporal Goods is the same to him, that the actual Enjoyment is to
other Men.

But as some Passions are more Criminal than others, there is a kind of
spiritual Pleasure, which is particularly dangerous. It may be reduced to three
Species; Namely, the Pleasure of Hatred and Revenge, of Pride and Ambition, of
Incredulity and Impiety.

Pride takes a delight in appropriating to us those Goods which are none of our
own, or such Qualities as are in us, but are not properly ours; or a Glory
which ought to be ascribed to God, and not our selves. As the Soul resents a
kind of Grief at being stripped of its Honor, to cloth and adorn another, which
causes the secret Repugnancies it has to Humility, so it finds a very sensible
Pleasure in derobing others of this Glory, to cover and set off it self with
their Feathers.

We may very well wonder, what Pleasure the Romans could find in the bloody
Pastime of the Circus, to see the Gladiators kill and mangle one another, to
make them Sport and Recreation: This barbarous Delight may be reckoned a
Pleasure of Ambition and Vainglory: The Thoughts that these Combatants were
Slaves, made the Romans forget 'em to be Men. This was a Flattery to Ambition,
letting 'em see that the Men were made for no other purpose, but their
Recreation and Divertisement.

There Is a Pleasure of Hatred and Revenge which consists in the Joy we perceive
at other Men's Misfortunes. This is an hideous Pleasure, which is nourished by
our Neighbors tears: Yet if you look closely into the Matter, you will find it is
most agreeable to the Palate of worldly Men. This Pleasure is proportioned to
the degree of that Hatred which gave it Birth. Hence a Poet of our Age, who had
a competent Knowlede of Man's Heart, expresses the Excess of Hatred, by the
Excess of Pleasure: Should Clouds disgorge their Flames upon this Place,
And Thunder to the ground these Buildings raze;
Should thy proud Laurels into Ashes wast,
And all the Roman Stock new breathe their last;
I could endure these Objects in my fight,
Cause 'em my self, and Dye even with Delight.


Incredulity fortifies it self with the Pleasure of all the other Passions
which attack Religion, and are delighted with upholding such Doubts as favor
the Interest of their Disorder; and Impiety, which seems to do Evil for Evil's
sake, and without any further Advantage, yet has its secret Pleasures, which
are so much the more dangerous, the more the Soul hides 'em from it self at
that time, when it most exquisitely tastes 'em.

It often happens, that an Interest of Vanity, makes us irreverent to the
Supreme Being. We would fain seem formidable to Men, by seeming to have no fear
of God: To menace and threaten the Earth, we blaspheme Heaven.

But yet that is not the principal Ingredient of Impiety: Man naturally hates
God, because he hates the Dependence which submits him to his Dominion, and the
Law which restrains his Desires. This Abhorrence of the Deity lies hid in the
bottom of Man's Heart, or Infirmity and Fear many times conceal it from the
Eyes of Reason: This inward Aversion perceives a secret Pleasure at any thing
that dares and affronts GOD; Men love those flights of Wit which scandalize the
Divinity.

Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni.
Il dedaigne de voir le Ciel qui le trahit.
He scorns to see the Heaven, which betrays him.
This seemed Brave and Great, because it was Impious.

I am inclinable to their Opinion, who hold that Fear is the original Source of
Superstition, provided we join Hatred and Fear together, as they are often
found in the Heart of Man; it being hard for us not to have some Hatred and
Aversion at that which we very much fear and dread. It Is certain, that
Superstition would not be so common in the World (for ordinarily it is made up
of an inhumane Extravagance) did not Pleasure inveigle Men to that which Reason
forbids; and this Pleasure consists in an inward Satisfaction, at seeing the
Deity abused and degraded. The Pagans did not only meet with a Pleasure of
Pride, in raising Men to the Order of Gods, but also a Pleasure of Hatred and
Impiety, in debasing the Gods to the Condition of Men; and it may be they were
not so much delighted with reading those Fables of their Poets, which related
the Apotheoses of Men, as those which feigned the Wounds and Defeats of the
Gods, by Humane Arms.

So that whoever sounds the Depth of our Heart will find, that Superstition and
Profaneness are not so opposite as Men commonly imagine; and that they are
united in this secret Hatred of God, which follows the State of our Corruption,
and which nothing can cure but Grace.

As Pride and Hatred are united to form that vast Pleasure, which Superstition
aims at, and the Delight we find in Impiety; so also they combine to make the
Pleasure of Malignity, Slander and Calumny.

Here we find a Pleasure of Vainglory: For we many times dispraise other Men,
with a Design indirectly to commend our our selves. Any Man in the World would
openly praise himself, if he dared be so bold; but fearing least a breach of
Modesty might make a Blemish in his Escutcheon, he is obliged to go a By-way to
work, to use Cunning and Artifice in displaying his Merit to the Eyes of
Mankind, so as not to attract the Reproach of too great Vanity: He dares not
commend himself in plain Terms, but hopes that by speaking of others, he shall
give an indirect Description of himself; that by making a show of Horror and
Detestation of an evil Action, he shall testify how much his Virtue removes him
from the like Fault* And that the more he blames the Vices o^ others, the
greater Evidence will he give of his own Exemption from 'em, and make People
think him endu'd with the opposite Virtues. A dull and unpolitick Self-love
draws this Discourse, saying, As for my part, though I have very great Defects,
yet may I boast that I have not This: But an ingenious and prudent Self-love
knows better how to manage its Modesty, and many times hides its Contempt, but
much more the design it has in Contemning.

But besides this Interest of Pride, which makes us delighted in despising
other Men, there is also an Interest of Hatred, which creates in us the like
Disposition. We look upon other Men as our Enemies, because we regard 'em as
Competitors in the pursuit of temporal Enjoyments: You Will always be pleased at
seeing 'em Degraded, whilst you think 'em in a Condition to rival you in any
thing: But no sooner does this Opposition cease, but there is also an End of
that Pleasure you conceived in their Debasement; hence it happens that Slander
has for its Object, not the Dead, but the Living.

After this it is easy to judge, that the Pleasure of Conversation, is not so
innocent as Men commonly fancy. Indifferent things are tedious to us; those
which concern and nearly relate to us, excite a Pleasure either of Pride,
Hatred, Impiety, Ambition, or some other Passion no less Criminal.

As there is a Pleasure of Conversation, there is also a Pleasure of Thoughts,
which proceeds from the same Source with the former: It arises from this, that
our Heart, being prepossessed with certain Passions, cannot enjoy it self, but
when it thinks upon certain Objects; and therefore suspends all our other
Thoughts and Reflections. Such is the Pleasure of a Lover, who forgets every
thing else to think of the Object of his Love; he perceives a sort of Delight
in his Amorous Contemplations, (which is destroyed by Passion) because the
Pleasure of Thought yields to that of Sense.

Men commonly imagine, that the usual Distractions and Wanderings of those that
pray to God, or exercise any other Duties of Religion, are the least of Faults;
but if they enquire into the Cause of 'em, they will change their Opinion: For
indeed these proceed merely from the too great Pleasure, which the Ideas of
temporal Things excite in our Minds; and that, as I may so speak, we desire to
retain those worldly Objects by the Pleasure of Thinking, which escape our
reach through the Suspension of our sensual Delights.

We every where seek for Pleasure, just as Bees for those Flowers which afford
'em Nourishment; and as they many Times find what they search for in foul and
moorish places, so it frequently happens, that we perceive a kind of Pleasure
in Affairs, Dangers* Labors, and sometimes even in Affliction* if it be not
very great. There Is a Pleasure which might justly be termed, the Pleasure of
Complaints and Tears: We take delight in lamenting the Death of illustrious
Persons the Glory of those, who are bewailed, signalizing, in some sort, even
those who bewai^^ 'em. We take a Pleasure to prolong and eternize our Sorrow:
We think to give a Specimen of the Constancy of our Soul, by an inconsolable
Affliction. Lastly, we are very glad to make an appearance of the Greatness of
our Loss, thinking to engage the Compassion of others to reflect upon our own
Worth.

In the last place, we perceive a sort of Pleasure even in Idleness, which
oftentimes causes us to renounce all the rest. It proceeds from a certain
Effeminacy and Softness, which makes us hate even the least Pain and
Incommodity: For our whole Business being the search of Pleasure, we accustom
our selves to think, love, desire, speak and act with Pleasure; to seek for
such Company as delights us, and to avoid all manner of disagreeable
Occupations. Hence the least Inconveniency puts us in Despair, it being
contrary to this prevailing Habit, and suspending the Perception of so many
different Pleasures, the Thoughts whereof are always present to our Mind.

Wherefore we must not think to find Stedfastness and Constancy in Voluptuous
Souls: Pride indeed may cause 'em to affect a sort of Hardiness, to support
Disgraces and Calamities, but certainly they never put on a real Fortitude till
they are freed from the charming Idea's of Pleasure.

Bodily Pleasure is more sensible than Spiritual, yet this appears more
Criminal than that: For the Pleasure of Pride is Sacrilegious, which
appropriates to it self the Honor belonging to God; the Pleasure of Hatred is
Barbarous and Blood-thirsty, which is delighted in nothing but Desolation and
Tears; and the Pleasure of Incredulity and Superstition is, as we before
showed, full of Impiety and Wickedness, which is nourished and upheld by any
thing that seems to deba^e or annihilate the Deity.

This shows us, in the first place, that Pleasure is as universal as our
Corruption, it being certain, that they who are abandoned to one sort of
Pleasure, seldom fail to enslave themselves to another. It signifies but
little, for Instance, to make great Scruples about the Use of sensual
Pleasures, when we are given up to that of the Mind, which is far more criminal
and dangerous.

Secondly, we may reasonably conclude, that it is impossible to cure One-self of
this Vice, by Motives purely Temporal. For when you allege to a Voluptuous Man,
the Considerations of Honor and Decorum, of his Interest and Establishment in
the World, you may perhaps so far work upon him, as to oblige him to prefer the
Pleasures of Pride and Ambition before sensual Pleasure; but this will but
transport him from one Vice to another.

If you would find such Motives as are capable of withdrawing him from all kinds of
Pleasure, you must put the case to him of forsaking all worldly Delights, if
need be; and to this End, set him upon making this Reflection, That himself
shall last to Eternity, and those Pleasures but for a Moment.

Indeed upon the Principles of a mortal and perishing Man, the Cause of
Pleasure seems just and reasonable; for it is natural to One that is not to be
very long in a Condition of enjoying the sweetness of Pleasure, to seek and
pursue it, so long as he has an Opportunity: This Piece of Morality is prettily
expressed by Horace: Vitae summa brevis spem nos vetat inchoare longam. Were
all Man's Hopes and Pretensions confined to the short Duration of this Life,
there would be Truth and Reason in these Maxims: But being destined to live
after Death, the Light of Nature teaches us, that he ought in like manner to
aspire at those eternal Delights, whereof Religion so happily informs him.

To this I add, that the Immortal Man, or as I have already described him, he
who believes he is Eternal, and acts according to this Principle, easily
renounces the Allurements of Pleasure, through his desire of an endless and
unlimited Happiness. It Is impossible he should become a slave to sensual
Delight, which he knows the Author of Nature employed purely as a Motive to
engage us in the Preservation or Propagation of the Body. He Is as far from
placing his Supreme Felicity in the Pleasure of being applauded and extolled by
a Society of Mortals, as any Man in his right Senses would be from placing his
Glory in the Praise and Commendation of one that is to see him but for a Moment.
He is not affected with the Pleasure of Revenge; he will hardly look upon those
Persons as Enemies, who do him but a temporal Prejudice. He patiently supports
the short D^pendances of this Life, and for the same reason tastes not any
criminal Pleasure, in being a Superior, regarding his Condition as a
provisional and transitory State, which scarcely deserves his Care and
Attention. In a word, the Immortal Man has no Passions but what are very
moderate about (...) Objects of this Life, and as his pleasure in the World, is
proportioned to the Degree of his application to these Objects; it is easy to
conceive, that he finds himself situated above the Sphere of Voluptuousness; in
which certainly he cannot be said to lose any thing, being advantagiously
indemnify'd by the Commerce of Love, Gratitude, Zeal, Joy and Consolation,
which he holds with God, who by the Sentiment of his holy and unspeakable
Delights, raises him above the melancholy Scene of our sad and intoxicated
Pleasure.

Wherefore Man does not escape the fond Embraces of Pleasure, as it is usually
fancied, either by Pride, Interest, Revenge or Ambition; he that shuts himself
up in the narrow limits of this Life, will be Voluptuous, do what he can. Let
the Pagan Philosophers tell us as many fine Precepts of Virtue, and prescribe
as many Remedies as they please against Intemperance, we'll indeed admire their
Maxims, because of the secret Relation they have to our natural Dignity, of
which we have a confused and imperfect Knowledge: But shall never find our
selves any farther disposed to practice 'em, than as we are convinced of our
Eternity.

CHAP. XIV. Wherein we Treat of the general Disorders of Self-love, and
particularly of Pride.
PLeasure and Glory are the two general Goods, which give a season and relish
to all the rest: They are, as it were, the Spirit and Salt of all the others,
differing in this, as we before observed, That Pleasure becomes amiable and
desirable purely for its own sake, whereas Glory is perceived merely upon the
account of that Pleasure which attends it.

But though Glory be perceived only by means of that Pleasure, wherewith it is
accompanied, yet may it still be said in some sense to be desirable for its own
sake; at least it must be certainly acknowledged that it is no easy matter to
find out the primitive and ancient Reason, upon which our Love of Esteem is
founded. This is no satisfactory Solution, to say, that we desire Esteem
because of its appendant Pleasure: For this Pleasure being a Pleasure of
Reflection, the Difficulty is not so easily ended, since it still remains to
know why this Esteem, which is something foreign and remote in respect of us,
should cause our Satisfaction?

Nor is it more to the purpose, to allege the Utility and Profit of Glory, for
though the Esteem and Repute, we acquire, may serve to make us succeed in our
Designs, and procure us diverse Advantages in Society, yet there are
Circumstances, under which this Supposition will not hold good. What prospect
of Advantage could Mutius, Leonidas, Codrus, Curtius, and all those other
Heroes propose to themselves, who laid down their Lives in the Field, and
pursuit of Honor? What Advantage could they see in sacrificing their Goods and
Themselves upon the Altar of Pride? Through what Principle of Interest do those
Indian Women, who burn themselves in the Funeral Pile of their deceased
Husbands, seek even in despite of Laws and Remonstrances, for an Esteem which
they Survive?

A certain Person has said upon this subject, That Self-love delights to
foster and cherish an Idea of our Perfections, which is, as it were, its
domestic Idol, being unable to endure any thing that opposes this Idea, as
Contempt and Injuries; and on the other hand, passionately searching after all
that flatters and magnifies it, as Esteem and Commendations. According to this
Principle the Advantage of Glory would consist in this, That the Esteem which
others have for us, confirms the good Opinion we have of our selves: But that
this is not the principal Source of the Love of Esteem and Honor, appears from
hence, That Men for the generality make more account of the apparent Merit
which they obtain by the Esteem of others, than of the real Merit which
attracts the Esteem of themselves; or, if you will, that they had rather have
those Faults which Men esteem and value, than such good Qualities as are not
prized in the Eyes of the World; and that moreover there are multitudes of
Persons, that seek to make themselves considerable and valued by such
Accomplishments and Qualities, as they very well know they are not endu'd with,
which destroys the Opinion, that they have recourse to an outward and foreign
Esteem, to confirm the good Sentiments they have of themselves.

It Is equally groundless to imagine, that we desire Esteem merely for this
reason, That we may be distinguished and raised above the common Rank; for this
is to explain the Cause by the Effect. We don't seek for Esteem, that we may
distinguish our selves, but we distinguish our selves, because we would be
esteemed, by departing from the Multitude, and leaving the Dungeon of our
former Obscurity.

Lastly, The Love of Esteem in its general Idea, cannot be said to proceed from
this Idolatry of Self-love, which aims at being Eternal and Immense like GOD,
exhibiting to us an imaginary Eternity in the memories of Men, to save us from
the Shipwreck of Time, and maugre its consuming Malignity to perpetuate our
Name; and trying to enlarge our Dimensions, and extend 'em to the utmost limits
of the World, by buisying the Minds of Men with the Consideration of our
Actions and Grandeur. If that were the only Source of the Love of Esteem and
Honor, 'twould follow, that we could not innocently desire the Esteem of other
Men, nor consequently be blamable for dreading Infamy and Disgrace, which is
contrary to Reason.

Though we search never so long for the Springs of this Inclination, I Am
persuaded, that the reason of it will no where else be discovered, but in the
Wisdom of the Creator. For as God imploys the Use of Pleasure, in order to
preserve and propagate our Body, to unite us together, and make us sensible of
the Good and Preservation of Society, wherein we are placed, so there is no
doubt, but his Wisdom makes use of the Love of Esteem, to defend us from the
Debasements of Pleasure, and put us upon exerting honest and laudable Actions
(which so well agree with the Dignity of our Nature) and at the same time to
unite us more conveniently one with another.

This Pre-caution would not have been necessary, had Humane Reason acted only
by it self, and independently from Sense: For then this Reason would be able,
not only to show us what is Honest, but also to prefer it before what is
Pleasant: But because this Reason is Partial, and many times judges in favor
of Pleasure, tying Honor and Decorum to that which delights us; the Wisdom of
the Creator thought fit to give us for the Arbitrator of our Actions, not only
our own Reason, which suffers it self to be corrupted and bribed by the
softness of Pleasure, but also the Reason of other Men, which is not so easily
seduced.

Wherefore, because the Author of Nature was so pleased, that other Men's
Reason should be in some sort our Law and Judge as to moral Honesty, and the
Decorums of reasonable Nature: Upon this very account he formed us with a
natural Desire of raising an Esteem of our selves in the Minds of others; a
Desire, which assuredly precedes the Reflections of our Mind.

For though the Utility, Pleasure and Desire of finding Confirmations of the
Opinion we have of our selves, etc. may be capable of satisfying the Love of
Esteem, yet we have shown, that they are not the Cause of it.

And here we might distinguish Three Worlds, which the Wisdom of the Creator
has founded upon Three natural Inclinations: The Animal, the Rational, and the
Religious World. The first is a Society of Persons united by Sense, the second
of Persons united by Esteem, the third of Persons united by natural Religion.
The first has for its Principle the Love of Pleasure, the second the Love of
Esteem, the third Conscience. All these three Principles are Natural, and the
Grounds of 'em is not elsewhere to be searched for, than in the Wisdom of the
Creator. The first of these Worlds relates to the second, the second to the
third, and the third to the last. Wherefore these things are thus subordinated
to each other, Esteem regulates the Love of Pleasure, and Religion ought to
regulate the Love of Esteem; and this Subordination is no less natural than
these Inclinations.

The Love of Pleasure may truly be attributed to Nature: But the Irregularities
of Voluptuousness are to be reckoned to another Account. The Love of Esteem may
be said to be Natural; but yet we are not to suppose, that the Extravagancies
and Enormities of Pride arise from the Womb of Nature. To this we may ascribe
the Fear of God, and the Love of Virtue: But we ought not to give it an
Appennage of all those Superstitions, which Men have been pleased to ingraft
upon the Principles of Nature; and consequently it is necessary, that the Love
of Pleasure, of Esteem, and Conscience, should have their natural Law, Rules
and Limits: But 'twill not be amiss to insist upon the Love of Esteem.

CHAP. XV. Where we examine all those Irregularities, which are the Ingredients
of Pride.
IT seems, that hitherto we have not had a very perfect Knowledge of Pride, and
doubtless the reason was, because we have not thoroughly distinguished its
several Parts, nor with sufficient Attention examined all its Characters. Pride
in general may be reduced to Five principal Branches: Namely, to the Love of
Esteem, to Presumption, Vanity, Ambition, and Haughtiness. For though Men are
wont to confound these Terms, and use 'em indifferently to signify the same
Thing; it is certain that these Expressions have somewhat different
Significations. The Love of Esteem is Natural and Lawful in it self, as we
before observed; but it is Vicious and Disorderly when it rises to Excess: This
is the most general Irregularity of Pride, for when our Desire of Esteem is
excessive, it is natural to romage in our selves for some estimable Qualities,
and finding we have none, our Imagination presents us with some in Complaisance
to the Inclinations of the Heart, from whence arises Presumption. Moreover this
immoderate Love of Esteem makes us value our selves upon any Endowment, whether
good or bad, and for want of real Sources of Glory, to aim at an Esteem upon
the account of those things which are in no wise Estimable, unless in our own
Fancy; this is properly our Vanity. For this Expression originally signifies
the Emptiness of those Objects, wherein we erroneously seek for Esteem, and
which are naughty Sources of Vainglory. From this excessive Love of Esteem
arises the Desire we have to raise our selves above other Men, having a
Persuasion, that we cannot attract a public Esteem and Consideration, whilst we
are confounded with the Vulgar Rabble; and this produces Ambition. Lastly, The
Desire we have to make a great Show, by distinguishing our selves from the
common Rank, makes us despise other Men, seeking all possible means to degrade
and pull 'em down, that we may stand upon their Heads. All the Irregularities
of Pride being reduced to the excessive Love of Esteem as their first and
original Principle, we cannot use too much Diligence in considering this latter.
The two general Faults of this Inclination are Excess and Irregularity; the
First consists in this, That we love Esteem too much: the Second, That we love
false Esteem as well as true.

In order to understand what is the Excess of the Love of Esteem, we must
consider the Design of God in placing this Inclination in our Heart. He gave it
to us for the Preservation of the Body, the Good of Society, and the Exercise
of Virtue. I say, for the Preservation of the Body, seeing that the Love of
Esteem defends us from those Extravagances of corporeal Pleasure, which would
presently tend to our Destruction and Death: For who doubts, that the Desire of
raising an Esteem of our selves, is a powerful Motive to stave us off from that
excess of Debauchery and Sensuality, to which we are dragged by the Love of
Pleasure, and which is of so fatal Consequence even to our Body. He placed in
us this Inclination for the Good of Sciety; for it is this Desire to obtain an
Esteem in the World, that renders us Affable and Complaisant, Obliging and
Civil; that makes us love Decency and Sweetness of Conversation. And yet all
this while, who does not know, that the finest Arts, the most lofty Sciences,
the wisest Governments, the most just Establishments, in general, most that is
Admirable in reasonable Society, proceeds from this natural Desire of Glory?
Let us not fancy, that our own Corruption and Concupiscence brought this
excellent Benefit to Mankind; doubtless the wise Instructions of the Author of
Nature had the chiefest Hand in this Matter. Lastly, it is certain, that the
Design of God was to steer and incline us to honest and laudable Actions, by
giving us for the Judge of our Conduct, not only our own Reason, which is
oftentimes bribed by the Enticements of Pleasure; but also the Reason of other
Men, who are not so partial in our Favor as we our selves. Indeed God may be
considered either as the Author of Society, or Religion. As the Author of
Society, he thought fit Men should enter into mutual Commerce, during some
Time; and with this Intent he endowed 'em with such Inclinations as were
necessary to the Good and Preservation of Society. Among these are to be
reckoned the Love of Pleasure, and the Desire of Esteem: This latter is the
Spring of Humane Virtues, which ought not to be so much cried down, as usually
they are, for if they are not inservient to eternal Salvation, yet are they
designed for the Good of temporal Society; they proceed from the Intention of
the Author of Nature; they are a part of his Model and Platform; Love of Esteem
being the means he makes use of to perfect Society, as the Love of Pleasure is
designed to found it. As for Religion, that has more lofty Views; for it
undertakes to direct Men to the eternal and infinite Good.

Hence it follows, that the Love of Esteem is Excessive: First, when it tends
to destroy the Body, instead of preserving it; Secondly, when it disturbs the
good and order of Society, instead of maintaining and supporting it; Thirdly,
when it causes us to violate the Precepts of Virtue, instead of putting us upon
the Practice of 'em.

We find a pat Example of the first of these in the Fury of Duels: That, in my
Opinion, is a very extravagant point of Honor, which would have us love Glory,
and yet despise Life, which is the main Foundation, and partly the End of it,
as we have already seen. What will Men's Esteem signify to me, when I am not in
Being to enjoy it? Without Life this Honor is nothing. Life is something, even
without this Honor, and God himself thought fit to let us know by his Conduct,
that the former is more Estimable than the latter; for he incites us to the
Love of Honor, but by one bare Motive of Glory, and makes us in love with
Life, by Pleasure and Glory too.

But if it be answered, That it is not so much the love of Honor and Esteem, as
fear of Contempt and Shame, that makes a Man expose himself to revenge an
Affront; and that it is natural to a Man of Honor to be unable to live under
the pressure of Infamy: this Reply is not satisfactory, because as it is a
Weakness not to be able to endure Grief, it is no less One to be unable to
suffer an unjust and groundless Contempt.

In the bottom we find the Love of Esteem, as to this Example, to be irregular
in every Respect. For this is to love Esteem too much, To love false Esteem,
and that too more than Life, and consequently more than the Preservation of the
Body, than Society, which is deprived of one or many Members by the Fury of
those infamous Combats: And lastly, more than Virtue; since it is to love it
more than Humanity, Justice, Charity and Moderation.

I know when the Case is put to spend one's Blood for the good of Society, and
the Service of the Prince, who is its Representative, and has its Rights and
Properties deputed into his Hands, a Man ought not to make the least
resistance, or scruple to expose his Life; but then it is Virtue, and not
Esteem, that he prefers before Life: He pursues the Design of the Author of
Nature, conforms himself to his Model and Will; since he that made us has
placed us in a State of Subordination and Dependence. All the Irregularity
proceeds from this, That Men have not a competent Knowledge of Honor, and love
it Blindfold; they have only a confused Notion of it, which Education,
Examples, and the Judgment of other Men do incessantly change. Honor, in its
ordinary Idea, includes three Things; it is a Sentiment of one's Excellency, a
Love of Duty, and a Desire to be Esteemed. A Man of Honor should be sensible
of Virtue and Merit, and consequently be grated and offended at any outward
Contempt or Disrespect. He should so far love his Duties, as even to expose
himself to the greatest Dangers, rather than fail of observing 'em; and he
ought to love the Esteem of rational Persons, and make it his endeavor to
deserve it.

This general Idea is just and true, but the Application, Men make of it, is
ordinarily False; for they attend not sufficiently to their real Merit, which
is far greater than they imagine, in not having an Idea of their Duties, which
are of much larger Extent than they suppose, and being unable to discern false
Esteem, from true, which is the Thing to which they ought to aspire.

Nevertheless it is probable, that Men, even in their Irregularities, have a
sort of confused Sentiment of their natural Dignity, which joining it self with
their false Prejudices of Esteem, and worldly Glory, causes that Impatience, or
rather Fury, at receiving Abuses and Affronts. Would one, whose Merit reaches
no higher than that of a Mortal and Dying Man, resent so great Horror in
Debasement? And would he be so excessively vexed at being reduced, even to that
Nothing, which surrounds him on every side? No certainly, there is an Instinct
in Man, which continually puts him in Mind of his Condition, and renders him
sensible of all that opposes the Idea of his Perfections.

But it is certain, that this Glory to which we aspire, includes many different
Sentiments, which are the constituent Parts of it. We may distinguish Four:
Namely, Esteem, Consideration, Respect, and Admiration. Esteem is a Tribute we
pay to a Man's proper Qualities, and Personal Merit; Consideration has for its
Object, not only the Merit of a Person, but also his external Accomplishments,
as Birth, Riches, Power, Credit, Reputation; and in general all those
Advantages, which make the Difference of Conditions, and Distinction of Persons
in Society. Respect is nothing else but an high Consideration; and Admiration
is no more but a great Esteem. The finest, or at least the most proper Glory,
consists in Esteem and Admiration: But the most sensible and conspicuous Glory,
consists in Consideration and Respect; the reason of it is, Because all the
World are not capable of discerning a worthy and deserving Man, from an
unworthy; whereas every one can distinguish a great Lord, from a private Man.

It Is certain, that every Man which wears a Head, may justly demand this
Sentiment of us, when we consider his Excellence, and natural Dignity. We owe
Esteem and Admiration to those Perfections which GOD has pleased to endow a Man
with. We owe Consideration and Respect to the Rank and Station he has in the
World: But this original Glory of Man has been darkened, and almost defaced by
Sin; and here we cannot without Surprise and Amazement consider the prodigious
Depravation and Irregularity of corrupted Man; see his Pride, as it were,
springing up from the Ruins of his Glory, and his Humility ending, where his
real Vileness begins.

It Is somewhat strange, to see Men Complementing and Praising one another,
whilst they equally deserve an eternal Shame and Reproach:

But we need not wonder at it, God being willing to preserve Society, even
after the Corruption of Man, was not obliged to deprive us of this natural
Inclination toward public Esteem, which makes, as we said before, the
Perfection of civil Conversation.

The Example of those Philosophers is not to be minded, whom we have seen
despise Men's Esteem to such a Degree, as even to count themselves Unhappy if
they chanced to attract it. It may be, these Heroes in Humility did not really
despise Glory, but only made an appearance of despising it to the Eyes of Men.
Cicero says, that none of all those who wrote Books concerning the Contempt of
Vainglory, ever forgot to put their Names to 'em; this is a politic
Contrivance of Pride, to aspire after Glory by seeming to shun it. When a Man
openly professes his Desire of Esteem, he meets with a great many Emulators and
Rivals, who observing his Designs, are so much the more eager to stand in his
Light with their own Esteem; and more vigorously endeavor to deprive him of
the Esteem of other Men, with how much greater Ardour he reaches after it: But
when a Man seems to despise this Esteem of the World, which is so much courted
and sought after, then as he voluntarily separates himself from the Number of
those, who directly aim at it, he is very well thought of, Men like his
Disinterestedness, and would even force him to accept of that which he seems to
refuse. Gloria, says St. Augustine, sequitur fugientem.

Moreover, Merit and Fortune have always been at Daggers-draw, for the
Upper-hand in the way to Glory. Grandees are invested, by the Privilege of
Fortune, with the most illustrious Honors, which usually attract the
Affections of the Multitude. The Philosophers, maintaining the Rights and
Properties of Virtue, and Wisdom, opposition to Fortune, have raised, as it
were, a Party of Confederates against Grandeur and Renown; being incapable of
obtaining it, they betake themselves to contemn and despise it. 'They made a
Show of renouncing that ambitious Desire, which makes Men cringe and run after
the Dispensers of the Goods of Fortune, lest an eager Officiousness might be a
tacit Confession of their Inferiority; and because the Multitude condemned 'em
by their interested Conduct, they pretended to despise vulgar Esteem, and
popular Applause; but let 'em once change their Condition, they will presently be
of another Mind.

But the Irregularity consists principally in this, That our Thoughts are so
much taken up with gaining an Esteem amongst Men, that we don't take time to
think of approving our selves to God: Not but the Approbation of God seems to
us, in the Bottom, more precious and valuable than Men's Esteem: But it falls
out thus, because to obtain the Esteem of Men, it is not requisite that our
Heart should be changed, it suffices that we disguise our selves to the Eyes of
the World; whereas we cannot approve our selves to God, unless we change the
very Foundation of our Heart. Now it is no hard matter for Self-love to put on a
counterfeit Visage; but it is a point of Difficulty to be willing, in good
Earnest, to become new Men.

CHAP. XVI. Where we consider the Second Irregularity of Pride.
OUr excessive Desire of Esteem, inspires us with an ardent Desire to have
estimable Qualities, and an extreme Dread of being stained with those Faults
which do u^ a Disparagement in the Minds of Men, or o^ betraying our selves by
not raising a very advantageous Opinion of our Persons. Now as we are persuaded
of what we desire, and of what we vehemently dread, it happens* that we either
conceive too good on Opinion, or fall into an excessive Distrust of ou^ selves.
The first of these Faults is termed Presumption, the Second, Timorousness; and
though they seem opposite, yet they both spring from the same Original, or rather
they are but the very same Fault under two differen^ Forms. Presumption is a
confident Pride; and Timorousness is a Pride fearful of betraying it self: We
are inclined to one or the other according to the Diversity of our Temperament.
A predominancy of Blood usually makes Men assured and persuaded of what is for
their Profit and Advantage; hence arises Confidence. Melancholy causes a Man
to believe whatsoever he fears; it is the Principle of Distrusts and groundless
Suspicions: But Diffidence and Confidence are both grafted upon the Stock of
Pride, seeing they both spring from the excessive Love of Esteem, which is the
Firstborn of our Irregularities.

It Is the Opinion of all the World, that a presumptuous Man values himself too
highly* But I may venture to say against all the World, that he esteems not
himself enough* and that his Fault lies in a Defect, and not (...) of
Elevation, beyond what he really (...) truly s^nsible, that he is endu'd (...)
Excellency than the Object (...) that the Desert of the perishing Man (...)
light and inconsiderable, if weighed (...) ^n equal Balance with that (...) the
immortal Man.

Yet it is not to be wondered, that he had rather consider himself with relation
to Time than Eternity, since in the first of these Views he usurps Glory,
ascribing all to himself, and none to the Supreme Being; whereas in the
prospect of Eternity, he is obliged to derobe himself of all his own Glory, to
offer it a Sacrifice to God. Strange Blindness! Which permits him not to see
any other real Happiness, but what is confounded with the Glory of God.

But yet I own, That in one sense a Man may esteem himself too much; and that
it is common to see Persons have immoderate Pretensions to Humane Glory. To know
this we need only call to Mind what we have already said, that the Love of
Esteem was engraven in our Hearts, with relation to Society: For thence it
follows, that they have a Right to the greatest share of this outward Glory,
who most promote the Good of Society, and are most considerable in the Eyes of
the Public; whether through their Services, Offices, or the Eminency of the Rank
to which Providence may have tied Dominion. Great Persons have reason to
pretend to external Homages, because these things are measured with respect to
Society: But they would be vain and unreasonable, if they supposed the intrinsic
Foundation of their Merit to be ever the greater upon this account, than that
of other Men; and would not own, that theirs is a Preference of Order, and not
of real Excellency; for again I say, that the Advantages of the mortal Man are
nothing, if compared with those of Him, who subsists to Eternity: Nay, so far
are they from this, that the whole temporal Society of Men, taken all together,
with its various Governments, Power, Dignities, etc. don't counterbalance the
Immortality of one Man.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Third Irregularity that goes to make up Pride, which is
Vanity.
THe excessive Love of Esteem does not only deceive us, by persuading us, that
we have those good Qualities and Accomplishments which we really want: But also
makes us take for Sources of Glory, either estimable Goods, or even the most
inestimable Objects.

The end of Vanity is consecrated by the Custom of making the same Estimate of
that Man's Disposition, who attributes to himself those Qualities which he
truly possesses, that we do of his, who endeavors to build a Foundation of
Honor upon false Advantages.

It seems, that Man's Vanity commenced, when he lost the Sources of his real
Glory, by quitting that State of Sanctity and Happiness, wherein God had
originally placed him. For being unable to renounce the Desire of Esteem, and
finding nothing worthy of it in himself, after Sin, or rather not daring after
that to cast a steady view upon himself, when he found he was guilty of so many
Crimes, and become an Object of the Divine Vengeance: What must he needs do,
but see abroad into the World, and seek for Honor, by clothing himself with
the apparent Gayety of outward Things? And Mankind are so much the more willing
to agree, and universally consent to this, as they all find themselves by
Nature equally exposed to Nakedness and Poverty.

Methinks the Condition of Men, in this respect, is very well like that of a
Monarch, robbed of his Treasures, who having neither Gold, nor Silver, is forced
to make Copper Money pass.

We shall plainly see this, by considering, that the Sources of Humane Glory
are reduced either to things that are indifferent on this Account, being
susceptible neither of Praise nor Dispraise; or to ridiculous Things, which are
so far from raising any real Honor, that they are the fittest Mark to denote
our Vileness; or to criminal Things, and which by consequence cannot but be
Shameful and Unworthy in themselves; or lastly, to those things, all whose
seeming Perfection and Glory consists in the Relation they have to our Defects
and Infirmities.

I place Riches in the first Rank, which though they have nothing Contemptible,
yet neither have they any thing Glorious in themselves.

Our covetous and interested Desire never informs it self either of the Source,
or Use of the Riches it sees in other Men's Bags. Their merely being Rich is
sufficient to obtain its first Homages, and though it be not actually profited by
their Wealth, yet it still respects 'em upon the bare Possibility of being the
better for 'em one time or other.

But if your Heart would please to receive a distinct, instead of a confused
Idea, 'twould be often surpised at the Extravagance of its Sentiments; for
since Riches are not essential to Man, and there must be some accidental Cause
to give him his Estate, it would find, that it many times esteems his Person,
because his Father was a Profligate, or himself a Knave; and that when it pays
external Homages to Riches, it either blows a Kiss to Robbery, or commends
Infidelity and Injustice.

It Is true, this is not its direct Intention: It follows the Hankerings of its
Desire, rather than the Dictates of Reason: But is a Person whom you thus court
and accost, obliged to correct, by all these distinctions, the Baseness of your
Carriage; and to separate that which your Interest gives him, from what your
Reason would pay him, if it did but follow its own Counsel and Advice? No, no,
He receives your outward Deference and Respect, as a Tribute to his Excellency.
As your covetous Desire draw'd you in to make a Fool of you, so his Pride fails
not to Chowse, and put a Trick upon him. If his Riches don't increase his
Desert, yet the greatness of your Complaisance enhances and augments the
Opinion he has of 'em. He interprets all in a literal Sense, and fails not to
magnify and aggrandize himself, in his own Thoughts, at the outward Ceremonies
and Veneration you pay him, when you are scarce a Farthing the better for his
Wealth. Not but there is something in Riches which seems to render 'em an
Object of Esteem to the Eyes of Men, as there is someth^ng in Poverty, which
makes it an Object of Contem^t; and this I believe is, because by the former we
are invest^d with a kind Power, which advances us to a pitch above other Men,
and puts us in a Condition to live without being beholding to 'em; whereas
Poverty places us in a State of Necessity and Weakness, which forces us to rely
upon the Assistance and Succor of others: But we may say even in this, That
Opulence owes its Glory to our Ambition, and Poverty is not Shameful, but
merely through our Pride.

Nevertheless, we don't by any means approve of their Carriage, who cannot
endure any Persons should receive the Blessings of Providence, but they must
presently vent their Malice and Outrages against 'em. We turn 'em every way,
diligently examine all their Faults, and in that bate 'em not an Ace. Certainly
if the Esteem Men have for Riches proceed from Self-love, the Contempt and
Scorn which some affect for wealthy People is always a Mark of Envy; and this
very Envy is extremely shameful and unworthy. In the bottom, the dependence of
Interest is much more prevailing than that of Envy* and Men had rather
voluntarily give Place to those, from whom they expect some Benefit, than to
spurn above 'em, and do, as it were, a forced Homage through a Displeasure at the
Prosperity of them, whom they envy.

Riches are to be estimated merely by the good or bad Use Men make of 'em; as
also Birth, Authority, and Dignities. All these things put Men in an Engagement
to do good and laudable Actions. If you practice the Duties to which they
engage you, they become Fountains and Causes of your Glory; if you transgress
the Obligations they lay on you, they serve to no other purpose but to brand
you with Infamy and Disgrace.

They, who being arrived to some Degree of signal Prosperity, get Drunk with
the Thoughts of their Grandeur, are not curious Artists in the Trade of
Vainglory; would not an apparent Moderation, which should make a Show as if
they were above those Things which elevate and raise 'em, gain 'em much more
Honor, than this hair-brained Stateliness, which gives People occasion to
think they are beneath their Fortune; since they so little understand how to
manage and support it? This is so much the more surprising, as it is not the
Fate of those alone, who are not sufficiently enlightened to know the Prejudice
which this Conduct does 'em, to forget their own Condition: But also of those
who perfectly know this Truth. The reason is, Because when Men are advanced to
some Dignity or Preferment, they change, if I may so speak, their inward
Station, Pride mounting 'em to an higher Post than they were in before. In vain
will Reason advise 'em to abide in their former Situation, and to affect for
their Glory an Evenness of Temper, which may hinder 'em from taking notice of
the Advancement of their Fortune: Men choosing rather to follow the Sentiments
of the Heart, than the Lights of the Mind; it happens, that they insensibly
forget the refined Intentions of their Vanity, and pursue the Career of their
Inclination, to make the best Market of all their Advantages. They, whose
Grandeur is of long standing, or to whom the Splendour of a lofty Fortune was
Hereditary, are not altogether so subject to those Dazlings of Vainglory;
because their Mind being long accustomed to look down upon others, from the
Tallness of its Station, does not much concern it self to render that
Difference remarkable which causes their Distinction: But yet the common People
are mistaken in thinking, that these Personages are more humble and modest than
others; they would undoubtedly show the very same Insolence, were they in like
manner apprehensive, that Men did not sufficiently remark their State and
Elevation; their Courteousness and Civility is owing to a confirmed, and (as
they think) incontestable Opinion of their Superiority. To be certify'd of
this, you shall see those very Persons, which are so Affable and Modest to
those that are extremely Below 'em, Haughty and Insupportable toward those who
are almost their Equals; the Reason is undoubtedly this, That the Civilities
they show to those, who are much their Inferiors, seem to 'em of no unlucky
Consequence; they are sure their Civilities and Condescensions will not be taken
in a literal Sense, and they may gain the Name of Courteousness without
blemishing their Rank: But the Case is not the same when they have to do with
such as may enter into a kind of Comparison with 'em; as the Distance, that
separates 'em from these latter, is not very great, their Pride seeks to extend
and enlarge it as much as lays in its Power, and puts 'em upon doing a Thousand
unreasonable and unnatural Things, that they may cause all the World to take
notice of that, which they are afraid is not sufficiently remarked.

There are certain Temporal Advantages, which we take for Sources of Glory,
though in themselves, and separately from the Use Men make of 'em, they deserve
neither Esteem, nor Commendation; but we must bring under this Head, That Man
oftentimes values himself upon such Qualities as render him ridiculous.

I don't only mean those who affect such Accomplishments, as they are not
really endowed with, though it is this that properly makes those we term
ridiculous People, or Naturals: Men give this Quality to whom they please, and
laugh at the Cost of whom they think fit: It may be if there were an Order of
reasonable Creatures exempt from our Imperfections, they would find the
Ridiculousness of Humane Nature to be greater than we imagine. Man indeed,
considered in his natural Excellency, is assuredly a Work of God, most worthy
of Admiration: But this is because he is Admirable in one sense, and Ridiculous
in another. Is there any Thing, for Instance, more unsuitable to our natural
Dignity than the Vanity which is displayed in Luxury of Habits, and Superfluity
of Clothes; is it not a more Ridiculous thing than all that Men use to laugh
and make sport at, that Embroidery and Gilding should be Ingredients in the
Formal Reason of Esteem, that a Man well Dressed should claim an Exemption from
the Lash of Men's Tongues more than another; that an immortal Soul should give
its Esteem and Consideration to Horses, Equipages, Furnitures, Liveries, etc.
and that we should attribute that Glory to the Ornament of the Body, which is
the most glittering Jewel of the Soul? Cicero reproaches it; he calls One who
left off the Glory of his Profession, to follow this ridiculous Vanity; Virum
in dicendis causis been vestitum: But he need not have passed this flouting
Jeer only upon one Man, who followed the common Prejudice, but in general upon
all Mankind, who may justly be reproached for being in so great want of Glory,
that they are put to the shift to seek for it even in that, whose primitive
Design was to serve for a covering of their Shame and Nakedness. The Art of
Danceing, which some People seriously study, is a Quality that would render us
Ridiculous, if considered in that high and lofty Situation wherein we are
placed by Nature and Religion. An immortal Soul Dancing and Capering, is an
Object equally odious and ridiculous.

I know, indeed, this Ridiculousness does not appear, because it is too general.
Men never laugh at themselves, and consequently they are not much affected by
this universal Ridiculousness, wherewith all, or at least, the greatest part of
Mankind are liable to be charged: But their Prejudice does not change the
Nature of Things, and the wide Disagreement between their Actions, and their
natural Dignity, is no less Real for being concealed from their Imagination.

But, what is more grievous, Men don't only value themselves upon Qualities
which would make 'em Ridiculous, could they but duly weigh and consider 'em,
but also seek to gain a Reputation by Crimes and Villainies.

We have said before, that Men tie Reproach and Disgrace to Unfortunate, but
Esteem and Credit to Successful Crimes: Theft and Murder, which are Harbingers
to the Gallows, are disdained in a private Man, but in a Potentate the greatest
Robberies, and most notorious pieces of Injustice, which mount him to the
Empire of the World, are very well thought of.

Old Rome is a famous Example of this: In her Birth she was a Colony of Rogues
and Highway Men, who fled to her Sanctuary for an Impunity of their Crimes.
Afterward she was a Re-publick of Murderers, who extended their Injustices,
far and wide, over all the Earth: So long as these Villains make it their
Business to rob and plunder Passengers, to banish Peace and Security, from a
little Corner of the World, to enrich themselves at other Men's Cost, they have
no very creditable Reputation, and indeed they don't so much as pretend to
Glory: But no sooner does a notable Prosperity put 'em in a Condition to rob
whole Nations, and signalize their Fury and Injustice by dragging Princes and
Sovereigns to their Triumphal Chariots, but they have no more to say of
Impunity, they pretend to Glory; they don't only dare to justify, but also
consecrate their famous Robberies. They assemble, as it were, the whole
Universe in the Pomp of their Triumphs, to expose to open View the success of
their Crimes. They open their Temples, as if they would bring in Heaven it self for
an Accomplice of their Ravages and Fury.

Moreover, There are very many things which Men esteem merely as they relate to
some or other of their Infirmities. Pleasure many times makes 'em think
Debauchery honorable; Riches are beholding to poor People's greedy Desires,
for all the Consideration they have in the World. Puissance derives its Worth
from a certain Power of doing what one list, which is the most dangerous
Present that can be made to Men; Honors and Dignities draw their principal
Luster from our Ambition; and so it may truly be said, That our Depravation,
and Irregularity, is the only Source of the Glory of most temporal Things.

CHAP. XVIII. Where we continue to examine the Characters of Men's Vanity.
OUr Vanity is so palpable and manifest in all these Things, that we need not
be at any trouble to find it out: For what a piece of Blindness is it, for a
Man to value himself upon those Advantages, which don't go to make up the Merit
of his Person; and upon such Things as render us ridiculous, by showing the
extreme Disproportion betwixt what we are, and what we ought to be: Or lastly,
upon criminal Things, and consequently those which are essentially Shameful and
Unworthy?

But methinks one may, at first sight, make quite another Judgment of the
Qualities of the Soul, which are reduced to intellectual Qualities, that belong
to the Understanding and Virtues, that belong to the Heart, since the one and
the other make up what we term, Personal Merit.

Yet if we look closely into the Matter we should find, that this is far from
being the Seat of such real Sources of Glory as is commonly imagined. What if
we grant the Philosophers, who made choice of this sort of Advantages, to raise
themselves Esteem and Credit, that there is something more pure in their
pretended Glory, than in that which Fortune and the Prejudices of the World tie
to external Goods, yet we shall not fail to convince 'em of Vanity, and perhaps
in the bottom they will not appear more reasonable than the rest of Mankind.

The natural Qualities are, Memory, Apprehension, and Judgment; the acquired
Qualities are Sciences or Arts: and in general, all experimental or speculative
Knowledge, which adorns our Mind, by instructing us in that which we knew not
before, or which is useful to the purposes of Life.

Memory is not reckoned to be very significant in point of Vainglory. Men
don't pretend to build much Grounds of Esteem upon this Faculty, which appears
from this, That they think they may safely boast of having a good Memory
without offending against Modesty; and that they are not fearful of blemishing
their Character, by owning that they have a bad One. It Is to be imputed to this
Reason, That there being in Man Two Qualities: Inferior, which are serviceable
to some higher; and Superior, which direct and rule the rest: We naturally more
esteem the Superior and ruling Faculties, than the Inferior and instrumental,
such as Memory is, which serves only to furnish the Understanding with Memoirs;
and some say that there are various Apartments in the Mind of Man, and that
when one Power is enlarged, another is contracted and lessened; whence it is
thought, That Want of Memory betokens Wit and Judgment. In general it is
certain, That Men never own their Faults and Imperfections for any other
reason, but merely to acquire a piece of Glory by virtue of this Confession,
which they value much more than the Quality they acknowledge themselves to
want; or to appease the Pride of others, by an apparent Humility, and oblige
'em by an artificious Dis-interestedness to render 'em their Due.

Men are as diligent and concerned in point of Wit, as they are neglectful and
careless in point of Memory; this appears both by the Sensibility they express,
when they are upbraided with the Want of it, and by the delicate Pre-cautions,
their Modesty takes to show that they are Witty, though they don't pretend to it.
He that should openly say; I have a great deal of Wit; would be insupportable
to Mankind; yet this would be no more than what he commonly thinks: but it is
requisite he should disguise his Thoughts, and strive to gain a Commendation,
by seeming to turn his Back to it.

Men are undoubtedly very much beholding to this kind of Vanity, seeing they
owe to it very many agreeable Productions, not to reckon the Pleasure they take
in the Conversation of those Persons who act or speak by this Motive: But
indeed sometimes this Vanity becomes troublesome and unpleasant.

Whence arises the Habit Men have of contradicting in Company, but from a
secret Envy and Desire to make the World think that themselves are more
Enlightened than others, and better understand the Things spoken of, or at
least from a strong Persuasion they have of it themselves? They oppose those,
who take an Ascendant, and pretend to be Masters in Conversation, more freely
than others, because through a Principle of Pride they cannot away with the Pride
of those who would be thought to have taller Understandings than their
Brethren. They more voluntarily contradict in a very great Company, where there
are many Witnesses of what is spoken, than when they are privately Discoursing
with a single Person, with whom they cannot enter into a Contestation, because
then the same Man would be Judge and Plaintiff both at once. It also happens,
that Men contradict, though they have nothing Material to urge, for when
themselves cannot show any specimen of Wit, they strive at least to oppose the
Glory of those, who seek to make an Appearance of it.

To the same Principle may be imputed that Liberty, which most Men take to
blame the Conduct of their Superiors. In this there is undoubtedly both
Injustice and Blindness: Injustice, because they judge of what they neither do,
nor can understand; it being impossible for private Persons, that have not
entered in the Council of their Governors, to know, unless very imperfectly,
the Reasons of their Conduct: Of Blindness, because it is commonly seen, that
those very Men, who set up for Judges, and Censurers of their Master's Actions,
prove very great Bunglers, when they happen to be called to the like Employ;
and how should they be off of it, since they are incapable to frame a right and
exact Judgment, of what is before their Eyes? It being a grand Rule, among the
common Sort, That Adversity is a constant Token of Disgrace; and Prosperity is
a sufficient Ground of Esteem and Commendation.

Yet who is ignorant, that Men confound an unfortunate Ingenuity, with
Ignorance; and a fortunate Ignorance obtains the Glory of Ingenuity? Nay, I
dare say, and boldly maintain, that few great Events are owing to Humane
Prudence; it is the Concourse of Circumstances, that causes the Happiness and
Success of grand Exploits: There be Heroes of Fortune, if I may so express my
self, and those in a greater Number than Heroes of Merit.

But Wit, taken for that vivacity and sprightliness of Imagination, which makes
us conceive things with Quickness, and express 'em with Facility and Ease, has
a kind of Inconsistency with Judgment. It most frequently happens, that these
impetuous ebullitions of Fancy embarass, instead of directing us: They are
false Lights, which lead us into Precipices. Wit, to define it in a word, Is,
in the Hand of the Passions, an Instrument of committing great Faults.

I don't say the same of Judgment, which is undoubtedly the most Estimable of
all the intellectual Qualities. It Is certainly a mistake to attribute great
Things and Actions to Wit: It Is not Wit, but Judgment, that governs States;
disciplines Armies; excels in Trading; soars in the study of Arts and Sciences:
But not to set two Qualities at Variance, which are in no wise opposite; Wit
must be said to be the Perfection of Judgment, and Judgment reciprocally the
Perfection of Wit, yet with this difference, That Judgment without Wit is
Something; whereas Wit without Judgment, is worse than Nothing.

The reason of Men's general Mistake is, because they imagine upon a Vulgar
Prejudice, that Wit is rarely found, and Judgment is very common; it is quite
and clean the contrary. Wit, that imagines, invents, refines, and subtillizes,
in every Thing is frequently met with; but Judgment, which compares, examines,
weighs, considers the Connection and End of Things, determines not it self but
upon solid Reasons, is the rarest Thing in the World.

Most Men have a Portion of Wit, every Passion inspires 'em with that, and even
the Strength of Wine creates a Vivacity; but there is scarcely a Man upon Earth,
who wants not Judgment; since there is rarely One, that makes a just Discernment
of what is truly Advantageous to him, from what is of little or no Concernment.

As in the World, Vivacity makes Hair-brains, and Judgment Persons truly
Ingenious. We need not wonder, to see in Religion, that Good-sense believes,
and Wit is incredulous; it is because the later determines it self, upon the
least Appearances, without any Attention; whereas Judgment compares, and
examines all things before it is determined.

In vain have the Learned endeavored, to raise a Veneration of Learning, through
an Interest of making that Respected, which causes their Distinction in the
World: It may be, by attracting the vain Approbation of the Vulgars, they have
found out the Secret of satisfying Themselves; if so, then Learning it self
stands in need of the Succor of Vanity: For pray, of what Advantage is most of
our Knowledge, to One that is made for Eternity? What does Humane Learning
teach us? Words, Etymologies, Dates, Facts, which are of no concern to us, and
serve to no other purpose but to show, that we know 'em; vain Questions, either
ridiculous or dangerous; endless Speculations; a multitude of Fictions and
Falsities, and scarcely any Thing that is profitable to us, or capable of
nourishing our Soul. Moreover, How came the greatest part of Men to know these
Things, in so troubled and confused a manner, that their pretended Knowledge,
serves but merely to throw them into Errors? To have confused Notions, and a
great deal of Vanity, is the ready way to perpetual Mistakes; and it is certain,
that the ordinary Learning implies the one, and the other: For it is impossible
to make a Distinction of those various Ideas and Kinds of Knowledge, which Men
heap together in so great a Number; and it commonly happens, that they are
mightily puffed up, with the Attainment of this tenebrous Booty; as if a Man had
any grounds to think himself Happy, for acquiring new Prejudices and Errors;
and as if a confused heap of Knowledge, which hinders the Exactness and
Rectitude of the Mind, was more valuable than clear and distinct Notions, which
produce a quite contrary Effect. In this they may take an Advantage of the
Errors of the Vulgars, who use to confound these Things; but they will never
impose upon Persons truly ingenious and enlightened, nor will they have much
reason to be satisfied with themselves; even those, who have a clear and
perfect Knowledge of what they pretend to know, who join natural Qualities to
acquired, who are accustomed, by the exactness of diligent Meditation and
Attention, to refine and purify that Knowledge, which by its confusion embroils
and puzzles the Brain of other Men; don't in the main reap any other Fruit of
their Studies, than to know how limited and finite Man's Knowledge is; they
find themselves every way surrounded with impenetrable Depths, cannot move a
Step without finding a Difficulty: Their distinct Knowledge is but small and
inconsiderable, and all that little is, as it were, Buried in almost an
infinite Number of Prejudices and Errors, from which it is to be separated and
sifted; and which is a yet greater Misery, though Knowledge of this Character may
enlighten the Mind more than any other, yet we don't see that it is a whit more
inservient, at leas^ for the generality, to the Satisfaction of the Heart.
There are some, says an Ancient, who Know merely to Know; this is the Effect of
an unprofitable Curiosity: Some obtain Knowledge in order to obtain Honors or
Riches; this is the Effect of a shameful Traffic: Lastly, There be some who
Know, that they may make a great show of their Knowledge; this is the Effect of
a swelling Vanity.

In fine it may be said, that the ordinary Knowledge is unprofitable in Nature;
dangerous very often in Society; pernicious in the Heart, and most commonly
mortal in Religion. It Is unprofitable and useless in Nature; you may reason
long enough about the Cause of Storms and Diseases, but cannot avoid the Insults
of either. It Is often dangerous in Society, for there it stirs up Troubles and
Disorders; hence Augustus in the Model of Politics, which he left to his
Successors, would have Philosophers banished the Commonwealth, because the
Infatuation of their pretended Wisdom, was wont to make them despise
Authority. It Is dangerous in the Heart, seeing it most commonly costs us our
Humility: And mortal in Religion, because it sets up it self for a Judge of
Revelation; and would have us apprehend that of our Selves, which Faith credits
merely upon Divine Testimony.

The Incredulous do mightily Triumph and Insult in this, That it is rarely seen,
that Men of very great and eminent Learning, have the same Belief with the
common sort of People, as to the Mysteries of Religion. Let 'em not mistake
themselves, the Objection is not of such Force as they imagine: For a Learned
Man, to define him exactly, is but a Man perplexed with more Prejudices than
others; and with Prejudices so much more dangerous, as he is set at a farther
distance from the Knowledge of 'em, by the Preventions of his Pride. His great
Reading serves to furnish him with Materials for his Errors, by supplying him
with indistinct Notions; and his great Vanity gives 'em a Form, by putting
confused Ideas in the place of distinct, and changing his least Conjectures
into so many Demonstrations.

It Is the Property of none, but the Immortal Man, to rid the ordinary Knowledge
of all these Defects: For by employing it in the Views of Eternity, he may be
said to Consecrate the least Degree of Knowledge, in directing it to so noble
an End; the Moderation, in the Motions of his Heart, leaves a clear Distinction
in his Ideas; he does not promiscuously keep up all Kinds of Knowledge, but
selects and picks it; he makes not Merchandise of that, for the Interest of
Time, which may be serviceable to the purpose of Eternity; his Heart is not
imposthumated and puffed up with Learning, bu^ Learning derives its whole
Perfection, from the relation it has to the lofty Views, and Motions of his
Heart; his Light, instead of disturbing Society, procures the Good and Peace of
it, by the Prospect of that Eternal Conversation we ought to have with God: And
lastly, He places not the Honor, and Perfection of his Mind, in an
Independance, which mounting him above the Revelation of God, subjects and
pulls him down to the Prejudices of Men, or the Illusions of his own Vanity;
but he thinks his Knowledge sufficient, when he knows what it pleased God to
teach him for his Good.

'Twould now remain, that we value our selves upon Humane Virtues; as Courage,
Intrepidness, Fortitude, Liberality, Magnanimity; but this would but betray our
Ignorance of Man's Heart, to take them for real Sources of Glory. We will not say,
that they always proceed from an Excess of our Corruption, neither will we set
'em up for true Sources of Esteem.

For pray, What is Virtue taken in this Sense? It Is a Sacrifice of the
inferior Passions to the superior; it is to offer up One's other Affections as
Victims to Pride, and the love of Glory.

Liberality is nothing else, as we before observed, but a Traffic of
Self-love, which prefers the Glory of giving, before what it gives. Constancy
is but merely a vain Ostentation of the Strength of One's Soul, and a Desire to
seem above the reach of Adversity. Intrepidness is but an Art of hiding One's
Fear, or of putting off a natural Infirmity. Magnanimity is only a Desire to
make an outward Show, of great and elevated Thoughts.

Love of One's Country, which made the noblest Character of the Ancient Heroes,
was but a secret and by-road, their Self-love took, to arrive to Consideration,
Glory and Dignities; and sometimes 'twas only Ambition, disguised under noble
and venerable Names. Cicero's Revenge, Augustus's Ambition, Lucullus's
Interest, would not have been very well taken by the Romans, had they appeared
in their true and native shape; they were obliged to cover 'em with this
Pretext, The Love of their Country. There have also been Cases, wherein Men
having some confused Sentiment of their Perfections, and seeking for natural
Grandeur, left no Stone unturned, to give their Actions and Conduct such an
End, as was worthy of what they conceived of their Excellency; but wanting good
Direction, they diverted to false Objects. Brutus commends Virtue, and
afterward repents of it* Cato sacrifices to his Country, and considers not,
that under the specious Name of the Country, he adores, he works for a Company
of Robbers and Usurpers; and though a confused Idea of the Public seem so
Glorious, a distinct ought to cover him with Shame and Confusion.

In a word, there is a Falsehood in Humane Virtues, which is obvious to all the
World, and hinders us from setting a Value upon 'em, without a gross
Extravagance. Is there any more Sincerity in the Injustice of those other
Heroes, who became Ennobled by Crimes and Villainies, and Renowned by their
injurious Exploits? They Sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes, as if all were
their own; Alexander is a lively Instance of this Disorder: One would guess,
from the furious Conduct of this Prince, that all Things were made for his
Pleasure and Glory; and that Mankind was good for nothing else, but to serve
his Desire. He Burns Cities, Ravages Provinces, Reverses Thrones, makes other
Powers the Play-game of his own, as if the Nation of the Earth were but Dust
and Worms in his Sight. Is it tolerable, that a Man should make such Sacrifices
to himself, as he would dread to Offer to the greatest of his Gods?

CHAP. XIX. Of the Two last Characters of Pride, which are Ambition, and the
Contempt of the World.
THE excessive Love of Esteem produces another Irregularity, which is Ambition,
because our too violent Ardour, to make our selves Considerable in the World,
causes us to aspire at all that may render us eminent, and great upon the
Theater of Humane Life: Whilst we are confounded with the common Rabble, others
are equally respected by the Public; if we would draw Attention, and a
peculiar Deference, we must depart from their Company. Superiority challenges
the Preferences of Consideration and Esteem, and for this reason we are
ambitious of attaining it.

Every One strives to excel in his Profession, be it never so mean; and that,
not because he loves the Excellency of his Art, for its own sake; but because
he would become more Famous and Considerable than others: They that expose
themselves to War, are not in love with the Dangers, but the distinguished Glory.

But lest the Distinction, which proceeds from Merit and great Actions, may
p^ssiblyly hid, be subject to Contestation, or not exposed to general View, our
Heart ambitiously covets another kind of Elevation, which is Incontestable, and
acknowledged by all Men; namely, Grandeur, Dignities, and Power, as we before
observed.

The Fancy of Self-love is particularly tickled, when it sees those, whom it
feared as Rivals in the Field of Vainglory, court and crouch under its
Superiority: It Is charmed, and mightily taken with the Power that brings them
under it; and loves them so much the more, as it less fears the Obstacle of
their Competition. But the same Sentiment of Pride, which excites us to love
those, that are subject to our Empire, so much tempts them to abhor the
Necessity, which puts 'em in a state of Dependence, that no less than an
heroic and eminent Virtue, on our side, can force them to hide their Malignity.

Lastly, The same Reason that makes us endeavor to mount our selves to a
distinguished Rank, that we may no longerly in the Obscurity and Confusion,
which hinder us from being Remarkt in the World, inspires us with that
Inclination we have to despise and contemn our Neighbor: We are not contented
to stand on Tip-toe, to seem Taller than other Men; but must also endeavor to
Trip up their Heels, and throw 'em down, that we may seem Greater by their Fall
and Debasement.

The Pleasure we take in Satyr, and Comedy, is not only to be imputed to our
Spite and Malignity, but also to our Pride. It Is Nuts to us to see other Men
disgraced and pulled down; especially those Persons, who hereby become
incapable of being our Rivals in the Suit of Vainglory; we take a particular
Delight to see these Ridicule'd, because this Debasement seems greatest and
most incurable of all, Men being ashamed to make those the Objects of their
Esteem, whom before they derided and reproacht.

How comes it to pass that Men, who never Laugh to see a Stone, or a Horse fall
down, can hardly forbear it when they see a Man fall; since the One is
undoubtedly in it self no more Ridiculous than the Other? It Is because our
Heart is not at all concerned, or interested in the Fall of a Beast; whereas we
are so much interested in the Fall and Debasement of other Men, that even the
Image of it delights and pleases us: Men think their Laughing is always
innocent, and indeed it is always criminal and blamable.

This same Propensity inspires us with the Contempt of our Neighbor, which is
termed Insolence, Haughtiness, or Arrogance; according as it is Conversant about
Superiors, Inferiors, or Equals. We are eager to Debase those who were
beneath us before, thinking we shall rise higher, proportionably, as they fall
lower; or to disparage and injure our Equals, that they may no longer be at the
same Level with us; or to slight and undervalue our Superiors, because the
Luster of their Grandeur extinguishes ours: Herein our Pride visibly betrays it
self; for if others are an Object of our Contempt, why should we ambitiously
covet their Esteem? Or, if their Esteem be so much worth, as to deserve the
most passionate Desire of our Souls, how can we despise 'em? Is it not because
the Contempt of our Neighbor, is rather affected, than real? We behold his
Grandeur and Excellency, seeing his Esteem appears to us so Valuable; but we
use our utmost Efforts to hide and conceal it, thinking we shall seem to spin
our Honor out of our own Bowels.

Hence arise Slanders, Calumnies, Ironical Praises, Satyr, Malignity and Envy:
Indeed we are very careful to conceal this latter, because it is a forced
Confession, we make of the Merit or Happiness of others, and an Homage we do
'em by a kind of Constraint and Violence.

Of all the Sentiments of Pride, Contempt of our Neighbor is the most
dangerous; because this directly opposes the Good of Society, which is the End,
whereunto the Love of Esteem, by the Intention of Nature, ought to tend; and
also renders Men most odious, and detestable in the Eyes of the World.

When we see two Fellows, one whereof makes an outward show of Vanity and
Presumption; the other swears he cannot endure this Pride of all things in the
World, we may boldly conclude that the latter is more dangerously tainted with
this Fault than the former; it is merely his own Pride that gives him an Idea of
the Pride of others; and it is a less criminal Effect of Pride, to presume too
much upon One-self, than to degrade one's Neighbor.

Presumption and Confidence are a kind of Drunkenness in the Soul; but Hatred,
Envy, Malignity, are a downright Fury and Madness.

Envy is an implacable Sentiment, you may silence and stop its Mouth, by
Be^fits and Kindness, but you will never bend, or alter its Course; 'twill last
as long as your Merit: It may pardon the last Affronts and Abuses you offered,
or Time at least, will blot out the Remembrance of 'em; but 'twill never excuse
your Desert and Accomplishments.

Envy and Flattery are two very opposite Faults: The former makes a show of an
apparent Contempt, though it secretly carry a real Esteem; for Envy, in the
bottom, is an honoring Sentiment; it tends to nothing but what it Esteems; it
lives and dies with Merit and Desert: whereas Flattery cloaks a most real
Contempt, under the Mask of an apparent Esteem, since it arises merely from a
supposition of his Infirmity and Weakness, who is the Object of it: And it may
be said, that some Satyrs are very Commending, and some Panegyricks most highly
Abusive. Alexander, intoxicated with the Fumes of his Vanity, sees not, that
the Macedonian Strength and Vigor gains him more Honor, than the Idolatry of
the Persians; yet he is much obliged to his Friends, if they will not ridicule and
make sport at him.

It Is easy to judge, from what we have said upon this Subject, how odious a
Fault Pride is; for all its Irregularities are most criminal and sinful. The
excessive Love of Esteem makes us reverse the very Course of Nature, by
changing the End, into the Me^ns; and the Means into the End: For since the
Love of Esteem, as well as of Pleasure, is only a Means, which God employed to
steer us to Virtue, and the Good of Society, is it not repugnant to the Rules
of Nature, for Men to act as if they were born for no other End, but merely to
be honored and esteemed? Presumption casts a Mist before our Eyes, that we may
not discern what is truly Estimable in us; it being certain, that what we are,
is infinitely beyond what we think we are; and that our real Perfections; much
better deserve the Attention of our Soul, than those imaginary Qualities we
falsely boast of.

The Vanity, which applies it self to false Sources of Glory, makes us lose the
sight of the true and solid Foundations of Honor; which are Piety, and the
Fear of God. The Contempt of our Neighbor necessarily reflects upon our
selves, seeing we are not very different from Beasts, if we truly differ so
much from other Men; and the Distinctions of Pride, destroy all the Ideas of
our natural Excellency.

But besides all these, there is a more latent and hidden Fault in Pride, which
exceeds all the rest; for it makes us Usurp the Glory of God himself. Our
Perfections are Talents, wherewith God entrusted us, to the end we might
improve 'em; the Profit resulting from 'em is the Glory, which ought to be
ascribed to him, as being a Rivulet of his own immense Goodness: But this
unjust and sacrilegious Pride, which robs and pillages all it meets with, has
no more Respect to Divine, than Humane Rights: All the Reverence it has for God
is, That it dares not confess the Injuries and Wrongs it has done him; and,
that it is tormented with so great Horror for its Sacrileges, that it is afraid
to show 'em in open View, or bring in Reason for its Accomplice and Confederate.

It may be gathered, from what we have here said, that Pride, as well as
Corruption, in general, is almost equal, and the same in all Men: In some it
does not show it self so manifest as in others. All are not alike sollicitous
and thoughtful to raise themselves Esteem and Reputation; because Poverty
imposes upon many Men more pressing Occupations; but all have undoubtedly the
same Inclination to Esteem. This Disposition may indeed ly hid, and the
Sentiment of it be suspended; but yet, absolutely speaking, it is alike in all
Mankind; or rather, there is no difference, but what is made by Grace. Some
perhaps will make a greater Appearance or Presumption than others; but there is
no less Pride in Timidity, and those punctilious Umbrages of One, who is
continually afraid, that either himself or others, will blemish his Character,
than in open Presumption.

Some Men seem civil and good-natured to others; but yet they look to take the
upper hand in the way to Glory: Outward Civility being, to speak the plain
Truth, nothing but an apparent Preference we make of our selves before all the
World.

Again, there be some who are Masters of themselves, when commended; but not,
when they are blamed. Modesty holds out against the Impressions of Flattery,
but is disturbed, and out of Tune, at the Insults of Abuse. Pride makes it self
Mistress of its Joy and Satisfaction, but cannot command its Grief and
Resentment. Lastly, There are some, who seem elevated above the reach of of
Esteem, and make as if they are troubled at being caressed with public
Approbation; but search deeply into the Motives of this Philosophical Grief,
and you will find that Pride has a very great Hand in 'em. One puffed up with an
Opinion of his Merit, thinks many times that Men don't render him his Due: Till
all Mankind fall down to him on their Marrow-bones, he will not leave his ill
Humor; and if he be not Adored, you will see him a Mysanthropist.

Hence, in the last place, it appears, that Pride lives by the Error of other
Men, and the Illusions it puts upon it self: It has established, I know not
what, false Maxims in the World, upon which all Men reason as upon true and
solid Principles; by Virtue whereof it endeavors to promote, and put forward
its Pretensions. Let no Man fancy, that these Prejudices can be destroyed by
opposing 'em directly with Reason; Men hold fast these Errors, maugre the
Dictates of their Judgment, which tell 'em how Irrational they are, because
they proceed from the Disposition of the Heart. The ready way to be cured, of
these Cheats, is to moderate the excessive Love of Esteem, which reigns in our
Heart; and there is no other Means of destroying this latter, but by turning the
Bent of our Soul toward the eternal and infinite Good, which is GOD, the only
Source of our Happiness and Glory*

This is the Sum of the Reflections had to make at present, upon our most
general Inclinations, and Irregularities; waiting till I make more particular
Discoveries in the Knowledge of the Heart, which is so excellent, so important,
and so worthy our Study and Application. May God, by his Grace, Bless those I
have made in this Writing; and make them Succeed to his Glory, and my Eternal
Salvation. Amen.

FINIS.

