Medico Mastix OR, A Pill for the Doctor:

Being a short Reply to a late Vindictive Letter, sent to Mr. Vicars, in the
name of Doctor Bastwick, concerning Leiut: Coll: JOHN LILBURN.

By E. A. A She PRESBITERIAN.

1 COR. 13. Although I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, ( or
love) I am but as sounding brass, or as a tincling cymball. Printed in the
Year. 1645.

Medico Mastix, OR A Pill for the Doctor.
Being a short Reply to a late Vindictive letter sent to Master Vicars, etc.
By E. A. A She Presbyterian.
Brother Bastwick. IN regard none of the Independent party has taken upon them
to answer your Book of no Manners. I your Sister a Member of the Church of
England, have undertaken the task, it being fittest for a Fool to answer a
Fool in his Folly.

YOu say in the first page of your Idle Pamphlet you have taught Leiv. Coll:
Lilburn (so much) manners. That J in answer unto you say, You have left your
self never a whit: For you have gone beyond the bounds of Modesty and
Civillity. (In your seventeenth page) you have reviled your Creator, in the
despising of his creatures. Secondly, The last Petitioners for the Liberty of
the subject, you call them Ghastly, Ugly faces, having Complexions like the
Belly of a Toad. O blasphemous lie! For God himself says of his works they
are all very good. In page Six, you say the Devil shit out Independent
Ministers. Brother, I fear you are one of his treatles: For its like you are
of his very nature, you know so well what he does; Why are you so foolish to
find fault with the Sucking Apothecary, seeing you your self order the Pipe?
Brother, I think you have scoured your Pate, as clean of Wit, and your Tongue
of Manners, as some do their Closse Stools after the sound of your Glisters.
A Tailor, or a Controwler of the dreeping pans are better trades then a
Milke-Wench, that milkes her Cowes backwards. and lets them Scomer in the
Paile. I hope you will not condemn me, seeing I am so apt a Scholar of yours
to learn your own Language, at the first teaching: For it is the manner of
Schoolmasters, to commend their forward puples.

I thought to gratify my Master with a Cap and a Cocks Fether, with a Bell, a
Ladle and a Pudding; because he is more fit for a Vice in a Morris, then to be
near a Wise Council.

No marvel (Dr, Bastwick) you have so impudently belyed the Independents (as
you call them) to say They purpose to put down all the Nobility and Gentry in
the Kingdom (page 21.) when as your own Conscience can witness: they are the
readiest people, to give God his due and Caesar his.)

Sir, In the latter end of your railing Pamphlet, you say that there is no
Kindred so good, that has not either a Whore or a Knave in it. So it is
impossible in such a great Council as the Parliament is, but they should have
some Ninnyes and Groles, and men that have no more wit, then will reach from
their Nose to their mouths. If I had been a man, and had spoken such words in
this Age, I should never have lived to come to so great an honor, as to have a
Gray Beard, and a Set of thin teeth of Gods placing: But I should surely be
Hanged, and well I had deserved it: For it is as great Treason as any is, to
make a Kingdom so void of wisdom, as to make choice of Naturalls to sit in
so great a Court as a Parliament is: Oh that the wisdom of the Parliament
would consider what you have done, for you seem to vindicate the one party,
and revile the other: and so divide the House. Then, how shall it stand, where
works of Truth and Righteousness are, they will justify themselves, and have
no need of a Foule-mouthed railing-Lyar, to mantaine them, for that is a great
disgrace.

Brother, the number of those honest people (whom you call Independents) is so
greatly increased, and so surely grounded are they upon the Rock Christ, that
its neither you, nor I, nor all our Brethren the Presbyterians, nor the Gates
of Hell, that shall ever remove them, For the rage of man shall turn to the
praise of God (as it is said in the 76. Psalm.

Are these the fruits of our Fasts, to fast for strife and debate, and to smite
with the fist of wickedness? for even so it appears by those
lying-railing-Pamphlets, which daily are suffered to come forth to make Gods
People odious: but that will never prevail; You call them Independents, but I
think by their Profession and practices, we may judge them to be as chief
Dependants, as any Presbyterian in the world. Brother take their Profession,
according as I your Sister have taken it from their own mouths, That they
depend first upon the great power of Heaven and Earth, upon the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost for protection, the Word for their direction, life, and rule to
walk in and by. Secondly, That they depend upon the Civil Magistrate, and
submit to all godly Civil Laws. And good brother, give me leave to tell you,
that Gideons Army had the exercise of their Tongues, as well as the use of
their hands, see (Judges 6. and 7. and 8. And the Lord prospered them, and
wrought a great deliverance for them. And therefore why should you envy at the
Lieutenant Collonell or any other for preaching in the Army. Have Soldiers no
Souls? Surely I think the very worst of them have, as much as you have
Conscience: But there is a God above all, and he is greater then all.

Brother. The man of God was not seduced by wicked Jeroboam, but was deceived
by a Prophet, that came to him with a lie in his mouth, as if it had been from
the word of the Lord, (see 1 King. 13. 10.) So this our Parliament was not
seduced by the wicked Prelates, and I pray, they may not be deceived by you,
and those we call good men and Prophets of the Lord, that come with lies in
their mouths (as it were) from the word of the Lord.

Doctor Bastwick, surely your cause is bad, for a good cause will make the
owner better, not worse. I should have wondered greatly at your great and
painful labor so much (in your evil way) for our Brethren the Presbyterian
Ministers, but that they themselves are so helpelesse (in thumpping the Pues
and managing their business almost after your manner) that the most of them
have scarred away their Hearers: And it is not the sent of the Independents
pissing and scomering (as you speak) in their Churches and Pulpits: And if you
mean the Separates also, that is as gross a lie as to say The Independents
can smell the good cheer out of England into other Countries, For surely God
never made men such long Noses, and the Separates never come near your Pues to
trouble you.

You say the Independents have demanded their money of you which they gave you,
and that is false, some [of them] employed me several times, and I brought you
three or four pounds at a time, which was never demanded, and many friends
more did the like, beside my self. Brother I am sorry you have not remembered to
be thankful, nor forgotten to lie. Gods Children are Children that will not
lie, So I rest, your Sister but no Independent. Therefore charge them not with
my work. I have sent you but two Letters of my name, not for fear have I
omitted them, but merely for Modesty sake: for truly I am ashamed of my
Masters teaching, Dear Sir, If you happen to conjure for me, you shall never
find me in a Bulls Hide, It may be you may in a Cowes.

E., A.
Allowed and licenced by me this October. 1645.
JAMES 1. 26: If any man among you seem to be religious, and brideleth not his
Tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is but vain.
FJNIS.
I have got great light, by Englands Birthright.

