SIGILL: COLL: YALEN: NOV: PORT: NOV: ANGL LUX ET VERITAS "I give these Books
for the founding of a College in this Colony"

YALE UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

Gift of Edward S. Harkness 1914

An Address of Thanks, On Behalf of The Church of England, TO Mris. JAMES, For
Her Worthy Vindication of That CHURCH.
Published with Allowance.

MADAM!
THo the Sons of Our Church seem of late somewhat out of Humor as to the
Business of Addressing, yet the Obligations You have laid upon Us, cannot but
vanquish the most Obstinate. It Is true, scarce any of Us could find in our
Hearts to Thank the King at all, for the Greatest and most Gracious Favor that
ever Prince did or could Vouchsafe to Subjects; And those Few that pretend to
do it, have proceeded so Awkwardly in their Acknowledgments, as renders them of
very little Value: For to Thank His Majesty not Absolutely for the Main Scope
of His Healing Declaration, but only for one Single Expression therein,
relating to our own immediate Interest and Temporal Advantages; and at the same
time to press the continuance of those Penal Laws, which diametrically oppose
both the Royal Indulgence, and that Generous, Universal, and most Christian
Principle upon which it is grounded, is apt to be construed not only a gross
Defect of Charity (as if we regarded no bodies Ease and Happiness but our Own,
and minded our Possessions above all other Considerations) but also discovers a
deep-rooted Aversion to the Toleration it self, a tacit Reflection on His
Majesty's Proceedings, and a violent Inclination to be Pashing and Goring,
Rending and Tearing, as fiercely as formerly, if ever we can get the
opportunity: And what is all this (will our Enemies say) but to Upbraid and
Affront the King, whilst we seem to Complement Him?

But whatever Cause His Majesty may have to Resent this Shuffling Conduct, You,
Madam, shall not fail of our Sincere Respects, for so Brave an Effort on the
Behalf of our Distressed Mother. It must be confessed she was under very
deplorable Circumstances: For tho her Doctrines stood firm as a Rock (for
thereon They are grounded) and She enjoyed not only Public Liberty and
Protection, but all the Ecclesiastical Revenues to boot, yet, alas! She was
disarmed of her Thunderbolts; Her dear Excommunicato Capiendo's, her sweet
Twenty Pound per Month Penalties, her precious Thirty-Fifth of Elizabeth, and
the like Weapons of her Spiritual Warfare, were all wrested out of her Hands,
or rendered Useless: Toleration Discussed to her vast disadvantage; The
Mischief of Separation proved to proceed from the Mischief of Impositions: And
not a Man of Sense that would appear on her behalf for the Restitution of this
Blessed Artillery. For those Mighty Champions and well-paid Pensioners, who
swagger'd so high for her in days of Yore, had no more Ink at her Service, when
once the Golden Current was dried up; but remain Retired and Silent, as Owls at
Noon; and like Treacherous Advocates, having Exhausted their Clients Purse in a
tedious Unnecessary Brangle, desert her, when reduced (by their own
Ill-management) to Sue in Forma Pauperis.

In this Extremity, you, Madam! are the Pucelle de Dieu, that Joan of Arque,
who stepped in to Retrieve our Forlorn Affairs, and body up our Sinking
Reputation; You are the brave Semiramis that must Rebuild the Walls of our
Babel; You have satisfied all the World by undeniable Demonstrations, That our
Church has its Enthusiasts too, as well as the Rankest Phanaticks: And tho you
could not (as you Gravely tell us) obtain to be the City's, you shall have our
Vote to be the Churches God-Mother; and to Fast too (if you please, since you
have got so rare a Knack at it) for all our Reverend Clergy; because that
Meager Exercise may not, perhaps, agree very kindly with many of their
Constitutions.

We cannot but with equal Joy and Gratitude, observe how wonderously you have
Edified the Tripe-Women, and Convinced the Porters, That our Church is the only
Church for Loyalty; and that you your self (how light soever) can Weigh down
all the rest, in that excellent Qualification. The truth is, whilst the
Government takes our Measures, and advances our Interest, we can be very Loyal;
huge good Subjects, and Admirers of Prerogative, as long as we are pleased; But
if our Purposes be crossed, and Affairs happen to go against the grain of our
Humor, we can be as Peevish as our Neighbors, drop the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, and leave Non Resistance to shift for it self; prove as apt as any
to murmur and look bowdy; as full of Fears and Jealousies (the Swadling-Clouts
of Sedition) as the Tribe of Forty One it self; As loud in Clamours at the
Ministers of State, as busy in Squinting Reflections to mis-represent our
Superiors Actions and Intentions, as ready to lick up the Abominated
Distinction between the Natural and Politic Capacity, and to set the Law and
the Prerogative at Daggers-drawing against each other.

But all this notwithstanding, we have your Word for it, That our Church of
England (that is, as you Wittily define it, p. 7. Those that are for
Common Prayer and Bishops) desires Nothing Else but to serve God Truly, and the
King Rightly; and we Rejoice we have such an Authentic Evidence in the case;
for else the People would suspect, it was rather, To hold our Benefices,
Domineer over our Neighbors, and Ruin all that will not Truckle to our
Inventions. You have asserted (which amongst Friends passes as well as if you
had proved it) That all the World (you might decently have Excepted some few,
that may happen to be of your Sovereign's contrary Opinion) knows, That they
that are for Liberty of Conscience, Never had any Loialty. A bold Stroke! which
besides a very course Complement on his Majesty, Brands the Bulk of the Nation
for Rebels and Traitors.

For all these your Great and Heroic Achievements, you may justly expect our
Grateful Acknowledgments, and especially for your most Orthodox Hopes, That the
King will not satisfy His Own (and the far greater part of His Subjects)
Desires, by removing the Test and the Penal Laws, but let them stand as Rods do
upon Mantil-trees, to keep Rebellious Children in Subjection. A brave Expedient
to continue our Expectations, and feed our Hopes of getting Power once again,
to worry our Honest Peaceable Fellow Subjects! Of whom, even of Protestant
Dissenters, by a Modest Calculation, we have (thanks to those Excellent
Statutes of our own Procurement) occasioned the untimely Death of above
Three-thousand Persons, by their Imprisonment in Noisome Jails, and Ruined more
than Threescore-thousand Families, within 25 years by past; And all this on the
Score of Conscience and Nonconformity to Ceremonies, which we our selves owned
to be Indifferent.

Yet still we are not without good hopes that your Notable Paper, in
Conjunction with our strenuous Endeavors (which are much of the same size,
both for Logic and Politics) may cajole the Easy Nonconformists to abandon
their Interest and Only Preservative, at this Critical Juncture; And suffer
their Actions to give the Lie to all their Addresses, by HERDING with our
Party, to Continue those very Plagues, which they have so severely Smarted
under, and loudly Complained of. In Requital whereof, we are resolved on the
first Opportunity to Scourge them more Canonically then ever, That they may
learn by Experience the Truth of that Proverb, The Rod is Reserved for the Back
of Fools.

In the mean time, for these, and the rest of your alike Wise and Pious
Suggestions, we cannot but return you our most Humble and Hearty Thanks, as
becomes the Modern True Sons of the Church of England;

And, Madam! Your most Obliged and Devoted Servants.

London, Printed by George Larkin, at the Coach and Horses without Bishopsgate.
1687.


