WEST BARBARY, OR, A short Narrative Of the Revolutions OF THE KINGDOMS OF Fez
and Morocco. With an account of the present Customs, Sacred, Civil, and
Domestic.

By LANCELOT ADDISON, Chaplain to His Majesty in Ordinary.

Printed at the THEATER in OXFORD, and are to be sold by John Wilmot, 1671.

TO THE Most Worthy and truly Honored Joseph Williamson Esquire.
SIR,
THE Liberty of Dedications, being the undoubted Privilege of every Scribler,
may save me harmless in prefixing your Name to the ensuing Remarks. In which I
do not so much design your Patronage, because I cannot fancy that these Papers
will be so much taken notice of as to be questioned for their Faults. But my
whole Design on this occasion is to tell the World, how much I love your
Person, and honor your Worth.

I will not be so vain as to endeavor to represent you to the World, or to
your Self, for you are sufficiently known to both; and your excellent Parts and
Integrity have not attracted you more honor at home, then they have acquired
you abroad. For I know your Reputation is as happy in Foreign Countries for the
even Menage of Affairs, as in your own.

But to attempt any thing of your Panegyric, were to do, what is done by all
who know you: and therefore I may justly divert my Pen to express my
Resentments, that I can make no Present agreeable to your Merit or my
Affection. For which, I have no other Apology, but either my Unhappiness, or
that this is not the Age, when Temples, Altars, and Statues, are erected to
Worth and Virtue. Nevertheless, I cannot be so fashionably modest, as
altogether to Vilify my Offering, or so far wrong you, as to imagine it will
be despised as utterly Unprofitable; for it must be a Present extremely mean,
which so great an Ingenuity as yours, will despise; and a Subject strangely
dry, from whence so great a Discernment can gather Nothing.

I know, that little worthy a Polite Judgment can be gathered from a Discourse
of People famous only for being Barbarous; yet if Public Affairs can spare you
minutes enough to read over these Remarks, you may perhaps in them meet with so
much Order, Civility, and (according to their way) Religion, as may somewhat
refine that Name. However, if what I tender may be by you received, as it is
sincerely intended, for an Unfeigned Testimony of my Respect and Affection, I
have accomplished my Design, which is without all Artifice, to declare my self,

Your Humble, Faithful, and Devoted Servant, LANCELOT ADDISON.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT being the manner of those who Write, to acquaint the Reader with the Design
of the Book; if I had any in Publishing this besides your Divertisement, it was
chiefly to make the Justice and Religiousness of a People esteemed Barbarous,
Rude, and Savage, to reflect upon their Enormities, who would be reckoned for
the only Illuminati of both. And to show that this Unlick'd, Uncultivated
People agree with the wisest Nati^^s, in making the care of Religion and
Justice to suppress Vice and encourage Virtue, as the only method to make a
State happy.

It was one of the Pedantick Vanities of the Grecians to repute all Barbarous
but themselves; and albeit there are some who have the same Opinion of every
thing that is diverse from the Manners and Customs of their own Country, yet
those who acknowledge Humanity in all its Habits, may in perusing the Remarks
made upon these Barbarians, meet with something that may civilize the Title,
and induce them to think, that what is commonly called Barbarous, is but a
different Mode of Civility.

As for the Truth of what is written, I have used an Industry as probable to
ensure me thereof, as the nature of the Subject would give me leave. Having
first traveled the Country, and remarked as much as such an occasion would
afford, and then retained a Conversation with such Persons, both Moors and
Jews, as I found best able to increase and amend my first Remarks. So that they
are not barely the Occasionals of a Journey, nor scraped up from Casual
Discourses, but the result of some Years Inspection into the People of whom I
write; and that I might not dis-ingeniously impose upon your Belief, I have not
contented my self with a single Test, but have rejected several Passages which
have not had a sufficient confirmation. It being not my intent to be known for
Writing things strange and Romantic, but to be very civil to the World, in
putting nothing upon them but what is Firm and Solid.

As for the Dress wherein they appear (though perhaps suitable enough for the
matter) I have been therein so negligent as not greatly to regard it, except in
the Narrative to preserve coherence. For I conceived, I was not to present you
with the Customs of a Nation as I made them, but as they were in themselves,
which could scarcely be done, but by exposing them (thus) naked.

The Narrative of the late Revolutions, etc. is that for which to some I may
seem the less accountable, because I insinuate a want of Public Records among
the Moors, out of which it was to have been collected. But there was no such
great need of those Assistances in Penning the Annals of our Age; and the
Narrative ascends no higher then the Period of the Xeriffian Family, and the
Division of Kiram's Usurpation of the Crown of Morocco, which are very fresh in
the minds of the Moors. And yet for the clearer Certainty herein, I have had
the assistance of some Ancient observing Moors, who were Actors in the late
Revolves. But my best help I had, was from an Aged, Inquisitive, noting Person,
an Hebrew Sabio, one Joseph Messiah, who for many Years had been Secretary of
Tituan, and with great diligence had observed Memoirs of what a long time had
happened in that part of Barbary. In what concerns the War between Gaylan and
Taffilet, I confess I am not very particular, because much thereof related to
Tanger; but what is here wanting, may be supplied in the modern Story of that
Ancient City.

How far I have been from Transcribing Leo Afer, which some may suspect, will
easily appear by comparing what is contained in the Remarks of West Barbary,
with his Description of Africa.

That I have not spoken more largely of their Colleges, needs no other excuse,
than that they now use none; and the like may be answered for my silence of
their Libraries. And how famous soever Mauritania Tingitana has been in former
Ages for a Race of Literati, yet now there is little hope to see a Restoration
of their Studies, if it be considered what small regard the present Moors bear
to Learning: Which I understood from Cidi Abdella, Gaylan's Secretary, a
Spanish Renegado of a bold Capacity; to whom, when I was praising the Ancient
Learning of Fez, etc. he told me, That now the Moors were not very fond of
Bookish Inclinations, being generally addicted either to Military or Mechanic
Employments: and when I read to him out of Don Diego Savedra Taxardo (in the
66th of his Empressas Politicas) how that a Learned Age might have as little
Valor as Devotion: That all knowledge was superfluous which taught the People
more than to Obey, endure Travel, and Conquer: That great Discursists were apt
to intrigue Affairs, dispute the Princes Resolutions, and stir up the People:
That it was the best Obedience, which was rather Credulous then Inquisitive:
That the Ottoman Empire, so much enriched with the Spoils, and elevated with
the Trophies of many Nations, reckon it among their Happinesses, not to have
their Consultations lime-twigg'd with Quirks and Sophisms of Philosophical
Persons, and make Illiterature one of their chief Engines of Empire: That the
City may be taken, while the Mathematician is delinea^^^g the Fortification:
That Nations, Provinces, Colonies, have grown great by Industrious, and not
Poring Arts, etc. While I was thus reading to the attentive discerning
Renegado, he broke out into a sort of Exultation, and called Muley Mahumed to
witness, that he thought Savedra (the Author I read) was a Moor, or otherwise
he could never have so punctually described the Humor, and Sentiments of the
Moors concerning Learning: adding withal, that if they who in their present
Illiterature were so prone to Sedition, that they would be much more so, if
they were heated with Bookish Speculations, and had their Black humor chafed
and quickened with Subtilizing Studies.

The next thing which may seem herein omitted, is, that which would have best
pleased the Virtuosi, an account of their Libraries, for which I was once
solicited by a Letter from a Stranger, in the Year 1664. who designed an
Universal Catalogue of Ancient and Modern Writers, and their Books: And though
he possessed me with great hopes of finding great store of Books in Barbary for
his purpose; yet upon Enquiry, I met with nothing but Disappointment, and that
the Moors are so far from having excellent Libraries, that they wonder to see
any Book of Age or Volume in their own Language. This I understood from Cidi
Hamet Cogez (formerly Alcayd of Alcazar) who when in Tanger coming to see the
Public Library that we had Founded there, where I showed him a MS. in his own
Character concerning their Religion, he kissed, hugged, laid it to his Brow,
upon the Crown of his Head, lifted it up to Heaven, and in every Circumstance
appeared therewith so much transported, that I could scarce rescue it out of
his Embraces.

The same MS. I showed to a Talib (who was one of Tafilets Emherkin, or
Messengers of State, sent to Compliment His Excellency the Lord Ambassador, The
Illustrious Lord H. Howard at Tanger) who esteemed it so great a Rarity, that
he solicited the Ambassador to beg or buy it for him at any Rate. This
Manuscript is now in the Possession of the Archbishop of Canterbury His Grace.
It is the first part of the Mustadarif (or, as the Talib Expounded it) The
Clean Book. It was composed by Alfachi Mahumed Ebn Ahmed Alchab, and Copyed
into that fair Letter, wherein it is now extant, by Ali Ebn Abd'alirahman ebn
Mahumed, a Native of Suz, who finished it in the second Month Giamadi, Anno
Hegirae, 1005.

But these Stories have betrayed me to an unintended length, for which I hope
to make some amends in what follows; in which I have endeavored, like a
merciful Executioner, not to protract your Pain.

A BRIEF NARRATION Of the late Revolutions in the KINGDOMS of Fez and Morocco.
THIS Narrative of the Revolutions of Barbary, shall not be derived beyond the
Annals of our own Memory. For whose clearer introduction, the contexture of
affairs invites us to step back to the notorious change, which happened about
the year 1508. Near which time the Marine Family approaching to its designed
period and determination, it fortuned that a certain Alfachi, or Morish Priest,
in the Province of Dara, began to grow into great reputation with the people,
by reason of his high pretentions to piety and fervent zeal for their Law,
illustrated by a stubborn rigidity of conversation and outward sanctity of
life. His first name was Mahumet Ben Amet; but pretending to be descended from
their Prophet, he caused himself to be called Zeriffe: A Title which the
Kindred of that Impostor have appropriated to themselves, and made the
character of that whole Family. The credit of his pretended Pedigree, was
another Engine wherewith he insinuated himself into the peoples likeing, which
together with his seeming severity, made him of no vulgar esteem with a
generation, who from time to time have been fooled with such Mountebanks in
Religion.

The great applause and approbation his person met with from the Moors,
kindled in him no less an Ambition then of making himself Lord of Mauritania
Tingitana; which must needs have proved a very Hypocondriacal design, had it
not been assisted with a favorable conjuncture of affairs. For the
Mauritanian Princes had a long time weakened themselves with civil discords; and
the Portugals taking that advantageous occasion, had far advanced their Arms,
and arrived at a considerable puissance in Barbary, and were still under a
daily success of new achievements: Besides, the Moors desirous of Novelties,
and sensible of oppressions, both from their own and foreign powers, were
sufficiently inclinable to adhere to any, who appeared with probability to
deliver them from their present Yoke.

This now Zeriffe, who wanted neither Wit nor Ambition to conduct or
enterprise an innovation, found by the Stars, in whose Science his Legend
makes him very skilful, that the time was not yet suitable for so great an
undertaking. Religion was his pretense, and nothing could have been so fit
beside to advance him in the estimation of the many.

To facilitate his designs, he sent his three Sons, Abdel, Abnet, and Mahumet
in Pilgrimage to Mecha and Medina, to visit and worship the Sepulcher of their
Great Prophet. Much was the reverence and reputation of Holiness, which they
thereby ^^^^uired among the superstitious people, who could hardly be kept from
kissing their garments, and adoreing them as Saints. His admired sons failed
not in their parts, but acted as much Devotion, as high contemplative looks,
deep sighs, tragical gestures, and other passionate Interjections of Holiness
could express; Ala, Ala was their doleful note, their sustenance the peoples
Alms. Their Father received them with content and joy, and perceiving the
favor and opinion of the people toward him, to continue the same as at the
first, he resolved to make use thereof, and thereupon sent Abnet and Mahumet to
the Court of Fez, where they were kindly received by the too credulous King,
who made the elder, President of the famous College Amadorac, and the younger,
Tutor of his own Sons. Advanced thus in favor at Court, and Grace with the
people, by the Council of their Father, they desired leave of the King to
display a Banner against the Christians; induceing him to believe, that they
would easily draw the Portugal Moors to their party; and by that means secure
the Provinces of Morocco. Muley Nazer the Kings brother, resisted the p^^^tion,
warning the King not to arm this name of Sanctity, which being once
Victorious, might grow insolent, and forgetful of Duty in minding a Kingdom.
He told him likewise that War makes men awless, and that through popularity,
many became ambitious and studious of Innovation. But the King intoxicated with
the Opinion of these Pilgrims Sanctity, rejected his Brothers necessary
cautions, and gave them a Banner and Drum, with Letters of Credence to the
Princes and Cities of Barbary, with twenty horsemen to attend them. Many
Wonderful successes awaited upon their actions, and all things thrived so well
under their conduct, that at last the King of Fez, who all along applauded his
own Victories in theirs, began to distaste them. And seeing they had poisoned
the King of Morocco, and made Amet Zeriff to be proclaimed King in his stead,
he mistrusted his own safety, and began but too late to repent his approveing
of an armed hypocrisy. Puffed up with their successes they forgot their
obedience, and these Saints deny the King the fifth part of their spoils, and
only sent him six Horses and six Camels, and those lean and ill shapen. The
King demands his dues, but they answered, That seeing they were lawful
successors to Mahumet, they ought to pay no man Tribute, and that they had more
right in Africa then himself; but if he would respect them as his Friends and
Allies, they were not froward to embrace him under that quality; but if he
expected any more at their hands, they doubted not, but as they had had power
to offend the Christians, they should not be destitute in defending of
themselves; By which it appeared, that they took up Arms, not out of Love to
their Country and zeal for their Religion, but out of a desire of Rule.

The sword by both sides was chosen to umpire the contest, which awarded for
the Zeriffs. For upon the encounter of both the Armies, the Fessan Forces after
a long and doubtful Battle were defeated; and the Zeriffs so well improved the
victory, that in few moons they became the uncontrouled Lords of the Kingdoms
of Fez and Morocco, in whose Government their Family continued a considerable
sum of years. But not with out destructive Hostilities among themselves; the
Descendents pulling down each other by the like treacheries, that advanced
their Ancestors: The greater thief still leading the less to the Gallows. Their
Rebellions appeared under the specious pretenses of mending some faults in
Government, and one Cousin deposed another, under the pleasing disguise of
setting up a gentler and more orderly Dominion; forgetting that it is safer to
permit some inconveniences in the outer buildings, then to pull the whole
structure down; There being corruptions which may safelier be continued then
removed.

But notwithstanding these Civil Wars, the power still remained in the same
Family, and the dissension of the branches proceeded not so far as to cut
down the tree. And yet about the year 1607. the Zeriffian House seemed near an
extirpation by reason of Boferes and Sidans opposing Muley Sheck their elder
Brother in his succession. But Muley Sheck and Boferes dying in the wars,
Morocco was left to Abdalla son of Muley Sheck, who scarce warmed the throne,
till he was violently pulled thence by his Uncle Sidan, and by an unintended
kindness freed from the troubles of a Crown.

This Muley Sidan once more joined Fez with Morocco, and in himself made the
Zeriffian Family to reign over both. But he was much infested both by Land and
Sea. For Abdela a Religious Hermit, and Hean, one of like hypocrisy and zeal,
two opposite factions distressed him at Land, and the Pirates of Salla and
Algier by Sea. But his great valor maintained him against both. For by his own
Arms he pacifyed the tumults at Land, and by the assistance of the English
Shipping, he destroyed the Pirates of Salla, which so much disquieted the Ocean.
And this being done he sent to have the like aid against those of Algier the
Pest of the Mediterranean. The tenor of his Heroic letter sent to King CHARLES
of Great Britain on this occasion, I have here annexed, with no other design
then to manifest the great esteem, which that Mahumedan Prince worthily
retained of CHARLES the first, our Victorious Martyr.

The Letter of the KING of MOROCCO To the KING of ENGLAND. 1625.

WHen these our Letters shall be so happy as to come to your Majesty's sight, I
wish the Spirit of the Righteous God may so direct your mind, that you may
joyfully embrace the Message I send; presenting to you the means of exalting
the Majesty of God, and your own reward amongst men. The Regal power allotted
to us makes us common servants to our Creator; then of those people whom we
govern: so that observing the duties we owe to God, we deliver blessings to the
world; in providing for the public good of our States, we magnify the honor
of God; like the Celestial Bodies, which though they have much veneration, yet
serve only to the benefit of the world. It is the Excellency of our Office, to
be Instruments whereby happiness is delivered to the Nations. Pardon me Sir,
this is not to instruct, for I know I speak to one of a more clear and quick
sight then my self; but I speak this, because God has pleased to grant me a
happy victory over some part of those Rebellious Pirates, that have so long
molested the peaceful trade of Europe; and has presented further occasion to
root out the Generation of those, who have been so pernicious to the good of
our Nations: I mean, since it has pleased God to be so auspicious to our
beginnings in the conquest of Salla, that we might join and proceed in hope of
like success in the War against Tunis, Algier, and other places (Dens and
Receptacles for the inhumane villainies of those who abhor Rule and Government.)
Herein whilst we interrupt the corruption of malignant Spirits of the world,
we shall glorify the great God, and perform a duty that will shine as glorious
as the Sun and Moon, which all the Earth may see and reverence: a work that
shall ascend as sweet as the perfume of the precious Odours, in the Nostrils of
the Lord. A work grateful and happy unto men: a work whose memory shall be
reverenced so long as there be any that delight to hear the Actions of Heroic
and Magnanimous Spirits; that shall last as long as there be any remaining
amongst men, that love and honor the Piety and Virtue of Noble minds. This
action I here willingly present to You, whose Piety and Virtues equal the
Greatness of your Power: that We who are Servants of the Great and Mighty God,
may Hand in Hand Triumph in the Glory which this Action presents unto us. Now
because the Islands which you Govern, have been ever famous for the Unconquered
strength of their Shipping, I have sent this my trusty Servant and Ambassador
to Know, whether in your Princely Wisdom You shall think fit to assist me with
such Forces by Sea, as shall be answerable to those I provide by Land: which if
You please to grant, I doubt not but the Lord of Hosts will protect and assist
those that fight in so glorious a Cause. Nor ought You to think this strange,
that I, who much reverence the Peace and accord of Nations, should exhort to a
War. Your great Prophet Christ Jesus was the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, as
well as the Lord and Giver of Peace: which may signify unto You, that he which
is a lover and maintainer of Peace, must always appear with the terror of his
sword, and wading through Seas of Blood, must arrive at tranquillity. This made
JAMES your Father of glorious memory, so happily renowned amongst all Nations.
It was the Noble fame of your Princely Virtues, which resounds to the utmost
corners of the Earth, that persuades me to invite You to partake of that
blessing wherein I boast my self most happy. I wish God may heap the riches of
his Blessings on You, increase your happiness with your days, and hereafter
perpetuate the greatness of your Name in all Ages.


The Traders into the Levant have reason to bewail, that the condition of his
Majesty's affairs would not give him leave to entertain this motion: which in
all probability can never be revived with such promising circumstances, as it
might then have been enterprized; for those Pirates were then inconsiderable to
what they are now; for by the computation of their increase in Shipping and
Skill in Navigation, if not timely subdued, they in short time may bid defiance
to the Christian in the Mid-land Seas. And albeit the proposal was not
embraced, yet it loudly spoke Sidan a Prince of Generous Designs, and Noble
Ambitions; and one who aimed at the Advance and Security of Trade, the Common
interest of the World.

Muley Sidan having reduced the affairs of State to a great degree of Quiet, he
finished both Life and Reign at once, contrary to the example of the most of
his Predecessors, whereof few either Reigned to the natural length of their
Life, or were suffered to live beyond the violent shortness of their Reign.
Upon his Death, Muley Abdelmeleck his eldest Son, entered upon the fruition of
his Fathers Achievements. He was a person of much phlegm and indifferency,
naturally fitted for a tame and peaceable Empire, into which he was happily
inaugurated, but not long continued, for in the second year of his reign he
was unnaturally assasined by his second Brother Luellud, whose ambition broke
all bonds of Nature and Polity to ascend a Throne. But the infamous fratricide
was presently thrown from his usurped greatness: for having by a powerful
example taught the nearest method to wear a Crown, he was clandestinely
Murdered by his youngest Brother Muley Hamet Sheck, before he had accomplished
the period of twenty Months in his Kingdom. And it is remarkable that Muley
Shek pretended to no vengeance of his eldest Brothers death in that of his
second; but that he acted it only cut of an itch to obtain the Government,
seconded with a suspicion of his own safety; which could not be great, while
his Brother might justly fear him as a Rival for the Kingdom.

Muley Sheck being the last of the Brothers, and thereby without any to
competition him, he studied to make both his Government and Person gracious to
the people. In which artifice he was so prosperous, that no Sultan in Barbary
had equaled him in a confluence of happiness. The Sky of his Reign was for
nineteen years serene: and there were no prognostics of alteration in his
condition, till Laella, one of his Wives, began to be exorbitant in her
appetites, and to meditate disloyalty to her Husband's Bed. She is reported to
have been a woman of a refined subtilty, and learned in the most artful methods
of stealeing her pleasures. But at length she fell excessively enamored of her
own kinsman, one Cidi Kirum, whom the King had adopted into his Grace and
Conversation. This Kirum was of a popular inclination, and skilful in feeding
the humors of the people. He had been at Mecha in Devotion, and of course
received for that visitation the title of Hadge, granted to all that have
performed the Hage, or Pilgrimage to their Prophets Tomb. By this, and a great
show of exterior Religion, he had with men of all capacities purchased a
significant reputation. And albeit he was a wel-wisher to an Innovation, the
common design of their pretended Piety, yet the present face of affairs
looked very disagreeable upon such an enterprise. For the King so ruled, that
all had cause to love, and none to fear him, and the courteousness of his
personal behavior, had secured him a large share in the worst of his Subjects
bosoms; His custom being to punish and spare none, who were convict offenders
against their Law, the known Rule both of their Religion and Polity. And for
the greater discouragement of all commotions, the Zeriffian name was grown
sacred with the Moors, through its long continuance: and they concluded its
prosperity a Divine approbation of its Right.

Kirum no doubt was still as coveteous to enjoy the Crown, as Laella his Bed;
whose amors at last grew to that height of impatience, that nothing could
quiet them, but the embraces of her Paramour in a Regal State; which she
plotted with a feminine invention. The death of the King her Husband was the
only secure Recipe for her distemper, but altogether of an unsafe
accomplishment, if enterprised by open violence. Wherefore she is reported to
have essayed his Death by Sorcery's; in which wickedness (Story tells us) that
the Mahumetan Women have always been dexterous. But not precisely to
determine, by what way Muley Hamet Sheck came to his Grave, it is certain that
his end was sudden and unexpected, and that he shut up his life before he had
seen the twentieth year of his Reign. His decease was much lamented, and the
more because it came unsuspected. The Government lineally descended upon his
Son Muley Labesh, a child of three years old, whom his dying Father bequeathed
to the protection of Kirum El Hadge, and other Grandees of the Kingdom,
appointing them to administer the affairs of State in Labesh's name, till he
was come to the age of eleven years. In which time Kirum was so balanced with
his fellow Regents, that he durst not attempt the least alteration. But such
was the crafty conduct of his demeanor, that he had made many of the Almocadens
among the Alarbs to be his creatures and ready at his Devotion, and of whose
assistance he might rely, when he saw it convenient to time a Revolution: which
he deferred to the entrance of the second year of Labesh's reign, being the
thirteenth of his age. At which time Kirum secretly retired from Court, and was
not heard of, till he appeared in the head of a numerous Army of Alarbs, whom
he had allured into Rebellion with the promises of large Incoms, the bait
disloyalty still leaps at.

Labesh quickly took the Alarm, and with considerable Forces marched toward
Kirum, if possible to end the War in the place where it was begun. The Moors
highly extol the valor and conduct of this young King, who forgetting the
delights and toys of that age, devoted himself to the severities of Military
Discipline, constantly watching in the Camp, or courageously fighting in the
Battle. For four years His fortunes and Kirum's had their vicissitudes, for so
long they fought with dubious presages of the event; till Treachery at last is
said to have given Kirum that conquest which courage could not; for Labesh
being invited by Kirum to receive his Recantation, met with a Barbarous death,
where he hoped to receive a Loyal subjection. Others report that Kirum slew him
with his own hands in that fatal Battle, which proved the finishing overthrow.

After the death of Labesh, Kirum became too powerful for the resistance of his
scattered Forces, having none left under whose conduct they might venture
their last Efforts; so that now all oppositions being removed with the King,
Kirum made a quiet march to Morocco, where the Citizens received him with all
the significations of subjection, in whose imitation the adjoining Cavilas
brought in the pledges of their Allegiance to Kirum: which they did not
intermit, till by a natural death he resigned the Kingdom to his Son Muley
Boucar, who after the short reign of three months was dethroned by Taffalete,
of which Revolution more will be said in the story of that prevailing Zeriff.

The Moors having for a long season been torn and distracted with the unnatural
Murders of Sidans Sons, and wearied out with following those Wars, which had no
juster causes then private interests and envious Annimosities, began at last to
provide for their own peace and safety. The adored Zeriffian Family was extinct
in Labesh, whereby they were quitted from obedience to that Race. Kirum by
several of the great ones living distant from the Court, was looked upon as
one, both by unjustness of title, and meanness of Pedigree, unfit to receive
their Allegiance. In this shaken and doubtful State of affairs, some stood
neuter in their judgments, but outwardly complied with the present Government;
others resolved to stand upon their Guard, chooseing rather to run the hazards
of War, then to enjoy the safety of a dishonorable Peace.

Cidi Hamet-Ali-Haiashi, Cidi Mahumet Ben-el Hadge-Ben-Boucar, and the Zeriff
of Benzaruel were the Chiefs in these new commotions, but all opposite
factions, and all Alarbs, and all great Saints: The last of the three contented
himself with the protection of Ben Zaruel, a large Cavila almost impregnable by
nature, in whose Government his Ancestors for many years had lived in peace.
But after two months of stout resistance was subdued by Tafilete; who took with
him the Aged Zeriff, and dispersed his Family, of which there perhaps will be
an opportunity of speaking more in another paragraph.

Haiashi and Ben-Boucar, gifted with greater ambitions, labored to enlarge the
Curtains of their Territories, and each seemed to aim at no less then the
Empire of Mauritania Tingitana. Their outward Sanctimony equald them in the
peoples affection and esteem, and if they could have reconciled their
Interests, and joined in the same design, they had shared that state, which
both lost, while each would have all or none: of whose rise and fall these
succeeding periods will give you information.

Cidi Hamet Ali Haiashi was an Alarb, (or one of that sort of Moors, who live
under Tents and in Mountains, without any fixed habitations, as I shall show in
my notices upon this Country,) who had the learning of a Talib, and sanctity of
a Marabout; by which he was esteemed as an Oracle among his Countrymen, who
upon all Emergent occasions repaired unto him for advice and Instruction; which
they received as Infallible, and obeyed as a Law. His Parentage according to
the Moresco Heraldry was not obscure; for the Government of Abenimalec was
Hereditary to his Family, and legally descended to his possession. Which
Abenimalec being a very large Cavila, upon the river of Mamora, was by Haiashi
governed with that politic carriage, which made him reverenced of his own
people, and feared of his neighbors, as appeared in their ready abetting his
enterprises.

The late suspected death of Muley Sheck, together with the violent murder,
and dethroning of his Son, both Haiashi's beloved Sovereigns, made Kirum, whom
he supposed to have been as well the secret contriver of the first, as he saw
him the open acter of the second villainy, to be odious to his thoughts, and
unfit for his obedience. Revenge, whose lawfulness is an Article in the Moors
Creed, put Haiashi into Arms, with intent, if not to depose Kirum from being
King, yet at least keep himself from becoming his Subject. His first Musters
consisted ownly of the Levies of his own Cavila, to which were daily accessions
of the Neighboring Almocadens, which helped to adjust his Insurrection. His
Forces being soon increased above his hopes, he ordered his March toward Fez,
the Metropolis of the Kingdom of that name. This ancient City was now governed
by Vbaha, Kirums Creature; who upon the advance of Haiashi's Forces, secretly
stole away to Morocco, as not daring to trust himself to his own valor, or the
fidelity of the Citizens. By the flight of Vbaha, Fez being left Governorless,
it became the easy Achievement of Haiashi; under whose Command it continued
seven Years, and was a fair addition to his Greatness and Safety, being (as was
said) the Metropolis of the Kingdom.

Haiashi by his Successes began to be the envy of Ben-Boucar, who for some
Years after his Revolt from Morocco, contented himself with the solitary
Dominion of Zawia, where he lived in a House of that name, which for its
Religious Foundation, was become a Sanctuary, or Refuge for Offenders. The
Inhabitants of Zawia are reported to be very numerous and Warlike, yet by
reason of remoteness, they created Haiashi very small Disturbances; besides,
Ben-Boucar was unwilling to refer himself to the uncertain Decision of the
Sword, which, in all probability, must have given the Victory to Haiashi, by
whose Forces he was far exceeded. He therefore betook himself to Stratagem, and
consults with Ali Ben Hamet, Almocaden of Saphian, one whom Haiashi had not yet
entirely subdued, by what method their common Enemy might be removed. Now the
Moors, in removal of those they hate, seem to know no other Policies, besides
an armed Violence, and secret Massacre. The two Conspirators saw their
inability to undertake the former, and therefore resolved to put the latter in
execution.

Ali Ben Hamet greedy of that sweet bit Revenge, and to express it upon
Haiashi, who had dispoiled him of his Right, uudertook to be his Assasinate:
which he thus effected. Haiashi being lodged in his Tent near Azount, a
Fountain he greatly esteemed in the Cavila of Atcleik, about six Leagues North
of Alcazar, was in the Night visited by Ali, accompanied with about 70 Horse,
who came not with any show of Hostility, but with a pretense of Friendship,
declaring, That his Errand was designed to render himself Haiashies Subject,
and to receive the continuance of his Cavila from his hand. Under this Cloak
Haiashi received him into his Tent, and thereby gave him the opportunity of
Murdering him, which he effected with one Stab. The Murderer had his
Accomplices ready to make his Escape, which was the less difficult, because
Haiashi had no Guards, which he had declined either to save Charges, or
dissemble his confidence in the Moors, who are best made faithful by being
trusted; but very vindictive, when they find themselves suspected.

Ben-Boucar being ascertained by Ali of Haiashies treacherous Slaughter, in the
Twelfth Year of his Revolt, he incessantly marched to take Possession of his
Country, which he found ready at his Devotion; either because the People were
unprovided for Opposition; or, that they thought Ben-Boucar's Superiority was
less obnoxious to exception, then any other they could elect. The Almocadens,
mindful of their accustomed method to preserve their Commands, secretly one
after another subscribed to Ben-Boucar's Regiment; only Fez and Alcazar cost
him some time and Blood in their Reduction. But at last they yielded upon
Articles, Arzila having first shown them the way. Ben-Boucar's next March was
to Tituan, governed by the Ancient and Worthy Family of the Narsis, out of
which he had received a Wife, and by that Relation was welcome to the
Supremacy of that City.

Ben-Boucar having brought this part of Barbary to his subjection, resolved to
return to Zawia: But before he left the Country, he took from the Grandees
thereof, the best Assurances he was able for their Obedience and Fidelity.
Next, he disposed the Towns of greatest Importance, to the Government of his
Sons and Favorites. To his eldest Son Abdalla he entrusted the Rule of Salla,
which he had observed proner to Sedition then the rest, and yet much addicted
to Persons famed for Piety, for which Abdalla was arrived at a Saintship. To
his second Son Mahumed, he committed the care of Fez, to whom he saw the People
thereof have a peculiar Inclination. To his third Son Hamet Zeer, or Hamet the
less, he gave the command of Shehall, a Mountain of rude Inhabitants, yet much
addicted to obey a fierce nature, wherewith Hamet Zeer was furnished. Arzila he
left to Benzeir, a Thing of his own framing: And Alcazar to Cidi Benzian. After
this Partition, he returned to his Religious Zawia, where in great Peace he
enjoyed the fruits of his War, making the easiness of his Yoke an argument with
the People to bear it.

But the memory of Haiashi's treacherous Death (compassed by Ben-Boucar) was
still fresh in the Breasts of those Sons, whose Fathers had their Fortunes
thereby depressed; which Ben-Boucar, as he could not but know, so he could not
but conclude, That the vindictive Spirit of a Moor would take the first
occasion of avenging. In prevention whereof, he took with him to Zawia such
Sons as he saw were likeliest to inherit their Fathers hatred against him; not
as Hostages of Peace, but as Pledges of his Care, whom being as yet in their
nonage, he loved to Print with the Characters of a peaceable acquiescence in
his Authority. Among these Youths, young Gaylan was most considerable, and
indeed the only Person that he detained: whose Story now succeeds, in which
will be supplied what is here wanting of Ben-Boucar.

In Beniworfut, near to Arzila, lived the Family of the Gaylans, which was of
that sort of Moors styled Barabars, and to which through flux of time, the
Government of that Cavila was become Hereditary. This House (though never low
or obscure) began to be signally advanced in Ali Gaylan the Father, which
proved but a Prophecy of its downfall in El Hader the Son; whose Ambition lost
what the others Humility had obtained. Ali was in great favor with Haiashi, and
a chief Engine of his advancement, in which he was observed not much to
endeavor his own. But his greatest Renown sprang from his Zeal for the
Mahumetan Law, an Artifice which seldom fails, and a knack with which
whosoever is gifted, cannot want Reverence among the Moors. Arzila being much
moved with his Sanctity, invited him to a residence among them, which they
rewarded with considerable Rents, and great Testimonies of respect.

This Ali Gaylan spent the last Scene of his Life with great satisfaction to
Haiashi's prosperity, whom at his Death he left without any threatening
Prognostics of an alteration in his State: But when he grew sensible of the
near approaches of his end, he called for his Beloved El Hader, to whom he
recommended the care of his Family, Government of his Cavlla, imitation of his
Conversation and Faith to Haiashi. El Hader was too young for the undertaking
all this when his Father dyed, which caused the provident Parent to leave him
to the careful Tuition of Hamet Benzian, Almocaden of Beni-Haros, with whom he
remained, till removed thence by Ben-Boucar, after the reducement of Haiashi.
About the xxiii of his Age, this El Hader Ben Ali Gaylan, was married to the
Daughter of one Akadim, a principal Man in Beniworfut, upon which Marriage he
had license to return home; a Concession that proved very fatal to Ben-Boucar.
For El Hader being got to his own Territories, where he received an
affectionate welcome; there happened a Commotion in the populous Cavila's of
Saphean, Shawia, and Homar, (all Alarbes) which denied to pay Ben-Boucar the
accustomed Rights, and were so far from an obedient tender thereof, that they
inhumanely murdered his two Brethren, Abdelhalac and Missinievi, whom he sent
to demand them.

The news of this Insurrection quickly arrived El Hader, who thereupon, with
some of the best Horse of his Cavila, instantly posted to Alcazar, where
according to Intelligence he met with Ali Ben Hamet, Haiashi's Murderer, whom
with his own hand he killed, in revenge of the Murder he had committed upon
his Fathers Friend: In whose death, he pulled down one of Ben-Boucars best
Supporters in this Canton of his Dominion. Next he speeded to Arzila, forsaken
by Ben-Boucars Alcayde, who upon the tidings of Hamets death, and the Alarbes
revolt, durst not trust himself among a People whom he saw zealously to favor
his Masters Enemy.

Upon this Gaylan appeared at Arzila, which was very acceptable to his Fathers
old Admirers, who readily yielded him their utmost Assistances, and were
seconded with several of the adjacent Cavila's. Ben-Boucar coming to chastize
the seditious Alarbes, and to avenge his Brothers blood, which he speedily
dispatc'd; his next care was to render Gaylan sensible of his Deportment, who,
upon his advance, took sanctuary in Arzila, where he lay immured, till such
time as necessity forced Ben-Boucar to withdraw his Levies. Upon every such
retreat, Gaylan was still at his wonted disturbances, and yet upon every return
of the Enemy, he betook himself to the protection of Arzila; Out of which
nothing could fetch him, but a close, tedious, and expensive Siege, a thing ill
agreeing with the Moors Custom and Provision.

Ben-Boucar, weary of that Fatigue, in which for some Years he had been
exercised, and whereof he saw no end, proferr'd Gaylan this Accommodation: That
if he would pay him the accustomary Tributes, and an acknowledgement of
superiority, he should peaceably possess the Government of Arzila, and his own
Cavila. Gaylan was not backward to accept an Accommodation so favorable to his
present Condition and future Designs; being at that time shut up in Arzila, and
yet entertaining an ambition of making himself Lord of the Country. This
accommodation being ratifyed, Ben-Boucar returned home, and Gaylan was set at
liberty to take his Divertisements in the Country, where his plausible Fortune
and Personage, Zeal for their Law, and reservation of Carriage, made the
Grandees of the Country greatly affected with his Society. Gaylan finding
himself under so favorable an Aspect, thought of Strengthening his Intentions by
contracting Alliances with the best Casts: whereupon he took him a second Wife,
a Daughter of Cassian Shot Almocadem of the Cavila called Angera, a Warlike
Family, and descended of the Andalusian Moors banished Spain. His third Wife
was the Daughter of Coger Alcayde of Alcazar, and a leading Person in that part
of the Country. His fourth was a Virgin Daughter of Mufadal, Governor of
Tituan, which made up the legal number of four, so many being allowed by their
Prophet: upon the death of his second Wife, to keep up the account, he married
the Daughter of one Messimd, a popular Person in Tituan, and descended of a
Saint.

By these Alliances he got an Interest both in the Persons and Places of
greatest moment in this part of the Country, by which he was animated to break
with Ben-Boucar: a design of such nature, that Gaylan durst not venture thereon
in any open Declaration, but advisedly disguised it under a pretended
Enterprise against the Christians, Garrisoned in several Towns on the Barbary
Coast, maintained by the Crowns of Portugal and Spain. Which to effect the
better, he first showed the Moors how their Prophet, both by his Example and
Doctrine, had taught them to exercise their Revenge against all Opposers of his
Law; and that whoever should dye in its Defense or Propagation, were assured of
Paradise; and then concluded, how much it would redound to the honor of that
Generation, if they should drive the Christians out of their Country, to which
and their Religion they were the common Enemy.

This Proposal was strangely moving with People of all capacities, and the
report of Gaylans Intentions against the Christians, induced many to be his
Followers, who otherwise would have eschewed his Company: But having drawn in
some by his Affinity, others with fair Promises, and the generality with
Religious Pretenses, he began a little to pull aside the Vail, and show the
naked Face of his Design. Having given some Testimonies of his Zeal and Valor
against the Christians, and enraged them to an activity above what they had of
late expressed: He likewise laid before them their necessity of Union, and that
they should combine under one Leader, the better to carry on what they had
begun. He also set before them their unhappiness to be governed by one whom age
and distance rendered so unfit to relieve them, in case of sudden necessity;
and withal magnifyed his Title to the Government of the Country, equal to
Ben-Boucars. The People found no reason to dispute any part of Gaylans
Harangue, in which they could perceive he aimed at nothing but their safety.
Whereupon the Alcayde of Alcasar, El Haders Father-in-law, was the first that
declared for his Government, who was seconded with several other Grandees of
the Country, so that in short time all the Cavila's which Ben-Boucar had taken
from Haiashi, left him as they had done their former Master, and adhered to
Gaylan. But Salla and Tituan utterly dissented from the rest, and instead of
yielding a tame submission to Gaylans Empire, they altogether resisted him.
This moved El Hader to advance his Forces first against Tituan, which he found
very stubborn: for Abdel Crim Nacsis (the chief Governor thereof) would be
inclined to no thoughts of Pacification or Surrender, while he could cherish
any hopes of being relieved by his near Relative Ben-Boucar. But at length,
despairing of any Succors, and seeing the great spoils Gaylan was like to make
of their Vineyards, Gardens, and Houses of Pleasure about the Town, which the
Inhabitants highly valued for their profit and delight, he sought to prevent
him in that desolation, by a mature and timely Address for Peace: which was
welcome News to Gaylan, being very covetous to be Master of a place so
considerable for Strength, Riches, and Traffic. The Articles were soon
concluded, Gaylan demanding no more then their subjection, a constant Levy of
Soldiers to serve him on occasions of greater moment; and that one of his own
Election should be equal in the Government with Nacsis. Upon this Pacification
with Tituan, Gaylan marched against Salla, which was under the Rule of that
great Saint, Abdala Ben-Boucar, who upon weak Temptations retired to the
Castle, leaving Gaylan the Signory of the Town, wherein he placed some Forces
of his own, to secure the Inhabitants from Apostasy. But not long after, Abdala
being sore pressed for want of Provisions, and hopeless of being succored by
his Father, privily quitted the Castle, having first of all sent away in an
English Frigate, his Wives to Phedalla.

The gaining of this Castle made Gaylan sole Master of this North West Canton
of Barbary, beyond which he was never able to enlarge his Territories; albeit
he was struggling for more room, as foreseeing that endeavors after more, was
the means to be secure of what he had got already. He often tried his valor
upon the Xerif, Hamet Bocalla, chief of Benzaruel, and Beni-Halet, but his
Attempts still proved successless, for those Cavila's are almost inaccessible
by reason of their Mountainousness. Erif, Botoia, Beniuphrash, Benimisgildah,
and Benijaacob, being all large Cavila's which for Generations had been
governed by the house of Arras, under the title of Alcayde, never received any
attempt of Gaylan's reducing them. And albeit he wanted neither courage nor
ambition to have made himself Sultan of Barbary, yet his Stars denied him that
Grandeur, and he was never able to stretch his Arm beyond the command of 22
Cavila's, whose names are hereunto annexed, with the number of their usual
levies of Men for the Wars.

The List of the Names of the Cavila's, with the number of their Forces, which
were under Gaylans Government in the Year, 1666.
1. ANgera under the command of Cassian Shot, Gaylans Father-in-law, is a large
Cavila, inhabited with Barabars, and is able to raise 500 Foot, and an equal
number of Horse. 2. Wadross, the nearest Neighbor to Tanger, yields upon any
urgent occasion 800 for the Wars, in equal number of Horse and Foot. 3.
Benider, about ten Leagues from Tanger, can bring 500 Foot and a thousand Horse
to the Field. 4. Minkel, a small Cavila, not able to leavy above 500 in all. 5.
Hammiharshen is well Peopled, and able to advance 1000 in all; the greatest
part Foot. 6. Hamnizouer commonly raises as many. 7. Alkarobe, being a large
and well-inhabited Cavila, is able, upon a small warning, to arm out 1500 Horse
and Foot in equal numbers; it is governed by Mahumet Akadim, and Lassin Akadim
his Brother, who revolted from Gaylan and sided with Tafilete. 8. Beniobras, of
Horse and Foot can raise a thousand; it is governed by Ali Azus, who revolted
from Gaylan to the Xeriff. 9. Beniharos is next adjoining to the former, and
able to send 1200 to the Field: This Cavila is governed by Lasin El Phut, who
was the first that invited Tafilete to advance against Gaylan, promising him
his assistance. 10. Beni Joseph is a Cavila of two days Journey, able to raise
3000 in all, but very few Horse: It is very Mountainous, and so fortified by
Nature, that it has often attempted to stand upon its own defense. It is
governed by Lazid Ali Mahumed, who left Gaylan upou the approach of Tafilete.
11. Sumatta is a small Cavila, whose usual levy is 500 of all sorts: It is
governed by Talib Ali Elfiluz, who joined with Tafilete. 12. Beniworfut, which
advanced 600 Horse, and as many Foot: The Government hereof belongs to the
House of Gaylan, but since Tafilets Empire, the Almocaden thereof is one
Mahumed Dengith. 13. Arzila and Salli make one Cavila, and when but easily
charged, raise 500 Foot, and as many Horse; they are governed by an Alcayde.
14. Halixerif raises with Alcazar 1200 Foot in all: it belongs to the Alcayde
of Alcazar who in Gaylans time was Mahumet Cozhez, but now Ali. 15. Kit^n,
which being very small, its Forces exceed not 200. 16. Benimadar yields about
the same number. 17. Beni Zaid, which if the same with that in Leo Afer, must
yield more Soldiers then 500, though that was the ordinary levy exacted by
Gaylan. 18. Al Couff is a small Cavila, lying between Alcazar Ezzaguer, and
Ceuta, which usually sent in 200.
These are all, or the most of them Barabars, who have fixed Habitations,
living in Neighborhood and a settled Conversation; and of these consisted
Gaylans chief Forces: yet he had besides these four Cavila's of Alarbes,
namely, Delholot, Shawia, Beni-Guedar, and Saphian, which are reported to be
very numerous and Warlike, lying West of Salla and Alcazar: But by reason of
their untractable nature, and floating manner of living, they are not so
certain in their Musters, nor ready upon Emergencies. These Gaylan could never
bring under a perfect subjection, but was content they should pay some small
Tribute in acknowledgement to his Superiority.

The above mentioned Cavila's were the total of Gaylans Dominions, beyond which
he could never make any Enlargement. He was for the space of twelve Years
prosperous in his Government, and the general success of his Enterprises,
raised him highly in the estimate of his Followers: It being the Genius of this
People, to make the Prosperity of the Action, an undoubted argument of its
Justice, and the voice of Heaven to approve it.

Gaylan from his Youth was trained up in Arms: And for the Adventures he had
made upon Tanger, when Portugues, was called the Almocaden of those Fields. But
not to mention any thing of his proceedings against the Christian (that being
no design of this Paper) we find him constantly in War with the Moor.
Ben-Boucar was still Master of Fez, and ready upon every frail Temptation to
enter Gaylans Frontiers, which kept them both in continual Hostility. The
People at length wearied out with the incessant Troubles occasioned by these
Rivals for the Supremacy, were ready to adhere to some third Party, able to
settle the Government in such a single Person, as both by Title and Strength
should be above an ordinary Competitor: Which unexpectedly came to pass in the
Sixteen hundred and sixty fifth of the Crucifixion; for about the entrance of
that Year, Muley Reshid first appeared with the Prognostics of a Revolution,
of whom I here set down this short Account.

In the Province of Dara, in Numedia, the Country of Mahumed Ben Amet, Founder
of the Xeriffian Empire, there arose a Mulatto (one whose Father was white, and
Mother black) one Reshid Ben Mahumed, a Native of the Town of Taffilete, the
place whether Mahumed (the second Son of Mahumed Ben Amet) the second of that
Family (who was Emperor of Morocco) had confined his eldest Brother Amet, whom
he had taken Prisoner. This Reshid ripening in Years and discretion, began to
make himself known to the World by the name of the Xeriff of Tafilete: By which
Title he made himself descended of the Xeriffian House, which so long had
enjoyed the Empire of Barbary, and of the Prophet Mahumet. [Xeriff] (as was
said) being a Name peculiar to that Deceiver. And because a research into
Moresco Geneologies shall have labor for the pains, I shall enquire no further
after Reshids Pedigree, then to observe that his Father was one Muley Mahumed,
a Prince of great Authority in Numedia, who besides his four legal Wives, had
several Concubines; of one of which, being a Negra, he begot this Reshid. His
Father dying while he was a minor, he was committed to the Tuition of his Elder
Brother Muley Hamet Ben-Mahumed. This Reshid having accomplished his Pupillage,
began to look into his Condition, and to enquire what was left him by his
deceased Father: For by the Moresco Institutes, the Sons of Concubines are
equal Sharers in the Patrimony with those of the lawful Wives. While Reshid
made himself the comparative of his Brother, he was lost into an Emulation,
that spurred him into the endeavors of promoting his Fortunes. He saw his own
Condition, and that of Public Affairs, qualified for no other Proposal to
effect his desired Advancement, but what was to be obtained by the Sword:
Whereupon he consulted with his own Genius, by what Artifice he might soonest
imbroil Barbary in a new War, and communicated the Design with some few Moors
of his own Complexion. At the first opening of his Adventure, his Retinue
exceeded not the number of thirty, and those of an inferior Quality, who yet,
by reason of the contractedness of their Lots, were disposed to execute any
Proposition that was probable to enlarge them.

With this paucity of Adherents, Reshid secretly withdrew from Tafilete to
Tessa, a place abounding with Inhabitants, but as poor as numerous. Here Reshid
received the Royal Title of Muley, and was Proclaimed King of Tafilete. And in
acknowledgement and token of his Royal Power, the People brought him Presents,
as the known Pledges of their Loyal subjection. This new Sultan manifested a
great disdain of that Avaritious humor, which had possessed the minds of the
Barbarian Princes, much inveighing against the sordid Devotion of Sacrificing
the Wealth of their Subjects to themselves. He therefore by a subtle
contrariety refused to shrine up more Money in his Coffers, then might decently
defray Expenses, leaving at the first that pleasing bait to be devoured by his
Proselytes, whereby he purchased a great reinforcement of his Retinue. Tessa,
which he elected for his first place of Arms, swarmed (as was said) with poor
Inhabitants, whose Labors were too little for their Sustenance, which might
render them the readier to take the Impression of any Counsil that was likely
to better their Condition. And Muley Reshid is conceived to have repaired to
this beggarly Colony, to meet with an easier advance of Followers.

By rolling up and down, he had in short time gathered so great a Bulk, as
threatened an Inundation wheresoever it should spread it self. Attended with
this numerous Rabble, he addressed himself to his Elder Brother Muley Hamet, in
a posture compounded of Hostility and Friendship, of whom he demanded the
Estate left him by his Father, that he might be the better enabled to perform
something worthy of Their House. The two Brothers began to wax hot in the
Conference; and it is said, that the Language on both sides was so
exasperating, that they had like to have forgot the distance of their
Condition, and to have closed up their Discourse with an unmannerly Combat.
Both were so far transported with Anger, that without the least overture of
Reconcilement, they fell into declared Hostility, and left their private
Quarrel to the public determination of a War.

In which Muley Reshid was so fortunate as to slay his Brother, and thereby was
left without any to justle him in the Government of Dara. This success did so
swell Reshid's bosom, that less room could not circumscribe him then a
Kingdom. The present Affairs of Barbary were auspicious to his Enterprises: the
Countries being rent into petty Monarchies, every Almocaden that was able,
having put himself into a defensive Posture, aiming to live independent in his
Government. This division much facilitated Muley Reshid's Designs: yet nothing
was more conducing to his success, then his careful execution of Justice, the
want whereof had been a general pretended grievance; every detected Criminal
had condign punishment according to demerit, whereby he became both beloved and
feared.

Together with his care for public Justice, he continued his seeming neglect
of Riches; still dividing among his Partisans the estates of those whom their
own obstinacy made his spoils. But those, who gently yielded to his mercy, he
generously protected both in their Goods and Persons. This obliging carryage
gave wings to his Fame, and made him where ever he came to be received with
acclamations; The common voice was Illah Enzur Muley Reshid, i.e. God bless
Prince Reshid and the vulgar esteemed him sent on purpose to chastize
oppressors.

Having made himself master of his Brothers Territories, he advanced toward
Erif governed by the Alcayd Arras, who was his Brothers confederate, and his
Father-in-law, and who in confidence of this relation (if we may credit report)
granted Muley Reshid a peaceable admission into his Dominions; wherein for some
Moons he deported himself as a Son. But being ascertained of the Alcayds
intention to contract a Friendship with Tanger, and that he had dispatched an
envoy to the same purpose he concluded that he now wanted no reason to declare
himself an enemy to the Alcayd's proceedings, and under this pretext armed
against him. The Alcayd seeing the Xeriff attempting to dispoil him of his
Territories; and that contrary to all Ingenuity and Laws of Hospitality; he
began to usurp the Country of his Entertainer, he thought it high time to
provide for his defense. Therefore with some Extemporary Forces he repaired to
the Maritim Bos^mma where he reinforced a small Fort; not out of any hopes to
maintain it against the Xeriff, but thereby to have the advantage of
surrendering it and himself upon gentler Articles. Muley Reshid advised of the
Alcaids flight, addressed himself to the pursuit, and overtook him at the
mentioned Fortress. Which in few days the Alcayd delivered up to be demolished
by the Xeriff, and himself his prisoner.

This Victory, or rather surprisal of the Alcayd was a fair accession to
Reshids power, having now subjected the only Potentate, whom the rest of the
neighboring Grandees had so often Courted for a Confederate.

Having thus obtained the command of Erif and the rest of his Fatherinlaws
Country, it raised in him no less aspireing hopes then to become Sultan of
Mauritania Tingitana, at that time rent into parties. To the accomplishing of
which design he saw the gaining of Fez would contribute much to his esteem, and
give him admission into the heart of the Kingdom. Upon this consideration he
resolutely marched to try his fortunes with that ancient and famous
Metropolis. This City was lately in the Government and Possession of Cidi
Mahumed, second Son to Ben Boucar, who was despoiled thereof, together with his
Life, by the cruelty of Bensallah, Soheir, and Doriedi, said all to be
Andaluzian Moors, and who had the Government thereof divided among them, when
Reshid came against it. The news of whose approach no sooner reached Fez. but
the Governors, whom guilt had made cowardly, betook themselves to the strongest
holds of the City, depositing the Keys into such Hands, as they thought fittest
to be entrusted with the protection of the Gates. Reshid seeing that Fez was
likely to cost him dear, if he stayed to take it by a formal Siege, thought of
having recourse to Stratagem; knowing that he who aspires after nothing but
Conquest, ought not to bind himself to the Laws of a fair Gamester.

Reshid had so long pressed the City by impeding their Markets, that he might
reasonably imagine there was a want of provision of Cattle; whereupon he
resolved to lodge some of his Forces near the City Walls, and that himself,
with about sixteen more, would drive some Cattle to the Gates of Fez, under the
disguise of Friends come to bring them Provision. This he put in execution in
the Night, and coming with the Cattle to the Gates, with a Voice counterfeiting
haste and fear, they called to the Guards for entrance, and desired that they
would take into their Protection them and the booty brought for their succor.
Two were admitted to enter, whereof the Xeriff is said to have been one, who
instantly slew the Sentinel, and thereby made way for the rest; who having
seized the Keys, straight ascended a small Turret over the Gate, and thence
gave the Signal to his Forces, lodged near for the purpose to advance: And the
small Gun that was placed in the Gate, he caused to be turned upon the City.
The Citizens being miserably confused and affrighted at the suddenness of the
action, were not recovered of their Distractions till Reshid poured in his Army
amongst them; against whom being unable to make any considerable opposition,
their last and only succor was a timely submission, which they performed with
such humility, that Reshid had no temptation to reject it. After they were
received into protection, the Fezans were not penurious in complaints against
their Governors, imputing it to their wilful Pride, that the Xerif was not
received with such evidences of Honor, as they had always born to that Title.
But not staying at such useless Complements, Reshid in the first place took
into his possession the ancient Treasures of the Kings of Fez. Next, he caused
the three Governors to be brought before him, and having told them of their
great Oppressions of the People, he commanded one of them to be burnt
immediately, another to be dragged about the Streets till he was dead; but the
third he committed to custody, and afterward is said to have killed him with
his own hand: And then declared, That this was the just recompense of all those
who deal unjustly with the People.

And having thus subjected the famous Fez, his next Trophies he designed upon
Ben-Boucar, whom without much resistance he took Prisoner, and brought to Fez,
and there granted him a liberal Confinement, in token of that respect which he
bore his Piety and Age. After this, he went against the Xerif of Benzaruel, who
proved a very resolute Enemy, for with the strength of his own Cavila he found
a Months work for all Reshids Army, but at length was forced to render himself
Prisoner, and still remains in that Condition.

Reshid had now so far advanced his Dominion in the Kingdom of Fez, that he had
none therein to oppose him but El Hader Ben Ali Gaylan; who for his military
Skill, personal Valor, and many Years of Success and Settlement in his
Government, rendered Tafilete dubious in his Councils how to proceed against
him. Tafraught, a prodigious ridge of Mountains, so secured Gaylans Frontiers,
that no part was left passable, but what might easily be guarded. And therefore
to enter Gaylan's Dominions by open violence, Tafilete foresaw would cost him
the expense of more time then his Affairs could spare: upon which reflection,
he fell to his successful Art of making a false Party in his Enemies Camp, that
he might obtain by intestine Treachery, what in this case he could not by his
own Force. To this end he secretly entered into correspondence with Cidi Lasin
El Phut, Governor of Benittaros, (Gaylans chief Frontier Cavila) who was
entrusted with the Avenue that let into Gaylans Country. Lasin was not much
indisposed to a Revolt from Gaylan, being one of those whom he had highly
displeased in not calling them to the adjousting of the last Peace with Tanger,
nor to partake of its Benefits (which was very fatal to that juncture of
Gaylan's Affairs) and because he saw the growing power of Tafilete, and that
albeit for a while they might resist him, yet in time he would eat through
their Alps. Upon these Temptations, or what other, we may imagine operative
upon the wary, covetous, aspiring and revengeful nature of a Moor, Lasin
contracted with Tafilete, Reshid, or the Xeriff (which in this Narrative do all
express the same Person) to advise him, when he should attach the Passage, who
to that end had always a select Band in readiness. And when by his own Example
Lasin had taught the Guards to be remiss, and had got the advantage of Gaylans
absence, he gave Tafilete the Signal, who gained the Passage, and with such
suddenness set upon the Reserves, that they were not able to make any
considerable resistance.

The news of this Disaster soon reached Alcazar, where Gaylan was entertaining
himself with his Relation Cogez, who with some of his best Troops marched to
the succor of his other Forces, which otherwise had been totally destroyed.
Gaylan in this Encounter gave great testimonies of his Valor, and had, no
doubt, given the Enemy a brave repulse, if his Infantry had not been wholly
discomfited ere he could come to their relief. At last, finding himself
oppressed with number, he was forced to order the Party that stuck to him to
seek for their safety, and himself, with about six more, retreated to Arzila;
from whence, as one not well recovered of the fright, he acquainted that
Excellent Person, Colonel H. Norwood, the Lieutenant Governor of Tanger (with
whom he was then in League) with his Disgrace, in this following Letter,
Translated out of Spanish.

The Superscription. Al Exmo Senor Don Enrique Norwood.
Ext. Sir,
ALL Places are overspread with the Disasters and Events of our War. The ill
success at this time befaln me, has been by the Design of my Enemy, a Xerif of
Tafilete, who falling in with his Army, surprised my careless out-guards, and
broke and rooted the whole Body. Upon notice whereof, I got on Horseback at
Alcazar, but found my People running away in so great Disorder, that it
exceeded my Power to rally them till I came at Arzila. Whence I am now
necessitated to crave your Excellencies assistance, upon the account of that
Peace and Friendship so solemnly contracted betwixt us. I therefore desire,
That you would send me a Boat of good bigness, that if I should be put to any
strait, I might send to you for succor, which I doubt not but your Excellency
will please to send me upon Honorable Terms.

Also I desire your Excellency, that in case any of my Guards, of what Quality
soever, do retire to your City with Cattle, or otherwise, that you would
vouchsafe to favor them with your Protection, and supply their Necessities.

I crave your Excellencies Commands, which I am ready to perform with great
willingness.

The Bearers, your Mariners, promise to return, by whom I entreat you to send a
larger Imbarcation.

May God keep your Excellency. Arzila, June 29. S. V. 1666.

As Soon as the Lieutenant Governor had perused the Letter, he resolved to
gratify Gaylan's desires, as being glad of an opportunity to vindicate the
honor of the English Nation from some imputations, which Gaylan objected to
the Lieutenant Governor (when he was with him at Arzila) and which was chiefly
occasioned through some mistake between the Great Tiveot and Gaylan, concerning
the time when the War should commence in the Year 1663. For albeit the Earl of
Tiveot had sufficiently cleared the Honor and Justice of that Action, yet
Gaylan seeming not so to apprehend it, the Lieutenant Governor was glad of an
occasion to let him know, That it was the mind of his Master, the King of Great
Britain, that all his Ministers should be punctual in the observation of what
they stipulated in his Name. To which end, in a generous and well-composed
Letter, the Lieuteuant Governor condoled Gaylan's misfortune, assuring him of
his Friendship, and that he would exactly comply with every Article of the
Peace concluded betwixt Tanger and his Excellency; and that if any of his
Vassals, Allies, or Domestiques, should in any Exigence make Tanger their
Sanctuary, they should find it no otherwise, and that they should be treated
according to their Quality and Condition. This Letter was sent by a Kinsman of
the Lieutenant Governors, who according to directions, confirmed Gaylan in the
belief of meeting with all the succors that he could reasonably expect from the
lately contracted Friendship.

This Message, whose kindness was doubled by its seasonableness and speed, put
new Spirits into Gaylan's drooping Concerns, and gave him Courage to sound the
temper of his revolted Cavila's, which he found well disposed to his Service,
albeit they were forced to dissemble their Intentions till their Harvest was
secured, least otherwise they should second the War with a Dearth* for so
little is the Provision of the Moors, that the loss or miscarriage of one Crop,
brings a Famine.

But while Gaylan was laboring to retard, Tafilete was improving his last
Victory: and having possessed himself of the Passage into his Enemies
Territories, he quickly became Master of Alcazar, the chiefest of Gaylan's
Inland Towns, which was deserted by Cidi Hamet Cogez, who for many Years had
governed there by the Title of Alcayde. The tidings of the Xerifs Successes no
sooner reached Tituan, but that Town declared for him, and with their best
Solemnity Proclaimed him King. At the same time the Shat of Angera, a principal
Person in those parts, nearly related to Gaylan by Blood and Marriage, retired
to the Woods in the Bay of that Alcazar, which stands upon the Midland Sea;
where he resolved to conceal himself, whilst he sent his Domestiques to Ceuta,
a Spanish Garrison, and Tanger, to procure Seguros for himself and Family, in
case the Xerif should prove implacable, and refuse to receive him unto fair
Quarters.

But the Shat of Angera tired with his retreat, and cherishing some dull hopes
of Gaylan's Recovery, sent in a Bille^ to the Lieutenant Governor of Tanger in
Moresco, in which he seemed to insinuate, that he intended no submission to the
Xerif, which was Translated thus.

The Letter of Almocadem Casum Shat, and his Sons Almocadem, Abdelcrim, and
Almocadem Ali, to the Captain of Tanger, whom we honor much. Desiring that he
would do them the favor to send them four Kintals of Powder, four hundred
Balls, and a Kintal of Lead, with fifty or more Muskets: and that if the
Captain have any need of Wood or Barley, they will repay him in that Commodity:
This they solicit as Gaylan's faithful Friends.

I have inserted this Letter for the sake of its style, being the first and
only Address made in this manner to any of the English Governors in Tanger. But
how hopeful soever the Shats Affairs might appear at the date of this Letter,
yet very shortly after they seemed to be in a very languishing state, as was
easily to be collected by a large account thereof given to Cidi Hamet Algilo,
who was then in Tanger, and which is here translated out of Arabique thus.

The Letter of Taliffo Hamet El Shat, which is bid to salute Hamet Algilo, and
to give him an account of the Troubles that have happened here; how that the
same Night that Taliffo Hamet El Shat left Angera, he came into the Fields of
Tanger, where he killed two Men, and took away their Goods; and returning to
the Aldea (or Village) he found not one Person at his House, neither Man nor
Woman, except Ali El Hag in the House of our Uncle Abdelcrim: all our Kindred
were fled to Ceuta. But coming to speak with the People of Angera, they desired
us for the love of God to leave them, whereupon they also fled to Ceuta: He
that did this was Ben-Haloo. I thereupon writ a Letter to the King, to desire
to have pity upon us. I writ also to Almocadem Hamet Ben-Leefi, and now write
again for the Kings Answer, and according to it I shall advise both them and
thee. Have thou patience, and within two or three days the Answer will be come.
Moreover, I let thee know, that we are guarding our Houses from fire and
mischief, having every Night twenty upon the Guard. I endeavor to keep up my
Peoples courage. Know moreover, that the King has given to Abdelhader
Alfiftoah, the Government of Angera, but the People will not receive him, but
have writ to the King about it, though as yet they have no answer. Lastly, I
give thee to understand, That the King has burned the Village of Benigerfut,
and taken away their Goods.

So various was Gaylan's Fortunes, that while at one place he seemed desperate,
in another he was victorious, and notwithstanding that at Angera Taffilete was
a Conqueror, as his letter intimates, at Arzila he was subdued; for from
thence Gaylan assured his Confederates that all his Cavilas were returned to
their Obedience, that they had massacred those Tafilete had left to keep them
in awe, and shut him in between two rocky mountains; and that himself was
hastening thither to see his enemy and act his Catastrophe, and to put a period
to the war. At the same time he gave out that Tituan was penitent for their
Revolt, and weary of the Xerifs exactions, and were ready to join with him to
effect the utter overthrow of that Imperious Invader.

Yet what face soever Gaylan put upon his condition, it was certain that
Taffilete daily advanced his conquest, and at the same time when his enemy thus
confidently reported his distress; he was in a flourishing condition, for the
Xerif had then routed all Gaylan's fresh recruits, and in detestation of him
had taken up the bones of his Father and burned them, saying, That he deserved
no better, who was the root of that bramble, which had so long tyrannically
rent and torn the poor.

He had also taken Prisoners some of Gaylan's nearest relations, and sent them
to Fez, and committed great spoils upon their goods, whom he found absent from
their habitations, and had brought a considerable wing within a league of
Arzila, where if he had stayed to streighten it, want of bread within a few
moons would have constrained them to surrender.

The Town of Tituan was at this time likewise so far from resuming Gaylan's
Interest, that all things there seemed settled under the Authority and obedience
of Taffilete The notice of which truth was the subject of a letter sent to
Colonel Norwood (Lieutenant Governor of Tanger) whose Honorable proceedings had
rendered him so esteemed among the Moors, that Taffilete thought him a fit
Person to be complemented; and to that end ordered his Alcayd of Tituan to make
his address.

The Alcaydes letter from Tituan to Colonel Norwood translated out of Spanish.
Excellent Sir,
HIs Majesty the K. Muley Xerif my master (whom God preserve many years) has
sent me to this City with express order to take Care of all Vessels of Trade
and Commerce, which shall come to this place, and that they receive all
security and Royal dealing here, as is used in all places under the Rule and
Government of the King my Master. To this purpose he has granted me his Royal
order to give Seguros in his Royal Name. Therefore all who have any occasion to
trafique here, may come in safety, and be assured of good usage, both in Goods
and Persons, above all that has bin here formerly. This his Majesty has
commanded me to advise your Honor, that you might not be ignorant of the
King's pleasure and kindness. And if you send any to trade hither, they shall
find no imposts, but such as are every where usual. And if your Honor please,
we may with our mutual Seguros (or letters of safe conduct) send men or Goods,
as occasion shall require. To this I desire your speedy answer.


The Alcayd from whom this came, was a French man, Cidi Hadrachaman Ben-Reshed,
one who had succeeded his Father in the Consulship of Tituan, who hoping to
raise himself with the Xerif, renounced his Christian Religion and liberty for
the Mahumedan Imposture and servitude; and changed the gentle Name of Antonie
Cheysan, for this stubborn one Hadrachaman, and to encourage his Conversion,
the King made him Alcayd de la Mar, or Receiver of his Customs in the Port of
Tituan, and also adopted him for his Son, by the name of Ben-Reshed.

The Lieutenant Governor delai'd not to answer the Alcaydes letter, as
importing Trade, the chief thing which most concerned the welfare of Tanger, to
whose advancement the Lieutenant Governor always declared a singular
propensity. About the same time Hamet Ben-Isa Nacsis, and Hamet Ben-Abdelcrim,
Governors of Tituan, with other Grandees of the Country and chief Ministers of
the King sought unto him in matters of Moment. Betwixt whom and Gaylan he
guided himself so steddily, that the continuance of his Friendship could not be
suspected by the one, nor want of disposition to contract a new one by the
other. Tafilete could not so much esteem him his enemy as Gaylan's Friend; and
his fidelity to a distressed Confederate removed all suspicion of being
otherwise to a prosperous. And by this wise management he cleared up those
scruples, which through some mishapprehensions of former proceedings (of the
Earl of Tiveot above mentioned) had rendered the Moors jealous of the English
fidelity. But a little to return to Gaylan, who had by this so long contemned
the condition of his affairs in a doubtful Style, that at length an ambiguous
intimation of his Enemies disgrace was taken for a clear assertion of his own.
And however he labored to beget or preserve his friends hopes of his
Restoration, yet it could not take with those who saw Taffilete master of the
whole Country, and all places of importance replenisht with his Creatures; and
Gaylan shut up in Arzila, from whence he could create no more disturbances than
amounted to a few plundering Sallies, which served only to exasperate the
adjoining Cavilsas, and totally to aliene and estrange them from his Relief.
And yet was this a mischief which surpassed the Xerifs skill and Power to
Remedy, for Gaylan might still have kept Arzila from him, as he had done from
Ben-Bowcar, if his accomplicies had bin now as Trusty as they were then; But he
found the Scene so far changed, that he had reason to suspect those in whom he
once confided. He saw that the people of Arzila were weary of their
confinement, and the more, because they could not foresee any hope to be
enlarged. And that they could not but conclude, That their sturdy resistance of
Tafilete, contrary to the example of all their Neighbors, would, if
protracted, render him implacable. All this Gaylan was able to read in their
carriage, wherein there appeared so great an alteration, that he clearly
perceived some mischief intended against him, and fearing that they might
appease Tafilete with the Sacrifice of Gaylan: he resolved upon a sudden
removal, and having before dealt with the Pirates of Alger for his Protection,
when nither pressed by the Enemy, nor want of Provision, he unexpectedly shipped
himself, goods and the dearest Friends, upon two of the Algerine Corsaires,
that were crusing before Arzila; and presently sailed to Alger, where I leave
him to be plagued by that Medly of the worst of men, for his ingratitude toward
the Honorable Colonel Norwood, which would brand him to mankind, if that
Judicious and Vigilent Governor would give an Account of his last deportment,
and oblige the world with his Exact History of Tanger, since it came into the
possession of our dread Sovereign Charles the second whom God Preserve.

Of West Barbary.
WE find a Commonwealth compared to a ship, and the Western part of Barbary
has fulfilled the Allegory, not only in respect of the intestine Broils,
wherewith it has bin so long tossed; nor yet in regard that the government
thereof has bin continually floating from one faction to another. But in this
especially, that there remains no track, or impression, no Registers to
acquaint us with what has passed, except ruins and devastations, the Genuine
memories of a Desolating war. For to demand of a Talib (one of the most learned
sort among the Moors) the Annals of remote vicissitudes, or an account of the
Traverses that bear a fresher date, were to baffle his observation, and thereby
affront his adored literature.

Now the likeliest reason, that can be rendered of this ignorance, is the
neglect of preserving Records of their Transactions, for the Moors trust all
to an Illiterate Tradition; insomuch that the best Chronique can be now
compiled of their late changes, must for the most part be collected from some
aged Grandsires memory; a frail foundation to support an Historical credit.

As for the Ancient Model of the Moresco Polity, it is so miserably convulsed
and shaken through manifold alterations caused by prevailing Interests, that
not many of its first Maxims, nor much of its old Constitution, are visible in
the present state; And this superseded my Curiosity in making reserches into
the Moors Politiques, further than to be informed of the Methods used to ascend
to government by the aspiring factions of the last Age, of which I have given
an Account in the foregoing Narrative. And therefore without the solemnity of
any larger introduction; I shall give a faithful Narration of the present
customs of Barbary in the succeeding Chapters.

CHAP. I.
The soil, productions, Commodities, and Husbandry of the Country.
LEo Afer delivers two Etymologies, which are so agreeable both to the nature of
the Language, and Glebe of the Country, that they may seem to have bin imposed
by Adam, the Primitive Nomenclator. For if we listen to the Moors language,
Barbary seems to be descended from Barbar, which signifies an inarticulate
murmur and grumbling noise without accent or harmony, for their speech is
harsh, being very guttural: which is esteemed an argument of its Antiquity. And
indeed it has gained the vogue of no less ancient a pedigree, than to be bred
of the old Punic and Arabian.

Another reason why this Country bears the name of Barbary, may be taken from
the frame and disposition of the Earth, which being full of wild and unkindly
Tumors, well challenges the name of Bar (a Word not known to the present
Inhabitants) signifying a Desert, and the duplicate of the Monosyllable Bar-Bar
implies that of old, Barbary was nothing but a great Solitude. And for this
derivation, Leo Afer tells this Story: King Iphycus being driven out of
Aethiopia, fled into Egypt, where finding himself much pressed by his Enemies,
and dubious what course to run for his safety, he asked his Adherents what they
thought was the most probable way to secure themselves; whereupon they all,
with an unexpected consent answered Barbar, meaning thereby that the
hopefullest method of Protection was to pass over Nilus into the Deserts of
Africa. And finding this Etymology to bear so fair a Proportion with the
Complexion and Surface of the Land, I shall not scruple the occasion of its
Imposition.

But when we look from the outward shape, to the Productions of the Country,
we see the uncomeliness thereof recompensed in the Fertility, which forbids us
to judge of Internal Dowries by the outward Model: Providence usually supplying
the defects of the Body with the abilities of the Mind, it being the fate of
many excellent Parts, like Galba's, to be ill lodged. The Ancients accounted
Wood and Grain, the more natural and useful Issues of a Country, as having a
more immediate tendency to supply Mankind with the greater Necessities of
Lodging and Diet. But in this Canton of Barbary, the Woods are scarce and mean,
and fitter to warm the House then build it. For ranging their Groves, I found
them consist chiefly of Cork-Trees, which seemed to differ but little from the
Scarlet-Oak, excepting the indenture of their Leaves. Their Fruit is a smaller
kind of Acorn, woody within: At the Root of these Trees is usually found the
Lentisco, which is generally but a shrub, and of little other service to the
Moors then to feed their Goats. The Juice whereof, mingled with other
Ingredients, is used by the Potters to give a faint color to their
Earthen-ware, which they find to enhaunse the price, and advance the sale.

The next remarkable sort of Wood is the Alcarobe, a Tree of great Curiosity,
and meriting a larger Note. The Alcarobe bears a Cod, in quantity* and likeness
much resembling the English Bean; the inner substance thereof is sweet, and
lodges hard small Kernels. This Fruit is eat by the Moors of inferior
Condition, and by all at the Feast Ashorah: but it is chiefly preserved for
their Horses, to whom it is both Physic and repast. For as a Moor, well
skilled in that Animal, told me, the Fruit of the Alcarobe has two excellent
Properties, to Drench, and make their Horses Fat.

Some have called the Fruit Locusta, and supposed that it was the Baptists Food
in the Wilderness: But others conjecture that St. Matthew's (...), were only
the tops and extremities of Herbs and Plants. And there are also some judicious
Critics, who interpret the Baptist's Locusts to be a kind of Fly or
Grasshopper, which in warmer Climates are very large and many, and were formerly
dried and eaten by the Inhabitants. But they were observed to yield but small
Nutriment, and ever thought fitter for Medicine than Alimony. I was told (but
by a Travailer) that in Egypt these flies come in such clouds, that they
darken the sky where they appear, and that in a short space they consume the
fruits of the Earth where they are permitted to fall. To prevent which mischief
(he told me that) the people observing the season of their coming, prepare
against them, and keeping them from settling by discharging Gunns into the air
where they are discovered. That these locusts and Grasshoppers were eaten by the
Barbarous Nations, may be concluded from the Law that made them forbidden meat
to the Jews, Levit. 11. 22.

But to leave the Moor to this sort of flys, whereof he has no scarcity, there
is a greater probability that the fruit of the Alcarobe is the same with the
Prodigal's Ceratia, or husks; for it does excellently accord with their
description set down by that great intelligence of Divinity in his Note. B. S.
Luke. XI.

In some parts of this Country there is great plenty of white Mulberry trees,
nourished on purpose to feed the silkworm, a creature that does afford the
curious many delightful speculations; but the Moor regards it only for its
emolument. The season of the worm being passed, they feed their Cattle with the
residue of the Mulberry leaves.

The Towns of Commerce, and Conversation, have pleasant Orchards of Orange,
Lemons and Limes, with Gardens yielding plenty and variety of sallad. And that
which makes their Gardens both profitable and delightful is, that they are
always fruitful and retain a refreshing verdure. And this they effect by
keeping the soil constantly in a temperate moisture: for the watercourse are
so providently contrived that every Garden receiv's it in due proportion, and
at a certain hour; which running among the little trenches, affords a very
equal and fertile irrigation.

Besides the Sallad ordinary in other Countries, they have one sort rarely to
be met with in Europe, which they call by a word, sounding spanish Tomatos.
This grows in the common fields, and when ripe is plucked and eaten with oil*
it is pleasant but apt to cloy. Barengenas, as in Spain, grow creeping like
Cucumers upon the Ground; These are boiled with Beef and Mutton, and of no
vulgar estimation among the Moors.

Some Cavilas (a division in the Country that much resembles that of Counties
in England) have large and fruitful Vineyards, and the blood of the Grape,
though it be utterly prohibited them by Mahumed their Prophet, yet of late
through the licentiousness of the times, it is liberally quaff'd by many of the
Moors. But that they might not herein give offense to the weaker Musul-men, nor
betray any contempt of the law, they are generally cautious in this liberty,
and use it, as we say, Under the Rose.

The Plants of this Country are very observable for their variety and
strangeness, for many are to be found in Barbary, which cannot be met with in
colder Climes. And some, which are usual in other Countries, are in this found
to differ much from their descriptions in Common Herbals. D. H. W^a^.
This I learned from a worthy Friend (well read in this part of Nature) who had
enterprised, and would doubtless have finished, a Collection of Barbary
Simples, if his too early immortality, and immature death had not deprived the
world of that profitable endeavor.

The Grain in this, differs not from that in other Countries, excepting that
here are two sorts of Grain, scarce well known in other parts of the world, The
one they call Pharouk, which is of a lesser size, hungry and course, much
resembling, if not altogether the same, with the Spanish Panizo, and it is only
the more beggarly Moors that use this for bread. The other is known among them
by the name of Tourkia, which is a larger body than the former, and yields good
flower, whereof bread is made for the Nobles of the Land. And as the Barley and
Beans are reapt in April, the wheat in May and June, so is September the usual
season for gathering the other kinds of bread-corn.

The rains are to the Moors, what the Nilescope is said to be to the
Egyptians, for according to their plenty or scarceness, they are able to
foretell the dearth and plenty of the year. But there is a sort of Religionists
among them, who measure the products of the earth by the sins of its
Inhabitants, and who divine of the success of their tillage from the
Observation of their Ramadan (or Lent) and the due celebrating of their
[Easter] Hid Seguer, or the little feast that concludes it.

If the clouds are sparing in showers at Seed-time, and Earing, the crop is
little lean; and in their best Harvests, they seldom reap more than will bring
about the year, so that the failure of one Crop brings an inevitable dearth
upon the land. The Moors are very observing of the Trade-rains, (for so they
may not improperly be termed, as never falling but at such a time) The former
Rain is called by a word importing Blessing, and the latter [Nas^n] or
Holy Water, of which names I could meet with no other Rationale but Tradition.

There appears but little industry in the Moors husbandry, for their tillage
is so mean, that he that sees it may justly wonder, that the Land under such
small improvement should be so fruitful. In most parts they plough but with two
Oxen, carelessly tied by the horns, and in some Cavilas with a like number of
Asses, Mules, Camels, and a baser breed of Horses. The plough turns up no more
mold, than suffices to bury the seed: for (say they) if the furrows should be
deep, and the drought begin, er'e that the corn has broken the Earth, it would
not be able to force a passage through the stifned clods. They use no labor to
assist the Arbale by manuring it, except that the Ordure of their Towns is cast
out, not so much to enrich the Glebe, as to keep themselves cleanly. But this
painful part of husbandry is supplied by the Anniversary burning of the
withered grass and stuble, which servs to help the soil, and destroy the
Vermin, which otherwise, especially the Scorpion, would render the Country
very dangerous for habitation.

When the Moors have reapt their corn, they tread it out with Oxen, Camels,
etc, and winnow it upon the place where it grows, and then set the chaff on
fire; In which particulars they are an excellent Comment upon the like,
reflected upon in Sacred Writ. Instead of Granaries, they have Caves brick'd or
wrought with stone, called Matamoras, in which they reposite their Corn, where
it is preserved from the Worm, and other Enemies. The Straw they chop and keep
for their H^rses, for although there be abundance of Herbage, yet no part
thereof is cured and preserved for a Winter store of Hay, which I impute to the
Moors sloth, rather than the needlesness of such a Provision.

After I had taken this Survey of what appeared upon the Earth by Nature, or
its Improver, Husbandry, I found sufficient Instigations, both by Curiosity and
Reason, to dive into its Entrals, which I have been told are in many places as
rich as the best Oars can make them. And of this Truth there have appeared
large Specimens, about Tituan, Alcazar, Gheber, etc. And the reason why the
Moors pursue not so advantageous a Temptation, may be charged upon their
Ignorance, Idleness, or Fear; as in another place I may have occasion to
demonstrate. The Commodities of this Country bearing the name of Mercantil,
are chiefly Honey, Wax, Hides, Marokins or Cordavans, Dates, Almonds; course
Twine, Mats of a curious Straw and Workmanship, Mantles, Alheicks, and in some
places great store of Saltpeter. As for the Fabulous abundance of Gold
reported to be found in Barbary, I leave its Legend to the Poets.

CHAP. II.
Of the Beasts in Barbary, tame and wild.
THe Survey now passes one Stair higher, from Vegetable to Sensible Creatures,
whereof Barbary has no less plenty, than of Grass to maintain them, but looking
into their Flocks and Herds, I found the latter more numerous, yet not to that
quantity as report informed me. And enquiring why the Moors were more for the
Stall, than the Fold; they replied, That Cows yielded them more constant relief
than Sheep, and were more ready to furnish out both their Tables and Purses.
Their Horses are both few and mean, and for the most part much inferior to
those of other Nations, which at first created my wonder, because of the great
repute the Barbary Horses had obtained in most European Countries. But they
have a peculiar Cast of Barbs able to maintain this Renown, which the Moors
carefully preserve, never employing them in low and base Offices, but keep them
only for the Saddle and Military Service. And to the great ease of their
Horses, the Moors have store of Camels for their sorest Drudgeries. Now the
Camel is a Creature of strange Bulk and humor, whose Diet is mean and
incredibly little, for they will Travel great Journeys under heavy Loads,
without further allowance than the tops of Thistles, or any mean Herbage. Nor
are they less abstemious in their Bevarage, than Meat; being so patient of
Thirst, that they will Travel four days without touching Water, and then at one
Drinking take in as much as will serve them as many Days more. The Moor from
Observation has this general Rule concerning Camels; viz. That those which
when young drink much and often, are of a degenerate Lineage, and will never
prove serviceable.

There is a Presumption, that the Camels engender backward, but Ali Mulud, an
Ancient and Inquisitive Moor, would often swear by the Hairs of his Chin (an
Oath that he had learned in the time of his being a Slave in Spain) that he had
much enquired after the manner of the Camels Copulation, but could meet with no
certain Information therein; for (said he) these Creatures are strangely
bashful in their Embraces, which makes them very secret in the time of their
Amors; and to retire, if possible, even from their Keepers Eye. At the season
of their Coition, both Sexes are very furious, and like their Moresco Masters,
they never forget to revenge the Injuries done them at that time. I was told by
an Alarb, who had no Temptation to abuse my Credulity in such an unconcerning
Story, that the Macho, or Male Camel, generated with the Female when she is
asleep, and that the Female brings forth in a kind of negligent slumber. But I
leave the curious Inquisitors of Nature to discover the frailties of this
Story, and pass on to remark the docile gentleness of the Camel, which is
evident in their submission, kneeling to be laden and unloaden at their
Drivers pleasure. And we find it reported in the History of Beasts, Jonson.
Hist. Quadrup. That Camels have been taught to dance exact Measures, which is
no more strange, than the Balletto di Cavalli, that not long since graced the
Nuptials of a Duke of Florence.

But intending no Zoography, I pass from this and other Tame Quadrupeds, to
observe that Barbary has all sorts of Beasts that are called Wild: Lions,
Leopards, Wolves, Foxes, etc with great plenty of Jackals, so much famed for
Catoring for the Lion: They usually hunt in Packs, opening with a shril yelping
noise, and are described to be Mungrel Creatures, of an equivocal Generation,
deriving rapaciousness from the Wolf their Sire, and cunning from the Fox their
Dam; they are very ravenous, eating Carrion, digging up dead Bodies, and will
feed upon that which a genuine Fox will not daign to taste.

Wild Boars are no rarity in this Diocese, which the Moors hunt and kill in a
Manly Pastime, they being no way subservient to the Trencher, because all sorts
of Swines Flesh is forbidden Meat by their Law. But their Slaves, that are
Christians, have permission to dress and eat them, and know from Experience
that they are very wholesome and strong Food.

But I shall surcease to Travel further among these inhospitable Salvages, with
whose descriptions Natural Histories are so largely replenished, and therefore
I will shut up this Chapter with this general Remark, That Barbary has variety
of all sorts of Beasts, Birds and Serpents; the Land affording Habitations most
suitable to such unsociable Beings.

CHAP. III.
The Division of the Inhabitants, different manner of living, their Genius,
their entertainment of Foreign Ministers.
THe Family of Noah (says the Jewish Antiquary Flav. Joseph.) being jealous of
a second Deluge, durst not descend to Cultivate the Plains, but dwelt upon the
tallest Mountains: till at length, Sem ventured to Inhabit the Valleys; where
they lived in a Cluster, and seemed suspicious of the Divine Command, bidding
them disperse and overspread the Earth: fearing that this might be a Design to
scatter them that they might the more easily be destroyed, for which reason
they long time kept together in a close Neighborhood. Out of which story
nothing is needful here to be collected, but that Mountains have ever proved
the Refuges of the Distressed, and the People that Inhabited them valued for
their Antiquity above the rest of the Land. Of which truth, Barbary yields a
pregnant instance in the division of her Inhabitants, of which there are two
sorts known among them, by the usual Names of Alarbes and Barabars.

The Alarbes are usually by the Europeans styled Mountaineers, from the place
of their greatest residence. And these think themselves the Elder Natives, and
therefore of the better House. They are not altogether so Civilized as the
other, but live more rudely and rovingly, shifting from Mountain to Mountain
according to their Exigences, never confining their rambling humors to any
settled Mansion. They live in Haimas or Tents, made of a course brownish Cloth,
which the Women work and weave of the Bark of Palmito's mingled with Goats
hair; and these Itinerary Habitations they remove from one place to another, in
obedience to their fickle Humors and cogent Necessities. Robbery is their
Masterpiece and best Livelihood; and in this Estate they much glory, as coming
so near the condition of Muley Mahumeds first Votaries. About an Age past they
were very numerous, but the late Civil Wars have made great abatements of their
Musters.

The other sort of Moors are vulgarly called Barabars, but by a Dialect
Brebers: These have fixed Dwellings, and live in Neighborhood; and finding
Conversation to be useful and safe, affording Comfort and Profit, they are
combined into Aldea's, or Villages, where their Cottages are so disposed, that
there is not any considerable disproportion among them in respect of their
distance from the Giemma, or Church.

Over these Barabars are Subordinate Governors or Almocadens, to whom they pay
a dutiful Observance. Their Vocation is Tillage and Grazing; and live much
after the condition of the Labaradores in Spain, the Paisants in France, and
the Boors in Flanders. The Barabars of late are grown more numerous than the
Alarbes, and for several Years have inhabited both the Mountains and Campaigns.
But albeit they have taken the Hills from the Alarbes, yet they have left them
the reproach of Robbery, though they themselves are no Novices in that Mystery.

But notwithstanding their different Mode of living, they unite in the general
Character of Body and Humor: For they are all of a large Stature, strong
Constitution, stately Carriage, and differing in Complexion according to their
conversing with the Sun and Air. Those whom for distinction I must call the
Gentry, are according to their Rules of Chivalry well skilled in managing of
the Horse, and dextrous at the Lance, for they scorn all toil that is not
Military, and account no Employment so noble as that of a Soldier. They agree
likewise in Humor, for both are Jealous and Revengeful. Their Jealousy is
palpable in their Carriage toward their Wives, whom they keep in great
Subjection and Retirement, which makes Adultery a Stranger to their Beds: Nor
can it reasonably be otherwise, seeing that the Wife is fully assured that the
very attempt to pilfer a Pleasure, if discovered, will cost her her Life. They
are likewise implacable in their hatred, and impatient till they have avenged
an Injury; for they are taught by their Prophet, That Revenge is a Virtue. But
leaving these Passions to the justification of the Moresco Law and Customs, the
Moors are guilty of a censorious Suspicion toward Strangers, which has no
color to be excused. This I first observed in their carriage toward Don Diego
de Palma, a Cavalier of the Habit of St. James, who being sent to Complement
Gaylan from his Catholic Majesty, and chanceing to smile at the Moors
Deportment, as not answering the starch'dness of his own Nation; the Moors, who
were very circumspect in observing every tittle of the Don's Deportment, were
so sagacious as to find in this casual Smile a derision of their Courtship,
which they left not unrevenged in intrigueing his Errand. Now it is observable,
that the Moors are very morose and abstemious in point of Laughter, esteeming
those who are much thereunto addicted, to be scornful and foolish.

And now having promised to give an account of the Moresco manner of receiving
Public Ministers, and finding that they have no solemn and fixed Rites; I
conceive the description of their entertaining the Spanish Envoy, may serve for
a Specimen of their Carriage toward all Persons of the like Character: which
take as follows.

The Envoy Don Diego Felippe de Palma, having from Ceuta (a Spanish Garrison on
the Barbary-coast) advised Cidi el Hader Ben Ali Gaylan, that he was come from
the Crown of Spain on a Message to his Excellency (that was Gaylans Title) and
desired to know when and where he should have permission and security to
deliver it: Gaylan returned him answer, concerning the set Day and Place for
the Don's Reception, which was according to our style, the tenth of September,
in the One thousand six hundred sixty third Year of Grace, and at a place
equally distant from Ceuta and Tituan: where, to grace the Entrata, Gaylan
appointed a Parade of the best Horse of his own Cavila, and committed them to
the Conduct of his Brother Cidi Tobib Ebn Ali, who marched with them from
Arzila to Tituan, whither according to appointment, Gaylans Father-in-law,
Almocadem of the Cavila of Angera, had sent his Sons with about sixty of their
Cousens, to join with Tobib, who with many more went to receive the Envoy at
the prefixed time and place: Where the Moors, having paid him their Greetings,
they all Marched in this order.

In the first Troop came the two Sons of the Almocadem of Angera, with about
sixty of their Kindred, all bravely mounted, and according to their Gallantry,
richly accoutred: These in several Rings exercised the Lance with laudable
Agility, the Music of Tituan still playing before them.

In the next rank came Cidi Tobit, attended with about fifty Horse, maintaining
a very slow march, as if they intended to revie or deride the Spanish Gravity.
Next to them rode the Envoy, Don Diego Felippe de Palma del Habito de Sanjago,
with a single Trumpet sounding before him: Next came led six stately Horses
trapt in blew Cloth: after them fourteen Mules laden with Trunks; and in the
last place rode the Governor of Tituan, with the Alarbes Music tinkling before
him, and attended with a large and well ordered Train. Vast multitudes were
flockt thither, having no other business but to gaze, being Strangers to such a
Procession.

In this order was Don Diego conducted to his Lodgings in Tituan, where he
courteously received the Christians that came to give him the Parabien to
Barbary, and declared a great readiness to serve my Camrade and my self, whom
he knew had no other concern in those Parts, but securely to travel and view
the Country. After two days refreshment at the Moors charge, the Don began his
march toward Arzila, but first caused the Horses to be richly trapt, and led in
State through the Streets of Tituan; which being done, they came into a Plain a
little out of the Town, where the People made a spacious Circle, in which the
Moresco Cavalleres showed their active Horsemanship, and dexterous darting of
the Lance; after which, about fifty Negros and Alarbes began a Dance, which
they performed with pleasant variety of Gesture, and strange Agility.

These Desports being finished, the Envoy advances his Journey, and found the
ways crowded with Spectators, invited thither by Gaylan's Politic Friends, who
designed that the People might take notice of the Honor done to Cidi El Hader,
and that his Friendship was sought by one of the greatest of Christian
Monarchs. But there were many that came not so much to be Spectators, as to
reap the fruit of a common Report, that the Don would cast great store of
Realito's among the poorer Moors. But their hopes were deceived in the rumor
of the Spaniards Bounty, who did not herein degenerate from the Nature of his
Nation, which has ever been noted for a backwardness to such insignificant
Profusions. The Envoy being safely arrived at Arzila, he was lodged in an
Apartment of Gaylan's Place (pardon the Word) where I leave him to lodge, and
eat, if possible, worse then he did at home.

The business and design of this Embassy, met with diversity of Conjectures: by
some it was supposed that Don Diego was sent to solicit larger Privileges for
the Spanish Garrisons on the Barbarian Coast. Others concluded that the Duke of
Medina Celi, envious at the Earl of Tiveot's successes against the Moors, and
his Truce concluded with Gaylan, caused this Messenger (a Creature of his own)
to be sent with Instructions, to interrupt and disturb the new Correspondence
and Amity betwixt Tanger and El Hader. But to find out the Riddle, I ploughed
with one of their own Heifers, having employed a Moor versed in public
Affairs, (and recommended to me by that great Lover of the English, Cidi
Abdelerim Nacsis, then chief Governor of Tituan) who from the Spaniard's
inquisitiveness after the state and condition of Tanger, the number of the
Soldiers, the quantity of the constant Guards, the height and strength of the
Walls, the situation and number of the Guns ready mounted, etc. with his Design
in a Moresco habit to take a narrow view of the whole place (which in Gaylan's
company within few days after he performed) filled us with Jealousies that some
mischief was purposed against Tanger. And it is very certain, That the
forementioned Duke had an evil Eye upon the Immortal Tiveot, for the Renowned
Victories which under the most Christian King he achieved against his Nations
Interest in the Low Countries, which aged Choler he found highly inflamed by
the Victories gained by that indefatigable Captain over his Moresco Neighbors,
which instigated the Dukes spleen not so much against Tanger, as its Restorer
Tiveot, who being at this time in England, took the advantage of his absence to
disgrace him (if any such thing had been possible) with his new Confederate
Gaylan. And acquiescing in this account of the Embassy, I pursue my Province in
setting down the exact account of the present Customs of the Moors.

CHAP. IV.
The Moresco Compellations, Reverence to Superiors, Complexion and Conversation
of the Women, pious manner of salutation and Style.
I Have not found any Nation so rude and Barbarous, as to be utterly devoid of
all Rites of Civility and Respect: for some tokens of honor and kindness, some
terms of distance and familiarity are used by the most uncultivated. And the
Moors though they are very sparing in Complements, yet they use both words and
gestures of Respect. Toward all superiors they indifferently use the
Compellative Cidi, which is as extensive as [Sir;] To women of better quality
they use Lala, signifying as largely as Madam does now in England. And as to
their outward demonstrations of Respect, there is little variation; for a grave
inclination of the body, with a putting the right hand first to the heart, next
to the forehead, and then kissing the two foremost fingers laid a cross the
lips, is the exactest manner of saluteing the Grandees; whose hand, knee, or
bottom of the Vest is kissed by the Vulgar. Those that are familiar, and of
equal rank, at their first meeting strike hands, but shake not, and then lift
them up and lay them to their breasts. And their greetings are in the second
person singular, useing [Thou] to all from the slave to the King: wherein they
observe the Eastern Custom. But in their addresses to their Prince no people
can testify more signal tokens of Humbleness and Piety, for at the entrance
into the Royal presence, they bow their bodies to the ground, saying, Salam
Allig Alla Ensoruck Muley, Peace be to thee, God preserve King Fulano; and
these words and gestures are devoutly repeated at every pace they advance
toward the King. And if any come with petitions they kiss, the earth when they
present them to his royal perusal. The like Reverences are discharged when they
depart the Presence. But I pass on to view the female Moors, who if preserved
from the injuries of the Sun and weather, are generally well complexion'd full
bodied, and of good symmetry. Those that live in great Towns, together with the
wealthier sort in the Country, are inclined to paleness, which may be imputed
to their sedentariness, or want of motion; for they seldom stir abroad, except
it be to visit the Sepulchers of their deceased friends in devotion, to pray
for their felicity, and in the night time to the Baths for health and
cleanliness. As to their Friday-meetings I shall speak of it in another
Chapter. They never step without the threshold but so closely veiled, that no
part is visible but an eye. In the state of Matrimony their principal study is
to please their husbands, to whom they are taught by their Alcoran to bear a
dutiful observancy, and to omit no art that may render them delightful to their
conversation. Those husbands that are able, allow their wives Negra's or
black-women, to do all the servile offices in the Family; but yet there is no
quality that sits idle; for the chief of the Moresco Dames employ their time in
some thrifty huswifry. And this prevents that custom of expensive gossippings,
with which in some Nations so many wives are debauched, and husbands beggared.
And yet the married women want not their friendly conversations, for they visit
one another houses in token of good neighborhood, but without the company of
their husbands; no male though he be never so much a relative, can be admitted
into their society. And to prevent it, she that makes the visit first, sends to
know whether the husband be at home if the answer be negative, then without
further ceremony she goes straight to her Gossips apartment, where she is
entertained with a liberality that never injures her husband; who if returning
home in the interim of the visit, is careful to give no interruption, but upon
notice quickly departs the house; yet they give such signals that he has bin
there, as are easily perceived by the Visitant, who thereupon shortens the
Visit, otherwise it commonly lasts a whole day. But these being offices that
are seldom in their returns, may justly be pardoned in their length.

But foreseeing that I shall in another place have occasion to speak again of
the Moresco women, I surcease to enlarge the paragraph that here concerns them,
and therefore proceed to view the pious forms used by the Moors in their
salutations and Letters.

And indeed there is none that has had any intimacy with the Moors in this
particular, but he might observe a great appearance of Piety in all their
customary expressions. And this I learned both from the discourse and practice
of those with whom I journy'd, who at their setting out in the morning, would
with zeal and humility look up to heaven, and in a low voice say, Bismillah,
that is, in the name of God; which is also done at the beginning of any labor
or travail. By which they intend that nothing ought to be enterprised, but in
the power and hope of the divine favor and help. And when the work or journey
is finished they say, Ham der illah, Thanks be unto God; in which words they
deny all ascriptions of success to themselves. When they meet one another upon
the road, etc. their greetings at large is this thanksgiving, El ham dillah al
salam tiqsi. i. e. God be praised that I see thee well: but in passing by one
another the Salutation is usually this prayer, if there be no more but one,
Salam alleq, if more than one, Salam alleq cum, Peace be with thee, or you. At
the hearing of one another sneez, they say, Era hanig allah, Dios tenga V. M.
en sumano. God be your keeper. When one Moor goes to see another at his house,
the first that receives him says, Mar baba, or welcome, which if repeated
thrice, is an undoubted mark that they are glad to see him; which kind
reception he requites with saying, Allah ellah miq i. e. God pay* you. And the
like air and genius of Devotion and Piety is observable in those letters that
the Moors write in their own language; a taste whereof you have in these two
ensuing, translated out of Moresco.

In the name of God Gracious and Merciful, whose Blessing be upon our Lord
Mahomed and his Family. To the Mighty, honorable, Glorious, and most Excellent
Lord and Governor of Tanger the Earl Tiveot.
GOd perpetuate your Excellencies Honor and Glory, and vouchsafe your
perseverance in Grandeur and Felicity. Happiness unto you with the odours of a
glorious Name, shall continually breath out their fragrancies, and let God
continue and prosper both you and your estate agreeable to your wishes.

Furthermore, to advise us of your abundant love, and especially generosity,
there came to us the worthy Gentlemen your servants in their Ship, with the
honorable Commanders of it, the Consul and the Captain, and they behaved
themselves amongst us like Men, touching your Command which they observed, and
accomplished our desires according as we expected in the going forth of our
men, they returning home to us in health and safety, so that we now reenjoy
their company according to the best of our wishes. And let God in our stead
largly reward and recompense you, who have so highly obliged us herein.

Your Messengers staid with us for some days, till we had performed some of
their desires, so that we sent along with them two excellent horses and of the
best sort that has been in our time, one whereof was for our own Riding, and
the other is of the same breed; likewise forty good choice beasts, both Bulls
and Cows, and a flock of about fourscore sheep, as a present to your
Excellency, which out of your Grace and favor, you would vouchsafe to accept
from us. For the deserts and Merits of your Honor, God alone can recompense.

We gave also to your Legates two special horses and a few Cattle as the time
permitted, and they likewise bought some horses as the time served, and then
departed from us well contented. But we are always with you in that inviolable
love and friendship, which neither distance of place, nor length of time shall
ever dissolve. And as for our Country Barbary (blessed be God) all of it that
is loyal and in obedience to us, whether Mountains, Plains, or Cities, you
have free passage into in love and friendship, to converse and trade as you
please, and to manage all your affairs. And this will be of great advantage
unto us, if it please God we live, and the General take the Castle of the Port
Town, and the Rebbels return wholly to their obedience, and then you shall not
apologize for us, or excuse us in any service we can do you. But we request
you to excuse us at present, as to the rest of your desires, being assured that
we cease not to encounter and fight those enemies which have broken Covenant
with us, that so they may shortly (if God please) return to their Allegiance.

And we entreat you to grant our Servants, the Inhabitants of the Port, your
best assistance in what ever they shall have need of your help and supply. And
whatsoever of our Consorts shall come to you, we beseech you not to be wanting
in your Care toward them.

But the most earnest and important business which concerns us to mention to
you is, for a great ship to lie at the Port betweeen us and the enemy, on
purpose to cut off all relief by shipping from the Enemy, and pray let it be
hastened with its fraught, provision and all other necessaries. This is our
chief business which we entreat you to accomplish, according to our desires.
And any of the Ships that shall come to this Port, shall drive away whatsoever
Merchant ships they find there, and seize their goods. For the only thing we
are wanting in, and in need of assistance, is this business of the Merchants.
Thus we have given you the full of our desires in what we have written. And let
God accomplish all your desires. Farewell,

Written the third day of the week being the twenty fifth of the month Dulhevil
the last month of the 1073. year of the Hegira. The Servant of God who trusts
in him Abdalla ebn Mahamed ebn Abebeker, of blessed memory.

The Superscription, To the chief of the Nobles Lord and Governor of Tanger
the Earl Tiveot whom God preserve.

Another Letter.
IN the name of God the Greatest of all Great ones, whom we worship and serve
and none other.

To the most excellent Count Tiveot Captain General of Tanger, the Just and
Valiant, greeting and desiring that he may have health and Prosperity which we
value much.

We received the Servants of your Excellency in our Country, for whom we have
done what we are able, and have commanded our Vassels to guard them to Tanger.
The Present made us by your Excellency we kindly receive. God augment your
Honor and Happiness.

In all that is required at our Hand, Let it be upon our head, that we serve
you with much willingness, Being that we are made Friends we esteem your
Friendship much. My Son and Couzins Greet your Excellency, desiring God that
you may have health.

Subscribed Almocadem Cassian Shat.


This Shat, is Father to one of Gaylan's Wives, numerous in alliances, and
reported to be an Andalusian, on of the race of the Moors banished Spain; He
has hereditary to his Family, the command of Angera, which is a large Cavila
adjoining unto Tanger. And having lodged at this Grandee 's house, I may from
our entertainment there be able to give you an account of the Moors
hospitality, which differs not in the fashion, however it may vary in the stuff.

CHAP. V.
The Moresco Entertainment, fashion of Traveling, Hospitals, Diet, Reverence
to Corn, forbidden Meats.
IN the Year of Salvation, 1663. Sept. the sixth, at the going down of the Sun,
we came to an Aldea called Angera, at the utmost Bounds of a Mountain of that
name; where we repaired to the House of Cidi Cassian Shat, whom we found
sitting at his Door, environed with about twenty aged Moors of the
Neighborhood. Alighting from our Horses, we delivered our Segura or Letters of
safe Conduct, to the Old Man; who when he had perused, returned them with a
grave Nod, the testimony of his Approbation, and the signal of our Welcome.
This done, we were called to a little upper Room, which we could not enter till
we had put off our Shoos at the Threshold; not for Religion, but Cleanliness,
and not to prevent our unhallowing of the Floor, but defiling the Carpets
wherewith it was curiously spread. At the upper end of the Room was laid a
Velvit Cushion, as large as those we use in our Pulpits, and it denoted the
most Honorable part of the Room. After we had reposed about an hour, there was
brought in a little oval Table, about twenty Inches high, which was covered
with a long piece of narrow Linen; and this served for Diaper. For the Moors,
by their Law, are forbidden such superfluous Utensils as Napkins, Knives,
Spoons, etc. Their Religion laying down this general Maxim, That mere
Necessaries are to be provided for: which caused a precise Moor to refuse to
drink out of my Dish, when he could sup Water enough out of the hollow of his
Hand. But this straitness has of late Years begun to be enlarged, and the
prohibition is interpreted to reach no farther then their Churchmen, and chief
Ministers of Justice; so that those who are able to provide handsome Furniture
for their Tables, have a Dispensation, which they seem not prone to make use
of, if the humor of the rest may be devined by that of this Grandee: At whose
House the Table was adorned as before, and for Supper there was placed upon it
an Earthen Pot full of Mutton, Beef, Cabage, Raisins, Potato's, Berengenas,
etc. all boiled together, and extremely hot with Dimicuto and Garlic, which is
their immutable Sauce. This hodgepodge was in imitation of the Spanish Olla
Podrida, excepting that it wanted Bacon, an Ingredient so indispensible to the
Spanish Olla, that there can be none without it, which occasioned this Proverb,
No Sermon without St. Austin, nor Olla without Bacon: Ny Sermon sin Agostino,
ny Olla sin locino. But to proceed in our Bill of Fare: our next Course was a
single Pullet cloven down the Belly, with the four Quarters spread out at
large, by a way of Cookery peculiar to the Moors. And these two Dishes, with
store of good Bread, made up the Feast. Our Drink was strong Wine newly brought
from the Press, which stood by us in a great stone Jar, with a sort of wooden
Ladle in it, out of which we drunk. Our posture was laying round about the
Table, according to the custom of the Country. Our company was the second Son
of this Family, a debonair Gentile Person. Having supped, and solaced our
selves with muddy Beverage and Moresco Music, we all composed our selves to
sleep: About twenty were allotted to Lodge in this small Chamber, whereof two
were Christians, three Jews, and the rest Moors: every one made his Bed of what
he wore, which made our English Constitutions to wish for the Morning, which no
sooner appeared but we quitted our Lodging, leaving our Entertainer sans adieu,
not tarrying to return thanks for his Hospitality; which could incur no
displeasure, as conforming to the style of the Country. And this Breviate of
Cidi Cassian's hospitable Housekeeping, is an Essay of the rest, for the Moors
have all one fashion of living, and their Houses, Diet, and Apparel vary not,
but in the matter.

Now that which makes Journying in Barbary so full of Fatigue, is the want of
Houses of Public Entertainment (like the Venta's and Posada's in Spain; the
Caborets and Hostelries in France; and Inns in England) whereby the Travelers
are constrained to carry their Provisions with them. The Moors usual Viaticum
are Raisins, parched Beans, Onyons, Garlic, and store of Bread. They rely upon
the Fountains for their Drink, which are kept in great decency and cleanlyness:
at every Fountain there being a Dish made of Cork, fastened with a string, out
of which Man and Beast drink for refreshment. Many of these Fountains are
provided with a large smooth Stone, whereon the Moor, after he has performed
his preparative Washing, celebrates his Salla, or Orisons. And the Bigots that
live near these Fountains, every day repair thither to pay their Bigotage, or
Superstitious Devotions.

They usually shut up their Journey at the going down of the Sun; and if there
be an Aldea or Village at hand, they turn thither for House-room, and lodge
commonly in a Cotage, as mean as that wherein Ovid's aged Couple entertained
the Pilgrim Gods. But if it be Summer, or the Weather fair, then they repair to
some shady Tree, under whose prote^tion they sleep and eat. If the place be
suspected for bad Neighbors, the Travelers watch by turns, and do the like in
places that are troubled with wild Beasts.

When I said that the Moors have no Houses of Accommodation, it was with
exception of the Almamora's, or Chambers maintained by the Revenues of the
Church, built on purpose to receive Strangers of any Persuasion. These Houses
afford nothing but room to Lodge in; but if it happen that Travelers are in
want of meat, the Villagers are ready to supply them. The Alfaqui, or Priest of
the place, has Inspection and Superintendency of these Hospitals. The Moors
have likewise peculiar Places, resembling the Infirmatories or Lazaretto's in
other Nations, for those that fall sick in their Journeys, whom they treat with
a laudable Care, till they either recover or dye: And if the infirm dye, not
leaving wherewith to bury him, there is care taken for his Funeral, and a
Mulato, or some baser Moor, is appointed to beg the Alms of the place to defray
the Expense of the Strangers Interment. In these Almamora's, the Stranger is
permitted to stay till the Weather and his Health dispose him for his Journey:
but they repine at his abode, when it is not urged by necessity.

In later Years, every Town of Trasfick has erected a sort of Inns, called
Alfandach, which affords nothing but House-room for Man and Beast, the Market
yielding Provision for both. Those that farm these Fandachs, cannot exact above
a Blankil a Night both for Man and Beast, which is in sterling Money about two
pence. The Horses Lodging costing equally with his Riders.

These Fandachs were at first built by the wealthier sort of Moors, who dying
in a pious humor, gave them to the Giamma or Church, to hallow, say the
Moresco Rabbis, the filthy lucre raised by their employment. However, the
Giamma has its Revenues greatly augmented by such Donations. And whatever was
the Design of their Institution, we find them of late under a great Degeneracy,
being little better then Tippling Shops, where the Moors Quaff the Fruit of the
Vine. But that which herein most raised my Admiration, was to see the Incomes
of these Fandachs, appropriated to the maintenance of the Alfaqui's or Priests,
and that that Holy Order, having the disposal of such Houses, should not see
them under a more regular administration.

But to go from these Public Houses to view the Moors in their private Roofs,
I find them in their Caresses frugal, without Parsimoniousness, and placing no
Character of good Housekeeping in abundance of Viands. They have two dishes in
singular esteem, the chief whereof ^nscusson, which is made of Water and
Flower, or grated Bread, boiled into a Consistence, into which they put Butter,
or any Kitchin-stuff: And this they eat without Spoons; for when it is ready,
every one that is admitted to taste it, dives into it with his hand, and
danceing it in his Fist, till it be shaped into a Ball and cooled, then casts
it into his Mouth. The other dish is known by the name of Pillow, vulgarly
pronounced Pl^w, and it is the same with that which I said has so near a
resemblance with the Spanish Olla Podrida. Besides these two Dishes, the Moors
of a better allay make their Breakfasts of Bonuelo's, or small Loaves boiled in
Oil, which they eat with Sugar, or Honey.

The Country Moors feed much on Milk, which they are by their Law forbidden to
taste, if it has been touched by a Dog. They have store of Cheese, but very
course and homely. And as for their Butter, we may suspect their cleanliness in
making it; for they Churn it in a Sheep or Goat skin, dressed or fitted for
that office, which they shake between their Hands.

But not much delighted with their Dary-house, I leave it to observe their
Reverence to Bread and Corn, which is both great and general, for from the
Throne to the Plough, if any see a crum of the one, or a grain of the other
cast out, or scattered, he stoops to take it up, kisseth it, puts it to his
Forehead, and looking up, says, Dill an, It is from God; and then gives it to
the first Creature that will eat it.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Moresco Giamma's, or Churches: their Foundation, Consecration, manner
of Structure, Subordination.
ALL Religions in their first model and Constitution have had some less
intelligible Articles and things of a remoter signification, mingled with their
easier Doctrin's, and more obvious Institutions. And there has ever bin found a
Catholic agreement, not only in the main Article of the Deity, but also in
some solemn manner of his worship. Upon which consideration there were ritual
circumstances established, for the more decent celebration of Religious
Ministers. In the number of which ritual Circumstances, I esteem a dedicate
place, Separate Time, solemn Actions, Prescript Forms, and above all a
distinct Order of Persons, by whom the Exteriot Religion is to be officiated,
and to whom for the Power and Sacredness of their Function there have ever bin
decreed convenient Observances and Revenues. How determinate the Alchoran is in
these particulars, falls not within the compass of these remarkes, but it is
evident to those that attentively read it, that the Author thereof seems not in
any thing to be definitive. But what ever the mind was of that Impostor
concerning the mentioned Rites, we find his Sectaries have in all their
Dominions made Provision for Solemnity in their Worship. Being guided thereunto
either by the more lasting and regular Principles of Reason, or in imitation of
some people of an other Persuasion, which they esteemed Wise and Deliberate.
Nor can Mahumed be blamed for not leaving Decretals in the Rights of worship,
because their nature is of so great an indifferency, that no Religion does
acknowledge them to be determined in every particular by any Law, meriting, or
usurping, the title Divine: neither is there any thing in themselves to make
them originally necessary.

And therefore without enquiring into the Motives by which the Moors or others
have been induced to the usage of the Accessories of Religion, I only observe
that the Moors are not therein defective; having Churches, Priests, Times,
Revenues, etc. appropriate to the Divine Adoration.

I shall begin with their Giamma's, Moschs or Churches in which this Country
abounds, and to which the Moors perform a great Reverence and liberality, never
suffering them to be profaned, nor to want a competent stock to keep them in
repaires. The manner observed in the erection of a new Giamma is orderly and
laudable, which is thus: When a considerable Number of People have agreed and
resolved to settle together in neighborhood, they seek out a piece of ground
convenient for their purpose, which by mutual consent is divided, every family
being allowed sufficient Room, whereof to rear an habitation. This done their
next care is to set apart a spot of Earth for the foundation of their Giamma,
with great regard that it have no considerable inequality of distance from
their several habitations. After they have thus framed their Design, the
Giamma is first built, to which Holy work all ages, sexes, and qualities of
persons contribute their labors Gratis, every one valuing it for a peculiar
felicity and honor to have his hands and shoulders wearied in such a sacred
employment. The fabric or Giamma being finished, they dedicate it to no
Patronage but the Public Worship, nor use any other ceremony of consecration,
but only choose one that is able to read the Alcoran, whom they accompany to
the new Giamma, where some parcel of their Law is read, and their Salla's, or
offices performed, and from that time it is accounted a Holy place. And the
Giamma being thus raised to its full Stature, every family begins a Cotage for
it self, and when they are built, they seek for an Alfaqui, or Priest, to
Officiate in their new Church, with whom they agree for a yearly Pension.

But we must restrain this custom of building Churches to the Barabars who
have fixed Mansions; for the Alarbs who retain no place of constant habitation,
have for their Giamma a large Tent standing exactly in the middle of their
dwelling-Tents, whither they resort at Canonical hours to their Orisons, in
which they are comformable to the other Moors.

The Giamma's do all agree in the fashion of structure; being all long and
generally narrow, not running into Isles, nor branching into Chapels and
Quires. Their situation is East and West, without any windows at all, nor have
their Giamma's doors but on the North-side. [They are without the too easy
accommodations of seats, Pews, or benches:] the floor of the Giamma is
handsomely matted, and so are the walls about two foot high. If the roof be
large and weighty it is supported with pillars, among which hang the lamps,
which are kept burning all the night.

Every Giamma has a turret, on whose top is placed a Crescent, or half Moon (a
Mahumedan Cognizance) from this Turret the Almuden, or Sexton, with a loud
voice invites the People to Prayers, which supplies the forbidden use of Bells.
The Moors keep their Giamma's in a very Reverend decency, never permitting any
dilapidations. None are vouchsafed to enter them but the Males of their own
Religion, which makes it dangerous for Christians or Jews to look within them;
yet if this happens they think not the Holy place to be thereby any way
desecrated. But this signal respect to their Churches, renders not their
Devotions elsewhere performed, to be invalid; yet if possible they never fail
to be at their Giamm's, attributing much to the Statary prayers made in the
Church.

In greater Towns there are many Giamma's: in Tituan fifteen, in Alcazar more,
in Arzila, five, and in Fez seven hundred. Among which there is a
subordination, for the Giamma Gheber, or Great Giamma, being the Cathedral, or
Mother Church, commands the rest, and is the Cure of the Alcalib, or
Chief-Priest. To the Giamma Gheber all the other Giamma's conform in the hour
of public offices, and though all the rest are hung with Lamps, yet this has
one of a peculiar shape and quantity, called Ettouria, or the Master-Lamp, in
testimony of the Chutche's Prelacy.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Moresco Priests, their education, Orders, Office, Reverence of the
Priest, Revenue, the Almuden, Penalties for absence from the Giamma's.
THe Moors have at this day no Schools of Science, like the European
Universities and Colleges; which may be a main reason of their Growing
stupidity and Barbarism; for the want either of leisure, or lack of opportunity
to study Arts and Sciences, because their whole time is spent in gaining
whereon to live, through a deficiency whereof the politest Nations will soon
degenerate into ignorance and rusticity. As for the College called Amarodoch
in Fez (whose structure cost King Aba Henen 480000 Crowns, and which has been
so amply celebrated for the Concinnity of its building, delightfulness of
situation, carved roof, Mosaic Arches and brazen gates) it is now wholly
destitute of Students. And if the Moors were not careful to keep up great
store of Petty Schools, they would soon decay and fall into a total
illiterature. In these Petty Schools the Alfaqui, or Priest, takes in the first
rudiments of his Learning, without any possibility of climbing higher than to
write and read; and if a Youth be found towardly and capacious, and bearing a
good affection to the Priesthood, when he has arrived to the first form in the
School, he is removed thence, and placed with one of the best learned Alfaqui's
in the Town, or Cavila where the School is kept. And this new Tutor instructs
his Pupil to read the Alcoran with perspicuity, and to understand the principal
points it contains: The Tutor likewise informs him of all the Rites of the
Giamma, which being both few and easy, are quickly obtained; and when the
Scholar is deemed competent both for age and Learning to be a Priest, then his
Institutor call's two or three Alfaquis more to examine the Candidate, who
being found deserving, they grant him Testimonials of his willingness and
abilities to be an Alfaqui: And this is all the education and Orders, which I
could observe to be bestowed upon their Priests. But it is very remarkable,
that among the Moors none are admitted to this Holy Dignity, but such as are of
a competent age, and married; for the former they render this reason, a Novice
ought not to be admitted to the Priesthood; but I conceive that their
jealousy, with which they are notoriously gifted, is the fittest account can
be given of the later.

The Moors suffer no Giamma to be vacant, because they esteem an Alfaqui to be
altogether necessary to exterior Religion; and that Common Persons, or the
Laity, performing the solemn offices of Religion, does make them common. For
Holy Rites are no more to be dispensed by all, than the secular Laws; and
though all men have common Interest both in Religion and the Laws, yet all
cannot be Administers of either. And upon this consideration, that in the
Combinations and Communions of men Religion cannot subsist, without some to
guide, officiate, and prescribe the ministeries thereof, the Moors are diligent
to provide an Alfaqui for every Giamma, that there may be no vacancy, nor
omission in the service.

To the Alfaqui the Lay-Moors pay a signal Reverence, giving him the more
honorable hand, and place. They plough his ground, dress his vineyard, reap
his Corn, etc. to the end that by no secular cares he may be interrupted in his
Function; And by this I am guided to look into the office of the Alfaqui, which
is first, to preserve the Giamma in decency, and to provide that the structure
be not dilapsed, and that the Lamps and matts be duly supplied. But the Priest
never puts his hand to any servile work, having those under him upon whom all
the drudgery is discharged.

The second part of the Alfaqui's office is, to inspect the Institution of the
children; to which purpose he has usually under him, one that is fit for the
toil, and reserves to himself no more but the examination of the Childrens
proficiency, which he does once a week; and those whom he finds remiss, receive
his Correction, but the diligent, the marks of his approbation. They have no
free Schools, but pay a weekly salary to those whom the Alfaqui does appoint to
teach, for none can be a Schoolmaster without his License and approof.

His next care is to take notice who absent themselves from the Giamma, having
power at his own discretion to punish whomsoever he observes to be therein
delinquent. He is very vigilant to assist the sick, whom dying he accompanies
to the Grave. If there happen any disagreement among the Neighbors, the
Alfaqui mediates a reconcilement, but if the Quarrel exceeds ill language, and
be concerning Meum and Tuum, he is not permitted to intermeddle.

If the Alfaqui dislike his Cure, he has liberty of removal, being not
confined to any Parochial Giamma above a year, and he seldom contracts for a
longer space. And for that time he is the Superintendent of the Mosch, out of
whose Rents he defraies all the Charges for Reparations, etc. taking the
surplusage for himself.

And now the remarke passes to the Revenues of the Giamma, which chiefly arise
from the Donatives of the dead. In some places the Incoms are very large, in
all comfortable; for the Moors exercise a great benevolence to places dedicated
to Religion: whereby they reproach many styled Christians, who cast aside the
least sheaf for the Tenth, and who are so far from enlarging the Churches
Patrimony, that they are ready to devour the pitiful Remainder that she still
enjoyes.

Muley Mahumed, in his third Commandment, enjoynes his Musalmim Liberality, and
Alms-deeds, which proceeding from goods honestly gotten are according to the
Alcoran meritorious of Paradise. He likewise prefers private Alms before the
public, and declares the Devil to be an inplacable enemy against this
expression of mercy. And indeed there are many such pious doctrines in the
Alcoran, but they are but as so many good ears of corn in a good field of
Tares, or as so many single grains lost in a heap of chaff: it having been the
subtilty of the old Serpent in all ages, to guild over his poisonous Pills, and
to blend Truth with falsehood, that the latter might be embraced for the sake of
the former. Besides it is an ancient mistake to think, that Truth and falsehood
are of too great a contrariety and distance to mingle and concorporate; which
makes many when they have found some truth in Doctrine, to conclude no falsehood
to be joined with it. And those truths which are dispersed up and down in
Mahumed's Law, being evident to its Professors, make them credulous of the
whole system. And though they are zealous for all the precepts, yet for none
more than that which concerns Alms-deeds; for they have their Ashorah which is
an Anniversary Festival, whereat they bestow a certain quantity of their
Substance upon the Poor. But the greatest Bounties are toward the Giamma, to
which every one at his death leaves a Portion of his estate, by which method
the Giamma has considerable endowments, which are under a continual
improvement, and made capable of no manner of Alienation.

To every Giamma there belongs an Almuden, or a kind of Sexton, whose office is
to call the people to Church at the hours of prayer; which he does from the
top of the Turret (mentioned above) crying with a voice articulate and loud,
Illah Gheber, God is the great; and sometimes, Laillah La Mahumed Resul alla.
There is but one God, and Mahumed the Messenger of God. And these words the
Almuden pronounces at every corner of the Turret, beginning at the East, and
ending at the point that looks toward Mecha; by which they signify, that all
the corners of the world should look toward Mecha in worshipping the Deity,
that is be Mahumedans.

The next office of the Almuden is, to open the doors of the Giamma, to trim
the Lamps, and keep the matts in repair and cleanliness. He also informs the
Alfaqui, who has an inherent power to punish those who can show no good reason
of their absence.

But the penalty is very tolerable, being no more than five or six pounds of
Cuscussow, which the offender brings to the Giamma, where it is eaten by the
Priest and the Assembly. None are found to offend therein through contempt, or
wilfulness, nor yet through the pursuance of their pleasures; for there is so
strict an observance of the Church Service, that the husband will leave the
society of his wife to be there, if he hears the Almuden speaking the
Invitatory. The last branch of the Almuden's office is to dismiss the people,
which he does at the end of the Salla, or Orisons, in the same words that he
called them together. And now before I close up this chapter, I cannot,
speaking of their Ecclesiastique penance, but observe that the Moors have no
such thing as excommunication, so that they are for no crime debarred the
Giamma; but on the contrary the greatest mulct inflicted by the Priest is for
their absence, above three times in twenty four hours, from that Holy Place.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Moresco set-times of Prayer. The preparation, Entrance into, and
deportment in the Giamma. Church-Musick.
THe Moor's season of Prayers returns five times in twenty four hours, or a
Natural day; The first is, Alowilic Sbah, and comes about Noone; The second
they call Allahiric Luli, which is about three a clock in the afternoon; The
third Atelthah Aser, at the going down of the Sun; The fourth Alarbee Asha, a
little within night; The last, Alhamsah Magnib, which is in winter a little
before day. At every assembling the Prayers are the same, except that at the
Allahiric Luli they repeat the La illa Gheher but thrice. The Moors esteem the
prayers made in the Giamma to be of the greatest efficacy, and therefore all
endeavor to perform them there, but those who cannot repair thither, do
discharge this duty, where the solemn hours find them

In their addresses to these Holy celebrations the Moors use great tokens of
reverence, being very punctual in fitting themselves for the Giamma. Their
general preparative consists in washing; which is such a necessary right, that
without its observation it is impossible to be of their Religion. And it is
notorious to all acquainted with the Mahumedan Institutes, that Washing is a
great part of that Law; nor need this create any man's wonder, seeing that all
the Musalmim of the Alcoran use washing in a mystic signification of internal
purity, and that the soul receives the benefit of their corporeal Lavors. None
among them return from natural evacuations, but they wash the parts liable to
defilement, nor will any who is a Virtuoso in the Ceremomies, eat with unwasht
hands: which at first I Interpreted a mere Civil Cleanliness, because they use
no knives, etc. but tear their viands in pieces with their fingers, but upon
farther scrutiny I perceived it to be reckoned by the superstitiosi among the
Actions of Religion.

In places where they have hot Bathes (which are in few places wanting) they
use them after concubinate, and all improvident pollutions; but their greatest
exactness in washing, is at their going to prayer. Then every part where nature
disburdens her excretions, is warily cleansed, and the other parts also which
are more egregiously obnoxious to pollution. If any Moor after he has washed at
home, in his way to the Giamma chance but to belch, he dares not enter the Holy
r^of of until he has used the lotion. And therefore in the foundation of a
Giamma, great care is taken that it may stand near some spring, or receptacle
of water, that those who come to the Church, may be provided with that element
in case of any contingent defilement, without the trouble of returning home to
wash.

When they come to the door of the Giamma, every one puts off his shoes at the
threshold, and then enters with a slow pace, erect body, and eyes bashfully
looking toward Heaven: in this posture they advance directly to the southside
of the Giamma, and they always make their prayers toward that point, because in
all their devotions they are commanded to make them toward Mecha. While they
are in the Giamma none dare openly to yawne, Cough, walk, discourse, spit,
scratch his head or face, but if any has need but to wipe his lips, he does it
unseen, covering his countenance with his Alheic, which is a loose garment
generally worn by the Moors.

And by these Reverences in their Carriage toward Holy places and Performances,
they are taught to upbraid the Christians, whose behaviors at sacred
solemnities some of the Moors have observed to be of a far different character.
And this I learned from a Moor who had unluckily been in England to make the
animadversion, with whom when I discoursed about this point, he told me with
anger and indignation in his looks, that it was a shame to see women, Dogs, and
dirty shoes, brought into a place sacred to God's worship, and that men should
walk and discourse in a Mosch, as in a public Borsa or Exchange, and that they
should have Chaires there to sit in with as much lascivious ease, as at home:
which with other actions of the like irreverence he zealously repeated to
reproach the Christian. And indeed I was not furnished with arguments to (nor
could in conscience) excuse any considerable part of his Animadversion: only I
told him; That as for the exclusion of Women from the public offices of the
Mosch, it was a doctrine of the Alcoran, grounded upou conceits of imperfection
peculiar to that sex, which are not so far to be owned, as for them to exclude
the females from the means of their chiefest felicity. Besides this
excommunion of women, was an Article of Interest and Policy, and which Mahumed
adopted into his Religion on purpose to complease the Jew, who at this day
begins his public Prayer with a thanksgiving to God, que no le hizo muger,
that he did not make him a woman, a creature not allowed to serve him in the
Synagogue, and that seeing we wanted reasons which moved the Moors to this
practice, we could incurr no scandal by its rejection. As for his objecting our
bringing Dogs into the Church, I told him it was an uncomely and irreverend
permission and wholly abhorred by knowing. Christians; that there was a
Provision made against it, and that it had been his ill hap to look into a
Church, where the Sanction in that particular met with a remiss execution.
Next, as to our having seats in the Mosch (for I was to speak in his own
dialect) and to sit at some parts of Divine service, Custom and innocent
convenience were all that any one could pretend to hollow it. But as for
walking in the Church in time of Divine Service, or therein at any time to
discourse of secular concernments, that it was only the practice of profane and
ill disciplined minds, the miscarriage of the rude, contrary to the Rule, and a
certain argument of a relaxed Discipline and negligent Superintendent. Pudet
haec opprobria --. But I return to the Giamma, whither the Alfaqui comes not
till a considerable number of the People are assembled; who in the Priests
absence spend their time in a devout repetition of the Sallah, a Word that
signifies the whole Form of their Prayers. And when the Alfaqui is come, he
advances straight to the South Side of the Mosch, and the People fall orderly
into ranks behind him. Upon this the Priest begins the Prayer in a Voice
moderately elevated, which the People humbly repeat after him. At the
pronouncing of Illah El Gheber, that is, God is the great, they all use an
Elevation both of Hands and Eyes to Heaven: at the name of Mecha, they all kiss
the Ground; but when they mention Muley Mahumed, and the Mercies he procures
them, they fall prostrate, and upon the sudden, in a kind of Rapture, reassume
an erect. When the Priest has repeated la illah Mahumed Resul Allah four
times, the Almuden dismisseth the People. And when they leave the Giamma, the
Alfaqui goes first, as a token of his Prelacy above the People. Their Sallah or
Service is very short, for if it took up any considerable time, the frequency
of its return would take up most of their leisure, and thereby be a sensible
impediment to their Temporal Vocations.

In the closure of this Chapter, I thought to have spoken something of the
Moresco Music in the Mosch, but this I found to be a delightful piece of
Devotion, wherein they seem to be very ignorant. I have been told, that in
former time they had in every Giamma some Lay-persons, that understood the
Cadences of the Alcoran, and which could sing it in its Original Meter, which
must needs be very harsh Harmony, if any at all, in regard of the incapacity
that is in the Alcoran Language to fall into Syllabical Measures and Tuneable
Proportions. Besides, the Moors have very harsh and sawing Voices, as they will
have cause to observe who have had their Ears grated with their Amorous
Sonnets, in which all are wont to express their sweetest and best moving
Accents.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Moresco Church Government. The Alcalib, or High Priest. The Instruction
of the Women. Forms of Prayer. Charms composed by the Marabitos or Marabouts.
Sabbath, its Institution, Celebration.
SOme have laid it down for a great Reach in Muley Mahumed, that he reserved
the Church Government to himself and his Successors: Which is still visible in
the Grand Seignior and the Sophi; for albeit the one has a Mufti, and the
other a Mustard-Dini to inspect the Ecclesiastic Affairs, and to be as the
Oracular Interpreters of the Mahumedan Law, yet their Election is
incommunicably in themselves. And albeit that these Principal Churchmen are
had in so great esteem with their Princes, that their Decisions are scarce ever
contradicted by them, yet when their Determinations are not consistent with the
Interest of the Public, these great Oracles are dismissed, and others
introduced, who are not so scrupulous in their Sentences. By which it is
evident, that the Mahumedan Princes are in effect the Heads of the Church, and
chief Expositors of Religion. But not much of this can be observed in the Moors
Church Government, who have in every Cavila (or County) an Alcalib, or
High Priest, in whose nomination the secular Power does not at all interpose,
for he is chosen out of, and by the Alfaquis, over whom he is invested with a
Power, whereby he is enabled to Depose, or otherwise Chastise the Offending
Clergy. Immediately upon this Arch-Priests Election, he is possessed of the
Giamma Gheber, or Great Church: Wherein upon every Friday he Expounds some Text
of the Alchoran, unto which Exercise he always goes accompanied with the chief
Personages of the Neighborhood. And being entered the Church, he immediately
ascends the Albambar (which is a Bench about five steps from the Ground) with a
tall Staff in his Hand, wherewith he often beats upon the Bench to express his
Zeal, and to awaken the People to a more signal attention to what he then
delivers. This Discourse, Homily, Exposition, or Sermon, exceeds not an hour
and a quarter in length, and is delivered exactly by heart. And when it is
ended, the Almuden dissolves the Congregation, and the Alcalib returns to his
House accompanied with the chief of the place, and in his passage he receives
the customary Tokens of respect from the People. And whatever some Cursory
Review of this Country tell us of the other Priests making Sermons to the
People, yet having with some diligence made enquiry into this particular, I
found that the Office of Preaching was peculiar to the Alcalib, or
Chief-Priest, and that no Sermons were celebrated at any other Church, but at
the Giamma Gheber (that which I may English the Cathedral.) This eminent
Churchman is seldom seen in Public, but at this Exercise; for to make himself
the more Reverenced he affects retirement, spending his hours in the study of
the Alchoran, and in resolving such Cases as the Layity present him, who esteem
his Resolutions infallible. And this, with a careful Inspection into the
deportment of the Inferior Clergy, does constitute the Office and Government of
the Alcalib. As for his Revenues, they are suitable to his condition: and as to
his Life, it is austere and reserved, he affecting a peculiar Gravity in all
his carriage. Every Alcalib has his distinct Diocese, out of which he has no
power, so that the Alcalib of Beni-Aros has nothing to do in Minkel, for every
one is absolute in his own Cavila.

At the public Instructions of the Giamma, none are present but the Males, for
the Women, as I said, are denied admission into the Assembly, yet are not wholly
destitute of the means of being taught Religion: for upon every Friday they
repair to the House of the Alfaqui, where his Wife is bound to Instruct them:
But her Lectures usually concern good Houswifry, and how they should demean
themselves to their Husbands, in Obedience and Submission, and to live in Peace
with their Fellow-wives. All the while the Women are at the Priests House, he
is not to return home, nor stir out of the Giamma, but has his Meat brought
him thither. But for what reason the Priest should be under this restraint, I
leave any one to imagine, who has heard of the Moresco Jealousy. But now in
case the Priest has no Wife, who seldom wants four; or that by any
Indisposition she is not able to perform this Office, then it is discharged by
some aged Matron of the place: and for a further supplement of the Women's being
debarred of the Giamma, their Husbands repeat unto them such Lessons as they
have heard there. And this is all that on this account I could observe of the
Moors Women.

Muley Mahumed styled Prayer the Key of Paradise, and the Pillar of Religion,
that he might the better recommend its practice to his Converts, who generally
maintain so careful a performance of this Duty, that no secular business can
detain them from, nor any thing divert them at their Devotion. I once
endeavored to collect their Prayers into an Order, the better to take a
distinct view of this Pillar of their Religion, but I found them reduced to no
certain Form extracted out of the Alcoran, but were a Collection of some
incoherent Sentences magnifying the Power and Mercy of God. Their first Prayer,
or rather their Creed, is that which the Almuden Proclaims with a loud voice,
when he calls the People to the Mosch; as there is but one God, and Mahumed his
Messenger: and this admits of no variation. The second Prayer is the first
Chapter of the Alcoran, wherein there is some difference according to
Translations (in which the Alcoran has been very unhappy) but those which I
have seen in Latin, Spanish, and French, agree in this Traduction of the
Chapter.

In the Name of God, Gracious and Merciful, King of the Day of Judgment: thou
art He whom we adore: it is from Thee that we require help: guide us in the
right way, in the way of those with whom Thou art pleased, against whom Thou
art not angry, and we shall not go astray. This Prayer is repeated with the
former, after the same manner as the Papists repeat their Pater noster with the
Ave Maria: For the Moors have their Tesserae Precariae, or their Beads,
wherewith they number their Prayers. And the whole Corona or Rosary consists of
ninety eight, which the Devoti, or Religiously affected, carry always about
them. They have a Custom to repeat often together the first Words of the
Prayer, which they conclude to be a great act of Charity, as supplying by this
Repetition the defaults of such as are remiss in this duty.

In the Name of God, Merciful and Gracious, is the Proeme of every Chapter in
the Alcoran, and were the first Words that Mahumed is said to have spoken when
he came out of his Epileptick Fits, which he made the People believe were
Trances. And with the same Words the Mahumedan Doctors begin all their
Discourses, and the Letters written in Moresco Language, if the Penmen are
precise, are likewise introduced in the same Form. There is a Learned Man, that
tells of a Prayer among the Mahumedans, which is called, The Prayer of Jesus
the Son of Mary, ending thus, And let not such an one bear rule over me, that
will have no pity upon me, for thy mercy sake, O thou most merciful. But having
diligently enquired, I could not find that the present Moors have any such
Letany in their Uses. There are few who are able to read, that want Manuals of
Private Devotions, which are composed by the Morabito's or Morabouts, and are
indeed rather to be termed Charms, then Prayers. Now these Morabito's or
Morabouts, are a sort of Alarbes which are skilled, or so pretend to be, in the
Law of Mahumed, severe in their Conversation, bearing a great ostentation of
Sanctity, pretending to Prophecy, or Predictions. They compose all sorts of
Charms, to which the Moor is so addicted, that he has one for every occasion: I
have seen a whole Book thereof, containing some for the Childbearing Women, to
facilitate their Travel; some for the Passenger, to guide him in the way; some
for the Soldier; and one for the Horse, which is much in the Service of the
Saddle: This they hang under the Beasts Neck, and believe that it keeps him
from being blind, or dimsighted. They have likewise Spells to keep their Cattle
healthy, and make them fruitfnl, all composed by the Morabouts and Priests; the
latter, of late, being much given to this sort of Composures.

And now from these short Notices of the Giamma and its Appendages, I pass to
speak of the Moresco Sabbath. That the fifth day of the Week, is the Weekly
Festival of the Mahumedans, to distinguish them from the Jew, who keeps the
sixth according to our account, and from the Christian who observes the
seventh, is known unto every one that knows any thing of this subject. About
the Institution of this Sabbath, variety of Opinions may be met with: For some
derive its Original from the veneration Mahumed bore to the New Moon, which is
said to have appeared on Friday, the same day he began his Imposture; and in
memory of so happy an abodement, he set apart this for Solemn Worship. There is
another Conjecture which fetches its Institution from some Heathen Rites paid
on this day to Venus, whose name Friday bears. But there is little ground of
this Opinion, further then it may well suit with the Genius of Mahumedism, to
have a day Sacred to the Goddess of Carnality. But that Opinion herein seems
best to agree with the Chronicles of Mahumed, which makes his escape from the
Conspiracy of the Nobles of Mecha, to have been the occasion of this Sabbath,
from which deliverance the Mahumedan Hegira had its Original and Name. And in
this Mahumed undoubtedly imitated the Ancient Christians, who took their Aera's
from some notable Persecutions. But whatever was the Original of this Sabbath,
I observed that it has no great marks of Reverence above other days: for on it
the Moors go to Plough, hold their Markets, open Shops, and omit little of
their Ordinaries, so that I must retract my calling of it a Sabbath.

They indeed on this day have an Exposition at the Giamma Gheber, and on it
they put on their whitest Alheics, dress their Locks, and are seen in their
best Accoutrements. The Women likewise on this day visit the Sepulchers, and
and strew the Graves of their deceased Friends with green Boughs and Herbs.
And this is all that I have been able to remark upon this subject.

CHAP. X.
Of the Moresco Judicatory, chief Minister of Justice, Rule and manner of
Process, Testimony upon Oath, Recovery of Debts, Punishment of forgers of
Writings.
THe Moors have no Judicatories, or Public Houses where they assemble about
Judicial Controversies; neither have they any Mercenary Advocates, or professed
Lawyers, but all is decided by an Alcaddee, who is appointed by the Supreme
Ruler to be the Minister of Justice in the Cavila, and Town where he lives. Now
every Cavila has a peculiar Alcaddee, from whom they cannot Appeal to any
other but Alcadde Gheber, or the chief of these Justices, who is appointed to
receive such Appeals, and is in constant attendance upon the King, or chief
Governor. But it is not permitted to use these Appeals, except in Causes which
are supposed to be too difficult for the Decision of the Local Alcaddees; and
when the matter is of that Importance that the Parties are unwilling to
acquiesce in the solitary Sentence of one single Alcaddee.

These Justitiaries take no state of retirement, nor do they weary out the poor
Clients with tedious Attendances, but to signify the facility of access, and
their readiness to relieve and succor the Oppressed, these Alcaddees sit in the
Gates of the City, or some open and Public place, to hear and determine all
Cases that are brought before them. And albeit that this manner of doing
Justice be conformable to the Custom of the greatest and best Antiquity, as
also very significative of open and clear dealing; yet the Moor renders another
reason thereof, and that it is to avoid all Suspicion and Jealousy of corrupt
Carriage in the Alcaddee with the Female Plaintiffs that solicit him for
Divorces.

Every one of these Local Alcaddees has two Assessors, who in abstruser Pleas
assist him with their Counsels: But the chief Employment of these Sidesmen, is
to Copy out the Sentences of the Alcaddee, and to draw up all the Contracts
that come to be confirmed by him; for there is no bargain esteemed Legal and
Authentic, till it be certified under the Hand and Seal of the Topical
Alcaddee.

The Moors, as all other Mahumedans, acknowledge the Alcoran to be the
Immutable Rule both of Civil Justice and Religion, and therefore according to
the Letter and Interpretation thereof, the Alcaddee frames all his Definitions
and Judgments. Here Is no Intreaguing the Plea with Resolutions, Cases,
Presidents, Reports, Moth-eaten Statutes, etc. But every thing is determined
according to the fresh Circumstances of the Fact, and the Proof of what is
alleged. The Testimony of two Men, if they are of known sobriety, is
sufficient to make good the Allegation; but there must be twelve to ratify it,
if their Conversation be suspected: for the Moors believe, that amongst twelve
Men as much honesty may be met with, as will equal what can be found in any
two. If any Alfaqui or Priest be introduced to give evidence to the depending
Contest* his bare Affirmative or Negative deposition is of validity to put a
period to the Dispute, and the Alcaddee supersedes all Enquiry, when the Priest
has declared the state of the Cause. And in this, as in all other Instances,
they give a Reverend Estimation to their Priests, whose Presence secures the
Civil Disquisitions a great Veneration with the Many.

In taking the Testimony of a Moore upon Oath, the Servant of the Alcaddee
carries the Deponent to the Giamma or Mosch, where in the presence of the
Alcaddee he swears by that holy place, that he will declare all what he knows
concerning the matter, to which he is to give Evidence. But oaths are never
administered to any in another man 's Case, but such as are suspected Persons,
and they are usually numbered among the Rogues, and faithless, who have no
Credit without them; Besides it is never permitted for a man to swear in his
own Case, but for want of Witnesses, or when the Accusation is of that nature,
that the Impeached cannot otherwise Receive Purgation. As for the Christian,
and Jew, they are suffered to give Testimony according to the Rites and Customs
of their own Religions, but the Moors, are not forward to put them upon this
Trial, as doubting that fear of Punishment, should tempt them to perjury, and
those who are thereunto accessory (according to the Moresco Principle) are
involved in the Guilt.

In Pleas of Debt, it is required that the Reality of the Debt be first
manifest, which being done before the Alcaddee, he signifies it to the
Almocadem of the Cavila where the Debtor lives, who upon his Signification,
commandes a present payment to be made; but if the Debtor refuse or be unable,
to give the Creditor Satisfaction, the Almocadem Remits him to the Alhab's, or
Prison (which is always near the Almocadems house) where he stays till bayled
thence by sufficient Sureties, or Personally pays the debt.

And to secure their Courts of Justice from interfering, or clashing oue with
another, the Alcaddee of one Cavila may not intermeddle with any thing that is
transacted in an other, but every one moves orderly in his own Sphere, and
confines his proceedings within the Punctual Limits of his Assigned
Jurisdiction. And that herein there might be no Collusion, Covin, or Imposture,
every Alcaddee has his Privy Seal, wherewith he firmes the contract, or other
things that pass under his hand. And the Seal is usually engraven with the name
of the Alcaddee, and Place of his Office. And yet notwithstanding this care to
prevent, they have the Villainy of forging deeds, which is done by some skilled
in the Alcadde's office. But upon detection he that produces the forged Paper
is immediately imprisoned, and remains without hope of enlargement, till he
declares the Forger, and after that the Alcaddee puts upon him a pecuniary
Mulct; but he deall's much more severly with the Principal in his Forgery, who
for the first Conviction receives a sharp repremend from the Alcaddee, and
after that the Almocadem is ordered to burn his house; but if he be found to
repeat his offense, the Forger dies without mercy; which just rigor secures
them from the mischiefs of counterfit writings to the prejudice of another
Right. So that this is a Villainy through the whole world condignly punished;
and by our own Laws, a second forgery of Deeds concerning another Land after a
former Conviction, is Felony.

CHAP. XI.
The Moresco punishments of Fornication, Adultery, Thievery, Retaliation,
Murder, Bribery, Usury, Alcadee's Revenue, Opinion of the Jews.
IN the Moresco Catalogue of Crimes, Adultery and Fornication, are found in the
first Comma, whose difference in the Moors Opinion may be collected from their
Penalties. For Adultery, it is allways Capital, insomuch that without regard of
any Eminence or Quality, the Convict thereof is certainly stoned to Death,
which is done with most notorious Circumstances. For first the day of Execution
is published, then the Criminal is brought to the Calvary, where buried up to
the navel in a Mat Mora, or a pit dug for that purpose, every one present
casts one stone, and no more, at him, saying, this is for thy filthy
transgression of the Law; but if the Adulterous be Persons of Condition, their
Friends have License to dispatch them privily, to prevent the open reproach to
their family.

In the punishing Fornication they are less Rigorous, as finding the mischief
thereof not to be of so large a derivation, as that of Adultery. And if the
Persons convict of this Unchastity are in the state of Coelibate, they are only
Chastis'd with Scourges: but if either be married, or under matrimonial
contract, Death is the certain penance. But the Moors are no less solemn in
whipping the Fornicator, than in Stoning the Adulterer. For on Friday, after
the Archpriest has ended his Lecture, the Offender, if a man, is placed at the
great door of the Giamma Gueber, or Cathedral Church, naked down to the middle,
and in the presence of the Congregation receives an hundred stripes on his back
from an Officer appointed for that Purpose, who has a certain number of
Blankeles (or Moresco twopences,) for his Service; the Moors as they pass by
the chastised, use these deprecatory words, Allah Iffecni min had El ham. i. e.
God deliver me from this wicked fellow. The woman who has been partner in the
filthiness, suffers her punishment in the night, when she is whipped through the
streets, but with more severity than the man, because the Moors suppose the
Female to be of a predominant allurement in such unclean commixtures.

The Moors who live in a Roaving condition are much addicted to Thievery,
against which the Alcaddee proceeds by these steps of punishment; for the first
Theft the Convict is publicly whipped in the Alsouck or Market; for the second,
he loses his hand; for the third theft he may truly be said to dye without
mercy. For the Moors observe Caligula's Severity in making the Offender
exquisitely sensible of his death, which they inflict. Against the day of the
Theif 's Execution, the Youth of the Place are advertised to prepare their
Instruments of blood, which are little dry Canes, made in the fashion of darts,
accurately sharp pointed, these they hurl at the naked body of the Malefactor,
till his whole skin be struck therewith full of holes, and when they find him
sinking under the torture, they dragg and hang him up by the heels upon a gate,
or the like, where he breaths out his last in torments, and being dead he is
loathsomly exposed to the birds of prey.

In bodily injuries they observe the law of Retaliation, as an Eye for an Eye,
a tooth for a tooth, etc. but it is in the power of the maimed party to Receive
a pecuniary reparation, or without any satisfaction to remit the wrong; but
this is not permitted til the matter has been tried before the Alcaddee, and
the hurt party publicly declared, that he is willing either freely to forgive
the injury, or to accept so much money in full Repair.

And however the Municipal Laws of some Countries put a vast difference between
murder and manslaughter, as appears in their defined punishments, yet in
Barbary all homicide, or killing of a man by a man, is Capital.

And the Moors have herein two concessions. The one is to License the next
kindred of the slain, to take money for his blood of him that spilt it. The
other to permit the Relations of the murdered to kill the murderer, without any
judicial proceedure, if he be not already in safe custody; which is no more
then a pursuance of that Position, Revenge is no sin. Of this there happened
a famous Instance, not many months before I left Barbary, an account whereof,
as it was given me by my old friend Cidi Alli Mulud Ben Ali, take as follows.

A Moor of Targa not far from Tituan having his Brother treacherously murdered
by one of the Voisinage, undertook to pursue the fugitive murderer, with
design to avenge his Relations blood, and coming to Alcazer Gheber, he was
informed that the Person he sought for had some days before been there, and
that he had put on a Pilgrims habit, with full resolution to pay a holy journey
to Mecha; upon which the Pursuer put on the like habit, and in prosecution of
his design purposed to perform the same pilgrimage; bnt being come to Morocco,
he overtook and lodged with the murderer in the Pilgrims hospital, where early
the next morning he slew him; whereupon being apprehended and examined upon the
fresh circumstances of the fact, he produced a Certificate under the hand of
the Alcaddee of the place where he lived, that his Brother was slain, and that
he had undertaken to avenge his death, the murderer being fled, and likewise
answered them, that that was the Homicide whom he had killed, whereupon he was
set at liberty, and the Corpse left to his disposal, to which giving a decent
Interment, he returned home to receive the praises of his Gallantry.

But to return to the Alcaddee, whom I shall here only observe in his Revenue,
and office; as to the former it is very considerable, for he signs not a paper
without a Fee; and as to the latter, it is very honorable, and careful, for
all civil affairs pass through his hands, and he daily sitts attending on all
qualities of persons without varying his respect to any. If he be corrupt in
his Charge, the Alcaddee Gueber, upon mature conviction turns him out of
Office, which is his extremest penalty.

But indeed the Ministers of Justice have no opportunity to be Collusive, as
being free from the great allurement of dealing falsely, for Bribery is not
known amongst them. Usury which (I promised to intimate in this Chapter) is
totaly forbidden by their Law, for Mahumed has made it an irremissable sin,
and the Userer in as bad a condition as the Devil, leaving him neither will,
nor hope to be saved.

Yet notwithstanding the severity of the Law, and the supposition of this
Crime, the Moors have a Custom which much favors it; for he that borrows money
of another wherewith to trafique and gain, gives the lender an equal share of
the Profits, and in case the borrower lose the whole Principal, he is obliged
to make it good to him that lends it, but if only part be lost, the remainder
is employed to regain it. And it is usual with the lender to forbear the
Borrower, till he perceives him fraudulent, Careless, or Unfortunate.

And because the sin of Usury is so notorious among the Jews, the Moors
believe that for it they are oppressed of God, and live Exiles from their own
Canaan. But it is easy to observe a sort of Antipathie between these people,
notwithstanding that they are conjoined in neighborhood, commerce, and in very
many rites both civil and Religious. But the contempt is reciprocal, for if the
Moor by way of Proverb say, As deceitful as a Jew, the Jew repayes, as
uvbelieving as a Moor. And this enmity I remarked in a Barabar of my
Acquaintance, who observing the Jews very much frequent my lodging, he very
roundly reproved that Conversation, and angrily told me, That the Jews were
born to cheat both the Moor and the Christian, that he was assured that they
were not descended of Adam, but that they were breed of the bone of a dead
beast, and when he conjectured my incredulity of his ridiculous Story, by my
smiling thereat, he told me in angry zeal, that he would pledge his head for
the truth of his Assertion; whereupon I demanding what he conceived of those
Jews who turned Moors, he answered, that there was such efficacy in their
religion, that it made all those good who embraced it.

CHAP. XII.
The Moresco opinion of Marriage, manner of woeing, marriage-Solemnity,
carrying home the Bride, Offering wedding-feast.
THat marriage is honorable among all men, if it were not a truth dropped from an
inspired Pen, might be proved by Induction, and the ecumenical consent of all
Nations, which pretend to any settled Rites in Religion or Policy. As for
Mahumed, he had matrimony in so peculiar an estimation, that he made it the
second of his eight Precepts, and enjoined every Subject of his Law to marry in
the Vigor of his Age, making the predominant end thereof, the Propagation and
maintenance of his Sect. He likewise told them that chaste celibate was
impossible, and that those who pretended to live therein, were justly to be
suspected for unclean conversation. And hence perhaps it comes to pass, that
the Moors (who are the Puritans in Mahumetism,) are so generally observant of
this commandment; for few among them are found to live out of the state of
Wedlock, if they are able to purchase a wife. But many are not very prone to
take all the liberty in marrying indulged them by their Prophet; for albeit he
permits them plurality of wives, yet there are several families that for many
ages have confined themselves to one: and I have met with those who abhor that
filthy position fathered upon Muhumed, That the more they are spiritual, the
more liberty and abilities they have to be carnal.

Unto the persons that are to be married there is no conversation permitted
till the Knot be tied, so that both parties take one the other upon trust, and
the man perchance never sees the woman till they be brought to the
bride-chamber; A custom that would be very hardly disgested by the Utopians,
who think it very unreasonable that a man should take a wife with less scrutiny
than he does his horse, and that he should bring one to be the perpetual
partner of his life, with less information than he does a horse to his stable,
which he may part with the next day.

But the Contriver of the New Atlantis finds all these inconveniences
avoidable by the custom of Bensalem: where (says he) near every Town there is
a couple of Pooles (which they call Adam and Eves Pooles;) in these it is
permitted to one of the Friends of the man, another of the woman, to see them
severally both naked. And the Moors have a custom not much differing from this
of Bensalem, for upon the design of marriage two of the man's Female friends,
who have lived long enough in wedlock to understand its Perquisites, are
appointed to view the intended Bride, and to give the Suitor an account of her
bodily accomplishments, and defects, which is exactly entered in the Contract,
and if any infirmity be concealed for which the husband afterward disliks her,
he may put her away; and this makes them very cautious to omit nothing in the
search or report; But there is no such examination passed upon the man, because
he is daily exposed to a free Censure.

If this Inquisition be passed with satisfaction, then they proceed to frame
the Articles of Marriage, which is always done by the nearest Friends or
Relations of the Parties to be contracted. And when they have finished them,
they are brought to the Alcaddee to be confirmed under his hand and Seal; for
unless the bargain be thus ratified, the woman in case of her husband's death,
or her own divorce, cannot recover the Portion that was promised her, or rather
the price that was to be paid for her by the man; For I suppose that few are
ignorant of the Moresco Custom of buying their wives; When the Paper containing
the Bargain has passed the Alcaddee, it is carried to the Alfaqui, who having
perused and declared his approbation of its Contents, he bids the Man take home
the Woman when he pleases to be his Wife; and this is all that is done by the
Priest in this, according to their Estimate.

And after this short dispatch of Wooing, Contract, and Marriage, the
Bride-Grooms next consultation is with his own convenience in order to fetch
home his Bride: in which the warm Clime suffers him not to be tedious. But
herein he is obliged to observe the appointed Times; for neither all Weeks in
the Year, nor all Days in the Week, nor all hours in the Day, are free for this
Solemnity. For the taking home the Bride is altogether prohibited during their
Ramadan, or Lent: The like, Prohibition reaches unto the Tuesdays, Wednesdays,
and Fridays of every Week, and on the Canonical or Regular Days, the Afternoon
and Evening are the accustomary Hours. At the time when Marriage is Celebrated,
they use all possible significations of Joy and Hospitality; and it is the
Custom for the Friends of the Married to contribute something to grace their
Nuptials. Therefore if the Married Pair live both in the same Town, then at
their set time the Bridegroom goes attended with his nearest Kindred, who
coming to the Lodgings of the Bride are not suffered to go in, but wait at the
Door till the Negra's, which the Husband has bought or borrowed for that day,
bring the Bride from her Chamber under a Canopy of Alheicks, and place her in
an Almaria, or close Chair (much resembling a Tub) which they cover with Scarfs
and Ribons. And in this manner she is born through the Streets by Christians
that are Captives, and for want of these by Negra's, or by a meaner sort of
Whites. When they begin their March from the Brides House to the Bridegrooms,
the Music, Colors, and Drums pass in the first rank; next to them go some
ancient Women, who have been a long space Married, all closely veiled:
immediate next after the Almaria, or Bride-Chair, march those who carry the
Clothes and Presents of the Bride, which have been made her by her Friends, who
follow immediately after in a regular disposition. When they are come to the
Bridegrooms, the Chair being lighted, the Negra's take out the Bride, and under
a Canopy of Alheicks conduct her to her Apartment, where she is received by
some aged Matrons, who instruct her in the important Offices of a good Wife,
and the rules of that Relation, but they are wary of betraying any discouraging
Severity, and therefore intermit their Documents by tasting the good Cheer
provided for their Entertainment. While the Bride is thus caressing the
Matrons, and receiving their Maternal Councels, the Bridegroom entertains his
Comrades, Feasting them with the best Cuscussone, and brisk Wines, if their
over scrupulousness debar them not the cheerfulness of that Beverage. But the
Bridegroom is not licensed for that time to drink freely of any strong Liquor,
for Reasons not worth the mentioning.

In the interim of this Entertainment, the Batchellors make a kind of Offering
to their Wedded Companion; in which they observe this Method: The Bridegroom
places himself upon a little low Seat, behind him stand two Negro's bending
his Head moderatly back; then come the Batchelors, who cover the Bridegrooms
Forehead and Brow with Metacales (or single Coins of Gold) and Blankeles,
according to their Affection and Ability: and as they lay them on, the Negro's
stroke them off into a Basin set for that purpose in the Bridegrooms Lap, who
all the while shuts his Eyes. The Negro's likewise call every one by name who
Offer, saying Fulano (or such an one) lays on so much, God enlarge his Life and
Riches. And this continues till all the Batchelors have been at the Corban.
About eight of the Clock the Company breaks up, with resolution to reassemble
the next Morn; and when they are gone, the Bridegroom visits the Bride, whom he
undresses with his own Hands, first taking off her Ornaments, then untying her
Drawers, and in every point prepares her for his Bed; none being admitted to
assist, or to be present at this Office. And this they say he does, in
signification that she is wholly and only at his disposal.

Some Conocido's or intimate Associates of the Bridegroom, stay behind the rest
of the Company to congratulate the first Pleasures of his Marriage. For about
Midnight he leaves his Bride to manifest unto his select Companions the
evidences of her Virginity, by Traditional Arguments authentic with the Moors.
This good News they all celebrate with increase of Jollity; and now they
venture to warm the Bridegroom with his own Fires, and endeavor to return him
to his Bride crowned with his own Vine. But if she yield not these Testimonies
of Virginity, it is in his power to put her to death, or otherwise to dispose
of her as he pleases. For they esteem that the most unpardonable sort of
Cozenage, which takes a Man's self and his Money for that which is impossible to
be made good. And those Women are accounted egregiously impudent, who conscious
of their own Failures dare put themselves upon this adventure.

But if for this Injury he returns her to her Friends, she meets with that
rigor at their hands, which she might easilier have undergone from her
Husband; for all her Cozens think themselves dishonored in the Debauchery of
their Kins-woman, which they imagine cannot be expiated but either by death, or
some more durable Purgatory. And by reason of this just Severity, the Moresco
Damsels are very cautious of their Behavior, and scarce in half an Age has
any one been convict of this Delinquency; however, the Man is circumspect not
to omit the Ordeal.

When the Bridegroom and Bride have refreshed themselves apart with their
choice Companions, all are dismissed till the next day; when the Festival is
reassumed, and lasts a considerable time; the Wedding Feast of the poorest
continuing a Week. And for this time the new Married Man has a privilege to be
absent from the Mosch without fear of mulct. Some Grandees are not seen abroad,
from the day of their Wedding till they can show the Pledge thereof in their
Arms. But these are bound to have a Dispensation from the Alfachi for their
absence from the Mosch, and to observe the Times of Prayer in their Chambers.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Moresco Polygamy, Concubinage, Divorce, for what reasons, in what cases
it is allowed.
THat the Muley Mahumed might the better complease the loose humors of his
first Sectaries, he made his Religion to contain many carnal indulgences,
denying nothing to Believers of his Doctrine, that had any sensible compliance
with their brutal affections. And of this we meet with an Example in his
concession of Polygamie and concubinage; for first he granted to every
Professor of his Religion the liberty of marrying four wives; he likewise
taught that they might take as many Concubines as they were able to maintain,
but in this also the more illuminated Moors confine themselves to one of their
own Persuasion, esteeming Concubinate with Infidels (under which name all are
comprised that profess not Mahumatism) to be an unexorable uncleanness. As for
Polygamy it is looked upon as a Divine Institute, and when any object against
it, the Moors vindicate it by the frequent examples and universal customs
thereof, in the Patriarchs and worthies of the Hebrew world. And I could meet
with none who asserted Plurality of wives upon politic considerations, as that
it was coveinent for the propagation of the Empire, increase of people, and
enlargement of their Religion: but that it proceeded from God, was used by the
Holiest of his Servants, and the economy of the Old Law.

When the inconvenience of these Plurality is objected, and that their
Oeconomicks cannot but be much disordered by reason of the inquietudes, and
strifes that will inevitably arise among so many female corrivals for one man's
affection; they tell you that this is a disease whose remedy is of a very easy
procurement, by reason of that absolute Dominion, which the husband has over
his wives, whom, if they prove disagreeing, he confines to their several
apartments, without allowing them any further conversation among themselves,
then that their society at meals affords them. And if this will not cure the
unpeaceable humor, then Divorce proves an infallible Receipt; of which give me
leave to give this brief account.

When the woman finds herself aggrieved by her husband, or any of her
fellow-wives, her only reparation and succor is to seek a divorce. And in this
case she has liberty to address her self to the Alcaddee, who has the sole
power of dissolving, as well as of tying, the knot of matrimony. And when the
woman has declard her condition, and spread before the Alcaddee the reasons
upon which she grounds her desire of Divorce, the Alcaddee presently sends for
the husband, and examines him concerning the verity of the complaint brought
against him by his wife, if he deny it, then the matter is decided by the voice
of the Neighbors, but if the husband have a willingness to be quit of his
wife, then he needs but confess that whereof he is accused, and the Alcaddee
tears in pieces the Bill of their marriage which he had Confirmed, declares
the Marriage void, and certifies the Divorce under his Seal; and from hence
forward they are both at liberty for new nuptials. From which the woman is
bound to abstain till it be apparent that she is not impregnate by her last
husband, who is still obliged, to provide for the issue that she shall bring
into the world five months after the Divorce. But if she cannot tarry so long,
then the Alcabla, or Midwife, has her in Examination, who is bound to return a
just and true report upon pain of being stoned to death. The Moors call the
Divorce and widows by the same word, and enjoin them the same Laws of second
marriage.

The chief causes of Divorce on the woman's part or either disquiet and froward
carriage to the Family, especially when she will not live in amicable society
with the Sharers of the same Bed: or when she is unpleasing to her conjugal
embraces, or when she will not endure his familiarity with his women slaves.
But if she be found guilty of adultery, the injury is too great for Divorce to
repair and in this Case she is solely left to the pleasure of her husband, who
has Absolute power both to be her Judge and Executioner. And albeit the Moors
are not sparing in the revenge of their kinreds death, yet they applaud the
husband who kills their kinswomen, whom he has certainly found treacherous to
his Bed.

The occasions of Divorce on the husbands side are his refusal of paying his
wife marital Due; or, some other sort of unkind deportment. But after all the
wives complaints, the husband is at liberty to retain or put her away; and he
may at any time divorce his wife in case he will make good the marriage
Contract.

It is usually said, that the wives seek for Divorce when their husbands deal
unnaturally with them; and albeit this is said to be done with a great deal of
modesty, the crime being signified by the turning up of a Shoe, yet in Barbary
examples of this kind are very unusual, for the Moors abhor the villainy,
believing that it is not in man's Nature to be so preposterous; and that it was
at first the malicious invention of some vile and impudent Strumpet.

The Children which are begot before Divorce, follow not the woman, but are
left to the husbands charge. And it is observable that the Moresco women
seldom prove unfruitful, for in a town of above twelve hundred married women,
it was reckoned for a great rarity that there was one dyed barren. But the
wife, different from the Jewish custom, suffers no dishonor for her Sterility,
and if the husband takes a second wife who proves also childless, the husband
bears the imputation. Mahumed in the fourth Chap. of his Alcoran advises the
husband whose wife is barren, to swear by her belly, and asserts it a means to
make her Conceive. A devotion which as I have been told is still in use among
the Alarbes, but quite worn out of fashion with the other Moors.

In the nursing of Children the mother abhors that unnatural pride of suckling
them with other breasts, while her own are sufficient for that affectionate
service. And to show that there is something more than common kindness in this
particular, the Empress her self is obliged for the first seven days to give
her child suck.

And now before I dismiss this remark, I cannot but acquaint you with all the
material ceremonies, of the second, third, and fourth marriages. Every former
wife upon the introduction of another, lives seven days deprived of all manner
of society with her husband, who for that time devotes himself entirely to his
last Bride; whom on the seventh day after marriage he solemnly brings into the
acquaintance and fellowship of his other wives, whose brows the last married is
bound to kiss, and tells them that they are not to be angry that their Holy Law
has entitled her to a share in his affection as large as any of theirs. The
husband likewise exhorts them all to reciprocal kindnesses, assuring them that
without fraud, or any partiality, he intends to divide himself among them.

Now that which seems most nearly to concern the wives, and proves the
greatest and most incentive of their wrath is their husbands liberty of taking
as many Concubines as he lists; which for the most part are Blacks, the Moors
doting much on that Spanish saying la Negra tiene, turmentina en ella. But
those that keep Concubine slaves, are not permitted to associate with them in
the night, and if any of them bear, their Patrons Children, she thereupon
receives her liberty, and the Child is coheir with those begot in Wedlock.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Moresco admission of Renenegados, Circumcision, Imposition of Names,
Sur-names.
EVery Religion have had still some Rites appropriated to the admission of such
as undertook its profession; and by which they were characterized and
distinguished. Concerning this the Author of Mahumatism was much distracted,
not knowing what inaugurating ceremony to Ordain. His two assessors Sergius the
Monk, and Abdalla the Jew, divided him with their opinions, while each pleaded
for the character of his forsaken Faith. But the wary Impostor (laboring to
keep up the credit of his pretensions, in being sent, to be the reconciler of
the Jewish and Christian Religion, and to compose a Law comprehending both) to
comply with Sergius, who stood stiffly for Baptism, he ordained daily washings
to all those who became Mahumetans, and ascribed thereunto no less efficacy
than the cleansing of the Soul. And that he might not disgust Abdalla the Jew,
he made Circumcision admissive of Proselytes into his Law. But did not
institute it under any notion of absolute Necessity, and indispensibly required
of all who undertook the Profession of his Religion, but made the want of it no
impediment of future happiness. And therefore in the admittance of a Renegado,
or the denyer of his first Religion, circumcision is not exacted of the Moors,
for fear that the undergoing of such a painful Sacrament should deter the
Proselyte. But when any desires to be of their persuasion, they carry the new
Musulman on horseback, in a kind of triumph through the streets, and proclaims
that such an one being turned Moor, desires the assistance of their Prayers
that he may not Apostatise.

But their male children are initiated by circumcision, and because the child
may die before it can be circumcised, therefore the lack of this Write in such
a case is concluded to be no hindrance of its enjoyment of Paradise. When the
child is seven days old, the Moors give it a name, and the Father of it makes a
feast. But the imposition of the Name is done in the public assembly; for the
Father at the evening-Sallah carries to the Church several dishes of Cuscussow,
of which he sets one apart for the Priest, and the rest to be eaten up by the
people. And when the Prayers are ended, the congregation demand of the Father
what he will call his Child, and if the Name he gives it be not satisfactory to
the People, they decide it by lots what he shall be called, for every man here
has a Vote in the Nameing of his Neighbor's Child. And when they have agreed
the point, all pray that the child may Live, prove Rich and Valiant, and
understand the Alcoran; then they eat up the Cuscussow and depart. It is
observable that the Priest neither at the Nameing, nor circumcision of the
child has any apppropriate office, of which I could find no other reason,
unless the Moors estimate of these Ceremonies, which they never reckon among
the essentials of Religion.

There are some who have asserted, that there is an inevitable time of
circumcision among all the Mahumetans; But if they had lived in Barbary, they
might have lessened the proposition, for the Moors circumcise their children
when they please, being by Law not bound up to any particular day or hour. But
it is generally grown into fashion, to circumcise at the Animadversary Feast
called Mulud, kept in December in memory of Muley Mahumed. And few or none
defer the circumcision of their Males at the first Mulud after their nativity.
Now there is no person set apart for this office, but the child is circumcised
by any that has a gentle and nimble hand, to whom the parent gives a bountiful
reward.

When the Sons arrive to a due maturity, they are disposed of to Vocations,
among which the Sword is reckoned the most honorable, as a Privilege of
Primogeniture belongs to the first born. The rest betake themselves to such
Callings as best agree with their inclinations and Fathers fortunes. Many of
the wealthier sort put their Sons to to be Talbyes, that in case they be
reduced to want, they be in capacity to be received unto the Priesthood and be
maintained by the Church.

The Moors have no surnames, which want they supply by adding to the Child's
name, either the name of some remarkable time when it chanced to be born, as
the Ramadan, Mulud, Ashora, and the like; or the name of the Father by
prefixing Ben, as Hader Ben Abdalla: being the same with Thomas Fits Williams,
etc. and the higher they derive the pedigree by reckoning up their Ancestors,
it is accounted the most honorable. And in this they follow the ancient
custom, for to add to a man's proper name, the proper name of his Father by
putting [Son] before it, was of old in stead of that, which we now call
surnames: and in some parts this is not yet worn quite out of use. Whether the
names now given by the Moors, are significative of any Virtues desired or
foretold by those that impose them, to be in the Children, has not yet fallen
under my comprehension.

Curiosity tempting me in pursuance of this Note, to enquire into their
child-births; I found that therein they observed a decency conformable to the
best civilized People. For the pregnant Wife perceiving the approach of her
pangs, call's for the Alcabla, or Mother, the same with our Midwife, to assist
her travailes, who never leaves her till the seventh day after her delivery,
for so long she keeps her bed, and tarries forty days before she associates
with her husband. Who if he be scrupulous will not embrace his Wife from the
time she appears impregnate, till the last minute of the forty days after her
delivery be accomplished.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Moresco Funeral Rites, Testaments, Mourning for the Dead, Esteem of
Interment, Sepulchers, Places of Burial, etc.
THe Moors are very careful that nothing be wanting or disorderly in the Rites
of Burial, wherein the surviving Relations signify great Sentiments of
humanity and affection toward the deceased: whom when they understand that they
are sick, they delay not to visit, on purpose to admonish them of their Faults,
and to exhort them to look forward to the great Pleasures of Paradise. The
Priest never omits this good Office of assisting the sick; and I have been
told, that there are certain Azaora's or parcels of the Alcoran, appointed to
be read on this occasion to the Infirm, who if he die not while those Azaora's
are thrice read over, it is an Omen of his Recovery; but if the Agony be
observed to increase in the time of Reading, they conclude that the Patient
will not escape: which when the sick Man observes, and sees that in all
probability his Distemper will terminate in Death, he begins an exact disposal
of his Estate, whereof in the first place some part is bequeathed to the
Parochial Church where he lives, and some small Legacies to the Alfachi and
Almuden, and the rest he leaves to be divided by the Alcaddee among his Wives
and Children: in which Distribution, a Son has twice as much as a Daughter,
and the Wives can claim no more then is set down in their Contract of Marriage.

In signification of their love to the Dead, the near Kindred of both Sexes use
Tokens very expressive of Sorrow: the Men testify their Griefs by putting on
their courser Alheicks, and not wearing any thing that is very white about
them, which at other times is a chief part of their bravery: for they account
white to be no less a token of cheerfulness then Innocence, and therefore
account the wearing thereof very improper for such sorrowful occasions. The Men
likewise (that are of near Alliance to the Dead) cut not their Beards, but
declare their pensiveness; they suffer a great neglect in all those
Accoutrements, in which at other times they are very curious; and by a peculiar
Fancy they have some Hairs hanging over their Eyes in token of a careless
Sorrow. But this is done chiefly for such as come to untimely ends.

The Women are very loud and dolorous in their Lamentations of the departed,
and they intermit not to howl over the Corpse while it is in the House, which is
not long, for as foon as the Breath is expired, the dead Body is washed with
Soap and warm Water, by those of the same Sex with the departed. Then the Body
is wrapped in white Linen and laid in a Coffin (though a Coffin is but the lot
of a few) on the right side, with the Face toward Mecha, in which posture it is
also buried. When the Corpse is carried out to Burial, the Priest goes next unto
it, who coming to the Grave or Sepulcher, prays that the Sins of the Defunct
may be remitted, and that he may have a Portion in the promised Delights.
Returning home from the Buryal, they have a Feast to comfort those of the
Family who are not permitted to dress any thing while the Corpse are in the
House: and this consolatory Feast is great or small, according to the condition
of the Dead.

They account it a great unhappiness for one of their Faith to want a decent
Interment; and therefore if any dye without an Estate sufficient to discharge
his Funeral Expenses, they supply it by a Neighborly Contribution. Those that
are more Wealthy and Honorable have Sepulchers, which vary both in Materials
and Fashion: For some are built of rough Stone, others of course Marble, but
the most of Brick: Some in form of a half Moon, others open upon Pillars; and
some round and close, and to be entered by a Door. But the Vulgar lie in common
Graves, covered with green Turf and Boughs. At the Feet and Head of those that
are thus Buried, they fix large Stones, in which are writ the Name of the
Interred, with the Year of his Age and Hegira. As for Epitaphs, they are quite
worn out of request, yet they were in great estimation of old, as may be
gathered from that Collection which John Leo made thereof, and presented it to
a Brother of a King of Fez.

Upon every Friday the Women repair to the Graves of their deceased Friends,
whose deaths they bewail with a very loud and bitter Lamentation, recounting
the great Satisfaction and Pleasure which they once enjoyed in their Society.
And because they believe that on every Friday the Soul returns to the Body,
they spread the Graves with sweet Flowers and green Boughs on purpose to
refresh it, and to adorn the Grave. But there are some Moors which hold this
Rite for a Mystery in their Religion, and therefore pretend not to give any
account of its usage. They have one thing in Buryal, observed no where else,
which is not to bury another in the same Grave where one has been Interred
before, and therefore they use certain Marks to secure them from mistakes.

It has been often told me, That the Moresco Women in their Weekly Lamentations
of the dead, use to ask them what reason they had to dye, seeing that they
enjoyed loving Friends, wanting none of the Comforts of this Life, etc. But I
found this was an idle Story, and a Moor assured me that they had no such
Custom, and that it could be the Calumny of none but a deceitful Jew.

Neither is that other Story of more credit, which makes the Moors reserve a
vacant Place in the Grave, to give the dead Carcass room to rise up and kneel
before two pretty Angels, who come to confess the Departed concerning the great
Points of the Law; namely, paying of Tithes, giving of Alms, and observing of
Ramadon: for upon mature Enquiry, I was assured that the Moors had no such
Article in their Creed.

The places of Burial that belong to great Towns, are in the Fields: but in the
Country they are generally by the Highways, which may be to put Passengers in
mind of their Mortality. The Ground which is set apart for this Employment, is
usually the Donative of some devout Person, or purchased with Legacies
bequeathed for that purpose. And that there might be no fraud practiced in this
Particular, both Alfachi and Alcaddee keep Registers of all such Donations,
which are transmitted to Posterity. When the Ground is once devoted to this
service, the Moors call it Blessed and Holy, and accounted its alienation an
unpardonable Wickedness. Neither the Christians, nor any of another Religion,
are permitted to tread within these Burial Places, unless they be their Slaves,
whom they admit to any thing capable of service, and use as sorely as their
Dogs. These Slaves always wait upon the Women to the Sepulchers, but for no
other intent then to carry their Flowers and Boughs, and to assist them
therewith to dress the Graves.

There is no Aldea or Village that has a Church, but it has also a peculiar
Burying Place, given or bought as has been already mentioned.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Moresco Ramadan, its institution, moveableness, manner of Celebration.
SOme have imagined that for twelve Years after the promulgation of the
Mahumetan Law, the Sectaries thereof kept the same Fasts with the Jews: but
Mahumed being displeased with that refractory People, and scorning to borrow
any of their Institutions, commanded his Proselytes to abandon their Fasts, and
appointed in their room the Moon Ramadan, to be kept in an Anniversary
Abstinence. But others date this Lent from the second Year of Mahumeds
Prophecy, and that it fell out in the Month September, at which time the
Alcoran is said to have been sent from Heaven. But it is not likely that the
Fast was in memory thereof, because so great a Blessing (in the Mahumedans
Estimation) deserved to be kept in mind by a far different Memorial, great
Mercies having never been Celebrated with Penances and Corporeal Humiliations,
but rather with Festival Expressions of Joy, and Actions significative of
Exaltation.

The Ramadan is moveable, and depends on the appearance of the New Moon, which,
if through the Cloudiness of the Weather they cannot discern, they tarry till
it may be presumed by the course of Nature that it is Changed. And those who
are less Learned in the Lunar Mutations, continue the Fast for thirty days,
being assured that in that Period the Moon must fulfill her course.

A Winter Ramadan is very welcome to the Moors, because their Labors are not
then so pressive, and better then to be endured, by reason of the coldness of
the Season: and the Fast is not so afflictive, because the Days are short, and
the Nights long to Revel in.

Though this be the severest Precept in the Mahumedan Law, yet it is not
without all capacities of Indulgence, for therein is had special Regard to the
wayfaring and infirm, who have License to eat in the day time, with this
Caution, That at the end of their Journey, and upon their recovery from
Sickness, they perform the full account of their Lent. As for the rest, they
are enjoined no more then a diurnal Abstinence, having the Night at liberty for
all Fruitions they can procure, Wine only excepted, which by those who at
other times liberally drink it, is for this Moon totally renounced. The breach
of this First they punish with Stoning to death, and there is no necessity can
Privilege any (except Travelers and ins^^^ Persons) to eat or drink till the
Evening Star witnesses that the Day is shut in.

They make great Provision for this Ramadan, wherewith they furnish out their
Necturnal Festivals; and for this end, use a great Frugality before for some
days.

They place a great Sanctity in this Fast, which yet to a Scrupulist scarce
would seem to deserve that name, for the Day is usually past away in a
loytering Sleepiness, and the Night in Junketing: the one is at best but a
drowzy Lent, and the other a Luxurious Carnival. Yet there is a devouter sort
of Bygots, who spend the Day in the Church and Devotion, and are very reserved
in their Nightly Caresses, living for the whole Moon separate from Women, where
they supererogate, their Law no where exacting this Severity* for such was the
Carnal Temper of their Prophet, that he thought it an Impossibility to live a
whole day Continent. Both Sexes are bound to begin this Fast at the twelfth
Year of their Age, and it is placed among the Articles necessarily requisite to
the Constitution of a perfect Mahumetan.

The last day of the Moon, the Moors spend in doleful Lamentations of their
deceased Relations, and with their Yearly Commemoratives end the Fast.

CHAP. XVII.
The Moresco Feasts.
AT the end of their Lent, Mahumed instituted a Festival Solemnity, as has
been imagined in imitation of the Christians Ester. The Turks call it Bairam;
the Moors, El Ed Geer, or the Little Feast: Little, not in respect of its
duration, but Expense; for it lasts three days, which equals it in length with
any of the rest.

On the first day thereof they spread the Floor of their Giamma's with colored
Leather, and then entertain each other with Honey, sweet Butter, and Wafers.
And according to the performance of this Festival, they Divine, as the
Egyptians by their Nilescope, the Blessings and Plenty of the descending Year.

About two Months after, the Moors have another Festival, by them called, El
Ed Gueber, or the Great Feast, in respect of the Expenses and Charges thereof.
This Festival still commenceth with a Sermon, which the Alcalib or chief Priest
makes concerning its Institution, with amplification of its Praises. Returning
home from the Sermon, the Moors fall to killing such Sheep as they have made
choice of for their Entertainment at this Solemnity, and there is not the
meanest Fortune, but now has his Sheep which is killed, by cutting the Throat
thereof, with their Faces toward Mecha, and Swearing by Alquibla. This done,
every Family takes the Heart and Appurtenances, and immediately dress it with
Saffron, red and black Pepper; then, with store of Bread, they bring it to
their Parish Church (where every Quality knows his station) and eat it in
Communion. Returning from this Ecclesiastic Ordinary, they pass the second and
third Day in Eating and Drinking. This is also called the Mutton Feast.

The next to this is their Ashorah, which lasts but one Day, and called a Feast
of Fruits, nothing being then eaten but Dates, Figs, purched Corn, and all such
natural Cates as their Substances can procure. This Festival is not held in
Giamma's, but every Father of a Family treats his Household under his own Roof.
And the rich on this day give a Portion of their Estates to the Poor, who on
the Morning of the Festival go from one Giamma to another, and receive the
Yearly Alms, which are proportionably divided amongst them. None cast into this
Treasury who have not a certain sum of Money in Possession; and he that has
less then ten Metacales (which something exceeds our Five shilling Pieces) is
exempt from this Corban.

At the receipt of these Alms, the Poor pray that God would increase the Givers
store, and enable them to bestow more the next Ashorah, telling them, That this
fulfilling of the Law, is the best assurance of rendering their Petitions
successful.

Anserah is another Moresco Festival, which lasts but a day; and with the
Andaluzian Moors bears the Name of Saint John Baptist's, or the Feast of the
Christians. On this Festival, those who live within ten Leagues of the Sea come
thither to wash themselves; and those who cannot, by reason of distance, repair
to that great Monopoly of Waters, take Salt and throw it into the Fountains at
home, and Bath themselves in that counterfeit Ocean. This is exactly at
Midsummer, and held in Commemoration of that great Blessing of Water. The
Viands of this Feast exceed not their ordinary Provisions, only they eat them
with greater alacrity.

Mulud is the Yearly Feast for Circumcision, and continues three days; on the
first whereof, they make a Gatcha, or Hodge-podge of Flower, Water, Butter and
Honey, and carry great quantities thereof to the Church, whither they invite
one another, saying, Come, let us go to the Allamdillah, or to the Feast that
is made to Mahumed for Gods sake: And when they have eaten of this homely Dish
in the Church, they leave store thereof to be devoured by the Poor, and spend
the two following days in good Neighborhood and plentiful Collations. This is
their chiefest Feast, because at it their Males are Circumcised, and may seem
to have a reference to the old Whitsuntide among the Christians. But I forbear
to swell these Remarks with such Conjectural References, which if I should
enterprise, I might make all Mahumeds Institutions yield some probable
Resemblances of those ancient Customs and Ordinances in usage among Jews and
Christians; and show, that this great Deceiver has confused both the Testaments
into his Alcoran, laboring thereby to have his first Pretensions made
creditable, That he came to reconcile Jew and Christian unto the obedience of
one and the same Law.

These Moresco Festivals seem not so much Commemorative of received Mercies, as
relaxatives of Corporeal Labors, from which they are observed to have no other
Divertisements. For Cards and Dice are utterly abhorred by the better Families,
not only as forbidden by the Law, under the Infamous terms of Diabolical
Inventions, but as observed to be occasions of many nocive Passions, engendring
Debates, and Incentives to Avarice: Besides, they are looked upon as Effeminate
and Trivial Entertainments, fit only for Seamen, and Women; the former being
much versed in this Idleness, though no such Aspersion can be cast on the
latter.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Moresco Pastimes, Music, Dancing, etc.
WHen the Moresco Gentry are disposed to Sports, the Wild Boar fits them with a
Manly Exercise, and affords them both Pastime and Improvement; and when in the
failure of some Circumstance they are debarred this kind of Recreation, they
supply it with their Lances in Lusory Skirmishes on Horseback, wherein their
Dexterity cannot be too much admired.

But they are naturally uninclin'd to Sports, being very Saturnine, and loving
the Extremes, either to sit still, or to be in robustious Motions. They spend
much of their Time in a sort of drowzy Conference, but the sum of their
Domestic Entertainments, are their Women and their Chess-boards: All
communicating in the former, but the latter is only the serious Pastime of the
Virtuoso's.

They use Vocal and Instrumental Music, but in both are very serious and
plain, devoid of Levity or Flourish. Their usual Instruments are the Rabeb and
Ahlud; the former resembles our Violin, but strung only with one great Cord of
Hair; the other a Getar. In Fez they have Lutes, and those who will teach them
well. The Alarbs have an Instrument called Zauphen, like the bottom of a
Kettle, on which they Tinckle with a stick. The Tituanezes have a less Organ,
and also use a sort of Tabor and Pipe when they march in the Field. So most
Towns have their peculiar sorts of Music. The singing part is performed by
Negra's, not for any peculiar Excellency they are happy in, but because singing
at public Dances is looked upon as Slavish.

In their Dances they permit no mixture of Men with the married Women, which is
granted to the Virgins, who upon some Solemnities Dance with the Batchelors;
but so closely Veild, that not any part about them is seen naked. They act the
Tune with their Hands and Head, and abhor as loose and lascivious, Jigs, or
high Dancing. Every Town and Cavila have their own Dances, which are known by
several Names. The Fessians have a Dance called Estitati, which is used in
Sally, Mekenez, Alcazar, etc. Those of the City of Morocco have one named
Sholakeber; and in the Cavila's of Minchel, Bemi-Wadres, etc. there is a Dance
styled Ismmahah. It seldom happens that those of one Town know the Dances of
another, therefore thofe who use this Divertisement, only know the Name and
Mode of the Dance where they live.

Their set Times are their Weddings and Yearly Festivals, the Married dancing
on the Day, the Single in the Night.

CHAP. XVIII.
A Miscellaneous Chapter of the temper of the Air, Diseases, Medicine, Poisons,
Education of Children, Apparel, etc.
BEfore I shut up these Tumultuary Remarks, I cannot but add some
Miscellaneous Notes, occasionally collected from Discourse and Observation, of
whose Credit I have not many Arguments to render me dubious. The first Notice
concerns the Temperature of the Air in this Part of Barbary, wherein there is
some Variation according to the Site of the Places. At Fez, the Air in Summer
is more temperate then at Morocco. The Inhabitants of the latter for several
Hours cannot endure the Heat abroad, and therefore for that time keep close
within: But the People of the former are by no such Excess constrained to
intermit their Labors. Albeit, as I have observed in other Countries, much
herein is to be imputed to Humor and Custom.

The Inland Country is hotter in Summer, and colder in Winter then the
Maritine, which may easily be conceived, by considering what Neighborhood the
one has with the Sea, the other with the Mountains, which from December to the
latter end of February are covered with Snow; at the Resolution of which, such
Rivers are caused, that in some places the Channels will yield Water the whole
Summer ensuing.

The Inhabitants live long, and are generally Healthy; the Diseases, when they
happen, are Fluxes, after the Season of Fruits; and Calentures, when they
immoderately Travel in the Sun. And what seems herein remarkable, the Winter
(which Season consist of great Rains) is most mortal amongst them.

The Lues Venerea, or Foul Disease (which the Moors call Bubes) is incident to
those who accompany with variety of Women: and though this may seem to confine
that Distemper to those Moors, who live after a more rude and roving manner,
yet it is no stranger to those of a more refined and settled Life, the Grandees
of late having herein exceeded the Paisants.

As to the Plague, they observe no set time of its return, the tenth and
fifteenth Year of its coming being worn out of Remarks; and in this last
Century it has happened very seldom, but in no parts it does rage more furi usly
then in Barbary: and when they are visited, the Inhabitants take little or no
care to avoid it, holding it to be inevitable.

In cure of Sicknesses, they use very plain Medicines, and whatever be the
Disease, Cauterizing is first practiced, which they do with no more Art or
Curiosity, then with a Knife red hot to gash and cut the place where the Pain
lies. To cure the Headache, they take the Root Tauz Argent and Rosemary,
burning them in an Earthen Pot, over which the Diseased holds his Head for the
Fume; then binding the same in a Cloth about the Head, present ease is given.
This Tauz Argent is a Root, much Celebrated for an excellent and lasting
Perfume: there is great store thereof about Sally, which is white within,
without duskish and streaked. The Moors use it in Airing and Perfuming their
Rooms, but the scent is much less durable then has been reported.

The People, when sick, cure themselves with Herbs, in whose Virtues the common
People have a traditional knowledge. By this they supply the want of
Apothecaries and Physicians, of which Profession none are found, except a few
Mountebank ignorant Jews.

The Moors have an Herb called la Halis, which mingled with Honey, they make up
into Balls as big as Pistol Bullets, and of these they swallow five or six at a
time, which they find to procure Appetite, further Digestion, and to make
Frolic, Amorous and Witty. Opium is much used by all sorts, rather for Diet
then Physic; and a Moor will sooner buy a Pill of Opium, then a Cake of Bread,
if his stock be too little to buy both. And in many places they are so
accustomed to this Stupefactive, that the want thereof proves fatal.

In former Times the People were so exquisite in mingling Poisons, that they
had some would kill by smell: Of late they are acquainted only with two kinds,
which they call Rahash and Zehim. The former is either white or pale, and more
quick in dispatching the Person who takes it. But Zehim (signifying any thing
that is coutrary to the Palate or liking) is cured with incessant Spitting. As
for that Poison which once they had the Art to communicate in Letters, to kill
those who read them, they are thereof at present totally Ignorant.

Muley Mahumed having out of Politic Ends prohibited Printing, made thereby
Writing of a more singular use and esteem; and the Moors of old were noted to
be very excellent at the Pen, but now in this, as in all other Learning, they
are much deficient of what they were formerly, for there are not many that
arrive to a higher Proficieney in Letters, then barely to Write and Read: To
which end they have little Schools, where the Children are taught after this
manner. The Moors having (as I said) no Printed Books, when their Children are
sent to School, they take with them pieces of Boards, or Slats, on which the
Schoolmaster writes so many Letters of the Alphabet; and when the Child has
learned their Names and Figures, the Master writes them a certain number more,
and so proceeds till the Alphabet be ended: and then goes on to write some
Periods of the Alcoran (for they teach no other Book) and continue this Method
till the whole Alcoran be wrote over, which usually lasts four Years. When the
Child has thus spelt it over, he begins to get it by heart, which costs eight
Years at the least; then the Child, if his Father be able, is taught a little
Orthography. When the Child is come to certain Periods of the Alcoran, the
Father is obliged to make him a Congratulatory Present: and when he has learned
the whole Alcoran, he is brought home to his Fathers House in Procession on
Horseback. As he Rides along, he holds a Table written with Mahumeds Law,
whereon he continually fixes his Eye, thereby signifying, That the Honor
conferred upon him was for the careful Reading of the Alcoran; and when the
Youth, accompanied with the Alfaqui, Schoolmaster, and School-fellows, has
visited all the Churches, they come to his Fathers House, where they are
entertained, and the Master rewarded for the care shown in the Proficiency of
his Scholar.

FINIS.
An Index of the Moorish Words.
ABa Henen. (...) 138 Abdalla, Abdel. (...) 3, 8, 7. Abdalla ben Boucar. f.
(...) 38. Abdalla ebn Mohammed ebn Abebecar. (...) 121 Abdel Crim Nacsis. (...)
37 Abdel Hader Alfiftoah. (...) 64 Muley Adolmelek. (...) 16 Mahumed Acadim. f.
(...) 41 Alarb. (...) 20 Ahlud. (...) Almocadem Ali. (...) 62 Ali ben Hamet.
(...) 26 Ali Gaylan. (...) 30 Cidi Ali Mulud ben Ali. (...) 175 Alla, Alla.
(...) 4 Allah Mahmique (...) 117 Allah iffecni min had elham. f. (...) 173
Amadorac, Amarodoch. (...) 138 Amet Zerif. (...) 5 Angera. Leo Afer. p. 161.
34. Arras. Leo Afer. p. 229. 39 Alarbe Asha. (...) 147 Ashorah. (...) 78
B.
Bar (...) 76 Barabars, Brebers. (...) 133, 30. Bere^genas. (...) 91 Bensallah.
(...) 52 Bismillah. (...) 116 Boferes. (...) 7 Muleh Boucar. f. (...) 21 Cidi
Mahumed ben el Hadge ben Boucar. (...) 22 Alcadee. (...) 55 Almocadem Casum.
(...) 62 Alcatib. (...) 155 Alcarobe. (...) 78 Cavila. (...) 22 Alcazar. (...)
27 Alcazar Ezzaguer. (...) 42 Ceuta. (...) 42 Cidi. (...) 112 Cuscussow,
Enscusson. (...) 130, 145.
D
Al Dea (...) 63 Dillan f. (...) 132 Dulhevil (...) 121
E
Era hanig allah (...) 117 Erif. Leo 162. 39
F
Al Faqui (...) 1 Fez (...) 29
G
Cidi Al Hader ben Ali Gaylan. (...) 105 Giama Gheber. (...) 137
H
Al Habs. (...) 196 El Hader. (...) 30 Cidi Hadrachaman ben Reshed (...) 68
Hage. (...) 17 Halizarif. (...) 42 Hamder illah (...) 117 El Hamdillah al salam
tiqsi. (...) 116 Hamet ben Abdelcrim. (...) 68 Hamet Zeer. (...) 29 Hegira.
(...) 121 Hid Seguer (...) 93 Homar. (...) 32
I.
Illah enzur muleh Reshid. (...) 50
K.
Cidi Kirum El Hadge. (...) 17
L.
La illah la Mahumed resulala. (...) 145 Laella. (...) 17 Lala. (...) 112
M
Mahomet ben Amet. (...) 2 Almamora. (...) 128 Marhaba. (...) 117 Matmora.
(...) 95, 171. Muleh Mahumed. (...) 45 Mecha. (...) 145 Al Mocadem. (...) 20
Marabout. (...) 162 Mosch. (...) 142 Mufadal (...) 35 Mufti. (...) 155 Ali
Mulud. (...) 98 Musalmin. (...) 91, 143 Alowilicsbah, Allahiric Lulli, Atelthah
Asa, Alarbe Aser, Alhamsa Magnib. (...)
P.
Pillow, Plaw. (...) 130
R.
Rabeb. (...) Ramadan. (...) 93 Muley Reshid. (...) 45 Reshid ben Mahumed.
(...) 45
S.
Salam aleq, salam aleq cum (...) 17 Salam alig alla ensorick muley fulano
(...) 13 Salla. (...) 128 Sala. (...) 28 Muley Sheck. (...) 7 Sidan. (...) 7 Al
Souk. (...) 173
T.
Talib. (...) 23 Tanger. (...) 41 Turkia. (...) 92 Zawia. Leo, 146. 25 Muleh
Xerif. (...) 67
FINIS.

