AN ACCOUNT OF What past on Monday the 28 th. of October, 1689. In the HOUSE of
COMMONS, And since at the King's-Bench-Bar at WESTMINSTER, In Relation to the
Earl of CASTLEMAINE.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Granger, 1690.

AN ACCOUNT OF What past on Monday the 28th. of October, 1689. in relation to
the Earl of Castlemaine, etc.
THE Attorney General being (on Saturday the 26 th of October 1689.) informed,
that the Earl of Castlemaine, Sr. Edward Hales and other Prisoners of the
Tower, were brought by their Habeas Corpus to the Hall to be bailed, desired to
know the Pleasure of the House in that Affair; who ordered that they should
presently be all sent for to their Bar; which was done accordingly; Only the
said Earl was not there; for he remained still in the Tower, having (it seems)
made use of no such Writ; However the House directed the Governor to bring him
up (as he did) the Monday following; And then the Speaker said to this Effect.

Mr. Speaker to my Lord.
MY Lord, the House having understood, That You went Ambassador to Rome; and
also took your place at the Board as a Privy Councellor without taking the
Oaths (which are great Crimes, and against Law.) They have sent for you to know
what you have to say for your self.

His Lordship's Answer.
IT cannot (Mr. Speaker) but put me into more then an ordinary Confusion, when
I find my self in this place as a Criminal; especially, seeing (through the
whole course of my Life) the Glory and Welfare of England has been my chief Aim
and Endeavor. You are pleased Sir to lay so great a Charge upon me, that
(without shuffling or impertinence) I might ask time to consider it; Yet since
I well know how much you value your time, and since time also may make what I
say suspected more of Artifice then Candor, I shall now (without further delay)
let you and this great Assembly see (where so many of Birth and Quality are
met) how far I am from deserving either censure or reproach. But (Mr. Speaker)
before I go further, I must humbly beg these few Favors of you. First, that
you would Pardon all Tautologies or want of Method, as beginning perchance in
the middle, and ending again where I should have begun. Secondly, That you
would not take any advantage at my Answers, for I shall be Ingenuous to the
utmost, and hesitate at nothing you shall ask. And Lastly, if (through
inadvertency or have) I should say what might shock you, that you would not
stand upon the rigor of the Words, but upon the sincerity and clearness of my
Explanation.

Be pleased then to know, Sir, I was so far from seeking this Employment, that
I did not so much as dream it was designed me; And when I knew it, I used my
utmost endeavor to avoid it. My ignorance of the Kings Intentions appears by
this, that (in the Year I went to Rome) returning out of the Country (according
to my usual custom) after Michaelmas, I found a Protestant, a Person of Note at
my House, who told me, that before I spoke with any Man, he was to bring me to
my Lord Sunderland, and from thence I was to go to his Majesty; Nor would he
(scarce) afford me time to put my self in a tolerable order to attend them. My
Lord Sunderland soon hinted to me, what the Kings intentions were; And when I
recurr'd to his Friendship, I had this Answer, or Words to this purpose; That
if Subjects should refuse their Kings Service in every thing that was
troublesome or Contre-Coeur, all Kings would be in an ill Condition; that my
request was beyond his Power; and that he believed I should find his Majesty
very positive; and so I did Mr. Speaker, I Will assure you. Nay to satisfy you
yet more fully of my backwardness to this Journey; can you think, Sir, that I,
that had been at Rome more then once; that had seen the Grandeur of so many
Roman Embassies; and knew they exceeded in Splendour and Expense three times
those to any Crowned Head whatsoever, should not be extraordinarily concerned
at an Employment, which had for its Subsistence (as the Lords of the Treasury
well known) no other Establishment then that to Spain or France, which (being
100 l. a week) amounts only to 5200 Pounds per. annum?

Having thus Sir, showed you how little fond I was of the thing, let me now
(with Submission) ask you, what could I otherwise do in my Circumstances? For
first I call all that is Good to witness, I never heard of Law against it, nor
know of any to this very day; And yet (on the other side) I was not only
Commanded by the King, but knew his Royal and Legal Power of Commanding the
Service of his Subjects, and most particularly in Embassies, as appears by many
old Examples; Nay, by a fatal one in this very Century; I mean the Case of
Overbury, to which no body here (I Am sure) is a stranger. In the next place,
Sir, what did I go to Rome for? Why only with a Letter; with a Complement from
a professed and open Catholic King to his Holiness, as all Princes of that
Communion do in the beginning of their Respective Reigns. Besides Mr. Speaker,
as I know no Law, that forbad my Obedience, so I must needs say (and this
without cramping or putting any Bounds to the Legislative Power) that no such
Law can be made; For Sir, the Pope is a very considerable Temporal Prince,
whose Territories border on two Great Seas, the Miditerranean and Adriatic; If
then our Merchants should be by storm or other necessities, driven into his
Ports; if Englishmen should be surpised by any Roman Party as they travel in
a Neighboring Country, shall our Government (not to mention a hundred other
greater accidents) want Power to send a Messenger to Ransom and Compound for
them? What Law therefore was there ever yet framed, or can be enacted (let the
Commerce or Intercourse between Nations be never so much broken and prohibited)
but that a Commander in Chief, a General, and much more a King, may beat a
Parley, dispatch a Trumpet, nay, send and receive Letters as often as occasion
does require?

Now (Mr. Speaker) for Religion, I neither had any Commission concerning it,
nor Transacted with his Holiness about it; And as no body ever did, or could
lay any thing of that nature to my charge, so for some confirmation of it, I
will appeal even to the Aqua fresca Houses of Rome, and to all the Protestant
Gentlemen of our Nation there during my Embassy; for though what I tell you,
Sir, be a Wonder, yet the Honorable Persons, who have resided in those parts,
know it to be true, that for a Dish of Chocolate or a Dish of Limonade, one may
know the measures and particulars of an Embassy in that City, as well as we do
what passes within these Walls at our Coffeehouses. I am sure my under Servants
have often smiled at the Grimaces and Mysteries which my Secretaires used in
the beginning to make before my Audiences; for they have told them (within few
hours after my return) almost Word by Word what had passed. Give me also leave,
Sir, to add one truth more, which will assure you that I had no dangerous
intreague in hand; and this is, that notwithstanding his Holiness never had the
least imagination or thought, but that I was as real and sincere a Catholic as
any Man living; and the same thing also I can say of all the Cardinals; and in
fine, of the whole Court in general; Yet none of them (and every Englishman in
Town knew it) but looked upon me as one, that if any Immunity of the Crown were
in question, or any Temporal Concern of the Kingdom touched, would stand as
much in the Gap, and be in as Diametrical an opposition, as any Person of the
Reformed Religion whatsoever.

You see then Sir, both how, and why I went; nor have I done any thing
certainly to merit any Man's unkindness or ill will; nay, to lay yet further
before you the hardship I am under, I shall state you a Case, not fetched out
of old forgotten Records, or Transacted in an Age disparate from ours, but of a
Man attainted in this very House, in the memory of several now sitting, and
even whilst I my self had the Honor to be a Member of it. The Case Mr.
Speaker is Axtels the Regicide; one whose Crime (I dare say) my greatest
Enemies think I abhor in the highest manner; nor do I mention the thing in
favor of the Criminal, but in Honor of his grave and worthy Judges. Axtell
you know (Mr. Speaker) was Indicted for the Murder of Charles the First; And
to show that he maliciously contrived and abetted it, the Kings Counsel urged
his Commanding in the Hall at the Trial; his placing the Sentinels all about;
And in short, his performing there the whole Office of Captain of the Guard.
The Prisoner answered; but pray, Mr. Speaker, let me beg Pardon, if the
Interval of almost Thirty Years has made me forget his Words, I am sure the
sense of them I have not; I say, Sir, the Prisoner answered; My Lords I am
under great oppression, I am hardly dealt with. Has Charles the Second been so
Gracious as to pass over the ordinary transgressions of his strayed Subjects,
and to look upon the Obedience of Soldiers to their then Superiors, as if the
Authority had been more Legal? And shall I now dye (who was under Military
Discipline) for that, which I must have presently died for, had I not done it;
to wit, had I not drawn up my Regiment, kept the Post ordered me, and performed
the other duties, the Concourse being great and troublesome? Upon this the Judge
replied; I confess (considering the Kings merciful Resolutions) that your
Argument is strong; it has great weight in it; But Mr. Axtell, did you do no
more? Did you only perform the Duty of a Commanded Soldier? Who was it (I
pray) that animated the Rabble? Who beat the Soldiers for not crying Justice?
Who encouraged spitting in the Kings Face? And who barbarously reviled and
threatened a Noble Lady, that in the transports of her zeal (when she saw her
Sovereign abused, when she heard such Blasphemy against him, and all this
Fathered upon the Nation) made a noise or stir in the Court? These things
therefore Sir, being proved against him; He was convicted, condemned, and so
paid a Debt to Justice, and to the Sacred Ashes of that great and just Man.

Now Mr. Speaker to application; And first (after a little glance on the
tenderness of these Judges, when any necessity could be pretended) let me with
your Pardon ask you, shall I suffer as a Transgressor of the Law, were there
any, when I must have suffered by the Law, had I refused his Majesty's Orders
and Commands? But Sir, if you demand, did I do no more then carry a Letter, or
go with a Ceremonious how do you from the King? I must answer yes, and a great
deal more too. For my House was an Asylum, a Place of Refuge to all distress't
or oppress't fellow Subjects. If Seamen mutiny'd or had any contest with their
Captains, here a Reconciliation was made, and here they returned to their
Obedience, if the Captains themselves (fraughted for the Camera) were delayed
their Money, or misused by under Officers, they quickly found Redress, and
often (by my interest) received more then they themselves expected; And if the
question happened about quantity, or how Goods were conditioned at delivery,
the Verdict I am sure went still on their side. Nor was my care confined to
Rome only, but reached to all the Factories of Italy: For the Consuls
themselves, nay every private Person found both an easy access to me, and an
indefatigable Zeal in their concerns; so that the Merchants in General that had
to do in those Parts, were far from being behind hand in their thankful
acknowledgments. Nay one of the greatest Companies of our Nation, I mean that
for Turkey, not only returned me their thanks very heartily by Letter, but did
it again by Word of Mouth after my Arrival home.

I am sure (Mr. Speaker) if the Employment I submitted to were a fault, I have
already not a little suffered for it; for I never put bounds (as our
Travelers, as well as my own Officers fully know) to any Expense that could be
imagined for the Dignity of the Nation; And give me leave to tell you also Sir,
that though the Name of Rome may be harsh and ungreatful to your Ears, yet what
I did, was with a good intention, and like a true and faithful Englishman. For
had I been sent with a Character to Constantinople, where they are Mahometans;
or to China, where Gentiles; the Eclat or Figure which I should have
endeavored to make, would never be considered by you as an Honor to their
Religion, but our Country; therefore since it is a Disparagement and great
Reflection to a Kingdom, to come below or short of others in any thing that is
public and of note, I cannot but have (at least) faint hopes, that you will
have some consideration, some opinion of an Ambassador (though at Rome) that
kept up (to his Power) the Glory and Grandeur of England.

But Mr. Speaker, not to trouble you longer on the present Head, I Will end when
I have told you this; That if I have done amiss in obeying the King's Commands,
no Consul that has pursued Pirate or Bandite to Rome; No private Factor that
has followed a Debtor thither; Nor in short any Man that has Written so much as
one Letter to that City, though it were to demand his own, but is a far greater
Criminal then my self, and lies at the mercy of every Enemy to be Indicted as a
Contemner and Breaker of the Laws.

Your second Charge Mr. Speaker, is my being a Privy Counselor, without
taking the appointed Oaths; To which I can truly say, they were never offered
me; though I must also confess (for I shall be sincere with you in every thing)
that I believe, nay that I am certain, I should not have taken them, had they
been offered; So that I do acknowledge the Omission a fault against Law --

Here the Speaker thinking that his Lordship had made an End, desired him to
withdraw; but being informed that he had not done; He excused the Interruption,
and then his Lordship went on.

I say (Mr. Speaker) I acknowledge this a fault against Law, were there not
several things of weight, that will (I hope) justify me to you; And here, Sir,
I must entreat you, not to conceive that I come now to defend or make good the
Dispensing Power, but only to show you how necessarily I was driven and induc't
to the aforesaid Omission; for (Mr. Speaker) in controversies and disputes,
what can one do, but recur either to his own Observation, or to the opinion of
learned Men, and Professors in the Science?

In the first place then, when I began to examine my self as to the Right the
King claimed and asserted; I saw Non obstantes deemed Legal, which signified to
me Dispensing; I found the Power of continuing Sheriffs owned for many Ages to
be undoubted Law, and yet I knew there was a positive Statute against it; Nay I
remembered an Act, which I my self had in this House given my Vote and Consent
to, viz. That about the Regulation of Carriages and Wagons; Or if this be not
the exact Title, I must beseech you to Pardon my Treacherous Memory, and it is
I Will assure you the only Traitor I ever yet succored or supported; I say Sir,
I remembered this very Act (almost as soon as made) suspended by Charles the 2
d's. Proclamation without the least Question or Murmur; and I took so much
notice of it, as to make even then this Reflection (and I do assure you upon my
Honor it is true) That though our Monarchs could not impose and abrogate Laws o
themselves, yet they had the Power (I perceived) to respite them.

In the second place (Mr. Speaker) if I went abroad; I mean if I consulted the
Thoughts and Sentiments of others, I found not only Great Men of the long Robe,
but the Judges also themselves declaring in favor of this Prerogative; And the
interpretation or determination of these Sages was always told me to be Law,
till a new Law or a new Explanation should be enacted. What would you then (Mr.
Speaker) have me to do, who was called to the Board by the King; who could not
in Conscience take the Oaths; and yet had no reason to think I committed (in
not taking them) a Crime; seeing the Law was thus openly expounded and published?

And now Sir, since I have been forced to mention my Religion, which I know is
a legal Fault, and of a high Nature; I must not forget also to celebrate the
Goodness of this House, which has pardoned the Fault, even in the solemnest
Way, and by the solemnest Act that ever past since Magna Charta; to wit, The
great Act of Oblivion. Give me leave Sir, to say this too, for I can justly do
it; That being so faithful and so true an Englishman, I neither should nor
could (I am sure) have ever, during my Life, offended my Country, but in my
Religion. Pardon also I humbly beseech you this digression, and together with
it the Incoherences and Disjunctions all along; Nor shall I any ways doubt of
it, since you so well know how uneasy and troublesome a long discourse (which
my Circumstances have now required) must needs be to one, that wants both
Eloquence and Practice.

But (Mr. Speaker) to return where I left, and so conclude; How Sir, I pray you
(and I demand it again of you with great respect) could I think the Omission
(as I said) of the Oaths a breach of the Laws, when our Guides, who had the
Laws in their keeping, told us explicitly, and without reserve the said Oaths
were not necessary? Shall I then suffer that had neither Buoy nor Mark to
direct me? certainly no; for if there were a fault, it is not I must suffer, but
the Judges, and those knowing and deputed Pilots, that hung out (it seems) the
wrong Flag and Signal. I have Sir, but one Word more to trouble you with, and
this I speak in behalf of all here; Nay in behalf of all the People of England;
That if I now undergo your Severity, and that single Persons (notwithstanding
the Determinations and Judgments of our Courts of Justice) must be still
responsible; No Man can be safe, no Man can be rest; for no body that acts can
know (as accidents will often happen) whether he be Innocent or Guilty.

Mr. Speaker, I am in great disorder for imposing thus on your Patience; and
especially seeing I must yet presume to do it, one thing more occurring to me
(as I hope) for your further Service, or at least Satisfaction; And it is to let
you know how I came to be a Prisoner, and why I continued so thus long. Be
pleased then Sir, that I tell you, that as soon as the King first left
White Hall, I thought it decency to go out of Town; and therefore three days
after I took Coach for Montgomery-shire, where of late I used to reside in the
Summer time. On the Borders of that Country, at a small Corporation called
Oswestree, I was first stopped by the Rabble, and afterward detained (with a
strong Guard) at my Inn by the Major; though no body (as he confessed) made any
Oath against me; and tho he had no orders (as he said) from London for it; Nay
(after a Months restraint) he denied me my Liberty upon Bail notwithstanding
two Neighboring Lawyers (whom I sent for) assured him he could not justify the
refusal by Law. I do not Sir, complain of any Incivility, either from him or
the People; for I was used with respect enough; But I judge it extremely fit to
let you see how the Liberty of a Subject was wilfully invaded by a Magistrate,
and how little conscious I was of any Guilt, since instead of flying, I went to
a place where I was known by every body.

In fine Mr. Speaker, after a confinement of Seven Weeks, I was sent for up,
and brought hither by a Party of Horse; Nor was I ever questioned or examined
by any body, but kept (upon the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act) at a
Messengers House for Three Months; And when the said Act was suspended the last
time, I was Committed (by my Lord Shrewsberry's Warrant) to the Tower, for
Suspicion of treasonable Practices.

His Lordship having ended, retired with the Serjant at Arms to his Room, where
after a little stay, he was sent for in again; And then the Speaker told him;
That since he said his Journey to Rome was with a Letter of Civility to a
Temporal Prince, and not about Religion, The House (to be more fully satisfied
of it) desired to see his Instructions. To which his Lordship thus answered.

I hope (Mr. Speaker) though I shall readily acknowledge my own natural
Weakness, you will not yet think me so imprudent, as that (in a time of such
troubles and distraction) I would keep Papers by me, and especially about Rome,
to render my self liable to every malicious Man's Extravagancy and Comment.
This therefore caused me Sir (the Night before I went toward Wales) to burn
all Papers that came to hand; and truly some amongst the rest, that I have
since wanted; Nay this I can also justly aver, that I remember not now one Word
of those Instructions, having (I Am confident) never read them twice; only this
I remember, they were Things of Course; Words of Form; and needed no further
consideration. Yet Sir, that you may plainly see my Sincerity, and how far I am
from any design of illuding and deceiving you, I shall show you how you
mayretrieve them, when I tell you, that Mr. Monstevens brought them me, and
that they were drawn (as I take it) by Mr. Bridgman; For I Am certain they came
from my Lord Sunderland's Office.

But my Lord (replied the Speaker) had you no private Instructions? None;
Answered his Lordship. What none at all, said Mr. Speaker again. None I Will
assure you Sir, replied his Lordship; unless the Kings Orders, to demand a
Cardinals Cap for Prince Reinaldo of Este, were private instructions; Nor do I
certainly know, whether those Commands were in my forementioned Instructions,
or whether I had them by Word of Mouth.

My Lord, said the Speaker, I have another question to ask you; to wit, who of
the long Robe told you of the Kings Power of Dispensing, and that there was no
necessity of taking the Oaths?

I am Sir (answered his Lordship) infinitely troubled, if I have through want
of Care, or by any improper Expression given you occasion to misapprehend me;
For I never asked any particular Man of that Profession about this Affair; But
my meaning was (and I hope my words are not contrary to my meaning) that the
said Power was manifestly and openly declared to be Law by Judges and Lawyers;
So that I deemed it no Solecism in Discourse to mention it as if they
themselves had told it me.

Then his Lordship retired again, and after a long Debate, the House past this
Order. That the Earl of Castlemaine stand committed to the Tower by a Warrant
from this House for High Treason, for endeavoring to reconcile this Kingdom to
the Sea of Rome, and for other High Crimes and Misdemeanors.

As soon as his Lordship was informed of this Vote, he entreated a Member to
let the House know, that he had a Word or two more to trouble them with; So
that being brought in, the Speaker told him, that the House having notice (he
had something further to acquaint them with) was very willing to hear him.

Mr. Speaker (replied his Lordship) I have nothing more to say about the former
Matters; but understanding your Pleasure, I thought it my Duty to let you know,
how the custom of the Tower as to Prisoners is changed; for in course
heretofore (unless there were a particular Order of State to the contrary) they
had the Liberty of the Tower; that is to say, they could walk about at
seasonable hours with a Warder; But now as soon as one is committed (though it
be upon bare suspicion, as I was) he is confined to his Lodging, and hindered
from the Consolation of seeing his Friends, till (after much solicitation and
trouble) leave be granted by the Secretaries. Therefore Sir, being morally
certain that I shall be confined again as soon as I return, I humbly desire the
Favor of this Freedom; It being also what I hitherto enjoyed after I had been
restrained for some days in the aforementioned Manner.

This said, his Lordship went out, and then was carried to the Tower, where he
was made a close Prisoner, as he foretold, though what he moved, occasioned the
following Vote.

That a Committee be appointed to bring in a Bill for the better regulating the
Imprisonment of the Subjects of this Kingdom, and to settle the Fees of
Goalers; And it was likewise referred to them, to examine into the abuses of
Goalers toward their Prisoners which have been heretofore Committed.

On Wednesday the 5 th of the following February, His Lordship moved for his
Habeas Corpus, and was brought by the Lord Lucas, (the present Governor of the
Tower) to Westminster, on the 10 th; So that appearing at the King's Bench, his
Commitments were read, and Mr. Attorney having nothing to object against his
being Bailed, the Court awarded it upon the Security of Thirty Thousand Pounds;
that is to say, a Recognisance of Ten Thousand from himself, and Five Thousand
a piece from his four Sureties; which were, John Earl of Bath, Thomas Earl of
Aylisbury, Thomas Earl of Sussex, and Charles Lord Landsdown.

FINIS.

