A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL, ON Sunday, the 17th. of February, 1694/5.
Before the Right Honorable the Lord Chamberlain, Ladies of the Bedchamber,
and others of the Household to our late Gracious Queen MARY, of Blessed Memory.

By J. Adams, A. M. Rector of S. Alban's Woodstreet.

Published at the Request of that Honorable Audience.

LONDON: Printed by BENJ. MOTTE, 1695.

A SERMON ON ISAIAH xxxii. 17. The Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and
the Effect of Righteousness Quietness, and Assurance for Ever.
HUman Nature is very subject to Presumption or Despair, according as men's
Circumstances are: this appears in the Jews particularly; and therefore 'twas
the manner of their Prophets to mingle Threats and Promises together.

Thus in the beginning of this Chapter, the Evangelical Prophet describes our
Savior, and the Happiness of his Kingdom, under the Person of Hezekiah. (verse
9.) Then turns them of a sudden to a sight of those Miseries which should befall
their Nation before this should come to pass; but then lest this should deject
them too much, he assures them that their Afflictions shall last no longer,
then Until the Spirit was poured out upon them from on High, (verse 15.) at
which time Judgment should dwell in the Wilderness, and Righteousness remain in
the fruitful Field. Nor was this all, but The Work of Righteousness shall be
Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness Quietness, and Assurance for Ever.

By the Work of Righteousness is meant, as this place refers to Christ, and
concerns us in particular, the Acting according to the Precepts of the Gospel.

The Word Peace has a large signification, but seems to be used here for the
inward Peace or Tranquillity of the Soul: By Quietness is meant Security from
outward Dangers: by Assurance for Ever a Settled Trust, an Entire Confidence in
God.

That the Work of Righteousness produces Peace, Quietness, and Assurance for
Ever, in these Senses which I have mentioned, I shall endeavor to show,

I. As to the Inward Peace, or Tranquillity of the Soul; the Work of
Righteousness caules this upon several accounts.

1. Because this is most Natural to the Soul of Man. If Reason be the thing
which distinguishes Man from other Creatures, his Ease and Happiness must
consist in the Acting according to this, and the improvement of it. But Reason
leads us of it self to the chief grounds of those things which are Commanded us
in the Gospel, as the Works of Righteousness: as the Knowledge of a God, of
Good and Evil, and Reward and Punishment hereafter.

And tho men are sometimes so perverse, as to endeavor to destroy these
Notions in themselves and others, yet all the while they do this Violence to
their Understandings, the Soul is unnaturally forced and strained, as appears
by its frequent striving in Doubts and Fears. Whereas he that Acts according to
his Reason, and Endeavors to improve the Natural Notions of a God by Searching
into His Revealed Will, and living according to it, does that which is most
agreeable to His Nature, and finds the most perfect Peace of Mind; and the Rest
and Acquiescence, which is the Effect of having done Well, is like that which
Natural Bodies find by lying still in their proper Places: Which proves that
Righteousness is particularly agreeable to the Soul of Man, and that the Works
of it give Peace and Satisfaction; while every Work of Wickedness is Acting
contrary to some Principle or other belonging to it, and consequently causes
Disquiet and Confusion.

II. The Work of Righteousness, or the Acting according to the Precepts of the
Gospel, brings Peace to the Mind, by leading it to a clearer Knowledge of God
than it can have from Nature, and by conducing to the improvement of that
Knowledge.

Tho the corruptible body presses down the Soul, and the earthly tabernacle
weighteth down the mind. Wisd. 9.15. yet these Expressions show that this is
unnatural, and argue Resistance and Reluctance; Accordingly, we may observe
that the Soul is frequently struggling and endeavoring upwards, and by its
quitting so soon its fullest Enjoyments, by its perpetually hunting about after
new Objects, shows plainly, that Nothing of this World is of sufficient Worth,
to improve, or employ it. But if at length it can, by the Assistance of Right
Reason and Divine Grace, raise itself to Heaven, what Joy, what sweet
Acquiescence does it find in the Knowledge and Contemplation of its God! For if
there be the strongest Inclination to Union between things of the same Nature,
the Soul being immaterial, can have no immediate, no proper Connection with
material Objects; But when it meets with Spiritual ones, rejoices in what is
like itself: How then must it be pleased, when it has discovered the Father of
Spirits! What unspeakable Joy must it find, in being united to God himself by
the Works of Righteousness!

But alas! In how wretched a Condition was Mankind in this Regard before the
Gospel? How little Knowledge had they of God, and therefore how little Progress
did they make in the Works of Virtue? Some thought Him a Cruel and Inflexible
Being, and that whatever came to pass, was by absolute Necessity; and this took
off all Hope and Comfort in Affliction: Others thought Him an Idle and Careless
Being, not concerning Himself at all with the Events of Things, or Actions of
Men; and this took away the Relish of Success, made it always suspected, since
what came by Chance, might be as quickly lost by it. As for the Jews, tho they
had a better Notion of the True God, yet the Passion which worked chiefly upon
them was Fear: God revealed Himself to this stubborn People, by His dreadful
Attributes of Power and Justice, and therefore their Obedience was Servile and
Uneasy to 'em: But how soon were all these Evils Remedied! And how plainly did
God Reveal Himself to the whole World, by the Coming of our Blessed Savior? By
His Coming the Abominations of the Heathen Worship, the Delusions of their
Oracles, the vain Boasts of their Virtue were Discovered, by the Coming of the
Desire of all Nations, the Prince of Peace, the Lord of Life and Glory: That
Fear and Dread which attended the Mosaical Law was qualified by that Love which
is the Foundation of the Gospel; and the terrible Name of the Lord of Hosts,
the God to whom Vengeance belongs, changed into the Mild and Sweet Style of
the God of Peace and Consolation, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. So that
all here contributes to our inward Peace: Here Power and Goodness, Justice and
Mercy, Moderate our Fear and Love so sweetly, that they produce such a
Smoothness in the Mind, as cannot be equaled by Love or Joy alone; for tho the
Passions of Love and Joy are more agreeable to Nature, because their Objects
are what we suppose to be good, then Fear or Sadness, because their Objects are
what we suppose to be Evil; yet they are no less Troublesome and Dangerous in
the Excess; So that they require a convenient Allay, and an equal Mixture of
both together: and in this equal Mixture, wherein the Soul is neither tossed
nor driven violently one way or other, consists its Ease and Happiness.

This is that Ease which the Mind finds in the Knowledge of God, which must be
supposed as the Ground of our Obedience in Working Righteousness; and this
Knowledge is wonderfully increased by the Works of Righteousness. A Barren
Contemplation of the Perfections of the Divine Nature, is no Improvement of the
Soul; but when it is withal fruitful in good Works, this is what the Scripture
calls Drawing nearer to God, and being like Him: and for this God has promised
His Holy Spirit; by which they shall have a more full Knowledge of Him. Thus our
Blessed Savior, (14. John 21. verse.) He that has my commandments, he it is
that loves me, and he that loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I will
love him, and will manifest my self unto Him. And from these Grounds it is,
that the Work of Righteousness brings Peace to the Soul in the following
Respects: as,

III. The Work of Righteousness contributes to the Peace of the Soul, by the
Pleasure which is to be found in the instant of doing it. This, I do not
question, but every Body here has frequently experienced: there is no one Work
of Righteousness which regards God or our Neighbor, but bring along with it
its peculiar Satisfaction.

What an unspeakable Peace of Mind accompanies Devout and Fervent Prayer? How
is the Heart enlarged in Holy Joy, when it pours out itself in Praise and
Thanksgiving to its Great and Good Creator? And when we assist our Neighbor,
either by Relieving his Wants, or Comforting his Sorrows, are we not good to
our selves, in the Satisfaction which we feel immediately, as well as the
Reward which we expect hereafter! What a generous Delight is there in a Quick
and Ample Return of any Benefit! And what a Blessing to a great Mind is the
very Opportunity of being grateful! But in that Noblest way of Conquest, of
overcoming an Enemy with Kindness, when it is in our Power to be Severe to him,
is a more Rational and Complete Satisfaction, than in that which is counted by
some the Sweetest of all things; Revenge. In a word, the most Solid, Sublime,
and Durable Delight accompanies the Act of Doing Well; and tho there be much
Danger in most kinds of Satisfaction in ones self, there is no fear of Flattery
in the Applause of a Faithful Conscience. When a Soul well practiced and
experienced in Virtue, and conscious of a due and regular Use of its free Will
Acquiesces in its good Actions, and something whispers from within, Well done
thou good and faithful servant. -- Happy is the people that are in such a case:
yea, blessed is the man who has (thus) the Lord for his God. Psalm. 144. v. 15.

IV. The Work of Righteousness promotes our Inward Peace by Regulating our
Passions: How great Disturbers of the Mind these are, is too well Known; and
yet how ready is every Body to be led away by them: How little of the least of
them, is sufficient to make vain Man! That Lord of the World! That Boaster of
his Reason! A Tyrant over his fellow Creatures, and a Slave to himself.
Sometimes the uneasiness of Pride Sours him into Habitual Peevishness;
sometimes he is raised in unreasonable Joy; and then cast down again in as
unjust Despair; then Envy and Ambition, Grief, Hatred, and Revenge, Rage in him
by Turns, and often all together: What can express the misery of the Soul in
this Condition? Yet this is not all; this makes a Man not only miserable as to
himself, but odious or Contemptible to all the World.

There is something in Gentleness and Meekness which is most proper to procure
Respect and Love; For these Qualities are the Causes of Order and Beauty, not
only in Peoples Looks, but in their Words and Actions; but in Anger or any
other violent Passion, all is Deformity; yet such a Deformity as becomes rather
ridiculous than terrible; for tho it may surprise at first, yet when it is
found to be unreasonable and customary, it is scorned and contemned, and when
it finds that it is so, it rages often unto Madness.

Now this Violence of Passion is chiefly occasioned by Men's being mistaken in
their Esteem or Dislike of the things of this World, and the Rashness of their
Inclinations or Aversions accordingly. Whereas the Work of Righteousness
supposes a true Knowledge of the Good and Evil of such things; and is nothing
else but a Regular Pursuit of the first, and an Orderly Flight from the latter:
And in this consists the Government of all our Passions, and our Peace and
Happiness. An ill Man can find nothing of this, while his Passions drag or
hurry him each a different way; But O, what Rest, what Quiet, what Security of
Mind can a good Christian want, when every Work of Righteousness joins kindly
with the other, and all contribute sweetly to his Peace! The Wicked are, in
reference to their Extravagant Restless Passions, compared to a troubled sea,
which casts up mire and dirt, ( Is. 57.20.) Turn the Metaphor, and you will
find the whole Life of the Righteous Man a continued Calm; How Composed is his
Temper! How moderate are his Desires! and how well Governed his Fears!

And this is not only caused but also promoted by such Works of Righteousness
as are enjoined by the Gospel; because that Jesus who enjoins them there, give
us also the greatest Example of Humility and Meekness: for with what Patience
did He go about doing Good! Healing the Sick Graciously, Instructing the
Ignorant Gently, and Reproving the Wicked Calmly! With what Lowliness did He
bear the greatest Injuries of Contempt or Violence! Alas, if we reflect in the
least upon His miserable Life and Death, we shall find a Thousand Instances,
wherein we may Learn of him to be meek and lowly, ( Mat. 11.) and in so doing,
to find Rest to our Souls. When I name the Word Jesus, says one of the Fathers,
( Bernard. in 15. Sermon. Cantic.) all that is Sweet and Delightful comes into my
Mind; Grace, Mercy, Bounty, Forgiveness, Goodness and Love, compose the Blessed
Sound, and the very Pronouncing of it, as it cast out Devils heretofore, might
be sufficient now to Allay our Passions, and Compose our fiercest Anger or
Revenge.

But of all the Passions, there is none more uneasy than Fear, and no Object
so apt to cause this as Death; but the Work of Righteousness continues Peace to
the Soul, by securing it from this: The Wicked are in this Regard the farthest
from any Peace, they own that Death cannot be avoided, they are ignorant when
it will happen, and yet never think of it till it is upon 'em: Then all the
Faculties of the Soul are in as great Confusion as a Town taken by Surprise,
and the stubborn obstinate Wretch sits him down, and expects the Worst in a
surly Despair: the more timorous sneak and cringe in Officious Superstition;
this upon a sudden Attack of Death; but if it comes on by Degrees, if they
reach old Age, what sad Spectacles of Woe are they! What Ruins of Vice appear
in every Limb! yet their greatest Hell is not visible, the Torments of the Mind
are far more insupportable.

But the Righteous feel nothing of all this; there can be no Fear where no
Guilt is, and for Death it self, they know that this is but the Passage to that
Eternity which is their Reward: How blessed and happy is he! How secure his
Innocence! Who reflecting upon one well-spent Day, can say, Return to thy Rest,
O my Soul, for the Lord has rewarded thee: It Is but doing thus for a little
while, and he may with as much Readiness and Joy lie down in the Grave.

The Life of a Good Christian ought to be a continual Contemplation upon Death;
for he that keeps this farthest Point in his Eye, shall never mistake his Way:
He that considers how soon his Body, tho it be fearfully and wonderfully made;
though he be never so Healthful or so Young, so Great or so Good; is by the
least Accident shaken into its Dust, will ever be in readiness; if Death come
never so unexpected, 'twill find him doing his Lords Will: but if he be
continued to a good old Age, his Body fails Regularly, because he lived so;
every Passion and Appetite grows less imperious, as every Sense decays, and the
Soul grows more sprightly and vigorous the nearer it is to its Separation. Nay
let us follow such a one to his last Minute, let us consider him as just
passing into the next World; if he have leisure to look back on this, what a
Blessed and Cheerful Prospect does his well spent Life afford him; how do his
Works of Righteousness rise to his View in Numerous and Goodly Order! There
where he sees how many Naked he has Clothed, how many Sick he has Visited, how
many Temptations he has Mortified, has he any thing to do think you but to
Comfort his Friends useless and unreasonable Sorrow? Or does any Passion move
him, unless it be a Holy Joy for the Nearness of Eternity? No, certainly, Mark
the perfect, and behold the upright; for whatever his Life is, it is certain
that the Death, the end of that man is Peace. Psalm. 37.37.

But it may be objected, that a Man may be so absolute an Atheist, and have so
seared a Conscience, as to be past feeling, past any Sense of Guilt, or Fear of
Death; such a Monster can scarce be fancied, but never known: the most
Speculative Atheist can get no farther than Incertainty as to a God and future
State, and how far incertainty in a matter of so great Importance can
contribute to a settled Peace of Mind, any one may guess, when what Pains
soever he shall take to Root up or Stifle these Notions, the Danger, the dismal
Consequence of being mistaken, will return often upon him, and let him choose
what Vice he pleases (for that is the modern way of Dispelling these Vapors, as
they call 'em) yet after the most industrious Debauch, this Qualm of Mind will
always follow; but more especially if any Calamity befalls him, what a Wretch
does he grow without Council or Courage; then however he has been entranced for
a Moment, the frightful Images of his former Wickedness return more powerfully,
and increasing still in Terror as Death draws on: There is no Peace, says my
God, unto the Wicked; the way of Peace they have not known in their Lives, and
therefore shall never find it at their Deaths.

V. The Work of Righteousness does not only promote Peace in the Act of doing
Well, but also by the memory of such Actions; by leaving such sweet impressions
upon the Soul, as bless us as often as we Reflect upon them with ever new and
everlasting, Pleasure. What Horror! Confusion and Dejection of Soul attends
the Reflections of an ill Conscience! When a Wretch considers how Perversely,
and Ingratefully he has neglected, or Despised the most gentle and gracious
means of Salvation; Fear, Sorrow, Shame, Anguish and Dsepair, Wrack and Torment
him: the Sense of an Offended God, His Love and Mercy Despised, His Justice and
Anger Provoked; no length of Time, no change of Place, can give him any Ease:
This is excellently Described in that dreadful threat. (Deuteronomy. 23, 65. etc.)
Thou shall find no Ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest; but the
Lord shall give thee trembling of Heart, and failing of Eyes, and sorrow of
Mind, and thy life shall hang in Doubt before thee; and thou shall fear day and
night: in the morning thou shall say would God it were evening, and in the
evening, thou shall say would God it were morning. So restless a Condition, so
far from any the least Peace is the wicked Man. And this is the farthest from
Remedy of any Evil, for other Afflictions Reason Cures, but Reason itself
promotes remorse upon ill Actions; gnawing upon the Soul to its Shame and
Confusion: For as they who have Agues or Fevers feel a more intense Heat or
Cold than those who dwell under the Pole or the Equinoctial: so the mind is
less affected with outward Accidents; but an ill Conscience! when it is Echoed
from within, I! none but I my self have been the cause of all this! what
Torture and Despair! Whereas on the contrary, the worker of Righteousness not
only enjoys the immediate Pleasure of his good Actions, but provides wisely
against Age, Adversity, and Death itself, and lays up continually Satisfaction
for Hereafter: Such Satisfaction as not only Reason promotes, but Revelation
Encourages by repeated Promises of the greatest Assistance and Reward:
Wherefore no Plenty of Riches, no Nobility of Blood, no Extent of Empire can
yield such Serenity and Calmness to Life as the Souls being free from ill
Actions; for when that Fountain of Action is preserved pure and clear; good
Deeds perpetually flowing from it, bless us with the sweetest Peace, and
fullest Happiness; make us look back upon Life with Pleasure, and forward upon
Death with Joy. Let us then be so far from doubting of the Torments hereafter,
or questioning the Eternity of them, as rather to be Astonished at the Divine
goodness in promising Immortal Joys, Immortal Happiness for our momentary
Obedience here, when we have so great, and so immediate a Reward as a good
Conscience!

But tho this may be so; yet, Can no outward Evils disturb this Peace of the
Mind? Will not the Malice of wicked Men, or the suddenness of great Afflictions
shake and disturb it? In answer to this I proceed to the other part of my Text,
The effect of Righteousness shall be Quietness and Assurance for Ever.

By the first of these is meant that the Work of Righteousness shall produce
Peace in regard of our Neighbor: this we are assured from the Scriptures, That
when a man's ways Please the Lord, he makes his enemies to be at peace with
him. (Prove. xvi. 7.) And that this is agreeable to Reason, will appear, if we
consider what it is that is most apt to Provoke or Please mankind, and the
Nature of Goodness or Righteousness in general. The great cause of Strise and
Contention is the Injustice that is offered to Men in their Persons, Estates or
Reputations, and that by Ambition, Covetousness or Detraction: Ambition is
generally the cause of the other two, for this being the thirst of Power; Power
consists in the having many others at Command, and that comes to pass either by
their necessary Dependence upon us for their Interest, or their voluntary
Service for Reward, and this is the Power of Riches; or else it consists in the
Reverence and Love which Men bear to Superior merit, and this is the Power of
Reputation. Both these Ambition endeavors to lessen in others, and Usurp for
it self by all kinds of Fraud and Injustice; and from the striving for these on
the one side, or endeavoring to keep 'em on the other, arise most Quarrels and
Divisions: But the worker of Righteousness makes no Enemies by these ways, but
is fair and open in all his Words and Actions; Impartial to Himself, and Just
to his Neighbor. Besides, that Love and Charity which is every where
inculcated in the Gospel, so quiets our Passions, so softens our Tempers,
causes such a generous neglect of Injuries, such a ready and watchful
disposition to Oblige, such a calmness and sweetness of Conversation, without
Offense to the Present, or Injury to the Absent; that a Righteous Man has no
Affronts to Revenge, because he gives none; and no Enemies to fear, because he
makes none: but on the contrary is loved and defended, because he is a general
Good, and because his Peace and Happiness is every Man's Interest.

But further: this is so through the nature of Goodness, or Righteousness in
general, which uses of it self either to prevail upon the best Tempers, or to
Awe the Worst.

The Soul being most worked upon by Sensible Objects, the power of Example is
very Great in the doing Good as well as Evil. There is a Secret manner of
Conviction in good Actions, which persuades more than all the force of Reason
or Charms of Eloquence. Something in Human Nature rises and opposes it self
against Arguments, especially when they come from an Equal, not but that we
could be contented to entertain Truth could we find it out our selves; but we
can seldom endure that Superiority which the Discovery of it seems to give
others over us, no not in matters of the greatest importance, of Salvation it
self.

But when the light of our good Actions shines before Men, it pleases without
suspicion; it wins insensibly upon their Souls, and makes 'em to Glorify, with
us, our Father which is in Heaven.

And if Righteousness has not this effect upon stubborn Minds, yet it strikes
'em at least with awe and terror. The most ignorant People have very Early
Notions of Good and Evil, and if these be any thing improved by Education,
opened and confirmed by Reasoning, it is impossible that they should be so
entirely rooted out by any Habit of Vice, but that there must remain enough of
the Knowledge of Good to apprehend what is so in others, and regard it
accordingly. There are many Instances in History how Robbers and Murderers
have suddenly held their Hands at the sight of single and disarmed Men of known
Goodness; and how raging Multitudes have been restrained by the Presence of Men
of Public Worth, as if, as S. Chrysostom says of Daniels Lions, ((...) T. 5.
p. 17.) they saw the Venerable and Majestic Image of God Resplendent in him,
they beheld the same Characters of Goodness which were visible in Adam before
his Fall, when every Beast approached to receive its name from him; and this
has been particularly Observable in good Magistrates, or great Persons, who
scatter evil with their Eyes, as Solomon says Elegantly; their very looks being
sufficient to damp and chill the most successful Impudence, and Habitual
Wickedness.

But Lastly, Tho this should not be always so, but good Men may sometimes
suffer under the Malice of evil Men: and not only so; but tho they may be
afflicted with any other Calamity whatsoever, yet the Work of Righteousness is
a sufficient defense against this, in that Assurance which it always carries
with it. This consists in an Absolute Trust in God upon account of his
Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, and in a joyful Resignation of our selves to his
good Pleasure; this is the effect of Righteousness as it is the product of a
good Conscience. Beloved, if our Hearts Condemn us not, says S. John, then have
we Confidence toward God; therefore no Affliction can disturb the Peace or
Quiet of the Righteous; keep thy Eye fixed in humble Confidence upon the God of
Peace and nothing shall offend thee: Thou will keep him in perfect Peace whose
mind is staid on thee, because he trusted in thee. (Isaiah xxvi. 3.) And what
is the ground of this Assurance; the knowing that God will not tempt 'em; try
'em; farther then they are able to bear, and the shortness of such Trials: we
no sooner hear that many are the Troubles of the Righteous, (Psalm xxxiv. 19.)
but it follows immediately, The Lord will deliver him out of all.

But then again, the Prophet adds for ever: the Effect of Righteousness shall
be quiet, and Assurance for ever. This is that which makes the Righteous Man's
Joy complete, and which settleth his Hope, and confirms his Faith; all other
Assurance is vain and finite, that, in God infinite as His Being: What
Confidence, alas! in Man, whose Days are a Shadow that flies away, their
Breath goes forth, they return to Earth, and all their Thoughts, their
Projects perish: This is the end of that busy Creature, who is so ingenious in
Disturbing his Neighbor and himself. But thou, O God, art from Everlasting,
and thy Years shall not fail; thou art God blessed for ever, and thy
Righteousness extends to Childrens Children, even to all Generations.

This is that Assurance for ever, which supports such as work Righteousness in
the Day of Trouble, and in the Day of Death: All Evils are dreadful only as
they threaten Death; but what is this, in all its utmost Horror, to a good
Conscience? They who believe that all things happen by Chance, and that nothing
is after Death, may be frighted and alarmed at whatever disturbs or shortens
their only Being. But they who believe another World, may enjoy the fullest
Quiet in the greatest Afflictions, yes, when the blackest Calamities thicken
dreadfully upon us; this sweet Assurance breaks through all, and shows us beyond
'em the Prospect of Heaven opening still wider and wider to our view, and the
Son of God Himself encouraging us to be faithful unto Death (but unto Death,
which is never far off in Prosperity, but which is still nearer, the greater
the Adversity is) Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of
Life.

Therefore with what an equal and deliberate Courage, with what a generous
Indifferency, as to Life or Death, does the Good Christian bear himself; he
disdains to fly to a Grave in the greatest Calamites; and yet whenever his Lord
calls, he readily resigns his Dust and Ashes; He gladly quits that Body which
is subject to so many Dangers and Diseases, to receive it again in a short
time; to receive it so changed, so improved, so spiritualized, as never to be
sick, never to be tempted, never to be laid down more, but to remain with Him
for ever, who is the first and the last, who lives and was dead, and is now
alive for evermore.

FINIS.

