The Address of above Twenty thousand of the Loyal Protestant Apprentices of
London: Humbly presented to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, September. 2.
1681. the Day appointed by Act of Parliament to be Yearly observed in
Commemoration of the Burning that Famous Protestant City by Papists, Jesuits,
and Tories, Anno 1666. With some of the Reasons that Induced the said Adressers
to this Application.
MVch Clamor, many Scandals have been no less industriously than maliciously
raised, to misrepresent this Modest Address: Therefore here it is published, and
left to the Censure of every Judicious Peruser. So far it was from being
originally set on foot by Faction, or since carried on by any sinister
Practices; that, on the contrary, nothing swayed with the Subscribers, but a
just sense of their Duty. For,

1. Some few of their Fellow Apprentices having lately presented an Address to
His Majesty, the Caresses and Favors they received puffed them to the Vanity of
boasting themselves the only Loyal Young Men of this City: Such a Scandal to
so great a City, and such an Affront to all the rest of the Apprentices
thereof, that they lay under a kind of necessity to vindicate themselves by
some public Testimony of their Loyalty.

2. The Tendency of that other Address seemed to reflect on Parliaments, the
Bulwarks (under His Sacred Majesty) of English Liberties: And this was noised
to be the general Sense of all the London-Apprentices. How reasonable was it
therefore to check such an Aspersion, by declaring the just Veneration ought to
be conserved by every true Englishman for those August and Honorable
Assemblies.

3. We are cast into an Age wherein the long-exploded and detestable Idolatries
of the Church of Rome, by an Hellish Plot, and variety of Sham-Plots, daily
broached, threaten once more to invade us. And what in such a Juncture could be
more necessary, than for so many thousand Young Men unanimously to declare
under their Hands, their detestation of those Abominations; and that their
Blood shall not be so dear to them, as the Preservation of the true Protestant
Religion, and the Legal Liberties of Englishmen; which as they had the
Happiness to be born to, so they hope to transmit them entire to their
Posterity?

4. As for the Method of gaining Subscriptions to this Address, it is well known
to have been candid and open: No Masters prompting their Servants, No Men of
Bulk and Title stickling, or over-persuading any; but every one left free and
voluntry. On the contrary, they lay under great Discouragements, both by
Printed Lies, and Lies by Word of Mouth; tearing of several Papers by Rash
Lads, instigated to such Insolences, whereby some Hundreds, nay, Thousands of
Hands were lost: And yet as under all Provocationsnothing rude or undecent was
returned, so the disproportion between the Subscribers of this and the other
late Address is remarkable, theirs not amounting to above 2000, or, the most
that themselves can pretend to,3000; and these to above 20000; In no respect
for Quality of Birth, Breeding, or Understanding, inferior to the others; not
to mention Advantages of Civility, due Sense of Religion, and Moral
Accomplishments. The Address it self follows in these Words.

To the Right Honorable Sir Patience Ward Knight, Lord Mayor of the Honorable
City of London.
The Humble Address of many Thousand Loyal Apprentices of the same City, whose
Names are hereunto subscribed,
In all humility shows,
THat as we are justly sensible of our Happiness, in being born under the
enjoyment of the Protestant Religion, so Excellent a Government, and so
Gracious a King, to whose Service we shall ever be ready to sacrifice our
Lives; so have we continually applied ^ur selves to discharge our Duties in our
proper Callings, without presuming to intermeddle in Affairs beyond our Sphere
or Concernment.

But being fully satisfied, both by His Majesty's frequent Proclamations, the
unanimous Votes of several Parliaments, and the notoriousness of Fact, That for
diverse years past there has been, and still is, a Devilish Plot carried on by
the Papists, against the Sacred Life of our Sovereign (whom God preserve), and
to subvert the Protestant Religion, and the Government Established. In which
horrid Practices the Conspirators have always appeared most Active and Insolent
during the Intervals of Parliaments; and from thence, and the continuing Hopes
of a Popish Successor, take occasion with greater Confidence to push on their
Fatal Designs.

Observing likewise, That amongst the many late Addresses, there has been One
promoted in the Names of some few of our Condition in this Honorable City,
which now is represented as the Act and Sense of the Generality of Apprentices;
although the far greater part never joined therein, as fearing lest the same
might seem of a tendency dishonorable to Parliaments, whose Constitution we
reverence, and humbly apprehend their Counsels highly necessary in such a
Juncture.

Wherefore, though out of an awful Respect we presume not to approach His
Sacred Majesty, yet we cannot but think it our Duty to declare to your
Lordship, (the Chief Magistrate under Him of this Honorable City) and to all
the World, That we shall never be behind any of our Fellow-Apprentices in
Demonstrations of Loyalty to His Sacred Majesty, even to the last drop of our
Blood, whenever His Service shall require it, against any Traitors or Rebels
whatsoever: And also to assure your Lordship, That as we do (and through God's
Grace ever shall) abhor Popery, and all its Bloody Traitorous Practices; so we
do utterly disapprove and dislike any such Proceedings from Private Persons as
tend to reproach Parliaments; but do unanimously, with one Heart, and with one
Voice, express our Satisfaction in, and Thanks for The Humble Petition and
Address of your Lordship and the Common Council, presented to His Majesty in
May last, and since approved of in Common Hall, for the Assembling and Sitting
of a Parliament.

That the God of Heaven may ever Bless and Preserve His Sacred Majesty, and
your Lordship, and this Great and Honorable City; and grant that your
Successors in this weighty Trust may imitate your Lordships Piety and Zeal for
the Protestant Religion, and His Majesty's Service, shall ever be the daily
Prayers of us His Majesty's Humble, Faithful, Loyal, and Obedient Subjects.

THis Address was this Second of September presented to the Right Honorable
the Lord Mayor, by a young Gentleman of good Quality, attended with a
convenient number of the Subscribers, who having modestly represented the
Reasons of this Application, did likewise take notice of the base and false
Rumors, which suggested as if the same was promoted by Dissenters; assuring his
Lordship of the contrary, and that himself, and all the rest, (as far as his
Knowledge could reach) were such as could boast of nothing more than their
being true (though unworthy) Sons of the Church of England.

To which his Lordship was pleased to answer, That he was glad to see so great
a Number of Young Men of the City thus cordially express their due Loyalty to
His Majesty, and Zeal for the Protestant Established Religion.

LONDON, Printed for William Ingol the Elder. 1681.


