THE Life and Death OF MAHUMED, The AUTHOR of the Turkish Religion. BEING AN
ACCOUNT OF His Tribe, Parents, Birth, Name, Education, Marriages, Filthiness of
Life, Alcoran, First Proselytes, Wars, Doctrines, Miracles, Advancement, etc.

By L. ADDISON, D. D. One of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary, and Author of
The Present State of the Jews.

Imprimatur.

Geo. Thorp.



LONDON: Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1679. And are to be sold at the Bible in Westminster Hall.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOSEPH WILLIAMSON, Principal Secretary of State,
One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
Right Honorable,
I Here present your Honor with a short and plain Account of the only great
Impostor, that ever continued so long prosperous in the World. The
consideration of whose Mean Original, Sudden Progress, and Present Grandeur,
may justly awaken all Christian Magistrates into a timely suppression of False
Teachers, though never so despicable in their first Appearance, lest (like
Mahumed) they second Heresy with Force, and propagate Enthusiasm with Conquest.

If you can have leave from your Great Affairs to peruse the following Papers,
your Honor will find the Account they give of Mahumed and his Doctrine, to be
free from many ridiculous but usual Stories concerning them both; which the
present Mahumedans laugh at, as the malicious Inventions of the Enemies of
their Prophet. And though many odd things are here set down of this Impostor,
yet they are all owned by his Sectaries, and urged as proofs of his Divine
Mission.

But that for which to my self I seem least accountable, is the giving your
Honor the trouble of this Address; which indeed you have drawn upon your self,
by your too great Candor and Generosity toward former Instances of this Nature.
Besides, Accounts of this kind ought in my judgment to be presented to Persons
who have Abilities as well to Correct what is Erroneous, as to Patronize the
Truth.

Accept this, SIR, as a sincere Testimony and Confession of my Gratitude and
Affection, and you oblige me to be for ever

Your Honors Most Humble and most Obliged Servant, LANCELOT ADDISON.

TO THE READER.
I Have taken some care fairly to report the things relating to Mahumed and his
Doctrine, and to free both from many fabulous passages have been long current
in their Story. That I have made the same public, was with no other purpose
than to let you know what manner of person Mahumed was, with whose Cursed
Doctrine the greatest part of Mankind is at this very day so egregiously
befooled.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. OF the Name of Mahumed, and the pretended Prophecies declaring his
coming. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of Mahumeds Pedigree, Parents, and Tribe, etc. p. 6.
Chap. 3. Of Mahumeds Birth and Education, etc. p. 12. Chap. 4. Of Cadigha's
Dream, how Mahumed became her Servant. How he was sent into Syria by the
Caravan; what happened to him in his Journey. p. 19. Chap. 5. of Mahumeds second
Marriages, filthiness of life; Revelations pretended to justify his looseness.
p. 26. Chap. 7. Of Mahumeds retirement, and how he began his Sect. p. 31. Chap.
8. How Mahumed received from Gabriel the first Chapters of the Alcoran. p. 36.
Chap. 9. Of the Alcoran, the circumstances of its Composure and Collection,
etc. p. 39. Chap. 10. Of the Honor given to the Alcoran. p. 47. Chap. 11. Of
the Sune, its Name, Contents, and Circumstances of its Collection, etc. p. 53.
Chap. 12. Of the first Proselytes of Mahumed, which he gained during the time
he held a Conventicle in Mecca. p. 58. Chap. 13. How Mahumed was forced to
leave Mecca, and fly to Medina. Of his disputes with the Jews there. A short
account of the Hegira. p. 63. Chap. 14. Of Mahumeds first Wars. p. 70. Chap.
15. Of Mahumeds Death, and many remarkable passages about it. p. 78. Chap. 16.
Containing some more remarkable Doctrines taught by Mahumed, p. 83. Chap. 17.
Of the things conducing to the propagation of Mahumeds Heresy. And first of
his carriage toward the Christians. p. 101. Chap. 18. A Copy of the League
Mahumed made with the Christians, whose Original was found in a Monastery on
Mount Carmel, near Mount Libanus, a days journey from Mecca, and (as some say)
was sent to the Kings Library in France. p. 104. Chap. 19. The opinions of some
Learned Men concerning this Covenant. p. 113. Chap. 20. That Mahumeds carriage
to the Jews and Arabians might be a help to nourish up his Infant Sect. p. 117.
Chap. 21. Of Mahumeds Paradises. p. 120. Chap. 22. Of Mahumeds Miracles. p.
122. Chap. 23. A short view of the state of Christianity at the time Mahumed
began his Heresy. How the divisions in Christian Religion might help up
Mahumedism. p. 126. Chap. 24. A farther enquiry into the things conducing to
Mahumeds advancement, etc. p. 132.
CHAP. I.
Of the Name of Mahumed, and the pretended Prophecies declaring his coming.

SOme men (says Rabbi Jose) have brave Names, but mean Actions; some brave
Actions, and mean Names; and some both brave Names and Actions. In the first
number Mahumed may not unfitly be reckoned, who in excellency of Name, was
second to none, and yet in depravity of Manners had few equals. For we are
assured by the Learned in the Arabian Language, that Mahumed comes of a word
signifying Praise and Honor; and that this Notation of his Name, was but a
presage of his future Actions, whereby he merited and purchased both. Others
say, Mahumed imports Thanksgiving; which is to be understood, with respect to
their duty of Gratitude, who believe he procured great benefits for them. And
that there might want nothing of lucky Abodement in the Name of this Great
Impostor, some of his flattering Doctors Paraphrase it by A Man of Desires,
which in Latin we may call Desiderius. And this notice of the Name they
confirm, by a Sacrilegious application of the 7 verse of Hag. 2. to filthy
Mahumed, which was solely intended of the most Holy Jesus.

As to the Writing and Pronunciation of this Name, there wants not variety,
both among the Greeks and Latins: some spelling it Machumet, and Machumeth; and
others Mohummed, and Muhammud: but as to the Moors (whom we are chiefly to
follow in this matter) those of Barbary both Write and Pronounce it, Ahmet, a
Name familiarly given to their Sons, as votive of their Virtues, and
commemorative of their Prophet. But though the Name of Mahumed, or Ahmet, be
now of very ordinary and common usage among the Musulmin: yet it was of old a
very great secret, and not lawful for any to bear, whom they did not conjecture
might prove to be that Prophet, whom (they now say) was ever expected by them.
And herein the Muhumedans produce a Tradition, which Age has made Authentic
among them, How that there were but three Men who were ever known by the Name
of Mahumed, before their Prophet; to whom their Parents gave this Name, in
hopes they might prove that Apostle of God, whom they expected. Now that the
Arabians had a Tradition, that they should have an Apostle sent unto them by
the Name of Mahumed, seems not obscurely intimated by that severe Warning the
false Prophet gave his followers, in the sixth Chapter of the Alcoran (styled
the Chapter of Arrah) where Mahumed having commended those who fought in rank
and file for his Law, he bids them, Remember, that Moses said to his people, Ye
shall do me (that is, Mahumed) no harm: ye shall know in the end, that I am the
Messenger of God. But God seduced them from the right way, when they departed
from obedience to his Commandments, he judges the wicked. These are the
express words of the Alcoran. But lest the single testimony of Moses should not
be sufficient to procure belief to what he had said, he produces Christ,
speaking to the same purpose, Remember, that Jesus the Son of Mary said, O ye
Children of Israel, I am to you the Apostle of God, who has sent me to verify
and confirm the old Testament, and to declare unto you, that there shall come a
Prophet after me, whose Name shall be Mahumed, (says Die Ryers French
Translation) whose Name is Achmed (says another Translation of the Alcoran)
that is, Mahumed. Now if the old Arabians had not by some blind Tradition been
taught to expect a Prophet under the Name we now speak of, it would have been
infinitely below the cunning and sagacity of this great Cheat, to have cited
sayings of Moses, and Jesus, to a purpose of which they before had never had
the least footstep or intimation. And I am induced to believe, that all this
was occasioned by some Jewish corrupt Gloss concerning the Messiah, and a
mistake about the promise of sending the Holy Ghost: for to this day, the
Mahumedans apply the promised Mission of the Paraclete, to relate unto Mahumeds
coming, and that in him it was certainly fulfilled. And that this may not be
looked upon as a singularity of mine own, we find those Learned and Ingenious
persons, who have given us an account of the Mahumedan Doctors in this
particular, do always bring them in confirming the truth of Mahumeds Prophetic
Office, by applying to him, what our Savior spoke of the Holy Ghost, St. John
14. 16, 17. Though it is manifest to every attentive and sober Discerner, that
there is not in that Sacred Text the least ground whereon to build such an
extravagant conjecture. But yet we cannot deny the great subtilty of Mahumed,
in making such pretended promises to have their accomplishment in his own
message; as also in making use of a dark Tradition, received of the Arabians,
concerning their promise of an Apostle. And I take the crafty management of the
said Tradition, to have been the first Engine of raising Mahumed to the
reputation of a Divine Messenger. Though it cannot be denied, but he was a Man
of so great assurance, that if he had not been assisted with any such
Tradition, his Ambition and Hypocrisy would sufficiently have tempted him to
aspire both to a Prince and a Prophet, as we may show in due place.

But yet for all this, I find not Mahumed very forward in justifying his
pretenses upon the score of Predictions concerning his coming, though his
Doctors are very zealous in asserting his Apostleship, upon the account of
Prophecies, among which they reckon the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. 2. The Lord
came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shined forth from Mount
Paran. The Mahumedan Doctors from hence conclude of a triple manifestation of
God to Man: First, by Moses at Mount Sinai; Secondly, by Christ at Mount Seir
in Palestine; and lastly, at Paran by Mahumed, which (they say) is a great Hill
near Mecca. By the first, he sent the Law; by the second, the Gospel; by the
third, the Alcoran. The same Mahumedan Writers most Blasphemously abuse the
second verse of the 50 Psalm, to the coming of their Apostle; because in the
Syriack there is found the word Mahmud, which they absurdly, and against all
sense of the words, interpret Mahumed. Though either in the Hebrew Text, or in
the signification of the Syriack word, there is not the least bottom to support
so wild a fancy; as Men excellently versed in both Languages have made it
plain. But not to pursue this remark any farther, I shall dismiss it with
observing, that the great Parasites of Mahumed, according to his threefold
state, assign him a triple Name; and that during his abode upon Earth, he was
called Mahumed; and in Paradise, Alvatrasim; but ascending thence into Heaven,
he was there saluted by the Name of Achmed. For an account of which variation,
I leave the Reader to Mahumeds wise Interpreters.

CHAP. II.
Of Mahumeds Pedigree, Parents, and Tribe, etc.

HAving (in the antecedent Chapter) with equal brevity and plainness, set down
what more egregiously imported the Name of Mahumed, and intimated the Holy
Scriptures that are forced to insinuate his being designed for a Prophet; I
shall endeavor, with the same perspicuity and shortness, to give an account of
his Parentage. And not to engage in the differences which in this concern are
to be met with, between the Saracen and Christian stories; I shall through this
whole discourse chiefly adhere to the former, as being in all likelihood more
competent to furnish us with Mahumeds Legend; whose rise we shall take from the
place of his Nativity, which is not a little controverted by the Persian and
Arabian Writers; both being desirous to have him spring from their own Nation,
and to be honored with his Genealogy. But the prevailing opinion makes him a
Native of Mecca, a known Town in Arabia the Happy. Where his Pedigree is
unanimously derived from Ismael, who according to Jo. Andreas Maurus, married
an Ethiopian Idolatress, by whom he had Twelve Children; namely, Nabayath,
Caydar, or Kedar, Abdael, Nabsam, Masna, Doama, Massa, Hadab, Thema, Jackour,
Naphis, Redma. These being dispersed through Arabia, Armenia, Persia, took
after their Mother, and became great Patrons and Propagators of Idolatry. Some
of them Worshipped the Sun, others the Moon, others Fire, and others the Angels.
But one of the Brothers is said to have fallen so greatly enamored of the Tree
Betulamar, that he made it his God; and another is said to have been no less
transported with zeal and affection toward an old Idol, called Bohinun. But
those of their Relations who kept their Paternal Habitations at Mecca, remained
constant Votaries to the Idol Allech Alleze; of which in due place. But to
proceed. Ismaels Children being dispersed, as aforesaid, his second Son Caydar
returned, and settled at Mecca, (as most assure us) where his Posterity
continued two thousand eight hundred years; for so long the Mahumedans derive
their Prophets descent from this Caydar. About which period, there happened to be
born one Abdalla, who by a general agreement of the Saracen Histories, is
concluded to have been Mahumeds Father. Abdalla signifies, (say the Moors) The
servant of God; among whom it is an usual Name, and often given to the
Christian Renegado's, as the signification of the happiness of their
Conversion, as they vainly imagine. This Abdalla was sorely persecuted (says
Elmacinus) by the Jews, because he was a very warm and sturdy assertor of
Idolatry. He was the Son of Abdolmutleb; who, in a fit of zeal, is said to have
vowed to sacrifice him to God, if he should be the Father of ten Children; or,
succeed happily in digging the Fountain Zemzem. But Abdolmutleb having obtained
his request, was very loath to sacrifice his Abdalla; whereupon, he resolved to
commute, and redeem him with an Hundred Camels. Abdalla being thus delivered
from the rash vow of his Father, was at yeats of Maturity married to one
Hemina, the Daughter of Vahebus, the Son of Abdamonasus. But here it must be
confessed, that there has been no small difference about Hemina's Parents; some
making her to be the Daughter of Hayab, and Halima, who dwelt not far from
Mecca. But there are some, who make Hemina to be the Daughter of one Guabbin, a
perverse Jew; but Jo. Andreas Maurus, who had been a Moresco Alfaqui, or
Priest, and had no doubt fair opportunities to be informed of the descent of
Mahumed, though he makes Hemina the Daughter of Guabbin, yet he speaks not a
word of his Religion. The European story of Mahumed makes him descended of a
Pagan Idolater, and a Pervicacious Jew; though I am inclined to a contrary
opinion, from the Antipathy between the old Arabians and the Jews; which was so
irreconcilable, that it can scarce be fancied they should take one another in
Wedlock. And this antipathy arose, especially from the different nature of
their Religious Rites; the one being punctual observers of Unity in the
Godhead, and the other given up to Polytheism. Besides, both the old Arabian,
and the Jew, were at that time equally cautious not to mingle and confuse their
Tribes by inter-Marriages one with another, and much more with those of a
different Tongue and Religion; which tempts me to believe, that the story of
Mahumeds Mother being a Jew, is fabulous, and without warrant. Nor is their
Tradition any more Authentic, who make him of a very mean and contemptible
Extraction: for the Arabic Authors, Albunasar and Elmacinus, make him not
ignobly descended; and Erpenius calls it a vulgar error to opine otherwise.
It Is true, Mahumeds Family was sunk very low, and had a long time been under
the great inconveniences of a narrow Fortune: but this had not forfeited the
Honor of their Descent, or lost them the reputation and credit of Nobility
among their Tribes. In whose propagation, and distinction, no Nation have been
ever more scrupulous and careful, than the old Arabian. Having been ever
vigilant, lest by Foreign Marriages their Tribes and Genealogies should
receive disturbance and interruption. And therefore either out of imitation, or
emulation of the Jews, they preserved the Law of Marrying within their several
and distinct Casts.

Hottinger tells us, out of Ibu Chalican, a famous Arabian Author, that Eminal,
the Prophets Mother (upon whom (says Chalican) be Peace, and the Prayers of
God) sprang of the Koraishites: where I cannot omit to tell my Reader out of
Hottinger, as he does me out of Ibu Chalican, that it was the Custom of the
Arabians, to signalize their Tribes for some Vice, Virtue, or Skill, etc. Thus
the Tribe of Thoal was known by the Name of Good Marks-men; insomuch, that one
who drew an Arrow well, was Proverbially said to be as good an Archer as
Thoalus. The Tribe of the Garae's, by reason of their numerous Riches, were
called the Wealthy. But the Koraishites, from whom Mahumed descended, was known
by the Title of Noble. Now among the Arabians, the Koraishites, and Nabatae's
made up the extremities; the one being esteemed the most Honorable, and the
other the most Vile among the Tribes: whereupon, they used by way of Proverb,
to signify the lowest and highest rank of Men, by saying, From the Nabatae's
to the Koraishites: from the later, Mahumed undoubtedly derives his Parentage;
and from them too he received his greatest opposition, none more stubbornly
resisting his designs, as scorning any of their Lineage should set up for an
Impostor and Tyrant; for so they accounted all who spoke against their Idol,
and under the pretense of Religion sought for Empire.

CHAP. III.
Of Mahumeds Birth and Education, etc.

HAving taken this short prospect of Mahumeds Pedigree, our next step is to his
Conception and Birth; for the Arabians are so punctual in his Legend, that they
tell us the time of his Conception, and that it was upon a Friday, in the Month
Dulhajiah, when God (say they) transmitted all his secret light by Abdulla,
into the Womb of Hemina. And albeit we meet with no discord as to the Day and
Month of Mahumeds Conception, yet Writers are not so well agreed as to the Year
of his Birth, which some place in the 571, others in the 570, but the most in
the 620 year of Christianity. And notwithstanding this difference among
Chronologists about the date of the false Prophets Nativity, yet the general
opinion of the Saracens makes him to be born upon a Monday, and that his
Nativity was attended with many Miracles, whereof Seven were more egregiously
remarkable, and follow in this order.

1. His Mother Emina was free from all those pains when she bore him, which are
incident to all other Women in Childbirth.

2. She felt no anxiety, nor trouble of Mind, nor apprehension of danger, as is
usual to the rest of her Sex in that condition.

3. Mahumed being pulled from his Mother, fell upon his face, by that humble
posture to testify his Worship to God; and while he was thus prostrate, he
cried out, O Mother! and then lifting up his head, he spoke these words
distinctly; I declare, That there is no God, except the one true God, and that
I am his Legate.

4. Mahumed was born Circumcised, as Adam, according to the Jews, was created.

5. From the minute of Mahumeds Birth, the Devil and his Angels were excluded
Heaven. Now the meaning of this Miracle, depends upon this story: The Moors
believe that the Devils were wont to ascend into Heaven, and to hear the
private discourses of the Holy Angels, and to steal away their sayings; but
when their Apostle Mahumed was Born, they were forbidden to ascend any longer.
Upon this sudden exclusion, they repair to Ablisus the old Devil, and made him
acquainted with what had happened; and how they were debarred all future entrance
into Heaven: upon which tidings, he ordered them to compass the Earth, from
East to West, and to observe what new thing had last fallen out. They obeyed his
command, and journeyed up and down, till they came to Mecca, where they came to
an House that was environed with Angels, out of which a fire ascended up to
Heaven, and the Angels likewise in a contiguous order. Upon this discovery,
they returned to Ablisus, whom they told what they had seen; who at the hearing
of the story, gave a sudden and fearful shriek, saying, A sign is gone out,
whereby we are admonished, that God will have mercy upon the Sons of Men, and
therefore we are forbid to ascend Heaven.

6. His Nurse Alima had been always dry of one Breast; but she no sooner began
to give Mahumed suck, but it was as full of Milk as the other.

7. At his Birth, a voice was heard from the four corners of Caaba; from the
first was heard, Preach, the truth is come, and no lie will appear, or return.
From the second it was said, Now comes an Apostle of your selves, with whom is
the mighty. From the third was heard, Light, and a manifest Book is sent unto
you from God. And from the fourth corner issued these words, O Prophet, we have
sent thee to be a Witness, Evangelist, and Monitor.

These are the seven Wonders, which are confidently maintained to have happened
at Mahumeds Birth; in whose larger relation so many Blasphemies are to be met
with, preferring and extolling this wicked Miscreant above our most blessed
Savior, that I was afraid to give them a Transcription. But it need not create
our wonder, that the Mahumedan Doctors should be thus large in the Encomiums of
their Apostle, when as strange things are attested of St. Francis, by the
Friars of his Order; and also by the Dominicans, in praise of their Founder.
But weary of this palpable trash, I leave it, to come to the time of Mahumeds
Birth; which I find generally fixed by the Moors, in the 620 year of our
Salvation. His Father dyed (say some) within two years after he was born; and
others affirm, that he was a Posthumus, and that before he was two years old,
he was left an Orphan: but his Mother, tender of her Sons welfare, and by the
fatal tokens of her Distemper, perceiving a few days would put her in an utter
incapacity of looking after his Education, she presently sent for his Nurse
Lala Alima, to whose care she most affectionately recommended young Mahumed,
whom at the same time she bequeathed to Hanza, her Husbands Brother, who bore
the charge of his breeding, till he was sixteen years old. And indeed, the
Poverty of Mahumeds Parents had left him so devoid of subsistence, that if his
Uncle had not taken him into his Tuition, he had certainly (as we now speak)
come to the Parish. But Hanza having brought him up to such years of
discernment, as he was fit to shift for himself; and being not able, or
unwilling to be at farther charge with his Nephew, he exposed him to sale in
the open Market; where one Abdael Mutalib, liking the complexion of the youth,
bought him of his Uncle. By his new Patron, say some, he was at first employed
in very inferior Offices; till Abdael Mutalib perceiving in him a more then
ordinary Ingenuity, and sharpness of Wit, raised him to employments more
agreeable to his Temper. And being a Merchant, sent him to negotiate his
Affairs abroad, and by the first Caravan or Cafila, dispatched him his Factor;
in which capacity he so well acquitted himself, that he no less advanced his
Masters Trafique, then his own Reputation. In this way of business he continued
till he was 25 years of age; at which time his Master dyed, and Mahumed managed
his concerns so well, that some say he succeeded him both in his Trade and Bed.
For through carefulness in his Mistresses businesses, say some; or through
Sorceries, say others, he so gained upon her affections, as that at last she
took him for her Husband. This Woman's Name, say the common stories of Mahumed,
was Gadisha, of the same Tribe with himself, and one who was both very
beautiful and wealthy.

And though what has now been spoken concerning Mahumeds Education and
Marriage, has passed very current in the Europaean Accounts of him; yet I find
it much otherwise related out of the Saracen Writers of his Life: of which,
take this short report.

Mahumeds Father dyed two Months before he was Born; and his Mother, when he
was six years of age: his Uncle Abdolmutleb received him into his tuition upon
his Mothers death, who survived her about two years; and he dying, Mahumed fell
into the care of his Uncle Abutabeb, with whom he lived till he was fit to be
disposed of in Marriage: but both his own, and Unkles fortunes, were at that
time so low, that they wanted wherewith (according to the ancient custom) to
purchase him a Wife. Whereupon, Abutaleb, and his Wife Atechna, resolved to
send him abroad with the Caravan that went for Syria, and to entrust him with
the management of a small Adventure; hoping by this means to lay the beginning
of his future welfare. And they were the more inclined thus to put their Nephew
into the World, by reason of his inclination to Merchandise; as also that they
saw in him such a composed Government of himself, as promised him a fair
acceptance with whomsoever he should happen to converse. But how Mahumed
performed his journey into Syria, and what therein befell him, we shall sum up
in the next Chapter, and conclude this with two Miracles that happened to him
when a Child. When Mahumed was with his Nurse Alima, and about four years old,
going with his Nurses Sons into the field to fetch home the Cows (says his
famous Legendary Abunazar) the Angel Gabriel came unto him in the likeness of a
Man clothed with a snow-white Garment; and taking him by the hand, led him
behind a little hill, where with a razor he opened the Child's breast, and took
out his Heart, and let out of it a small quantity of black water; which,
according to the Moors, is the matter by which the Devil tempts Men. From whose
temptations Mahumed was for ever delivered, after the Angel had taken away this
Core. This being done, Gabriel put the Boys Heart into its place, and the Wound
immediately closed and healed up. Another passage (which Abunazar calls a
Miracle) was, that of the Monk Bohira; who, as Mahumed came to Bozra, went
forth to meet him, and spoke openly, how that some great thing (pointing at
Mahumed) would be done by that Boy: and that his fame should spread from East
to West. And the Monk having said thus, Mahumed (says his Legend) was covered
with a Cloud, to the astonishment of all that beheld him. I shall not remark
any thing upon these two stories, but leave it to the judgment of every Reader.
Only give me leave to take notice, that whether such things really happened, or
not, it matters not much, while they are confidently believed by the
Mahumedans, and entertained as no frail arguments to prove the excellency of
their Prophet.

CHAP. IV.
Of Cadigha's Dream; how Mahumed became her servant. How he was sent into Syria
by the Caravan; what happened to him in his Journey.

HAving heard how Mahumed was under the Tutorage of his Uncle Abutaleb, and his
Aunt Atechna; and how they were unable to prefer him, by reason of the
narrowness of their fortunes; as likewise of their intent to furnish him with
an Adventure to go with the Cafila into Syria: my Author tells me, that the
better to equip him for that journey, they resolved to place him with one
Cadigha, a Woman of singular probity, and one observed to be very succesful in
her Trading into Syria, whither she was shortly to dispatch a Caravan. To this
Gentlewoman Abutabeb and Atechna addressed themselves in the behalf of their
Nephew; expressing a great desire to have him go as her Servant into Syria.
Cadigha accepted their profer, having thereunto been disposed by a Vision, or
Dream, which was thus: Cadigha being one night in her bed, in a Vision, saw the
Sun descend from Heaven, and entering into her House; whose splendour so diffused
it self, that not a House in Mecca but therewith was enlightened. Cadigha
awakening, began to ruminate upon the Vision, and being therewith not a little
startled, communicated it to her Uncle Varka, who being a great expounder of
Dreams, gave hers this Interpretation: viz. That in the last days a Prophet
should come, who was to be her Husband; concerning whom, Cadigha asked her
Uncle of what City he should be? who answered, Of Mecca. Of what Tribe? Of the
Caraishites. Of what Family? Of the Haschims. What is his Name? Mahumed. These
things were much noised abroad; and coming to the knowledge of Abutaleb, and
Atechna, did much heighten their expectation of their Cousin, in whom all the
abovesaid circumstances did concenter. And some say, that this was the occasion
of their desire to place him with Cadigha, and of her receiving him into her
service. But she suppressed her design to Marry him, till she might see his
management in the Syrian journey, whither she resolved to send him. Yet as an
earnest of her respect and affection, she gave him double wages, and some other
testimony of her good liking; which was granted to none of those who went the
same journey with more considerable trust. For Mahumed is thought to have had
no higher employment in the Caravan, than to drive the Camels. Abutaleb, not a
little elevated with Cadigha's grant to entertain his Nephew, instantly had him
to her house, enjoining him fidelity, diligence, and obsequiousness in his
service; as the most probable means to advance him in his Mistris's favor. When
Mahumed came to Cadigha's, he sat down at the door, and fell very pensive; the
tears flowed from his eyes; and being in a deep melancholy and sadness, the
Angels therewith were so much affected, that they also wept (says the story)
to see him so dejected. But the Caravan having their dispatches, the
Amir-Alkipha, or Captain thereof, commanded all that were to go along with him
to appear in their journeying habits by such a day. Mahumed, according to his
inferior condition, put on the Habit of a Camelero, but not without great
resentments, wishing his Parents were alive to see their Son thus dressed up in
a Slaves habit. In his journey to Syria, many strange passages are said to have
befaln him; but one more remarkable then the rest, is thus related: The Caravan
coming to the Cottage of an old Hermit, where they used to refresh, all the men
went into the Hermitage, leaving Mahumed abroad with the Camels. The Hermit
asked if all the Company were there; 'twas answered, all except a poor Boy,
whom they had left with their beasts: whereupon, the Hermit stepping out,
brought him in; and inquiring concerning his Country, Parentage, and Name, and
being fully informed of each particular thereof, the Hermit openly told them,
That he was the Apostle of God; and then with a loud voice added these words;
There is no God, except God, and Mahumed his Prophet. Then the Hermit took the
youth, and making bare his shoulder, showed them the privy Mark of a Prophet
imprinted upon him; and concluding with high enlargements upon his
commendation, and of the great things in process of time that should make up
his Achievements. Mahumed soon found the good effect of the Hermits
expressions, in the carriage of the Amir-Alkipha, which was so changed toward
him, that often he became his Companion: but once more especially, when he took
him with him to a Synagogue of the Jews, to see the custom and fashion of their
Service; where Mahumed was no sooner entered, but the chains in which their
Lamps and Candlesticks were hung up, upon the sudden broke, and fell to the
ground. The Jews being greatly affrighted with this accident, consulted their
Rabbis what it might bode: who returned this answer; We have found (say they)
in the Law, that in the last times, a certain Man shall come, called Mahumed;
and that when ever he shall be present at our Feasts, this thing shall happen:
and for ought we know, he may now be here, and therefore let search be made, to
find and destroy him. This we have recorded by that most egregious Trifler
Abunazar.

Now Mahumed being acquainted with the Jews design against him, as he was
bethinking himself of an escape, two Angels (says the story) suddenly took him
upon their wings, transported him to Mecca, where having spent some few days in
the conversation of his friends, the Legend tells us, he went to his Patroness
Cadigha, to whom having given an account of his journey, he demanded his Wages;
telling her withal, that his Uncle and Aunt had much upbraided him with
despondency of Mind, That he had made his address of Love no sooner. Here,
forsooth, he bowed his head, blushed, and made a stop. But Cadigha understood
his meaning; and told him, That as for his wages, it amounted to so little,
that it would not do him much service; but (says she) I will look out a Wife
for thee, one who is the most Noble, Beautiful, and Rich among the Meckezes,
and whom the Arabian Princes have courted to Marry. The only blot in her
character, is, the miserable Death of her first Husband; and if this could be
past over by him, she was at his service. With this large declaration of
Cadigha's respect, Mahumed was dismissed; who coming to his friends, communicated
with them the whole matter. They transported with the profer, thought of
nothing but its accomplishment. And to that end, sent Mahumed back to Cadigha,
to let her know, that he was wholly at her disposal and devotion. The Marriage
was soon completed betwixt them; which brought Mahumed a fair Wife, a great
Estate, and no little esteem. And now we have the Impostor in Wedlock, being
aged twenty four years, five months, and eight days. His Marriage was
celebrated on the same day of the week on which he was born. By Cadigha,
Cadijah, or Gadisa, (for all signify the same Woman) he had seven Children;
three Sons, namely, Kalem, or Casin, (an usual Name among the present Moors)
Taher, and Mader; who all dyed when young. He had also four Daughters, to wit,
Phatema, Zeyneb, Rakia, Omcolthum, Vnicultum. Phatema was married to Ali,
Zeyneb to Abalrebiah, two Brothers; and Omcolthum to Ibu Affar Ottamaindi, who
upon the death of Omcolthum, married her Sister Rakia. The three first were all
married upon the same Friday. But among all his Daughters, Phatema was his
darling; and for her virtues, is so highly esteemed by the Mahumedans, that
they number her among the principal women, and compare her with the Blessed
Virgin. Among Men, many have been famous (say the Mahumedists) but among Women,
these four are reckoned for the chief; namely, Asiah the Wife of Pharaoh; Mary,
the Daughter of Imram; Cadigha, the Daughter of Chowailedi; and Phatema, the
Daughter of Mahumed, whom we find giving her this Encomium: Praises be to God,
who has made thee like the Lady of the Women of the Sons of Israel, that is,
the Blessed Virgin. This commendation was delivered of her, upon the occasion
of a supposed Miracle: of which an account will be given in the Chapter of
Miracles. Mahumed lived with Cadigha twenty two years in Matrimony, and dying
at Mecca, she left her Husband great store of Wealth: for she was exceeding
rich, as is plainly to be collected from the Prayer made by Abutaleb, when he
married Cadigha to his Nephew; which for its rarity I have here inserted.

Praised be God, who has chosen us out of the stock of Abraham, and made us of
the lineage of Imael, and has given us the Holy Country, and the House to which
Pilgrims resort from every quarter, and has made us Judges among men.
Furthermore, who has chosen my Cousin Mahumed, the Son of Abdollahi, whom none
of the Noble Koraishites can equal, nor be laid in the scales with him, for
goodness, worth, understanding, glory, sharpness of wit. And although he be
poor, (for certainly Riches are a shadow that passes away, and a loan that
must be restored) yet is he in love with Cadijah the Daughter of Chowailidi,
and she with him; and whatever portion is desired, I take it upon my self. This
I find called a Prayer; but I leave the Ingenious Reader to give it a Name.

CHAP. V.
Of Mahumeds Second Marriages, filthiness of life; Revelations pretended to
justify his looseness.

MAhumed, whom his Sectaries are not ashamed to declare to have been insatiably
given to Venery, married several other Wives besides Cadigha; as Aijscha or Axa
the Daughter of Abubecer, and Sewda, the Daughter of Zameas, and Hafeza the
Daughter of Homar. These are upon record; and it is certain he had several
others, besides very many Concubines. And though he confined his Proselytes to
four Wives, yet he laid not any such restraint upon himself; having received a
license from Gabriel to marry as many as he pleased, and a power to Divorce
them when he listed. But it gave no small scandal to the Moors, when he gave it
out, that to have as many Wives as he pleased, was an indulgence granted him in
particular, in token of the affection God bore him above other Men; which
blasphemous assertion, was out of fear tamely yielded to by his timorous
Adherents. So that when ever Mahumed had a mind to a new bedfellow, the Angel
Gabriel brought him a Revelation for so doing. But all this would not appease
the anger his Wives had conceived against the naughtiness of his carriage;
especially in point of his unequal conversation with them, contrary to
Matrimonial Contract: which bone of contention was quickly hurled out of doors,
by a voice sent from Heaven to ratify what he did; in which also his Wives
were enjoined to surcease all murmuring against his actions, and to make a
total resignation of themselves to his pleasure. And what was yet more severe,
he pretended a command from God to prohibit his Wives to marry after it was his
mind to divorce them, and that upon pain of Hell, they should never know any
man but himself.

Now though I am weary of this despicable stuff, yet farther to illustrate
Mahumeds unclean Genius, and the bold miscreancy of his spirit, we find that he
denied himself in no instance of lewdness, but that he entitled God to a
special approbation thereof, and made it a divine testimony of the truth of his
Apostleship. An example of what I now mention, is to be met with in the story
of Marina, a Jewish Damsel of about fifteen years of age, with whom Mahumed
fell so deeply in love, that he desisted not till he had wearied her into his
embraces, by the most subtle importunities. But being surprised in the villainy,
by the waking jealousy of his Wives, Axa and Hafeza, he received from them a
severe reprimend; they telling him how ill it became a Married man, and a
Prophet, to be guilty of advoutry. And it seems that Mahumed was so astonished
with this reproof, and the consciousness of his own irregularity, that he gave
his Wives all possible assurances of future amendment; promising that if they
would not divulge it, they should find greater pledges of his love than they
had hitherto been acquainted with. They granted his request, upon condition,
that if ever they found him guilty of the like fault, they would not only
discover it, but repudiate his society. But his affections were still so warm
toward Marina, and the jealousy of his Wives so diligent, that in a short time
they took him in her company. Whereupon, they straightway repaired to their
Fathers, with all those tokens about them of women who had repudiated their
Husbands. This instantly took air, and the matter of Marina became
Town-discourse; and a thousand evil things were now spoken against Mahumed,
whose mind was seized hereupon with a strange despondency. And it is thought,
that this had utterly forfeited him the reputation of a Prophet, had not
Gabriel (as he pretended) brought him several Verses from God, to justify what
he had done, and also to permit the Moors a liberty to embrace their she-slaves
with as much freedom as their Wives (a custom not yet antiquated among the
Mahumedans;) and to obstruct the future repining of his Wives, they were by a
pretended Revelation, enjoined to be quiet and content. This was a very welcome
Institution to the Moors, and very prevailing with them to accept him for their
Prophet, who had such a care to gratify their lusts. And as to Mahumeds
carriage with Marina, it was from Heaven declared to be no Sin; as likewise
that his Wives were very criminal in taking notice of it, and divulging what he
did in secret; and to restrain Axa's and Hafeza's vigilance and jealousy for
the future, in finding out the carnality of their Husband, they were utterly
forbid all such deportment toward him, and commanded presently to return home,
penitent for what they had done, and to be content with such a share of his
conversation and benevolence, as he should daigne to grant them.

By this subtle device, or rather diabolical hypocrisy, he re-gained his
Wives; and not only appeased the Moors, but closely insinuated himself into
their favor. To whom nothing was more acceptable, than to have the Indulgence
of their vile affections to be made an Article of their Religion, and a piece
of their Worship. And that this may not be imagined to be a mere calumny,
devised by the enemies of Mahumedism, we find it recorded in the 66 Chapter of
the Alcoran, where the Wives of Noah and Lot are produced as fearful examples
of suffering punishment for not obeying their Husbands; and where Mahumed is
also commanded not to deny himself in any thing, for fear of discontenting his
Wives. The Fathers of Axa or Aijscha and Hafeza, are said to have humbly
supplicated Mahumed to pardon their Daughters rashness and folly, in
discovering his Filthiness; and that the Moors (upon receipt of a Law to
embrace their slaves) surceased not to reproach the said Axa and Hafeza, till
they returned unto, and made their peace with the Prophet.

CHAP. VII.
Of Mahumeds retirement, and how he began his Sect.

IN mentioning Mahumeds Wives, and his deportment in Wedlock, we have been
forced to run higher up into his Legend, than the designed Method will permit.
Which cannot now be atoned for, but by confessing the fault, and following the
rest of what happened to him during the time he lived in Matrimony with Cadigha,
which was from the 25 till the 38 year of his age. Most of which time he spent
in a constant Trading from Mecca into Syria and Persia; which he never deserted
till he was 38 years old: at which time he entered upon an Hermetical and
contemplative life, daily frequenting a place near Mecca, called Garhera, or
the Cave of Hera. There he continued all day; but what he did in the interim,
is not certainly known. The Moors conjecture he spent the time in Divine
Contemplation, and made it an occasion to wean himself from his Idolatry,
having been brought up in the rites of the Idol Alleze, which he now began to
abandon; moved thereunto, as is generally concluded, by some occasional
discourse he had with a Nestorian Christian, called by some Bohira, whom he met
with at Jerusalem. This man practicing Mahumed in some points of Religion,
found that he was of the Tribe of the Koraishites, notorious Idolaters at
Mecca, and deeply rooted in their Idolatrous Ceremonies. And moved with
compassion toward him, he began to acquaint him with the pernicious falseness
of his Religon, and palpable vanity of Idolatry: and at the same time
instructed him in the knowledge of the true God; whereupon, he read unto him
several parcels of the Law and Psalms, in confirmation of what he had said;
which wrought so much upon Mahumed, that he was no sooner returned to Mecca,
but he began to declare his abhorrence of their Religion, showing them (as
Bohira had shown him) the manifest iniquity of Idol-worship; letting them know,
that his resolution was, never more to sort with them in their impious Rites.
Hereupon, he began to lead a solitary life, and to betake himself to the Cave;
which he continued for the space of two years; during which time, it is
generally conjectured he laid the villainous design of his Apostleship. But at
last his strength and health became greatly impaired by this abstinent and
austere course of living. And his judgment sympathized with his body; for
through immoderate fasting, he became so hypocondriack, that he began to talk
idly, which terminated in a perfect Lunacy, going up and down after an odd
distracted manner. In memory of whose Lunatique carriage, the Mahumedans at
this day bear a singular respect to Idiots and Madmen, accounting them no less
than inspired. But to return to Mahumed in the Cave: and as we find it
confidently asserted by his Doctors, he was there entertained with Divine
revelations, and Visions: That there was a voice at his elbow frequently
discoursing with him, although he could never perceive any bodily shape. Every
night returning from his Garhera, he imparted to Cadigha what had happened the
antecedent day. Who finding him still full of Revelations and Visions, she told
him plainly, That they were nothing but delusions of the Devil. This greatly
ruffled his passions, and created in him that disturbance of mind, which at
last cast him into such a fit of dejectedness, that he thought of nothing but
destroying himself. To which purpose, he went to the precipice of a rock,
designing thence to cast himself headlong; saying, It was better to dye, then
to live under the infamy of being Mad. But Gabriel, as he was ready to put his
resolution into practice, surprised him with this Greeting; O Mahumed, be of
good courage, be not troubled at the Reproaches of thy Wife; thou art not now
to look upon thy self as thou have done, but as on a person highly in favor
with God; who has now appointed thee to be his Prophet and Messenger. And as he
said thus, Gabriel gave him a scrowl, and bid him read. Mahumed replied, he was
altogether illiterate. Gabriel said again, Read, O Mahumed, In the Name of thy
Creator, who made the worm Man; read in the Name of thy most honored Creator,
who with a Pen shows to Man what he never knew before. And then he delivered
him the first Chapter of the Alcoran, and so vanished.

In this apparition, the Angel Gabriel was seen (say they) sitting on a Golden
Throne, which hung between Earth and Heaven. They tell us likewise, that
Mahumed now received a general delineation of his Embassy and Apostleship. And
this first salutation of Mahumed beginning with [ In the Name of thy Creator]
was the ground and occasion why the Moors at this day begin all their Letters
of Correspondence, and other Writings, with Bismillah; that is, In the Name of
God. And the praise Gabriel in this greeting gave unto the Pen, caused Ozman to
give one of the Chapters of the Alcoran the Title of the Pen; though it is true,
the word we render Pen, signifies, says Du Ryer, Ink, an Ink-horn, and
sometimes the Table on which the Alcoran was writ. And whatever the Arabic
word may import, which the Translations of the Alcoran render Pen; we are
assured, that the Mahumedans have a Tradition, that a Pen was the first thing
God Created. But to return: Mahumed having, as we are told, received this
apparition of the Angel, to that end Cadigha might no longer doubt of the truth
of his Visions, or persist to censure them for diabolical illusions; as he
returned from the Cave, he had them confirmed with a Miracle; the trees
saluting him as he passed by them, with an Absir ya Mahumed ineq. etc. Rejoice,
O Mahumed, for theou shall be the Apostle of God, and most dear unto him. The
Impostor being not a little raised with this greeting, he hastened to tell it to
his Wife, and to unmask that his design was to set up for a Prophet, and to
frame a Sect. In whose contrivance he spent 23 years, beginning at the 40th
year of his age, and continuing till he was aged 63. During which time, he so
well managed his ambition and injustice, under the cloak of Religion, as never
any have yet proved his Equal: the nearest and most exact Transcript of this
great Impostor, was the late Usurper.

CHAP. VIII.
How Mahumed received from Gabriel the first Chapters of the Alcoran.

NOtwithstanding the great assurance wherewith Mahumed asserted the certainty
of his Visions, Cadigha still remained incredulous, and esteemed them no better
than the Enthusiasms of an overheated fancy, or the inspirations of a bad
spirit. Which incredulity of his Wife, created him no small disturbance; and
finding her so constant in her Opinion, some say, he was so far moved
therewith, as now to doubt himself, and to grow suspicious of what had happened.
Being in these dumps, and deeply musing how to proceed, his whole body was
seized with an uncouth chilness, which cast him upon his bed, where his
servants loaded him with clothes to recover warmth. But as he was ruminating
upon the froward carriage of Cadigha, and what had befaln in the Cave; and
drooping under the resentments of his project, Gabriel, say his Parasites,
brought him a Cordial, which was the second Chapter of the Alcoran (now bearing
the Chapter of the Cow) containing 187 verses; which Gabriel presented him in
these words: Arise, Mahumed, thou that art covered with Praise (alluding to his
being covered with clothes) and abandon Idols. And having thus spoken, he gave
him the Chapter. Hereupon, Mahumed instantly called for his Wife, to whom he
read it. Who scornfully told him, it was but the old delusion. She told him
likewise, that if Gabriel were his friend, he would not have been absent so
long, seeing his presence would so quickly have resolved his doubts, and
redeemed him from his anxieties. But Mahumed now finding his Wife to have so
far reduced her refractoriness, as to cast it into an Objection; he soon
foresaw that the Angels coming more early the next day, would certainly remove
it. Which happened accordingly; for the next morning betimes, Gabriel presented
the Prophet with the Third Chapter of the Alcoran, (entitled The Lineage of
Joachim) and when he delivered it, he said; God swears to Mahumed, by the
dawning which brings the day, and by the night which brings darkness, that his
Creator has not forgotten him, neither will forget what he has promised.
These words of Gabriel, though they quickly restored Mahumed, yet they could
not convince his Wife, whose infidelity grew now so obstinate, that nothing
could refute it, but a personal interview with the Angel; from which Mahumed
strongly dissuaded her, urging the impossibility of seeing Angels, as being
Spirits. And belike, his arguings had at last his desired effect upon Cadigha;
for we hear no more of her, till we find her in the number of his first
Proselytes. In which the Impostor at the beginning was not very fruitful; and
those few who became his Sectaries, were moved thereunto through mere temporal
advantages; so that he may be said to have bought, rather than converted them.
This was evident in the youth Zeydin; who being a Slave, became his Proselyte,
to gain his freedom; and who, it is like, would never have hearkened to the
Doctrines of his Master, if upon his believing him to be a Prophet, he had not
had the promise of a release. Now Mahumed finding how powerful this wrought
upon Zeydin, he began to preach present freedom to all those Captives who
would take him for their Apostle. By which means he now enlarged his train, and
increased his credit: for all the Bondmen were so taken with this Doctrine of
Freedom, that if Mahumed had had power to protect them, they all would quickly
have emptied themselves into his musters. But because there (perhaps) may be a
more convenient place to give an account of Mahumeds first Converts, we will
return to his compiling of the Alcoran; which, as he pretended, was given him
from God, by the Ministry of Gabriel; who did not, as some have delivered,
bring him it all at once, but one Chapter after another, and at several times.
And when Mahumed had any project to carry on, or any difficulty to be removed,
or any villainous act to be cloaked, he presently pretended to receive from
Heaven Revelations to that purpose. Now, because the sum and substance of all
his Impostures are comprised in the Alcoran, we will give a short account
thereof in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Alcoran: the circumstances of its Composure and Collection, etc.

THe Alcoran (says Andraeas Maurus) signifies a Lesson, or Collection of
Chapters or Songs; and those who respect the different times wherein it was
composed, and the diverse Papers, or Scrowls, wherein it was written, have given
it the Name of Alforzan; that is, A collection of scattered verses. The
Materials of this Book are very various; but it treats especially of such
things as respect that Sect, whereof Mahumed was Founder. It cannot be denied
but that many excellent Truths are therein contained, as we shall see
hereafter, when we lay down the principles of the Mahumedan Imposture.

This Alcoran was begun at Mecca, in the year of our Lord 630. which was about
the fortieth year of Mahumeds age. The first Chapter thereof was that which the
Angel Gabriel gave him in the Cave, which is called the Chapter of the Pen; and
the last Chapter was composed at Medina, and is called the Chapter of Fate, or
the Conquest. During the time he abode at Mecca, the Chapters writ there were
called Asoar Mikia, or the Songs of Mecca; and the rest composed at Medina,
bare the title of Sore Almaedina; and both these being collected into one
Volume, are now generally known by the Name of Alcoran.

Mahumed, as was said, being wholly Illiterate, kept a Secretary, who wrote in
Scrowls such Verses as he pretended were privately sent him from God by the
Angel Gabriel. And when he had copied them, they were dispersed among the
Moors; who when they had learned them by heart, delivered them back again to
the Secretary, who put them into the Mensegina, or box of Embassy. But Mahumed
taking a displeasure against his first Scribe, chose a new one called Abdalla
Celen, a Renegado Jew. This man continued with him ten years. And being well
versed in the Law of the Hebrews (to which he still bore a great respect,
notwithstanding Temporal interest had moved him to renounce it) and finding
that Mahumed did not make good his pretenses of being the last Accomplisher of
the Mosaical economy, he was so curious to observe Mahumeds carriage, that at
last he perceived, and took notice, that all Mahumed dictated to him were mere
Forgeries, and not sent from God. Yet lest Abdalla might impose upon himself in
this particular, he resolved upon this trial; namely, that whenever he was
commanded to write such and such verses, he would turn the end of the verse to
another meaning, changing the words and order, but not the Rhyme nor Consonance.
So that when he was commanded to end the Verse with -- Alla hazizum haquimum,
that is, God is gracious and wise; he wrote, -- Alla Cemilum halimum, that is,
God is a Hearer and a Judge. And when he bid him write, God is Almighty and
most high, he set down, God is merciful and gracious. And thus Abdalla for
seven years continued changing the end of the Verses. And finding that Mahumed
did not perceive the change, he concluded, that if he had received them from
God, and that if God had intended them to be the immutable Rule of life, the
palpable changes made by him would have been detected. Whereupon, Abdalla
quitted his Office, and reconciled himself to his old Religion. And the
forementioned Author ( Jo. Andraeas Maurus) tells us, out of a Book called
Azzifa, that Mahumeds next Secretary renounced his employment upon the same
reason. And, as the said Author observes, If Mahumed had been so great a
Prophet as he pretended, and so deeply inspired of God; he could not but have
perceived how grossly he was abused by the Jew. But to proceed.

In the composition of the Alcoran, many contrarieties and repugnancies being
observed by the Moors, thereat they took no small offense. It being usual with
this Impostor, one day to set down Verses commanding some, and forbidding other
things; and another day he would dictate, and cause other Verses to be written,
forbidding what he had before allowed and permitted them, making that lawful
which he had before forbidden. And of these contrarieties, no less than 150
verses were observed by them. But to remove this scandal, he made a Law to
revoke such verses as occasioned it, which he called Hacen and Mausoh. But that
which created Mahumed the greatest trouble, was, the Moors forgetfulness of
those Verses he gave them to commit to Memory. For, for no less time than two
years, did this course of learning the Verses by Heart continue among them; who
when they had forgotten the Verses, and desired Mahumed to repeat them again,
he could not remember them himself. But Mahumed excused this forgetfulness,
confidently affirming, that it was from God. And being told, That if God
intended them for his abiding word, he would not suffer him to forget them; or
if he did, yet he would inspire them afresh: to reprove their petulancy (as he
styled it) God (as he said) gave him a Verse, wherein it was said, That God
does not suffer any of the former Verses to be revoked or forgotten, save when
he intends to give another like it, or one better in its stead. By which
cunning he cloaked his own failures, and kept up his credit with the Moors. And
also altered and abolished such Texts (as he had before delivered) to comply
with his affairs, and carry on his designs; giving authority to New Verses to
revoke the Old, when they would not serve his purpose. And what was yet very
remarkable, Mahumed would not suffer his Verses to be made an Alcoran, or be
collected into a Body, and reduced to Books and Chapters, as now it is; but
kept them in scrowls and Papers in the Mesengina, or Box of the Embassy: so
that if he had lived to this day, he would still have altered his Law; and what
we now call the Alcoran, would not have been finished, or reduced to any
certain form. For while he kept it secret in the Shrine, he reserved unto
himself a power to add, change, or retrench things as he pleased, and as was
most agreeable to his concerns.

As to that Book which now bears the Name of Alcoran, it was collected by
Hozman, Mahumeds Son-in-law, who was next Caliph to Homar Alhatab, as he was
next to Vbequar, who was the Immediate Successor of his Son-in-law Mahumed.
This Hozman took the scrowls and papers out of the Box, and put them into
order, and entitled the Chapters, and divided the whole System into four Books.

The first Book consists of these five Chapters.
1. The Chapter of the Cow. 2. The Chapter of the Lineage of Joachim, the
Father of our Lady. 3. The Chapter of Women. 4. The Chapter of the Table. 5.
The Chapter of Beasts.
The second Book consists of twelve Chapters.
1. Of the Wall. 2. Of Spoils. 3. Of the Sword. 4. Of the Prophet Jonas. 5. Of
Hud, who was one of Mahumeds New Prophets. 6. Of Joseph, the Son of Jacob. This
Chapter I have seen in Ms. larger by four Verses than that in the common
Alcoran. 7. Of Thrones. 8. Of Abraham. 9. Of Ahigere. 10. Of Flies. 11. Of the
Voyage of Mahumed. 12. Of the Cave, and Seven Sleepers.
The third Book contains nineteen Chapters.
1. Of the Virgin Mary. 2. Of Taha. 3. Of the Prophets. 4. Of Earthquakes. 5.
Of Believers. 6. Of the Light. 7. Of the Gibbet. 8. Of the Executioners. 9. Of
the Pismire. 10. Of Cahaz. 11. Of Spiders. 12. Of Lucumen a Saint, and David's
friend. 13. Of Bowing. 14. Of the Romans. 15. Of the Creator. 16. Of the
Sabbath. 17. Of Additions. 18. Of Man. 19. Of Angels.
The fourth Book contains 175 Chapters, to each of which he gave a particular
Name: so that according to Hozmans division of the Alcoran, it contains 211
Chapters. But little above half this number are found in Du Ryers French
Translation. And J. Andraeas Maurus tells us, that Ozmans Collection does not
contain all those Chapters, which were written by Mahumeds Secretaries, and in
his lifetime used by the Moors. And the instance of this defalcation, is
placed in the Chapter of Additions; which in Mahumeds time, was as big as the
Chapter of the Cow, but is not now half so big. The like I have noted of the
Chapter of Joseph. And besides these retrenchments, it is very probable, that
whole scrowls of Mahumeds Doctrine were utterly lost, or become so imperfect,
that they were never entered into Hozmans Collection. And this may more than
conjecturally be concluded, from the condition wherein Ozman met with Mahumeds
Notes; many whereof were found in the House of Axa, or Aijscha, one of his
Wives; but so eaten with mice, and rent, and worn with ill usage, that Ozman
could gather nothing out of them. Hereupon, he had recourse to the most aged of
the Moors, collecting from them what they remembered of Mahumeds Verses. Some
told him, that they had forgotten many of them: others told him, That in such a
Wall he should find such Verses in writing. And so amongst the old Walls, and
the Moors weak Memories, he retrieved much of Mahumeds Doctrine. Yet he could
never regain the Verse which commanded, That all married persons taken in
Adultery, should be stoned. From all which, it may safely be inferred, that all
those things taught by Mahumed in his lifetime, are not now to be found in
Ozmans Alcoran.

CHAP. X.
Of the Honor given to the Alcoran.

HAving given this short account how the Doctrines of Mahumed were collected,
and reduced to that form in which they are now extant, I shall fill up this
Chapter with setting down the great Titles and respect given the Alcoran after
Ozman had compiled it. And first, it is usual with the Musulmin, or Proselytes
of Mahumed, when they take the Alcoran in their hands, with a wonderful
reverence to kiss it, and salute it by the Name of Alkilib Alhazim (i. e.) The
Glorious Book; and Alcoran Alhadin (i. e.) the Mighty Alcoran. They swear by
it, and pay it all the reverence they would do unto God. And no small disputes
have been raised among the old Mahumedists, about the nature of the Alcoran,
whether it was the created or increated word of God. Vathecus was for the
opinion of those who held the Alcoran to be created; and he writ to all the
Provinces of Eyypt, That the Musulmin should be of the same opinion. Which
Injunction was very displeasing to the Mahumedans; but they were by penalties
forced to embrace it. Though not a few suffered Martyrdom for the contrary
opinion; choosing rather to dye, than to hold the Alcoran was not the Increate
word of God. These disputes continued long, and opinions prevailed according to
the humor of the present Caliph that Reigned.

The excellent Erpenius tells us, in his Notes upon the Chapter of Joseph: It
is incredible, what Virtue, Majesty, and Authority is granted to the Alcoran;
yea, what Honor and Veneration is given it by the Musulmin; whole Books (
says he) are extant in its commendation, written in so swollen and fabulous a
style, that no discerning Reader can peruse them without laughter. First, they
commend it above all the Creatures, and place it next to God* That he that
handles it irreverently, is unworthy of life, and is as wicked as he that
contemns God. They permit not any who is not of their own Religion, so much as
to touch it. If any Musulman chance to sit upon it, the sin is piacular: but if
this irreverence be used by a Jew, or Christian, it is punished with death. No
Mahumedan is permitted to touch it with the top of his finger, until he first
wash: and lest any should unwarily offend therein, they write upon the cover of
the Alcoran in great letters, this Sentence; Let no Man touch it who is
unclean. They call it, the Medicine of the Heart; and hold it to be of such
secret Virtue and worth, that the reading of one letter therein, deserves a
good reward.

I have often doubted whether there be any true Edition of the Alcoran in the
European Language, since I observed how difficult it is for any Christian to
obtain from the Mahumedans a copy thereof. For they permit not any of a
Religion different from their own, so much as to touch it; nor of old was it
suffered to be written in any but the Arabique Language. And at this day it is
capital for a Moor to sell an Alcoran to either Jew or Christian. Nor indeed
are any Alcorans to be met with in private hands, or exposed to sale to the
vulgar. In above seven years of conversation among the Moors, I could not
obtain the sight of one: which I ceased to wonder at, when it was told me, How
the communicating of that Glorious Book (as they call it) might tend to its
defilement, and prove fatal to any one who should be so free therewith. The
buying of an Alcoran was once warmly attempted by Fr. Barton, a Countryman of
our own, who had the sight of one, fair written in the Persick Tongue in
Octavo, and of another in Quarto, written in Arabique. But when he essayed to
buy the later of a Hogia, who taught Arabique at Pera, he refused to sell it at
any rate. At last, hearing that several Alcorans in Persick, were to be had
among the Dervices (a Religious sort of Mahumedan Monks) Mr. Barton
endeavored, but in vain, to purchase one; and coming to Gallipolis in Greece,
he had news that two or three Alcorans were there in a College of the
Dervices. But trying to buy one, they asked, Why he being an Infidel, should
desire to have an Alcoran? He told them, That he had heard many things
concerning their Law, and that he was very desirous to be ascertained of the
truth thereof; and to that end, was willing to buy an Alcoran, and to take a
Master therein to instruct him. Upon the hearing of this, a Turk presently
replied, That the Infidel did dissemble, and that under pretense of love to the
Musulmanick Faith, he designed to deride it; and that he ought to be had before
the Vizier, for his profane attempt. So that our Countryman was forced to
escape privily, for fear of being brought in question.

I shall conclude this observation with what Hottinger relates of one Ahmed Ibu
Ali, who being in some great want of Money, pawned an exemplar of an Alcoran,
with other small Works, both in Verse and Prose, to the Duke of Sylva; which
the said Duke profer'd to Hottinger, at the price it was pawned for. Hottinger
(as himself relates) was glad of the occasion to procure a Book he had so long
desired; who receiving it into his possession, freely used it in the presence
of the said Ahmed Ibu Ali, without molestation or reproach. But Ali's occasions
drawing him out of Afrique, and Hottinger's into his own Country; after three
years, Ahmet came to Leida, and there made his Application to the learned
Golius, whom he incessantly importuned to procure for him the copy of the
Alcoran in Hottingers possession; and would not desist till he had obtained
from Golius an earnest Letter to that purpose. This Alcoran Hottinger had
illustrated with Marginal Notes, out of the Famous Commentaries of Beidavi, and
pointed it with great industry. So that by the Mahumedique Laws, it was wholly
become useless to the Moor, and unlawful for him to receive it again. Which
thing being urged unto Ali, he no whit desisted; but with a doubled importunity
desired to have it restored to him, for no other reason, than to have it
burned; that being the only lustration, whereby he thought it capable to be
purified from the filth it had contracted by the Christians Notes and usage. In
short, the Moors respect to the Alcoran is so egregious, that they so far
honor all written Paper for its sake, as to take up every little script where
they find it, and having kissed it, they stop it up in some chink of a Wall:
saying, It is no small iniquity that any Papers should be trodden under foot, in
which may be written some part of the Alcoran, and the Name of God. That the
Alcoran is writ in Meter, was never questioned by any, but the great Scaliger,
who considering the nature of the Arabique Tongue, concluded it very incapable
of Ryme and Verse. But upon second thoughts he grants, there is to be found in
it a kind of Ryme, but without any tunable proportion. For the word that should
make up the Meter, is either too near, or too distant from that which should
make the Harmony. And those who have purposely considered this matter, grant,
that the Alcoran is a very rude Poem; and the things therein contained, are so
loose and incoherent, that Moses Amyraldus thought them rather the ragings of a
Man in a Fever, or the Enthusiasms of a Drunkard, than the inspirations of
God, or the sentiments of a sober considerare person.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Sune, its Name, Contents, and Circumstances of its Collection, etc.

BEsides the Alcoran, the Mahumedists have another Book in little less
veneration than it, which is known by the Name of Zuna, or Sune, which
signifies a Way or Law, or the following of the Sayings, Actions, and Counsels
of Mahumed. This was written after his death, by some of his chief Disciples.
But through manifold transcriptions, it became so augmented by some, and
abridged by others, and altered and mangled by most Copies, that little
remained entire of the Impostors Words and Actions. Hereupon arose diverse
Readings, and thereby no small confusion. But lest in this troubled variety of
Copies, the true Sune should be utterly lost, to the irreparable damage of the
Mahumedan Religion; an Alkalife, or King of the Moors, called a general Council
of Alfaquies or Priests, Learned Men, and Doctors; and appointed Damascus to be
the place of their meeting. These by public Proclamation he commanded to bring
with them all the Books that could be found written of the Sune, and of
Mahumeds Words and Works. The Alfaquies and others, according to command,
repaired to Damascus, and brought with them the said Books. The Caliph seeing
them in full Synod, communicated unto them the purpose and reason of their
assembly; and then commanded, That six of the most Learned Alfaquies, and best
read in the Sune, should be chosen for a select Committee, out of the two
hundred Priests that were there met. The six that were chosen, go under these
Names, viz. Muzlir, Bohari, Buhora yra, Anecery, Atermindi, Doud. The Caliph
being well pleased with the Election, as being Men of reputed Learning and
Integrity, called them to him, and commanded them, that they should go alone
into a House, and cause all the pretended Books of the Sune to be brought unto
them. And that each of them should by himself collect a Book of all the Sayings
and Deeds of Mahumed, which he should conceive to be true; and that they should
each entitle his Book with his own Name. The six Priests did as they were
commanded by the Caliph; and having finished their task, they presented their
Collections to him; which he no sooner had received, than he delivered them to
the whole Council, to be viewed and examined. And these six Books, being thus
perused and approved, were preserved, and all the rest were ordered to be cast
into Adegele, a River near Damascus. And the number of Books thus cast into the
water, were no fewer than loaded two hundred Camels. This being done, an Edict
went forth, That no Alfaqui, or Priest, should dare to read or keep any Book,
but the six aforesaid; and that none should mention any Saying or Deed of
Mahumed, but such as should be found written in the said Books; and that all
Musselmen or Believers of Mahumed, should receive these Books for as true and
authentic, as if they were the very Alcoran it self; and that they should
receive equal reverence with it.

In this manner Mahumeds Sect was restored, and the Caliph; who procured this
Restoration, is to this day celebrated for a Saint. But it seems this was not
enough to prevent future Sects: for by reason of some dubious and contrary
passages found in the said Books, there arose several interpretations thereof,
which occasioned several opinions, and thereupon several Sects. Whereof these
four are the more remarkable. First, the Sect of Melich, of which are all the
Moors of Medina, and those of Africa. The second Sect follow the opinion of
Assafihy; of which are the Moors of Mecca, and the adjacent Country. The third
Sect is that of Hambeli, whereof are the Moors of Armenia and Persia. The last
Sect is made up of those who follow the opinion of Abuhamfa. So that by reason
of the different interpretations given by these four Doctors of the Sune, these
several Sects arose among the Mahumedists. And the differences of these Sects
chiefly consist in matters of Judicatures, Marriages, and Divorces; and those
Ceremonies which respect their Washings, when they make their Sala or Prayer.

Now, speaking of the Sune, as it contains in six Books the Deeds and Sayings
of Mahumed, we find them reduced to four kinds. First, the Cahch, or certain
and true, which contain all the Words and Works of Mahumed, which his Wife
Ayscha, and his ten Disciples, attest to have been spoken and done by him.

Secondly, all those Words and Works of Mahumed which are reported by his other
Wives, without the attestation of Ayscha and his chief Disciples, are called
Dahif, or Defective.

Thirdly, those Words and Works of Mahumed, which have only the testimony of
the Learned and principal Men of his time, and never came to the knowledge of
his chief Disciples, nor of Ayscha, are called Maucof, or Abrupt.

Fourthly, all those Words and Works which are delivered by his chief Doctors,
as proceeding from Mahumed after he was sick and infirm, are accounted weak,
and called by the Moors Zaquini. All these differences are to be met with
(says my Author) in the Preface to the Book of Flowers, which is an Epitome of
the six Books of the Sune, and contains only such Words and Actions of Mahumed,
as are accounted True and Certain.

There is yet another Book (which some Travelers report they have seen in the
Tursique Court) called Musaph; which is esteemed so sacred, that they will not
suffer it to be Translated into any Language out of Arabique. Some suppose that
it is to the Alcoran, as our Service Book to the Bible: others say, it is an
Extract of the Alcoran: and others conjecture it to be a short Gloss or
Paraphrase thereon. This Book is had in so singular reverence, that none is
permitted to touch it either with unwasht or naked hands. When it is read in
the Church, the people give it a devout attention; and the Reader may not hold
it lower than his girdle. And having done reading therein, he gives it a
reverend kiss; and then touching it with his eyes, with great decency lays it
up in its place. And yet the respect given this Book, is not more than the
Moors ordinarily bestow upon all Books of their Religion: which (indeed) they
treat with a Veneration worthy of the subject they are pretended to contain.
For I have seen them taking a Book of Devotion in their hands, presently to
hold it up toward Heaven, saying, Dillah, i. e. It is from God; and then
holding it to their Eyes, Heart, and kissing it, either peruse, or lay it aside.

Having given this short account of the Alcoran and Sune, I reassume the
prosecution of the progress of Mahumedism.

CHAP. XII.
Of the first Proselytes of Mahumed, which he gained during the time he held a
Conventicle in Mecca.

THe Revelation that Mahumed pretended to have received from Heaven, to set all
those Slaves at liberty who would embrace his Doctrine, had not that effect
which he expected. For after some years of Conventicling at his own house, we
find but Nine that he persuaded to receive him for a Prophet: Namely, Zeydin,
Cadigha, Ali the Son of Abitaleb, Otman the Son of Affan, Zeiber Ben-Awani,
Abdorrahman the Son of Anfa, Zaad, Abuwakas, Ibeidalla the Son of Algiarani.
Indeed the Law of releasing Captives, caused many of that quality to resort to
his Conventicle, and to be constant hearers of his private Preaching: but
Mahumed being as yet destitute of any competent power to put the Pretended
Divine Law in execution, few Slaves durst forsake their Patrons to become his
followers.

During the time of his private instructing at his own house, he constantly
insisted upon such points, as bore the greatest opposition to the opinions held
by the Idolaters of the place. As first, that the Idol Alleza was only the work
of Men's hands, and the Worship thereof an invention of the Devil. Secondly,
that there was but one true God, who was the Maker of all things. Thirdly, that
after men were dead, they should rise again. Fourthly, that there was to be a
last and final Judgment. Fifthly, that there was a Paradise and a Hell; that
the joys of the one, and pains of the other, were eternal. All which were
denied by the Idolaters of Mecca. And concerning all these, Mahumed pretended
that he taught nothing but what was commanded by Gabriel the Archangel.

But that which most advanced the credit of his Doctrine, was the conversion of
Omar Alhatas and Vbecer, Nobles of Mecca, (whose Daughters Mahumed afterward
Married) and very gracious with the Meckezes. These with their Household
increased Mahumeds Congregation to the number of forty persons, all special
zealots for his Religion. Mahumed confident of the quality of Omar and Vbechar,
and the place they held among the people, began to be more open in his design.
But still at Mecca meeting with nothing but rejection, he went to Taiifra,
hoping to meet with better, but found the same entertainment; which moved him
to go to Awaz, and Mastag; where his success was considerable, for no fewer
than 75 persons bound themselves by Oath to propagate and maintain his Law. Out
of these seventy five Proselytes, he chose twelve, whom he commissioned to
disperse his Doctrine; who according to the warmth usual to new Converts,
prosecuted the same with no small hazard and industry. But Omar and Vbechar
relying upon their power and interest with the people of Mecca, and confident
their example would be very prevailing with the multitude, they resolved to
publish what Mahumed had kept secret, and openly to read such Chapters as, he
said, were sent him from Heaven. But the other Grandees of Mecca so far
disgusted the deportment of these two Nobles, especially their decrying of the
Worship of the great Idol Alleze, which they and their Fathers adored as their
God, that they resolved upon their speedy suppression, and utterly to stifle
the new Doctrine of Mahumed. And holding a consultation to this end, it was
concluded, that Mahumed should be put to death. The Coraishites were chief in
this Conspiracy; who being Men of Honor, and considering that Mahumed was one
of their own Tribe, they thought the clandestine death of their Kinsman, would
turn to their irreparable disgrace. And looking upon him rather as a Lunatique,
than a Prophet, they began to deem him worthier of their pity than revenge.
It Is most certain, by many expressions of the Alcoran, that Mahumed was at
first looked upon as an Idiot, Sorcerer, Liar, and Demoniack Rymer. And as he
walked in the streets, the people would frequently call after him, saying, in
scorn and mockery, Behold the Prophet! there goes he that will destroy our God!
And this continued during the time Mahumed stayed at Mecca, which some say was
ten years after he began his Sect. But notwithstanding all this, the Impostor
did not desist from Conventicling; but every night preached at his own House,
whither resorted diverse of the Meckezes, but rather to droll upon, than respect
his sayings And of such mean esteem were the Chapters he dispersed, that the
more discerning said, That they were nothing but a few old stories put into
scurvy Ryme. It has been usually delivered upon this subject, That a Christian
Monk, and a Jew, were Mahumeds great assistants in devising the Alcoran; but
neither the Glossers upon the Alcoran, nor the most authentic Legend of his
Life, take any notice thereof. It is true indeed, that there is a general
agreement (in the History of Mahumed) how he was assisted with two Christian
slaves, well versed in the Old and New Testament; and that from them he
received several passages of the Bible, which he seems to have confusedly mixed
in the Alcoran. The Meckezes too, are often found to upbraid the Impostor for
his familiarity with several Jews and Christians; and how that out of the
imperfect informations he picked up from them of their Religion, he patcht up
his own. But how ever their conjectures might vary concerning the Authority and
frame of his Doctrine, the Meckezes resolved to suppress it; which forced him
to leave Mecca; of which in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
How Mahumed was forced to leave Mecca, and fly to Medina. Of his disputes
with the Jews there. A short account of the Hegira.

WHile the fame of Mahumeds New Doctrine filled Mecca with various opinions
concerning it, and that it received daily additions of new Proselytes; the
minds of the chief Citizens were more and more incensed against him; especially
when they perceived, that under the pretense of Religion, he designed an
Empire; and he was a Prophet in show, but a Tyrant in project. This awakened
all their Counsels and Endeavors to crush his enterprise in the shell; but yet
they could not agree of the Method. Two Accounts I meet with of this affair;
the one is taken out of Beidavi, which is thus: The Koraishites (says he) upon
an appointed time, met in the Porch of their own Temple, to consult about the
suppression of Mahumed; where the Devil also assembled with them, in the shape
of an Old Man, and said, I have heard far from this place, that ye are met to
deliberate about a matter of great moment; I have a desire to be of your
Council. Whom when they had admitted, one Abultachthar opened the business, and
gave advice to bind Mahumed in chains, and to cast him into Prison; and to stop
all the holes except one, whereat he might receive victuals. But the Devil
objected, that the Multitude would by force set him at liberty. Then stood up
one Hascham Ben Amru, saying, We had better banish Mahumed our Territories, and
enjoin him never to return again. But this Counsel was also rejected by the
Devil, alleging, That Banishment would but give him a fairer opportunity to
gather and muster Proselytes into an Army, and thereby to revenge himself upon
his Banishers. Upon this, Abughaliel advised to put him to death, as the only
expedient against all future jealousies and dangers. And this advice was
approved of by the Old Man, whom the friends of Mahumed say, was the Devil that
appeared in that form. But all their Counsels were infatuated, by some secret
information which Mahumed had thereof: And some blush not to tell us, That the
whole plot was revealed unto him by the Angel Gabriel.

Another account of the Koraishites Conspiracy against Mahumed, I find taken
out of Abunazar the Son of Abdorrachman; and it is to this purpose.

The House of Mecca (that is, the Temple) was the usual place where the
Meckezes used to assemble, when they deliberated about matters of importance.
Here they met to consult how to suppress the Prophet. There were chiefly five
who were of this Conspiracy; to wit, Othba, Shabbibah, Abu Ghahel, Abulbachir,
and Aazi. These entering into a Room of their Temple, Ablis (or the Devil) in
the likeness of an Old Man leaning upon a staff, came in amongst them; whom
they commanded to retire, because the business about which they were met to
consult, was of great secrefie. But Ablis told them, That he was the old
Negidheris, who had seen ages, and had long experience of things; that he knew
how to dispatch affairs, and to unriddle secret matters; and therefore begged
leave to be at their Counsels. They granted his suit; and Othba told him, That
they were met to advise about the suppression of Mahumed, and his Doctrine; and
added also, that he was of opinion the Impostor should not be meddled with, but
to leave him to the punishment of their God (meaning their Idol Alleza) whom he
had Blasphemed. But Ablis told them, That if Mahumed were let alone, before he
dyed he would fill the World with his Imposture, and gather such numbers of
Sectaries, as would vanquish both them and their City. This saying of Ablis met
with great approbation, and moved Schablibah to press for his instant
confinement. But Ablis answered, that that would only enrage his friends to arm
for his enlargement; and therefore Aazi Ben Vail thought it would be most
proper to set him upon a Camel, and send him to perish in the desert. But this
was also disliked by Ablis, because if it should happen that Mahumed should
fall into the company of Men, his comeliness of Person, and eloquence of
Language, would quickly move them to pity, and relieve his condition. At last,
Abu Gahel thought it the safest way to hire some desperate fellows to fall upon
him suddenly, and destroy him. And Ablis and the rest unanimously approved of
it; and so they broke up their Council, in order to put this last advice in
execution. But all (say his flatterers) was by the Angel Gabriel quickly made
known unto Mahumed, whom he advised to provide for his escape. So says the
Alcoran in the eighth Surat -- Seeing that Infidels lay snares for thee, the
most high God commands thee to depart from Mecca, and to go to Medina.

And having thus briefly set down the true occasion of Mahumeds leaving Mecca,
the manner thereof comes next to be considered. Though the plot of the Meckezes
was early known unto him, yet before he could provide for his departure, all
the Avenues of the Town were beset with the Spies and Guards of his Enemies;
whose watchfulness Mahumed is said to have deceived by Sorcery, though his
Sectaries call it a Miracle. And it was thus: Mahumed meeting his Proselytes at
the place and hour appointed, and finding all the Passages obstructed by his
adversaries, he commanded his Converts to lay dust upon the heads of their
Horses, and to cast some handfuls into the air, and then to lay the reins upon
the necks of their horses, and to read these words of the Alcoran: They took a
veil in their hands and about them, so that they blinded their enemies, that
they saw nothing. And in this posture they passed through the Guards of their
Enemies undiscovered, and came safe to Medina; formerly called Iatrib or
Tribick, ten days journey from Mecca. His coming thither was very successful,
for he was by several received for a Prophet; and during the thirteen years he
tarried there, he finished the Alcoran.

Medina was very populous, both with Jews and Pagans; and while many of the
latter became Mahumeds easy Conquest, the former stoutly resisted him,
scoffing at several passages of his Doctrine, and disputing the Authority of
his Mission. And when they required him to attest the Divine Power of his
Apostleship by such Miracles as their own Moses and Prophets had done before
him, he returned no other answer, but, That God was his witness, whose
testimony was sufficient: That he came not to work Miracles, but to reduce
those that went astray, and to render them subject to the Law of God and
Abraham. He told them likewise, That diverse Prophets had wrought Miracles, and
yet were not believed, but underwent manifold persecutions. And then instanced
in Hadin, Zamud, Zaleh; which were never read or heard of, but in his own
Alcoran.

Amidst the various disputes with the Jews, Mahumed is said to have practiced a
mavelous artifice in loading the Law of Moses with large Encomiums, ever
professing he had no other design, but to complete it with his own. The like
policy he used in magnifying the Jewish Prophets, and their holy Men. But all
this had small influence upon them, whose contradicting of his Doctrine met
with no abatement, till he encountered it with an Armed power, which both at
the first opening of Mahumedism, and ever since, has been the chief propagator
of that cursed Heresy.

In his flight from Mecca, Mahumed wanted not the Consolation of his
Companions; of whom the chief was Abubecer, whose zeal for the Doctrine of his
Son-in-law, purchased him with those of the same Sect the renowned Title of
Just over the Religious fugitives (for so Mahumedan Writers styled the
Companions of Mahumeds Flight) Abdalla Ibn Artakat was Captain. And it is
observed, that not one of Mahumeds Converts stayed behind him, save his Son
in-law Ali, who obtained leave to tarry but three days at Mecca, to dispose of
his concerns. At the expiration of which time, he was to hasten after them.
Mahumed with this Retinue entered Medina about noon, upon a Monday, say some;
others say, upon a Thursday; which was the twelfth of the former Rabiah. The
news of whose coming arrived Medina before his person; which caused Chaled Abi
Job to have Lodgings ready for him, where he tarried till other Houses were
fitted for his entertainment. After Mahumed had left Mecca, seven persons of
good quality appeared in vindication of his Doctrine; these were Balal, Zohiah,
Chabbab, Ammar, Abu-Haudal, Abes, and Sohail. All which being forced to leave
Mecca for fear of the Koraishites, were honored with the name of Religious
fugitives, or Men that fled for the sake of Religion.

As to the computation so well known by the Name of Hegira, I have little to
observe, besides, that with Mahumedists it properly signifies a Pilgrimage for
the cause of Religion. Next, that it happened in the 54 of Mahumeds Age, being
622 of our Redemption. Thirdly, that it is now the common and fixed Era of all
Mahumedans, and took its original from Mahumeds flight to Iatrib, now called
Medina talnabi, or the City of the Prophet; Because it was his Sanctuary, when
he was persecuted by the Meckezes.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Mahumeds first Wars.

THe first year of Mahumeds new Era, was signalized with the White Banner
which he gave to his Uncle Hamza, whom he sent with thirty Musulmin to
propagate his Doctrine. This first Essay of his Military attempts came to
nothing. And we read not of any more till the Battle of Bader, where several of
the chief of the Koraishites were cut off. This happened upon the 17th of
Ramadan, being Friday, in the later end of the second of the Hegira. While the
more warlike of Mahumeds Proselytes thus followed the field, he himself omitted
noartifice to gather Proselytes at home; and the number of these increased
according to the Successes of the other. When he found any of his Converts flag
in their zeal, or question either his actions or Doctrine, he actuated the one,
and silenced the other, with such Chapters as he pretended to be sent him from
Heaven; all which were afterward inserted in the Alcoran, and they bear the
Title of Chapters made at Medina. Thus Mahumed feigned Revelations according to
his purpose, and had a Verse from Gabriel always ready to adjust his
Enterprises.

As he was zealously proselytizing at Medina, news came that Abusophian
Ben-Hareth was going into Syria with a considerable Caravan of the Goods of the
Koraishites: upon tidings whereof, 319 Musulmin were instantly dispatched to
encounter and plunder them. And the Infidels (as the Mahumedists call them)
though a thousand in number, were totally discomfited, seventy being slain upon
the place, as many more taken Prisoners and the rest put to flight, leaving
their Goods a Booty to the Musulmin, whereof only fourteen were slain, or fell
Martyrs (for, for Martyrs, all are accounted, who die in defense of that
Religion.) This Victory is highly celebrated in the Arabian Chronicles; and in
the Alcoran is produced as a signal testimony of Gods approbation of the
justice of Mahumedism: for the Musulmin are bid to consider, That though their
Brethren were far inferior in number to the Infidels, yet they overcame them,
because they fought in the way of the Lord.

But no less than a Miracle assisted the Musulmin in this Battle; for their
Enemies eyes are said to have seen double, and thereupon to have thought the
Mahumedans thrice as many as they were, and of larger stature than ordinary.
From which imagination they suffered more, than from their adversaries. It is
very observable, that many of, if not all, those parcels of the Alcoran where
the fight of the Infidels is spoken of, and how God fought for the Believers,
are by the Commentators on the Alcoran generally understood of this Victory
gained over the Caravan. But after this, we hear no more of Mahumeds Battles,
till the fifth of his Hegira, when no less than ten thousand Jews and
Koraishites set upon the Mahumedans, who with an inconsiderable loss, gave them
a total overthrow. In the same year happened also the Battle with the Koraidae,
whom Mahumed Besieged twenty five days; who at last, oppressed with want,
surrendered themselves up to Saad Ben Maad (who was yet scarce recovered of the
Wounds he received in the former Battle.) The Koraidae being now wholly at
Saads disposal, he commanded all the Men to be put to death, and the Women and
Children to be made Slaves. Whereupon, between six or seven hundred persons
were slain; among whom was Hahibus, the Son of Ahtab, who was General. And all
the Men being thus destroyed, the Children, Women, and Goods, were divided
among the Musulmin. This Battle is called Praelium Fossae, because the slain
were cast into the ditches dug in the field of Medina for that purpose.

In the sixth year of the Hegira, Mahumed had several conflicts with his
Enemies; the chief whereof was the Battle with the Mustalaki, whom he utterly
vanquished, taking the Women and Children captive. Among whom was Gjuweira, the
Daughter of Harith, whom Mahumed afterward Married, and for her Dowry he
released all her Kindred whom he had taken Prisoners. In the same year likewise
fell out the Battle of Haditia, a place near Mecca, in the way to Gjudda; which
proved so advantageous to Mahumed, that his Enemies (the Koraishites) sought
his friendship. A League was concluded betwixt them for ten years, upon these
Articles. 1. That during that time the Koraishites should have free liberty to
follow their Tillages. 2. That any (who had a mind) of the Koraishites, might
go to Mahumeds party; and likewise those of the Mahumedans, who desired, had,
during the making of the Truce, leave to join themselves to the Koraishites. 3.
That after the Truce was made, if any of the Koraishites fled to Mahumed,
without leave of the Governor, he should be sent back unto him: but if any of
the Mahumedans revolted, he should not be sent back. 4. That if Mahumed with
his Soldiers should that year return to Mecca, they were not to enter with
more Arms than was usual for Travailers, nor to stay there above three days.

This League, on Mahumeds side, was effected by Sahlus the Son of Omar, and
committed to writing by Ali the Son of Abutalib. The same year (says
Elmacinus, in Hist. Sarac. p. 7.) Mahumed was inaugurated (what he means by it
I know not) under a Tree, which afterward was swept away, as they report, by a
great flux of water.

On the seventh year of the Hegira, one of Mahumeds Wives having a Son that was
a Carpenter, she moved her Husband that he should make him a Pulpit. To which
he readily consented, having before leaned upon a staff while he officiated in
the Temple they had built. This Pulpit was made of white Tamarisk, and ascended
by two steps, and had in it a convenient seat. In which condition it remained
until the Reign of Muavias the Son of Abusofian, who raised it six steps
higher; in which sort it continued until Osman the Son of Affan covered it with
Tapestry. Elmacinus Hist. Sarac. lib. 1.

In this year happened the Battle of Chaibar, where Mahumed was absolute Victor;
and pursuing his Conquest, took several Forts and Castles. His personal valor
and danger were here very remarkable. Watiha and Selalima, two great Cittadels,
cost him no small hazard and loss to subdue them. But having made himself
Master thereof, with vast stores of Riches, he spared the Besieged, upon
condition that they should annually pay him considerable Tributes, and that it
should be at his pleasure to turn them out of their Country when he thought
fit. The Inhabitants of Badra were taken into the same League, as also many
Jews, who all enjoyed the benefit of the Truce until the Reign of Omar the Son
of Alchitab; who understanding how Mahumed had said upon his deathbed, Let not
two Religions concur in Arabia, interpreted the words of the ejection of those
Inhabitants who were not Mahumedans. But to return: Mahumed by his successes in
the forementioned Battles was grown so formidable, that his Adversaries
despaired to prevail against him by open War; whereupon, they had recours to
stratagem. And here Elmacinus tells us, how one Zainab, the Daughter of Alharit
a Jewess, attempted to take away Mahumeds life, with a joint of Mutton
exquisitely poisoned. But Mahumed tasting thereof, instantly spit it out,
saying, This Mutton tells me that it is poisoned. And his deliverance herein is
reckoned among his Miracles, as shall be shown in a Chapter of that Subject.

This year Mahumed proved so succesful in Arms, that all the Country about
Mecca and Medina were subject to, or in League with him. And he had propagated
his Victories (which were now become the chief method of proselytizing) the
eighth of the Hegira, had not the Meckezes diverted him, who all on the sudden
violated their Faith with Mahumed, and became Truce Breakers, to their utter
overthrow. For Mahumed finding them to have broken their Articles, came against
them with ten thousand Men, who were suffered to enter Mecca, upon condition
that they should put none to the Sword: which was granted to all except a few,
whom he chose rather to kill, than to survive to the disturbance of his new
Kingdom. Elmacinus says, that all the people of Mecca at this time turned
Musulmin, following therein the example of Abbas the Son of Abdulmutalib, and
Abusofian the Son of Harith.

But his success at Mecca was greatly clouded by the overthrow he suffered in
the vale of Honani; where the Pagan Arabians under the command of Melick, Son
of Ausi, put the Musulmin to flight, and pursued them to the Gates of Mecca,
where Mahumed with a Javelin in his hand opposed their entrance, upbraiding
them with Cowardice, and biding them restore the Battle, promising them the
assistance of many Myriads of Angels. Whereupon, returning, and coming unawares
upon the Enemy, who were now careless through success, they utterly overcame
them: and taking Captive the Women and Children, the Men that escaped afterward
became Musulmin, upon condition their Wives and little ones should be restored
them.

The last Battle that happened in Mahumeds lifetime, was that of Tebuc, with the
Princes of Dauma and Eila; whom having overcome, he received to peace, upon
condition of receiving from them a yearly Tribute. Here great rewards were
bestowed upon the Army by Osman, and a numerous company of Proselytes came in
unto Mahumed. This happened the ninth of the Hegira, in which year Mahumed went
to Mecca, where having spent some time in teaching and instructing the people
in his Law, he returned to Medina, where he died: of which in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XV.
Of Mahumeds Death, and many remarkable passages about it.

MAhumed laden with Military successes, and through fear or ignorance the Jews
and Arabians having given up themselves to his Religion; himself at last was
forced to yield to Mortality. To which he was prepared at first by a light
Fever, which at length increased to such violence, that in a great degree it
seemed to bereave him of his senses. His carriage under this distemper was very
remarkable. Some say, that he desired to change many things which he before had
delivered; and that to that end he called for Pen and Paper, saying, that he
would write them a Book, which after his death should preserve them from Error.
But Omar hearing these words, cried out, Alas! the Distemper grows violent upon
the Apostle of God: the Book of God (viz. the Alcoran) is sufficient for us.
But their disputes grew warm; and some were desirous that Pen and Paper might
be brought to Mahumed, but Omar with many others denied it, confidently
affirming, that the Prophet knew not what he said. Mahumed moved at their
strife, commanded them all to depart, and no farther to dispute such things in
his presence. So that he writ nothing; which many of his Followers bewail; as
fancying themselves thereby to have been defeated of many things, which might
have proved advantageous to their Religion.

Mahumed finding his sickness to increase upon him, and falling into the
apprehension of his approaching Death; Elmacinus says, that he commanded
Abubecer to pray with the people; and that they said seventeen Prayers in his
behalf. He fell sick (says the same Author) upon the 28 of Sofar, and died
upon Monday the 12th of the former Rabiah, which some affirm was his Birthday,
and the same day of the week on which he fell sick.

But the news of his death was very variously entertained; some denying it, as
utterly impossible, conceiving him to be immortal; crying out, How can he be
our witness with God, if he be dead! and thereupon affirmed, that he was not
dead, but that he was taken away as Jesus the Son of Mary had been before him.
This stirred up the Multitude to withstand his Burial, constantly affirming
that he was not dead. Omar in this contrast took part with the people, and
threatened to be the death of him who durst say the Apostle of God was dead;
adding, That he was taken up into Heaven, and gone away like Moses. While the
contention grew violent, Abubecer stepped in, and said, Though Mahumed be
certainly dead; yet the God of Mahumed cannot dye, but lives for ever. And
then he proved his saying out of the Alcoran, which sets down, that as others
dyed who in their several times were Prophets, so Mahumed was to dye. And the
people all rested satisfied with Abubecers Speech, and from thenceforth
believed the Death of their Prophet. But no less contention happened about his
Burial; for those Meckezes who had been the Companions of his Flight, pleaded
that he ought to be interred at Mecca, the place of his Birth; the Medinezes,
who received him when he was persecuted from Mecca, said, that he should rather
be intombed at Medina, because it was his Asylum and refuge in the day of his
Afflictions. Others said, it was both most convenient and laudable, to carry
to, and bury him at Jerusalem, the burying place of the Prophets. But at last
they all agreed that he should be buried at Medina, in the Chamber of his Wife
Ayscha, and under the bed wherein he died. He died in the 63 year of his age,
after he had Merchanted 38, been two years in the Cave, lived at Mecca 10, and
13 at Medina. Phatema was the only Child that survived him, who lived but forty
days after him. He had seven Wives, besides Concubines. He was unsatiable in
his Lusts, and so enormous therein, that he spared no Man's bed. The filthiness
of whose life, was a plain demonstration of the falseness of his Prophecy,
according to the rules of trying false Prophets laid down by Maimonides [in
Moreth, lib. 2. cap. 40.] In the trial of Prophet (says that Learned Jew) thou
art to animadvert the perfection of his person, to enquire diligently into his
actions, and to observe his conversation: but the chief sign whereby he is to
be discerned, is the abdication and contemning of bodily pleasures (which is
the token of a wise Man, much more of a Prophet) and principally the filthiness
of Venery. By this sign God has discovered all those who falsely boasted of
the Spirit of Prophecy, so that the truth herein might easily be found of
those that sought it, and error be avoided. By which rule of Maimonides, if
Mahumeds Prophetic Office were duly examined, he would be found, as indeed he
was, a most Pestilent Impostor; being so far from renouncing his lusts, that he
reckoned them among the chief Privileges of his Prophetic Function. I shall
close up this Chapter, with remarking the groundlesness of that Tradition,
which makes Mahumed to be put into an Iron Chest, that by the force of
Loadstones hangs in the air. Speaking with one Cidi Absalom (upon his return
from performing the Alhage to Mecca) he told me it was an idle fable exploded
by the Mahumedists; who from this their conceit of the Hanging Tomb, upbraid
the Christians with ignorance in their story.

Mahumed being dead, and the care of his Religion and Empire being devolved
upon Abubecer, who for his zeal was styled the just; The entrance of his
Government was not a little molested with certain Men, who pretended either to
equal, or exceed Mahumed in his pretentions of a Prophet. Of these Aswad was
the first, who giving it out that he was a Prophet, under that cloak drew many
after him, with whose aid he made himself Master of Zanaa, Nazrana, and Tayfa.
And as he began to grow famous, he was killed in his own House by one Firus
Dailamus.

After Abubecer had rid himself of Aswad, one Taliha created him a second
disturbance; who likewise presenting himself to the people as a fellow-Prophet
to Mahumed, wanted not credulous adherents, well fitted to adjust his
prosecutions. But he was quickly put to flight by Chalid Ben-Walid: and upon
the death of Abubecer, came in to his Successor Omar, to whom he made an Oath
of Fidelity, and thereupon was permitted to return to his Country.

Museilema was the third who pretended to be a companion of Mahumed in this
prophetique Authority: he Married one Thegjazis, who made her self a
Prophetess; but in a very short time she forsook her Husband, and returned to
her own people. The vanquishing of Museilema cost much blood; of his party no
fewer than ten thousand being slain in one Battle; a wound which proved utterly
uncurable to that Sect.

The fourth great Pretender was one whom the Saracen History calls Almotenabbi,
or The Prophesier. An excellent Poet and Soldier; he in all things studied to
be like Mahumed. He wrote an Alcoran, both in Verse and Prose; and was the most
considerable that ever rivall'd the Impostor: but some years after his death,
all his followers were dissipated, and his Sect crumbled to nothing.

CHAP. XVI.
Containing some of the more remarkable Doctrines taught by Mahumed.

THe things taught by Mahumed are so mixed and confused, that it is no easy
task to range them under distinct Heads. And yet they are not more medly'd in
themselves, than disadvantageously represented by Writers. Some hearing of
Mahumedism, think it to be nothing but a bundle of mere absurdities, and a heap
of monstrous and disingenious Fables, wholly tending to the detriment and
subversion of the Truth. Of which mind I was my self, till desire of
satisfaction therein, brought me into a more ingenuous acquaintance therewith.
And that I may give an unprejudiced account of the principles of Mahumedism, I
have consulted with none but such as have professedly written upon this Theme.
It Is true, that Mahumedism strictly considered, is a hodge-podge of Judaism,
Gentilism, and Christianism; which makes it have so many excellent things
contained in it; and the very Alcoran it self, mostly consists of express words
of Scripture. And so subtle was Mahumed in the composure of his Doctrine, that
he took it all out of the Books of the two Testaments, and the Traditionals of
the Jews; adding little of his own, besides some sorry and ridiculous stories,
not at all relating to the points of his Religion. And yet notwithstanding all
this, so browless was this Heretic, that he was not ashamed to tell the
World, That all he Preached was sent him immediately from Heaven. As to the
main structure of this execrable Heresy, the Alcoran affords it to every
Reader in our own Language. But because things therein are so dispersedly laid
down, I shall here give a summary account of the chief points thereof,
collected out of the Saracen Authors. And first, Elmacinus has reduced
Mahumedism to Twelve Articles, namely: 1. To believe in one only God. 2. To
love and to adore him. 3. To despise and renounce the worship of Idols. 4. To
observe Circumcision. 5. Strictly to keep the Fast of the Month Ramadan, (of
whose institution I have already spoken in my account of the Moresco-Customs.)
6. To pray, or repeat the Zala five times in the compass of a natural day. 7.
To be careful to pay Tithes. 8. That every one who is able, once in his
lifetime perform the Alhage or Religious Pilgrimage to the Temple of Mecca. 9.
That they believe the Prophets and Apostles, and all the Books that were
written by them. 11. That Christ the Son of Mary is the Son of God, his Word,
and his Apostle. 12. That they acknowledge the Law and the Gospel.


These are the Twelve things commanded by Mahumed; and all who shall dare to
deny the belief and observation thereof, he commands to be compelled, or ruined
by the Sword and War. This scheme of Doctrine was proclaimed while Mahumed
lived; and the Constitution thereof was so specious, that not a few of other
Religions were therewith so far allured, as to embrace it, and become his
Proselytes. To which many were the more inclined, because Mahumed was now in
condition to secure and protect his Followers. Besides those who owned him for
their Prophet, there were diverse Jews, Magicians, and Pagans, whom he took into
his protection, upon their Oath of Fidelity, and promise of paying an annual
Tribute.

Another Extract of Mahumeds Religion, I find collected out of Ben-Abibecer,
which he received from one Moghahed, who received it from Mahumeds own mouth;
who told his said contemporary Moghahed, that whosoever desired to enjoy
Paradise, and would have God raise him up at the last day with the Apostles,
Prophets, and Wisemen, he was necessarily to observe and believe these Forty
things. 1. That there is a God. 2. A last day. 3. A Book. 4. Prophets. 5. A
Resurrection after death. 6. Providence about good and bad things. 7. That
there is one God, and Mahumed his Prophet. 8. To pray at appointed times,
having first washed and made clean their Bodies. 9. Payment of Tithes. 10. Fast
the Month of Ramadan. 11. To go in Pilgrimage if they were able. 12. That in 24
hours they say 12 Recaas, and three Ex abundanti, to show their love of
Devotion. 13. That they take no Usury. 14. That they drink no Wine. 15. That
they take not the Name of God in vain. 16. That they judge not hastily. 17.
That they defraud not their brethren, neither before their face, nor behind
their backs. 18. That they upbraid no Man for his deformity. 19. That they
neither divorce, nor cast off a chaste Woman. 20. That they make no man's misery
or misfortune matter of their sport or laughter. 21. That they cast not off the
fear of Gods punishments. 22. That they be no obtrectators, or given to Calumny
and Backbiting. 23. That they give God thanks for every benefit they receive
from him. 24. That they be patient in afflictions. 25. That they despair not of
Gods mercy. 26. That they believe that all what happens to them was not
appointed for another, for then it would have befaln him. 27. That God, to
please his Creatures, is not angry with them. 28. That they prefer not this
World before that to come. 29. That they do not covetously withhold from their
Brother ( that is, a Musulman) what they desire of them. 30. That in the things
of Religion they observe him who is above them; and in the things of the World,
those who are below them. 31. That they swear not. 32. That they contract no
friendship with the Devil. 33. That they bid farewell to all vanity. 34. That
they devour not the Goods of the Orphan. 35. That they suppress Calumny. 36.
That they instruct their Family and Children in the things that may be
serviceable to them with God, and lead them to the great and best God. 37. That
they do good to their Neighbor, and hide not themselves from those who stand
in need of them. 38. That they multiply the praises, jubilations, and
magnifications of God. 39. That they curse not the Creature. 40. That in every
state they read the Alcoran, unless when they are unclean. And forsake not the
Congregation of Believers, or turn not a Separatist. That they do to another,
just as they would have it done unto themselves.

There is yet another Abstract of the Mahumedan Religion, which Hottinger, in
Hist. Oriental. Lib. 2. Cap. 3. says is the most absolute. And he speaks of it
as of an excellent Present made him by his Friend Sam. Rhorius. The whole
Compendium bears this Title; An Account of the things which the Tongue ought to
confess, and the Heart to believe concerning Religion.

The first Article respects God, his Name, Attributes, Works, especially of his
Providence.

of GOD.
1. That God is the only God, and that there is none other beside him: That he
has no like, nor equal, nor Son, nor Companion, nor Colleague. Whose Original
is without beginning, and Eternity without end. Whose Attributes are
incomprehensible, and whose Power exceeds all expression. Whose Essence no
thought can comprehend; though men given deeply to meditate use to express it
by Signs and Examples. No Man can know more of God than he has pleased to
reveal of himself. His Throne is equal to Heaven and Earth, and no
inconvenience does accrue unto him from his conservation of them both. God is
the Excellent, Great, Wise, Knowing, Moderator, Powerful, Sagacious, Nimble,
Great, who sits upon his Throne honored with his Being, who pierces into all
places with his knowledge: who created Man, and knows whatsoever his Soul
inspired into him: not a leaf does fall without his privity, neither does a
grave lie hid in darkness, whether green or dry, which is not to be found in
the Books. [By which the Arabians understand Predestination.] The same God has
excellent Names (of which no fewer than 99 are reckoned up by the Arabians) and
excellent Attributes; in all which Names and Attributes there is not the least
change. And it is wickedness to believe, that his Attributes are created, or
his Names produced. God spoke with Moses, and appeared in the Mount, which was
astonished at his Majesty.

Of Providence.
All things, both good and evil, sweet and bitter, are under Gods Providence;
the Lord our God does govern them all. The disposal of all things are in his
hand, and their process and originals depend upon his decree. He knows all
things before they come to pass, and all things flow by his ordering. Nothing
is done by his Worshippers, which he has not decreed and anteverted by his
prescience. He knows all that he has made, making to err whom he will, by
leaving them in his just judgment, and directing whom he pleases, and of his
mercy helping them. All things are brought to an easy end according to his
foreknowledge and foresight, whether it be Calamitous or happy. And it were no
ordinary impiety to imagine that any thing can be done in his Kingdom against
his will; or that any emolument can happen to any one which he does not grant:
or that there is any other Creator of any thing besides him, who is the Lord of
his Creatures, the Lord of their Works, and the orderer of their Motions and
Counsels.

The Belief of the Mahumedans concerning the Alcoran.
They hold, That it is the uncreated Word of God. But this Article was not of
universal belief among the Mahumedans; for Almamon was of a contrary opinion,
and very grievously punished all those who held otherwise. Among those who held
the Alcoran to be the increated word of God, D. Ahmed Ben Habib, of happy
memory, was the chief, whom Almamon sent for in fetters. But Almamon dyed
before Ahmed came to him: yet his intention was pursued by Mutasimus, who
severely corrected him. Elmacin. lib. 2. Saracen. Hist. page 138.

This opinion, that the Alcoran was created, was greatly approved of by
Vathecus, and very highly commended by Ahmed the Son of Abi David, and by his
Counselor Mahumed Ben Abdolmelich, Vathecus upon occasion of this
controversy writ to all the Provinces of Egypt, that the Musulmin should be
compelled to believe that the Alcoran was created; and that this decree should
be written in the Temples, or public Mosks. But this was very displeasing to
the Musulmin, and vehemently detested by them. But those who withstood this
Decree, and refused to embrace the opinion of Vathecus, suffered most grievous
punishments; some being scourged, some imprisoned, and some slain. But
afterward, when Giafar Mottavacelus came to the Empire, he set those at liberty
who were under restraint for their opinion, and expressed no small dislike
against Mahumed Ben Abdolmelic, for advising Mutasimus to confine them. And the
Mahumedans are so zealous in maintaining their Alcoran, that they rather choose
to suffer the extremest miseries, than doubt of its Bternity.

Concerning the Prophetical Office of Mahumed.
It is required of Musulmin to believe that God sealed up all Prophecy and
Apostolate in his Prophet Mahumed: making him to be the last of all he intended
to send unto the World, to preach his will, and to warn and invite Men to turn
unto him; granting him a clear light: that God also sent unto him the wise Book
(that is, the Alcoran) in which his true Religion is explained, and Men are
directed to the right way.

Concerning the last Judgment.
The Musulmen are unanimous in the belief of a last Judgment, saying, that the
hour shall come, when God shall raise up those that are in their Sepulchers,
and that they shall return, like as God created them. That he shall give a
double reward unto the good Works of his faithful servants; whose greatest sins
he forgives if they repent, but the lesser sins are pardoned for their care to
avoid the greater. But God does not forgive those who make him to have
Associates, but he pardons whom he pleases, who are not involved in the Sin of
Association.

In perusal of this Article, the term of Association and Associates I found to
bear an abstruse meaning, which had exceeded my comprehending, till I found the
Alcoran calling the Jews and Christians by the title of Associates; because the
former held that Ozair, and the later that Messiah was the Son of God. And in
another Chapter of the Alcoran, Mahumed says expressly, That Cod does not
pardon him, who makes him to have a Companion. For those that do associate any
thing unto God, err a damnable Error. And Mahumed says, that they are not to
be interceded for. And he brings Abraham in for an example, who prayed not for
his Father, because he was an Idolater, and therefore an Associant. And I meet
with a place cited out of the Sune, or Traditions of Mahumed, which gives us
herein no dark information: and it it thus.

In the day of the Resurrection, it shall be said to the Jews, What have you
Worshipped? they shall answer, We have Worshipped Ozair, the Son of God: and it
shall be said unto them, Ye do err, for God has neither Son nor Companion:
but what is it that you desire? they reply, Something to drink: it shall be
said unto them, Drink, and fall headlong into Hellfire. After this it shall be
said to the Christians, What have ye worshipped? they shall answer, We have
worshipped Messiah, the Son of God: and to them it shall be said, You speak
lies, God has no Son nor Society: What is it you desire? That you would give
us drink: it shall be returned, Drink, and go to Gehenna. By this Tradition of
the Sune, ( which is of equal authority with the Alcoran) we are made to
understand who those Associants are, for whom there shall be no pardon in the
day of doom. But to proceed.

Those who have done so much good as equals in weight a grain of Barley, or a
Pismire, or an Atom, shall see it. And he that has done so much evil, shall
also see it. And that the Prophet Mahumed shall by his intercession deliver
those of his Religion from Torments, who have foully and grievously offended.

Concerning Paradise and Hell.
Under the name of Paradise, they understand the place of the Blessed, which
God created and prepared to be the eternal mansion of his friends, whom he will
there honor with the beholding of his face. And this Paradise the Mahumedans
believe to be the same place out of which God cast Adam, his Prophet and Vicar,
into the land which before he had designed in his foreknowledge.

They believe also another state contrary to the former, in which all those
shall be cruciated that believe not in God; and this they call by the name of
Fire.

Concerning the certainty of the Resurrection, and the manner of retributing
works.
The high God at the day of the Resurrection shall come attended with Troops of
Angels, to take an account of the Nations: the Scales shall be hung up, and the
deeds of Men shall be weighed; and they shall be happy whose works are found
weighty. And then the Books of Works shall be brought; and they who receive
their Book in the right hand, their account shall be easy; but they to whom
the Book is brought behind their back, shall burn in Hell.

Concering Purgatory.
All Men are to pass the Zorat, which signifies a certain infernal Bridge,
according to the disposition and nature of their works. Those that shall be
saved, shall be known by this, that they shall quickly and suddenly be
delivered from the infernal fire or Purgatory; but the rest, according to the
merit of their Works do perish there.

Concerning the Nature of the Mahumedique Faith.
The Musulmin are very metaphorical in expressing themselves in the description
of their Faith, which they call Mahumeds Pool, whither his people are to come
to drink: and that whosoever drinks thereof shall not thirst; but whosoever
shall profane or change this Faith, shall be forced and driven from it. This
Faith consists in the words of the Tongue, sincerity of the heart, and the
outward demonstration of the work. It increases by the increase of works, and
fails through the defect of works: increase and decrease happen to Faith.
Neither is the word of Faith perfected, unless by works: neither does word or
work avail any thing without intention; and neither word nor work, nor
intention is of any efficacy without consent.

Of the state of Martyrs, and of other Souls after this life, when they are
separate from their Bodies.
The Martyrs are not finally extinct, but live with their Master, by whom they
are sustained [where by Martyrs we are to understand all those who have died
(in Battle or otherwise) for the defense or propagation of the Mahumedan
Religion.] The Spirits or Souls of the Blessed do still remain, and shall enjoy
delights until that day in which their Bodies shall be raised; but the wretched
are tormented to the day of judgment. God, say the Musulmin, shall establish in
the life of this, and the World to come, those who believe. They hold also,
that every Man has his Guardian Angel, who appoints him his work; and that
nothing of his actions is hid from God. They believe, that the Angel whom they
call the Angel of Death, does gather together the separate Spirits or Souls at
the beck of the Lord. They have likewise a Tradition, how the Angel of Death
does beat the dead carcass in its grave: and they seem to borrow this Fable
from that of the Jews, which Buxt. takes notice of, Synag. Jud. cap. 35. After
the Arabian Author (out of whom these things are related) had set down these
Contents of Mahumedism, he concludes all with a large Encomium of Mahumed, and
of their happiness who lived in his time; as also of the Empire of his
Successors Abubecer, Omar, Osman, Ali: adding, that none ought ever to mention
them but with signal reverence.

Gabriel Sionita in his 14 Chapter de Urbib. and Morib. Oriental. gives us
another account of Mahumedism out of Jacob Ben Sidi Ali, an Arabian Author,
which being not voluminous, I have thought good here to insert.

The Worship and Religion of the Musulmin consists in this; That they belileve
all the discourses which the Archangel Gabriel had with Mahumed, concerning
the things that are to be believed and done: of which these are the sum: viz.
That the Musulmin believe in one God, and that there is none other like him.
That they believe the Angels to be the Servants of God. That they believe the
Scriptures which were sent to the Apostles; which are by common opinion divided
into an hundred and four Books; of which ten were sent to Adam; fifty to Seth;
and thirty to Enoch (whom they call Edris;) ten to Abraham; the Law to Moses;
the Psalms to David; the Gospel to Jesus Christ; and at last the Alcoran was
sent to Mahumed. And all these Books of Scripture they believe to be sent from
God, for the benefit of Men. They believe a day of Resurrection after death;
and that some are predestined to Fire ( by which they mean Hell) and some to
Paradise, according to the Will of God. For it is expressly said in the Alcoran,
There is none of you who has not his place in Paradise, and his place in
Inferno appointed for him. They believe also a reward of good Men, and the
punishment of bad: The Intercession of Saints. It is also necessary, that every
Musulmin believe the Divine Pen, which was created by the finger of God. This
Pen, say the Mahumedan Doctors, is made of Pearls, and is of so great length
and breadth, that a swift Horse in fifty years cannot pass over it. And it does
write all things past, present, and to come. The Ink with which it writes, is
of light; the Language wherein it writes, none does understand but the
Archangel Seraphael. They believe also the punishment of Sepulchers, or that
the dead therein are often cruciated; and of this they produce an instance of
what happened in a certain Sepulcher betwixt Mecca and Medina. Thus far Gabriel
Sionita.

The Doctrine of Mahumed, in several of the particulars already mentioned, is
much otherwise reported by European Authors, than it is done here. But I have
kept my self to the Orientals in this account, and am induced to believe they
are the fittest to be our informers, as dealing in their own story, and in such
things as did most nearly concern them, and in which we may imagine their care
was to deal fairly.

But ere I shut up this tedious Chapter, I hope the Reader will not take it
ill, that I advertise him of another account of the Mahumedans Religion, set
down by Doctor Pocock, in his Learned Notes upon Greg. Abul. Farajius, page
284. etc. which he cites out of Algazalius, a Writer of great reputation among
the Mahumedans; and it is called, The Interpretation of the Faith of the
Orthodox; which consists in these two points.

1. That there is no God, but the God. 2. That Mahumed is his Messenger. This
is that Duplex Testimonium, which Elmacinus says was the Poesy or Motto of
Mahumeds Seal: though a learned Writer tells us out of Alkodaius, that his Seal
had no other Inscription than Mahumed Messenger of God; which being but three
words in the Arabic, was written in so many lines. This is the usual Devise of
the Signets of the Barbarian Grandees.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the things conducing to the propagation of Mahumed's Heresy. And first, of
his carriage toward the Christians.

HAving, in the antecedent Chapters, given a short account of the Origin and
first State of Mahumedism, and therein of the more remarkable passages relating
to to the Birth, Life, and Death of the Author of that Heresy: In pursuance of
my first intention, I am now to set down the things which (are conjectured to
have) conduced to the first reception of that cursed Impostor; among which,
some related to Mahumed's Carriage and Doctrine, and some to the condition
wherein he found Religion at his first setting up for a Prophet.

It has ever been the guise of the Ringleaders of mischievous Enterprises, to
gain, if possible, a popular esteem of their persons: In which artifice Mahumed
was both studious and successful. For his seemingly rigid Zeal for Religion was
tempered with such an affability of deportment, that the very Koraishites, his
sorest Enemies, highly commended his Demeanor, though they resolutely
withstood his Doctrine.

But that which some have reckoned for a main Engine to advance his Religion,
was his not suffering it, like Moses his Rod, to turn to a Serpent, and devour
all the rest: For he granted a Toleration; for every one had free liberty to
enjoy his Worship, according to that place of the Alcoran, where he says: O
Insidels! I do not adore what you adore; and you do not adore what I worship;
observe you your Law, and I will observe mine. At his first appearance under
the Cloak of a divine Messenger, he found a great part of the World enlightened
with the Gospel, and Christianity: though it was greatly shaken with Intestine
Heresies, yet there was still that Zeal and Union of its Professors, and power
and activity of Civil Magistrates, as rendered it so formidable to Mahumed,
that he could not hope to afright them into compliance. Therefore during the
first and weak state of Mahumedism, its Author put on a modest Countenance and
plausible Aspect, especially toward the Christians, whom he so far courted, as
to draw his own Tenets and Doctrine in some conformity to theirs; highly
praising the Person, Actions, and Rules of Christ, and using a peculiar respect
to all bearing his Name.

Elmacinus (in the first book of his Saracen History) tells us, how that
certain Christians coming to desire Mahumeds protection, he freely granted
their request, conditioning only the payment of a small Tribute. He also
commanded Omar to tell them, That their Lives were as his Life, and their
Riches as this Riches; That whatever befell them, should befall him also. This
was written, says Elmacinus, by the famous Author of the Book Almuhaddeb, and
is cited by Abunifa. The same History reports likewise, that when a Grandee who
was a Christian came to visit the Prophet, that he stood up to him in token of
respect: and being by some of his followers rebuked for so doing, he told them,
The Christian was a Magistrate among his people, and honor is due to men of
that Quality. He charged his Captains to be kind to the Cophtites; and that he
would be an Enemy to that man in the day of Judgment, who oppressed the
Christians. And to testify to the world that his design was not to oppress or
ruinate their Religion, he is reported to have made this following Covenant for
the protection both of Christianity and its Professors.

CHAP. XVIII.
A Copy of the League Mahumed made with the Christians, whose Original was
found in a Monastery on Mount Carmel, near Mount Libanus, a days journey from
Mecca, and (as some say) was sent to the King's Library in France.

MAhumed, sent from God to teach Mankind, and declare the Divine Commission in
truth, wrote these things.

That the Cause of Christian Religion determined by God, might remain in all
parts of the East and West, as well amongst the Inhabitants as Strangers, near
and remote, known and unknown: To all these people I leave this present
Writing, as an inviolable League, as a decision of all farther Controversies,
and a Law whereby Justice is declared, and strict observance enjoined.
Therefore, whosoever of the Musulmin's Faith shall neglect to perform these
things, and violate this League, and after the manner of Infidels break it, and
transgress what I command herein, he breaks the Compact of God, resists his
agreement, and contemns his Testament, whether he be a King, or any other of
the faithful, (that is, Mahumedans.)

By this Agreement, whereby I have obliged my self, and which the Christians
have required of me, and in my Name, and in the name of all my Disciples, to
enter into a Covenant of God with them, and League and Testament of the
Prophets, Apostles, Elect, and faithful Saints, and blessed of times past and
to come.

By this Covenant, I say, and Testament of mine (which I will have maintained
with as much Religion, as a Prophet Missionary, or as an Angel next to the
Divine Majesty is strict in his obedience toward God, and in observance to his
Law and Covenant) I promise to defend their Judges in my Provinces, with my
Horse and Foot, Auxiliaries, and other my faithful Followers; and to preserve
them from their Enemies, whether remote or near, and secure them both in Peace
and War; and protect their Churches, Temples, Oratories, Monasteries, and
places of Pilgrimage, wheresoever situated, whether in Mountain or Valley,
Cavern or House, a Plain, or upon the Sand, or in what sort of edifice soever;
also preserve their Religion and their Goods in whatsoever part they are,
whether at Land or Sea, East or West, even as I keep my self and my Scepter,
and the faithful believers of my own people.

By this Covenant, I likewise promise to receive them into my protection from
all Harm, Vexation, Offense, and Hurt. Moreover, to repel those Enemies which
are offensive to them and me, and stoutly to oppose them both in my person, by
my Servants, and all others of my People and Nation: For since I am set over
them, I ought to preserve and defend them from all adversity, and that no evil
touch them before it afflict mine, who labor in the same work. I promise
farther to free them from those burdens which Confederates suffer, either by
Loans of Money, or Impositions; so that they shall be obliged to pay nothing
but what they please, and no molestation or injury shall be offered them herein.

A Bishop shall not be removed from his Diocese, or a Christian compelled to
renounce his Faith, or a Monk his Profession, or a Pilgrim disturbed in his
Pilgrimage, or a religious man in his Cell: Nor shall their Churches be
destroyed, or converted into Moschs; for whosoever does so break this Covenant
of God, opposes the Messenger of God, and frustrates the divine Testament. No
Impositions shall be laid upon Friars or Bishops, nor any of them who are not
liable to Taxes, unless it be with their own consent.

And as to great Merchants, Fishers of Pearls, Miners of precious stones, Gold
and Silver, and all other rich and opulent Christians, they shall not pay above
twelve shillings yearly; and it shall also be from those who are constant
Inhabitants of the place, and not from Travelers and men of uncertain abode;
for they shall not be subject to Impositions or Contributions, unless they are
possessors of Land or Estate; for he which is lawfully subject to pay money to
the Emperor, shall pay as much as another and not more, nor more required from
him above his faculty and strength. In like manner, he that is taxed for his
Land, Houses, or Revenue, shall not be burdened immoderately, nor oppressed
with greater Taxes than any others that pay Contribution.

Nor shall the Confederates be obliged to go to War with the Musulmins against
their Enemies, either to fight or discover their Armies, because it is not of
duty to a Confederate to be employed in Military Affairs; but rather this
Compact is made with them, that they may be the less oppressed; but rather the
Musulmin shall watch and ward and defend them. And therefore that they be not
compelled to go forth to fight, or encounter the Enemy, or find Horse or Arms,
unless they voluntarily furnish them: And be who shall thus willingly
contribute, shall be recompensed and rewarded. No Musulmin shall infest the
Christians, nor contend with them in any thing but in kindness; but treat them
with all courtesy, and abstain from all oppression or violence toward them.

If any Christian commit a crime or fault, it shall be the part of the Musulmin
to assist him, intercede, and give caution for him, and compound for his
miscarriage; liberty shall also be given him to redeem his life. Nor shall he
be forsaken, nor destitute of help, because of the Divine Covenant which is
with them, That they should enjoy what the Musulmins enjoy, and suffer what
they suffer.

And according to this Covenant, which is by the Christians just request, and
according to that endeavor which is so required for confirmation of its
Authority, you are obliged to protect them from all calamity, and perform all
Offices of good will toward them, so that the Musulmin may be sharers with them
in prosperity and adversity.

Moreover, all care ought to be had, that no violence be offered to them, as to
matters relating to Marriage, viz. That they compel not the Parents to match
their Daughters with Musulmin: Nor shall they be molested for refusal either to
give a Bridegroom, or a Bride; for this is an act wholly voluntary, depending
on their free will and pleasure.

But if it happen that a Christian woman shall join with a Musulmin, he is
obliged to give her liberty of Conscience in her Religion, and that she may
obey her Ghostly Father, and be instructed in the Doctrines of her Faith
without impediment. Therefore he shall not disquiet her, either by threatening
divorce, or by solicitations to forsake her Faith; but if he shall be contrary
hereunto, and molest her herein, he despises the Covenant of God, rebels
against the Compact of the Messenger of God, and is entered into the number of
liars.

Moreover, when Christians would repair their Churches, or Convents, or any
thing else appertaining to their Worship, and have need of the liberality and
assistance of the Musulmins hereunto, they ought to contribute, and freely to
bestow according to their ability; not with intention to receive it again, but
gratis; and as a good will toward their Faith, and to fulfill the Covenant of
the Messenger of God, considering the obligation they have to perform the
Covenant of God, and the Compact of the Messenger of God. Nor shall they
oppress any of them living amongst the Musulmin nor hate them, nor compel them
to carry Letters, or show the way, or any other manner force them: For he who
exercises any manner of this Tyranny against them, is an oppressor, and an
adversary to the Messenger of God, and refractory to his Precepts.

These are the Covenants agreed between Mahumed the Messenger of God, and
Christians. But the Conditions on which I bind these Covenants on their
Consciences, are these:

That no Christian give any entertainment to a Soldier Enemy to the Musulmin,
or receive in his House publicly or privately. That they receive none of the
Enemies of the Musulmin as Sojourners into their Houses, Churches, or Religious
Convents, nor underhand furnish the Camp of their Enemies with Arms, Horse,
Men; or maintain any correspondence or intercourse with them by contracts or
writing; but betaking themselves to some certain place of abode, shall attend
to the preservation of themselves, and to the defense of their Religion.

To any Musulmin and his Beasts they shall give three days entertainment with
variety of meat; and moreover shall endeavor to defend them from misfortune
and trouble. So that if any Musulmin shall be desirous or be compelled to
conceal himself in any of their houses or habitations, they shall friendly hide
him, and deliver him from the danger he is in, and not betray him to the Enemy.

And in this manner the Christians performing Faith on their side, whosoever
violates any of these Conditions, and does contrarily, shall be deprived of the
benefits contained in the Covenant of God and his Messenger. Nor shall he
deserve to enjoy those Privileges indulged to Bishops and Christian-Monks, and
to the believers of the contents of the Alcoran.

Wherefore I do conjure my people by God and his Prophet, to maintain these
things faithfully, and fulfill them in what part soever of the world they are;
and the Messenger of God shall recompense them for the same: The perpetual
observation whereof he seriously recommends to them, until the day of Judgment
and dissolution of the world.

Of these Conditions which Mahumed the Messenger of God has agreed with the
Christians, and has enjoyed, the witnesses were, Abu Bacre, Oman Ben-Alcherab,
Ishman Ben-Afaw, Ali Ben-Abitaleb.


The Secretary was Moavias ben Abi Sasian, a Soldier of the Messenger of God,
the last day of the Moon of the fourth Month, the fourth year of Hegira, in
Medina. May God remunerate those who are witnesses of this writing. Praised be
God the Lord of all Creatures.

This is the Covenant which Mahumed made in favor of the Christians; and
though the Turks deny the truth thereof, yet it is by very good Authors taken
for real. And if the condition of Mahumeds affairs be considered at the time
when this Covenant is said to have been made by him, there will be the less
temptation to suspect its Authority: For in the fourth of the Hegira he was at
war with the Arabians, and his Kingdom in no good posture; but like the
infancy of all new-erected Empires, weak and infirm: And to prevent his being
assaulted with two Enemies at once, the Arabian and Christian, he took off the
latter by this politic Compact.

CHAP. XIX.
The opinions of some Learned Men concerning this Covenant.

THis Testament of Mahumed was at first published in France, with the
Translation of Gabriel Sionita, and after that in Germany, by Johannes
Fabritius, in the 1638. of Salvation. Grotius in one of his Epistles mentions
it in these words: Edidit Gabriel Sionita his diebus Testamentum Muhammedis
(...), aut indultum potius ejus in gratiam Christianorum, haud dubie a
Christianis suppositum, ut sub obtentu tanti nominis Musulmannis aequioribus
uterentur. Ille tamen geminum esse affirmat, and persuadet iis, qui nasum non
habent. By which words the Learned Grotius utterly rejects it, as spurious and
supposititious. But Hottinger speaks a little more warily, and confesses he
never saw it, but that it may be discovered by its style: because Mahumed
expresses all his concerns after such a manner in Arabic, that one conversant
in his Writings, may easily discern what is his, and what not. But without any
venturous determination concerning the truth or supposititiusness of the
abovesaid Compact, we find about the beginning of the fifth Age, that the
Saracens were very respectful toward the Melchitae, whom they esteemed the
Orthodox Christians; of which Sect Mr. Brerewood has given an account in Chap.
16. of his Enquiries touching the diverfity of Languages and Religions, etc.
(whither I refer the Reader.) An instance of this kindness to the Melchitae, we
meet in Elmacinus, page 247. who writes, that Aziz Billah, a great Lord of
Egypt, Married a Melcitique Christian, who made it a condition of her Marriage,
that a Temple of our Lady, otherwise called the Temple of the Patriarch, should
be restored to the Orthodox, which was spoiled and taken from them by the
Jacobites. And that story of Almander, a Prince of the Saracens, is usually
related in testimony of the favor that was shown to the Melchites; which
Zonaras thus reports, (...), etc. Almander the chief over a Tribe among the
Hagarens, being Catechized or instructed by the Orthodox or Melchitae, believed
and was Baptized: to whom Severus sent two Bishops, on purpose to draw him to
his own Heresy; who telling him that the two Natures of Christ were confused
into one, he replied, that then the Divinity of Christ suffered with his humane
flesh: And being willing to convince the two Bishops of the Absurdity of such a
position, he appointed one of his Servants in the presence of the Bishops to
whisper something in his ear; upon which Almander feigned himself exceeding
sad, and began to look dejected. The Bishops demanded the cause, and what it
was that wrought in his countenance so sudden a change. He told them, that
Michael the Archangel was very lately dead. The Bishops told him, the news was
certainly false, and that it was impossible for an Angel to dye. To whom he
replied, If an Angel cannot dye, for what reason do ye affirm that the Deity
can suffer and dye, being conjoined and mixed with flesh, and with it made into
one Nature?

But to return. Mahumeds Solemn League and Covenant with the Christians, may
with good reason be numbered among the Artifices made use of by that Great
Politic, to assist his Infant Empire: which as soon as he saw grown strong,
he wrote the Chapter of the Sword, and another of the Battle, where all his
promises of Toleration and Indulgence to the Christians in their Religion, was
changed to a harsher style: And now it was, Cut off the Infidels Heads, take
them Prisoners, enslave them until you think sit to grant them their liberty,
or make them pay their ransom, etc.

And yet notwithstanding all this, Gabriel Sionita ventures to tell the World,
That by virtue of Mahumeds Covenant, they have in the Turkish Dominions enjoyed
the freedom of public exercising the Christian Religion, and security to
their Persons and Estates.

Consulting with a person very well versed in the Arabian Language, and
desiring his opinion of the said Testament; he writ me word, that he had
perused the Testamentum Mahumedis in Arabic, and concluded it spurious;
because not two lines in the whole are to be met with, any way savouring of the
Alcoran-Phrase. The Edition which I perused (says he) is in Arabic and Latin,
where the Printer in a Preface tells us, that it was first brought out of the
East by Pacificus Scaliger a Capucine Missionary, who took much pains in the
Eastern parts, in endeavoring the conversion of those people to the Roman
Faith. And it is very probable (says my Friend) both by the style and matter,
that he himself was the first and sole Author of it.

CHAP. XX.
That Mahumed's carriage to the Jews and Arabians might be a help to nourish up
his Infant Sect.

MAhumed's pretended Friendship to the Christians was not more advantageous to
his Sect, than his Enmity against the Jews, whom he looked upon as a
contemptible perfidious people, whom God punished with wants and shame; and he
always speaks of them as of Beggars and Vagabonds: and because of their
obstinate adherence to the legal Ceremonies, he by way of scorn calls them, The
people of the Law. And we are told out of Al Baidawi's Commentaries upon the
Alcoran, (who died in the 692 year of the Hegira;) That wherever Mahumed
uses these words, The curse of God be upon the Infidels, it is to be
understood of the Jews.

This his severe deportment toward the Hebrews, some impute to his hatred of
their cruel dealing with the good men God sent unto them. And others again
imagine it was, the more cunningly to ingratiate with the Christians. But we
need not herein have recourse to conjectures, seeing we find the Jews
continually opposing his Doctrine, and laboring to detect and expose him for a
Cheat. Once (we read how) some of the Jewish Priests coming to Mahumed, told
him, That there was a debate happened betwixt them and the people, and that they
had bound themselves to stand to his award; and that if he would give sentence
against the people, they would become his Proselytes, and by their Example draw
many to his Sect. But Mahumed perceiving their design, sent them away with
threatenings to be revenged of their project. At another time a Jewish Damsel
went about to poison him, and the Jews every where disputed against his
Principles; which was pretense enought to an imperious proud Impostor, of being
severe against such an unarmed and unwarlike Generation as the Jews were at
that time.

As to the Pagan Arabians, he treated them with other Stratagems. He found, as
he often calls them, Sufeha, an Ignorant, Beastly, and Idolatrous Nation, viod
of all Learning and ingenuous Education; to whom Mahumed discovered the vanity
of their Idolatry, and the insignificancy of the Idols they worshipped: and
gave them likewise to understand, that they ought to worship the Great God of
Heaven and Earth, who was the only true God, who made all things; who caused
Rain to fall from Heaven, and fruits to proceed from the Earth; who caused men
to die, and after death to rise again; to reward every man according to his
deserts with Glory or Punishment: That God had created the Paradises, with many
excellent things, for the Blessed; and Hell, with numberless torments, for the
Damned. All which were denied by the Idolatrous Arabians, upon whom he so
wrought by fearful and frequent inculcations of these things, that at last
numbers of them embraced his Dotcrine. And the more to endear these his new
Proselytes, (measuring theirs by his own libidinous humor) he indulged them
all manner of Carnal and filthy enjoyments; which, I doubt not, was a winning
concession to that rude and blockish people, and a fit Engine to insinuate his
Religion into their embrutisht minds. And we need not suspect the truth of
what is spoken, or doubt that Mahumed granted his Disciples a licentious
freedom in this life; seeing the Heaven he promises them in the next, is made
to consist chiefly in such fleshly fruitions, as may appear by this following
short description of his Paradises, or future state.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Mahumed's Paradises.

GOd, says the Alcoran, created seven Habitations, each of which is called a
Paradise. They are wrought with Gold, Silver, Pearls, and precious Stones: It
has diverse stately Edifices, Gardens, and diverse Fruit Trees, two sorts of
each: There are several Fountains and Rivers of cool Waters, Milk, Honey, and
most sweet Wine. In the midst of this Paradise there is a vastly big Tree, with
leaves of Gold and Silver, the branches whereof cover the walls of Paradise: In
every leaf of this Tree the Name of Mahumed is inscribed together with the Name
of God, in this known Abridgement of Mahumedism, Le ilehe ille allah Muhamed
razalo allah (as the converted Alfaqui Andreas Maurus writes it, lib. Confus.
Sect. Mahumed, cap. 10.) i. e. There is no other God but the Lord, and Mahumed
his Messenger. The ornaments and furniture of these Paradises are to be
collected out of several Chapters of the Alcoran; wherein is to be seen how the
Moors are to have their Silks, Purples, Tapestries, Tissues, Brocado's, for
Curtains, Vallens, etc. Their Beverage shall be a sort of Water whiter than
Snow, and sweet as the Honeycomb. Here the Moors shall have delight without
care, and continually be merry and jocund. They shall have their Guildemin
Mohalledun, Pages to wait upon them clothed in Tissues, and surpassing in
beauty; who have no other employment but to be Cup-bearers to the Musulmin.
Here are also the Horhin, Virgins sumptuous in apparel, and beautiful as the
light. These are not of humane race, but continually created. These Virgins
live recluse, and are made on purpose to entertain the Musulmin. And here he
speaks such uncouth filthiness, as may not with due modesty be named to an
ingenuous Reader. But, I confess, so great is the naughtiness of the things to
be met with in Andreas Maurus his account of Mahumed's Paradises, that I had
rather the curious Reader should consult that Author, than I make him here
blush with a Transcription.

But among all the Luxuries provided for the men, not one word is spoken of any
entertainment provided for the women; which the converted Alfaqui notes for a
singular defect (amid all the accomplishments) of Mahumed's future state.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Mahumed's Miracles.

THough the things Mahumed indulged his Followers in this life, and promised
them in the next, were certainly very taking with the sottish and Idolatrous
Arabians, and a very proper instrument to seduce them to his party: Yet with
those who were of a more awakened Understanding, he was forced to deal in
another Method. And because he was often urged to do Wonders, like Noah, Moses
and Christ; and to confirm the Divine Right of his Apostleship by express
Miracles, he pretended these following to have happened to him.

1. That in his Infancy (as was said above) the Angel Gabriel launced his
Stomach, and pulled out his Heart, and took thence the black Coar, which is the
seat of temptations, and instantly put up his heart again. Mahumed not
suffering the least disease or pain.

2. That going with the Caravan, and one day it chancing to be very hot, a
Cloud settled over Mahumed's head, and overshadowed, and went along with him,
to save him from the violent heat.

3. Mahumed (as he may well) reckons it for a Miracle, that Gabriel should come
and salute him in the Cave, and begin to deliver him the Alcoran.

4. A fourth Miracle was, that of the Beasts, Birds and Stones saluting him, as
one evening he came from the Cave, and told him expressly, that he was the
Messenger of God. To which he adds, that in his passage there lying the trunk
of a tree, and Mahumed being ready to step aside, the tree cleft asunder in the
midst, so that he went through it; and as soon as he was gone, the tree grew
together again as it was before.

5. Another Miracle was the coming of the trees to shadow him, and after they
had performed that office, at his command to return to their places. In the
Sune this Miracle (says Jo. Andr. Maurus) is thus reported:

Mahumed being one day uncovered in the fields, he had occasion to untruss,
during which the Sun shone so hot on his head, that he was all in a sweat;
whereupon he looked toward certain Trees which were far from him, and called
them to come and shadow him; upon which two Trees tore up the earth with their
roots, and came to the place where Mahumed was, and made him an Arbor; and
having done their office, at Mahumed's command they returned to their places,
and the earth closed up their roots again.

6. Another Miracle was the weeping of the trunk of a Palm Tree: which I find
thus related:

When Mahumed was ready to leave Mecca, and go to Medina, he had a dry trunk of
a Palm Tree in his house; which on the night of his Alhegira, or Banishment
from Mecca, was very moist; whereupon he called the Moors, and desired them to
see a great Miracle. The Moors answered, that they desired nothing more than to
see Miracles; then he brought them where the trunk lay, and bad them touch it
with their hands, and see how it wept for Mahumed's departure.

7. But his greatest Miracle was the dividing of the Moon, as is intimated in a
Chapter of the Alcoran, bearing that Title. Upon which a Commentary thus
relates the whole Story: One night an Uncle of Mahumed promised that he would
turn Musulman, and believe him for a Prophet, if he would make the Moon come to
the midst of Heaven, and be in the Full, which was then but newly Changed, and
divide it self into two equal parrs, and come out of Heaven to the Earth, and
the two pieces to go, the one through the hole of one of Mahumed's sleeves, and
the other piece through the hole of the other, and both pieces to come out at
the collar of his Coat, utttering these words, Mahumed is the Prophet of God;
and then to join together, and return to Heaven where it was at first.

Mahumed (says the Legend) prayed God to assist him with his Divine Power to
do all that his Uncle demanded. And the Story says, that the Moon presently,
at Mahumed's request, came to the midst of Heaven, and divided it self, and
descended, and did as is abovementioned. But all this was no whit prevailing
upon Mahumed's Uncle, who charged him for a Conjurer, and imputed to
Negromancy, what his Nephew pretended to be done by the Divine Power: which
occasioned those words in the Chapter of the Moon, The wicked say, it was a
manifest Forgery.

These are the greatest of Mahumed's Miracles, and the most authentic among
the Moors; though numbers more are related to have been done by him; of all
which, not one witness is produced, nor any reason rendered that might move him
to perform them.

CHAP. XXIII.
A short view of the state of Christianity at the time Mahumed began his
Heresy. How the divisions in Christian Religion might help up Mahumedism.

IF we look into the condition of Christianity both before and at the time of
the breaking forth of Mahumedism, we shall discern it miserably shaken and
convulsed; the principal Heads of Faith oppugn'd and renounced by various
Heresies, and the outward Communion of Christians vilely confused and rent by
the contesting Prelates of those days, who minded their own pride and
pre-eminence more than the peace and establishment of Christian Religion. There
is a Soldier, who in his scabrous and rough Latin, thus describes the state
of Christians in the time of Constantius: [Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 21.] Erat
( speaking of that Emperor) super his facilis adimere quae donabat,
Christianam Religionem absolutam and simplicem anili superstitione confundens:
In qua scrutanda perplexius, quam componenda gravius, excitavit dissidia
plurima, quae progressa fusius aluit, concertatione Verborum, ut catervis
Antistitum jumentis publicis ultro citroque discurrentibus per Synodos, quas
appellant, dum ritum omnem ad suum trahere conantur arbitrium, rei vehicularis
succideret nervos. And lib. 27. Damasus and Ursicinus supra humanum modum ad
rapiendam Episcopalem sedem ardentes, scissis studiis, asperrime
conflictabantur, ad usque mortis vulnerumque discrimina adjumentis utriusque
progressis: quae nec corrigere sufficiens Viventius, nec mollire coactus
secessit in suburbanum: and in Concertatione superaverat Damasus, part qua ei
favebat instante. Constatque in Basilica Sicinini, ubi ritus Christiani est
Conventiculum, una die Centum triginta septem reperta cadavera peremptorum:
Efferatamque diu plebem aegre postea delinitam.

In which periods our Author sufficiently insinuates the distracted State of
Christianity, occasioned chiefly by the haughtiness of those very men, whose
Office strictly obliged them to a clear contrary deportment. But the Historian,
by way of Sarcasm, seems to justify their proceedings, seeing it was for no
lower design, than that having obtained their purposes, Ditentur oblationibus
Matronarum, procedantque veheculis insidentes circumspecte vestiti, epulas
curantes profusas, adeo ut eorum convivia regales superarent mensas, qui esse
poterant beati revera, si magnitudine Vrbis despecta, quam vitiis opponunt, ad
imitationem Antistitum quorundum Provincialium viverent: quos tenuitas edendi
potandique parcissime, vilitas etiam indumentorum, and supercilia humum
spectantia perpetuo Numini verisque ejus cultoribus ut puros commendant and
verecundos.

But if it be suspected that his great hatred of the Christians moved this
Gentile to animadvert too censoriously upon their carriage, then it will be
reasonable to enquire what others have delivered in this matter, whom we must
needs confess to be free from that partiality, which we may be jealous of in
Ammianus.

Eusebius (Lib. 8. c. 1. Hist. Eccles.) describing the times immediately
antecedent Diocletian' s Persecution, says, That through too much liberty the
affairs of the Church began to degenerate into Softness and Sloth; and
Christians fell to persecute one another with hatred and contumelies, and
mutually to wound themselves with petulant Tongues: the people minded nothing
but bitter invectives, railings, calumnies and reproaches. The Governors of the
Church clashing with, and oppugning one another, drew the Laity into seditious
practices. Under a show of holiness, the most abominable depravities were
committed, and all manner of iniquity was acted under the pretense of Religion.
The Assemblies of Christians grew cold, thin, and seldom: And when God seemed
to have a design to open their eyes by the persecution raised against the
Christian Soldiers that were under Veturius, yet they were not at all
therewith moved, nor took the least care to appease Gods wrath, or render him
propitious; but as if they thought the Almighty had taken no notice of their
sins, they went on therein without remorse, adding new to old. The Pastors
leaving the rule of Godliness, fell into hatred, discord, threatenings,
emulations, enmities, etc. among themselves; minding nothing but haughtiness
and pride, and like Tyrants to suppress each other.

This was the miserable condition of the Church at the entrance of the fourth
Age: and to this purpose also we find Hermias Sozomen writing [in Prooem.
Eccles. Hist.] where he apologizeth for himself in taking notice of the
Seditious among Ecclesiastic persons about Primacy and Prelation; and with due
resentment recounts the litigious disputations which were hotly pursued under
the pretext of Holiness, and a more perfect knowledge of God, to the bitter
disturbance of the Church; those things being then made matter of controversy,
which before were never questioned. Sozomen Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 14. The
implacable contest betwixt Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome, and John of
Constantinople, about the dignity of Ecumenical Bishop, which happened about the
time of Mahumed, is too notorious to need to be enlarged upon.

But to come a little nearer; Arabia, where Mahumed first appeared, was fallen
under the pest of Heretical Doctrines, which began in Beryllus Bishop of the
Bostri; who that he might pervert the Ecclesiastic Canon, fell into various
Opinions about the Divinity of our Savior, and the immortality of the Soul.
And though by the pains of Origin he was reduced, yet the spawn of his Heresy
was not quite dried up in Mahumed's time. Eusebius intimates their Heterodox
opinions, Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 36. out of which Historian St. Aug. (in
his Treatise of Heresies) observes, that the Arabians generally held, that
humane Souls perish with their Bodies, and like them should be raised at the
last. And Danaeus says, in his Commentaries upon that Book, how Arabia, as
also its Neighbor Egypt, was always fruitful in Heresies: and as both
Countries have brought forth Serpents obnoxious to men's bodies, so likewise
Opinions dangerous to their souls. But, what is most remarkable to our purpose,
at the very time when Arabia was overspread with the Heresies among Christians,
Mahumed laid the foundation, and sowed the seeds of his damnable Imposture; as
Danaeus observes, in his Comment. in August. de Haeres. 6. page 202.

The Collyridians (so called from Collyris, or the wreathed bread which they
offered to the Virgin Mary) were at the rise of Mahumed very numerous and
prevailing; who, by giving divine honors to the Blessed Lady, brought no
little disrepute to Christianity, by giving Mahumed (and his Partisans)
occasion to think it guilty of Idolatry; the great sin he at first so zealously
preached against. But it had been well the Collyridians had been the only Sect
which gave Mahumed opportunity to oppose Christianity. For there were many
more, such as the Jacobites, Nestorians, Melchites, etc. who served to increase
the cry, and which made him so often upbraid Christian Religion with the
Division of its Professors; who were so separate in their Opinions, that
Mahumed thought them to be no better than a medley of Fanatics.

And that this troubled state of Christianity was very advantageous to the
designs of this great Deceiver, need not be suggested to the considering
Reader, etc.

CHAP. XXIV.
A further enquiry into the things conducing to Mahumed's advancement, etc.

IT would be too bold an intrusion into the secrets of Providence, to enquire
why God should suffer this monstrous Impostor, from so contemptible a
beginning, to grow up to be a scourge and disturber of the whole world; which
with most safety is to be ascribed to His Power and Wisdom, who makes the worst
of men serviceable to his Providence, in making them the Executioners of his
anger, which we may conclude was now fearfully incensed against those who had
so undutifully prevaricated the Heavenly Rule of good life, and had no less
violated the unity of the Gospel by Schism, through their want of Charity, than
they had prostituted the Faith thereof through Heresy, for lack of Truth. At
the first opening of Mahumedism, Arabia Foelix was overrun with all sorts of
false Religions, and the Professors of Christianity were then very negligent in
making Proselytes; and so far from laboring the conversion of either Jew or
Pagan to the most holy Faith, that not a few of them had in effect renounced it
themselves; having not only called in question, but flatly denied the Divinity
of the Son of God: And those who were not infected with that damnable Heresy,
were yet tainted with other Heterodox opinions, which made them so factious and
unquiet, that they gave occasion to the Infidels to scoff at them, when they
pretended to be the Subjects of one whom they styled The Prince of Peace.

The Emperor Heraclius was grown supine and negligent in the affairs of both
Religion and Empire. He was become also a mighty favourer of the Jacobites,
having been seduced to that Heresy by the crafty insinuations of Athanasius
their Patriarch. He was likewise so mightily fallen in the esteem of the world,
that when he sent Ambassadors to make a peace with Chosroe, the haughty Infidel
treated them much below their Character; and at last dismissed them with this
scornful answer: That unless Heraclius would renounce the crucisi'd Galilean,
whom he worshipped as God, and worship the Sun, he would treat no further with
him. He was moreover wholly given up to the Heresy of the Monothelites, which
spruag out of the bitter root of the Jacobites, and was the last of that long
and wicked train of Heresies, which upon the contempt of the Council of
Chalcedon, exceedingly wasted and ruined the East Church.

Out of this Heresy of the Monothelites there were sprung infinite extravagant
branches, which greatly deformed the Church, renting its Unity with manifold
Schisms, and wounding its Faith with as many Heresies: And God knows what would
have followed, if the Lord, whom they had wonderfully wronged by their wanton
and wandering conceits of him, had not, to stop the course and stream of their
wickedness and folly, let loose Mahumedism to overwhelm those first, who first
had most wronged the Savior of the world; punishing by this violent and wicked
Sect, the sinful Divisions of Christians: For we see that the Mahumedan
Conquests at first chiefly seized on those Regions where Christianity was most
pestered with Heresies.

Nor was Heraclius more remiss to suppress Factions in the Church, than
Discontents in the State; but by his Exactions made all sorts of his Subjects
ready to comply with any Pretender to free them from their present pressure. He
had made the Jews his implacable Enemies, by his new cruelties; being grown
unmercifully severe against them, after the Magician had warned him to beware
of the Circumcised Nation. And as to the Christians, their Intestine Divisions
were so great and many, and the Emperor a Patron of the worst, that they were
in the next disposition for a Rebellion. And in this troubled juncture of
affairs Mahumed appeared, promising, as some say, to reconcile all differences
in Religion, and to remove all oppressions in civil Government; pretenses not
more specious, than necessary to be made good. But his method was very
unprobable, while he left all to the decision of the Sword. And indeed, the
success of his Arms was the chief cause of the spreading of his Doctrine; it
having ever been the condition of the Conquered, to follow for the most part
the Religion of the Conquerours. And I cannot but here tell the Reader, that
the present Mahumedans make the success of their Prophets Arms, and spreading
of his Doctrine, the chief proofs and arguments of the truth of his Mission and
Revelations. But enquiring into the causes of the enlargement of Mahumedism, to
those already-mentioned, we may add the Impostor's strict prohibition of all
Disputes concerning his Doctrine, or calling any point thereof into question.
Next, the keeping his Proselytes in ignorance, by a suppression of the study of
Philosophy: for by putting out this light, he left them destitute of all manner
of discovering the grosness and vanity of his Positions. And lastly, the
sensual Liberty allowed by Mahumed, may be duly accounted among the main
causes of the advancement of his Imposture: for he did not grant his Sectaries
only in this life a prodigious filthiness and carnality, but he promised them
the like in Paradise, as I have before mentioned: And men (we know) are more
allured and persuaded with sensual enjoyments, whereof they have certain
experience, than with the promises of spiritual delights, presented only to
their hopes, and for which, present and sensible pleasures must in the mean
time be forsaken. But by what means soever Mahumedism was at first promoted, we
find a learned person upon a diligent calculation of Mahumedans and Christians,
making the former exceed the latter in proportion of Six to Five.

FINIS.

