AN ADDRESS Given in to the Late King James, BY THE TITULAR ARCHBISHOP OF
DUBLIN: FROM The General Meeting of the Romish Bishops and Clergy of Ireland,
held in May last, by that King's Order.

Wherein several Things relating to the Popish Designs upon these Three
Kingdoms, are discovered.

The Original whereof was found in the late King James's Closet, in the Castle
of Dublin, at his leaving that City: And the Copy whereof was found in the
Titular Archbishop's Lodgings.

Now Published with Reflections on each Paragraph.

LONDON: Printed for (...) Baldwin, in the Old Baily. 1690.

THE MEMORIAL GIVEN IN To the Late King JAMES, BY THE Titular Archbishop of
Dublin, etc.
THAT the late King James was induced by the Emissaries of Rome, to trample
upon the Laws and Liberties of the Subjects of these Three Kingdoms, there is
no body who enjoys the use of their Reason, can deny. But tho we felt every day
new Invasions made upon our Religion by the same Party of men under the Covert
of the Royal Power and Prerogative (as they called it); yet there are to this
very day, a certain incredulous sort of men, who have the folly to tell us,
That King James had never the least Design to alter the Religion of these
Kingdoms, or to introduce Popery.

Among a Thousand Instances to prove that King James's great Design was the
utter extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and the Restitution (as the
Papists call it) of the Catholic one, There has of late one come to light,
which sets the Affair in a Meridian light, beyond all possibility of doubting;
which Instance, and the occasion of its coming to be known, is as follows.

The Late King upon his arrival in Ireland from France, did make as
considerable Steps to overturn the Protestant Religion and Interest in that
Kingdom, as the short time he was there, and the Decorum he was to carry
toward the few Protestants who adhered to him, could possibly admit of. A
great many Laws made for the safety of the English Protestants, and for keeping
out the Irish from the possessions they had by so many Rebellions justly
forfaulted, were rescinded: And, which was next to giving the final Blow to the
Protestant Interest in that Kingdom, King James, in his Irish pretended
Parliament, had formally removed the Fundamental Charter, by which the
Protestants possessed their Estates; I mean, the Act of Parliament of Ireland,
called, The Act of Settlement: So it seemed, there wanted scarce any more to be
done, to restore Popery and Papists for good and all in Ireland.

But all this was not able to satisfy the fiery Zealots of the Church of Rome,
whom nothing could please, but a thorough work, as they named it. The Irish
Popish Bishops meet together in the Titular Archbishop of Dublin 's Lodgings;
and with them, The Provincials of all the Religious Orders: And having
unanimously agreed to the following Address or Memorial to be presented to the
late King, then in Dublin, they present it to him in a full Body. That King
James received this Address very kindly, was visible in his manner of treating
the Persons that presented it. He told them, They had never any reason to doubt
of his Zeal for the Catholic Religion; and of his willingness to sacrifice all
that was dear to him upon that account. And that he would within a few days
acquaint my Lord Archbishop of Dublin, with his Resolutions and Answer to their
Address.

What Answer King James returned, we have not yet been able to learn. But the
Memorial it self was found in that King's Closet, after his leaving Dublin; and
another Copy of the same, in the Archbishop's Lodgings.

The Memorial it self deserves to be here inserted word by word, as it is in
the Original found in King James's Closet: And it may not be impertinent to
make some short Reflections on each Paragraph, as they lie in order.

The Memorial runs thus.
SIR,
AS we are very sensible of Your Majesty's Great Zeal to Establish the Roman
Catholic Religion in this Your Kingdom of Ireland, and own our selves
extremely thankful and beholding to Your Majesty for Your Gracious Declaration
to us upon that Subject; So pursuant to Your Majesty's Directions and
Encouragement, we herein most humbly offer the means that to us seem most
efficacious for the due Accomplishing thereof.

REFLECTIONS.
Here is a fair acknowledgment of a Design to establish the Roman Catholic
Religion in Ireland, which they expressly say, King James had declared to them,
and had previous thereto given them Directions and Encouragement about it. One
would think, The Titular Archbishop of Dublin, and the rest of the Gang, needed
few Directions to go about so meritorious a Work as the Establishment of the
Catholic Religion: But it seems King James his Zeal has outgone even theirs in
this point. He has not only given them Directions about it, but encouraged them
in it. And we know the word Encouragement, is a very entensive one; as
including not only promises to assist, but means and power to bring about. And
we have no reason to doubt, but King James, though he thought not himself
obliged to keep his word so often given to English Heretics; yet He would not
fail to merit Heaven, by keeping firm with those People He imagined had power
to lock Heaven against him in case of a failure. And here by the by, I think it
but just, His Confessor should absolve him from the obligation of his Promise
to the Titular Archbishop of Dublin, and the rest of them, since the entire
Ruin of his Affairs in Ireland, has put him out of capacity to keep his word
to them.

MEMORIAL.
Imprimis, The usual and right Method for to compass any End or Design, is
first of all to remove the Chief Obstacles that offer thereunto; Wherefore,
inasmuch as the Penal Laws, particularly the Statute of Uniformity, and other
like, were originally devised and enacted to abolish the Roman Catholic
Religion, and still continue to be the main hindrance of its advancement; We
humbly conceive that to re-establish the same Roman Catholic Religion in this
Kingdom, as Your Majesty graciously intends, it is in all Conscience and
Justice an Act of indispensible necessity to repeal those aforesaid Penal Laws
so thoroughly repugnant to the Honor and true Worship of God, and to the
Salvation of Souls.

REFLECTIONS.
What a Barrier the Penal Laws are against Popery here, the Papists themselves
do witness; And what an Eyesore they are to them, they fairly enough insinuate
by their earnestness with King James, in this Paragraph, to have them Repealed.
Here it is we have reason to admire and praise the wise and happy Conduct of
the Church of England in the late Reign, who would not be imposed upon to take
off these Laws, which the Papists as well as they, knew to be a firm barrier
against Popery, and a sure fence for securing the Protestant Religion; Whatever
other glosses were put upon them by some of that time. This does sufficiently
free that Church from the imputation of wilfulness and moroseness thrown upon
them by their Enemies upon the account of their Refusal in this matter: since
the Papists themselves acknowledge in the abovementioned Paragraph, That these
Laws were originally enacted to abolish the Roman Catholic Religion, and to be
the main hinderance of its advancement. And indeed they must have been very
blind, that did not see through the Designs of the late Reign, in their
Intriegues of repealing these Laws: And it were a great Reflection upon the
Wisdom of the Dissenters, to think they had any other thoughts of the
Court-Designs at that time, or that they could be brought to imagine, there was
any real kindness meant toward them, either in the Toleration granted them, or
in the Insinuations made them to take off the Penal Laws. For there was no
Party of men more odious to the Papists, than the Dissenters, notwithstanding
of all the Caresses made them, merely to juggle them into their own Ruin, and
the Ruin of the Church of England.

MEMORIAL.
IIdly, Whereas Almighty God of his Divine Providence has placed Bishops in his
Church, bought and redeemed by the Price of his most Precious Blood, for to
rule and govern the same, and for to enlighten the People into the true and
only way of Salvation, as is apparent in Holy Writ; It follows by an
unavoidable consequence, that it is not only conducive, but also absolutely
requisite for the establishment of this Roman Catholic Church in its due
luster and decorum in this Kingdom; That the Prelates and other Clergy thereof,
be restored to their Livings, Churches, and full exercise of their
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, without which it is not to be expected that they
can prevail to repress the Vices most swaying in this Age, and make the
Christians improve themselves with more serious application in the observance
of God's Law, and in the wholesome practice of Piety and Virtue: For we find by
Experience, that the People nowadays, generally speaking, will not much heed
or regard the Exhortations or Threatenings of their Ghostly Directors, when they
see them reduced to so low an ebb of Indigence, as to depend of themselves for
their spiritual Power and Authority.

REFLECTIONS.
In the last Reign we were industriously told over and over again, by the Late
King's Emissaries, That there was never any thing of a Design to invade the
Livings or Revenues of the Church, or of applying of them to any body else, but
those of the Church of England. Here the Mask is taken off, and the true Design
of appropriating the Revenues of the Church, to the use of the Roman Catholics
alone, is downright confessed. This was really designed long before: And we had
Bishops consecrated by the Pope, for almost all the Bishoprics of England and
Ireland: But the Affair was not ripe enough to install them in their Livings.
These Bishops by the Canon Law, and by the acknowledgment of all the Lawyers of
Rome, Had an undoubted legal Right to the Revenues of their Titular
Bishoprics, and that immediately upon their being nominated by the Pope:
Likeas the Protestant Bishops were but Usurpers and illegal Possessors of those
Revenues, if we believe Romish Casuists. Now they put King James in mind of his
gracious Declaration to them upon that Subject; And they must have their Foot
in, and the new Possessors (as they take the Protestants to be) must be set a
packing for good and all. At the end of this Paragraph, our Irish Bishops and
Provincials, do formally contradict their so much cry'd-up Vow of Poventy; And
tell us plainly, That the People will not have regard to the Advices of their
Ghostly Directors, when they see them reduced to so low an ebb of indigence, as
to depend of themselves for their spiritual Power and Authority. Here they
plainly insinuate, that Poverty is obstructive of the Peoples profiting by
their directions; And thence it is, They must have the Livings of the Clergy
restored to them, to give a greater luster to their spiritual Power and
Authority. At this rate, the Clergy of the first three Centuries, and the
Mendicant Orders of their own Church of Rome, must have very little success in
their Ministerial Functions, since they of old did absolutely depend, and these
new Orders do yet, upon the sole Charity of the People.

MEMORIAL.
IIIdly, Though it may, perhaps, seem to some Politics, that this Restoring
the Roman Catholic Religion and Clergy here to their Livings, Churches,
Jurisdiction and Privileges, may be inconsistent at present with the Prospect
of Your Majesty's Affairs in England, and may alienate the Affections of the
Protestants there, from giving a helping hand, as may be expected, toward Your
Majesty's Restoration; yet, with submission, we conceive that this Objection
carries more seeming than solid Reason; for when did it ever prove successful
to Your Majesty, or to any of Your Royal Predecessors, so far to humor the
Protestants of England in Concerns of this nature relating to the Glory of God,
and good of Souls? What return did they make in these latter times to Your
Majesty's manifold Condescentions and Indulgences to them? Did not they, even
their Chief Clergy, bring in Foreign Power to invade Your Throne, without
regarding the Loyalty and Allegiance they swore unto You? Moreover, if those
Protestants, Laity and Clergy of England, or any of them, be now turned really
Loyal, and well-affected to Your Majesty; surely they will not in any reason be
displeased, or grudge, that in this Your Catholic Kingdom, always Loyal, Your
Majesty should establish, as aforesaid, the Roman Religion, as also the Clergy
thereof, who always preach and teach Loyalty and Obedience to their King, to be
an essential Maxim of the Religion and Law of God. Neither will the said
Protestants upon that consideration of Your Majesty's Gracious Restoring the
Roman Catholic Religion and Clergy as desired, flinch off, or desist from
cooperating to Your Majesty's Restoration, no more than the Irish
Roman Catholics have done, when deprived of their Estates, and brought under
severe Laws against their Religion, yet always kept touch to their Loyalty and
Allegiance in defending Your Majesty's Cause. On the other side, if the said
Protestants be not sincerely Loyal, but only Act for their own Temporal
Interest under the pretext of Religion, in their usual manner, how can Your
Majesty much rely upon their assistance, or after Your Restoration, (which God
send soon and happy) expect that they will give You any way, but rather all
imaginable hindrance to establish, as you purpose, the Roman Catholic Religion
and Clergy, in this Your Kingdom of Ireland, in that full manner aforesaid?

REFLECTIONS.
Here, in the beginning of this Paragraph, we have fairly insinuated, the true
Reasons why King James did not restore, when upon the English Throne, the Roman
Catholic Religion, and the Clergy, to their Livings, Churches, Jurisdictions,
and Privileges, tho he designed to do it when it was convenient: The Reason
was, It was inconsistent with the good of King James 's Affairs at that time.
But why was not this done, when King James came to Ireland, and was at the Head
of an Irish Army? The Reason that induced him to delay it, is here plain; He
was afraid it might alienate the affections of the Protestants in England, from
giving a helping hand toward his Restoration. He did not delay it upon the
account of the unjustness of the thing it self; it was from another Principle,
even that of Politics, lest the Protestants of England should be too much
alarmed with it. Thus King James and his Popish Clergy must have very low
thoughts of the Wit and Sense of the Protestants of England, to think they
could be so easily cheated with such silly baits, and could be hooked in by so
weak Pretenses. No sure; they could not be so short-sighted, as not to see
through these Cobwebs of Romish Politics; and they had too many hints of their
Designs, not to be ignorant what was really at the bottom of them.

But it seems at the giving in of this Memorial, the Romish Clergy was become
of another Opinion. They thought it not worth their while to dissemble any
longer, but that it was absolutely fit to fall to work without any further
Ceremony. They tell King James positively, That it is altogether needless to
humor the Protestants in concerns of this nature; That all the return they
made to his and his Predecessors Kindness and Indulgences to them, was to
Invite a Foreign Power to Invade his Throne. Here we are expressly told, That
all the late King's Kindness to the Protestants, was only to humor them, that
is, to lay them asleep with his Caresses, till it was time to give the Blow, by
restoring the Roman Catholic Religion, and the Roman Catholic Clergy to their
Churches, Livings, etc. But this is not all; These Gentlemen tell us by way of
an Inuendo, That all the Privileges the Protestants enjoyed by the Laws of the
Kingdom, were indeed no more, but King James's and his Predecessor's their
manifold Condescentions and Indulgences to them: So that instead of Laws for
the Security of our Religion, we were in the opinion of the Romish Clergy,
obliged only to the Condescension of our Kings for our peaceable Enjoyment of
it: And as all Favors may be revoked upon the ingratitude of them on whom they
are bestowed; so consequently may all the Liberties and Privileges of the
Protestants of England, be recalled in the sense of this Memorial, because of
the bad returns they made that King for them. I know no reason why they here
take in King James's Royal Predecessors, unless it be to insinuate something
against the Memory of King Charles II. as if he and King James had been upon
the same bottom, as to their Condescentions and Indulgences to the Protestants,
and therein both of one Religion; which how true, we must refer to the Great
Day, when all hidden things shall be laid open.

As in the former part of this Paragraph, the Givers in of this Memorial
derogated from the Wisdom of the whole Protestants of England, in being cheated
with their silly Baits; So in the last Words of the Period above mentioned,
they fall foul upon the Honesty of those Protestants that are upon King James's
side, as if they would not be displeased, or grudg at the re-establishment of
the Romish Religion and Clergy in Ireland; but that notwithstanding thereof,
they would continue to cooperate to His Restoration. I am not concerned to
answer for the Protestant Jacobites in England; here they have a Charge laid to
their door by others engaged in the same Bottom with themselves; and how true
the Charge is, they and their own Consciences know best: I shall only say, If
it be so, as is here insinuated, then it is no wonder they should be the Horror
and Hatred of all Good Men.

MEMORIAL.
Sir, Now is the true time for Your Majesty to accomplish that Glorious Work:
It is not likely that hereafter any more easy or better opportunity will
happen for it, than whilst we have the happy Enjoyment of Your Majesty's
Presence amongst us: For it is reasonably to be apprehended, that the
Difficulties to be surmounted in so godly a Design, will rather be increased
than diminished, by the continual Suggestions of our Adversaries against us to
Your Majesty, when restored to Your Throne in England. Furthermore, the very
Protestants themselves cannot in their hearts choose but applaud, and judge it in
the main to be a necessary effect of Royal Bounty and Justice, that those
Livings, Churches, and Prerogatives, which were taken away from the
Roman Catholic Clergy by Protestant Kings and Parliaments, should now, after
so many Years Sufferings, be restored back unto them by a Roman Catholic King,
with the Concurrence of a Roman Catholic Parliament; were it for no other
Motive, than to gratify Your Roman Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom, who
have so eminently signalized their Loyalty, Allegiance, and constant good Zeal
to assert with their Lives and Fortunes, Your Majesty's Rights, in a time when
Protestants and Sectaries, nay also the chief, and most part of the Protestant
Clergy, did not stick to stir up and bring in an Invasion, and join hands with
Your Enemies against You.

REFLECTIONS.
In the beginning of this Paragraph, they seem unwillingly to tax the
Protestants that are on King James's side, with what is indeed no Crime, but a
Duty, viz. Their Suggestions to him in case of his Restoration, against so
godly a work, as the restoring the Romish Religion and Clergy. I confess this
is a Compliment some of them do scarce deserve; and which is expressly
contradicted by what was said in the former part of this same Memorial, in
that, That they would not be displeased, nor grudg at the re-establishment of
the Romish Religion and Clergy in Ireland. And it is a question which of the two
Insinuations are most natural, and most consequential to the Principles and
Practices of the Protestant Jacobites.

What a ridiculous piece of stuff is this! That the Protestants themselves will
applaud in the main, that necessary effect of Royal Bounty in a Roman-
Catholic King's restoring back to the Roman Catholics, what a Protestant King
and Parliament had taken from them in Ireland. At the same rate, and by the
same parity of Reason, what a Protestant King and Parliament has taken away
from the Roman Catholics in England, should be now restored them by a
Roman Catholic King, when he comes back to the Throne of England. Indeed we
have no reason to doubt, but as the Reason is the same, so the Manner of acting
would be the same in both Kingdoms; which is fairly enough hinted in the Words
themselves.

How eminently they have signalized their Loyalty and Allegiance to King James
in this Juncture, their Bravery and inimitable Courage have evidenced with a
Witness. The truth is, it is hard to say, Whether King James be less obliged to
the Valor of the Irish, or they to his Conduct: I am of Opinion, They will not
be willing to try their Fortune again, under such a General, nor He to try His,
with such Soldiers: And so there is nothing lost in point of Gratitude on either
hand.

MEMORIAL.
What greater Mischief or Villainy than this can be apprehended from them! For
not to speak here of the Malicious endeavors formerly used in their
Parliament, to exclude You from Your Right of Inheriting the Crown, or of the
Treacherous Plots and Designs contrived by some of them, for to take away Your
Majesty's Life, and that of Your Royal Brother the late King of Blessed Memory:
And after all this, Is it reasonable to repose any Confidence in them, or to
expect that ever they will prove real and true unto You upon occasion of
helping You to regain Your Crown? Or certainly if they should chance to give
any such Encouragement, it will not proceed from a real Love to Your Royal
Person, but that they find it necessary for their Temporal Interests, which
they now experience to be in great danger, and much prejudiced by their late
Rebellious Defection. Consequently, as far as Your Return may avail for the
Preservation and Advantage of those their Interests, they may concur thereunto,
without regarding any Establishment whatever, that You make in this Kingdom, in
favor of the Roman Catholic Religion and Clergy; for they do not doubt, but
that Your Majesty being of the Roman Catholic Religion, intends to establish
the same, and to restore the Clergy to their Livings, Churches, and full
Jurisdiction, in this Your Catholic Kingdom.

REFLECTIONS.
As to some of the Protestants Design of old to exclude King James from
inheriting the Crown, as is here mentioned; The Bill of Exclusion, as it was
the result of the Counsels of those who saw no other way at that time to save
Us from Popery and Slavery; so it is a question, Whether it had not been better
for that Prince that that Bill had taken effect. For it seems to me, a far
greater misfortune, to be once upon a Throne, and to put a necessity on the
Nation to dethrone him, than never to have been suffered once to sit down upon
it; And I believe that unhappy Prince thinks so himself, by this time. So that
the Papists have no great reason to blame the Protestants upon that head.

As to the Treacherous Plots and Designs contrived by some of the Protestants
to take away the life of King James, and of his Royal Brother, Alas! We all
know where this Plot was coined; who they were that brought it upon the Stage;
and to what end.

This Protestant Plot here hinted at, was thought upon by the Popish Party then
at Court, as the only proper means to stifle for good and all the Popish one;
And what Villainies, Perjuries, Subornations, Lies and Murders, were put in
practice at that time, none in England can be ignorant. It could be wished,
That for the honor of the Nation, and for the honor both of the Bar, and of
the Bench, these things were buried in perpetual oblivion.

The Insinuation at the end of this Paragraph, That if those Protestants shall
help King James to regain his Crowns, it will proceed only from a motive of
temporal Interest; I believe may be very true in some sense. For certainly
nothing but a false show of temporal Interest can ever prevail with a
Protestant to bring back King James; since he must make account to lose thereby
all spiritual Interests, viz. those of his own Religion, Conscience and
immortal Soul; And these he must necessarily resolve to part with at the very
moment he brings back that Prince to the English Throne. But yet it is but a
false show of temporal Interest at the best; For not only the Ruin of his
Religion, but that of his Property and Liberty must attend King James his
Return. It Is then we must submit our selves either to a French Yoke, or a Yoke
after a French Model; And then farewell for ever the Liberties and Properties
of the Subjects of England.

That these Protestants (who the Memorial confesses from a temporal Interest
only would help King James to regain his Crown) should have no regard to any
Establishment He should make in Ireland in favor of the Roman Catholic
Religion and Clergy: I hope it is not true of them. And if it be so, They are
the unhappiest and most hateful Wretches upon Earth, as being willing for their
trifling Interests to sacrifice a whole Kingdom to Rome.

MEMORIAL.
What worse Resentments can they receive of Your Majesty's putting that
Intention now absolutely in Effect, than they may of what other glorious things
you have settled in this Kingdom as means thereunto, by making Catholic
Corporations and Magistrates, and Judges, by rendering Roman Catholics capable
of all manner of Offices and Employments, by putting the Government Civil and
Military into the hands of the Roman Catholics, by breaking that unjust Act of
Settlement, and restoring the Catholic Proprietors to their Ancient Estates.

REFLECTIONS.
Here the Romish Clergy tell the World plainly, That the Restoring the Romish
Religion, and the Romish Clergy to their Churches and Livings, merits no
greater Resentment from the Protestants, than the making Roman Catholic
Corporations and Magistrates and Judges, the rendering all Roman Catholics
capable of Offices and Employments, by putting the Government Civil and
Military in their hands. I confess we are obliged to them for telling us so;
Especially considering that in the last Reign some People looked upon these
last Innovations to be no great business; and were willing to concur, or at
least tamely to consent to them. We see what a sense the Papists themselves had
of these Violations of our Law: It was all one in their Eyes, as a
Re-establishment of the Romish Religion and Clergy, which some of the
Protestants themselves would not believe: And indeed the wiser part of the
Protestants rhought the one was as just as the other. And that the Royal
Prerogative might be wrested by Corrupt Judges and Lawyers then in pay, to
infer a power to do both.

MEMORIAL.
These are Changes of far greater difficulties, and more apt to exasperate the
Protestants of England; and yet without regarding their Displeasure, Your
Majesty, praised be God, was successfully prevailed on to compass these
Glorious Alterations. How then can it be thought reasonable that the
Consideration of displeasing or exasperating the said Protestants of England,
should influence upon Your Majesty to postpone or let slip this present
Opportunity of Re-establishing Your Roman Catholic Clergy of this Kingdom in
the full manner aforementioned?

REFLECTIONS.
If the late Circumstances wherein King James was in Ireland, was so favorable
an opportunity to Re-establish the Roman Catholic Religion in that Kingdom, as
the Memorial affirms, Then much more was the Circumstances he was in here in
England, some two years ago, a favorable Opportunity to Re-establish the
Romish-Catholick Religion in this Kingdom. In Ireland King James's Power was
only confined to that Island, and he was destitute of the Support and
Assistance of the Two other Kingdoms that had been once His. He had, when in
Ireland, a powerful Prince possessed of these two other Kingdoms, and of a part
of Ireland it self, who was ready to beat him out of the rest, at the Head of a
brave well-disciplin'd Army, while King James had no reason to hope any great
things from His, made up of Cowardly Ill-disciplin'd, and as ill-pay'd Irishes.
King James's Circumstances were far better two years ago, being Master of Three
Kingdoms, and of a brave and numerous Army, and no body to oppose him. So that
if his Will was the same as to the Re-establishment of the Romish Religion, (as
no body doubts but it was) Then his Power was much greater two years ago, when
in England, than two or three months ago when in Ireland, at the time of
presenting him this Memorial. Thus that Unfortunate, Misguided Prince was in
all his Conduct wise too late, though to the great happiness of these Three
Kingdoms, as the Event has proved.

MEMORIAL.
We must confess, that such an Entire Establishment of the Roman Catholic
Clergy in England, would perhaps prove very difficult, and provoke the
Indignation of the Protestants in a high measure, because it is contrary to the
Persuasion generally held by the People there, who though never so different
amongst themselves in their Tenets, yet agree together in bearing so implacable
an aversion to the Roman Catholic Religion and Clergy, that it is not to be
expected they would ever concur in their Parliaments thereunto: But the Case is
quite otherways in this Your Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland; for the People here
being generally Roman Catholics, incomparably exceeding in number all
Sectaries and Protestants, covet nothing more, than to have their own
Roman Catholic Clergy Re-established amongst them in those Churches and
Livings that the Piety and Devotion of their Ancestors, time out of mind,
conferred upon them for the Service and Honor of God, and for their decent
Subsistence; and restored to the full Exercise of their Spiritual Jurisdiction,
and enjoyment of their Privileges.

REFLECTIONS.
We find the Romish Clergy do here usher in the difficulty of Re-establishing
the Romish Religion in England, with a perhaps; And they will not allow it to
be impossible, but only that it would prove difficult. I make no doubt, but if
things were at this day in England upon the same foot they were in two years
ago, we should have heard of no difficulty in this matter: It was then, in
their opinion, the easiest thing of a thousand to Re-establish the
Roman Catholic Religion in England: And by all their Actions and words they
express so much. I will not determine, how far it was possible to bring England
in the last Reign, to comply with, and embrace Popery. But this I may safely
say, That the Debaucheries with which the Nation was poisoned in King Charles's
Reign, had laid them open to any Change in Religion. We all know Atheism is the
fairest Introduction to Popery: And he that is an Atheist to day, may easily be
a Papist to morrow, especially if his Interest concur in the Change. We saw how
much Popery gained every day, and how many men, and that of the first Rank,
Interest, and the Smiles of a Court, prevailed with to change their Religion
they were brought up in, for a new one they had never taken the pains to
examine further, than as to the favourableness of it with the King. Moreover,
in France we had the example of a vast many Thousand Protestants, who had not
the Courage nor Constancy to resist the Methods taken by the Romish Emissaries
to bring them back to the Communion of Rome. And the French Protestants were at
least as Zealous in their Religion, as we in ours, and seemed to be willing to
venture as much for it as we. So that I cannot either confute or consent to
this last part of the Memorial; but must conclude with this; That we have
reason to bless God, and pay our Thanks and Acknowledgment to the Glorious
Instrument he made use of, by whom we are put out of fear of having our
Constancy in the Protestant Religion tried, at the rate we had reason to expect
not long ago.

And thus I take leave of the Memorial of the Romish Clergy, and leave them to
the disappointments they have met with, both in that Kingdom and elsewhere, of
all the hopes they have been so long a rearing up to themselves; and which now
are vanished into smoke, upon the appearing of our Victorious King in the
Island, where they were to begin their thorough Work.

POSTSCRIPT.
WE live in an Age wherein some people have the Impudence to deny things of
themselves as clear as the Sun in its Midday Light. Go and enquire of the
Roman Catholics in France, and other Popish Countries, they will make no bones
to confess freely, That two years ago, they had the greatest Grounds possible
to have hoped for the Establishment of the Catholic Religion, and the utter
Extirpation of what they call Heresy, through the Three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland. But at the same time, go and enquire the opinion of some
among our selves at home, that call themselves Protestants, in this point they
will confidently tell you, There was never any such Change designed. These
people must either be strangely stupid, or must from some one reason or other
find themselves obliged to dissemble a thing that cannot, that will not be hid.
The Memorial I have before given a particular Copy of, is a proof of such a
Design, as to change Religion in Ireland; and such a proof, as there can be no
clearer given for any thing in the world: But I have thought fit in this
Postscript to give another evidence as clear as the former; but an Evidence
that proves not only a design to overturn the Protestant Religion in Ireland
alone, but likewise in the other Two Kingdoms of this Island: And that is, A
Memorial given in by Monsieur the Duke of Chaulnes, Ambassador Extraordinary
for the French King, to this present Pope, very soon after his coming to the
Papacy. The Memorial it self is to be found in several of their Papers now
printed at Rome and other places of Italy, on the occasion of the present
Transactions betwixt the Court of France, and that of Rome; and the Copy whence
I take it, is the Italian Mercury of Venice, Numb. 1012. The Memorial is there
mentioned at full length, and refers to a great many other Heads, than what I
need here to mention. I shall only copy from the Original, those parts of it
that concern the Affairs of King James, or of the French King as his Ally and
Confederate.

The Memorial is thus. The Memorial and Representation made to our most Holy
Father the Pope, by His Excellency Charles de Albert, Duke of Chaulnes, and
Peer of France, Ambassador Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiary from His most
Christian Majesty, to His Holiness, in Name and Behalf of His most Serene
Majesty, His Master.
HIS Excellency does most unwillingly, and with the most inward Grief, put His
Holiness in mind of the sad and unhappy Consequences that have arisen to the
Catholic Church, by the unnecessary and ill-timed mistakes entertained by the
late Pope Innocent 11. of the most Serene King his Master. What dismal effects
they have produced, all Europe feels at this day with regret.

The most Serene King his Master has done all in him lies to deserve the name
of the Eldest Son of the Church. And by breaking into pieces that Hydra of
Heresy, which had in his own Kingdom for above an Age, trampled upon all that
was Sacred, he might have justly expected better Returns of his Zeal for the
Catholic Religion, than he did meet with from the then Head of the Church. It
was not only in his own Kingdom, that his most Serene Master did use his utmost
Power and Interest to root out Heresy, and to establish the true Ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic Religion; but his Aims and Influence went farther;
and unless the late Pope Innocent 11. had wilfully obstructed his Designs by an
untimous and needless Breach betwixt him and the Crown of France, the state of
Christendom, and of the Catholic Church, had been far better than it is at
this day. All this his Excellency does not represent to his Holiness out of any
design to cast Dust on the Ashes of his Predecessor; for as the most Christian
King his Master suffered as much as ever Prince in his Circumstances and
Quality did, from the late Pope, and that without doing any action unbecoming a
true Eldest Son of the Church toward the common Father and Head thereof; so he
resolves for ever to banish from himself, and bury in oblivion the remembrance
of these things.

Here the French Ambassador does very fairly confess as a great Honor to his
Master, That it was not in his own Kingdom only, that he used his Interest to
root out Heresy; but that his Aims and Influence went further; and if the late
Pope's breach with him had not hindered, The state of the Catholic Church had
been far better than it is now at this day. What can be more plain than this?
And where could the French Designs and Influence to root out Heresy, be more
effectual and more probable to lie, than in England, at that time under the
Reign of a Prince as zealous a Romanist as himself, and in the nearest
conjunction with him in all ties of Friendship and Alliance.

The rest of the Memorial contains a great many other particulars relating to
the Pretensions of the French King, and Disputes between him and the late Court
of Rome: And therefore it is needless here to mention them. Only in the end He
has this other Article relating to the Affairs of England, which runs thus.

His Excellency humbly entreats his Holiness to consider in his Fatherly Care
and Zeal, the horrid and inexpressible prejudice the Catholic Church has
received by the fatal disappointment all her Sons have met with in the
misfortune of his Britannick Majesty; And that just at the very instant of
time, we were to expect all good and great things for the Catholic Church from
that King's Zeal and Affections to it. So that unless speedy course be taken
for that King's Re-establishment, not only all the joint Designs for the
suppression of Heresy will fall to the ground; but the Catholics of those
Kingdoms will be in the saddest condition possible. And the Holy Church
deprived of those great Kingdoms, etc.

Here is as fair a Confession as ever was made of a disappointment the Romish
Church met with in the late King's Misfortune, and how great things that Party
expected from King James his Zeal for the Romish Church: and in fine, of joint
Designs for the suppression of Heresy. And after this, I would fain know who
can doubt of our Intended Ruin, and that of our Religion, if the late happy
Revolution had not fallen out?

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Richard Baldwin.
A True Relation of the Cruelties and Barbarities of the French, upon the
English Prisoners of War. Being a Journal of their Travels from Dinan in
Britany, to Thoulon in Provence; and back again. With a Description of the
Situation, and Fortifications of all the Eminent Towns upon the Road, and their
Distance. Of their Prisons and Hospitals, and the number of men that died under
their Cruelty: With the Names of many of them, and the Places of their Deaths
and Burials: With an Account of the great Charity and Sufferings of the Poor
Protestants of France: And other material Things that happened upon the way
Faithfully and Impartially Performed by Richard Strutton, being an Eyewitness,
and Fellow-sufferer.

The secret History of the Duchess of Portsmouth: Giving an Account of the
Intreagues of the Court, during her Ministry. And of the Death of K. C. II.

The Memoirs of Monsieur Deagant; containing the most secret Transactions and
Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. (...) the beginning of the
Ministry of the Cardinal de Rioblieu. To which is added, A Particular Relation
of the Archbishopric of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation
for the Advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the
Duke of Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop about the Progress of that
Affair: Which happened the last Years of King James I. his Reign. Faithfully
Translated out of the French Original.

The Cabinet Opened: or, The Secret History of the Amors of Madam de
Maintenon, with the French King. Translated from the French Copy.

The Character of a Trimmer. His Opinion of. I. The Laws and Government. II
Protestant Religion. III. The Papists. IV. Foreign Affairs. By the Honorable
Sir W. Coventry. The Third Edition carefully Corrected, and cleared from the
Errors of the First Impression.

An Impartial Relation of the Illegal Proceedings against St. Mary Magdalen
College in Oxon, in the Year of our Lord 1687. Containing only Matters of Fact
as they occurred. The Second Edition. To which is added the most Remarkable
Passages omitted in the former. Collected by a Fellow of the said College.


