A DECLARATION Of a small Society of BAPTIZED BELIEVERS, undergoing the name of
Free-Wil^s, about the City of London.
WE well knowing, that we are and have been misrepresented to the people of
this and other Nations, as well by particular Letters from friend to friend, as
by public intelligence in pamphlets and news books, by which means we have
been rendered odious in the eyes almost of all, and as it were made a byword,
and a hissing to all; Were notwithstanding willing according to the requirement
of our Savior, Luke 21.19. In our patience to possess our souls, and silently
to wait upon our God, for a clearing of our innocence, and the cleanness of our
hands in his eyesight, but lately having had a view of a Declaration, dated
the 12 of December last, made by some persons of the particular Judgment, in
which some others of another persuasion have joined, to the which in several
particulars we cannot in the least assent to; we therefore thought it our
bounden duty, for the vindication of that truth which we are in present
profession and practice of, as also fearing lest they having declared to
public view, we by our silence should be looked upon, either to be of the same
Judgment with them in what they have declared, or else guilty of all or some of
those five particulars they in that Declaration say the Baptists in general are
charged withal; have therefore set pen to paper, and shall first give a
particular of the said five charges, and then as in the presence of God lay
down our real Judgments, and persuasions grounded upon Scripture record, to
those charges; by which it will be apparent that we are not guilty of them at
all, and that we differ from the said Declarers in point of Judgment; and if we
shall in any thing therein derogate from the mind of God, we shall desire in
the Spirit of love to be rectified by better Judgments from the word of truth,
and shall think our selves happy gainers in such a Christan reproof. Say they,
we being misrepresented to the Nation; 1. As such as are opposite to
Magistracy. 2. That we would destroy the Public Ministry of the Nation, who
differ from us in some things about Religion. 3. That we do countenance the
people called Quakers, in their Irregular practice. 4. That we do endeavor a
tolleration of all miscarriages in things ecclesiastical and civil, under
pre^ence of Liberty of conscience. 5. That we desire to murder and destroy
those that differ from us in matters of Religion.


To the first, we positively say, that we are so far from opposing Magistracy,
as that it would be to us matter of great rejoicing to know who were our
Magistrates. But far greater to see such set up who are men fearing God, and
hating covetousness, that so Justice might be duly executed without respect of
persons, and Judgment run down like water, and righteousness like a mighty
stream, that so there might be no more leading into captivity, and that
complaining in our streets might have an end; But for our parts to take a
ca^nal weapon in our hands, or use the least violence either to support or pull
down the worst, or to set up or maintain the best of men, we look not upon it
to be our duty in the least; much less to have a thought of endeavoring to set
up our selves, either directly or indirectly; for were we Abillitated and
furnished with such endowments as might render us capable of being Rulers, yet
could we not allow our selves to act as Magistrates, because we are a people
chosen out of the World, John 15.19. And look upon our selves as Pilgrims and
strangers in the earth, Heb. 11.13. 1 Pet. 2.^1. But this we know to be the
mind of God, from Romans 13. the beginning, 1 Pet. 2:13. Tit 3.2. that we are to
be subject to, and not to resist the powers, because they be ordained of God;
and as God sets them up, so he requires his Sons and daughters to render to
them Tribute, Custom, Fear and Honor, Romans 13.7. And we further declare, That
it is our bounden duty in obedience to our God, to pray for Kings, and all that
are in authority, 1 Timothy 2.2 So that we are so far from opposing them, as that
we say it is our duty to obey them, in all civil things, that are agreeable to
the mind of God, and if they shall require any thing from us that is contrary
to his mind and will revealed in his holy Scriptures of truth, we say we are
not to resist them, but if in conscience we cannot obey them, then we are
patiently to suffer under them, whatever they shall inflict upon us for our non
obedience to their requirements: and to this, we yet further declare, that it
is, our real Judgment as to things spiritual, not to own them as our Lawgivers
in the least, for there is one Lawgiver which is able to save and to destroy,
Iam. 4.12. which is the Lord, Isa. 33.22. And therefore if they shall at any
time impose upon us, Laws in point of worship, that is either to worship a
false God, or the true God after a false manner, we by Gods assistance shall
tell them with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 3.16. That we are not
careful to answer them in that matter, yet shall not violently resist, but with
them patiently suffer under them as aforesaid.

To the second, That we would destroy the public Ministry of the Nation, that
differ from us in some things about Religion; We do declare, that if there be a
destruction intended between us, we must leave it at their doors, and desire
them to Judge between the al-seeing God the searcher of all hearts and their
own consciences, what they have intended by their so often pressing Parliament
men from time to time, for a suppression of all that are not of their Judgment
in matters of Religion: and upon search made, if they find themselves guilty of
a desire of any such destruction to us, we shall beg them in Gods fear, to
break off that evil by timely repentance, and make their pe^ce with God; as for
our parts, we are so far from desiring any revenge against them, or any other
that shall desire or endeavor our ruin, as that in the presence of God, we
shall rather pity then envy them, and according to the requirement of our
Lawgiver, Mat. 5.44. pray for them, and their conversion, not at all in the
least desiring or endeavoring their confusion: That there are many things
wherein the public Ministry of the nation and we differ, in matters of
religion, both in doctrine and discipline, is very clear, and that we design or
so much as desire the destruction of them, or any other persons whatsoever, for
such differences, or any other matters concerning our selves, we hope in our
further answer to this, and to the fourth and fifth particulars, we shall
manifest to be as clear, and also therein discover our selves to be the
peaceable Lambs of Christ, John 21.15. the great Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. 1 Pet. 5.4. Heb. 10.22. Who does require us to learn of
him, for he is lowly and meek, Mat. 11.29. yet notwithstanding, we do declare,
when or wherever some of us shall conveniently meet with any of them, either in
private or in public, we shall resolve (God assisting us) to contend earnestly
with them for the faith once delivered to the Saints, according to that
exhortation of the Spirit of God, by his Apostle, Jude 3. and against them and
all oppositions and opposers wha^soever, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2.3. fight the good fight of faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. In which combat we are
confident, we neither shall hazard life, nor draw blood, for through mercy we
can say, with our Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4 that though we live in the flesh, yet
we war not after the flesh, for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal.

To the third, That we countenance the people called Quakers in their Irregular
practice; To this we answer, and God is our witness we lie not, that we are so
far from countenancing the Quakers or our selves in any Irregular practice, as
that if we our selves be found in any such actings, we shall not violently
oppose, but patiently subject to such penalties as the breach of such Laws calls
for; it would have been well, if the assertors had declared wherein this
Irregular practice does consist, that so we might have given a more particular
answer, yet we hope by what has and shall be declared, it will easily be
judged, that we for our parts are not such people as the Baptists generally are
reported, and some show themselves to be.

To the fourth, That we endeavor a tolleration of all miscarriages in things
Ecclesiastical and Civil under pretense of Liberty of Conscience. If by
endeavoring a tolleration of all miscarriages in things ecclesiastical, the
assertors intend amongst our selves in our own assemblies: we shall answer them
as in the presence of God, the searcher of all hearts: That we are so far from
any such toleration, as that we at this very day go under a reproach by that
people we formerly walked withal, because in the reality of our souls, and the
integrity of our hearts, we cannot allow of some things, that we judge to be of
that nature amongst them, we well knowing, that the Lord Christ requires a
perfect observation of, and a universal obedience to all things whatsoever he
commanded; Mat. 28.20. And that as well to what has been laid down by his
Apostles, given in by the incomes of that Spirit that was to lead them into all
truth, and to show them things to come, John 16.13. which are also the commands
of Christ, 1 Cor. 14.37. as to those that were laid down by himself, John
18.12.15. so that we positively say, that if we shall allow of any miscarriages
either in Doctrine or Discipline amongst our selves, to thwart the mind of
Christ revealed in his Scriptures of truth, we can expect no better answer from
him, then a proclamation of our worship to be a vain worship, as once he
declared against the Jews, Mat. 15.9. And therefore if miscarriages rise
amongst us, we are to bring such miscarriages to the touchstone of Gods word,
and so weigh them in the balance of the Sanctuary, and finding them either too
heavy or too light, that is, either adding or diminishing from or to the mind
of Christ, we are then to repair to those wholesome laws left us in Scripture
record, for the regulating of such miscarriages, according to the nature of
them, as they are private or public, or more or less in their several
agravations; and as they are committed by persons standing in such or such
relations: we say the more of this, because most persons think, and many do not
stick to say, that we live and act in things Ecclesiastical as Libertines, and
without Church government, because we withdraw our selves from the public
assemblies; But did such persons rightly consider, what the discipline of the
Ministry of the Nation is, in their Parochial assemblies, who profess
themselves to be the true Spouse and Church of Christ, and compare It with the
mind of Christ revealed in the Scriptures of truth, who gives Laws to his
Church, which is that body of which he himself is the head, Ephesians. 4.15.21.22.
Col. 1.18.^.19. They would then find themselves to be the Libertines and not
we; and therefore we shall earnestly desire all that are unacquainted with the
true discipline of the Church of Christ, well to weigh and seriously to
consider these statute Laws of Christ, in that case provided, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Ephesians. 5.11. Mat. 18.15. 1 Timothy 5.12, 19, 20. 1 Timothy 6.5. 1 Timothy
1.20. Tit. 3.10. 2 These. 2 15. 2 These. 3 10. 1 Cor. 5 4, 9, 11. The which as we
will answer the contrary at the great day of account, we dare not in the least
wilfully violate or neglect. But if by miscarriages in things Ecclesiastical,
they mean that we endeavor a Tolleration of all miscarriages amongst them in
their assemblies, we shall in the presence of God clear ourselves and say, we
have nothing at all to do with them, in such matters, for we say, they are
without as to us; 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. And so we look upon our selves to be as to
them: And if any one shall seem to be troubled at this term Without, and object
and say, that we are all the Creation of God, and what need these expressions
of, stand at a distance, I am more holy than you; To such we shall answer in
the Spirit of Love and Meekness, and God is our witness without AUSTENTATION,
That it is true, all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, are the Sons and Daughters
of God by creation, but few by regeneration and adoption; for many are called
but few are chosen, Mat. 20.16. for not the hearers of the Law, but the doers
shall be justified, Romans 2 13. And not every one that says, Lord Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of the Father,
Mat. 7.21. We well know, that many will say these are hard sayings, and cannot
well bear them; But to such we shall give a direction in our Postscript, where
from one of us they may expect, and we hope also find good satisfation as to
the term Without.

That we own Liberty of Conscience we confess, but under that or any other
pretense, to endeavor a toleration of any miscarriages either in things
Ecclesiastical or Civil, we have given (we hope) full satisfaion, for seeing it
is the will of our Master to have the Tares and the wheat grow together till
the Harvest, Mat. 13.30. And that our Heavenly Father does exercise his long
suffering to the whole bulk of mankind, not willing that any^d perish, but
that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. We look upon it to be our duty
to follow God as dear Children, and ^ to walk in love, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. and
therefore are like minded, having the same love Phil. 2.2. And therefore do
further declare, ^ we are as free, that all others should enjoy their Liberties
as we our selves, of what Judgment soever they be; we well knowing, ^ some are
called at the eleventh hour, as well as at the first and third, Mat. 20.1, 6;
And had the Apostle Paul been plucked up w^he was a tare, a persecutor, a
blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.13. and the chief of sinners, verse. ^5. he had never been
such choice wheat, ^atisfie, Refresh, Enable, Inliven, Inlighten, Encourage,
build up and Instruct, Corerct and Reprove, the building of God; ^ 1.3 9. the
house of God, Heb. 3.6. the household of God, Ephesians. 2.19. the Sons and
Daughters of God, 2. Cor. 6.18. Nor that b^of which Christ is the head, Col.
1.18, and therefore we cannot but say again, that we are as free that all
others should enjoy ^r Liberties in the things of God, as we our selves, We
well knowing, that every one must give an account of himself to God, Romans^ 12.
for every one shall receive the things done in the body, according to what they
have done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. ^ Mat. 25.34, 41. But either to
procure or maintain our own or others Liberties by force of arms, or the least
violence, we can ^ no warrant from the Scriptures of truth in the least, which
is that only and alone rule that we walk by, for all the remedy that we^d there
recorded is, that if they persecute us in one City, we may flee into another;
and this we see acted by our Savior himself, John ^ and by his patents, Mat
2.14. and the Apostle Peter, Acts 12.17. and Saint Paul, Acts 9.25, 26. 1 Cor.
11.33. And to fo^w our Master, and to tread in the footsteps of the flock of
God gone before us, we Judge it very safe; but to resist by force of ^nes, or
use the least violence, we judge unwarrantable.

To the fifth and last particular, that we woun^urther and destroy those that
differ from us in matters of Religion.

To this we cannot but answer, that so to^e Judge were not so much as Common
humanity, much less religion or Christianity; but our Religion is, pure and
undefi^ before God and our father, which is to visit the fatherless and
widows, not to make fatherless and widows; and to visit them in ^eir
afflictions, not to murder and destroy their Relations, to bring them under
afflictions: but to this we further answer, that t^ and the fourth particular
we judge seem to contradict one another, for murdering and destroying for
difference in matters of R^igion, and liberty of conscience cannot stand
together, nor in the eye of reason can they be charged against one and the same
per^ns, for murdering and destroying for difference in matters of religion,
destroys liberty of conscience, and liberty of conscience sw^ows up and drowns
murdering, and destroying for difference in matters of religion; so that it
argues, that the assertors of these things ^re yet in Babylon and confusion,
with those our Apostle writ of; in 1 Timothy 1.7. not knowing well what they say,
nor whereof they do af^e; yet notwithstanding, seeing we are there with
charged, in order to the discharging our selves of this confused burden, we
^all in the singleness of our souls yet farther discover our real judgments, as
to the main intent of the charge, which is murdering a^ distroying; and add
this further, that we read of a three fould sword in Scriptures. 1. The Sword
of the Spirit, which is the wor^ of God, Ephesians. 6.17. 2. The Sword of Justce,
which is the Magis^rates sword, Romans 13.4. 3: The Sword of steel, usualy so
called, which is the sword of slaughter, Isa. 1.20. Ezekiel. 9.1, 2.


The first of these we are required to take to us and put on, Ephesians. 6.12, 13, 17
and Thus to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, whose might
was evidenced once, again an^ again, by using this sword skilfully Mat 4 4 7,
9, for it is mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting
down immagina^ions, and every high thing, that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity, etc. and having in a readiness to
revenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10.4 5, 6. and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, tha^ the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. for
we wrestle not with flesh and blood, bu^ against prinscipalities, powers, the
rulers of the darkness of this world, Ephesians 6.12. not for nor against the
Magistrates, Parliaments, no^ Armies of the world, the best of whose strength
is flesh and not spirit, who shall be destroyed together, Isa. 31.1.2, 3. Mat.
26.58.

As for the sword of justce, or the Magistrates sword, we are to be subject to
it as we have fully declared, and not to resist it, which sword takes revenge
on no man before he be apprehended, charged, heard, and by good evidence
convicted, and sentence according to the fact proved given, and then an
immediate commission given to an executioner, according to the fact and
sentence, for the putting this sword in execution.

But the sword of slaughter without examination or due consideration, is many
times put in execution to the slaying and destroying of friends as well as
enemies, witness those slaughters, and (...)

And for our acting in this sword, we can find no warrant from Scriptures in
the least, for that sword being (...) Peter and another of the disciples, and
that by an immediate commission from Christ, the work being finished for which
it was intended, we find an immediate and peremptory command for the sheathing
it again; and this reason rendered from the lip of truth it self, for all they
that take the sword shall perish with the sword, Mat. 26.52. for whosoever will
save his life, shall lose it, Mat 16.25. and we find no tolleration in holy
writ to the people of God for the drawing it again in the least, neither by
precept or example.

But least this countermand, should not be looked upon to be a sufficient
warrant for its continuance in its place by the people of God for the time to
come, the Lord Christ amongst several other weighty things, sent to the seven
Churches in Asia, and in them to us, by John the Revelator, is not backward to
remind them and us in them of it again, as a matter of no small concernment;
(And as we judge) least it should not be taken so much notice of by us in this
our day, as he would have it, he brings it in, in the midst of a discourse,
not long before the rise of the man of sin, when one of the heads of the beast
is wounded, as it were to death, and that deadly wound was healed, Rev. 13.3.
Intimating thus much as we apprehend, that as Kingly power has had a wound in
these Nations, even as it were unto death, so we know that the design of God
shall be brought about; and the Scriptures must be fulfilled, for that deadly
wound shall be healed, Rev. 13.3. and we finding the spirits of the generality
of the people of the three Nations, very high in this juncture of time, in the
behalf of Kingly Government, like Israel of old, 1 Samuel 8. so that by the face
of things as they appear to us in this last change, we do discern as through a
glass darkly, that the deadly wound is now going to be healed, although we do
really judge, that several that are in present eminent power, intend no such
thing, no more then the Jews in the crucifying of Christ, intended the bringing
the great design, and fore-appointment of God about, Acts 2.23. by all which we
judge, that caution was intended chiefly to us, upon whom the ends of the world
is come; and least we should not be so mindful of our duties as he would have
us, he makes as it were a Proclamation, to bespeake our better attention, to
what he intends and says, Rev. 13.9.10. He that has an ear to hear let him
hear, he that leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity, he that kills
with the sword; shall be killed with the sword; here is the faith and patience
of the Saints, that whilst others are leading into coptivity and killing with
the sword, to pull down or set up this or that Power, man or Government, to
give a deadly wound to Kingly power, or to heal that deadly wound again, that
then the People of God should in their patience possess their souls, and in the
midst of these revolutions, exercise their faith as once that Prophet did, Heb.
3.17. and faithfully to depend upon God for his preservation and protection,
keeping themselves pure and undefiled from leading into captivity, or killing
with the sword, least they themselves be led into captivity, and be killed by
the sword, thereby evidencing themselves to be the peacable flock of Christ,
chosen out of the world, John 15.19. and following their Master the Lord and
Prince of peace, Isa 9.6. 2 These. 3.16. being regulated by his requirements in
the Gospel of peace, Romans 10.15. Ephesians 6.15. having received from the God
of peace, Romans 15.33. Romans 16.20. 2 Cor. 13.11. that spirit, whose fruits is
love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness and
temperance, against which there is no law, that as they are Christ's, so they
should evidence that they have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts, Gal. 5.22, 23, 24. but lust being not crucified it breaks forth into
wars and fightings, for when men lust and have not, then they kill and desire to
have, James 4.1, 2. and when the people of God shall act thus, the spirit of
God brands them wi^h those Ignominious names of adulterers and adultresses,
informing them, that what they are fighting for is enmity against God, and that
if they obtain it they aret enemies to God, James 4.4. and we well knowing,
that whilst we are friends to the world we are enemies to God, dare not in the
least, have to do in the world, so as to set up our selves; or to side with any
either in setting up or pulling down, and how can a man's love to the world be
evidenced more, then in ventering his life for it, according to that saying of
our savior, John 15.13.

And we further declare, that as we are to be a peaceable people upon the
account of action, so we look upon it to be our duty, to keep our selves from
oaths, Ingagments, and Covenants, either for or against this or that person
Government, or Persons whatsoever, For because of SWEARING the Land mourns,
Ier. 22.10. For the Lord has a controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land.
Because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land, for by
SWEARING, and lying, and killing, and Stealing, and committing Adultery, they
break forth, and blood touches blood, says the Prophet, Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. and
says the same Prophet, Hos. 10.3, 4. they have spoken words, SWEARING falsely
in making a Covenant, THUS judgment springs up as Hemlock in the furrows of
the field; and we not knowing what the Cabbinet Counsel of God is in this our
day upon the account of Government, dare not in the least, have so much as a
thought to engage in any such thing, least we be found fighters against God,
according to the saying of Gamaliel, though in another case, Acts 5.39.

And therefore do declare our resolution herein, that we shall not (God
assisting us) enter into any engagement whatsoever upon any such account, yet
shall this say again, that we shall not violently resist the imposers, of any
such engagements, but shall patiently suffer the penalty of our non-obedience
as aforesaid.

And we further declare as in the presence of God, who is the searcher of all
hearts, that as it has been some of our great trouble for a long time, to see
some of those that are in the same faith and order with us, so acting; so it is
now become even an overwhelming burden upon our souls, to see them generally
running such a precippitant course, by which actings of theirs, the mouths
almost of all men are opened against them, and that truth they profess, most
ignominiously branded and reproached. And therefore we further declare, that in
the sight of God, Angels and men, that we bear our Testimony against them in
their present actings, and cannot stand by them, nor have communion with them
therein, nor with those that strengthen their hands in standing by them; and
must tell them in the words of our Savior, Luke 9.55. That they know not what
Spirit they are of; for, the Son of man (their Mr.) came not to destroy men's
lives but to save them; The Premises considered, we shall appeal to the
judgments of all rational men, whether we are guilty of what we are charged
withal or not, yet if they shall still go on notwithstanding, to use us
reproachfully for the name of Christ, we shall be so far from endeavoring or
desiring a revenge, as that in the words of Christ, we shall in our requests at
the throne of grace, cry out and say, Father forgive them they know not what
they do.

POSTSCRIPT.
FOrasmuch, as the said declarers in their answer to the first particular in
their Declaration, do call the Independants and Presbyterians their Christian
friends, the which however it is they so complement with them, yet in reallity
(we judge) they cannot own them as such upon a Scripture account; as also
because one Mr. William Alleyn, in a book lately by him published, entitled, A
Retractation to Separation. In which book in the whole current of it, all the
Scriptures that he brings, which were written by the immediate direction and
incomes of the Holy Spirit of God, to the Churches as they were in the faith
and order of the Gospel, he applies to, and also for, and in the behalf of
Episcopals, Independants, and Presbyterians, who are opposite both to the
Doctrine and disipline of those Churches, he intendng thereby to persuade us if
possible, to a belief that they are the true and visible members of that body,
of which Christ is the head; the which book, by Gods assistance, is intended
suddenly to be answered by one of our soceity, who resolves to entitle it, The
Retractators work Scaned or the conceptions and supposals of Mr. William
Alleyn, regulated by Scripture record; in which, with other things, a Gospel
believer, or a true Church of Christ, upon a Gospel account, is intended to be
stated, the which is hoped will be so plain, that it may prove instrumental to
the undeceiving of some that are under a deceit by means of that and such
deceiptful discourses as that is; in which answer it is farther hoped, that
those that are unsatisfied with our term Without, in our answer in our
Declaration to the fourth particular may receive also good satisfaction, and in
the mean time we desire all to take notice, that though we thus speak, yet we
have good thoughts of those friends that go under those denominations, and do
own them and all others of all other opinions whatsoever, in union, so far as
they own God, Christ and their truths; but to own the best of men to be
members of that body of which Christ is the head, and so to have communion with
them, either to make them our mouth in Prayer to God for us, or Gods mouth in
speaking forth his truths to us, or in breaking of bread at the table of the
Lord, we cannot own them in the least, our reasons we hope will be fully laid
down in the answer to the said book.

Henry Adis.
Richard Pilgrim.
William Cox.
In the behalf of themselves, and those that walk with them.
And if any man shall question the reason why there are no more Subscribers to
this long Declaration, we must answer them in the sorrow of our hearts, in the
Language of the Prophet, Micah 7.1. Woe is us, for we are as when they have
gathered the Summer fruits, as the grape gatherings in the Vintage, there is no
clusters to eat. verse. 2. The good man is perished out of the earth, and there
is none upright amongst men, they all lie in wait for blood: they hunt every
man his Brother with a net. verse. 3. That they may do evil with both hands
earnestly, the Prince asks, and the Judge asks for a reward: And the great
man he utters his mischievous desire: so they wrap it up. verse. 4. The best
of them is as a brier, the most upright is sharper then a thorn hedge: the day
of thy watchmen, and thy visitation comes; now shall be their perplexity.

For thus says the Lord by his Prophet, Isa. 59.2. Your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you,
that he will not hear. verse. 3. For your hands are defiled with blood, and your
fingers with iniquity, your lips have spoken lies, your tongue have muttered
perverseness. verse. 4. None calls for justice, nor any pleads for truth:
they trust in vanity, and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth
iniquity. verse. 5. They hatch cockatrice eggs, and weave the spiders web: he
that eats of their eggs dies, and that which is chrushed breaks out into a
viper. verse. 6. Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover
themselves with their works: their works are works of iniquity, and the act of
violence is in their hands. verse. 7. Their feet run to evil, and they make have
to shed innocent Blood, their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and
destruction is in their paths. verse. 8. The way of peace they know not, and
there is no Judgment in their goings: they have made them crooked paths,
whosoever goes therein, shall not know peace. verse. 9. Therefore is judgment
far from us, we wait for light, but behold obscurlty: for brightness, but we
walk in darkness. And so read on to the 18. verse. and verse. 18. According to
their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompense to
his enemies, to the Islands he will repay recompense.

But lest any man should think us to be what we are not, by what has been
inserted in our paper, after our subscriptions, we shall in FINE declare, that
in the presence of God we fight not against sinners but their sins, against
sinful Actions and not persons, as they stand in such or such relations in this
Land of our nativity; And therefore shall earnestly beg all of all ranks and
qualities, to set themselves upon the work of self examination, and to take
that good advice from the Lord by his Prophet, Isa. 1.16. Wash ye, make ye
clean put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil,
and learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow; (TO WHICH) if ye be willing and obedient, ye
shall eat the good of the Land, but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
destroyed by the sword, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, verse. 19, 20.

And to our dissenting Brethren, we shall give that Christian advice, that the
Apostle Paul once gave to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7.1. That they cleanse
themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God.

LONDON, Printed for the Author Henry Adis Uphouldster, living in Princes
Street, and Published the 13. day of the 11. Month, Heathenishly called in
honor to their God Ianus, January, 1659.


