ADVICE to ELECTORS; BY A Well-wisher to PARLIAMENTS, and one who will live and
dye a Friend to his Country.
SEEING England can never be destroyed but by a Parliament, it greatly concerns
those who are empowered, to Elect Members to be very circumspect whom they
choose. And tho their own Mistakes heretofore, of which they have felt the
woeful consequences, may sufficiently instruct them to behave themselves with
more Prudence and Fidelity than they did the last time, yet it may not be amiss
to point out some Measures unto them for their better conduct in so important
Affair. All which, shall be so adjusted to their Safety and Universal Interest,
that those of the meanest as well as best Understandings, shall be forced to
acknowledge, that the regulating themselves by them in what they are now called
to do, will both become them in the discharge of their duty to God, Themselves,
and their Country, and prove the most subservient means to their Defense,
Prosperity and Happiness. Wherein, that I may acquit my self the better, and
the more distinctly, and with all the brevity imaginable, I shall first
represent the Characters of those, whom all wise and good Men may be ashamed as
well as afraid to give their Suffrages unto, and then declare what qualities
and properties are required in them, with whom we may securely trust the
Concerns of the Nation at this critical Juncture. To begin therefore with
those, whom all that consult their own good, and that of their Posterity, are
industriously to preclude, and much more to avoid giving any countenance unto,
they are such as stand marked out, and deciphered by one or more of the
Descriptions following.

1. None ought to be chosen to dispose of other Men's Estates, whom the Law
disables from managing their own; so that Minors who are not allowed the
conduct of their own Personal and Domestic Concerns, are not to be esteemed
capable of transacting the Affairs of the Kingdom. Such are fitter to be in
Schools under the Ferula, than to have a Room in the Senate House, to concur in
Enacting Laws. And of those of 40 and 50, that Elect them of 16 and 19; escape
the brand either of Fools or Knaves, for what they so preposterously do; the
favourablest thing can be said of both is, that the former are the Old Boys,
and the latter the Young.

2. They who have neither Money nor Land of their own, to be burdened in
common with the rest of the Subjects, are no ways worthy to be entrusted with
the bestowing of the Treasure of the Nation. It is a Dishionour for the Nation,
to have those chosen into a House of Commons, who could not escape being in
Goal, but through the Privilege of sitting there: So that all Vnsolvent Persons,
who see to get into Parliament, that they may defraud their Creditors, and
avoid legal Prosecutions for righteous Debts, ought to be held fitter to take
Sanctuary in the Minories or White-Friers, than to have St. Stephen's Chapel
vouchsafed them for an Azilum.

3. Nor do they deserve to be esteemed good Trustees for the Kingdom, who have
not known how to husband what their Fathers and Ancestors left them. For they
will never be found good Stewards of other Men's Money, who have been lavish and
prodigal of their own. So that your Luxurious and Lascivious D^bauchees, such
whom the Censors would have turned out of the Senate, tho of the Patrician
Order are to be reckoned among the unquallified, for the constituting the
Legislative Assembly of the Kingdom. And experience teaches us, that such will
be found wasting that time in Taverns, Gaming-houses, or worse Places, which
they ought to devote in redressing the grievances of their Country, and the
covering it from Oppressions.

4. Such upon whose honesty Men would not depend in the most trivial matter,
are not to be thought Persons duly qualified, for having all the Rights,
Liberties, and Estates of England, ventured into their hands, and consigned
over by Indentures to their disposal; nor will any but Fools, Elect such as go
under the Character of Knaves. So that those whom their Neighbors in County,
City, and Borough, would not trust with the conveving one hundred pound for
them to London; without better security for the discharge of that mean Trust,
then their own Faith and Honor, are not to have all that is valuable to English
Men put into their Power to barter away, and raise. Fortunes by, to themselves,
when they come to Westminster.

5. Persons who have not much of their own, either Real or Personal, and so can
loose little or nothing by keeping out of the House, but who propose the
gaining a great deal, by getting into it, ought not to have the Suffrage of
such as would be held either wise or honest to help them thither; seeing it is
not the serving the Country; but themselves, which they project and design. So
that of all Men, your narrow fortuned Country Demagogues are to be precluded
from being Deputies to a Parliament, seeing their Business when chosen will be
to talk themselves into Places by mutinous Harangues, and to keep them
afterward either by turning Silent, or by changing their Tone, who as they
will connive at the ruin of the Nation by the first, so they will concur to
hasten it by the second.

6. Such who purchase their being elected, whether it be by Money or great
Entertainments which is equivalent, are by all the rules of Justice and Wisdom
to be looked upon, not only with jealousy, but with disdain. For if their
Brains or Purses be their own, they will not spend so prodigally, but upon
formed Resolutions of reimbursing themselves what they lay out: And having
g^ined Votes by drinking People out of their senses, they will treat them
afterward answerable to the Character of Fools and Sots which they had made
them.

7. Neither are they to be accounted sit Guardians of the Peoples Privileges,
or Stewards of their Money, who are the Menial Servants or the Partisans of a
Court, that seek either to encroach upon their Rights, or that wants more of
their Treasure for carrying on its Designs, than the Subject can spare, or
safely undergo. It is enough that the Law has but the chacting Fiat of Bills
into the Sovereign's Hand, and it concerns the People in the whole they are
worth, to keep the moulding or preparing them in others than those, who neither
know, nor will, but as the Prince directs as well as allows them.

8. Whosoever has more by a Place or an Office in the Government, than their
own quota of a Tax can amount to, will never be good Husbands of their Purses
whom they are chosen to represent. For why should they care what others feel,
when their own shares are more then paid out of the Salaries and Perquisites of
their Places, especially when they hold them by the tenor of never considering
what the Country can give, but what their Royal Master is pleased to demand. So
that to avoid Persons of this Complexion, those in the Kingdom who are trusted
with the Right and Privilege of choosing Parliament Men, ought to take a
Survey, and have a List of the Commissioners of the Treasury, Admiralty,
Custom-house, Excise-Office, etc,

9. Especially, none ought to be chosen into Parliament, whose whole
Subsistence and Livelihood arise out of Taxes, seeing such will rather
impoverish others, than submit to starve themselves. So that Military Officers,
whose Trade of War is upheld by lavish Impositions on the Subject, are in no
more consistency with Reason to be elected Members, than those that live by
Padding on the Road, are to be appointed Arbiters, what shall be taken from, or
lest with those whom it is their business to rob.

10. They who have neither Quality nor Merit to deserve Honor, but yet who are
ambitious of it, are as little qualified to be elected into Parliament, as any
of those I have already mentioned. Seeing to be advanced to the Titles they
covet, their Pride baited with agreeable Temptations, will influence them to
give away whatsoever the People do possess. And whosoever are inordinately
ambitious, will make it their business to arrive at Grandeur, without
considering the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the means by which they attain
it: Who, when they have ascended by the Peoples favor to the height which they
aimed at, will insult over and trample upon them, who made and furnished them
with the Ladder. And in recompense for the Feathers they have put into their
Caps, they will clap the Fools Coat upon their Backs, who gave them the
Interest as well as the Opportunity to procure them.

11. Neither are they who have betrayed their Country or abandoned the care of
it in former Parliaments to be trusted again in this of any other: For upon
whatsoever motives they behaved themselves unfaithfully heretofore, and
unbecoming the Trust that was imposed in them, they will do the like again, if
lustily baited in proportion to the lust and passions that predominate over
them, so that a little retrospect will give such Idea's of many, as may serve
honest Men to govern themselves by, in the Elections they are to make: Only let
them remember that the Character of Knavo, which belongs entirely to them, who
deceived them once, will the next time be their own lot with the addition of
Fool to boot; if they give them the same opportunity of deceiving them again.
Nor are they who have through Bigottry or Disloyalty overthrown one Branch of
the Constitution, to be trusted with the Guardianship of the Remainder: For
such as have alienated those Rights, which by all the Laws of the Land were
rendered most inviolable, will not be conscientious or zealous on this foot of
Principles for preserving the Privileges and Immunities of others: Not but
that there is a difference to be made, between them who have acquiested in what
they could not prevent, and those that have subverted what was most Sacred in
the Government, upon Republicane Prospects and Inducements of Ambition and
Covetousness. And though the present King may be safe in these Men's hands, while
they can serve their ends by him. Yet as Kingship is not, so neither will be be
any longer, than they can raise themselves to Power and Interest, to change the
Monarchy into a Commonwealth.

12. Of all Men they are not only the Unworthiest to serve again in Parliament,
but to be abhorred as Betrayers of their Country, who in any Parliament
heretofore, are either known, or justly suspected to have been Pensioners:
Seeing the only reason why such Persons are bought by others, is their having
Inclinations, and their being in a capacity to sell the Nation. For it is only
their Treachery that makes them valuable at a Court, and not Parts or Ability
for National and Honorable Service. And all Men have cause to believe, that
they who have bargained for, and sold them so often, will deliver them at last,
if they be but offered a Price accordingly. Nor do we deserve better, if we be
so sottish, as to elect them again, whom either certain Intelligence or common
Fame have divulged, for making Merchandise of the People, to enrich themselves:
Of whom I need not give a Catalogue, there being some in all parts of the
Kingdom, that can both publish their Names, and proclaim their Infamy.

13. Nor are they worthy to be chosen to serve in a House of Commons, who are
recommended by such as have other Ends to serve, than those of their Country;
they whom their own Merit cannot advance at Court, ought not to be relied upon
in their Solicitations for any to be Members of Parliament; seeing all they aim
at, is by gaining the Votes of the People for their Favorites, to render them
Tools by whom they then form themselves into Mercuries at Whitchall, where
otherwise they would be overlooked as useless Blocks, whilst otherwise they
are.

14. To which I add in the last place, that they who value themselves upon the
favor or credentials of Persons owning a Foreign dependence are to be treated
with the disdain, which is due to those detached from the Interest of England,
and who are become embarked in that of an Outlandish People; for considering
the influence that Strangers have either by themselves, or by those that are
their Creatures, upon all the Revolutions of Estate, we may easily foresee,
that nothing is wanting to the making us a Province to those that Rival us in
Trade, or to the giving us up a Sacrifice to their lust and pleasure, but the
getting such into our Senate House, who tho Natives by Birth, are bribed to be
Aliens by Inclinations.

It may be now apprehended, that if all those I have represented be unqualified
to serve in Parliament, there will be very few found whom the People may wisely
choose, or safely trust, and tho to the reproach of the Nation, it is too
likely that it may be so, yet I must display such Properties requirable in
those to be elected, as will render the finding them still more difficult, tho
I hope not impossible.

1. It is needful then they should be Persons of good sense, that they may not
be easily misled, nor wheedled out of their own Rights, and those of the
Nation. Tho Money may be thought enough to recommend one to be an Alderman, or
Lord Mayor, yet a little Wit and some measure of Understanding are needful to
qualify one to be a Member of a Legistative Body of the Kingdom. I do not mean
he should be a Philosopher, but he should understand something of the
Constitution, and how to conduct Public Affairs.

2. They should not only be Men of exact honesty, but of undaunted fortitude,
who as they are not to be bribed, so they will not endure to be hoctored; not
that I would have them rude or unmannerly to their Prince, but only bold and
zealous in asserting and vindicating the Rights of their Country.

3. They ought to be Men of some considerable Fortune themselves, who may be
encouraged to protect other Men's Estates upon the motives of defending their
own.

4. They should be Gentlemen recommended well affected to their Country, who
may thereby render whatsoever is grievous in it self, tho necessary to be
granted, not only patiently submitted unto, but cheerfully approved of.

5. They are to be Persons not only well inclined, but unalterably principled
as to the goodness of our Constitution above all other Forms of Sovereign Rule
and Authority; otherwise they will over-tax the People under pretense to
support the Government, but in reality to overthrow it.

6. Nor ought they to be People indifferent about or Heretical in Religion,
seeing the State is so inter-woven with the Church, that whoever endeavors to
supplant the one, will be found to shake the the other. Which I do therefore
intimate, because they who have for several years been spawning among us a
Socinian Christianity, do begin to palm upon us a new frame of Civil Policy,
and who by their late prints obtruded upon the Nation, are designing to mould
the Kingdom into conformity with a little Corporation.

7. They ought to be such, who tho favorers of a due liberty in Religious
matters, yet have a hearty concern for preserving the Ecclesiastical Order and
Discipline, that are at present established. For as those of the National
Communion are by far the most considerable for number, quality and interest, so
there are few Dissenters in the Kingdom capable to defend our Common Religion,
when vigorously attacked either by Arguments or Force: If we should disoblige
or discourage those I have mentioned from appearing to vindicate and protect
it; and besides they have not only as many but more Laws to secure them in
their Claims, then any other rank of People whatsoever has for its Properties,
so that whosoever take upon them to overthrow their establishment, may with as
much reason as well as right disfranthise the Body of their People of England.

8. Nor would it do amiss to get such every where returned, as may seriously
examine, whether any thing be at all needful to be levied of the People at this
time, for support of the Government; seeing it can so liberally alienate away,
and bequeath both the ancient Lands of the Crown, and what we call the late
forfeited Estates upon its Minions. For it was never heretofore found, that
Impositions were laid upon the subject to spare the Inheritance of, and
Incidents to the Throne, and much less to encourage the squandring them away in
Donatives, but only to supply those deficiencies, which the Royal Treasure
could not answer and defray.

9. It will be but congruous to Justice as well as to Prudence, that such may
be chosen to dispose the Money of the Nation, as will not only enquire, but be
satisfied before they grant any, how much is necessary to be given; for thereby
we shall only bear the Burden of our own quota, and not undergo the Charge
incumbent upon all the Confederates, or at least the greatest part of them. In
the doing whereof, we may be thought Rich, and with all Prodigal, but will
never be called Wise nor Discreet.

10. All Men will find it their Interest to choose such, as may not only
consider what is demanded, but what the Kingdom is in a condition to give.
Seeing otherwise we pull only ruin upon our selves, in order to preserve
others; and will meet with no better recompense from those whom we are
endeavoring to defend, than to be styled Fools for our pains.

11. Those upon whom the right of representing the Nation in Parliament is to
be devolved, ought to be Persons, who before they grant more Money, may exact a
strict impartial account how that has been laid out, which the Kingdom has
already so liberally granted, being if not applied to the Uses it was designed,
and particularly to the preserving our Navigation and Trade, our Treasure as to
us, is only impertinently wasted, and we impoverished to no purpose, or to such
purposes as we reap no Benefit by, and it may be know nothing of.

12. Is will be both convenient and necessary, that those chosen to serve at
this time, be Men of such Integrity to their Country, that as they are to give
from the People with one Hand, they may get something for them with the other.
That is, that they may not part with so much Treasure as will be required,
without procuring some good ^^d beneficial Laws in the room of it. I do not
mean that they should pare from the Crown any of its essential and necessary
Prerogatives, but only that they would repair and strengthen the Fences about
the Peoples Liberties, and make such Pro^s against our trafficking and
eneroaching Allies, as that we may not prove a Prey to them upon the expiration
of the Confederacy.

What has been here briefly represented, required more room to enlarge upon,
than the Design of this Paper and Undertaking would allow: But if judged
necessary, the enforcement of all these Heads are ready, with the several
Reasons proper to support and give efficacy to them; which being rather needful
to justify the Sincerity of the Author, than further to influence those to whom
this Sheet is addressed, is therefore at present superceded, but shall be
publicly exhibited, whenever called for, or demanded.

October. 14th, 1695.
FINIS.

