ADVICE TO THE Men of Shaftesbury, OR A LETTER to a FRIEND Concerning The
Horrid Popish-Plot.
SIRS,
YOUR frequent solicitations to know my thoughts concerning the many talks of
Plots, has at last prevailed with me; and they are these.

I. I think no man that is not void of Reason and True Protestant Religion, can
any way question the reality of the Popish Plot; it being made out so clearly
(to the sat^sfaction of the Law) even by the Plotters themselves; whom God at
last wrought so upon, that they durst not go on, but by a Divine Hand were
forced to discover their own and others hellish Designs: Had not God wrought
this Change upon them, a Discovery had been impossible; for no honest man durst
have ventured his Soul to have been the Carrier on of such Diabolical Designs;
but I also think, that our King has, and will take such effectual Care, by
putting the Laws in Execution, that we may be free from the like future dangers.

II. I think no man, that is not void of Reason, Loyalty to his King, and Love
to his Country, can any ways question, but the same Plot is still carrying on:
Yet by different, men for different ends: (viz.) By men called Phanaticks or
Common-Wealths-men; the Papists contrive secretly, wanting a plausible Pretense
to take with the People; the other find secret working would fail them,
therefore fly to the Law, endeavor to make that speak their Treasons Legal:
and so delude the unwary by covering their Horrid Designs with so fair a Vail:
But durst they appear without that, the multitude would soon cry, Tyburn,
Tyburn as a just reward for such who would have wheedled them into slavery.

The Papists would destroy our Church and State; so would the
Common-Wealths-men: The Papists would set up Popery and absolute Monarchy; the
other an Amsterdam Religion, and Arbitrary Government in the hands of many; but
the latter designing Gentlemen say, They only endeavor to secure Protestant
Religion and Property; it this were all, Pray, why did they not accept the
Security the King offered; such as was never offered by a King, never refused
by a People; for in case of the King's Death, (whose life God long continue)
the Administrative Power would have been in the hands of Protestants, and that
by a Law, and pray, what then could the D. of York have done against Power and
Law. But the truth is, these Gentlemen were for Power in Possession, not in
Reversion; for the King must either devolve upon them all but the name of King,
as Navy, Militia, and whatever is of value; otherwise they will still suggest
unto the People, there is great danger of Popery and Arbitrary Government. --
Oh foolish Englishmen! Who has bewitched you to believe such Liars? They say
they will make our King a glorious King; Oh! Jesuits, for they do not tell you
where they laugh when you believe it here, no, Heaven is the Place, they tell
you; They will make you a free People, still Mental Reservations; It Is they
will make you free to part with your Moneys; free to accept free quarter; free
of any Religion so it make for their Interest.

In the mean time (as tender as their Consciences are) they complain not
against the Jews Synagogue here, which is because they cannot hurt them, no
more would they against the Papists, would they bring Lands to them, not take
from them; had not Papists as much Liberty in the late time as since? But you
will say, they were then sequestrated; so were Protestants, and both as they
were Delinquents; and were not Papists usually admitted to Composition with
Protestants? Were there not then as many Priests and Jesuits as since? And how
many then suffered as such? (not one) but these Zelots could then and would
still be Friends with Papists, might they but have the sovereign Power, King,
and Church Lands in their Possession, but these men cannot endure to hear of 40
and 41. It Is great Pity they could not have had their then Actings forgotten,
as well as forgiven; then indeed they might hope to accomplish their hellish
Designs now, as well as then. O little Politicians! what in one Age to play one
Game twice! but how do they acquit themselves of the Parallels of 40 and 41?
Only with Billinsgate Language, and the Act of Oblivion, as if they had been
forgiven for no other end, but to act the same Villainies over again -- But they
tell you, it is not now, as in 40 and 41, and I think they speak true as to one
part (viz) that the People are not so Tumultuous; (no thanks to them) for now
they went from house to house with their Petition, and glad to get any; Whereas
before the People sought their Petition: But as for their Leaders, they act as
if seven Unclean Spirits, more than before, were entered into them; otherwise
what Tends their so strenuous endeavoring to get men of their old Principle,
that can swallow all Oaths; take Sacraments upon them to be Magistrates, but
that they may pack Juries, and so commit Insolences without fear, and make a
way to be Legal Traitors.

Yet these men would have you believe they are the only Patriots of their
Country; but did they not in 40; and after, prove Wolves in Sheeps Clothing,
and are not some of these now the very men that acted then? are they not of
restless, ambitious and covetous natures? or men of broken or breaking
Fortunes; and shall True Englishmen be such fools, to believe those who have
no better ways to commend themselves to the People, and to countenance all
their actings, than by going about to make a breach upon the best Constitution
of Government in the World, by asserting that the sovereign Power lies in the
Commons, and would have all men wonder why the King will not wholly cast
himself upon them.

Now I will offer to the common sense of any man, whether he would put himself
under the Guardianship of those that had murdered his Father, and turned
himself out of all: And I will farther offer whether the King have not reason
to be equally jealous of the Protestant Dissenters, as of the Papists, the
former in this Age having actually subverted Church and State, the latter only
plotted so to do.

But this I know will be looked upon as an unpardonable Crime, to take notice
that Phanatick Protestants should allow themselves in that which they condemn
in a Papist, (viz) to overthrow a Protestant Church, and murder a Protestant
King. But these zealous Reformers say, they designed nothing but to make our
King great; so did they in 40. They complain not against the King, but against
his Evil Counselors; so did they in 40. They would be content with
Reformation; so said they in 40. But they will tell you, they mean now as they
say; but how shall we know it? I suppose the King will never Trust them so as
to try them; for some of these men were in 40, and as yet they never showed any
change, but in changing, getting in all to Governments: Yet as noxious humors
spewed out of all; these in 40 and 41, were as well esteemed for honest men, as
these would have the World believe them to be now, but then they had got
sitting Power; and do but see what they offered to their then King about April
42; Eight Propositions declaring their Rights, and their Petition and Advice in
May following, Consisting of 19 Propositions, both which I have added to this
Paper, that the World may Judge whether if this Government should attempt to
put such Conditions, but upon any private man, we had not just reason to cry
out Tyranny, Oppression, and all that could be bad; nay, was there ever a free
born English man that would leave that to be such an enslaved King? But I would
have these that talk so much of God, take notice of his hand formerly against
them; for when under pretense of Redressing what was amiss in Church and State,
they had by slaughter (to give it the best terms) Pillage, Plunder,
Sequestration, Decimation, Free Quarter, unheard of Monthly T^xes and Excises,
brought Church and State to ruin. Then they went about to build their Babel to
reach to Heaven and Eternity; how then did God confound their Language, and
make some speech Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, 5. Monarchy, Quaker,
Sweet-Singer, with diverse more? How can they think now to carry on their work,
since yet they do not, nay, confident I am, never will understand one another?
Therefore I would offer an Expedient to put an end to all Plots, and continue
our Peace, that we fear God, honor and Obey our King, and Love one another;
and all that will not comply with this, let them meet with Korah's Reward;
Numb. 16.31, 32, 33, etc. And it came to pass as he had made an end of speaking
all these words: That the ground clave asunder that was under them. And the
Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the
men that appertained unto Korah, and all their Goods. They, and all that
appertained to them went down into the Pit, and the Earth closed upon them, and
they perished from among the Congregation, etc. That they being removed, our
Land may enjoy Peace and Truth.

The Eight Propositions in April, 1642.
I. That whatsoever they declare to be Law, ought not to be questioned by the
King. II. That no president can be limits, to bound their proceedings. III.
That a Parliament, for the public good, may dispose of any thing wherein the
King or Subject has a right; and that they, without the King, are this
Parliament, and the judge of this public good, and that the King's consent is
not necessary. IV. That no Member of either House ought to be troubled for
Treason, Felony, or any other Crime, unless the cause be first brought before
the Parliament, that they may judge of the fact, and give leave to proceed, if
they see cause. V. That the Sovereign Power resides in both houses, and that
the King ought to have no negative Voice. VI. That the levying of forces
against the Personal Commands of the King, (though accompanied with his
presence) is not levying War against the King, but the levying of War against
his politic person, viz. his Laws, etc. VII. That Treason cannot be committed
against his, otherwise than as he is entrusted with the Kingdom, and discharges
that trust; and that they have a Power to judge, whether he has discharged his
trust, or not. VIII. That they may dispose of the King when they will.
The Nineteen Propositions in May following.
I. That the Lords and other of His Majesty's Privy Council, and all great
Officers of State, both at home and abroad, be put from their Employments, and
from his Council, save only such as should be approved of by both Houses of
Parliament, and none put into their places but by approbation of the said
Houses: And that all Privy Counselors take an Oath for the due Execution of
their places in such form as shall be agreed upon by the said Houses. II. That
the great Affairs of the Kingdom be debated, Resolved and Transacted only in
Parliament; and such as shall presume to do any thing to the contracy to be
reserved to the censure of the Parliament; and such other matters of State as
are proper for his Majesty's Privy Council, shall be debated and concluded by
such as shall from time to time be chosen for that place by both Houses of
Parliament. And that no public Act concerning the Affairs of the Kingdom which
are proper for His Privy Council, be esteemed valid, as proceeding from the
Royal Authority, unless it be done by the Major part of the Council, attested
under their hands; and that the Council be not more than 25, nor less than 15;
and that when a Councellor's place falls, it shall not be supplied without the
Assent of the major part of the Council; that such and Choice also shall be
void, if the next Parliament after confirm it not. III. That the Lord High
Steward of England, Lord High Constable, Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the
great Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord privy Seal, Earl Marshal, Lord Admiral, Warden
of the Cinque Ports, Chief Governor of Ireland, Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Master of the Wards, Secretaries of State, Two chief Justices and Chief Baron,
be always chosen with the approbation of both Houses of Parliament; and in the
Intervals of Parliament, by the Major part of the Privy Council. IV. That the
Government of the King's Children shall be committed to such as both Houses
shall approve of; and in the Intervals of Parliament, such as the Privy Council
shall approve of: That the Servants then about them, against whom the Houses
have just Exception, should be removed. V. That no Marriage be concluded, or
treated of, for any of the King's Children, without consent of Parliament. VI.
That the Laws in force against Jesuits, Priests, and Popish Recusants be
strictly put in Execution. VII. That the Votes of Popish Lords in the House of
Peers be taken away; and that a Bill be passed for the Education of Children of
Papists in the Protestant Religion. VIII. That the King will be pleased to
reform the Church Government and Liturgy in such manner as both Houses of
Parliament shall advise. IX. That he would be pleased to rest satisfied with
that Course the Lords and Commons have appointed for ordering the Militia, and
recall his Declarations and Proclamations against it. X. That such Members as
have been put out of any Place or Office since this Parliament began, may be
restored, or have satisfaction. XI. That all Privy Councillors and Judges take
an Oath, the form whereof shall be agreed on, and settled by Act of Parliament,
for the maintaining the Petition of Right, and of certain Statutes made by the
Parliament. XII. That all Judges and Officers placed by approbation of both
Houses of Parliallament, may hold their Places quamdiu been se gesserint. XIII.
That the Justice of Parliament may pass upon all Delinquents, whether they be
within the Kingdom, or fled out of it; And that all Persons cited by either
House of Parliament, may appear and abide the Censure of Parliament. XIV. That
the general Pardon offered by His Majesty, be granted with such Excep^ions as
shall be advised by both Houses of Parliament. XV. That the Forts and Castles
be put under the Command of such Persons, as with the Approbation of the
Parliament the King shall Appoint. XVI. That the Extraordinary Guards about the
King be discharged, and for the future none Raised, but according to the Law,
in case of Actual Rebellion or Invasions. XVII. That His Majesty enter into a
more strict Alliance with the United Provinces, and other Neighbor Protestant
Princes and States. XVIII. That His Majesty be pleased, by Act of Parliament,
to clear the Lord Kimbolton, and the Five Members of the House of Commons, in
such manner, as that future Parliaments may be secured from the consequence of
Evil President. XIX. That His Majesty be pleased to pass a Bill for restraining
Peers, made hereafter from Sitting or Voting in Parliament, unless they be
admitted with consent of Both Houses of Parliament These Propositions granted,
they promise to apply themselves to regulate His Majesty's Revenue to His best
Advantage, and to settle it to the support of His Royal Dignity, in Honor and
Plenty; and also to put the Town of Hull into such hands as His Majesty shall
appoint, with consent of Parliament.
Thus Sir you have my thoughts, viz the Plot is the same carried on by
different Parties and how far others in this King's days have trod in these
steps, to subvert Church and State, I leave the whole World to judge.

London, Printed for John Smith in Great Queen Street, 1681.


