The Admonisher Admonished: IN, A MODEST and IMPARTIAL NARRATIVE Of the
Proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Court, AGAINST JAMES JONES Citizen of LONDON,
Of the Parish of St. Bartholomew Exchange. Being a True Account of matter of
Fact, from his Citation to Doctors Commons, to their taking out the Writ of
Excommunicato Capiendo against him. AND ALSO An Account of the several Ways
made use of for the taking off the said Writ. WITH Useful Observations Upon
several Particular Passages and Statutes. Dedicated to the Worshipful Doctor
Pinfold.

Isa. 59. 15. ^ea, Truth fails, and he that departs from Evil makes
himself a Prey; and the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no
Judgment.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Malthus at the Sun in the Poultrey. 1683.

To the Right Worshipful THOMAS PINFOLD, Doctor of Laws, and Official to the
Archdeacon of London.
Worshipful Doctor,
AFter those Respects due to you, this is humbly to entreat you with patience
to read and consider this following Narrative of matters between you and my
self, in which I have been careful to give a true Account, without any bad
Language, or any bitter Reflections, which are too common in matters of this
kind: My only design in this is to discover past Proceedings, as well on my own
part as on yours; that so such as may hereafter be concerned with
Ecclesiastical Courts, as I have been with yours, may by these Proceedings
learn either to forbear to do as I have done, or else improve the same to do
better, or find out some other way more for their own Advantage.

And for as much as your Worship has loaded a Multitude of his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects with Admonitions and Excommunications (and with the Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo) to force them into a Jail, if they do not pay you great
Sums of money for not obeying your Admonitions:

I beseech you to receive a few Protestant Admonitions agreeable to the Holy
Scripture.

I. That you being a Doctor and Judge of a Court called Spiritual, it highly
concerns you to see that you are a true Spiritual man, not walking according
to the Lusts of the Flesh: Spiritual persons ought to maintain Spiritual
practices, Romans 8. 1.

II. Take heed that you do not force any Persons by your Admonition to come
unto the holy Communion, who are unholy in their Conversation; and that they
may escape your Excommunication, Venture to Eat and Drink their own Damnation.
1 Cor. 11. 20.

III. Take heed you do not force the Godly to partake with the Ungodly, least
you make them Partakers of other men's Sins; but purge out the Old Leaven that
you may be a new Lump; for a little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, 1 Cor. 5.
6, 7, 8, 9.

IV. Take heed you do not that to others, which you would not have them do to
you, viz. You would not be willing the Protestant Dissenters (considered as
Independents, Presbyterians, or those falsely called Anabaptists) should compel
you to take the Holy Sacrament amongst any of them, Mat. 5. 12. Therefore why
should you do the like?

V. Take heed that you do not force Persons to the holy Sacrament against their
Wills, seeing God must be served with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind,
1 Chronicles. 28. 9.

VI. Take heed you 'do not force Persons to the Holy Sacrament, who have not a
right unto it; or such as for fear of your further Proceedings may come unto it
contrary to their own Consciences, of whom it may be said as Paul said to the
Corinthian Professors, 1 Cor. 11. 20. This is not to eat the Lords Supper; for
the abusing of Gods Ordinance is a losing Gods Ordinance, to the Abusers of it,
and it may be said, Such eat man's Dinner, rather then the Lords Supper.

VII. Take heed that whilst you proceed in handling Persons about Spiritual
things, that you let your Proceedings be according to Spiritual Rules contained
in the Holy Scriptures, in which there is no Directions to inflict outward
Penalties upon Persons for not performing of Spiritual Duties.

VIII. Take heed that you do not debase Religion in making Spiritual matters
bow and Truckle unto Temporal matters, for base ends; and let not the Holy
Sacrament be made a Qualification for keeping an Alehouse, or for being
Electors of Magistrates; it is enough that men be Freeholders in the Country,
or freemen and of the Livery in the City for such things.

IX. Take into your Consideration the many miseries that now attend a great
number of his Majesty's good Subjects, some constrained to be as Prisoners, in
their own Houses, others fled into the Country, others let their Houses, and
put off their Trades, and others remove from those Parishes where they were
prosecuted, in hopes to be more quiet elsewhere, and some are carried to
Prison; and all by reason of your Proceedings.

X. Take heed that the Sighs and Cries of poor Women and Children, (who groan
under this Distress) do not go up to the God of Compassion, and be returned
against you as the Cause of them.

XI. Do not think it will be enough for you to say you have proceeded according
to Law, (if you could prove that) but consider that the Ecclesiastical Doctors,
and such as were called Spiritual Judges in Queen Mary's days, had the same
Plea for their Persecuting the poor Protestants.

XII. I Beseech you consider that the Noncompliance of Protestant-Dissenters,
in matters of Religion, as imposed by you, is not for want of Loyalty to his
Majesty, but for fear they should corrupt Christianity.

And now worthy Sir, be not afraid to put your self upon a Trial by this
Christian Jury of Sober Admonitions, which are humbly and honestly Impannelled
by

His Majesty's Loyal Subject, and your Worships Humble Servant, James Jones.

A Famous Example for Ecclesiastical Doctors.
ANd now Doctor, because worthy Examples and good Patterns are sometimes more
Prevalent then Admonitions and Precepts, I will humbly set before you the good
Example of a Famous Doctor of Law, belonging to the Ecclesiastical Court in the
famous City of Jerusalem:

Who when the Dissenters and Non-Conformists of that day, were cited and
brought before the said Ecclesiastical Court, and by the Authority thereof were
decreed to be Excommunicated out of the Church, and out of the World also;

The aforesaid Doctor of Law favored and defended the Cause of those poor
Dissenters, by making an excellent speech against the violent Proceedings of
that Court; which take as follows, as it is Recorded, not in Acts of
Parliament, but in the Acts of the Apostles, Chapter 5.

Verse. 34. Then there stood up one in the Counsel, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel,
a Doctor of Law had in Reputation of all the People, and commanded to put the
Apostles forth a little space.

Verse. 35. And said unto them, Ye men of Israel, take heed to your selves, what
ye intend to do as touching these men.

Verse. 38. And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone,
for if this Counsel or work be of men, it will come to naught.

Verse. 39. But if it be of God ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found
even to fight against God;

A Sober Question Proposed.
Whether the aforesaid Doctor of Law belonging to that Ecclesiastical Court,
who was a Pharisce and did thus favor those poor Dissenters; Or Saul, who also
was a Pharisee, and did violently Prosecute those Non-Conformists, even to
Imprisonment and Death, and caused some faint-hearted Professors to Blaspheme,
that so they might escape those punishments that he inflicted upon many by that
Authority which he received from the high Priest, who was Judge of the
aforesaid Ecclesiastical Court: Be the best Pattern and Example for a Spiritual
Judge?

The Resolution shall be left for Doctor Pinfold, and all other violent
Prosecutors of them that fear God, to be considered and Resolved, as they will
answer it before the Lord Chief Justice of the whole World, viz. The Lord Jesus
Christ, Acts. 17. 31. Rom 2. 16.

ERRATA. Page. 2. Line. 45. for Sir Thomas's, Read St. Thomas's.

The Admonisher Admonished: OR, A MODEST and IMPARTIAL NARRATIVE OF The late
Proceedings of the Ecclesiastical-Court against JAMES JONES, etc.
THe Subject of the Ensuing Narrative being chiefly matter of Fact, and the
Design of it being only to give the World an Account of the Proceedings of the
Ecclesiastical Court against several hundred of his Majesty's Subjects, and in
particular against James Jones; I shall without any Preface acquaint you, That
upon the 16th of November last there was a Citation left at his House, by an
Ecclesiastical Officer, the form whereof was that which follows:

To Mr. Jones, of the Parish of St. Bartholomew Exchange.
I Cite you by virtue of a Process under Seal, to appear before the Right
Worshipful Thomas Pinfold, Doctor of Laws, and Official to the Archdeacon of
London, or his Lawful Surrogate, or any other Competent Judge in that behalf,
in the Parish Church or Tabernacle of St. Mary Magdalen Old-Fish-street London,
On the 17th day of November, between the Hours of Nine and Eleven in the
Forenoon of the same day, then and there to Answer to a Presentment given in
and Exhibited against you by the Churchwardens of your said Parish, as by Law
you are bound. And further to do and Receive as by Law and Justice shall
Appertain.

Francis Speak, Officer.


From this Citation the said Jones does observe these following things, and
desires others to consider and well improve them.

1. That this Citation is not in the Kings Name, (only, I Cite you.)

2. Though there is Mention made of a Process under Seal, by virtue of which
the said Jones was Cited, it is not said, By virtue of a Commission from his
Majesty, given to Empower that Court so to proceed.

3. Though there is mention made of Law and Justice in the said Citation, that
is no Demonstration of the Legallity of the aforesaid Court; and how much of
Law and Justice has been managed there, let those Judge that have been handled
in the said Court, and what may yet be expected of Law and Justice must be very
patiently waited for, by those that suffer.

The next day, being the 17th day of November aforesaid, the said Jones with
others of his Protestant Neighbors, did appear before the said Doctor Pinfold,
thinking thereby to avoid a strange thing called Cotumacy or Contempt in that
Court; Supposing he should have had further Citations, before any further
Proceedings; but he found himself greatly mistaken, for the said Doctor was
very nimble with the honest Neighbors of the said Jones, as they were
particularly called by their Names, and presently concluded them Guilty of the
matters in the Churchwardens Presentment, viz. of not coming to Church, and
not Receiving the Sacrament, without Positive Proof, of those matters by
Persons appearing Face to Face; though the Truth is, the said Doctor did not
put any of those before him to accuse themselves, but did presently proceed to
Admonish them, To come to Church, and to take the Sacrament in their own Parish
Church, and bring a Certificate, they had so done from the Doctor of the said
Parish, by the 6th day of December following. And when most of the said Jones's
Neighbors had been called, the Clark called for one Mr. Jones; The said Jones
Replied, His Name was Jones, and he was come to see whether he was the man
intended in the Presentment.

The Doctor concluded that, (because the Citation was left at his house:) Jones
confessed there was a Citation left at his house, but that was no Proof that he
was the same Person intended; Especially considering that his Whole Name was
not in the Citation, only Mr. Jones, and there might be other Jones's in the
said Parish.

Then the Doctor inquired of the Apparitor, who said that one of the
Churchwardens did direct him to the house of the said Jones, where he left the
Citation, and said he was the same Jones in the Presentment.

Jones then told the Doctor, That if he were the Person, he would not needlessly
contend; but however he thought the Citation was not legally served, it being
not given into his own hand, neither had he seen the Seal of the Court
mentioned in the Citation.

To which Doctor Pinfold Replying, Allowed that it was not a Legal Citation,
and that if the said Jones had not then appeared, the Court would have sworn
their Officer, who if upon Oath he had said he could not find the said Jones,
then they would have set up a Viis and Modis upon the Church door, or upon his
own door, requiring him to appear in the Ecclesiastical Court, but being the
said Jones did appear, the Citation was at an end, and there was no need of any
more Citations.

Then the said Jones perceived that he was got into a Trap, by being so ready
to go with his honest Neighbors to that Court, upon a Supposition that the
Citation being not served upon his Person, nor his full Name in, the Citation
was not right, and therefore thought he should have had a Dismission for that
time till a new Citation was sent and served upon him; he very well knowing
that the Ecclesiastical Courts did formerly proceed very slowly; but it seems
Sir Thomas's day was near at hand, for the Citizens of London to choose a New
Common Conncil, and it was high time to hasten Excommunications, thereby if it
were possible, to prevent the Privilege of such Persons in their Election of
that Honorable Court of Common Council; but this is a happyness to the Loyal
City of London, that the Citizens of London do understand the Statute Law, by
which the Kings Power and the Peoples Privilege is maintained, though they may
not so well understand the Roaring Cannons of Ecclesiastical Courts, viz. The
Canon Law; and now the said Jones does humbly desire his fellow Protestants to
bear with this Digression, and not count it a Transgression; but he thinks it
advisible that such as are not cited with a Citation upon their own Persons,
need not make so much haste to the Ecclesiastical Courts as to break their
Shins. And so the said Jones will return to his sober Discourse with Doctor
Pinfold.

Then the said Doctor soberly proceeded, telling the said Jones that he was
under the same Circumstances with his Neighbors, viz. Presented by the
Churchwardens, for not coming to his Parish Church, and for not receiving the
Sacrament; and added, I think it in vain to ask when you were at Church, but I
will hear what you have to say.

Then the said Jones Replied, Doctor, I perceive you will deal with me as with
my Neighbors, presently proceed to an Admonition.

The Doctor said, You may be sure of that.

Jones replied, Sir, I desire you to hear me a few words, before you proceed to
Admonition; for I am not come to Provoke you, and I hope you will not Oppress
me.

Then the Doctor consented to hear what Jones had to say.

Jones. Sir, I am ready to receive and comply with an Admonition to receive the
Sacrament, provided you will give me such an Admonition, and in such a Spirit
as the Apostle Paul gave in his days, (at this word the Doctor looked somewhat
strangely, as if Paul's Admonitions were strange things in that Court; but Jones
went on, saying that) Paul did Admonish Persons to examine themselves and come
to that Ordinance, and in another place, Paul did Admonish Persons to take heed
they did not partake with Whore-mongers, and Drunkards, and Railers; in the
first Admonition, Persons are taught to look after their Own Fitness; and in
the other Admonition Persons are taught to take heed of the Unfitness of
others, and such an Admonition I am willing to Receive.


Doctor. You are a very Uncharitable man; what do you Judge your Neighbors to
be Whore-mongers?


Jones. Sir, I do but speak what Paul said a great while ago, which is
Instruction to us now; and though I will not say, my Neighbors are
Whore-mongers, yet this I will say, and Appeal to your Conscience, that there
is some Persons mentioned in one of those Scriptures, in most, if not in all
the Parishes of London, viz. Drunkards, and Railers, and I may add, Dreadful
Swearers, and such as call upon God to damn them; for Wickedness is grown bold
in all our Streets.


Doctor. Sir you must look to your own self.


Jones. Sir, that I learn from the first Admonition of Paul; and must take heed
I do not communicate with wicked persons, from the other Admonition of Paul.


Doctor. I Admonish, I Admonish you to come to Church, and to take the
Sacrament in your own Parish Church, between this and the 6th day of December
next, and bring a Certificate from the Doctor of your Parish, that you have so
done.


Jones. Sir, seeing you have proceeded to Admonish me, I pray tell me whether
you Admonish me as a Minister, or as a Magistrate?


Doctor. I Admonish you as a Magistrate.


Jones. Sir, then I suppose you have the Kings Commission for your thus
pr^ceeding with me and my Neighbors.


Doctor. What Sir! Do you call the Authority of this Court into Question?


Jones. Sir, I rather conclude it; if you be a Magistrate, then you must have a
Commission for what you do, and I desire to see it.


Doctor. Now I see what you are, if you had Opportunity you would question the
Kings Authority or Title to the Kingdom.


Jones. Sir, that is unworthily spoken of you, and though you be a greater man
than I am, I cannot bear this, it is Unsufferable, and you cannot answer this
thing. Sir do you sit here as a Judge of a Court; and Insinuate so base an
Accusation against any of his Majesty's Liege People? I would have you to know,
and I do here declare, that I do own the Kings Authority, as King of this
Realm; and if you have the Kings Commission for this Court, show it me, and I
will own the Kings Authority in you.


Doctor. Sir, I will not show it you.


Jones. I have humbly desired it, but now I demand you to show me the Kings
Commission for your keeping this Court, for I desire to Reverence the Kings
Authority wherever I see it, and I will Reverence you as the Kings
Commissioner, if you show your Commission.


Doctor. I do not use to carry it in my my Pocket, I will not show it you.
Clark go on.


Jones. Well Sir, then I demand a Copy of my Libel, and time to plead to it.


Doctor I cannot deny you a Copy, you may have it at the Registers Office.


Jones. Sir I demand time to plead to it when I have it.


Doctor. Sir I will not give you time.


Jones. What Sir, will you choke me with the Sacrament? I do own and Reverence
the Sacrament as a holy thing, and an Ordinance of God, but you ought not to
force it down my Throat after this manner at your Pleasure; this is not the way
to bring People to a Right Conformity to the Church of England, that should be
done by good Arguments and gentle Reasoning.

Then the Doctor bid the Clark go on, and call another Person, saying, I have
had talk enough with this man. And another being called, the Doctor after a
very few words, proceeded to Admonition, and dismissed him.

Jones then spoke to the Doctor again; saying, Doctor, I beseech you let me
have a few gentle words with you in Coolness of Spirit.


Doctor. Why I was not angry.


Jones. Truly Sir, you seemed to be angry just now, however I do now entreat a
kindness of you.


Doctor. Speak on, what is it?


Jones. Sir I entreat you to tell me the worst of this matter, what will be my
danger if through ignorance, or neglect, or any thing else, I should not take
the Sacrament at the time appointed by you?


A Gentleman standing by the Doctor, answered, You must go and ask your Council
that question. Jones. What need that Sir, seeing I am before the Judge of this
Court who can tell me all the Proceedings of his own Court? And therefore
Doctor, I pray tell me, that I may not be an ignorant Offender, nor an ignorant
Sufferer, an Obstinate one I will not be.


Doctor. Then I will tell you, If you do not come to Church and take the
Sacrament by the time appointed, you will be Excommunicated, and afterward
laid up in a Jail.


Jones. But pray Doctor, is there any such Law of God in the New Testament,
concerning the Sacrament, to lay up People in Jail for not taking of it?


Doctor. I have done with you. And so bid the Clark go on, and call some body
else. And thus the matter ended for that day.


Now the said Jones further says, That he could not see any marks of Honor or
Power belonging to a Court held by the Kings Commission, for he could not see
the Kings Arms in the said Tabernacle; and whether the former Discourse were
Pertinent or Impertinent, is submitted to the Consideration and censure of all
sober Persons when they have well considered of the Statute of the 1st. of
Edward the 6th. Chap. 2. which take as follows,

ANd whereas the Archbishops and Bishops, and other Spiritual Persons in this
Realm do use to make and send out their Summons Citations, and other Processes,
in their own names, and in such Form and manner as was used in the time of the
Usurped Power of the Bishop of Rome, contrary to the Form and Order of the
Summons and Process of the Common Law used in this Realm, seeing that all
Authority of Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is derived and deducted from
the Kings Majesty as Supreme Head of these Churches and Realms of England, and
Ireland; and so, justly acknowledged by the Clergy of the said Realms) That all
Courts Ecclesiastical within the said two Realms be kept by no other Power or
Authority, either Foreign or within the Realm, but by the Authority of his
most excellent Majesty, Be it therefore further Enacted, by the Authority
aforesaid, that all Summons and Citations, or other Process Ecclesiastical in
all Suits and Causes of instance, betwixt party and party, and all Causes of
correction, and all Causes of Basterdy or Bigamy, or Inquiry de Jure
Patronatus, Probates of Testaments, and Commissions of Administrations of
Persons deceased, and all Acquittances of, and upon Accounts made by the
Executors, Administrators or Collectors of goods of any dead Person, be from
the first day of July next Following made in the Name and with the Style of the
King as it is in Writs Original, or Judicial, at the Common Law, and that the
Test thereof be in the Name of the Archbishop or bishop, or other, having
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, who have the commission and Grant of the Authority
Ecclesiastical, immediately from the Kings Highness, and that his Commissary,
Official, or Substitute, Exercising Jurisdiction under him shall put his name
in the Citation or Process after the Test.

Furthermore be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all manner of
person or persons who have the Exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall
have from the first day of July before expressed in their Seals of Office the
Kings Highnesses Arms decently set with certain Characters under the Arms for
the Knowledge of the Diocese, and shall use no other Seal of Jurisdiction but
wherein his Majesty's Arms be engraven, upon pain that if any person shall use
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (after the day expressed) in this Realm of England,
Wales, or other his Dominions or Territories, and not send or make out the
Citation or Process in the Kings Name, or use any Seal of Iuri sdiction other
then before Limited, that every such Offender shall incur and run in the Kings
Majesty's Displeasure and Indignation, and suffer Imprisonment at his
Highnesses Will and Pleasure.

Now whether the Ecclesiastical Courts have such Authority from the Kings
Majesty by Commission under the great Seal of England, and do proceed in the
Exercise thereof, according to the recited Statute of the 1 Edw. 6. the said
Jones does humbly leave it with Doctor Pinfold to give a Satisfactory
Demonstration of it. However the said Jones has yet no cause to conclude that
the Ecclesiastical Courts have such Power, or have so Legally Proceeded with
him, and many other Persons, first, because the first step of Proceeding, viz.
the Citation, was not in the Kings Name.

Secondly, Because Doctor Pinfold refused to show the Kings Commission when
humbly desired, and honestly demanded in the place where he held his Court,
which if the said Doctor had been empowered according to the former Statute, it
had been very easy for him to have given some convincing Demonstration thereof,
and then the said Jones would have so declared the matter to others of his
fellow Protestants, as might have prevented many People from finding fault with
the said Court, and have caused them to give the more Reverence and Respect
because of his Majesty's Authority according to Law.

But it may be some will say, that the aforesaid Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. has
been Repealed. The said Jones does grant that to be true, but then let it be
well considered by whom it was Repealed, and that was by Queen Mary, a
shee-Popish Successor, an Enemy to the Protestent Religion, and to Protestants
of all sorts, who made a change in Ecclesiastical Courts, as well as in other
Courts, Popish Persons being made Judges, Officials, and Surrogates to manage
Ecclesiastical Affairs, according to the Popish way, and then were the poor
Protestants, the Dissenters of that time, and were handled accordingly, being
Cited to the Ecclesiastical Courts, and Excommunicated, and then delivered up
to the Temporal Power for Imprisonment and death also, because they were the
Non-Conformists of that day, and did not in all things submit themselves to the
Government as Established by Law; though they had the holy word and Law of God
on their sides. This may teach all Persons to take heed of insisting too much
upon National Laws, in matters of Religion, because they who are the
Conformists in one Kings Reign, may be the Non-Conformists in his Successors
Reign; and they would not think it a sufficient Argument against them, that
their Opinions and Practices are contrary to the Government Established by Law:
But whether the men of Doctors-Commons may not believe that a change of
Religion Established by Law, is not a sufficient Argument to keep their places,
and plead Conformity, shall be left for time to manifest.

And now the said Jones will return to the Repeal of the former Statute, Anno
Primo Mariae Sessio Secunda chap. 2. A Repeal was made of the Statute of the
first of Edw. 6. 2. called an Act for the Election of Bishops which is the
aforecited Statute.

But then it must be again considered, the Statute of Repeal of 1 Mary 2. was
repealed by King James; see Anno 1 Jacobi Regis Chap. 25. in these very words.
And be it ^urther enacted. by the Authority of this present parliament, that an
Act made in the first year of the Reign of Queen Mary, Entitled, An Act for
the Repeal of certain Statutes made in the time of King Edward the sixth, shall
stand Repealed and Void.

So that now it is Evident that Queen Mary's repealing Statute being repealed
and made void by King James, those Statutes of King Edward the sixth, are now
in full force, they being left in the same Life and Strength as when they were
first made, unless it can be proved that a Repeal of them has been made since
the Statute of 1 Jacobi Chap. 25.

And so the said Jones will return to give a further Account of his own Case
and further says, that between the time of the Admonition, and the time
appointed by Doctor Pinfold, for him to take the Sacrament, he did advise with
such as were learned in the Laws of England, and had a Plea in Law, prepared
and drawn up as an Answer, to what he was charged with in the Presentment of
the Churchwardens of his said Parish.

A Copy of which Presentment take as follows.

George Cole and William Baron Churchwardens, of the Parish of St. Bartholomew
Exchange, each do declare as follows:
Whereas we cannot of our own knowledge prove who of the Parishoners have and
who have not been at Church, and for that Mr. Robert Key, the late
Churchwarden did promise to give in and make up his Accounts, we gave in our
Presentiments as we did.

For the Persons following we do not Remember to have seen them at Church in
some time past, or to have received the Sacrament, for three Months past.

Mr. Robert Key. Mr. Peter Kid. Mr. Michael Bailey. Mr. Job Sargant. Mr....
Jones. Mr.... Walker. Mr. Francis Miller. Mr. John Millward: Mr. Thomas
Netherway. Mr. George Sterman. Mr.... Jacksen.

And as touching the aforesaid Presentment, the said Jones does verily believe
that the Churchwardens did not do it as an Act of Envy or ill will to their
Neighbors, for as much as the names of the before mentioned Parishoners were
carried to Doctors-Commons by some body else, and then the Churchwardens were
sent for to Doctors-Commons, and required to put them into a Presentment, and
the said Churchwardens did then forbear to do so, but about a week after they
did it, at the importunity of some person at Doctors-Commons. However the said
Jones cannot but take notice, that the Churchwardens were very sparing of
their words, in the Presentment, there is no harsh Expressions against any of
their Neighbors, neither have they made it a Positive charge, thereby
demonstrating they were men cautious of what they did in matters of Accusation,
but it seems any small hint at things of an Accusing nature, may serve as a
Foundation of the Proceedings of that Court.

And the said Jones further says, that if the aforesaid Churchwardens had not
consented to make this Presentment, they could not have been punished by that
Court: And seeing the names were carried into Court by some other person, they
might have left him to be Prosecutor who was so forward to turn Informer.

But this matter being done, it cannot be now undone, and poor Jones does yet
hope he shall not be quite undone by it.

And for the Benefit and help of Churchwardens, who are required by the
Ecclesiastical Courts to take an Oath, to make Presentiments of Crimes and
Ofences, let the Statute of Anno Decimo Sexto Caroli Prim. Chap. 11. Paragr. 4.
be well considered, that so they may not be Imposed upon in such matters. The
words of the Statute are as follows,

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Archbishop,
Bishop, nor Vicar General, nor any Chancellor, Official, nor Commissary of any
Archbishop, or Vicar General, nor any Ordinary whatsoever: Nor any other
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or Minister of Justice, nor any
other Person or persons whatsoever, exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
power, Authority, or Jurisdiction, by any grant License, or Commission of the
Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or by any Power or Authority derived
from the King his Heirs or Successors, or otherwise, shall from and after the
first day of August, which shall be in the year of our Lord God one thousand
six hundred and forty one; Award impose or inflict any pain, penalty, Fine
amerciament, Imprisonment, or other Corporal Punishment, upon any of the Kings
Subjects, for any Contempt, Misdemeanour, Crime, Offense, Matter or thing
whatsoever, belonging to Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Cognizance, or
Jurisdiction, or shall Ex-Officio, or at the Instance or Promotion of any other
person whatsoever, urge, Enforce, Tender, give or minister unto any
Churchwarden, Sideman, or other person whatsoever, any Corporal Oath whereby
he or she shall or may be charged, or Obliged to make any Presentment, of any
Crime or offense, or to confess, or to Accuse himself or herself, of any Crime,
Offense, Delinquency, or Misdemeanour or any Neglect, matter, or thing whereby,
or by Reason whereof, he or she shall or may be Liable or Exposed to any
Censure, pain, penalty, or punishment whatsoever, upon pain and Penalty, that
every person who shall Offend contrary to this Statute, shall forfeit and pay
Treble Damages, to every person thereby grieved, and the sum of one hundred
pounds, to him or them who shall first demand and Sue for the same, which said
Treble Damages, and sum of one hundred pounds shall and may be demanded, and
Recovered by Action of Debt, Bill and plaint, in any Court of record, wherein
no privilege, Essoine, protection, or Wager of Law, shall be admitted or
Allowed, to the Defendant.

But it will be objected by some that this Statute is repealed; unto which it
is answered, by the said Jones, that the first part of the afore-recited
Statute is repealed; but the second part, viz, that in which mention is made,
of imposing the Oath Ex-Officio or any other Oath to the damage of any of the
Kings Subjects, is repeated and Confirmed by the Statute of Decimo
tertio-Caroli Secundi. Chap. 12. Paragraph. 4.

Provided also, and it is hereby further Enacted, that it shall not be Lawful
for any Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar General, Chancellor, Commissary, or any
other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Offices or Minister, or any other
person having or Exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to Tender
or Administer unto any person whatsoever the Oath usually called the Oath
Ex-Offic^i, or any other Oath, whereby such person to whom the same is
tendered, or Administered, may be charged or Compelled, to confess or Accuse, or
to purge him or herself of any Criminal matter or thing whereby he or she may
be Liable to Censure or punishment; any thing in this Statute, or any other
Law, Custom or Usage heretofore to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And for a better Understanding what Power or Authority Ecclesiastical Persons
have or have not, consider well the last clause o^ the before recited Statute.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend or be construed to Extend, to give unto any Archbishop, Bishop, or any
other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or other person, or persons,
aforesaid any power or Authority to Exercise, Execute, Inflict, or Determine
any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Censure or Coertion, which they might not by
Law have done before, the year of our Lord 1639. nor to Abridge or Diminish the
Kings Majesty's Supremacy, in Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs, not to
confirm the Canons in the year 1640. nor any of them, nor any other,
Ecclesiastical Laws or canons not formerly confirmed, Allowed, or Enacted by
parliament, or by the Established Laws of the Land, as they stood in the year
of our Lord 1639.

From which two Statutes these things are to be Considered:

1. That the Statute of 1 Eliz. Chap. 1. Sect. 18. by which some Power and
Authority extraordinary, was Exercised by Ecclesiastical Persons to the great
wrong and damage of his Majesty's Subjects, is repealed and made void by Car.
1. and Car. 2.

2. That though the Repealing Statute of Car. I. chap. 11. be Repealed by 13th
Car. II. chap. 12. yet the Ecclesiastical Party have thereby no power or
Authority given or left unto them, but such ordinary power as they had before
the making the Repealed Statute.

3. That the Imposing of Oaths by Ecclesiastical persons to the damage of any
of His Majesty's Subjects is plainly forbiden by the Statutes of 16 Car. I.
chap. 11. and 13 Car. II. chap. 12

4. That the Ecclesiastical Party have not any power to proceed against any of
His Majesty's Subjects, or to make or confirm any Cannon or Ecclesiastical
Laws, otherwise then was Allowed and Confirmed to them by Acts of Parliament,
and the Established Laws of the Land, as they stood in the Year 1639. and how
much or how little that was, shall be left to further Search.

And since the making of the aforesaid Statute of 13 Car. II. viz. in the 27th
year of his Majesty's Reign, one Thomas Watersfeild, Churchwarden of the
Parish of Arundel, in the County of Sussex, was Imposed upon by the Bishop of
Chichester, to take an Oath, That be should with his utmost diligence, Present
every person, which then or lately was inhabiting within the said Parish of
Arundel, who has done any Offense, or neglected any Duty, mentioned in certain
Articles, contained in a certain printed Book: In which book, amongst other
things, there was contained this Question, viz. Whether every person
inhabiting, or sojourning within the Parish of Arundel aforesaid, did daily
resort every Lords day and Festival days Appointed for Divine Service, to the
Church? And whether they did there remain the whole time of Divine Service,
quietly, with Reverence, order and decency?

Which Oath the said Churchwarden did refuse to take, and for it was afterward
Excommunicated by the said Bishop. But the said Watersfeild brought his Case
before His Majesty's Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, who relieved and
released him by a Prohibition; in which and wherein it is plainly Declared on
the behalf of the Kings Majesty, as follows viz. That by the Laws of this our
Realm of England, no person ought to be cited to appear in any Court Christian;
before any Judge Spiritual, to take any Oath, unless it be only in Cases
Matrimonial or Testamentary. And the aforesaid Bishop is in the said
Prohibition Charged with Breach of the aforesaid Statute of 13 Car. II. and of
the Common Law of this Realm, and therefore was required to Release and
dissolve* all Decrees and Sentences against the said Thomas Watersfeild. And
for your further satisfaction pray go and look the Prohibition. But to teturn
to our Narrative.

The said Jones further says, That upon the Sixth day of December, instead of
carrying a Certificate of his taking the Sacrament, he carried his Plea in Law,
to Doctor Pinfold's Court, then held in the Tabernacle, in Old-Fish-street,
London; and took witnesses with him, and presented his Plea to the Doctor; but
he refused to take it, saying he would go thorrow what he was then upon. The
said Jones bid the Doctor take notice he was there and he would wait; which he
did above an hour, till the Doctor spoke of Adjourning the Court.

Then Jones spoke to the Doctor as follows, Doctor, this Paper is a Plea in
Law against the Presentment of the Churchwardens: I desire you to receive it,
and of Right demand you to Record it in your Court Book, and Doctor I pray do
not take what I am now going to say to you as an Angry word proceeding from my
own breast, but I am Advised to say: Excommunicate me at your peril; this is my
Plea, and I will stand by it. Then the Doctor said, Leave it; and Jones said,
Record it: this was spoken several times over by each; at which Instant
somebody pulled off a Gentleman's Hat; and some busle was like to be in the
Court: and Jones desired the Doctor to Record his Plea, and he would be gone,
and not be concerned with any Tumult. The Doctor said, Leave it, and I will
presently Adjourn the Court; which was done accordingly.

A Copy of the forementioned Plea, is as follows.
The Answer of James Jones of London, to the pretended Charge or Presentment o
Geroge Cole and William Barron, Churchwardens of the Parish of St. Bartholomew
Exchange: Exhibited on the Fourteenth day of November last; before the
Worshipful- Thomas Pinfold, one of the Judges of the Ecclesiastical Courts.

1. THE said James Jones always reserving to himself, and praying the liberty
of a further and more full Answer, and in more due form of Law, and the benefit
of all Legal Exceptions to the said Charge or Presentment, says, that he the
said James Jones cannot determine the bounds of Diocesses and Parishes; and
therefore whether he the said James Jones be, and during the time in the said
pretended Presentment, was an Inhabitant within the said Parish; but refers
himself to the due proof thereof according to Law.

2. The said James Jones says, he is credibly informed, and hopes to prove the
same; that the said Churchwardens sometime since their being in that Office,
and before the pretended Presentment, did upon their Oaths Return into the
Court Omnia been, etc. or did not Charge the said James Jones with any Offense,
and therefore, if he the said James Jones, were an Inhabitant within the said
Parish, (as the pretended Presentment supposes) he the said James Jones ought
to be supposed innocent, and free from any fault. And for the time of such
their first Presentment, he the said James Jones refers himself, and demands
the sight and proof thereof.

3. The said James Jones says, That the now pretended Presentment, against
this Respondent, etc. is not sufficient in the Law; it being not positive, but
doubtful and uncertain, and therefore, he the said James Jones, ought not to
Answer thereunto, or to receive any admonition upon such an Illegal
Presentment, for that all Presentiments (as the said James Jones is advised)
ought to be certain, and not doubtful, before any Answer by Law ought to be
given. The Law of this Realm of England, not compelling any person to accuse
himself: and by the words of this pretended Presentment, the said
Churchwardens have not accused him of any Crime, but only says they cannot of
their own knowledge, know who of the Parishoners, who have, and who have not
been at Church, etc. And further they do not remember to have seen the said
James Jones, etc. at Church for three months last past: which is no Charge
according to Law, for that it ought to be certain, that the said James Jones,
etc. did not come to his Parish Church.

4. The said James Jones says, That it does not appear by the pretended
Presentment, That he the said James Jones is the person Presented; forasmuch as
his full and complete Name was not in the Presentment, at the time of the
Exhibition thereof. And he the said James Jones, conceives it cannot be Legally
inserted ar added afterward in the said Presentment.

All which the said James Jones does insist upon and prays this Court, to take
the same into their Consideration, and that he may be hence Discharged.

Subscribed and delivered into the Ecclesiastical Court, by the hand of James
Jones, on the Sixth day of December, 1682.

THE said Jones having thus proceeded, he waited several days, thinking he
should be Cited to have some kind of Answer to his Plea: whether it was
Accepted or Rejected; but not hearing any thing at all, upon the Eleventh of
December, the said Jones went again to Doctor Pinfolds Court in the Tabernacle
of Old-Fish-Street, London; that so he might observe Proceedings, and to make
answer if he should be called upon. Which day many Pleas were delivered into
the said Court; which the Doctor received with great civillity, and promised a
Hearing of them all, the next Friday following. The said Jones being not that
day called, kept silence, and did not urge his own Case, least he should be
counted a Troubler of that Court; and therefore resolved to attend Doctor
Pinfold the Friday following: concluding that then he should have opportunity
to have his Plea debated as well as others. Especially considering that his
Plea was one of the first that was delivered into that Court.

When Friday came, which was the Fourteenth of December; the said Jones, with a
great number of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, went to Doctors Commons; for
Doctor Pinfold had ordered the Hearing of the Pleas to be there in, a very
large place, like a great Hall, which looked somewhat more like a Court than
the Tabernacle. At which time Doctor Pinfold appeared as Judge. And Counselor
Welden and Counselor Hook, and one of the Doctors belonging to the same
Court, viz. Doctor Rains, appeared to Plead for them that had put in their
Pleas. And the Cause of Mr. Mortymer, and one Mr. Duberry, were debated, with
great Soberness and strength of Argument: touching the Errors of the
Presentiments, and that Courts Imposing the Sacrament at such particular times
as the the Law does not Impose it upon any of His Majesty's Subjects. Doctor
Pinfold saw he was hard put to it, in the beginning of this work, and
therefore, after a little Debate of the matter, between him and the
Counselors: he spread forth his hands and said, he would hear no more Pleas,
but he would Answer them all by the Seal of the Court to morrow morning. And so
the Doctor went away without any Formal Adjourning the Court, or dismissing
that great Assembly; not any Officer appearing to open his mouth, so much as to
say, God save the King. And so that great Assembly departed, in very peaceable
manner, as became His Majesty's peaceable Subjects, though greived in their
minds at such proceedings. The said Jones was ready to appear in his own Case,
if he had been called, or if there had been opportunity: he being prepared with
a Supplyment to his Plea: drawn up by the Learned in the Law. A Copy whereof
take as follows.

The further Answer and Supplyment of James Jones, to the Presentment aforesaid.
Imprimis
THE said James Jones saving and reserving, as in his former Answer he has
already prayed, says, That it does not appear by the said Presentment, or
pretended Presentment, That the same was made upon the Oaths of the said
Churchwardens: which the said James Jones, is Advised ought to have been
Asserted in the said Presentment, or pretended Presentment, in regard (as the
said Jones is advised) no Presentment is legal and sufficient in the Law, to be
Answered unto: nor ought the said Jones to Answer any Presentment but what is
given in upon Oath to this Court. The Laws and Customs of this Land not
pemitting any of the Kings Liege Subjects, to be any ways vexed or greived, or
to be called into question by any Court whatsoever, thereby to be Charged with
any Offense; but upon the Oath of One or more persons. Nor ought any
Accusations to be received by this Court against the said James Jones but upon
Oath. For that the said James Jones is a free born Subject of England;
unconvicted or Accused legally of any Crime, and therefore is Advised he ought
not to make any Answer to such a Presentment, until it does appear to be
according to Law.

2. And the said James Jones says, That by no Law of this Realm, any Layman
can be compelled or Obliged to Receive the Sacrament, more or oftener, than
three times in the year, viz, at Easter, and the two other times in the year
are left free, and Indifferent, to the party; when he is best fitted and
prepared. And the said James Jones says, he is a Layman, and does not know of
any Law, that does Abridge him of that Liberty; or oblige him to Receive it
oftener; or otherwise in any fixed time: wherefore, forasmuch as the
Churchwardens, that made the said Presentment, or pretended Presentment, could
not Legally Present the said James Jones, for any Offense, but such as do, or
shall arise since Easter last: and for that there is abundantly sufficient time,
for him the said James Jones, to perform what by Law is required, viz. to
Receive the Sacrament twice betwixt this and Easter, and once then. And that as
the said James Jones has not broken any Law, so neither, as he conceives and
is advised, is there any ground for any Citation or Admonition against him, nor
that any Admonition should or can limit him where the Law has left him free;
nor may this Court Compel him by Ecclesiastical Censures, or otherwise, to
Receive the Holy Sacrament in a shorter or fixed Time, or any otherwise limit
him than the Law has specified, directed, or allowed.

Which the said James Jones insists upon, with what before he has already
insisted on, and prayed as before he has already prayed. James Jones


An Addition to the Supplyment.

AND furthermore the said Jones says, That besides all that is contained in
his Plea, and Supplyment to the said Plea, he had more Matter to be Argued in
his Defense against the aforesaid Presentment, to show the deficiency and
insufficiency thereof. A brief account of which take as follows.

1. He the said Jones says, That there is no mention of what Diocese the
aforesaid Parish (and he as Inhabitant thereof) is, which should have been
plainly Expressed in the said Presentment.

2. The said Jones says, That he was Prosecuted for Nonconformity, before His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, in the County of Surrey, and particularly for
not coming to Church: which is the same thing mentioned in the Churchwardens
Presentment, and for which the said Jones is Excommunicated. Now for the said
Jones to be punished in the Temporal Courts and in the Ecclesiastical Court, at
or about the same time, seems be contrary to the Statute of Anno primo Regni
Eliz. Chap. 2. which says,

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That whatsoever persons Offending in the
premises* shall for their Offenses first receive Punishment of the Ordinary,
having a Testimonial thereof under the said Ordinaries Seal: shall not for the
same Offencee eftsoons be Convict before the Justices: and likewise Receiving
for the said Offense punishment, first by the Justices: shall not for the same
Offense eftsoons Receive punishment of the Ordinary, any thing contained in
this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

3. And he the said Jones says, That the Churchwardens did not in their
Presentment Allege against him, That he had not any Lawful or Reasonable Cause
to show why he had not been at Church or Sacrament of so long a time, mentioned
in the presentment. See 1 Eliz. Cap. 2. Paragraph 14.

4. And he the said Jones says, That whereas Errors in an Indictment at
Sessions or Assizes, or Errors in a Mittimus whereby a man is Committed to
prison, will when Legally Pleaded, overthrow and make void such Indictment or
Commitment, and so relieve the Indicted and Committed person; Even so and much
more should the said Jones by reason of a Deficient and Insufficient
Presentment, be Discharged from the Ecclesiastical Court, as he prayed in his
aforesaid plea and Supplyment, and therefore the said Jones does conclude, that
it is better to be concerned with the Kings Justices, and Judges, who Sit by
Commission from the King, in the Kings Courts of Record, than to be concerned
with any Ecclesiastical Court, and such as are Doctors and Judges in the said
Courts.

The said Jones further says, he heard no more from Doctors-Commons till the
Twentieth of December, and then the Doctor of his Parish, viz. St. Bartholomew
Exchange, did in very friendly manner acquaint the said Jones, that an
Excomunication against him was come from Doctors Commons. and that the said
Doctor was ordered to publish the said Excommunication next morning, being St.
Thomas's day: unto which the said Jones Replied, That the Ecclesiastical Court
had proceeded Illegally in going so far as an Excommunication, and demonstrated
the same in two Particulars, First, that he the said Jones had given a Plea in
Law to that Court against the aforesaid Presentment, and was never admitted to
be heard upon his Plea, which is contrary to the Laws of England, to have any
Sentence pass upon any man to his damage, without his Cause be Legally heard
and Debated. Secondly, That it was not in the power of the Ecclesiastical Court
Legally to Excommunicate the said Jones for not taking the Sacrament at any
such time as that Court should at their pleasure Appoint, there being but one
time of the year named for Receiving the Sacrament, viz: Easter. The aforesaid
Doctor replied, he was sorry things were brought to such a point, but he could
not avoid obeying the Order of Doctors Commons, and so the next day being Dec.
23. called St. Thomas day, the Excommunication was published in the Parish
Church called St. Barth^lomew Exchange: and upon the Twenty third day of the
same Month, the said Jones went with a Witness with him to the Registers
Office, and demanded a Copy of the Libel against him, but the said Jones could
not have it though he offered payment for the said Libel. And upon the Twenty
Sixth of the same Month, the said Jones took witness with him and demanded a
Copy of all the Proceedings of the Court, and particularly a Copy of his Plea:
the Clerk did promise a Copy of the proceedings of the Court, but could not let
him have them at that time. And upon the Thirtieth day of the same Month, the
said Jones went and a witness with him for the aforesaid Copy, but it was not
done; the said Jones then allowed the Clerk till the next Monday, and the Clerk
would not promise to have those things copied by that time, pleading it was
Holy Days, and that was the reason they were not done; the said Jones replied,
That it was a strange thing to him, they could not write their own proceedings
upon a Holy Day, as well as Excommunicate him upon a Holy Day. The said Jones
waited till Wedensday the Third of January, and then went with his friend for
the aforesaid Copy, and then the Clerk said, That he whom he had appointed to
draw out the aforesaid Copy was out of the way, himself was going from the
Office at that time, and so the said Jones came away without what he so much
endeavored to have, going more times to the Office than he was bound to do.

Thus things remained till about a fortnight before Hilary Term, and then the
said Jones went and made Affidavit, before Judge Charleton: the form of the
said Affidavit is as follows, James Jones of London, Merchant-Taylor,
deposes upon Oath, That he was Cited into the Ecclesiastical Court, before
Doctor Pinfold, and made his appearance, and since has been at the Registers
Office, and there demanded a Copy of his Libel, but could not obtain it, though
he offered payment for the same.

And after this upon the twenty third day of January, 1682. being the first day
of the Term, the said Jones with a few others moved the Honorable Judges of
the Kings Court of Common Pleas, for Prohibitions, upon the not obtaining
Copies of their Libels, when demanded, and payment offered for the same; the
particular Affidavits of that matter being read in Court, and moved by several
Sergeants at Law: the Judges were pleased to grant Prohibitions with a Nisi
causa, viz. if Doctor Pinfold could not show cause against them, and a Rule of
Court was served upon Doctor Pinfold to Appear before the Judges of the Common
Pleas, on Friday the twenty Sixth of the same Month, but the said Jones thought
it expedient to move the honorable Judges of the King's Bench for a
Prohibition, and therefore made Affidavit of not obtaining a Copy of his Libel,
before the honorable Judge Dolben; and it was read before the Judges of the
Kings Bench upon the twenty fifth of the same Month, and that honorable Bench
was pleased to grant a Prohibition for the said Jones, but the next day being
the twenty sixth of January, Doctor Pinfold engaged Sir George Jefferies, who
is well known to be a Lawyer that will stoutly defend and maintain the cause he
is engaged in, either for the King, or any of his own Clients, against the
plaintiff or defendant, on the other side, and in this Case, there was no want
of words by Sir George, to overthow the Prohibitions, both at Kings Bench and
Common Pleas: but the said Jones, does take it a little unkindly that Sir
George Jefferies should with such sharpness of Spirit reflect upon him, before
the honorable Judges, as if he had surreptitiously obtained the grant of a
Prohibition, and highly blamed the said Jones for moving in two of His
Majesty's Courts for the said Prohibition; but if the said Jones had been then
in Court, he would have ventured by humble desire to the honorable Judges, to
make a modest and honest reply to that Gentleman without being so sharp upon
him, and therein have showed, that the obtaining that Grant of a Prohibition,
could not fairly be counted Surreptitious, because the honorable Judges
granted it upon the Affidavit of the said Jones then read in Court, the truth
of which Affidavit the said Jones would have sworn before all the Judges of
England, viz. that he had been at the Registers Office and demanded a Copy of
his Libel, and could not obtain it, though he offered paymnent for the same,
and in this very case the Law has provided a Prohibition, for the the releif
of the Kings Subjects, who are too often vexed by the Ecclesiastical Courts:
See the Statute of the 2 Hen. V. chap. 3. the words are these,

Item, Forasmuch as diverse of the Kings liege people, be daily Cited to appear
in the Spiritual Court, before Spiritual Iudgee, there to Answer to diverse
pexsons, as well of things which touch Freehold, Debts, Trespass, Covenants,
and other things whereof cognizance partaineth to the Courts of our Lord the
King, as of Matrimony and Testament, and when such persons so Cited appear and
demand a Libel of that which against them is surmised to be informed to give
their answer thereunto, or otherwise to purchase a Writ of our Lord the King,
of Pro^ibition, according to their Case, which Libel to them is denied by the
said Spiritual Judges, to the intent that such persons should not be aided by
any such Writ against the Law, and to the great damage of such persons so
impleaded: our said Lord the King by the advice and assent of his Lords
Spiritual, and Temporal and at the request and i^stance of the said Commons,
has Ordained and established, that at what time the Libel is grantable by the
Law, that it may be granted and delivered to the party without any difficulty.
From which good Statute, let these things be considered,

1. That the Spiritual Courts ought to have Libels of those matters that are
surmised against the Kings Liege people,

2. That upon demand, without any delays, copies of such Libels ought to be
given to such of the Kings Liege people as make a demand of them, that thereby
they may be enabled to make a legal defense for themselves, either respecting
the matter of fact surmised against them, or any illegal Proceedings in the
mannagement thereof.

3. That such of the Kings liege people as are denied or cannot obtain a copy
of such Libel when grantable by Law, shall have the Kings Writ of Prohibition,
for their releif; or if the matters surmised against them in the Spiritual
Court be such things whereof cognizance pertains to the Court of our Lord the
King; besides those of Freehold, Debt, Trespass or Covenants, they may have for
their releif a Prohibition.

Now the said Jones humbly conceives that the matters surmised against him in
the Spiritual Courts are such things whereof cognizance pertains to the Court
of our Lord the King, viz. an uncertain Information of the Churchwardens,
saying in their Presentment, They could not of their own knowledge prove who of
the Parishioners have, and who have not been at Church, and that they did not
remember to have seen the said Jones at Church for some time past, or to have
Received the Sacrament, for three Months past: and besides these things
surmised, when they were in the Ecclesiastical Court, a Copy of a Libel
concerning them could not be obtained when demanded, upon which the said Jones
moved for a Prohibition; but Sir George Jefferies in mannaging the cause for
Doctor Pinfold, did plead there was no Libel in that case, and therefore the
Ecclesiastical Court could not grant it when demanded, and that Doctor Pinfold
had proceeded by the Presentment of the Churchwardens. The said Jones does not
blame Sir George for making this Plea for the Doctor; but the question is,
Whether Doctor Pinfold ought not to have a Libel in the Case, as well as a
Presentment? the Statute mentioning a Libel of things surmised against the
Kings liege people: however the Kings Subjects have good cause to esteem the
Proceedings of the Kings Courts of Justice, where there is not only
Presentiments but afterward Indictments, and time allowed to the Kings Subjects
to defend themselves, and the Accusers brought to the face of the Accused, and
upon not making substantial proof of matters of fact, the Kings accused
subjects are by the Judges and the Law discharged: but the said Jones and a
multitude of his fellow Protestants, have not had such fair dealings in Doctor
Pinfold's Court, and therefore the said Jones has cause to say, From such
Courts, and such Proceedings, Good Lord deliver us. And whereas the said Jones
is informed that Sir George did reflect upon him for moving in the Kings Court
of Common Pleas, before he came to move in the Kings Bench, for a Prohibition:
as being willing to have two strings to his Bow, the said Jones does humbly
desire Sir George to consider that it is every man's concern to do his best and
use the utmost means in a legal way, to accomplish his relief: and the said
Jones does believe that if it had been his happiness to have engaged Sir George
Jefferies as his Conncel in this case, it had not been lost for want of
speaking to it, as it was by the Silence of some Sergeants at Law, that were
expected to make some Reply in that Case; and the Lord Chief Justice Pemberton,
then Sitting upon the Bench, was willing to hear a Reply. What was the cause of
that silence, whether because they could not speak, or because they would not
speak, or because they dared not to speak, or because they had not sufficient
Fees to speak, Grandfather Time must show. But whether because one Sergeant
spoke so much, and others said nothing at all, Prohibitions wear overthrown in
Westminster Hall, shall be lest to consideration. However the said Jones says,
That he was encouraged to take this way, because diverse of the Kings Subjects
have thereby had releif, formerly, from the power of the Ecclesiastical Courts,
who were under the same circumstances, and therefore the said Jones does humbly
pray Sir George Jefferies to consider, that not every cause he has managed,
either for the Plaintiff or Defendant, has gone current before the Judges in
Westminster Hall, which is a sufficient evidence that either the cause
undertaken was not right, or else that Sir George's Clients had some wrong; and
therefore no marvel if one or other of these things have attended poor Jones,
and others, who have proceeded by the Advice of the Learned in the Law: however
this little victory over Jones and his fellow Protestants gave occasion to
Doctor Pinfold to rejoice and boast and glory that night at Doctors Commons, as
if his cause were fifty in the hundred the better for that days work; but it
is humbly desired by the said Jones, that the Doctor would seriously cousider
that saying in a good old Book called, The Holy Bible: Let not him that girdeth
on his harness, Boast himself as he that puts it off, 1 Kings 20. 11.

Furtthermore, The said Jones does certify Doctor Pinfold, and all others
concerned, That he has a love and a reverent Esteem of the Holy Sacrament,
called in holy Scripture the Supper of the Lord, and has solemnly as becomes
a Christian, Taken the said holy Ordinance diverse times within the time
mentioned in the a^oresaid Presentment, and diverse times since the aforesaid
Admonition, and that in both kinds, of Bread and Wine, and in such manner, and
to such ends, as is expressed in the Statute of 1 Edw. VI. chap. 1. in these
words, Paragraph 1.

Which Sacrament was instituted of no less Author then of our Savior, both God
and Man, when at his last Supper amongst his Apostles; he did take the Bread
into his holy hands, and did say, Take, Eat, this is my Body, which is given
and Broken for you: and taking up the Chalice or Cup did give thanks and say,
This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you, and for many, for
the Remission of Sins; that whenever we should do the same, we should do it
in Remembrance of him, and to declare and set forth his Death and glorious
Passion until his Coming: of the which bread whosoever Eats, or of the which
cup, whosoever drinks unworthily, Eats and Drinks Condemnation and
Judgment to himself. And in Paragraph 7. there are these words,

Therefore be it Enacted by our Sovereign Lord the King, with the consent of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons, in this present Parliament
assembled, and by Authority of the same, that the said most Blessed Sacrament
be hereafter commonly delivered and administered unto the people, within this
Church of England and Ireland, and other the Kings Dominions, under both the
kinds, that is to say, of Bread and Wine, except necessity otherwise require:
and also that the Priest which shall minister the same shall at the least one
day before Exhort all persons which shall be present to resort and Prepare
themselves to Receive the same, and when the prefixed day comes, after a Godly
Exhortation, by the Minister made, wherein shall be further expressed the
benefit and comfort, promised to them which worthily receive the holy
Sacrament: and danger and indignation of Almighty God threatened to them which
shall presume to receive the same unworthily, to the end that every man may try
and examine his own conscience, before he shall receive the same. The said
Minister shall not without a lawful cause, deny the same to any person, that
will devoutly and humbly desire it: any Law, Statute, Ordinance or Custom,
contrary thereunto in any wise notwithstanding, not condemning hereby the usage
of any Church out of the Kings Majesty's Dominions.

But it is supposed that Doctor Pinfold will say, That the said Jones has not
taken the said Sacrament in his own Parish Church, according to the Admonition,
at the time therein prefixed by the said Doctor: unto which the said Jones does
soberly reply, That he does not know of any Statute Law, that impowereth the
Doctor thus to proceed, or that binds the said Jones to obey, and is much
more sure; that there is no Law of Jesus Christ, in all the New Testament for
such proceedings: however the said Jones says, That he has taken the holy
Communion, in such a Church as is declared and owned in the Nineteenth Article
of the Church of England, viz. That the Visible Church of Christ is a company
of faithful men, in which the pure Word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments
be duly Administered, according to Christ's Ordinance, in all things that of
necessity, are requisite to the same.

And the said Jones says, That himself and a vast number of His Majesty's
Protestant subjects, do exercise a Godly care, and makes great Conscience to
Wait upon God, in no other Assemblies then is expressed in the aforsaid
Article, viz. A company of faithful people that have the pure Word of God truly
preached, and the Ordinances of God duly administered.

But it may be the Doctor will say, That Jones means the assemblies of
Disenters.

To which Jones does reply, That he honestly means no other Assemblies, but
such where Christ is preached, as he is declared in the holy Gospel:

1. As God and Man.

2. As being Conceived in the Virgins womb, by the Holy Ghost, and so brought
forth into the world to be the Savior of Sinners.

3. His Death as the Satisfaction of Divine Justice.

4. His Resurrection, for the Justification of all True Beleivers.

5. His Ascension into heaven, and making Intercession at the right hand of
God, that so the Godly may be accepted of God, and be received into heaven.

6. The Second Coming of Christ to Judge the quick and the dead: at which time
of Judgment, he will receive the Righteous into Eternal happiness, and send
the wicked into Eternal misery, after the resurrection of the just and unjust.

And as touching the holy Sacraments the aforesaid Assemblies does profess and
practice water Baptism, as Gods holy Ordinance, and the Lords Supper in both
kinds, of Bread and Wine, as a holy Remembrance of Christ's Death till he come
again, as it is expressed in the Holy Scripture, and in the before mentioned
Statute of 1 Edw. 6. chap. 1. which Statute does not compel any of the Kings
subjects to come to that blessed Ordinance, to the damage of their own Souls,
but strictly warns to the contrary and requires persons to come humbly and
devoutly, of their own desire.

Now therefore why the said Jone^s, or any other of the Kings Protestant
subjects, should be prosecuted to the suffering Imprisonment, for not taking
the Sacramnt in their respective Parish Churches, who are zealous for the holy
Sacrament, and other parts of the Protestant Religion, in such assemblies as
are for higher degrees of Reformation than is among the common Protestants: it
is humbly presented to Doctor Pinfold, and all others called Doctors and
Judges, in Courts called Spiritual, whether they can produce any such Authority
from Jesus Christ, who is the Spiritual Governor in his Church, and has given
Spiritual Laws for the government thereof.

The said Jones says, he has carefully read the Holy Scriptures for many
years, and could never find that ever Christ did set up such a way of
Government in his Church, viz. of Fines, Imprisonments, Banishment, or any
other corporal punishment, to bring persons to conform unto his Gospel
Ordinances, but Christ's way was to aford plain and powerful preaching of his
Word, to inlighten the mind, and persuade the Soul, to make a free choice of
his Ttruths, from a cordial love to himself: but according to the proceedings
of Doctor Pinfold, and other Ecclesiastical Judges, such as are conscientiously
afraid they shall miss the comforts and blessed benefits of the Sacrament, by
coming to it at such times and places, with such Communicants, as imposed by
the said Doctor, must be contented with the discomforts of a Jail, or else pay
great sums of money to get off.

And whereas the said Doctor did declare, in the public Assembly of Doctors
Commons, that he fixed the taking of the Sacrament, in his admonitions, that
thereby the people might give a full demonstration of being true Protestants:
it is humbly desired that the Doctor would consider, whether too many, who
venture upon the Sacrament, are not a great Scandal to the Protestant Religion,
by wicked conversations, in Swearing, Drinking, Cursing, and calling upon God
to damn them: and the said Jones does heartily desire, that the men of Doctors
Commons, were quite free from all these sins, the least of which is enough for
damnation, and that is ten thousand times worse than Excommunication: however
it may be soberly and safely concluded, that such persons are very unfit to
drive others to the Sacrament, or punish them for not running so headlong as
they would have them unto such an holy Ordinance of God.

And besides all the former Relation, the said Jones says, That upon the
seventh of February, he went again to the Registers Office, belonging to the
Ecclesiastical Court, and there demanded a Copy of his Excommunication, and all
other proceedings of the Court, but the chief Register was very angry because
rhose things had been besp^ke so long before, and were not fetched away, and
reflected upon Jones as if he had not done honestly: unto which Jones replied
saying, Sir, I suppose you do not know that I have been more times for these
papers, than I was bound to come, and could not have them, however if they are
done, let me have them, and my money is ready for you: upon this great search
was made to find the papers, but the Clerks could not find them, nor the
Register neither, but one put it off to another, as being mislayed. Jones
seeing them in confusion, thought they might better find them in his absence,
and therefore told them, he would go to some house hard by and come again, and
about an hour after, Jones returned to the Office, but they were not found:
notwithstanding all this, Jones was fo fair as to give them till the afternoon,
and the under Register did promise that the papers should be sent by their
Officer who brought the Citation; so the said Jones went away in farther
Exercise of patience, but the papers did not come all that day. Jones waited
for them all the next day, till near night, and because they were not sent, he
went and made Affidavit before a Judge, That he had been four several times at
the Registers, to have a Copy of his Excommunication, and all other proceedings
of the Ecclesiastical Court, but could not have them, though he offered
payment, and to leave part of payment in hand, and about an hour after the said
Jones had been at home, the said papers were sent to his house, viz. about
Seven a Clock at night, with a Note from one of the Clerks, to pay thirteen
Shillings and four pence for them, which was paid and sent back by the
messenger that brought them. Now the honest de^ign of Jones in thus laboring
to have such papers, was to see whether any thing as matter of Law, might arise
from them, sit for the consideration of the honorable Judges, whereby the said
Jones might have some legal releif, but now the Term was very near expiring,
and not sufficient time to consult with those Learned in the Law, to make any
Progress, and so the said Jones remained in the Exercise of Patience.

But Doctor Pinfold went on to finish his Work, and to perform his Word to the
said Jones, viz. That he should be laid up in a Jail, if he did not come to
Church and take the Sacrament according to his Admonition; for in the close of
the Term, the said Spiritual Doctor did procure several Writs of Excommunicato
Capiendo, from the Temporal Power, to apprehend a great Number of the Kings
Protestant Subjects, and Substantial Citizens of London, and to carry them to
Prison for not obeying his Admonitions, and thereby separate Husbands from
Wives, Parents from Children, Masters from Servants, besides hindering many
Persons from Managing their honest and Lawful Trades and Callings, to the
damage of many good Families, the whole of which Punishment the said Jones does
hope he shall bear with Patience, as the Providence of God shall suffer it to
come upon him, being well satisfied that Loyalty and Christianity will keep him
Company, when in a Jail for Nonconformity.

And now the said Jones does think it may be of some Advantage to his fellow
Protestants that they be acquainted with the several ways allowed and practiced
by Doctor Pinfold, for Obtaining an Absolution, and so be discharged from the
Writ Excommunicato Capiendo, after it is out against, and served upon them.

I. Such persons may be absolved and discharged from the said Writ if they will
pay all the Charges of the Court, which is sometimes Ordinary; and sometimes
Extraordinary, the Ordinary Charges is about forty shillings, but according as
matters have been managed between the Prosecuted Party and the said Doctor, the
Charges by the Doctors Bill may amount to five or Six Pounds, or more. And
besides the payment of such Charges, the Party must deposit Ten Pound, or other
such Sum as the Doctor will impose, and subscribe that the said Sum of Money
shall be forfeited and disposed of as the said Doctor shall think meet, viz. If
the Party do not come to Church and take the Sacrament at such times as the
Doctor will appoint; at which instant, viz. when the money is tendered down, he
gives his Admonition so to do.

II. Another way to be absolved and discharged from the said Writ, is, to pay
the aforesaid Bill of Charges, and take an Oath to conform, viz. You shall
swear that you will obey all the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, and the Lawful
Commands of your Ordinary.

Now such as think to deliver themselves this way, had best in the first place
get a true Understanding of the Ecclesiastical Laws, what they are, and what
are the Lawful Commands of the Ordinary, least they should swear to such things
as may be against their Consciences, and so be under a force either to Sin by
keeping the Oath, or else Sin by Breaking the Oath; which if the latter, they
must expect to hear of it from Doctor Pinfold with both their Ears.

III. Another way of Deliverance is to give Bond to Dr. Pinfold, to conform by
such a time as shall be agreed with the said Doctor, or else to forfeit the Sum
of Money expressed in the said Bond, which formerly was used to be but ten
Pound, but now the said Doctor does Require a Bond of Thirty Pounds, and
besides this, the aforesaid Bill of Charges must be presently paid, and at the
sealing and delivering of the aforesaid Bond, the said Doctor will Admonish the
party to come to Church and receive the Sacrament according to the time of the
Bond. The Condition of which Bond take as follows.

The Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above bounden A. B.
was on the ^7th. day of November last Presented by C. D. and E. F.
Churchwardens of the said Parish Church of St. G. without H. aforesaid before
the Archdeacon of London, or his Official, for not duly Frequenting his
Parish Church for six Month last past, and for not Receiving the Holy Sacrament
of the Lords Supper within the said time; and being duly Cited to Answer the
said Presentment, and thereupon judicially Admonished to receive the Holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper in his said Parish Church, and not obeying the
said Monition was thereupon pronounced in Contempt and in pain of such his
Contempt duly Excommunicated, And whereas the said A. B. has submitted
himself to the Jurisdiction of the said Arch Deacons Court, and prayed to be
absolved from the said Excommunication, and offered Caution to be obedient to
his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws, and the Lawful Commands of his Ordinary: If
therefore the said A. B. shall obey His Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws, and the
Lawful Commands of his Ordinary, Then this Obligation to be void and of none
effect, or else to Remain and be in full Force and Virtue.

Signed Sealed and Delivered in the Presence of us, etc.

Now whether this and such like Bonds can be legally sued to recover the
Penalty thereon very Wise and Understanding men are of differing minds about
it; however several Person^ are in the ready Way to know the certain truth
hereof, in a short time;

And besides all this, there are other ways for deliverance by the Common and
Statute Law, before the Kings Judges according as the Case may be Allowable by
Law; and some are not without hopes of Relief, this Way, with the Expense of
Money.

And as the said Jones is not willing to be imposed upon by others, so he will
not impos^ upon others, but will freely and friendly leave all his fellow
Protestants to take that way, and use that means for their help, as is most
agreeable to their Circumstances, and Satisfactory to their own minds, in the
keeping of a good Conscience, humbly desiring it may be seriously considered,
That it is better to be punished in their Pursos, then their Spirits, and be
damaged in their Coffers, rather then in their Consciences; and let it also be
considered, Whether these and other Distressing Proceedings be not some cause
of stopping the Silver Streams in the Golden Street of this great and Loyal
City of London.

And now at last the said Jones is willing to leave a few Refreshing
Considerations for the Comfort of his Fellow Distressed Protestants.

I. Consider, That His Majesty has been Graciously pleased to Relieve his
Distressed Dissenting Subjects diverse times when they have been violently
Prosecuted by several Laws, under which they have Groaned; and has favored
them with the Exercise of Religion according to their own Conciences, approving
of this as the best way to quiet the minds of his Liege People, and promote
Trade for the good of the Kingdom, as may be seen at ^arge in His Majesty's
Declaration, Published by the advice of his Privy-Councel March 15. 167^.

II. Consider, That the Lords Spiritual and Lords Temporal, and the Commons of
England Assembled in Parliament, provided a Bill to discharge the Kings
Protestant Subjects from the Penalties of the 35. of Elizabeth, but it
unhappily missed of coming to His Majesty's Royal Hand for the Royal Assent;
which was a bad Brown-business: However both Houses of Parliament did their
Part.

III. Consider, That the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament have showed
a willingness to free His Majesty's Subjects, considered as Protestant
Dissenters, from all the Penal Statutes in matters of Conscience.

IV. Consider that what has been done by the King and Parliament, distinct one
from another, may be done by the King in Parliament, as a joint Act, which
doubtless would be ^^e Joy of the whole Kingdom, and then would be a full and
complete fulfilling and Performance of his Majesty's Royal Promise in his Royal
Declaration from Breda, just before his happy Restoration in these following
Words

We do declare a Liberty to Tender Consciences, and that no man shall be
disquieted or called in question, for differences of Opinion in matters of
Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the kingdom, and that we shall be
ready to consent to such an Act of Parliament, as upon mature De^^^ration shall
be offered to Us, for the full granting that Indulgence.

V. Consider all you that fear God, that Word of God in I saiah 2. 22. Cease ye
from (...) whose breath is in his Nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted
of? Which shows man m^^ not be depended upon.

VI. Consider of, and in all your distresses feed upon, and refresh your Souls
with the Word of God, Isa. 12. 5. For the Oppression of the Poor, and the
Sighing of the Needy, now will arise says the Lord, and set him in safety from
him that puffs at him.

FINIS.

