ADMIRABLE And Notable things of Note: viz. 1. The Royal Letter sent from the
French King to his Brother the King of England. 2. A true Copy of the Lord
George Digbies last Letter to the Queens Majesty. 3. The Queens Majesty's
gracious answer to the same. 4. A horrible Treason discovered from Holland,
which was plotted by a company of Jesuits and Papists, against the Lady
Elizabeth at the Hague, the seventh of March last. 1641.


LONDON: Printed for Francis Coules and Thomas Banks. 1642.

The Copy of a Royal Letter, sent from the King of France to the King of
England.
Royal Brother,

ALthough the Imperial Diadem has Crowned each of us, by the Omnipotent
providence of the Almighty, and those once dis-united, might exasperate our
Princely mind against the British nation, yet the noble lenety of your Clement
Nature, and the propitious consideration of those impendent and intricate
perils, wherein your Kingdoms are dangerously involved, have respectively
induced me to declare our good exoptations and well-wishes to you. And whereas
we maturely understood and with credible information received intelligence of
the rebellius insurrections of Ireland, We did respectively sympathize with
your solicitous deploration of their disasterous proceedings, and will (as
shall be perspicuously declared hereafter) vindicate their furious rebellion:
But your Majesty (as has been promulgated by report) has been misinformed of
diverse particulars, which not only casts an indigne aspersion o our royal
Name, and Monarchical Throne, but highly derogates from Our Imperial
prerogative and innocuous intention. It has been publikly divulged, that we
always made a ludibrious dirision at the perilous distractions of your
Kingdoms, and did not only rejoice at the disloyalty of Ireland, but also
instigated those Rebels with a calumnious suggestion to proceed in their
bloody Tyranny, as if they should depend in expectation of our auxiliary
assistance. But we do utterly defy and detest this scandalous and treacherous
imputation reflected on Us, and do withal desire that the Authors of this
ementitious Fable fathered on us, may suffer exemplary punishment: For we
royally protest and affirm, with our cordall assertion, that whereas the
doleful intelligence of the British distraction came to our first audience, We
were so far from entertaining any derisive alacrity, that we seriously rather
deplored the preposterous condition of of the same: And as for the rebellion in
Ireland, it did so astimulate Our just indignation, that We always
disaffected the same, and did not only de^ort our subjects from presuming to
conjoyn with them, but also did publish a Proclamation to the Epidemicall
Aspect of all in disswasion from that resolute intention. Wherefore in this
behalf, We are infinitely abused, and our royal Clemency blasted with the
infamous tongue of audacity, for rather a reciprocal sympathy of those
grievances did concur in our Princely lenity, then a contradictory antipathie
of vindicative resolution found any entertainment of Tyrannical habitation in
Our commoted Ire. Although many fugitive delinquents, (as Finch and others)
escaping from Impartial Justice, supposed to find their Asylum in our realm,
yet impute not so vicious a connivance to our unspotted Innocence, for we will
never protect them from impunity. First then, the fraternall concatenation of
Brotherhood (which by the legitimate bond of nature We are enjoined unto) does
foment a solicitous Indulgency in Our Princely mind to concord and co-union,
and not to inhiate the precipitious demolition, or at the least extenu^tion of
each others Crown. Secondly the singular love of our Sister (which likewise by
the respective injunction of Nature we are induced unto) does by a sweet and
delicious compulsion injoyne Us to corroborate, and not to precipitate each
others Throne. Lastly, the firm League made between us (which by the National
Law of Kingdoms we are bound to observe) does propitiously instigate us to
preserve each others Imperial Diadems. All these unitely concurring together
to the pl^usible composition of mu^ual tranquillity did respectively enjoyne us
in a reciprocal coaction to declare ^ur Royal intents, and indulgent desires
for the flourishing prosperity of England. We applaud you for the Royal
entertainment of our Mother, (although we have little cause, in regard of her
intestine stratagem against us) yet we conceive, had she tarryed longer in
England, she would have suddenly brought the State to a destructive ^u^ne:
notwithstanding all the sinister deprecations which we wish her, are, that in
what Climate soever she resides in, at length she may peaceably consummate her
days in an happy period. We now involve our intentions to the affairs of
Ireland, whose Barbarous Insolency We will sedul^usly endeavor to cohibit in
the limited termination of Loyalty and Obedience to you their dread Sovereign.
What I now implore, and desire more, is contained in these concise subsequent
Declarations: First, that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to expedite
and animate your Parliament to deliberate things in a conclusive Confirmation,
that as they have begun Nobly, they may conclude with more fortunate success
to the future security of the Realm: for procrastination in State matters does
either discourage some in the same Nation, whose imminent grievances, are not
eased, or at least does animate foreign Enemies to perfect any conspiracy
against a Kingdom; but a sudden conclusion does both create alacrity in the
joyful minds of Subjects, and also prevent what stratagem may be in agitation.
Secondly, We desire that your Parliament would correspondently accord with your
Majesty without any opposition on either sides, that thus unitely concurring
together, the weighty affairs of the Kingdom may be determinated with more
facility. Lastly, what we desire more is, that you would expedite your
consultations for the more propitious relief of Ireland: And for our self we
royally protest, that we will confirm our former resolution to curb the
Tyrannical insolency of those Rebels, which shall be a sufficient testim^ny
of our indulgent affection to your Majesty's prosperous reign, and the
undoubted security of your Kingdoms.

Sealed with our royal Signet at our Palace in Paris, Feb. 24. 1641.

A true Copy of the Lord Digbies Letter to the Queen.
MADAME;

I Shall not adventure to write unto your Majesty with freedom, but by
expresses, till such time as I have a Cipher, which I beseech your Majesty to
vouchsafe me. At this time therefore I shall only let your Majesty know where
the humblest and most faithful servant you have in the world is, here at
Middleborough, where I shall remain in the privatest way I can, till I receive
instructions how I shll serve the King and your Majesty in these parts. If the
King betake himself to a safe place, where he may avow and protect his
servants f^o^ rage and violence, for from Justice I will never implore it. I
shall then live in impatience and in misery till I wait upon you. But if after
all he has done of late, he shall betake himself to the easiest and
compliantest ways of accommodation, I am confident, that then I shall serve
him more by my absence, than by all my industry: and it will be a comfort to
me in all calamities, if I cannot serve you by my actions, that then I may do
it in some kind by my sufferings for your sake, having (I protest to God no
measure of happiness or misfortune in this world, but what I derive) from your
Majesty's value of my affection and fidelity.

Middleborough the 21. Ian. 1641.

Her Majesty's gracious Answer to the Lord Digbies Letter
MY LORD,

We respectively entertain great alacrity in Our joyful mind, to receive the
undoubted fidelity, which you expressed to Us in your last Epistle. You may
boldly adventure to write unto Us with freedom, as well as by expresses, the
time being come, that you have a Cipher, which I vouchsafe to confer upon you;
I am exceeding joyful to know, that the humblest, and most faithful Servant I
have in the World is now at Middleborough; where (We desire) you may remain in
the privatest way you can, till you rereceive farther instructions how you may
more faithfully serve the King, and Us in those parts. The King having betaken
himself to a safe place, where he does, and will avow, and protect his
Servants from rage, and violence (for from Justice you cannot implore it) you
may then live in patience, and joy, having the freedom to wait upon Us. But
he having betaken himself to the easiest and compliantest way of
accommodation, confirm your confidence, that then you may serve him more by
your absence, then by all your industry; and let it be a comfort to you in all
calamities, that you may serve Us by your Actions only, and in no kind by your
Sufferings for Our sake: that you may have no measure of misfortune, but
happiness in this World; which you may derive from Our gracious value of your
affection and fidelity.

Canterbury: Feb,.3.

News from Holland.
THe malignant disposition of some ill affected persons to the Commonwealth,
like some diseases in man's body, which by a kind familarity, and consent with
nature, fasten and get the possession of the body, and by degrees does subvert
and ruin the whole structure in man. None are of a more dangerous nature than
those which seem to comply with our constitution, and which by a pleasing
sympathy work themselves into custom and consent. Of our enemies, the civil
enemy is most dangerous, and as his practice has the least suspicion, so have
they the most danger, by this means working his designs from all means of
pevention. Since the last desire sent over unto the Lady Elizabeth, for the
prevention of the access unto the Queens Majesty, of all such persons, which
may be any means suspected to be evil Counselors, and advisers unto her
Royal Person, and thereby strive to divert the good opinion of the proceedings
of this Kingdom, whereby much danger and hazard has accrued unto this
Kingdom. Religion has been in its power perverted, the passage of the Gospel
much hindered, the Laws of the Kingdom in many points subverted, the execution
of justice upon many Malefactors prohibited, and the final peace of this
Realm drawn into many most strange distractions and distempers, and his
Majesty's good opinion of his most loyal Subjects good intentions has been
much abused; so that the proceedings concerning the affairs of this Realm,
have taken very small or none effect. The Cotholike Faction, perceiving their
malicious practices to be hindered, did well hope that now her Majesty being in
those remote parts, that they might have the more real access unto her
privacie, and by that means the better opportunity to execute their devilish
counsels, and malicious intentions, have often attempted their access unto her
Majesty: but by the care and vigilancie of that most religious and virtuous
Princess, complying with the desires of this Realm now to be hindered, have
endeavored by most execrable and irreligious attempts, to remove all obstacles
which they apprehend did hinder the prosecution and execution of their and
desires.

Whereupon, upon the 5 of March l^st, two Priests, and some others of that
hellish confederacy, having often attempted access unto her Majesty (without
question their aim not being ingenuous, or faithful) but being often
prevented, now did begin to express their venom, in the removal of all
hindrances that did retain and hinder their aims, and came unto the Princesses
Court, now being at the Hague, their persons were veiled in a strange disguise,
and their pretense was to prefer a petition unto her Highness, concerning the
distresses of themselves and their families, which they have suffered by the
long and tedious war in those parts; and for which they did supplicate unto her
Highness for some relief. Thus no Cheat never wants a fair dissimulation to
cloak and cover their base intentions, and vice as yet could never want any
excuse for its deformity. Being thus come to the Court, without a very tedious
stay, her goodness not being jealous of any evil intentions, as virtue is not
suspicious, gave them admittance unto her person, after which admittance they
delivered unto her hands and consideration a Paper, which while her Grace was
perusing, one of the disguised persons drew forth from under his coat, a
p^stoll charged with a brace of bullets, and with the cock drawn up, and
withal endeavored to discharge it; but by the mercy of God, who does still
preserve his elected, and does bring to naught the naughty counsels and
attempts of the wicked, the Pistol would not go off: another of the
Conspiracy drew out a poniard, and when he saw that the pistol did not
perform what they intended, with the poniard he offered to finish what the
pistol did not execute; but her Highn^sse did escape away into her private
chamber, and so by the mercy of her Creator, and her flight, escaped the
intended danger and destruction. Immediately being forced in by her Highness
cries, for which there was just occasion, many of her Attendants, who waited
not far off, issued in, and did lay hands upon those b^se and traiterous
villains, and incontinently conveyed them away into safe custody, which were
the next day put upon the wrack, and enforced to confess as follows: That
they having oftentimes assayed their access unto the Queens Majesty, for what
end they would not confess, and being by the strict Guard always kept about
her Majesty, prohibited and forbidden, that they now made this attempt upon her
sacred person, supposing by her removal to accomplish their ends, and one of
them, Tho. Earny, did make confession, that he was sorry he did miss his
opportunity, and wished a curse upon himself, for failing in his enterprise.
This was the sum that they would at the first confess, and so for that present
they were released from the wrack, and committed unto the pr^son again, where
now they remain in the Dungeon, and will ere long, be called again into a
second Confession, where until then, let them rest, until that Justice shall
further determine of them. I thought it also fit for the satisfaction of the
Reader, and the credit of the Relation, to set down the Names of these
Traitors which might otherwise neither gain bel^efe, nor give the buyer any
content.

The Names of the two Jesuits, were John Brown, Anthony Tailor, both
Englishmen, and borne in Derby-shire, by their own confession.

The names of the other three, were, Patrick Orny an Irishman, Jews Antony an
Italian, and Thomas Earny an Italian also, who have discontinued their Country,
and lived in Holland these eight years, during the time of those wars.

FINIS.

