AN ADVERTISEMENT On the behalf of William Dockwra, Mercht. Concerning the
PENNY-POST.
WHereas the said Dockwra did above Nine Years since at his Sole Charge, first
set up, that New and Useful Invention of the Penny-Post, so universally
approved, and well known to be a Great and Public good. He was most unjustly
deprived thereof, by the Power of the late King James, when Duke of York, under
Color of Law, and kept out of Possession in the late Reigns, without any
^anner of Reparation to this Day; as appears more fully by his Case lately
Printed.

Therefore finding himself obliged, for Vindication of his just rights, and in
orderto the Reparation of his great damages; to make Address to the Parliament
for Relief, he did accordingly exhibit his humble Petition, to the Honorable
House of Commons, and upon Reading of the same there, it was Unanimously
referred to the Commitee of the whole House, for considering the Public
Revenue.

Soon after some Unnamed Person, did Print, and Disperse a Paper, which he
called; An answer to Mr. Dockwras Case concerning the Penny-Post: wherein, by
citeing Part only of the Post Office Staute, and asserting several untruths,
and by frameing a Trvfling Parallel, between the General and Penny Post (but
leaving out the Ma^terial, and Essential Parts of the Practice, wherein they
are utterly disagreeable and inconsistent) he put the whole Case in a False
Light, and as much as in him lay, used his Talent toward the justifying of
those Illegal and Arbitrary Proceedings, under which the said Dockwra with his
Family of a Wife, and Eight Children, have been so many Years oppressed.

The Design of which Paper, bespeaking the Author, to be a Man of as little
Sense, as good Principles. The said Dockwra is well satisfied the present
Governor of the General-Post Office, had no hand therein; as knowing his
Abilities too great, and (believing his Ingenuity and Justice) to be far above
thoughts so low, and attempts so malicious.

Now whereas the said Dockwra, had prepared a Reply to that pretended Answer,
which he had by him ready to wash off the Varnish of that Officious Undertaker,
and solidly to Evince to the Parliament his Legal Title to this New Invention
(never known or practiced in the World before) and to expose the wicked many
Thousand Pounds (just to bring the Penny-Post to Perfection) and having
Dutifully attended the House of Commons to that End. The Parliament adjourned,
before the Revenue was fettled; so that the said Dockwra's Case came not on to
a Hearing this Session, for which Reason, he did not think sit to Print his
Reply.

But finding since the Adjournment of the Parliament, the same sort of Papers
have been thrown into Coffee-houses and other Places, and Care taken,
Industriously to spread false reports about Town, concerning the Issue of the
said Dockwra's Petition, which may beget undue Impressions.

The said Dockwra thinks it Incumbent upon him, to Advertise the Public
hereby, that h^^^ not met with any sort of Discouragement from the Parliament
in his Application to them for Relief: ^^^on the contrary, has found an
Honorable and Universal Countenance therein, and doubts not ^^^t^^e next
meeting of the Parliament) but that he shall receive from their great Wisdom
and Justice, su^ Generous Reparation for his Sufferings, and such due Reward
for the Public Service he has done h^^ Country; as will be not only to his
entire satisfaction, but to their Eternal Honor.


