ADVICE TO English Protestants, BEING A SERMON PREACHED November the Fifth,
1689. By a Country-Conformist.

LONDON; Printed by J. D. for Awnsham Churchill. 1689.

A SERMON preached on the Fifth of November, 1689.
MICAH 6. v. 5. O my People, remember now what Balak King of Moab consulted,
and what Balaam the Son of Beor answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye
may know the Righteousness of the Lord.
GOD has very greatly signalized This Day, making it the Time wherein he has
twice most wonderfully displayed his Glorious Attributes, in saving the
Inhabitants of this Land from the most formidable Evils and Dangers, the most
Inveterate and Inplacable Enemies of their Religion, and all their Interests
could design them unto. So that he has forcibly commended to all English
Protestants, the solemn Observation of this Day, by two of the most Miraculous
Demonstrations he has ever vouchsafed unto any People, of the special Care he
had of, and the peculiar Regard he had unto their Welfare and Happiness.

We have been wont, on this Day, to commemorate the great Deliverance God
wrought for our Ancestors, when the Papists intended, by blowing up with
Gunpowder their King, Lords, and Commons, to make way for their through
executing of all that Malice, Wrath, Revenge, and Fury, they had conceived
against all the Protestants, within the Territories belonging to the English
Crown. But God has now done very much to endear this Day a great deal the more
unto us. He has added a new Miracle of Mercy, beginning on this Day the last
Year, another Deliverance directly and immediately relating to our selves,
which in most respects does equal the former, and on many accounts does very
much transcend it.

Yet this latter Deliverance must not obliterate the Memory of the former: But
the consideration of them both together, should mightily enlarge our Hearts in
Admiration and Praise, and powerfully engage us to a serious, faithful, and
diligent improving what God has done for us to that purpose, which the Text
acquaints us is our Duty, viz. That we may know the Righteousness of the Lord.

In the first Verses of this Chapter, the Prophet gives us an account, that God
had a Controversy with his People, because of their unbecoming and undutiful
Carriages, after that he had wrought great Deliverances for them; they had not
considered his Works aright, nor behaved themselves after their Deliverances,
and under their enjoying of Peace, Liberty, and prosperous Occurrences, as it
was their Duty. But by returning to their old Sins, and by their perverse
Carriages they had kindled his Wrath, and provoked his Displeasure afresh
against themselves. So that he upbraids them with their Forgetfulness and
Ingratitude, and appeals to themselves, whether his way of treating them was
such, as did deserve so much neglect as they did manifest; and whether the
common Principles of Ingenuity, could justify or excuse their superstitious or
contemptuous Demeanor toward him, after that he had done such great Things
for them?

And may not we fear too justly, that besides all our unworthy Behavior
formerly, we have not demeaned our selves, since our late. Deliverance, with
that Circumspection, Care, and Dutifulness, God has indispensably obliged us
unto, by appearing in so miraculous a manner to effect so seasonable a
Deliverance for us? Have not many of us, since we were freed from our late
Fears, reassumed to our selves our old fretful, narrow, repining, cankered
Spirits? Do not too many of us murmur? Are we not dissatisfied and discontented
with our Freedom and Deliverance? Have we not exchanged our former real Fears,
for Suspicions and Jealousies, which have no Foundation at all, but in our own
whymsical and unreasonable Phanci^s? If the Israelites were altogether
unexcusable, when they thought of returning to Egypt, and hankered after the
Cucumbers, and the M^l^ns, and the Leeks, and the Onions, and the Garlic they
were wont to eat there; What must we be, if we murmur now, and cherish any
Inclination to the State we were lately in, or the Persons who so lately
frighted us? The Israelites knew very well, that the armed Body of their
Oppressors was actually drowned in the Sea, they found that they were really
entered into a wide, desolate, barren Wilderness, where there did not grow even
any such sorry Food as Egypt did afford them. But the Armed Force we were
afraid of, is not yet sunk as Lead in the mighty Waters, not are we led forth
into desolate Places, where we can expect no Provision, on necessary
Accommodations: We are in our own Country, enjoying all the good Things in
abundance, we were afraid, a Year ago, would in a little time be wrested from
us* You have your Lives, your Lands, your Laws, your Liberties; and you might
have them better secured unto you than ever they were, if you had but a mind to
it, if you had but public Spirits, if you did but understand where your truest
Interest lies, if you would but renounce your miserable, yet doted-on
Infatuation. You have the free and undisturbed use of your Bibles, of the
Gospel and Ordinances of Jesus Christ* O that we had all Hearts to prize and be
duly thankful for these Mercies, and to use and improve them as good Christians
ought to do! But alas! do we not give too many Intimations, that we are not
pleased, because God has not governed himself in his late gracious
dispensation, by our little scanty Measures? Are we not laying all the
Obstacles and Impediments we can in the way, to hinder this Deliverance from
growing up into an universal Blessing to the whole Protestant Interest
throughout the World? Have not Multitudes given too notorious Proof of their
being Men of very narrow and uncommendable Spirits, in that they have
depreciated themselves, relinquishing their former (at least pretended)
Characters, and exceedingly diminished the usual and true value of their
Estates, that hereby they might reserve to their private use, some certain Sums
of Money which should have increased their Sovereign's Revenue, and whereby the
Public Interest and Benefit would have been hugely advanced? Have we not shown
too much inclination and readiness to resign up our selves to the same Courses
and Practices, which we loudly acknowledged some Months ago, to have been
egregious Mistakes and Errors? Do not these and the like Instances testify
against us? And may not God expostulate with us, as he did with Israel in the
two Verses before my Text? O my People, what have I done unto thee, and wherein
have I wearied thee? For I brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, and
redeemed thee out of the House of Servants, and I sent before thee Moses,
Aaron, and Miriam.

May not God expostulate with us in this same manner? What Hurt have I done
you? Had you no occasion of the Deliverance I have wrought for you? Did you not
with earnestness desire Deliverance? Did you not groan, and very audibly
express your Fears? Did you not make a great and loud clamor of Tyranny,
Popery, Slavery? Was there any thing you pretended to desire with so much
passion, as Deliverance? What wrong have I done you now in granting you
Deliverance? Wherein are you impaired? In what respects is your Condition made
worse by what I have done? Have I not effected your Deliverance for you? Have I
not done much to secure your choicest Mercies and Blessings to you? Have I not,
as it were, sent before you, and given you a Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, to
conduct and govern you, and be Pledges of my gracious Presence with you? Why
are you so mutinous, so Impatient and discontented? Why do you not concur with
so gracious a Providence as this you have been treated with? Why do you not
comply with the Design of such rich and tender Mercy? Pray be a little
considerate; look back to former Times, remember what I have done for you.
Recollect your selves; mind what your Estate was the last Year, and consider
how much better it is now. Weigh the great things I have done for you, how I
have blasted the Projects, Consultations, and Enterprises which were on foot
against you: And then consider, what kind of Deportment will become you. O my
people, remember now what Balak King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the Son
of Beor answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the
Righteousness of the Lord.

In these words we may take notice of three Things.

First; The Relation God does acknowledge and own these Israelites (whom he here
exhorts, and with whom he did in the former Verses expostulate) had unto
himself. O my People. Though they had done much to provoke his Displeasure
against them, he does not entirely reject them, he does not renounce his
Relation unto them, but acknowledges they are his People; He speaks to them
with much tenderness of Affection, and intimates unto them, that he has still
a greater regard to them, and concern for their Good, than he has for other
People. And therefore if they would but reflect on Matters, and return to
themselves, and to their Duty, he would make it appear, that whatever Thoughts
their Adversaries may have toward them, He has Thoughts of Mercy toward
them, and will give them an expected End.

God had chosen them from amongst other People to bear his Name, and they were
his People by Covenant and Profession. He had committed to them his Oracles,
and they were acquainted with the Religion and Worship which he had Authorized.

It is a great Mercy and Privilege for a People to be owned by the Lord for his
People. Happy is that People whose God Psalm. 144. 15. and 33. 12. Isa. 63. 19,
is the Lord. Whom he has chosen for his own Inheritance. This is a prevailing
Plea and Argument in Prayer. We are thine. Thou never bear rule over them:
They were not called by thy Name. It is a ground of Hope, that God will be
mindful of, and merciful unto them. Fear not, O Jacob my Servant, Isa. 44. 2, 3
and Jesurun whom I have chosen; for I will pour Water upon him* that is
thirsty, and Floods upon the dry Ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed,
and my Blessing upon thy Offspring. It is an assurance, that under the darkest
Providence such a People can be exercised with, God will but correct in
measure, Psalm. 89. 32, 33.
and that He will not utterly destroy. I will visit their Transgression with
the Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes; nevertheless, my loving kindness will
I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my Faithfulness to fail.

God has singled us out to be his People; He has brought his Truth, and Word,
and Ordinances, amongst us, with a mighty Hand and stretched-out Arm, and he
has often appeared for our Defense, and has manifested his owning of us to be
his People many times, and on various Occasions, to the extraordinary
disappointment, and great confusion of our Adversaries. He has done thus of
late to a very wonderful degree; so that we have some ground to hope, that
notwithstanding there are such great multitudes amongst us, who by their
untractableness, and horrible abuse of Mercies, may provoke God to bring very
great Judgments upon our Land, yet he will not take his loving kindness utterly
from us, nor suffer his Faithfulness to fail. In what manner he will scour our
Land, and what course he will take with those who are obstinately refractory,
and do sturdily refuse to be reclaimed by any of those Methods he has hitherto
used with us, I cannot positively affirm. But there is certainly a Remnant, a
Generation amongst us; who do love and fear God, who do acknowledge and own, and
honor him, in his late mavelous Appearances, for whom God has a regard. So
that however, the continued and reiterated Wickednesses of many, may pull down
dreadful and astonishing Instances of God's Displeasure upon the Land, yet he
will not proceed to make an utter end of us, as long as he does own us for his
People. When his Corrections and Judgments have done their full Work, and
accomplished their Business on the Inhabitants of this Nation, then will our
God return to us in Love, and make his Name more Glorious in Mercy amongst us,
than it has yet been. God does still continue the Tokens of his gracious
Presence with us, we have his Word, and his Ordinances amongst us. And when it
shall please him to make these apparently effectual in all parts of the Land,
for the real Conversion of Multitudes of People, and the building up of People
in Grace and Holiness, then may we expect that our Joy and our Happiness shall
break forth as the Light, and be made firm and unalterable.

Secondly; What the People of God are here exhorted unto. And that is, To
remember what Balak King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the Son of Beor
answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal. They must reflect on, and call to mind
(so as to be duly affected with) the Contrivances which had been managed
against them, and how wonderfully and effectually God had blasted and defeated
all the Consultations and Enterprises their Adversaries intended should have
been so fatal unto them. Balak had a very secret and cursed Design against
Israel, he consulted to ruin and destroy them absolutely. God obstructs him in
his purpose, and very strangely overrules him, who was intended to be an
Instrument for their Hurt, to bless them; and to declare to Balak, that all
Contrivances and Consultations against them would be useless; for God did own
them, and would most certainly make them very prosperous. If you peruse the
22d, 23d and 24th Chapters of the Book of Numbers, you will find a full account
of what Balak consulted against them, and what Balaam did answer from Shittim
unto Gilgal. In short, Balak consulted to have them brought under a Curse, and
that he might have his Will on them. Balaam answers him, It cannot be, for God
has blessed them, and it is not possible to reverse his Blessing. They are a
peculiar People to the Lord, and he does own them for his, there is no
Enchantment, nor Divination that can take hold on them, they must and they will
prosper. He tells Balak, God will make the Israelites Masters of his Country,
so that they shall possess it, and pass through it, and go over Jordan, and
come to Gilgal, and enter with great Success upon the Lands which pertained to
the Princes on the other side the Water. They have God on their side, and they
will prosper, and there are no Consultations, no Stratagems, no Oppositions
which can stand before and obstruct them from arriving at all the Felicity God
has appointed them unto.

These things they were to remember, they were to call them to Mind, and
consider them thoroughly, weighing all their Circumstances, till their Souls
were duly affected with the Dangers they were in, and how wonderfully the Mercy
and Power of God were manifested on their behalfs.

Thirdly; For what end and purpose they who profess themselves the People of
God, should thus remember the Deliverances He has wrought for them: And that
is, That they might know the Righteousness of the Lord; That they may be truly
sensible of the Discoveries God has made of his Righteousness therein. What
Mercy and Goodness he has manifested in helping and saving them. How evidently
his Truth and Faithfulness do appear in the accomplishing of those Promises he
has made for his Peoples Support and Security: What other of the Divine
Attributes are evidenced in such Works of God, upon a due Consideration of
their Circumstances. And that we may get our Minds persuaded that the Justice
of God is such, that he will punish even with utter Extirpation, those who do
slight, and will take no notice of, but do abuse such great Deliverances.

In a word, the Expression does import thus much: That when God has wrought
any extraordinary Deliverance for a People professing his true Faith and
Worship, they ought seriously and often to call that Deliverance to Mind, and
remember it so, that they may be effectually influenced thereby to apply
themselves to such Courses, as have the plainest and surest Tendency to secure
unto them the continuance of the Mercies they do enjoy, and to ripen their
Deliverance which is begun, that it may grow up unto Perfection.

These Israelites had demeaned themselves unsuitably to what they were obliged
unto by the Deliverances God had granted them, so that God had a Controversy
with them; now he calls them to consider what he had done for them, referring
them to a Deliverance which he had wrought for the Israelites a long time
before that; so upon their considering that aright, they might learn to rectify
their Mistakes, and betake themselves to such Courses as would contribute much
to secure to them the Favor, and continued Protection, and Blessing of Heaven:
For their Happiness was not so established, but if they did carry themselves
unworthily, they might lose what they did at present enjoy, and they might
relapse into as great Dangers as any of those from which they had been rescued.

Now from hence we may be instructed what does concern us at present: And that
is, first, To remember the Deliverances God has wrought for us. Secondly, To
apply our selves in good earnest to those Courses, which are most proper to
secure unto us the continuance of our present Mercies, and to carry our present
Deliverance to its just Perfection.

In discoursing of these two Points, I shall, first, very briefly acquaint you
what Deliverance we are now to call to Mind. And, Secondly, show you what we
are to do, that our present Deliverance may arrive to its full growth; both
extend its benign Influence to the whole Protestant Interest, and be a lasting
Blessing both to our selves and our Posterity.

First, I am briefly to mind you what Deliverances we are now to remember.

God has been pleased to follow us with a long Succession of Deliverances,
ever since he expelled the thick Darkness of Popery out of our Country, and
introduced the first beginnings of a Reformation in Religion according to
Scripture. For the Adversaries of the true Religion have, ever since they lost
their main footing in this Land, been very industrious and indefatigable, to
make themselves Masters again, of all that the Goodness of God, and the Wisdom
of our pious and prudent Ancestors did dispossess them of: But hitherto God
has strangely infatuated them in their Councils, and miraculously defeated
them in those Enterprises against us, which they seemed to manage with the
greatest Dexterity, and from which they did not doubt but they should receive
the most plenary Satisfaction.

This Day does mind us of two very eminent Deliverances God has wrought for
us. And these are the only Deliverances I shall expressly take notice of at this
time. The former of them was effected in the days of our Predecessors. The
Enemies of our Faith, and of all our Interests, had contrived to have committed
a most cursed and barbarous Villainy on our King, Lords and Commons, and
afterward on all other Protestants, this very Day, in the Year 1606. And they
were so near effecting their Design, that they wanted but a piece of a Night
and a few hours in the Morning, to accomplish the principal part of what they
intended. I need not be particular in relating what our Adversaries had
projected, the steps they had taken, the way and manner how they were
discovered, and the Protestants delivered; you have often heard these things
reported.

Let us seriously consider with our selves, in what condition these Nations
would have been, both as to Religion, and every thing else that is valuable, if
this Plot had taken effect. And in what likelihood our Adversaries were of
accomplishing their own purposes. Their Plot was laid and managed with the most
contrived Secrecy; there was no knowledge of it in order to a human Prevention:
It was brought just to the point of Execution. And was there ever any Design
laid, which should have been so formidable and full of Dread and Consternation
in the Execution of it, as this must have been, if it had not been prevented?
If the Papists had then succeeded, What must the Consequences have been? What
Treatment and Usage must Protestants then have expected? None more gentle than
would suit with the Tempers and Principles of those who could deliberately
devise, and with thoughtfulness perpetrate so horrid, so bloody, so cruel a
Project as this was.

Well, God disappointed the Hopes of the Papists at this time, and miraculously
preserved those who were thus appointed to die. Surely this Deliverance, if
rightly apprehended and weighed by English Protestants, should powerfully
engage them to a very observant and dutiful Behavior toward God.

But this is not the only Deliverance we are now to remember. This Day does
mind us of another, singular and admirable in all its Circumstances, and which
made its Entrance amongst us, this Day the last Year. I need not say much
concerning this Deliverance, you all know the main Particulars of it; your own
Senses can be your Monitors. Would God we had all Hearts to make an Improvement
of it answerably to what we can every one inform our selves concerning it. In
what Estate did you apprehend your selves to be, before God was pleased to
grant you this Deliverance? Did you not think your Religion was in danger? Did
not you think your Claims to your Lands and Liberties (as Matters then stood)
were very precarious? What were your Fears then? What were your Complaints?
What were your Desires? What were your Thoughts, and your Discourses then of
Arbitrary Power? Did not those who have great Estates often think with
themselves, what little pittances of Land would be left them, when their Church
and Abby-Lands should be appropriated to those Uses the Papists formerly
applied them unto? Nay, were you not sometimes perplexed with Fears, that the
rest of your Lands must be ceased to make amends for the long Alienation of the
other? Were you not in doubt, that if Help did not speedily arrive, your
Estates, your Goods, your Lives would be claimed as forfeited, because the
Owners of them were Heretics? Did you not really believe that such Designs
were on foot, that if French Forces should come over before you had Help, your
Dangers would be altogether Remediless; that your Ruin and Destruction would be
irreversible? Were not these your real Apprehensions and Fears? Have you not
often solemnly declared so much your selves? How then should you now value and
improve this Deliverance? If you had not such Fears and Thoughts, why did you
make such Clamours? How can you be reconciled to the Practices you applied your
selves unto? How could you reconcile your selves then to the Courses you took?

God has now wonderfully delivered us from what some felt, and from what we
all feared. He has accomplished our Deliverance in a very miraculous manner,
making the Winds, the Seas, and the more inconstant Minds of most of all sorts
of People, to concur to help on our Deliverance.

There is no occasion of my making a large Relation of this Deliverance. What I
am speaking of, was not done in a Corner, nor in a Time your Memories cannot
reach unto. You can easily inform your selves about it, you can instruct one
another concerning it. You may easily have recourse to particular Accounts
which are published.

Yet there is one thing which I would just hint unto you, relating to this
Deliverance, which if we have not a regard unto, we cannot possibly set a just
Estimate upon it: And it is a Consideration of that Nature, which as it has a
tendency to shame and humble us, so to demonstrate, that our present
Deliverance is remarkably distinguished from, and made more considerable than
any of the other Deliverances God has been pleased to work for this Land.

It may be an unpleasing Intimation to some People, but I dare not forbear to
mention it, now I am discoursing on this Subject. Dawbing with untempered
Mortar, has greatly endangered both Church and State already. People must not
be soothed up in their Sins and Impenitence: It is high time for us all to be
humbled. We cannot praise God aright, and give him the Glory due for this
Deliverance, till we thoroughly debase our selves before him.

Now that which I would desire you all to take notice of, with reference unto
our present Deliverence is this, That we our selves had a main Hand in bringing
our selves into that dangerous Estate, out of which God has delivered us: We
advanced Notions, and countenanced Practices, which did exceedingly serve and
please our Popish Adversaries; and opened a way for them to enter confidently
on many of those Methods which we found to be very uneasy, and of dangerous
consequence; and of which we thought it was very fit to complain.

God has several times tendered us Deliverance, but some of his Offers we have
lampoon'd; with reference unto others of them, we have done worse. It is
certain the Papists have, since we can remember, formed a great many Designs
against us, but they went not on very prosperously with any of them, till we
refused to be convinced by Miracle; and instead of believing their Plots, and
endeavoring to prevent their Success, did give them our Assistance, and
contrived more effectually against our own Interests than they could. Now this
is the Wonder of our Deliverance, that God* should save us, when we had
industriously pulled Ruin upon our selves, and had shut our Eyes so fast, for
fear we should perceive our Enemies Designs, and had helped them with all our
Might, to forward their Purpose.

Our Predecessors were sometimes on the brink of Ruin; but that was their
Misfortune, not their Fault: They did not hoodwinck themselves, out of a narrow
peevish Suspicion, that their Adversaries Disappointment would prove too
general a Good. Nor is it so much to be wondered at, that Providence should
interpose extraordinarily to prevent the utter destruction of an harmless
innocent People, who are only devoted to Ruin, by the Craft and Malice of a
sort of Creatures, in whose Composition the principal Ingredients are Falsehood
and Cruelty. But notwithstanding our own faultiness, and our being so far
accessory to our own Trouble and Danger, God has saved us. He has proceeded
so far, as to fasten a very happy Deliverance on us; I pray God it may not
appear, that he has done it against many of our Wills. This present
Deliverance should be remembered by us, and considered particularly as thus
circumstanced. If we reflect on the Estate we were in a Twelvemonth ago, and
then consider in what a happy Alteration we found our selves a few Weeks after,
we may be justly surprised: And if we are under either a truly religious, or
rational Influence, we must be necessitated to acknowledge, that the Lord has
done great Things for us.

But my Business is not to attempt a Description of this great Work of God,
whereon he has so visibly imprinted the fairest Characters of his own
transcendent Perfections. A silent awful Administration seems best to suit with
the astonishing luster and brightness of those Divine Excellencies which appear
there. The most significative and emphatical Expressions we can use, in
speaking of this glorious Work, will but lessen and diminish its Greatness. We
can no more provide words, which will exactly instruct People in the
Peculiarities, and distinguishing Properties of this great Salvation, than we
can provide Colors which will fully represent unto them the Meridian
Brightness. Our Souls and Affections will be most powerfully wrought on, and
touched, by a due and serious Contemplation, and view of this Miracle of Power
and Goodness, just as God himself has set it before us.

Our great Care should now be, that we make a good Use and Improvement of what
God has already done for us. He has now put an Opportunity into our Hands: if
we mistake now, and fail of obtaining what is the Desire and Hope of all good
Men, the fixing of the Protestant Interest, and the settling of our Civil
Affairs on such bottoms, as may render them not subject to Profane and
Arbitrary Violations, the Fault will be wholly our own.

We have abused many Deliverances already: God is now trying us once more. It
concerns us to take care we do not abuse this Deliverance, lest our God should
resolve to leave off making Experiments on us for our Good, and should entirely
resign us up to them, who have long earnestly desired to have us under their
Tutorage. It is our Duty now, to apply our selves to those Courses, which have
the plainest and most direct tendency, to preserve and promote our Happiness.
Therefore I will proceed,

Secondly, To acquaint you what we should do to secure to our selves the
Mercies we do enjoy, and that the present Deliverance may grow up to its just
Perfection. And,

First, We should humble our selves in good earnest before the Lord for our
past Sins, and especially for the horrible Abominations which have so
exceedingly prevailed in this Land. God has been pleased to use various
Methods with us, but we have hitherto refused to be reclaimed: Our Iniquities
and Transgressions have equalled all his Dispensations toward us, and this not
only for number, but they have born a proportion in their Malignity, to what
has been singular, and more eminently remarkable in all his Providence. Our
Sins were a while since multiplied and increased to a prodigious degree; we
committed those Sins with an high hand, in a daring confident manner, which our
Ancestors would have blushed at the thoughts of, and which civilized Persons in
other Countries would have been ashamed to have heard mentioned. The Infection
of our Sins was spread over all the Land, our Guilt was become general, and we
appeared ripe for Vengeance. Clouds did immediately arise, Storms did threaten
us, our Dangers became apparent, we began generally to have black
Apprehensions, and we feared that a more fatal Stroke would fall on us than we
had ever yet suffered under. This was a time for a serious and general
Humiliation: But we may easily remember how defective we were in this Point. It
will become us therefore not to betake our selves to the true and through
performance of this Duty.

And if we would every one make a strict and impartial Scrutiny into our own
Hearts, and Consciences, and Lives, and finding out our own Sins in particular,
with their several Aggravations, would acknowledge them unto God with brokenness
of Heart and Godly Sorrow, earnestly entreat for Pardon, and implore Divine Aid
for the future, there would a very happy Alteration soon appear amongst us: We
should then be admirably prepared for all those blessed Fruits, this pregnant
instance of Divine Mercy we at present enjoy, and do at this time commemorate,
would assuredly draw after it, to a People so disposed.

Besides, our doing thus every one by himself, it may be of great use for those
of every Order amongst us, to consider what have been the most predominant Sins
amongst the generality of that Order, and to bewail those in a special manner;
and to search out such Remedies as are most proper for the healing those
Breaches which these have made in our Church and State. All Orders of People
have transgressed, and in every Order there have been peculiar Offenses; which
have contributed much to the inflaming of God's Wrath, and heightning of that
Guilt under which our Church and State have groaned. Nobles, Magistrates,
Gentry, Commonalty, and those of every Degree and Order in the Church, should
labor to be acquainted with the Plague of their own Hearts, and to bewail the
Wickednesses which have more especially prevailed amongst those of their own
Quality and Rank. All Sins are hurtful, but the Sins of those who are in
Public Offices, which are of a gross and heinous Nature, and have a special
relation to their Offices, are extremely dangerous. These are Wounds in the
Church and State, of which great care must be taken, or else they will prove of
very dreadful Consequence. Is there no Balm in Gilead? Jer. 8. 22.
Is there no Physician there? Why then is not the Health of the Daughter of thy
People recovered?

We should all likewise endeavor to be duly affected with the great Guilt the
Nation lies under in general. What a general Neglect, and even Contempt of the
Laws and Ordinances of God, are we chargeable with? Have not all sorts of
horrible Wickednesses abounded amongst us? Have they not past abroad every
where without any check and control? I say, have they not met in most places
with very much countenance and encouragement, even from those who should have
reprimanded and punished them, and who were inclined to reflect with severity
on other practices, which the Scriptures give no ill Character of? Have we not
all great cause to mourn, that gross Injustice, Unmercifulness, Oppression,
Insatiableness, Whoredom, Drunkenness, and such kind of Vices and Immoralities,
have gone barefaced amongst us, and been gloried in? Have not the Generality
amongst us, given up themselves to their Sports, and Pleasures, and Vanities,
when the Judgments of God have been visibly amongst us? How many new ways have
been devised of late, to sin against God? What Temptations and Provocations to
excess have been invented and applauded? Have not multitudes arrived to an
impudent contempt of God's Threatenings, and to make a Sport at those who have
warned them from the Holy Scriptures, of the Righteous Judgments of the Lord?
And to ridicule all serious Application to the great Essentials of Religion,
and concern for the Truth and Spirituality of God's Worship and Service? It
cannot, with any regard to Truth and Modesty, be denied, that these things have
had too much sway and influence in this Land. And these and the like Sins do
portend very ill to a Nation where they do prevail, and obtain allowance.
Therefore we should humble our selves deeply on these Accounts, that our Land
may be preserved from the Fearful Consequences such Wickednesses do ordinarily
draw after them.

And now the more Public, Solemn, and General our Humiliation shall be, the
better will the Remedy be proportioned to our Disease, and the better will our
deportment suit with that State into which God has now brought us. For God
has not, by giving us this Deliverance, discharged us from the Duty of true
Humiliation and sound Repentance: But he has rather the more indispensably
obliged us unto it; having now removed those obstacles out of our way, which we
might lately pretend did obstruct the public performance of it. And if God
has done so much for us, before we did address our selves to it with a due
solemnity; What may we expect he will do for us, after that we have testified
aright our lothing of our selves, and our detestation of all those Courses
whereby we had provoked his Displeasure? Yea, we shall Praise him the better,
and more acceptably for all his Works of Grace and Mercy toward us, by how
much the deeper sense we have of our own unworthiness, and by how much the
lower we fall in our abasing our selves before him because of our many and
unexcusable Provocations. O Lord God of Israel, Ezra 9. 15.
thou are Righteous, for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day; Behold; we
are before thee in our Trespasset, for we cannot stand before thee; because of
this.

Secondly; We should take a particular care that we do not apostatize, and
return to our old Sins. And more particularly those sorts of Sins which have a
singular malignity in them, and do tend directly, either to prejudice the
common Interests of Protestantism, or to disorder the Civil State.

These things brought us lately into that deplorable State, in which we must
have absolutely sunk and perished, if Help had not been sent us in a very
miraculous Manner, and in a very seasonable Juncture. And what can we expect,
if we return to our former Sins, but that God will discover his Anger against
us, to the rendering of our Estate Seven times worse, and seven times worse,
than ever it has yet been?

If we should have this present Deliverance grow up to maturity, so that our
Enemies may never so much as hope it will be to any purpose for them, to
contrive against, and attempt us again, let us forbear, and have those Sins and
Practices which have hitherto weakened and confounded us, made God our Enemy,
and inspired our Adversaries with Counsel, Resolution and Courage. Our Enemies
have no Knowledge, nor Discretion, nor Strength, they can use to any purpose
against us, but what they are beholden to our Sins and Wickednesses for. If we
return to our former sinful Courses, our Adversaries will soon frame Plots (and
it is to be feared with success) against our Peace and Safety.

May our former, and especially our late Experiences, furnish us with such
Iustruction and Wisdom, as may be as lasting as our Lives, and of perpetual
advantage to those who shall succeed us. Seeing God has now spoken Peace unto
us, let us see that we turn not again to Psalm. 85. 8.
Folly. Is it possible to affront God more insolently, than by apostatizing to
our old Sins? what! shall we evidence to the World, that we look on this great
Deliverance as good for nothing, but to render us more untractable and
incorrigible? Will ye Steal, Murder, and commit Adultery, Jer. 7. 9. 10.
and swear falsely, and burn Incense unto Baal, and walk after other Gods to
your hurt, whom ye know not, and come and stand before Me in this House, which
is called by my Name, and say, We are delivered to do all these Abominations?

More particularly we should take care that we do not return.

First, To any of those Instances whereby the Power of Godliness, and the most
essential Interest of Religion have been prejudiced. Let us now abhor all those
Methods whereby Peoples Instruction and Edification in Religion have been
obstructed; And whereby a Passage has been opened for Profaneness, to have an
abundant entrance into our Land, and an opportunity has been given it to
diffuse it self, and make a successful progress through all parts of our
Country. Instead of using any Means to hinder and discourage the frequent,
constant, and sound preaching of the Word of God, may those who are entrusted
with this Work, be everywhere obliged to attend unto it with greater
diligence. May care be taken in all places for the effectual Suppression of all
Profanation of the Lord's Day, and of the common and ordinary Abuse of his
Holy and Reverend Name; as also of those more bulky Blasphemies, Imprecations,
and Oaths, which have been in too frequent use amongst us.

It concerns us also to take care, that we do not relapse into any of those
horrible Debaucheries, and infamous Excesses, nor into any of those Arts and
Contrivances to betray People into Intemperance, which have past so openly, and
with too much applause, through most Places, especially of concourse, in this
Nation. These and the like Instances do exceedingly prostitute the Sacredness
of our Profession, and many ways expose the Peace, the Safety, the Honor of
our Government.

And we should likewise take heed that we do not any more exchange that
Spiritual Devotion, and reasonable Worship we owe unto our God, for empty
Formality, some pompous Rites, and a few bodily Gestures.

Secondly; To our Church-Bigotry. We have at the same time advanced Notions,
which make the Church of Christ much narrower than it really is, and set up a
more extensive Authority in it, than ever Christ established there: We have so
embarrass'd the Notion of the Church, and what concerns its Administration and
Government; it would be worthy of the best and maturest Thoughts of the most
understanding and experienced Christians to find out a way to clear Matters
well, and extricate us out of those Labyrinths wherein we have industriously
bewildred our selves. May we now come to entertain Notions of a Church, truly
consistent with that Peace, Affection, Brotherly-Kindness and Love, with which
every one who is a Member of the Church of Christ, should be endued. May no
Party amongst us arrogate too much, but be contented with such Authority and
Power as Christ has given to his Church. Will not Things indifferent remain
just so, when Bigots have done all they can to persuade the World of the
contrary? Let us now enlarge our Judgments, as far as we can, (provided we
leave not the Truth behind us, nor take in Error and Falsehood) that we may come
as near together in Opinion as is possible. And as for those Instances, about
which we shall still have different Apprehensions, let us dissent like
Christians, bearing with one another, and on neither hand assume Infallibility;
seeing the managing of our Differences hitherto, with undue Heats, has proved
of ill Consequence; let us now maintain and discover, in the midst of our
Dissents, an Affection one for another, truly pacifying and Christian.

Thirdly; To our Court-Sycophantry. This is an unhinging of the Government, and
an advancing of Notions and Practices which have a Tendency to overturn and
destroy our Settlement; that we may ingratiate our selves with some who do not
deserve the most excellent Characters. How much Prejudice have two precarious
Ju^ Divinum's done this Kingdom? The one to inslave Men's Souls and Consciences;
the other to inslave their Persons, and destroy their Civil Rights.

Thirdly; We should ascribe with Thankfulness and Joy, the Honor of this great
Deliverance unto God, and faithfully pay unto that great and blessed Instrument
He did employ in the effecting of it, all that real Gratitude, cheerful Homage,
and just Subjection which is due unto Him.

It is God who was the Author of this great Deliverance: Whatever Counsels were
taken, and whatever Provision was made in order to our Succor, our Deliverance
could not have been effected either in the manner, or in the time, wherein it
was brought about, if God himself had not wonderfully appeared, and wrought
mightily on the Spirits and Minds of People on every side. What a numerous
Multitude of stupendous Occurrences do crowd into our Thoughts, as soon as
ever we begin to observe and trace this Miracle of Kindness from its first
public Appearance to that huge advance it made in the two or three first
Months! Here we should give our freest Thoughts their full scope, to observe
all the Discoveries we meet with of the Divine Excellencies, and endeavor to
get our Souls raised to the highest degrees of sacred Admiration and Love, that
our Praises may, as near as possible, be as boundless, as God has been in the
Effusions of his Bounty and Goodness. The Hand of God is so eminently
discovered in this Deliverance, it should awaken and bring those to their Wits
and Senses again, who had sunk themselves into the deepest Unmindfulness of a
Divine Being. We must be more obdurate and sottish than the Magical Priests of
Egypt were, if we do not acknowledge that here was indeed the Finger of God. The
Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God do appear so conspicuous in this Instance, we
may even question whether he did ever display them altogether in so illustrious
and glorious a manner to any People as he has now done unto us. When did he
ever confer on such a Nation (considering both our Guilt and our Danger) such
an unbounded Goodness, introduced with such bright and shining Discoveries of a
Wisdom and Power as unlimited, as the Grace and Mercy for which they prepared
the way? Are, we not now under the most powerful and obliging Dispensations of
Mercy and Love, enhaunced by the attendance of every thing which is proper to
operate on, and influence the reasonable Nature? With what grateful Resentments
should our Souls be now possessed? How should our Mouths be now filled with
Praises and Acknowledgments? This is God's doing. It is his Right Hand which
has saved us. If he had refused and denied his Blessing and Conduct, all that
was attempted for our Relief would have proved vain and abortive, yea, would
have made our Condition more fatal, our Yoke and Bondage more insupportable.
Not unto us, Psalm. 115. 1.
not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy Name be all the Glory. It was thy
Right Hand, and thy Arm, and the Light of thy Psalm. 44. 3.
Countenance which saved us, because thou had a favor unto us. Let us
therefore resolve we will extol and bless him every Psalm. 145. 1, 2.
day, we will praise his Name for ever and ever.

The offering of due Gratitude and Praise unto God for this Deliverance, will
mightily dispose us to express and pay unto our present Sovereigns the exactest
Homage, and most dutiful Obedience. When our Hearts are possessed with an
affectionate and tender sense of the Good God has done by them, both to the
Protestant Interest in general, and in particular unto this Nation, when we
perceive in what Love and Mercy he has established them over us, and by what a
series of Miracles he has brought us under their Protection and Government, we
shall readily acknowledge that we are indispensably obliged to discover and pay
unto them our Gratitude, Submission* and Obedience in all those Instances which
do become good Christians, and true English Subjects. When I hear of the
Unwillingness that any do show to pay their just Tribute to whom it is due, and
of the Tricks which some do use to defraud their Sovereigns of their Right, I
am apt to suspect that these People did never give God hearty Thanks for what
he has done for our Church and Nation by their means. I am astonished! I am
filled with Indignation and Horror! when I consider how Englishmen and
Protestants are degenerated; when I hear that any who come under the former
Denominations, do grudg to pay the full Sums of Money which are legally exacted.
What would you have been willing to have parted with twelve Months ago to have
been assured of the Security, Peace, Liberty, and other Blessings you now
enjoy? Were you wont to play such Tricks, and to be so sparing of your Money in
former times, even when so many hundreds of Pounds were paid every Week to
maintain the Grandeur of a French Minion, and when Designs were carrying on
against all your Interests? Do you think the French Protestants, if they had
your Estates, and were under your Circumstances, would think much to part with
ten times more than is required of you, to secure their Religion and Liberty?
Had you suffered as they have done, did you really know what they know, and did
true Grace prevail in your Hearts, you would rather be troubled that under the
present juncture of Affairs, your Taxes are no greater. We have no Taxes laid
upon us now to maintain Exorbitances, and keep up the Grandeur of Lust. There
is nothing required of us, but what is absolutely necessary to secure our whole
Estates unto us, and preserve the Protestant Religion, and advance the public
Good. Would you be willing that Irish and French Papists should come and make
themselves Masters of your Estates, and turn you, and your Wives, and your
Children, and Families out of doors; nay to do worse with you than this does
amount unto? And can you expect to be preserved from their Encroachments and
Violences, if Armies and Fleets be not made use of against them, and for their
Suppression? And can Fleets and Armies be maintained without Expenses, yea
without greater Expenses than we are yet acquainted with? Repent heartily and
speedily for what is past. And let it now appear that English Protestants do
scorn to starve a good Cause, that they are indeed the most noble and public
spirited Subjects in the World. Do you know what Ravage, Havoc, and
Devastations the French Papists do make in other Countries, firing and burning
Villages and whole Towns, and leaving nothing but Ashes and Rubbish behind
them? How much of their Estates would Irish Protestants have parted with, that
their Country werein so peaceble and good a Condition as ours is? Will you
answer, You are not under such Circumstances? It Is true; But be thankful that
you are not; bless God heartily for the Deliverance this Day minds you of, and
cheerfully part with whatsoever is expedient to preserve you in the good Estate
you are in at present, and secure you from the Outrages other Protestants have
trial of. Learn to understand, and faithfully perform your Duty to your.
Sovereign, and do something more than ordinary now to wipe off that foul
Blemish so lately contracted on Englishmen. Let something be done speedily,
that it become not an indelible Reproach to our Nation, that our Estates were
unmeasurably under-valued to defraud our Prince. But that is not all, for
sparing the Name this Practice deserves under the former Consideration, our
playing such Pranks is an unpardonable Childishness; for we herein cheat and
deceive our selves: and blessed be God, that we have such a Prince, that we
cannot possibly wrong him, but we must trebly damage our selves. Tho you are
not sensible of this at present, yet time will make the Truth of it sensibly
evident. Lord! What shall be done to purge away the horrible Guilt contracted
on this Land, if the late Assessors have throughout the Nation performed their
Oaths no better than they have in some Countries? Our King ventured his Life
and his Fortunes, not in Word and empty Profession, but in Truth and Reality,
for our Good; and shall we be averse to part with a little Money to settle and
secure our selves in that good Estate, into which, by the Blessing of God, he
has brought us? Is this your Gratitude, your Duty, your Loyalty to your
Sovereign? not to say your Love to your selves, and your Concern for the
Public? Well! but however Matters have gone hitherto, let us carry our selves
better for the future. Let us now begin to quit our selves like Men. May we of
this Generation retrieve yet the ancient Honor of our Country. Let us from
this time endeavor to the utmost, that we may demonstrate a Courage for the
Truth, and a Gratitude and Faithfulness to our Prince, which may, as near as
possible, bear a proportion with the Worth of the one, and the Merits of the
other.

Fourthly; We should improve this great Deliverance all we can to the Advantage
of the Protestant Religion and Interest. It behooves us now to have a Zeal for
our Religion in some measure answerable to its own Excellency, and the
Demonstrations God has so lately given of his concern for it. How should we,
now we are freed from the Dangers we were in, be touched with a penetrating
sense of the Miseries, Desolations, and Sufferings of our Protestant Brethren
in other Countries? How willing and ready should we be to contribute all we can
to their Relief, Help, and Deliverance? Are we so obdurate, so miserly, that
neither our own Mercies, nor our Brethrens Necessities, nor the extraordinary
Works of God, shall prevail with us to be charitable and beneficent? What have
we our Estates, Lands, and Possessions continued, and confirmed anew unto us
for, but that we may liberally impart the same unto those, and for the
procuring of their Deliverance, who have lost all for the sake of that
Religion, which is so much maligned and persecuted in the World? If you were in
their Estate, would you not think them worse than Heathens, nay worse than
Papists, if they did quietly inherit Hundreds and Thousands by the Year, and
should refuse to contribute liberally and freely to assist the warlike
Preparations which should be necessary to rescue you out of such an unjust and
barbarous Thraldom? What account will you give to God of the Money and Estates
you are entrusted with, if through your Niggardliness and Stingyness, the
Deliverance of his persecuted Church is obstructed? Dare you spend great Sums
of Money, Yearly, Monthly, Weekly, on sumptuous Tables, and Clothes, at Games,
and needless, (to say no worse) Exercises? Dare you lay out your Estates on
Horses, Hawks, Dogs, etc. whilst glorious Enterprises for the bringing down and
subduing of Barbarous Persecutors, and for the rescuing of the suffering
Members of Christ, from under the wickedest Tyranny that was ever heard of, do
languish, and are in danger of miscarrying for want of Encouragement and
Support? Shall any of us think of scraping together plentiful Fortunes for our
Children, and contrive to add House to House, and Field to Field, whilst such
great numbers of God's most Faithful Servants are in the extremest Poverty,
and treated with the most savage Barbarity? Do you mind great Things for your
selves? mind them not, whilst such great Supplies are wanting for the relief
and help of your Protestant Brethren. Seeing God has delivered us, let us
cheerfully impart whatsoever is needful toward the carrying on of those
Enterprises with success which are now in Hand, for the settling of the whole
Protestant Church on a good Basis, and in a safe and Secure Estate. When we
were in danger so lately, did not others venture their Money, and their Persons
too to save and preserve us? And shall not we imitate them, seeing what they
did was of such happy Consequence to our selves? Did you ever know any who
fared the worse at long-run, by being noble and generous, and venturing to the
utmost in sincerity, for God's Cause, his Truth, and Persecuted Church? Do not
the Papists do all they can, in all Parts, to promote their false Religion, and
to weaken and overthrow the Church of God? Do they spare Money? Will they not
mortgage their Estates, and sell their Lands, and use all manner of ways to
maintain, and uphold, and help their own Party? And shall not Protestants have
as public Spirits as they have? We may take more comfort than they can, if we
lay out all that we have in the World, to procure Deliverance for the Church of
God; for they serve a very bad Master. Let this Deliverance God has wrought
for us, have this good Effect on us, to make us ready and willing to do all we
can, that our Suffering-Brethren may have Help and Deliverance. You that are
Poor, and have no Money, who are incapable of Taxes, you can pray, and importune
God for them: attend to that business carefully. Yea, let us all be careful
constantly to represent their Case with Earnestness unto that God who has
delivered us. How long, O Lord, Holy, and true, do thou not judge and avenge
our Rev. 6. 10.
Blood on them that dwell on the Earth?

More particularly, we should take care every one of us to improve this
Deliverance, to the rendering of us more true and serviceable to the Protestant
Interest in this Kingdom. To which end we should improve it,

1st. To make us more careful to be thoroughly instructed in the Grounds and
Principles, and the several Truths and parts of the Protestant Religion, and to
get our Souls truly affected with the Importance and Consequence, the Goodness
and Excellency of every one of them. The Papists themselves are necessitated to
acknowledge we have no positive Articles of Faith but what are warranted by the
Word of God, and that our Worship and Administrations are all for the substance
of them authorized by the Word of God. Let us therefore carefully search and
study the holy Scriptures, and see that the Word of God do dwell in us richly,
that we may be able to give a reason of the Hope that is in us.

2ly. To have such an abhorrence of Popery settled in our Souls, as may be in
some measure proportioned to its Falseness, Immorality, and Cruelty.

1. Its Falseness. There is not any thing offers a more rude affront unto God,
in every thing that is most dear and tender unto him, than Popery does. It
proceeds to that height of Blasphemy, as to make him an Authorizer and Approver
of the most shameful and nonsensical Idolatries which were ever devised. It
represents him as imposing upon Men the most contradictious Nonsense that was
ever invented; yea, as teaching and instituting those very Instances which do
most obviously, and in express Terms, contradict his own plainest Doctrines,
and most positive Institutions. All this is evident, in their Doctrine of
worshipping the Host, Transubstantiation, worshipping Images, withholding the
Cup, in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper from the People, denying the People
the use of the Scriptures, and praying in an unknown Language, etc.

2. Its Immorality. It finds out ways to reconcile the most horrid
Debaucheries, with the easy Hopes of Heaven. Its Doctrines of Purgatory,
Absolutions, Penances, Indulgences, etc. do encourage those who will entertain
them, to all manner of loosnesses. It provides to embolden People in every
Vice, beyond all the Restraints of Shame here, and of Fear as to hereafter.

3. Its Cruelty. This is its very Nature and Genius. It was bred and nourished,
and has swollen it self to that mighty Bulk wherein it now appears in the World,
by being drenched in Blood. What Massacres has it committed? How many Throats
have been cut, how many People have been forced to bleed to Death, that its
insatiable Thirst might have such Draughts as would a little qualify it? What
barbarous and inhumane Devices has it found out to torture the best
Christians? How abundantly has it exerted its Rage in all the Methods of
Cruelty and Violence in this Kingdom? In what manner has it of late, yea, does
it at present display its mischievous, cruel, merciless, and uncompassionate
Nature in France?

3ly. To get your Minds thoroughly purged from all unjust Prejudices, and
persuaded of the Means you have a right to make use of, to defend your
Religion, if any forcible and illegal Methods should be used against it. I do
not justify any Violence, and immoderate Severity toward any, on the account
of Differences in Religion. I look on that as an Inhumane and Antichristian
Wickedness. I heartily wish, even with reference unto Papists, that they may
find such courteous and gentle Usage, that our Meekness and Kindness toward
them, after all Provocations, may effectally convince them, that our Religion
is truly Divine, and that theirs must needs be of a quite contrary Original,
which engages them to such rude and barbarous Behaviors toward Protestants,
whenever they get an Advantage over them. But let them know withal, that if
they will not live peaceably, but will still be renewing their wicked Attempts
against us, we do understand the Right we have to defend our own Cause, and
bring the unjust Invadors of our Rights and Religion to condign Punishment. And
that we are resolved to approve our selves as valiant and courageous in
maintaining the Rights of the Protestant Religion in common, having the
Government on our side, as we should have been obliged to have approved our
selves patient and void of all opposition, if the Government had been against
us.

Fifthly. We should all do our utmost, according to the Capacities and Places
we are in, to promote a general Reformation: That such a course of practice may
everywhere prevail, as does best suit with the Nature and Tendency of that
Faith we profess, and may be most expressive of Resentments which do in some
measure correspond with the late Demonstration God has given of his Concern
for our Holy Religion. And if we do so, we need not doubt but God will heighten
the Felicity he has now introduced amongst us to that degree, Their Majesty's
shall have all the Satisfaction which can spring from a numerous Body of most
Obedient and Faithful Subjects, and We shall inherit all the Blessings Heaven
can promise, under the Government and happy Influence of Princes so peculiarly
designed to make a sinking and unworthy People, glorious. Has not God obliged
us, in the most solemn manner, by delivering us out of the Hands of our most
formidable Enemies, to observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws, and serve him
in Holiness and Righteousness all our Days? And if we refuse to do thus, what
can we in reason expect, but that our Sun shall set before Noon, and that our
Deliverance, like our Goodness, shall pass away, as the morning Cloud, and
early Dew? If we be not now reformed in our Lives; what can the Event of
present Matters be, but that we shall walk in Obscurity, and our Plagues become
such, as will make us a Terror, a Scorn, and a Byword to all who shall hear
what God has done for us? God turns Ps. 107. 33, 34.
Rivers into a Wilderness, and Water-springs into dry Ground; and a fruitful
Land into Barrenness, for the Wickedness of them that dwell therein. God does
now plainly offer us things Great and Good, beyond all Expression: our greatest
and only Danger is from our selves, lest by continuing to do Evil, we make all
his Gracious Purposes abortive. At what Instant I shall speak concerning a
Nation, and concerning Jer. 18. 9, 10.
a Kingdom, to build and to plant it; If it do evil in my sight, that it obey
not my Voice, then I will repent of the Good wherewith I said I would benefit
them.

If we now refuse to remember this Deliverance, so as to know the Righteousness
of the Lord, and shall, by our continuing in our Evil Courses, stop the Current
of Mercy, when so abundantly flowing in upon us, what can we expect, but that
God will glorify his Justice, by inflicting on us to the uttermost, all the
Curses which are due to such aggravated Ingratitude and Disobedience? Has not
this been God's wonted Method with People, when they have arrived to such a
prodigious obstinacy in their Sins, they would not be reclaimed by his most
remarkable Appearances for their Help? They forgot God their Savior, Psalm.
1^6. 21, etc.
which had done great Things in Egypt: Wondrous Works in the Land of Ham, and
terrible Things by the Red Sea. Therefore Verse. 40, etc.
he said that he would destroy them. Therefore was the Wrath of the Lord
kindled against his People, insomuch that he abhorred his own Inheritance. And
he gave them into the Hand of the Heathen, and they that hated them, ruled over
them. Their Enemies also oppressed them, and they were brought into subjection
under their Hand. See Jer. 15. 6, 7. Deuteronomy. Prove. 14. 24.
28. 47, 48. It is Righteousness that exalts a Nation; but Sin is a Reproach
to any People.

Great Disorders and Irregularities have prevailed amongst us; and we may
easily revive the Memory of what they had just brought upon us. It is to be
hoped, that those Disorders which related to Public Offices, and Great
Societies, will be taken into Consideration, by those who can provide the most
proper and effectual Remedies. May we never have occasion to complain, that
Isa. 59. 14, 15.
Judgment is turned away backward, that Justice stands afar off; that Truth
is fallen in the Streets, and Equity cannot enter: That Truth fails, and he
that departs from Evil, makes himself a Prey. When our Counselors, Judges,
and Magistrates, are able Men, such as fear God; Men of Truth, hating
Covetousness; such as have a Zeal for the Purity and Interest of Religion, who
from a real sense of Duty, shall employ all their Authority to suppress
Ungodliness and Vice, and encourage Piety and Virtue; to loose the Bands of
Wickedness; undo the heavy Burdens, let the oppressed go free, and break every
Yoke; then will Judgment run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty
Stream.

And the Influence of these from their higher Orb, like the bright and warm
Beams of the Sun, will contribute much to the clearing and purging of our Air,
and the reducing what is out of Order in the lower Regions, into a comely,
decent, and prosperous Posture: Then will the Lord comfort us; He will comfort
all our waste Places, he will Isa. 51. 3.
make our Wilderness like Eden, and our Desert like the Garden of the Lord; Joy
and Gladness shall be found everywhere amongst us, Thanksgiving, and the Voice
of Melody.

May those to whom it pertains to make an Inspection into the State of our
Church, contribute what understanding and good Men ought to do, that what is
amiss there, may be rectified, and Exuberances may be lopped off. That those in
the Ministry, whose Abilities are not inconsiderable, may be obliged to employ
their Talents diligently for the Benefit of those they are more immediately
related unto. And that Places of good Consideration may not any longer be
confined to the scanty Allowances of the cheapest Curats. And that if any who
have no tolerable sufficiency for the Sacred Function, have by any indirect
Methods crept into the Office, some due Care may be taken touching an Affair of
such Consequence. My Heart bleeds within me (says Archbishop Abbot, in one of
his Lectures upon Jonah) to think of the miserable Condition of the precious
Souls of many People, who have such Ministers as Joh. Aventinus speaks of, (if
they were not in the Ministry) would not be thought sit Hog-herds to keep Swine.

But besides that public Reformation both in Church and State, (the providing
for, and ordering of which, does pertain to those who move in the highest Orb)
there is much of Reformation necessary to be attended to, by People considered
in a much narrower Capacity. More particularly,

1. Those who are Governors of Families, should take care to begin and promote
Reformation in their own Families: For if Wickedness and Impiety be
countenanced and cherished in most single Families, the whole Society will be
but a Body which consists of corrupt and putrid Members, whatever appearance
there may be of a better Spirit, in some of the public Instruments of
Government; and the Errors of the first Concoction will be very difficulty
corrected afterward. Let those therefore who have Families under their care,
faithfully apply themselves to banish all Disorders out of their Houses, and
take care that Swearing, Intemperance, neglect of God's Worship, contempt of
Religion, and whatsoever savours of Profaneness, have no countenance there.
Let such be careful that those under their Government be well instructed in the
Principles of the Protestant Religion, and the Precepts, and Rules of Good
Living, and that they be inured to a pious and virtuous course of Life. Let
them see that the Holy Scriptures be read, and the Worship of God daily
celebrated with their whole Households; And that neither their Children, nor
Servants, be tolerated in the profanation of the Lord's Day, or neglect of the
ordinary Worship and Service of God. Let Governors of Families follow David's
Example and Resolution, as set down in Psalm 101.

2. Every particular Person should now be diligent to amend and reform himself;
If every one would be careful to amend one, our Land would soon be in a
flourishing Estate: Our Peace, our Safety, our Happiness, our Strength, our
Glory, would increase with the Luster and Honor of our Profession, by the
Brightness, Truth, and Power of our Graces and Virtues. Those particular
Persons who shall refuse to remember this great Deliverance, so as to engage
themselves to a personal Reformation, may expect that however gracious it shall
please the Lord to be unto our Land, for the sake of those who make a due and
faithful improvement of it, yet God will not be unmindful of their perverse and
undutiful Behavior. Because Numb. 14. 22, 23, 24.
all these Men who have seen my Glory, and my Miracles which I did in Egypt,
and in the Wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not
hearkened to my Voice: Surely they shall not see the Land which I swear unto
their Fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me, see it; but my
Servant Caleb, because he had another Spirit with him, and has followed me
fully, him will I bring into the Land, whereinto he went, and his Seed shall
possess it.

Let us now every one renounce our Lusts, cease to do evil, and learn to do
well. Let us take care that our Moral Virtues be impregnated into Christian
Graces, and that we be vigorous in doing every thing that is universally
commendable and Praiseworthy. Let us lay aside our narrow Designs, and love
every Grace and Virtue for its own intrinsic Beauty, and exercise our selves in
it with the greater Diligence, because it has such a Tendency to befriend the
Public. Let us every one addict our selves in Sincerity and with Earnestness
to render unto God that true and spiritual Worship he requires, and to fill up
all our Relations from the highest to the lowest, with the Duties God has
assigned, and with such Deportments as will most become and beautify the same.
Let us now approve our selves temperate, chaste and sober, humble, meek, and
self-denying. Let us every one now live godly, righteously, and soberly,
according to all the Instances our God prescribes, and our Land will presently
be blessed with all the Blessings of Peace, and with all the Blessings of
Plenty too. Our Oxen will be strong to labor; there shall be no breaking in,
nor going out, there shall be no complaining in our Streets; but we shall be in
as happy a case as a People can be, whose God is the Lord; Psalm. 144. 14, 15.

Sixthly; We should live in Love and Peace. Love and Peace are the Cement, the
Support, the Bond and Ornament of all Human Society, next to a Religious aweful
Sense of the Divine Being, and our dependence on him, which are the original
Springs and principal Cherishers of these Heavenly Dispositions. These are so
necessary to the Being and Welfare of every State, Kingdom, and Body Politic,
that as soon as these do cease, and those venomous Qualities do prevail, which
always abound proportionably to Peoples decay in these, nothing but Disorders,
Tumults and Confusions, do succeed. When Peace and Love are wanting in any
State, such fatal Wounds and Breaches do immediately follow, that the most
subtle Artifices of the wittiest Architects in Government do prove but like to
improper Plasters laid upon festered Sores, which make them rankle the more,
and at last throw the Patient into the most torturing, convulsive and mortal
Paroxisms; Mat. 12. 25.

All that Nature and Reason can invite others to take notice of, as fit to
alarm and engage them to nourish a pacisick and friendly Temper, do more
obviously, and with greater force solicit and importune us at this time to
surrender our selves up to its kindest and most beneficent Influence.

Yea, we are under those stronger and peculiar Engagements to love and follow
after Peace, and cherish an amicable and brotherly Affection toward one
another, the best Religion in the World does prompt us to take notice of. We
are under as many and as powerful Obligations to live in Love and Peace, as can
be deduced from the Nature and Institutions of the Christian Religion, the
Doctrines and Example of the Son of God when visibly present in our Nature,
from the numerous reiterated Precepts, Exhortations and Counsels of all his
Apostles after his Ascent into Heaven. And how many Incentives to Love and
Peace may we easily perceive, if we do but view the happy Effects of the
Christian Temper wherever it has prevailed? At first, the multitude of them
who believed were of one Heart, and of one Soul; and might we who profess the
same Religion, and are under the same Obligations with them, arrive at the same
pitch, our Happiness would be as firm and unalterable as our Faith is.

The sad Effects our late Animosities did produce should retrieve us to our
Senses and Wits, and dispose us to such a Friendliness amongst our selves, as
may not be any more broke or ruffled. Did we not struggle to that degree
against our fellow-Protestants, and Fellow Subjects* that if a wonderful Arm
had not interposed for our mutual Support, our own Heels must certainly and
irreversibly have been tripped up? Were we not so sedulous to keep others out
of Trusts, we were like to have been turned out, and dispossessed of all our
selves? If we receive not Instruction from such a Teacher, as our own late
Experience, what will be concluded concerning us, but either that our
Perverseness renders us more than brutish, or that we are so impoverished in
our Intellectuals, that to be begged is the best we do deserve?

Seventhly, We should frequently offer up our solemn and servent Prayers unto
Almighty God to perfect what he has begun for us. If God do determine now to
perfect our Deliverance, I do not doubt, but he will pour out upon the
Inhabitants of this Land, the Spirit of Grace and of Supplication, and mightily
incline us to seek and cry to Him with Earnestness to carry on his own Work
unto Perfection. This is his usual Method: And he has now given us a solemn
Invitation to betake our selves to this course. When God declared what great
things he purposed to do for the Israelites, it is added, Thus says the Ezekiel.
36. 37.
Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by the House of Israel, to do it
for them. See Jer. 29. 10, to the 15th Verse.

May we all so remember what God has done for us, that we may indeed know the
Righteousness of the Lord, and so apply our selves to do what concerns us in
our several Capacities and Places, that God may not behold Iniquity, nor see
Perverseness in us; and then the Lord our God will be with us, and the Shout of
a King among us; then will there be no Enchantment, nor no Divination against
us; but Numb. 23. 21.
according to this time it shall be said of us, WHAT HAS GOD WROUGHT? Ver. 23.


THE END.

