THE ADVENTURES OF THE Helvetian Hero, With the Young Countess of ALBANIA; OR,
THE AMORS OF Armadorus and Vicentina: A NOVEL.

-- Quae me Suspensam insomnia terrent?
Quis novus hic nostris successit sedibus hospes?
Quem sese ore ferens! quam furti pectore and Armis!
Virgil. Aeneid. 4 th Licensed 9th. December. 1693.

LONDON: Printed for Randall Tailor, near Stationers Hall. MDCXCIV.

TO THE Right Honorable THE E. of M. etc.
YOUR Lordship being so Illustrious an Example of Heroic Love and Renowned
Valor; It Is but fit that at your Feet our Adventurous Lover and most Valiant
Hero should fall: and that Good-natured Pity, and Sweet Compassion that moved
you to Espouse the Justest Cause of an injured Stranger, will incline you also
to Patronise The History of his wrongs and Injuries; and your Lordship cannot
be an Enemy to the Author, if you are but a Friend and favourer of ARMADORUS.

THE ADVENTURES OF THE Helvetian Hero, With the Young Countess of Albania, etc.
NO sooner had the God of War raised himself from a a profound Repose, a
Tranquillity in which all Europe lay, too long alas, for the restless humor of
the Aspiring Gaul, who in the midst of Peace betook himself to Arms; besieging
Phillippolis (a Frontier of the Empire) flaming Caesar and all his Allies, with
the surprising insult of so sudden an Invasion, so unjust a War: No sooner I
say, had Mars set up his Standard, and Bellona displayed her bloody Colors in
the Field; (as if War in Conjunction, were to denounce discord among the Sexes)
or only designed it on the two sorrowful Subjects of this Discourse; whatever
were the dispensations of Fate, or its deep designs; certain it is, that the
News of so Universal, so formidable a War, could not but reach the whole
Helvetick Body; a People so truly Martial and Warlike, that they have no other
Cradles but their Tents, and begin their Lives with a Campaign: A Nation
Neighboring on a Great Emperor, and a King as Great; which lying open to two
such potent Enemies, had need of all its Arts as well as Courage to subsist,
and had no little Reason to have some regard to its self, and so thought it
best by a wise Neutrality, to prevent their becoming a prey by a precipitous
participiation, to the Avenging and Triumphant Victor, and falling so many
Victims to the Force and Fortune of the Conqueror, (though this policy I must
confess has sometimes proved as destructive to States, as it is many times
thought a medium to preserve them, and makes them in the end to be aimed at as
Sacrifices by both sides, because they sided with neither) but here,
notwithstanding the general body of this Cantoned State stood Neuter, it was
left to their particular Subjects, in which Party they would Engage: And Gold
and Gain being with them a good principle of Honor, as well as the best
argument of a good Cause, (mixed with their Native hardiness, that on one side
or other enclines them always to Action) Their bold Youth betook themselves each
to that Country and Cause, where they thought they might find the best
Interest, and the best Pay.

Amongst which Martial Adventurers, it so sell out that the sprightly and
active Armadorus made one: A Youth well made, and of a good Mien, Proper and
Gay, qualified with a Sweet air, and a melting softness: The first, such as
Brezes on their Mountains; and the latter to be compared to the Snow that lies
upon them; while his Warlike disposition was all that was rugged about him,
like the roughness of his Country.

It Is true he followed Mars, while Venus seemed to form a Camp for him; and the
French Gallantry seemed couched under the robust denomination of a Swiss:
Perhaps his Parents from their long services in that politer Country, had
infused in his formation some more polisht matter than what usually Compounds
the Courser People of his own Country; but as soft as he seemed, for War he was
designed; and so the first prompting Expedition that offered to his
Inclinations, was the Warlike preparation that was made by the Belgians, and
the Heroic Prince that headed them, for a Descent on the Isle of Old Albion,
now commonly called Britain: A Command he soon got, either by desert or
recommendation, and accordingly entered upon the Action: The Success of which
every Historian has in Voluminous Diaries sufficiently related; it may suffice
to say their Expedition was Prosperous; they Landed their Forces without
Opposition; They marched into the Country without Resistance: looked on as
Redeemers, and not Conquerors. So that the Young Hero had not the occasion of
showing the proofs of that Valor, that a brisk action might have Exemplifi'd;
and so signalized Himself to Her, that proved afterward the Mistress of his
Affections; The first seat of War beginning in that very Province she called
her own; but alas! little did either of them then think of those Sharper
Engagements and Conflicts that afterward befell them; Honor led him on; so that
Love had no time to entangle him, or her; Though the little God perhaps had laid
his Plot already, though the Execution of it by him was deferred: The Army by
easy Marches advanced to the Metropolis; and our Noble Helvetian hardly gave or
received the least wound in the Field; The Cause seemed to Conquer for them,
while themselves professed they came not to Conquer; all the Conquest the Young
Hero was reserved for, was that of Beauty, and Armadorus to dye in no other
Arms but Vicentina's.

Thus having possessed themselves of the Capital City, which there was no need of
Force to make themselves Masters of; the willing Citizens receiving them with
Gratulations, Pageantry and Pomp; a peaceful settlement soon followed this show
of War; (at least what was thought to conduce to it;) the Crown was placed on
the head of the Deliverer, by a public Act of the Senate; and the People
pleased with a new Coronation; Festivals, Pageants, Triumphs and Rejoycings,
were the only Diversions of the Town; drowned all the noise of Drum and
Trumpet; and the useless Army dispersed, was Commanded to Reside in their
Respective Quarters, in the several Country Towns and Villages of such
Provinces as their General Officers thought fit: It was our Young Helvetian's
fate to be remanded to the Province of Danmonium; where they first Landed, and
his Quarters Assigned him in the Principal Town of it, Anciently the Isca
Danmoniorum; little imagining what Snares the little God had laid for him
against his return; what hard Conflicts he was to meet with after such easy
Triumphs.

Thou Powerful Love! Though Infant) God! How do thou Govern and dispose of
Human Affairs! And as inconsiderable and puny Deity as thou art painted,
influence all things! Fate and Destiny can do no more! Little did our Armadorus
think that He, whom all the Beauties of the Capital City could not Conquer, or
divert from his Martial Exploits and Employments, should be Triumphed over in a
Country Town; Captivated where he came as a Conqueror; Effeminated where he
appeared so much a Man; And what might magnify him more to Mars, or Venus, an
Helvetian; but the Goddess here with the help of her Invincible Cupid, got the
upperhand of our Hero; and the God of War; Shield and Buckler, Sword and Spear,
the Ensigns of War; and the Streaming Colors that he carried all bowed,
yielded, laid down at the Feet of an Imperious Beauty, that could Command the
Heart of the stoutest Hero: How this was effected, and by whom our Armadorus
was Metamorphosed into a Lover, (for certainly it could be no mean Object that
could produce such Monstrous effects) shall now be the Subject of the next
Section, or Paragraph.

The Isca Danmoniorum (we have mentioned) of Ptolomy, and the Ancients, is a
well known place in Modern Story: A City of good Resort in the Western part of
the Isle of Britain; well Peopled, well Seated on the falling Descent of an
easy Hill, whose pleasant Feet, and Fields adjacent, are washed with the sweet
Streams of a purling River that runs by them; and glides with a various and
delightful Current: many of whose Amorous Waves have often list'ned to the
Lovers Tales, that on its silent Banks have been repeated. And in these
Elysiums, and blessed Shades, the Virgin Youth of both Sexes, that frequented
the City for Education or breeding; as also those of Riper Years, whom Love had
Enchanted into those feeling Inclinations, and Passionate Emotions for Holy
Matrimony, and the like, would often, and doubtless very Innocently divert
themselves; but here it was not that our Noble Armadorus Received his Deaths
Wound: His Dear lay in Covert, and the Dart was laid up for him and her, in
Diana's Temple; so Sacred a thing is Love (if not profaned) that it makes its
first Sallies, and purer Essays, in places Dedicated to Devotion; and many a
Pious Votary to return a Devotee to some other Divinity than what he seriously
came to Adore. And this was the sad Condition of the Captivated Armadorus, when
one day he came to Offer up his public Oblations, to fall himself a Sacrifice
to the Charming Eyes of the Fair Vincentina; and she as much a Victim to the
Features of the Vanquished Armadorus. The Emotions' of their Hearts, the
glances of their Eye, the Trembling of the Nerves, and the Confusions that
might have been visible in both their Faces, had not the Assembly been too much
engaged in their Devotions to observe it; these I say are only to be described
to the Life, by such Dying Lovers; in a word, Haerebat Lateri Lethalis Arundo
-- was his case --
And, Vulnus alit Venis -- hers.


That is to say, The Deadly Dart stuck to his Reins,
Whilst Love fermented in her Veins.


The Priest ending, parted this Tormented Pair he should have joined who loath
to rise from their bended Knees, Prayed only that the Prayers might be
prolonged. And if Piety may be founded in Contemplation, no doubt were very
Devout; Their Eyes followed eagerly their departing Persons, and if Ogling-Love
may be believed, their Hearts went after their Eyes.

The glowing heat that nourished this concealed Love in their several Breasts,
could not be long without breaking into flame; and though with the Poet it was
Caeco curpitur Igne, yet it must blaze at last, and come to light: The Contest
was only between them, how with the greatest secrecy as well as decency they
could impar^ to each other their sufferings. Armadorus, an humble admirer of
Vicentina, hardly could presume to be the first Aggressor, to address himself
in a strange Country to a person o^ her Rank and Quality, and he him self a
stranger, whose Fortune seemed to depend upon his Sword; besides Love is apt to
Impress an awe and reverence on the Object you adore though the rank and
Dignity of the person did not require that awful distance, which here it seemed
to deserve. The Young Countess was not a stranger to the backwardness or
Timorousness of the Youthful Armadorus; she had considered well the decencies
that were commonly observed by those of her Sex; and though Love is
proverbially said to (Laugh at Reason, and leap over Laws) yet the Lady
strugled long before she could dispense with the least punctilio that might
transcend the bounds of a becoming decency; but where Wit and Love meet (we
know) the Inventions are wonderful; doubtless 't was pity compelled her to
Compassionate the Languishments of the poor Armadorus; and she had greater
Reason than the Charitable Samaritan, to pour some Comfortable Oil into those
wounds her self had made; and especially when Charity could begin at home too,
whilst it was extended to the distressed stranger; for notwithstanding the
severe rules of Modesty, Decency, and Restraint, the Troublesome Deportments,
the Languishings of that Sex are obliged to; and she her self Labored to be
Confined to, as much as possible, or ever was in a weak Woman's power; Yet the
resistless powers of Love will always prevail against all the reluctance that
seems to oppose it. Vicentina felt the same pains, and which she knew no other
way to cure, but by easing those of Armadorus; but as Love raises difficulties,
so it is apt always to raise the best courage; and reach at the finest
Inventions to Conquer them: Loath was the fair Countess to make a discovery of
her passion, to a person a stranger to her self, and Alien to her Nation, and
as loath to let the poor Languishing Stranger despond under such difficulties
as perhaps he might think invincible; but to show her self a Wit, as well as
Beauty, and her Invention to be as strong as her Charms, the matter was so
contrived, that Armadorus had imparted to him the reciprocal Affection
Vicentina had for him and that the matter should be so ordered, that the
Countess should not be seen concerned in so kind a Communication.

Drusilla, a young Gentle woman o^ a pregnant Wit, and good Invention was the
Lady that had the Honor to wait upon the Young Countess, as attendant on her
Person; she often had perceived the Disorders of Thought, and the Discomposure
of Mind, her Mistress would be under, and soon judged they could proceed from
nothing less than Love; and the Fair Sex have naturally such a fellow-feeling
for one another's Sufferings, that they are seldom easy till they help one
another to be so; and besides, Inquisitiveness and Curiosity is so common an
Ingredient in our Humane Constitution, and so more particularly in a Woman's,
that (if only to gratify their Humors) they will leave few Secrets undiscovered.
Drusilla's discerning Eye had played the Mercury, and watched the Darts that
Cupid had Shot, and knew too pretty well what Lovers they had wounded. This
made her with the greater liberty, sitting one Evening in a lonely Walk by the
side of her disconsolate Lady, who fetching a deep Sigh, gave her more pressing
occasion to enquire of the cause of her so frequent pensiveness.

Madam, said Drusilla, pardon the presumption of your Servant, if she makes it
her humble Request to be privy to that tormenting Grief that affects you; it is
only that Zeal and Affection I have for your Service, encourages me to that
confidence as to desire it, which should it prove a matter beyond my poor
Abilities to serve you in, yet at last it would be some comfort to the
afflicted to have a Partner in those Afflictions under which they groan. Ah
Drusilla, replied the Fair Vicentina, I am fully satisfied of thy Love and
Faithfulness, and can confide further in thee, than even the secresy of my
Affair would require; but alas! (redoubling it with a deeper sigh) such is my
misfortune, that I can perhaps be pitied, but not relieved. Love, then replied
the Zealous and Passionate Drusilla, has drawn all this disorder on your dear
self, Madam; and can that be the occasion of your despair? Can you, Madam, who
can command so many hearts, doubt of Conquering one? See, but look down only on
those Captives that already lie at your feet; what would the Amorous Carlo give
for one such Sigh sacrificed for his sake? And doubt not Madam, but were your
Esteem known to the Person you admire, he would soon Adore; he would sacrifice
his very Soul to your Service, and Court you into that Bliss and Happiness you
desire.

The melting Countess began to be moved at such tender Expressions; and softly
answered Drusilla, And can thou help me, my faithful Companion? Should I have
fixed my thoughts on a Person whom I could not handsomely Address unto, and yet
bring me off with Honor? For that let me alone, sasid the Zealous Drusilla,
greater Difficulties would I wade through for our sake, Madam; and to make the
discovery more easy to you, give me leave by my own foolish Interrogato^y to
anticipate your disclosing the Passion you can hardly conceal: Is it not for
the young Stranger, Armadorus, you languish? And can you dive into my Thoughts
so well, replied the Fair Vicentina (with a Countenance that seemed a little
surpised into a graceful blush)? don't press me in a matter, Drusilla, that it
neither becomes you to enquire into, nor me to own. It is enough, said
Drusilla, (with a pleasing Smile) and I could suffer a severer Rebuke for your
ease, Madam; but from my own Observation, the Young Cavalier looks very
suspiciously, and seems to have no less a Passion for your Ladyship; the
certainty of which, without your being in the least concerned, let me alone to
discover.

This pretty Discourse, and comfortable Consolation, past between the Young
Countess, or the Fair Vicentina, and her Faithful Drusilla upon the Evening,
that the following Morn the Citizens and Gallants were to Assemble in the
public Temple, for the Celebration of Divine Service; Drusilla's pregnancy
soon told her that Armadorus his Devotions, or doubled Adoration, would make
him to be present at the Solemnity, and this prompting-occasion (a Temptation
to so pregnant an Invention as hers) soon made her lay hold of the opportunity,
and enter upon Action: She gets her Lady to write a blank, or Anonymous Letter,
to a Person as unknown, or else so well imitated her Mistresses Hand, that it
might not be easily mistaken for another; Seals it, though Unsubscribed, and
Directs it for the Young Armadorus: Then cunningly disguising her self, that
she might not be known to relate to her Lady, she so lovingly designed to
serve, She habits her self all in the homely dress of some Peasants Daughter:
viz. In a fresh Straw-Hat, made but the last Harvest; a well stifned Pinner,
and deeply blewed with the Starch; edged with a moderate narrow Bone-lace; a
plain Handkerchief about her Neck, though of Course Linen, yet very clean; a
Wastcoat of a Russet Serge, such as the Country affords, spikand-span-New,
still savouring a little of the Weavers Oil; a short Petticoat of Red Bays,
edged at bottom with four rows of Green Gimp Lace; a pair of Yarn Stockins,
Blew, bought that Night on purpose, from a Welsh-man's Stall; with a good
substantial Neats-Leather Shoe, purchased once at some Country Fair; tied
close with a Green Ferret Ribbon, in a large. Bow-knot that touched the very
tips of her Toes. Dressed thus Capa-pee, Drusilla, in these her Country
Accoutrements seemed almost a stranger to her self, and her Ruddy Countenance,
though it were not so Course, from its freshness of Complexion seemed to humor
the disguise:

Eyes black as Sloes, with Cherry Lips; and Cheeks like Katherine Pear!
That cry not only Kiss, my Love! but Eat me up my Dear!
'T would tempt not only Country Swains, but any Switzer here.
In this Autumnal or Rustic dress she trips away to the Temple, much about the
time the Young Girls of the Neighboring Villages used to come, to gaze about
the Quire; and at last fixing their Eyes on the finest Face, that has the
loudest Voice, devoutly listen to the Vocal Music of the Church, till the
louder Organ Alarms them to turn about and look another way; but Drusilla,
better acquainted with the Service and Ceremony, had other Contemplations: Her
Eyes were fixed on the Comely Stranger, and it was not long before the Fair
Stranger had found out hers; and though he was more Devoutly engaged in his
Contemplations of his more admired Vicentina, than at her Devotions; yet
whether by Instinct, or wandering of his looks and thoughts, is not so certain,
he could not forbear regarding this Country Damosel, with a concern of which
then he could not comprehend the Reason; but much more surprised he was when
the Service ended, and this delicate and unknown Dame presented him (with a
simp'ring look and low Court'sy) these humble Lines.

Sir,
BE not surprised at the strangeness of this Address; it is in your power to
make your self the happiess Man living; follow your Fortune* where you Love,
you are as much beloved; lose no opportunity, lest you repent your neglect and
delay, and so b^ Wise too late; manage your Affair with Prudence; let your
first Visits b^ secret: and if your Love be warm, be confident it will find no
cold Reception;

Sir, Your hearty Friend, and well-wisher, D.


WHILE the Eager Armadorus full of wonder and admiration was anxiously running
over these Mysterious Lines, and ready to break out into passion and
Expostulation; the cunning Drusilla had withdrawn her self in the Crowd, and so
added another piece of wondering, to his perfect Astonishment! And am I then,
said he, made a Riddle to my self? Or this place some Fairy-Ground? Holy Ground
it is, and Dedicated to some Sublimer Deity; and theresore no such Fantastic
Scenes, Airy Phantoms, and Foolish Enchantments can take place here: This
cannot come from my Admired Vicentina; but some Country Beauty that perhaps my
person, though so unworthy, has seemed acceptable and agreeable to: The
Countess that has Charmed me, keeps no such Domestics; and this Gallant City
yields no such plain Rusticity; but yet me-thoughts much Innocence and
Sweetness seemed to dwell under that homely simplicity; and were I Master of
that Heart which once I had, when the Field and the Camp afforded me the only
delight, so pretty so fresh a Creature just come from the Country, could hardly
have got off so easily; but purer Love, and now more sacred thoughts possess my
breast; which though not tainted with the least of sin, I am sure I find to be
the greatest torment: But why after all this, may not some envious Rival Spark
have contrived this Stratagem to amuse and delude me, an unknown Stranger, only
upon suspicion of that secret passion I have so long strove to conceal? These
and such like thoughts and expressions, the troubled and Confused Helvetian had
to himself, and with which his melancholy entertained him for most part of the
following Night; and there we leave him, while we return a little to the
Countess, under as much discomposure and Anxiety. The Fair Vicentina happened
to be not far from him in the same Church, when en passant with some other
Ladies, she saw the Country Damosel with such Obeisance, and amiable simplicity
Address her self to the Heroic Helvetian; and so far was she from suspecting it
for her faithful Drusilla, under so well-contrived a disguise, that she gently
justled some of her Virgin-Companions to observe somewhat of an Intriegue, that
seemed to pass between the Renowned Stranger, and a plain simple Country Girl.

Under this perplexity both parties lay for some considerable time, while
Armadorus his Suspended Thoughts hung in the midst between hope and despair; he
sometimes resolved resolutely to Address himself to the Young Countess; when
the fear of being presumptuous, dashed again that resolution: This timorous
delay of his, made Drusilla play the second part, though not under so much
disguise as the first; and whether in a Letter under her Ladies hand, or under
her own, that could well imitate her Mistresses (since Report is various, I
shall not determine) She Writes the languishing Armadorus this second Epistle.

Sir,
It Is enough for Fortune to put their own happiness into Peoples hands; and not
to Court them to lay hold of it: Fools indeed have their hours to choose in, but
Wise Men know how to Husband and make use of Minutes; It was once in your power
to have been as happy as your own wishes could make you; but I can hardly say
it is so now, since your carelessness has delayed your Addresses so long, that
the Cavalier Don Carlo (who has hitherto been but Coldly received) begins now
every day to warm himself into her Affection: The Lady cannot be unknown to
you, and always so near by you; This is like to be your last advice, and you
best know your last and only Remedy.

D.


This Letter more plain and Expressive, and like to give more Light to
Armadorus, she delivers (directed to him) to a public Porter to convey, but
one to whom Drusilla her self was unknown; and that the fellow might not
discover to whom she related, she gave him this to carry at a place some
tolerable distance from the House in which she dwelt: The Bearer conveys it as
directed; but no sooner had the Transported Helvetian run over the surprising
Contents, but he seized the Messenger that brought it, for fear by his
withdrawing he should be left again in the dark: The poor man (employed as he
thought only on some ordinary Errand) began to be seized with a fit of
Trembling, to be thus taken into Custody; the eager Armadorus earnestly desires
him to discover the person that delivered him the Letter he brought; and
threatened him as much if he denied it, or did prevaricate; the poor fellow, as
ignorant of the person concerned, as of the Contents, could not be brought to
confess any thing but his Ignorance, and that he had no knowledge at all of the
person that delivered it him, but only that by her habit she was a Woman, and
some Gentlewoman; this not satisfying the warm Armadorus (who was resolved now
to pursue as warmly his obscure Intelligence, and to be as hot upon the Cold
Scent) he makes the poor unthinking Creature, the messenger, to accompany him
to the place where the Letter was delivered him. Thinking thereby to be more
thoroughly Confirmed in the place from whence it came: but for that Drusilla, as
I observed before, seemed to have taken care: However the little stir that it
made upon the fond inquisitiveness of the Eager Lover, and the poor Porter
enquiring about the Neighborhood, it so fell out, that a person thereabout had
seen such a Young Gentlewoman deliver him the aforesaid Letter, and affirmed it
to be Drusilla, that belonged to the Young Countess of Albania. The Sun (on
this discovery) seemed to display his Beams to the Clouded Armadorus, and to
dispel all Mists; hardinessbegan now to grow upon him, and he began with hope
to take heart; and soon after in his best Equipage went to make her a visit.

But Oh! Tyrant Love! With what Cruelty does he sport himself with Lovers
Hearts, and like a little Nero, play whilst they are a burning: This secret
Intriegue (soon after the bustle about the second Letter, having taken some
Air) This flame of this Amor was like to have been stifled in its first
breaking forth; and their tender Love, that like a silent Taper had a long
while been burning under ground, to have been put out by giving it vent, and
opening the Cavity: The Fair Vicentina had still living a Mother, very careful
of so fine a charge, if not watchful of her even to a fault. The Countess
Dowager, who after the Decease of the Count D' Albania, was again Married to
the Worthy and Honorable Patriot, the Noble Count D' Orlando, Lord of Ogliano:
This Old Lady, of great Judgment and Experience from her Years, and by
Conversation well versed in the Affairs of the World, knew that her Daughter
from the Signiories, Lordships, Heritages and Patrimony left her by her Father,
was fit for the Espousals of some Considerable Count; and besides, she well
knew should the Young Lady miscarry before Matrimony, (for it is a Proverbial
saying in that Country, That the Young may dye, as well as the Old must) why
then she was to take all by Survivorship, which would sufficiently have
advanced the House of Ogliano; for which next to her own Daughter she had
reason to have the greatest Love and Regard; but whether this (which perhaps
might be but a malicious Reflection, made her averse to her Daughters
Matrimony, or that a Motherly care made her willing to see her well Married;
some little Intimation of Armadorus his Amors, and Intended Addresses,
(notwithstanding all the care and cunning of Drusilla) came to her Ears; upon
which having taken the Young Countess apart, one Evening in the most private
walk of their Garden, a Comfortable Retreat behind their own House, from the
noise of the Town; She began to tell her a little roundly of the Apprehensions
she had of her, as well as the Tenderness she had for her, and that she was
afraid of some private Amors, that were going on between her and the Gallant
Stranger that had made of late so fine a figure; to which she added her
Cautionary Advice, to take care of Soldiers of Fortune; that notwithstanding
an handsome Person and Equipage, he might have but little to support either:
That all Towns and Cities, especially Theirs, was known to be full of invidious
Censures, and injurious Reflections. The Old folks, whose Virtues are commonly
Necessity, reviling the innocent Liberties of the Young, for wanton
Licentiousness; and the young ridiculing the staidiness and gravity of the Old
only for a supercilious dotage. That the odness of Marrying an unknown Stranger
(whatever his merits or perfections might be) would sound as strange to all her
Friends and Acquaintance; would make her the Subject of Table-talk, and be a
slur to the Young British Gallants of the same Province, as if all Albion could
not afford her an Husband deserving enough, but she must ramble so far as to
find out an Helvetian. With these courteous Admonitions and kind Reproaches,
did the Countess Dowager entertain her Daughter; who much surprised at the
Discourse, and severe reprehension for a fault she was but beginning to commit,
the very Intentions of which she thought none had been privy to but her self,
and her faithful Drusilla: This surprisal, I say, made the Fair Vicentina,
whose Complexion was naturally enclining to a lovely white, o'respread her
Lilly Cheeks with a little Rosy blush; but recollecting her self and Courage
again, she thought it best for the Young folks to be as cunning, as the Old are
sly; and did not much doubt but the Countess Dowager, when at her Years, was as
good at Dissembling as any, especially in matters of Love and Amor; in which
the severest Moralist allow it, even though they made a Lie for it, so long as
it is only an Officious and Jocose one. This put the Young Lady upon Imposing
on the Old, and upon this cunning Reply, That her Lady Mothers will should be
always a Law to her; that she had no thoughts of Matrimony, much less of any
Clandestine Marriage, or so much as secret engagement: That she was obliged to
so tender and careful a Mother, for giving her such good Advice, which should
be her constant endeavor to follow, for the making both her Mothers and her
own Life comfortable: That Disobedient Children would bring their own Golden
Locks, as well as their Parents Gray Hairs with sorrow to the Grave; That for
her part, her own Countrymen appeared to her the more amiable to make Husbands
of: that to lie by the side of a Foreigner, an Outlandish-Man, differing in
Speech, Custom, Manners and Behavior, must needs be but a cold Comfort,
especially if they come out of so Cold a Country; that indeed, she had read and
heard of Switzerland, and its Old Inhabitants the Helvetians; but that all the
Account, both Ancient and Modern Authors gave of the Men, was that they had
Grim and Grizly Countenances, Bristly Beards, and Brushy Whiskers; so that her
Ladyship had no Reason to fear she had any Inclination for the new-comers from
that rugged Country, of which they say this Stranger is one; Therefore, Dear
Mother, do not afflict your self with such Jealous thoughts, for my Affections
shall be certainly placed on some smooth handsome English Man, and no rugged
Bear of Bern or Switzerland.

The Old Countess being a very good-natured Lady, and very Godly given, hearing
her Daughter answer so Piously and so Religiously, so Learnedly and Rationally
too; seemed very well satisfied with that Evening-Lecture she had given her;
and was very glad the Young Lady abounded with so much Grace, as to unfold her
Heart so Dutifully to her Mother, and to fold down in it all the proofs and
reproofs she had given her, for Edification; not doubting but she would make
good Use of her Exhortation; and that then there was no fear of any Application
of any Helvetian whatsoever. Thus closed their Discourse, and upon them the
Night together; all things seemed hushed for the Young Ladys happiness; but the
Old Countess, though she went to bed seemingly satisfied, did not taste that
repose the nest of Mortals enjoyed; Sleep! Sweet Sleep! That only Solace to the
troublesome state of Human Life, had left her wakeful thought, and watchful
Eyes; which neither Nights Sable Curtain, no more than those of her Bed could
be said to close: Jealousy, which reigns in a Parents Breasts, has all the
Torments of a Lovers too, and perhaps more anxious and acute from the purer
flame that kindles it: 'Twas a Child she was concerned for; 'twas a Child she
feared might prove false to her, and treacherously miscarry; and the Violations
of the Bed cannot be more afflicting, than the breaking through the Bonds of
Nature, the Belly and the Womb; the former may cause the Head to ache, but the
latter must make the Bowels yern: This banished not only Rest, but the very
thoughts of it, with perplexing Arguments, and troublesome Objections of her
own raising; and who knows, says she, to her self, but these fair Answers she
gave me, may be full of Guile? passionate Love may prevail over the most
Dutiful Affection: It Is an irresistless Power, and so not to be trusted; and
its powerful effects I found once to operate too strongly in my self, to trust
it in my Daughter: It would make even a Saint to dissemble, and the sincerest
Soul to turn Hypocrite; she is Young, Fair, and Rich; her Youth may make her
Amorous, her Beauty to be much Courted, and her Fortune to be very fairly stole
and carried off beyond the Alps or Apennines, by some Swiss, or swaggering
Rodomontado; and then farewell Daughter, farewell Fortune, my joy, and my hope;
and this Intriegue that is buz'd about, may notwithstanding her stiff denial,
be a thing that has somewhat of truth in it, and is warning enough to me how to
trust young Girls under Temptations. With this she raised her self more early
than ordinarily from her uneasy Bed, and put in Execution a sudden Resolution,
that was like to have changed all the Scene of this Amorous affair.

As soon as she was up, she calls to Jacomo her Coachman, and gives him private
Instructions to get his Equipage ready; and when her self with the Young
Mistress was seated in the Coach, to drive directly away for the Castle of
Ogliano, their Country Seat; without expecting farther orders or instructions;
all things being thus prepared, the Countess Dowager accosts her Dear Daughter,
just then awakened from a pleasant Dream of Visionary Love, and the imaginary
Embraces of her Dear Armadorus; She Dreamt of flowery Fields, and purling
Streams: The Groves and Grotto's of beguiled Lovers; beneath the Amorous Shades
of one of those, she fancied her self sitting by the side of her admired Hero;
and he as full of passion, Contemplating the perfections of his adored
Mistress: Their pointing Eyes were fixed on each other, and shot those flames
their breasts had kindled; their nimble Tongues supplied each others Story, and
were always seconds to one another in some innocent and pretty Tale of Rival
Lovers; of happy or unfortunate Amors. The Nightingale, that over their heads
diverted them with his sweet Notes, put them in mind of the misfortunes of
Philomela; and the Silver Swan on the Streams below, made them remember how
proudly Leda, once enjoyed a God: The Grove, that with its shady Trees pressed
upon the Grott wherein they sat, seemed to insinuate to this Youthful pair,
the happy state of Old Baucis and Philemon, that under their rural Cottage,
grew Gray and Aged with uninterrupted Bliss, and undisturbed Love; that such
Innocent simplicity the Gods themselves did not disdain to visit, nor to
Consecrate into a Temple so homely a Cell: when from this pleasing Covert, they
were pleased to divert those fixed Eyes from their stedfastness of eager
Intuition; (which like that of Angels they could wish might be Eternal) and
suffered them to Expatiate a little over the Fields and Meads that lay before
them, at the opening of the Grove wherein they sat, where every Flower they
saw seemed to represent a new Scene of Love. The Hyacinth minded them of its
pretty Metamorphosis; the Wild Mint bid them remember the Fair Minthe, a Nymph
of that Name once as fragrant and as sweet: The yielding Anamone, waved about
with every Wind, recollected to their thoughts the Amorous story of Venus and
her Dear Adonis, whose Purple Blood the Flower had imbibed; the lovely Daffodil
that grew by some adjacent Fountains side, did doubly reflect and represent
both the Love and Disasterous Fates of the Enamoured Narcissus; so that they
could not forbear from rising up themselves, and each of them to crop a Flower;
and with a sort of self-Love, (though they only Loved most one another) to look
a little in that fatal mirror that had cost the lovely Youth his Life. The
Laurel, ever green, made them wish their Loves to last as long, and be so too;
and seemed to exhibit to them the fearful flight of Timorous Daphne; and the
eager pursuit of their Innocent Loves: and the Stock-Dove in the Grove, made
them think on the change of Semiramis, or the Chariot of Venus: The Echo often
would repeat the pretty Terminations of their pleasant Tales; and at the same
the prattling Nymph seemed to tell her own.

The gliding River run their thoughts upon the Loves of Arethusa, and Egeria:
The Murmuring Brook would needs mutter out some soft story, of some silent
Lovers; and tell the Tales of Byblis and Meander; and the Fish that glided with
the Streams (as mute as it is) would needs say somewhat too, and Record to
these retired Lovers, the wondrous transmigrations of Nais and Dercetis; all
that Lovers Thoughts, or Poets Fancies could invent, they seemed to have before
their eyes; unless it were the fate of the Unfortunate Acteon, and the
Discovered Nakedness of the Revengeful Diana; but Chaster thoughts attended
their more Innocent Loves and Speculations; and no such wanton objects appeared
in this Dodona-Grove, to pollute their purer Imaginations. Thus lulled almost a
sleep, with the delightful variety of such innumerable representations of their
Innocence and Love (this Fair Couple in this pleasant Vision, the Young
Countess had) seemed to lie down together on the Rosy Banks of a Murmuring
Stream, where, with the blushing Roses, was confusedly intermixed the Amorous
Myrtle, and minded them (even half a sleep as they lay down) of the sweet Bed
of Venus; and the Pastoral Amors of Myrtillo. But this bright Scene of some
blessed Elysium lasted not long with the Charming and Enchanted Vicentina; for as
she Dreamed on, she fancied all those soft enjoyments of sweet Content, seemed
on a sudden to vanquish and disappear. The Verdure of the Grove was changed
into a Withering, Wan, and Yellow Complexion; the very Trees looked as if they
were sickning with the Jaundice; the Leaves drooped and dropped down before their
Faces. The flowery Meads, and florid Fields, that smiled under the feet of the
Lovers that trip'd over them, began to look and languish, with a sullen aspect.
The Raven, Owl, and Batt, and all the fore boding Birds of Night, and winged
Omens of the Air, upon the Grotto where they fate, were sadly perched; and
spitefully possessed the Nightingale's sweet place; and chased from thence the
Turtle and the Dove, and brought the Baleful Story of hapless Lovers, and
blasted Love, to disturb their thoughtful Imagination. The frightful Fables of
Corvus, and Nyotimine, with the transformation of Ascalaphus, awakened their
slumbering Senses, and interrupted their so sweet Repose. The fate of Pyr^mus,
and fall of Thisbe, made both to start. The Ground so green but just before,
seemed stained with Blood; and the dreadful Lion with his guilty Jaws, but half
withdrawn within the Neighboring Thicket: The Streams that flowed with little
falls and softest Murmurs, unknowing how to glide, began to turn to Pools, and
Stagnate; instead of murmuring sounds, to Croke with Frogs that plunged from
out the Weeds and Rushy Banks; as if the incensed Goddess had made another
Metamorphosis of all the Rustic Inhabitants, for their surly rudeness: sad
Progne Tereus, and poor Itis's Tale, took up her slumbering thoughts that only
waked but now, to Dream so sweetly: The clear Sky, and serene Air, that just
before glar'd, and enlightened all the Hemisphere, was dwindled into a few
faint glimmerings, or a gloomy Mist, just light enough to let them see the
harmless Grass whereon one while they soft and safely trod, strewed over with
Adders, Snakes and Serpents; whose hissing Heads, and forked Tongues, did just
o'retop the bending blade which seemed to move from off the spiteful Venom.

While at her trembling Feet a grave Old Matron stood, with grim Medusa' s
Head, whose Curled-Locks seemed falling on the Ground, and to produce those
Vipers in the Grass.

With this the frightened Vicentina waked, surpised to see her Mother at the
end of the Bed, and softly opening of the Curtains; which, (perceiving her
Daughter to stir) she soon drew and saluted her with a Good Morrow: The latter
part of the Dream had put the Young Lady into a little Cold-Sweat; which the
Old Counfess took notice of; but the Fair Daughter as handsomely palliated the
matter, by imputing it to her putting her Head under the Bed-Cloaths, while she
slept: but after this Melancholy Vision that followed so pleasant a Dream, the
rising Sun shone in upon the Bed, and promised a glad and joyful Day; which
occasioned the Countess-Dowager to have a finer opportunity, for inviting the
Young Lady to take the Air in her Coach, in so lovely a Season.

Vicentina, that was always observant enough, did not much resist her Mother's
desires, and was as soon dressed; and with her Dear Drusilla, accompanied her to
the Coach: but still ruminating on the strange Dream, and the wondrous
Revolutions that had befell her in her last sleep; the latter part she was glad
was but a Dream, and as sorry that the former part of it was so too; for the
verifying of which sweet Repose she could have slept Eternally: sometimes she
thought this happy prelude of her Love, might portend as sad a Catastrophe; and
then again her Reason swayed, and rejected Dreams as Foolish and Fantastic, and
to have no other Effects or Events, but in the idle predictions of their dull
Expositors; but by this time the Driver (well instructed as before) began by
his making such haste, to let the Young Lady see she was not brought out only
for to take the Air; for instead of gently driving round a pleasant Hill, whose
top advanced up to Serener Air, was all o're-grown with wholesome Health, whose
dry and Thirsty clefts gaped down upon the watery Sea that washed the barren
Mountains sertile fect; and so afforded the loved prospect to the longing
sight, of distant Waters bounded with the Skies. The furious Charioteer, (I
say) instead of sostly driving round the pleasant Mountains top, ran directly
over it, with all the haste his Horses heels could make or carry: And then too
late the Alarmed Lady saw she was deceived, and carried only from the expected
sight of her enamoured Lover, and a Youth she so entirely Loved. This struck a
damp upon her Spirits, still disordered with her doubtful Dream; which as
insignificant as she forced her self to think it, she found now to be too truly
foreboding; and so not able to support her self under the weight of so much
grief and fear, sell down into the Arms of Drusilla, in a deep and dangerous
swound; out of which, by the time they were arrived at the Castle of Ogliano,
by Drusills rubbing of her Temples, and (...) Old Lady's Administering to her
^^strils a Bottle of Exalted Salts, or Spirits, she was somewhat recovered;
under which Melancholy confinement we must leave her, to relate a little what
befell the Noble and most Illustrious Armadorus.

After the Heroic Youth had Resolved with himself, (as above related) to
venture on a visit where he found he was like to find a welcome; and that his
being an unknown Stranger was like to be no such bar to his languishing hopes
and airy fruition; it was his misfortune or fate to defer the making his
personal Addresses, even to that very day that his adored Mistress, who no less
admired him, was so unexpectedly carried off, and ravished from his sight. The
Apprehensions perhaps they had of giving some Umbrage of their Amor to the
jealous Mother, made them a little more cautious of coming together; but so it
was, that when (...) came, thinking to prostrate himself at the Feet of the
Fair Vicentina, he found she had left the Town, and what was worse, could not
learn any news whether ever she would return to it: This made him almost curse
his Destinies for their cruel dispensations, and next, himself for his supine
neglect: To imagine that his adored Lady had left him for some new Rival, he
thought was too profane and injurious to so good-natured, to so sweet a Soul;
and that so false an Heart could not inhabit in so fair and Argelick a Body;
and therefore fixing his thoughts on the Faithfulness of the Fair one, where he
had already fixed his Heart, he resolved patiently to enquire for what
Intelligence he could get, and of the manner of her going off; and long it was
not before he was informed (this Amor beginning to be the talk of the Town)
that the Countess-Dowager carrying her out one Morning, upon pretense of taking
the Air, had conveyed her to her Country Seat, their famous Castle of Ogliano;
some Twenty Miles distant from the City, where she was detained under her
Mothers Eye, with a great deal of Circumspection: That the Old Countess had
made all her Domestics to keep Watch and Ward over her; and that she had
committed her more especially to the charge of one whose Duty it was to take
care of Souls as well as Bodies; the Learned Signior Castrucio Castrado, a sort
of Secular Priest, whose Godly Admonitions could not but make her lead a Life
very Regular: That the Young Lady when she perceived she was thus deceived, by
the cunning of the Old, fainted away in the Coach, as she was hurried away. And
what added yet more to the grief of the Young Armadorus, was, that he was also
informed, all this severity was shown her upon his Account; and that the
Countess-Dowager carried her away to this Confinement, merely upon the Jealousy
she had of his making her Addresses, and designing her visits; and this indeed
was the most insupportable part of his sufferings, That he, the wretched
Armadorus, should not only be the cause of his own misfortune, but so
unfortunate as to make so sweet a Creature suffer for his sake: A Creature
dearer to him than his Life, and for whose sake he was so ready to Dye.

Thus Instigated by Love, and stimulated by Revenge, he resolved to Storm the
Castle of Ogliano; and as a true Knight Errant, either to relieve the
distressed Damosel, or perish in the Attempt; and forthwith ordered his
Palfrey, which was of pure white, dappl'd with black spots, the very Emblem of
his Mistress in Affliction, to be richly comparison'd in Accoutrements suitable
to the Cause he had in hand, with this Device in his Shield, Innocence Oppressed:
but as he was going to bestride his Pegasus well Armed, (for if Love has Wings,
a Lover's Horse may have so too) upon which sitting like another Perseus, going
to deliver his Dear Andromeda, there came to his Horse's side a little Youth,
or Squire, delivering him a Paper Sealed, which having opened, found it
contained the following words;

Sir,
IT is too late, Illustrious Armadorus, to conceal those passions we have
hitherto so cautiously disguised; I have been well informed of that Affection
you have born me, and with so much modesty suppressed, lest your Love might be
looked on as presumption: but now that the noisy talk of a busy Town has made*
our most secret Amors, (to our selves hardly known) the subject of their
Discourse, it is no longer in our powers to suppress even our most silent
thoughts; and without the least breach of modesty, I am not ashamed to own,
That Armadorus his Affection, (of which my Eyes without much Information have
been witnesses) does deserve a better retaliation than is now in the power of
poor Vicentina to return; my Mother's jealous thoughts has hurried her on to
these extremes, to draw me from the harmless freedoms of your diverting Town,
to confine me to her House, a sort of Country Prison; but my only Comfort under
so melancholy a restraint, is, that I may yet be so happy as to have another
sight of the Noble Armadorus, whose absent Person is supplied by the presence
of his Idea in the breast of

Vicentina.


Love and Honor had agreed to pull on both Boots before; but these warm Lines
like the Spirits of good Wine, put such a Spur in our Hero's head, that was ten
times better than the the other two in his heels; which he clapped both presently
to the side of his Horse, and so salli'd forth out at the Western Port,
impatient till he arrived to the presence of that Fair Creature, whose obliging
disposition was such as to Compassionate a poor Stranger's sufferings, and to
Crown his Affections with her own Love.

On the Road we must leave him, to return a little while to the Young Countess,
and her faithful Drusilla, who had prevailed with Vicentina, since their
passions for one another could not longer now be kept a secret, to let the
Youthful Armadorus no longer languish in his prime: and having somewhat of a
Voice, Sung for the diversion of her melancholy Mistress, while they were
sitting in the Green-Chamber, which was allotted them for their use; a kindness
shown her even under so severe Restraint; that Color of all others being the
best for the Eyes, which with Tears and Sorrow are frequently injured; and to
divert both those, Drusilla, I say, Sung her two or three of those pretty
Songs, such as,

Gather your Rose-buds while, etc.
O be kind my Dear, be kind,
While that I and you are Young;
And seeing a Tear or two stealing from her half closed Lids, struck up her
Notes to some words more newly Composed, apposite as she thought to the
occasion, viz. Why are my Eyes thus always flowing?
Why does my Heart so trembling move? etc.


The Diversion that Drusilla had given her, even with the Repetition of her
Torments, in such Sonnets of Love as she thought best suited her occasion,
though never so old or ordinary, showing her affection for her dear and
distressed Mistress, more than any excellency in her self for skill or
performance: yet it had that effect, that it rouzed a little her Mistress's
dejected thoughts; and made her take down her Lute, that seemed to hang
melancholy by the Wall, conscious of, and disconsolate for its Ladies sorrow;
and laying it careless on her Lap, with a sort of negligent indifferency, and
with a Voice at last that neither sighs nor sorrow had altered from its
excellency and perfection, Sung to the warbling Instrument, on which she Played
as well, this Mournful Air, in return to Drusilla's merry Waggeries, with which
she so labored to divert her.

I.
Though Confined my Body be,
My uncontrouled Soul is free;
And Conscience must have Liberty.
II.
Love! surely then may crave the same,
Love! that move's the mighty frame;
And Love! that too from Heaven came.
The Old Countess Dowager passing by the Door from another Room, hearing her
touch the Lute, made a step back to listen a little to the good effects of that
Liberal Education she had given her; and though she was mightily taken with the
gravity of the Notes, and the Piety of the Words, yet as Pious and
Conscientious as she was, her hard Heart would not give her tender Conscience
leave to comply with the Passion and Amor of her dearest Daughter.

While the Fair Vicentina, with her faithful Drusilla, were thus entertaining
their too sensible melancholy with a sort of Diversion, they hardly had any
sensibility how near their real Joy was Approaching them. But whether some airy
Genius, what Old Philosophical Heads perhaps dotingly called Intelligences,
which may move Sublunary beings, especially Human, as well as Celestial Orbs,
or the distant Communication of Aerous, or Aetherial Attoms, agitated into
eager and Tumultuous Motion by the Approaching Body, might by their Impulse of
Matter make some Impression on remote Minds; and so verify a common Aphorism,
by material Affections upon our sensible Organs, and make us visibly and
palpably perceive, That Friends are never nearer, than when they are talked of.
(Though by the way, I think the Devil is said to be so too). It was Drusilla's
chance, or necessitated Impulse, after this sweet effort upon her melancholy
Instrument, to put her Mistress upon the pleasing Discourse of her Admired as
well as Enamored Armadorus; And what, says she, Madam, Who knows while you are
lamenting your Captivity, but that your Redemption draws nigh, and the Noble
Armadorus may go through all difficulties to compass our deliverance, and Crown
your happiness? The insinuated thought had that warm effect, and sensible
Impression, as to fetch a deep sigh from the bottom of her Young Ladies
disturbed Breast, which like the late Miraculous Board could not but Groan when
touched with so hot an Iron; when suddenly they were surprised with a
precipitous knocking at the Great Gate of the Castle of Ogliano, which caused
as great Pulsation at their Young and der Hearts; but much more did they pant,
when they saw the longed for Armadorus enter, with a Mien that carried Love and
Victory before it. The Young Hero entering with the Civilities of a Courteous
Stranger, could not but be as Courteously received, having with him a Friendly
Companion that accompanied him in the Journey; and coming as a Foreigner, that
curiously desired to see the Remarkable Seats and Situations of the Country;
and the Old Conntess that much mistrusted his Errand, yet because she thought
it a thing then not so publicly known, could not her self so handsomely refuse
him the Civilities of the House; In which being entered, and sat down, the
eager Armadorus, that had no longer design to trifle and delay, declared to the
Countess-Dowager, that the Errand that brought him there, was the Honorable
Design he had of making his most unfeigned Addresses to the Incomparable
Vicentina, her most Admired Daughter; and that he desired no longer to Live,
than he was ready to Sacrifice that Life, only to Dye at her Feet.

The Old Lady seemingly took no further notice of this; but only to return
these warm expressions, with this cold Compliment, That Young Gallants were
thus used to rally on the frailties of weak Women; and to ramble into wild
discourses of their praises and perfections, only to show their own Eloquence,
and by commending their Sexes Excellency, to take an opportunity of setting
forth their own Abilities: and so with an Amorous Smile, and a grave bow to the
Fair Helvetian, would have forced off the Discoure from her Daughter's Amors,
and (but that she was Married to the Noble Lord of Ogliano) could have wished
the Addresses made to her self. (For the Charms indeed of our Hero was such,
that they could excite Inclination even in Frosty Age, and Frozen Blood, as
well as in the warmest Veins:) But Armadorus had other things to do now, than
to dally, and that with an Old Gentlewoman; and so abruptly replied; Madam, The
Affection that I have declared for your Fair Daughter, though it seem not to
affect you, yet I assure you is not merely Complimental or Counterfeit, but a
real Passion: It has been my Honor and Happiness to have several times seen
her; but alas! the first sight was sufficient to make such an Impression of her
Beautiful Idea in my Heart, that all the remainder of my Life can never raise
or eradicate. He would have gone on; when the Tart Old Lady, with a Brow that
wrinkled without a Frown, took him up as sharply: Sir, said she, Your strange
Address is very surprising to me; especially that am unknown to you: and from
you above all, who both by your own Accent, as well as others Report, are not
only a Stranger to me, but the Country; and if you have such an Affection for
my Daughter, I must assure you, it is most Unfortunately placed, for to my
knowledge she has nothing like it for your self. This seemed a little Poinant
Sauce to that delicate Raggust she had given him at first Reception; and was so
far from pleasing his Gusto, that it set his Teeth the more an Edge; so that
the whetted and warm Armadorus, as sharply, (though a little too
incorsiderately for his Ladies sake and safety, and indeed his own) and hastily
replied; Know, Madam, then, that she has an Affection for me, though it can
never equal that of mine for her; and lest you should look upon these words
too, for fineness of Speech, and Fantastic Compliments, here are Acts,
Evidences, and Records for what I say; and so in a sudden Passion, that
savoured more of Heat then Judgment, (for Love transported, many times
terminates into Rage) pulled out of his Pockets the Three Letters that came to
his Hands, and offered them to her View. The Alarmed Old Countess finding what
she had so long looked for and mistrusted, so fairly now to offer it self,
suffered her Curiosity so far to overcome her resentment, as to examine them;
and seeing them somewhat to agree with her Daughter's Hand, if not the very
same, dissembles her Passion, to discover the depth of her Daughter's, (though
two very different Affections of the mind) and so parting from the passionate
Stranger, tells him she will Examine the Lady Vicentina, upon the Contents of
those Papers.

Rage now possessing her, instead of Reason, away she runs up to the panting
Vicentina, whose Heart seemed to labor under a Thousand concerns for her
Lover, for her self, under Hope, Despair, Love and Anxiety; so that the
Pulsations of her Breast could keep no Time; and went faster than the Pendulum
of her Watch: when the Old Lady entered, and began to ring the Alarm.

See, false Vicentina! See perfidious Girl! To what a sad pass you have brought
your self and me! see the Instruments and Records of your Treacherous dealing
with your own Mother, under your own Hand; dissembling Creature! here are
sufficient proofs of that Intriegue I tak'd you with in the Garden, which you
as Impudently disowned to me, and denied; go on, and follow your own measures,
but expect never more my blessing or favor, or so much as hereafter to see my
Face.

Vicentina, suprised at the sight of those Letters she thought would not so
soon have come to light; (which the passionate Imprudence of Armadorus had
indeed too rashly discovered) was at first too much confounded for a reply, but
at last recollecting her self, answered, Dear Mother, have but a little
moderation! and let your wonted Prudence prevail over that present passion that
sways you: Consider you are a Mother, and that it is your own only Daughter
with which you are so enraged; and then you will soon see, that similitude of
Hands is not sufficient to Convict any Person; and that Letters have been often
Counterfeited in matters of greater moment and concern, by dextrous and
designing Knaves: And who knows but this poor Gentleman may be as much deluded
as I am abused; for I disown them utterly (looking upon those Drusilla had
Composed). This calmed a little the Impetuosity of her Passion; and will you
then aver this (said the Old Countess a little more Calmly) to the Gentleman's
Face? Yes, indeed, said the cunning Vicentina, (who desired nothing more than
to see it) I am ready to aver it to his Face, and that my Hand was never to
those Writings; come then with me, said the Countess-Dowager, and put an end to
your Mother's trouble, and your own disturbance; and let this deluded and
abused Young Gentleman know what he has to trust to; how much he has been
deceived; and that he puts an end to that Passion which will only run him into
so many Inconveniences, and in which he can never hope to accomplish his
desires. This word never sounding like Eternity, and Everlastring Torment to
Vicentina, had almost put her into a Swound, in which indeed she might have
past away to her Eternal Rest: but her Mother's bidding her to follow* made her
pluck up her Spirits, and go after; and Drusilla attending both, descended into
the great Hall.

Neither the Readers of Romances, nor of all the Fantastic flights of Poetry
and Love; can truly describe that Embarrass, that perplexity, those surprised
Lovers lay under, when they saw themselves so near together: Their Colors
came, and went with their Eyes, changed like the Camelions with the motions of
their Body; or like variegated Silks, with the diversity of Light. Armadorus of
a Complexion Fair and Ruddy, Enameled and set off with a deep black; and Locks
that fell before his Face, like Curled Jet, that seemed to make a border to the
Rubies of his Cheeks; could not at the sight of his adored Mistress, and the
Consciousness of somewhat he had done amiss, suppress his boiling Veins from
sending up into his well-tempered Countenance, a guilty and disordered Blush:
Vicentina, of a most Comely Visage, and the Fairest Skin, such as usually
accompanies those of that Fair Sex, who have the glorious gift of Golden-Locks
and Amber Hair; could not but Re-salute her Amorous Armadorus with as modest a
Blush, and as concerned one tool, knowing what she was about to do, that is, to
deny their Correspondence, and that Love he knew she bore him: The difference
in their Countenances mostly appeared in this; that the Helvetian from his
Sanguine Complexion, was a little too much flushed from the eager Blood that so
furiously flew thither; while the Young Countess's upon this Interview, seemed
only to tinge her Cheeks with the Veins that rose to visit her Face, and to
Damask that Lilly-white Skin with a little Rosy Stian, to Paint with her Blood
instead of Wool and daubing; and by that acquired Beauty alone, she added a new
luster to her Native and Natural brightness.

But the Grave Matron, the Lady-Mother, soon interposed between these kind
Communications of their Souls (that seemed a transfusing with their Blood) by
stepping in between their Bodies; she was afraid they might commit Matrimony
with their Eyes, since her Rigid Divines had told her that Fornication and
Adultery could be committed with a look. And she had heard somewhat of the
Courtship of Italians, That could blow Kisses from one side of the Street to
the other; Communicate a thought with the twinkling of an Eye; send a Billet
doux with the lisp of a Lip, and tell a long Story on the tops of their
Fingers: This made her the more eager to make an End of the business, before it
was began to be Examined; she had learnt the Lesson at the last Lecture, Evil
Communication corrupts good Manners; and so without any more Ceremony,
accosts her Daughter. Here is a Strange Man, says she, Vicentina, that not only
pretends Love to you, but what is more strange! says you are as much in Love
with him! and what is strangest of all, shows Letters under your Hand for it
(as he pretends); but as you satisfied me, Daughter, before I came down with
you, so let the poor Gentleman know, that this is some Forgery and abuse put
upon him by some of the Debauched wild Fellows of the Town, and the naughty
Women, with which it abounds, that have no Grace of God before their Eyes; it is
pity such a Gentleman of so good a Presence, and Stranger too, should have such
tricks put upon him; but it is a such filthy Town, sye upon it!

The Young Lady (abounding with as much quickness of Wit, as the Old one did
with an hasty Passion) finding her self reduced to this pressing extremity,
either to offend and Exasperate a Mother already too much enraged, or else to
run a Man she loved the most of all men, into the greatest Confusion and
Despair: wisely chose rather to offend him for a little while, whom she thought
she could soonest please, than her Mother, whose fury if she had farther
provoked, she thought never to be appeased; and so made this dextrous Reply,
and well-contrived Discourse, with a Mien and Countenance made up with a well
compounded Temperament of a filial Duty and a Faithful Love, such as might
handsomely serve the Turn, and was adapted to the Time.

Madam, said she, I must always acknowledge your tender care in my Education;
and that I cannot make sufficient returns for that Motherly Affection you have
always shown me; and should I do any Act contrary to your good liking, much
less be guilty of downright Disobedience, I must needs be the vilest Creature
Living. And as for this Gentleman, with whom you challenge me to have had such
intimate Correspondence, as to send him the Letters here produced, I do declare
before him and you, (taking up one of those Drusilla had imitated her hand in)
that this is none of my writing; that some person has Counterfeited my Hand to
abuse both the Gentleman and my self; and as for this worthy Gentleman, (for so
his presence bespeaks him;) He is a Stranger to me, and with whom I never had
any Converse: it is true indeed, I have seen him often in the great Church,
Madam, when at my Devotions, and frequently seen him pass the Streets, without
being ever in his Company; nay, I have praised him, as well as heard him
Commended for a Comely Person (and the Gallant Stranger, I think may deserve so
much Commendation); but I hope, Madam, all this may be done, without any injury
to Modesty; much less be so maliciously interpreted, as to be made matter of
Love and Amor. If the Noble Foreigner (for I must give the Gallant Person,
though unknown, so much his due, that I think him of no mean Birth and Descent)
has made himself so unhappy as to be in Love with me, that am never like to be
his, and who am subject wholly to your Maternal disposal, it must be attributed
to his misfortune, and not to my fault; all that I can say to him is, that
perhaps he deserves a better Mistress to Crown his Affections, and that in his
own Country, where his Perfections being more known, are certainly more
Esteemed and valued.

She would have gone on, and perhaps in some further Panegyric: but the
Countess-Dowager began to be afraid of these fine words; and was glad her
Daughter disowned the Letters, and was willing she should break off with our
Hero, just where she had Complimented him back again into his own Country, and
where the Old Lady wished him with all her heart. And so was as officiously
ready to show the Stranger out of doors, faster than he came in.

Armadorus, that was got on so far in his Affair, in a strange Country to meet
with such an Embarrast Intriegue, was almost estranged from himself; and like
Strangers in an House where they were never before, knew hardly the way where
he came in, or by which way he was to get out; when the Young Lady's heart
began to ache, for the very Perplexity that his was in: and with as much Wit as
Good Humor, told her Mother, That she hoped she would look on it only as a
Specimen of that Good breeding she had bestowed upon her, and not in the least
an Indication of her Love and good liking to the unknown Stranger, if she
thought it was but handsome if her Ladyship showed him the Civilities that are
commonly due to Strangers; and which she thought even she her self might do
without any breach of Modesty, upon Condition he would cease all other
pretenses; and that without the Intimacy of Love and Affection; Pity and
Compassion required some Courtesy to be shown the Gentleman that had been so
basely Imposed upon, and Deluded. This made the Old Countess relent a little,
and make the Astonished Armadorus a cold Invitation to stay Dinner. But his
Stomach was full with the Breakfast they had given him: However this cunning
Discourse of Vicentina, gained that point, that the stay was prolonged; and
that the Mother's Eyes did not so exactly watch the Lovers: when Armadorus
perceiving some Emotions in the breast of Vicentina, (who had withdrawn her
self, either by Accident or Design, to the remotest part of the Room) eagerly
steps up to the Window where she stood, and with a submissive Voice, as well as
gesture, thus briefly and passionately Expresses himself. And is it true then,
Madam, that I am this Poor, Miserable, Deluded; and abused Person? Are none of
those dear Lines then your own; that I have hugged so long, as the Records of
my Happiness, Treasured as the Evidences of my Life? Ten thousand times more
dear to me than those of my Estate? Alas! wretched Armadorus, doubly wracked to
perish in the Port: Consider, Compassionate Madam, a Perishing, sinking Man; A
Shipwrack'd Stranger, beaten on your Shoars; and lend one helping hand to keep
the next Wave from washing him away: Though I may have been so miserably imposed
upon as to found my Happiness upon a malicious piece of Forgery of your
Letters; yet I am sure, I am not mistaken in your Ladyship, in your Person;
that is too pure to be Counterfeit; and the first sight I had of it, made too
deep an impression in my breast, that I should be deceived in its Idea.

If Vicentina's Heart was so soft before, you may be sure it was now melting
away at these tender expressions from a person she as tenderly Loved; her Eyes
trembled and twinkled like two little Stars, that were fixed on him, though they
moved in their own Orbs; her Lips quaver'd for an answer they were hardly able
to deliver, and her Tongue that would have spoke, falter'd; her Breasts heaved
and strugled with those sighs she so violently endeavored to suppress; her
heart failed her for having uttered so much already, as to make her Dear
Armadorus believe she had failed him.

But perceiving her Mother to be more regardless since the matter seemed to be
cleared now; or else casually gone out of the Room, she took Courage to make
this Ingenious Reply and Confession; Sir, You are indeed, as I have truly
confessed to my Mother, an utter Stranger to me: having never till now had any
Discourse with you; this you know to be true, as well as my self; and your
indiscretion (which pardon if I call it so, when perhaps it might be imputed to
the ardour of your Affection) having so rashly exposed those Letters to my
Mother's view, has put me into great pain how to Extricate my self and you from
that labyrinth of difficulties to which that rash adventure has exposed us to;
I cannot but confess that I have a great deal of esteem for your Person; and
were you not a Stranger to our Nation, it might bear the name of Love; but
alas! such is my misfortune, that I dare not call it by the right name; and for
those Letters you have produced, though I might really disown them, as I did,
they having not been Penned by me, at least the first; yet I must own I was not
altogether a stranger to their Penning; and what I Have said, and done, has been
both with a salvo to my Conscience and Reputation, as well as for your
Interest, and a further Correspondence.

The transported Youth could hardly contain himself, but bursting out into this
Extatick Expostulation; And am I then brought back from the Gulf of Despair,
to be plunged into an Abyss of Eternal Happiness? He would have dilated himself
into more Pathetick Exclamations, and turned all the Art of Rhetoric into
Ecphonesis and Hyperbole; but time cut him short, and put him upon the
Aposeiopesis; -- leaving her to Expound what he would have said had he not been
forced to this abrupt silence: but, Madam, added he (to begin where your
Ladyship ended) where may be this happy place, where I may have one hour of
your farther Conversation, or Correspondence? Is there no Grove, nor Grot, no
Wood, nor Covert, no quiet Retirement near your House, where I may have some
secret access to your Person? for though our Affections are no way Criminal; more
Innocent than those of our first Parents in Paradise; and that we need not so
much as a Fig-leaf to cover us; yet I Will venture through any dangers and
difficulties to bring my Affairs to that happy period, and prize that one
moment of my Life, more than all my Years that are past, or whole Ages that are
to come: The Young Lady, like Lovers that are loath to lose time; let him know,
that behind their Palace-Garden, (or just at the end of it) there was a little
place of no common access to which if he would repair such a Night, she would
be found there; in the mean time advising him to take the sooner leave to give
the less umbrage to the Mother, who by this time too was returned into the
Great-Hall; and seeing her Daughter as it were in some Discourse with the
Stranger, moving up toward them, -- Armadorus Addressed himself in this manner,
Madam, since it is my misfortune to be so treacherously imposed upon by some
abusive Villains, that designed maliciously to abuse your Daughter as well as
my self; I am resolved to make my utmost effort for the discovery of those
Execrable Authors, not so much for my own sake, as for the good Ladies that
suffers with me: It was indeed my hasty Ambition, raised by the excellencies of
this Ladies perfections, that made me so easily credit those Counterfeited
Impostors; my Credulity I now as much Condemn, as I do my Destiny, that has
brought me to this unhappy disappointment; I only wish this Fair Lady a Person
answerable to her Birth and deserts, and humbly take my leave of both.

The Old Countess glad to see the Affair so finely dashed, was as loath now to
part with the Youthful Helvetian; and could have wished her self almost
Unmarried for his sake: but the Young Hero, the better to take of all
suspicion, pretended the Post he was in, and his relation to the Public,
required his presence, and precluded him from those Civilities she intended
him; and so with a languishing Eye, and as sorrowful Heart, he made his
Obeisance to her that commanded it, with a Courteous though more negligent bow
to the Old Lady, and so left them: but far from those disconsolate thoughts
that he once thought he should have parted with; his whole mind, and all the
faculties of his Soul were ruminating upon the happy hour, and the place
wherein he was to have the Company of her, for whom he could have gone a
Pilgrimage over the Globe. The Evening being coming on, it being not long after
the last interview; the Gallant Armadorus (that never violated his promise to
any Man, you may be sure would less fail a Woman, and one to whom his very Soul
was devoted) set forth from the City where his Post was, toward the place where
his tender Heart was to be: a more agreeable encounter than the pointed Pike,
or Steeled Javelin; and the soft Lips of his beloved Lady made him March more
contenredly than he was wont against the Roaring Mouth of a Cannon: Though Pallas
and Bellona, with our Hero, had their Charms too, as well as the finest Juno,
or fairest Venus of them all; but here in his Adored Mistress he thought them
all met, all that was Deity, all that was Divine.

It was about the dusk of a Ruddy Evening, that promised a fair Day, when the
sinking Sun had fringed the neighboring Clouds with a glorious Reflection,
that he rid-out from the Renowned City, toward the sweet place of his Amorous
Rendezvous; and his Journey being Westward, had the glaring beams of that
little glimmering Light that was left, reflected on his Face; this he looked on
as a good Omen and Presage to his future Successes, of which he was as
Ambitious, as that Persian that obtained a Crown by first seeing the Sun to
rise; and so indeed might well Worship it: all that was bright, all that was
glorious to him, was to meet him amidst the very Shades of Night; and which
like a Phospherus could shine best even through the thickest Darkness.

All things were hushed, and Nature in repose, naught but these watchful Lovers
was awake; the very Birds of Night were percht and fast asleep, forgetful of
their time to roam abroad? -- Forgive, Drusilla, that we thee forget, thou
careful, faithful Creature to them both, and 'twas for both of them you Centry
stood, you with them waked for both. -- Whilst in this quiet season of still
Night, the lovely Armadorus did arrive, so still it was, they heard his Horses
hoofs that at a distant did rebound and shook the trembling Earth, and
Vicentina's sympathizing Heart.

The gay Helvetian, led by Love, (as blind as the little god is said to be)
proved a good Guide and Guardian Angel, bringing him directly to the
Postern-gate of that Garden, where they had appointed to meet: Armadorus
approaching, could distinguish even the soft whisperings that past between
Drusilla and his dearest Mistress from the easy repercussions that were made on
so free and open an Air; and found his heart affected with a more than ordinary
transport at so joyful an approach; no sooner did he alight at that Gate of his
Paradise, where there was no Angel, no Flaming Cherub placed to drive him off,
but invite him in; no sooner did he make a sign of Knocking, and a soft Whisper
through the Keyhole, but Drusilla was ready to let into the Arms of her
Mistress, the Noble Youth, whom she knew to be Master of her Heart: Armadorus,
after his awful Respects paid, with the License of a Lover, took the liberty to
take the fair Vicentina by the Hand, and conducting her to a soft Bank of
Mossy-grass, and the most convenient place for them to seat themselves on at
such a distance from the finer Walks of the House, where they might not be
heard, much less seen; The Young Lady, with the liberty that one might well be
allowed to take that loved so well, began to chide more lovingly, than angrily,
his rash discovery of those Letters to the Lady- Dowager, enough to have undone
them both for ever, had she not so shuffl'd the Cards, as to get a good
after-game at last. Armadorus had nothing to urge in his Defense, but his
Passion for her self alone, that transported his Resentment beyond his Reason;
and hoped that since he was so willing and ready to bear her kind Rebukes; she
would as kindly, and as easily forgive his Transgression, into which the
blindness of his Love and Passion had caused him to fall; and that now, since
it was their happiness, as to be able to concert Matters together more freely;
they would be capacitated to manage them the better for the future. They were
both agreed (you may be sure) to be very indulgent to one another, and neither
could ask the least modest Request, which, either for his part was not as ready
to grant; so this Pardon was granted as soon as asked.

Armadorus pressing of her fair hand, could not but imprint on her Cherry Lips
an eager Kiss; which she suffered rather to be stolen then allowed, only
perhaps that it might seem the sweeter: The Starry Sky, with the Luster their
own brightness and beauty brought with it, afforded them Light enough to
discover one another Pefections; and thus sat these embracing Lovers
repeating their past Adventures with a pleasantry that sweetened the Discourse
from the difficulties they had past; and contriving how to prevent all Dangers;
Disturbances, and Interruptions for the future. Whilst Drusilla had now changed
her Post, and was keeping of Watch and Ward near the great Door of the Garden
that came out from the Castle of Ogliano; and as vigilantly proud of her
Office, as the Centry-Goose that saved the Capitol.

Thus sat the Lovers safe, claspt in each other Arms, whilst their very Souls
seemed to sympathise with the motions of the Body; shrunk up, and hugged
themselves in silent Joy to find themselves blessed with so much success, and so
near the Consummation of their perfect bliss. Vicentina, from the silence of
the Night, and the solitude of the Place, could not but recollect the
foreboding Dream she had the Morning before her Mother hurried her away; and at
length repeated it to her Dearest Armadorus, who pleased with the beginning of
it, dissatisfied with the end, and surprised at the whole, comforted her in
these words, -- Had it not been, Dearest Vicentina, the designs of our Fates
and Destinies (though through many Difficulties, by which they only endear
their Blessings) to make us at last happy, they had never permitted us those
happy Minutes we now enjoy. It Is a Maxim among the blindest Heathens, and
taught by Christians too in their Schools, that their Fate, or our Providence,
never ordered any thing in vain. Those Stars that we see there twinkling above
us, are not only Witnesses, and the only too, of our unfeigned Loves; but the
Archives and Records, where the future Events of it, and our Fate is writ. You
I invoke, (you fixed ones, I mean) whether our Destinies be not as unmovable as
your selves; therefore do not, dearest Lady, distract your self with dreadful
Apprehensions from those Bugbear Dreams that terrify, or hug your self with
those that flatter: They are only the imaginary visionary Excursions of
licentious Thoughts when all Sense and Reason is locked up. And those fantastic
Seers of old, that fondly fancied they saw such Visions in their Dreams, the
wiser Critics in our latter Age, have expounded it, That they only dreamt they
saw such Visions: Those and the Oracles ceased long since together, and we have
had no Revelations since those of St. John. The Isle of Old Albion (thanks be
the Stars) lies far off from that of Patmos; and as for Conjuringbooks, they
are only believed by Blockheads in a Country Fair, where the Devil holds the
Candle, while the Fools throw the Dice. -- And be assured, That the Iron Book
of Fate is not so easily turned over as those foolish ones of Fortune; and by
the former it is decreed, That you, Madam, must be mine, and that Armadorus is
reserved for nobody but Vincentina.

The young Lady that was a little dejected with silly apprehensions, liked
these comfortable Consolations very well; but being Religiously Educated by the
Godly Mother, and so virtuously bred, thought the discourse a little loosely
laid out upon so Sacred a Subject as Providence; but then she considered the
Young Gallant again as a Soldier, and unconfined by those narrow notions of
Mystical Divines, (whose business is only to be Polemical in Disputes, (that
is) a Combat of words) while Military Men whose Salvations generally lie with
them in their Hands or their Heels, never trouble themselves with Metaphysics,
or any Abstracts but those from good Liquors; and whose best Divinity, next to
a Mistress, is always found in a Bottle or a Glass of brisk Wine; besides the
notions of Irreversible Fate and Eternal Decree, as they sounded well in her
Ears since that secured her happiness; so it did not come so strangely from a
Soldier of Fortune; for Predestination, though some malicious and Popish
Arminians may make it a Mohammedan Principle, will make a Christian Fight like a
Turk, and is the most serviceable Doctrine in any Camp or Engagement; and glad
was the Young Lady she could plead unavoidable necessity for Inevitable
Matrimony. This she knew would make the Pious Mother more cautious how she
opposed Destiny, or her being Predestined for her dear Armadorus.

These Rovings, and Rallying discourses, while time and the Night lay upon
their Hands, helped them on to pass both away, intermixing with those more
serious and sullen observations, some pleasant Sallies of Love and Amor: But
Drusilla coming up from the House-side, to inform them that she heard the Cocks
begin to clap their Wings, and were just going to Crow, they thought it time to
fall to their business; looking up too to the Skies, and perceiving a Dawning
Azure to break out from behind the Sable Curtain of the Night, which was just a
drawing, and which hasted them to these necessary Resolves, 1. That their
meetings should be more frequent. 2. That Vicentina should without the Old
Countess's leave now come again to her City-Mansion: and so Sealing their
agreement with a Kiss more soster than Wax, soon parted, the one to his dark
Ramble, -- And the other to her dainty Bed.

And a dark Ramble indeed did it prove to the distressed stranger: For instead
of mounting his Pegasus at his return as easily as when he first set out, he
found the wanton Beast had broke his Bridle, and took his. Airy flight over
Hedges and Ditches; these were great rubs in a Stranger's way in a strange
Country; Sed quid non Cogit Amor; after he must, through Wind and Weather, Wet
and Rain; and though Love is so kindly described by flattering Poets, to carry
his Torch and Flambeaux about him, it favored him here no more than an Ignis
Fatuus; for like a Will with a Whisp it led him only through Bogs and Ditches;
and had the poor Helvitian been put in this distressed condition (even in his
own Country) it had infallibly cost him his Neck over some horrid Precipices of
their Mountainous Alps; but Fate had reserved him, as he Prophesied before, for
better Fortune; and to have more soft and easy falls into the Marriage Bed, and
the longing-Arms of his admired Mistress; for though the day was not dawned
enough when he fell into this distress, to give him a distant prospect of his
strayed Beast; yet the Sky clearing by that approaching Light, which the rising
Sun drove before him upon their Horison from the adjacent Hemisphere, gave the
straggling Helvetian the happiness to see his Palfrey sweetly grazing in a fat
Pasture some few Fields off: These were sad disasters Love led him into; but he
had done much formerly for Honor, and now would do more for Love; the Hedges
he was to pass, were well lined, not with Musketeers, but Pike-men, thick
Briars and Thorns; but through these he brake with a Resolution, that showed
that those that dare venture their Lives, will never value their finest
Clothes, nor the fairest Skin; which had the relenting Vicentina known to have
suffered the least Scratch, it would have given her a deeper wound. But Heroes
never value light hurts! Glad he was that the Man had got his Mare or Horse
again; which bestriding with a thundering Rebuke, and girding him with a
Revengeful Spur, sprang furiously over the first Mound or Fence into the
Neighboring Highway, where being utterly unacquainted with the Roads,
erroneously rid the direct contrary; and was almost come again to the Gate of
that Enchanted Castle that detained his distressed Damosel; loath he was to be
discovered to have been thereabouts, and to fall into the Hands of any of the
Guards or Yeomanry of the Countess-Dowager, who by this time were straggling out
to their several Posts and Stations; but by good Fortune ere he came within
their Ken, an honest Country Peasant, unknowing as well as incapable to dive
into Love-Intrigues, had innocently as well as civilly put the straggling
stranger in the right way, which brought him a little out of the perplexed
Labyrinth of his Country affairs, to ruminate a little on them in the City with
more Repose.

It was the Young Countess's sole concern now, how to come up to the Capital
City of that Province, to concert Matters according to agreement with her Dear
Armadorus: To come up with the Mother's Privity, looked like an Insuperable
difficulty; and to steal away clandestinely, would raise in her the greater
Jealousy; so that this was a task that required a serious Consultation between
Drusilla and her self; but so pregnant is the Wit of Woman, that it is seldom
at a loss for Contrivances: Her faithful Drusilla, that never failed her, had
found out this Expedent; To propose to the Lady-mother Her readiness to Embrace
those Proposals made her by the Young Signior Ricco (a Person for whom the Old
Countess had a great deal of Inclination, both for his Personal qualities as
well as his Wealth and Estate); And that it was necessary to bring Matters
sooner to a Conclusion, that the Young Lady should reside some time in the
City, where the Young Gentleman was arrived, till all things were settled to
both their Satisfaction, and ready for Consummation; this Project of Drusilla's
being well laid, was liked as well by Vicentina; and so both dressing it up in
the best manner they could, offered it to the consideration of the
Countess-Dowager: The good Old Lady was ready to melt into Tears at this
dutiful compliance of her dear Daughter; Prophesied of nothing but Showers of
Blessings, the Dew of Heaven to descend upon her Head; and so gave her her own
Benediction into the bargain, and began to Expound in a long Paragraph upon the
Fifth Commandment.

The result of it was, That the Young Countess was to be Conducted the next
Morning in her Coach, well attended, to the City, to reside there in a fair
Mansion House, the residence formerly of the Old Countess of Albania, and to
what the Young Countess after the Mother's decease was Heir apparent. Vicentina
could hardly Sleep that Night, you may imagine, for ruminating on the Blessed
arrival of the next Morning. All her Dreams (if she had time to slumber into
any) were all of happy Lovers here above, and the blessed abodes, and Elysian
shades below: The next rising Sun, which could not prevent her from being up
first, found her dressed and apparelled for her Journey; and with his kind Beams
saluted her to make it look more auspicious; which (after a little warm
Collations of Caudles and Sack-posset, which the Old Countess could excellently
well prepare) she soon undertook, parting from her tender Mother with an Heavy
Countenance, and as light an Heart, letting her know as her last words at
departure, (which put the Lady-Dowager into a joyful fit of Tears and Ecstasy)
that she hoped soon to see her self up to their City-habitation, to see her
joined in that Holy Matrimony she intended for her; and so left the good Old
Lady in the Arms of her Maids, ready to melt away for Joy.

It is a Latin Aphorism well known and received, That he that knows not to
Dissemble, knows as little how to Rule; and this Maxim holds as good in Lovers
most Universal Empire, where that artful Disimulation subverts sufficiently the
doting Project of the Salick Law; And Women, Women only truly know how to
Reign. The deceived Lady- Dowager being so dexterously managed, it was now the
Young One's task, with her Trusty Drusilla, how to carry the Knife between the
Apple and Paring, in so public a Town where every bodies Eyes were upon her;
and how she should carry her self to her Mother's Favorite, Signior Ricco,
without disgusting Armadorus, her Dearest Intimado; and this the Cunning
Vicentina, with her Crafty Drusilla, did also most effectually accomplish: For
receiving the former with much Civility and Respects, tho with more Coldness
and Indifferency, his Visits were more publicly admitted, so that he might
pass for the only Person from whom she admitted Addresses of that kind, that
might be called Courtship; while Armadorus's Entertainments were more
privately, more kindly received, with a sort of warmth of Affection that
sufficiently assured him he had no great reason to fear the most Potent and
Richest Rival. When in Conversation with those of her own Sex, she was wont to
be suddenly seized with thoughtful Sullenness, and so with the usual raillery
taxt with Love by her merry Companions, to be sure she would return some
negligent or contemptuous Answer to any Interrogatories, or pleasant Queries,
put her about her Hero, the Helvetian; That Je ne scai quoy; that, What do ye
call him? The Outlandish-man, and the like; and then turn her whole Rhetoric
into Praises and Panegyricks upon the Accomplishments and Qualifications of
Signior Ricco; but her Armadorus at the next Encounter was to know how
cunningly her Tongue had given her Heart the lie; nay, so well had she ordered
her Affairs, that while she was entertaining in one Room her Mother's
Favorite, she would place her own in the next, and make him privy to all that
past. This Ambidextrous Dealing (which nothing but the fairness of the Sex can
excuse from foul play) did she continue for some considerable time, till the
Countess- Dowager, whether out of distrustful Jealousy, or affectionate Desire
to see her hopeful Daughter, sent for her again into the Country, with a
Resolution, as 'twas thought, there to complete what she supposed had been so
long in Agitation, her Daughter's Marriage with the Gentleman she had designed
for her, and whom her Daughter seemed to have chosen for her self at her
parting. This message made the Young Lovers relapse again into their former
misfortunes, and resolve to dally no longer with their Love, but to crown all
their Hopes and Tears with Fruition and Enjoyment; and so having that Evening
settled their Correspondency, which was to be conveyed to one another by the
Young Lad of the Lady Dowagers, who brought that sweet B^llet-doux to Armadorus
when he first set out to make his Visit; the lovely Vicentina returned the next
Morning to the Old Countess, and her Country Confinement; in which Melancholy
Retreat she could not live long, and therefore began to think how to bring
things to a Conclusion. The Old Lady's fits of Jealousies and Fears began to
return, and the Reverend Priest was again set over her for a Guide and
Instructor, which made him almost her constant Companion. The Lady Vicentina
did not like these Long-Robe-men, tho for the most part they have many good
Qualities to recommend them to Ladies, such as the Innocence of their Lives and
Conversations; the Severities and Mortifications they suffer by their hard
Labors; and Signior Castrado being in a Spiritual Sense an Eunuch, could never
be supposed to make use of any Weapon that was Carnal; but whatsoever slips and
backslidings Saints or Sanctified Men may fall into, the Young Ladies Virtue
was able to stand the test, and her Faith was engaged; and so finding her self
hard pressed in her Amors, she was fully resolved upon Matrimony; and according
to what was concerted with Armadorus at their parting, writes him these
Important Lines, and sends them by the Little Mercury, the young Livery-Lad,
whom from a Footboy they advanced to be the Post-boy.

Dearest Armadorus,
IT IS time, after all the Obstacles we have met with in our Innocent Loves, to
consummate them in that Holy State of Matrimony to which we we have so long
courted each other, and in which our last Resolves at our parting did seem to
end; but my Mothers Vigilance is such, that she has set again over me that
Industrious Priest, Signior Castrado, who is as watchful over me, as any Pastor
over his Flock, that would not suffer one Sheep to go astray: Therefore my
design is to remove further Jealousy, and to crave my Lady Mothers leave to go
to a little Country-Seat of my own, that lies toward the Remotest Part of the
Isle toward the South-West; and do you at the same time give out, that you are
gone a Journey toward the North-East; and moving by these two contrary Points,
my Jealous Mother may conceive we can never come together: My setting forth
will be about the 15th Instant, and you know how soon, and which way to follow;
my Spiritual Guide, I am afraid, will make but a weak Guardian, should you
overtake us. If you write any Answer, subscribe no Name, lest it fall into my
Mothers hand; and have always an assurance of the Faith and Affection of

Your Vicentina.


Armadorus upon the receipt of this (you may be sure) was ready to follow the
Instructions that were sent, when they were such easy Orders to obey; not those
that he was wont to receive, to Attack an Enemy in the Trenches, to march
against the Mouth of a Cannon, or to Storm a Castle; but only the easy Commands
from a Mistress, to commit Matrimony, to enter the Fort he had already won; and
therefore presently sat down like a Champion, and writ his fair Challenger
this Heroic Answer.

Most Adored Mistress,
HAD your Commands been the most difficult Exploit that ever Mortal was engaged
in; Had you ordered me to have singly attacked an Army, or engaged an whole
Fleet in a Cock-Boat; I could have gone through all that Fire and Water to have
served you, tho I had been sure of being sacrificed for your sake. For, alas,
what is one single Life, tho laid down at the Feet of so Meritorious a Lady
that deserves to have a thousand sacrificed to her Virtues, her Excellencies,
and Perfections? But when your Orders are only, that I must dye no other Death
but in your Arms; the only danger is, lest I dye with transport before I come
to those dear Embraces; do not in the least doubt, Madam, of my readiness to
attend your Person according to Directions; and for that Eastern Expedition,
it is known here already, that I am about to undertake it; my Baggage, Equipage,
Personage, all ready to part, but with this Consolation (Dearest Vicentina)
that it is only the better to attend your Person, for which I am always ready to
part with my Life, and for the sake of which I am ready to rescue you even from
the Hands of all your Mothers Guards, and pull you out of the Arms of all the
Carlo's, Ricco's, Castrato's, or Castruccio' s, that can encompass you: And so
farewell most adored Mistress, till we meet for ever, and inseparably.

Isca Danmoniorum 6. Calendar. Julii. Yours, X.


This Cannonading Language and Bombardous Style, tho it might come agreeable
enough from a Soldier that is supposed to Thunder, especially when Lightning,
or his bright Mistress is before his eyes; Yet this was not Armadorus's way of
writing or Discourse; which was always soft and sweet, easy and good-humored,
and of a clean contrary Air; but here was the Bombast wisely affected by him,
for he considered the caution his Lady had given him, lest the Answer from him
should by misfortune fall into her Mothers hand; this he thought would spoil
the Consummating Journey, upon which they were ready to set out; so that if the
Old Lady should by mishap meet with this, Vicentina's Wit and Invention would
soon put it off for a Banter; and 'twas well for both that it was so managed;
for the Countess-Dowager finding the Lad wanting, had watched his return, and
on his first unlighting took him into her Custody, and carried him into a
private Room; where she had laid up for him an Instrument of Correction, and
threatening also to lay it on severely, if he did not Confess his business, and
where he had been; and so with the Terror of it extorted from the Boy, that he
had both carried and brought back a Letter, the first given him by Drusilla,
and the last directed to Madam Vicentina.

You may be sure the Old Countess took care to possess her self of it; and to
send immediately to her Daughter Vicentina for the clearing this affair, she
had opened the Letter, and read it over and over; and being of a pregnant
Apprehension, she thought this Rant and Rhodomontado not so agreeable with the
Language of Armadorus, whom she had most Reason to distrust; but seeing her
Daughter coming, she composed her Countenance, and confined her Thoughts;
delivering the Letter, with these words to -- Vicentina.

Most unfortunate Child! must my Heart never be at rest for you? must I be
always thus Tormented, Alarmed, Afflicted, with new matters for fear and
Jealousy? See here a new set of Addresses, so impudently offered you, as if you
were going to Church to be Instantly Married: This must come from your old
Suitor Armadorus, that I thought had been long since laid aside; or else some
New Hectoring Spark, that has hopes of carrying you by Blusterings and
Bravadoes; yet his Letter seems to Answer one of yours that went before; and I
have brought the Boy to Confess that Drusilla delivered him a Paper, Sealed and
Directed to the Gentleman that delivered him this.

The Young Countess, though a little startled at the Adventure; yet upon perusal
of the Letter, soon saw she had room enough left to evade: And boldly told her
Mother that it was nothing but a mere piece of Banter and Roguery: That the
Letter Drusilla had sent by the Boy, was about common business to a Tradesman;
and that her Maid was ready to vouch the same to the Boy's Face, which
accordingly being called, Drusilla did (as well she might); for Armadorus's
Letter her Mistress left with her to send, she had enclosed in that to a
Friendly Citizen to be Communicated as directed; and that which the Boy
Received, was from a strange hand, and person that he could only say was a
Gentleman by his looks and behavior: so the unlucky Lad was left at stake; and
being too young to make discoveries, could not unriddle the Plot he was like to
suffer for; for the Old Lady a little better pleased with her Daughter upon the
presumption that she had been banter'd and abused, turned all her Resentment
upon the Innocent Lad, for Receiving of Letters from unknown Gentlemen for his
Young Mistress; and that he might the better remember his fault for the future,
exercised the Rod she had at hand prepared for him, with a suitable severity;
whilst the Unconscionable Craftiness of Vicentina that was present, made her
importune her Mother, that for her sake too, she would give him a little more
liberal Chastisement; though at the same time she stopped his mouth and crying,
with a piece of Gold, that he might Confess no further; but she had Craftily
brought her Affairs now to a near Conclusion, and so thought she might have no
more occasion for little Mercurys and Emissarys.

The time was now Approaching that was fixed for her Western Journey; for which
she had obtained leave of her Lady Mother, but with this limited Condition,
that it must be in the Company and Custody of Signior Castrado, the Old
Countesses Confident and Confessor: Though the Young Lady as little liked this
Black-Guard, as she was much Enamored of the Red-Coat: Yet Cedunt Arma togae,
that is to say, The Pulpit-Drum, strikes Soldiers Dumb. Yet was she forced to
give way to it, and with a submissive Courtesy to thank her Mother for taking
care she should be so well attended; and accordingly on the appointed day, with
Drusilla her faithful Confident, and the forward Priest her Mothers special
Favorite, with a Manservant, set forward on this Sanctisied Expedition, which
though it seemed outwardly only a visiting one of her Patrimonial Estates, and
the supervising her Affairs, yet ended at last in the Ceremonies of the Church,
and the happy State of Holy Matrimony; as by the sequel you will soon see.

While they were thus recreating themselves on the Road, she being as merry as
the Father-Confessor was musing and reserved; (for Priests desire to seem
Contemplative, to pass the better for Scholastic) the Young Lady trumpt up
upon Singnior Castrado a pleasant sort of a Question, but what quickly raised
his Spleen, (for Scholars from their Sedentary and Studious Lives, are apt to
be very Hypochondraical) But what, says the merry Vicentina, what should we do
(Reverend Doctor), should my fine Spark, the brisk Helvetian, that Swiss that
you used so to swagger at, now follow and overtake us? This put the Seraphick
Clergyman out of his moody dumps, into a Military posture of Defense; for he
verily believed the Enemy to be afar off; And with a Magisterial look and
style, let her Ladyship know, that such suggestions savoured somewhat of some
Love and Affection that she still retained for him: But whatever should happen,
he was resolved to discharge his Duty to her Mother, and execute to the
uttermost that trust she had reposed in him: And that if the Helvetian should
have laid any design of surprising them, he would to the uttermost resist him,
Vi and Armis, raise the Posse Comitatus; and to let her know that the Church
could be Militant, he himself would hand to hand attack the Helvetian; and show
her such proofs of his Prowess and Manhood, that she should soon see that the
Switzers were not the only Fighting-Men in the World, whatever noise they might
seem to make in it.

Vicentina seeing her Guide and Guardian in such a formidable Physiognomy, and
breathing nothing but War and Defiance, began to divert their Discourse to
subjects less provoking, and more agreeable; though at the same time she could
not but smile at the Heroic Valor of her Fighting Divine, which she fancied a
Fit that would hold no longer than the Foe was at a distance, and out of sight;
and so they jogged on till they came to their Inn, and Evening-Quarters, where
no sooner were they sat down to refresh themselves, but enters the brisk and
airy Armadorus, with a Port and Mien as pleasing to his Vicentina, as it was
terrifying to the Canonical Courage of her Guardian Divine, that but just
before had thundered out such defiance; but now his heart failed him, and was
got below his Girdle; and tho the Courteous Armadorus saluted him kindly, he
was ready to piss in his Boots, which he did not stay to pull off, but like the
Night-Bird that had seized some prey which she dropped at the sight of the Nobler
Hawk, and makes have away; so was the flight of this Renowned and most Reverend
Hero; Post he rid, but backward, leaving his comely Charge at the mercy of that
Friendly Foe, that certainly never came to do her much hurt; and the Out-guards
being thus fled, or defeated, the Castle was ready for Capitulation; and the
Articles of surrender being soon agreed on, they were solemnly sealed and
ratified the next Morning, in the adjacent Parish Church; and the Victorious
Helvetian, to the Crowning of all his Conquests, took possession of the
Fortress he had Besieged so long, that very Night.

In short, the Gallant Armadorus, and the Comely Vicentina were Wedded, and
Bedded, and (as they thought) to their Eternal Content and Happiness: The joys
they conceived, to find themselves approaching those mutual Embraces that sweet
Hymen has always in store for Innocent Lovers in their Marriage Bed, did almost
anticipate those enjoyments they were to find in it. The Virtuous Vicentina,
unknowing of those joys she was so sensibly to feel, trembled at the approach
of the Nuptial-Bed, with a sort of eager Fear, that seemed to edge her forward,
while still afraid; somewhat she knew was to be done, that looked like dying;
and the most pleasant Death will always carry some terror with it to a tender
Maid; and though one Foot was entered the Lists, the other made a stand, to
consider with her self whether she was to dye indeed; for her Ingenuity had led
her often to read the best Histories of Romance; where those Immortal Pleasures
are so feelingly Recorded, that she could not but be sensibly touched at what
she was about to do: she had seen there how their eager languishments were
described to the Life, their Eyes lifted up, as if they were ready to be
closed; their laboring Breasts, and their panting Breath, as on the point to
expire: these were Terrors enough to have palled the Courage of any Amazon, or
the Stoutest of the Female Sex, much more the Young Countess's that had been so
carefully Educated, as to know none of these things, but only by Reading and
Contemplation: There was no dispute here between Honor and Love, that made
once the One Boot to go on, and the other off; but Love here, and Honor both,
agreed to pull off both Stockings; and she yielding at last to the
Importunities and Encouragements of those about her; and considering also, tho
she was soon to Dye, that there was as great hopes of as sudden a Resurrection,
she entered at last the lists boldly, looking about for that Gallant Man, by
whose Victorious Sword she was but now so much afraid to fall.

On the other hand the Noble Armadorus had no such sensible disturbance, and
troublesome Emotions; he had made many a Campaign, and star'd all sorts of
Deaths in the Face; all that moved him, was Transport; and all that troubled
him, was Delay; for no sooner did he hear that his Fair Foe expected him, and
was ready to give him Battle, or sustain his shock and Charge, but he
immediately Marched to the Field with his wonted Bravery, only worthy of the
Noble Armadorus; and both Combatants being undrest, to show they had neither
false Armor on, but were to Fight it out fairly upon pure Flesh and Blood; and
this being a sort of Duel, best to be decided in the dark; The Discourse is
best closed with the putting out the Lights, and the drawing of the Curtain.

Modesty here obliges us to make a break, -- and leave the defects of these
fragments, to be supplied by those Lovers of either Sex, that have been so
engaged, or gathered an Idea of it from the Learned Works of Petronius, and
Cleopatra.

Thus these Gallant Lovers were at last engaged, and past the tedious Night
with greater toil; but as some are said to make a toil of a pleasure, (the
reverse of the Aphorism here was truly verified, and) this might be called the
Pleasure of a toil. The Morning-Sun saluted them both, locked in each others
Arms, and made them look like Duellists after closing, struggling on the ground
for Victory. The lovely Countess had a new luster added to her Natural
Complexion from the warmth of the Engagement; and the brisk Helvetian was more
ruddy with the heat of the Combat; and under such a doubtful Victory, they
seemed both to blush, for being both so foiled; but with the Sun they rose from
their Beds, to recruit and refresh themselves by the beams of it, as if they
were to renew the Fight at another meeting with greater Vigor: And tho the
Bridal-Solemnity, from the homeliness of a Country place, did not set forth
sufficiently the Gallantry of such Noble Personages; yet did their Presence and
Mien make as gallant a show, that was able even to turn a Cottage into a Court;
Consorts of Music indeed they wanted, Songs and Epithalamiums, Balls and
Dances; but tho the Country-Crowders played, and Selinger's Round went about;
this looked more like a Whitehall-Wedding, than a Winchester, or Westminster
one; for the Bride and Bridegroom, like a King and Queen, made all the figure.
The honest Parish Priest that assisted at the Ceremonies of the Church, was
present also to those of the Nuptial Bed: and looked as big as a Bishop, after
the Marrying of a Countess, and a Couple of such transcendent Quality; and
Mistress Abigail, now the Lady Vicaress, was the only person that could presume
the next Morning to send the Sack-Posset: but while this small Caudle is
tiffing with the Parson and his Wife the best of the Parish; it will be time to
relate what became of the Guardian Priest, that fled for the same; and left all
his Goods and Chattels to him that is now Lord of the Manor.

Neither Vicentina's Invitation, nor Armadorus's Civil Deportment to him (as we
told you) could retrieve his Abdicated Courage; but he fled like a Wolf when
the bleating Lamb is taken from between his Jaws: sor certain it is, that the
Fair Shepherdess Vicentina, took only Armadorus for her true Shepherd, whatever
this other Pastor might appear, or pretend to; and never was purer Love ever
known in Arcadia; but as Isgrim, when the prey is gone, will often look back and
Grin for the Purchase he had lost, and for fear of the Pursuer; so did this
Reverend Rhodomontado, when routed only with the fight of the Enemy, make haste
away with houlings as he went, making his plaints to the regardless Rusticks,
and unrelenting Stones; never Stopping till he came to a Water, over which he
was to Ferry, which yet could put no Stop to his furious flight or Panick Fear.

For no sooner was he got into the Boat, and putting off to the other Bank, but
he charged the Ferry men, whatever they did, to let no spark in a Red, or Blue
Coat, or any Coat, but a Black Coat, and that they were sure was no Soldier or
Officer, to pass the Ferry, till they might think that he was past being
overtaken (Love has Wings, and so has fear); for with that he flies as fast
from his Andromede, as swift as Perseus did to her deliverance; though I think
his Excellencies Palfrey did not put in for a Pegasus too: I am sure the lovely
Armadorus was with them looked upon as the Monster; and indeed by this time I
must confess he had devoured and quite eaten up the Maid; though I think the
Woman remained as sound as a Bell, which is not presently cras'd by the first
Peal of the Clapper; and to see such a Venus tied to a Rock, 'twould make a
Mars to Foam and tempt him too, to come out of the Sea, as well as the Goddess.

But by this time we may suppose, the Champion-Chaplain arrived; and Alarming
the Castle of Ogliano, the Old Countess was she that was most concerned, and
seeing her Chaplain enter with such haste in his Heels, and disorder in his
Face, and no Guard, no Lady; was ready to fall down in fits before her
Domestic Divine could deliver the woeful tidings of their sad Misfortune; which
as soon as the Reverend Guardian had got breath enough to impart, and which the
Countess had not patience enough to hear out; for as he was breathless almost,
and exclaming, The Switze^, Madam; The Swiss, The Helvetian! the Old Lady took
him up; and what? Him have you left with my Daughter? O Coward! O Perfidious!
Out from my sight, return to your Post, take my Guards; raise the Posse, and
bring me Vicentina again, or never more expect to see my Face. Signior Castrado
did not expect this sort of Reception; but rather Thanks for his quick and
speedy Information; and for going back to engage with Switzer^, he thought it
might prove harder service then the cutting down of a Sunday-Pudding; but since
his Patroness had imposed this severe penance upon him, he, to merit again her
favor assured her, he would venture his Life and Fortune to redeem the Lady;
and so rid back like Orlando Furioso to find out the fair Angelica. And what
did a little encourage him with a resolution to look after her, was, That
returning by the same Ferry he had so fearfully past over; the Watermen
assured him upon his Importunate Enquiry, that no such Soldier-like-man had
pursued him; which put a little more mettle into the Moody-man, and made him
think the Foe not so fearful and formidable; and so boldly approaches the
Mansion House where he had left the Lady, and Imperiously delivers to the
Courteous Armadorus this Lordly Message.

Sir, My Commands are, (and what I must see executed) from the noble Lady, and
incomparable Paragon, the Lady-Dowager, Countess of Albania, my most honored
and admired Patroness, and the present Consort to the Noble Lord of Ogliano,
That you deliver to my Hands the Young Countess of Albania, the Lady Vicentina
by name, to be by me re-convey'd to the Castle of Ogliano aforesaid, or else to
suffer your self to be proceeded against with a Noli prosequi, Soire facias,
Capias ut legatum, Ne exeas Regnum; or else, Sir, we shall attack you with a
Writ de Homine vel Virgin replegi and; and this, Sir, you are to do without
any Deliberation, Procrastination, Examination, Determination, or Defalcation
whatsoever.

The Young Armadorus, though a Scholar bred, yet being not so perfect in the
Country-Stile, did not so well understand this barbarous banter, but smiling at
the furious Phyz of the incensed Bravado, mildly asked, What the meaning was of
all this Thundering Dialect? and being informed that it was an Order he brought
from the Countess-Dowager, to deliver her Daughter to be by him brought back to
her Mother, -- With a Courteous smile replied, -- He was sorry that her Mothers
Chaplain did with such precipitous haste desert them, having not in the least
dealt uncivilly with him; and designed him no other hurt but a piece of Gold or
so, and a pair of Fringed Gloves by the by, for a cast of his O^fice; but if
she (...) with him now, he was obliged to ^^^nd her Person when she went, both
sor the affection that he bore the young Lady, and the filial Duty he was
always ready to show the Old Countess, whose Blessing he was coming to ask with
the Lady Vicentina, his dear Spouse, as soon as possible; and so taking her by
the Hand, they saluted each other in confirmation of all that was said. But as
hot as the High Priest was before, yet this soft and civil answer put him all
into a cold Sweat: He found the business done and past remedy; Gold and Gloves
gone too; and to bring him out of his brown study, they gave the musing or
amused Gentleman, a Cup of the Country-Caudle that was yet left warm after
Breakfast; and with that the astonished Vicar began to recover; and since all
was past Redress, to be pretty good Company; promising what mediation lay in
his power, he would make use of for moderating, the Old Countess's Resentment,
and restore them to her favor; Thus ended the great contest between the Lover,
the Lady, and the Gnardian; and having recreated themselves some few days with
what Diversions the Country thereabouts could afford them, they began to
bethink themselves how to make their Peace at home; which they did not so much
doubt of compassing, since things that are irretrieveable, though never so much
opposed, are commonly compli'd withal when past remedy; and therefore they
began to think of strengthening their Interest by Applications from all sides;
and so courteously thanked the Reverend Signior Castrado, for his kind
Overture; assuring him, that if he would please at his return to convey with
him a Line from himself, and his Lady, to the Lady-Mother, they had that
confidence in him, that they could entrust him with an affair of that nature;
and so accordingly both prepared their several Epistles.

The Countess Vicentina, to the Countess-Dowager of Albania.
Honored Madam,
SInce the Powers above direct all our Destinies below, and this an
acknowledged Principle by all ages, long before we came to profess our
Christianity; and was then owned and professed by the Apostles and Christians
themselves, in their Epistles to those Romans and Heathens they had converted;
I have wondered how it comes to pass that so many have set up such Novel
Opinions in these latter days, That we weak Worms are free Agents, and have a
free will to do what we please; whereas, dear Mother, you know what great
inclinations I always had to follow your good Counsel: How I weaned my self from
wicked Company to keep me from falling into any Snare: Nay, How I abstained
from the Conversation and Society of the most admired Armadorus; a Person whom
now I cannot but confess I ever dearly loved: And to avoid his Courtships and
Applications, came home in obedience to your I adiship's Commands; but such are
the overruling Powers above, and so do they dispose of things below, Armadorus
overtook me in this Journey, and being destined to marry me, did accordingly do
it, it was in vain for me, to resist the Decrees of Heaven; and the Crime I
have Committed is no more than what Heaven obliges you to Pardon; and that
therefore will shower down its blessings the more upon you, when you do not
deny your blessing to

Your most dutiful Daughter, Vicentina.


The Young Countess was never so much affected with a Canting Style; as to love
to write Letters in it; but knowing her Mother given that way; much gifted, and
a great Anti-Arminian; she methodiz'd the matter so, to make it more taking;
but Armodorus was more Laconick, and like a General, in a sort of Epistolary
Oration, accosts her thus:

To the Countess- Dowager of Albania.
Madam,
IT has been my fortune to espouse the Lady I loved above all in the World, and
that is your Daughter, the Darling of my Soul, the Delight of my Heart; she has
been pleased to accept of me for her Husband, and I hope for that Honor you will
receive me for your Son; and tho I am still a Stranger, you may, Madam, not
repent of the Alliance upon a further Acquaintance; my Affection for your
Daughter may merit some of yours for me: If you deny us both your Blessing, it
will only make your self uneasy, and us unhappy.

Armadorus.


The Reverend Doctor that had undertook a task now of quite another nature than
what he came about, began to be of a better Temper too; and taking his leave of
the young Married Couple, promised them to deliver their Letters, and use his
Mediation for their being received into favor; which to give him his due,
accordingly he did, discharging himself in both Trusts like an honest Man that
made a Conscience of his ways. When he was returned, and had encountered the
Countess, you may be sure the first Question was with a great deal of
eagerness; And where is my Daughter? Signior Castrado as calmly and cunningly
replied, Madam, she is coming to wait upon your Ladyship, and with her the
young Armadorus; For to tell you the truth, Madam, my Arrival was too late to
hinder what now, nor then could be helped, and that is, their Marriage; they are
Man and Wife: With that he paused a little, to give some vent to the Old Lady's
Passion, which he saw rising in her Breasts. -- And is my Daughter then undone
for ever, -- for ever ruined? Is all my Motherly care that cultivated her
tender Years, come to this? All my Godly Education, Exhortation, Conversation,
come to this Tergiversation, Abdication, Reculcitration, and downright
Reprobation? O Vicentina, falfe Girl, perfidious Creature! never more expect to
see my Face. -- But Anger that had stormed her breasts, being a little abated,
and she being a Woman of Judgment too, some more serious and Godly
Considerations began to take place; and who knows, added she, but this might be
ordained for her, Matches are made in Heaven, and it is in vain for us Humane
Creatures, to resist what is decreed for us. O, the Soul saving Doctrine of
Predestination! which the Reprobate and Ungodly reject, but all the Elect do
daily find to be a Doctrine delivered to the Saints; Poor Girl! we must submit
to what is ordained for thee; and so wiping her old dry Eyes, as if they had
wept, -- began to look abroad. And Signior Castrado took hold of this as a good
Juncture to deliver to her hand the two Letters; Vicentina's was that she first
opened, and finding her Daughter so piously begging her pardon, and using the
same powerful argument, and godly motive, that made the Countess so compliant;
she delivers it the Reverend her Chaplain to read; we must submit, said she, to
what Providence has ordained for us; and you see the poor Vicentina, as she
says, was overpowered by the Powers above. -- And she writes still as if she
had not abandoned all Grace, and turned Reprobate. And then opening that
Epistle of Armadorus, after perusal, added, Signior Castrado, he writes much
like a Gentlemen, and may be of some Consideration in his own Country, and
prove a kind Husband to her here. And therefore, Signior Castrado, take a
Journey back again, and give them my Blessing, and let them know they may come
home to the Castle of Ogliano, as soon as they think convenient. The Chaplain
that was glad he had brought matters to that Accommodation in an Affair in
which he had so great a share, and being of that importance too, that he could
say with the Poet,

-- Quaeque ipse miserrime vide;
Et quorum pars m^gna fuit. That is to say in our Idiom,
It Is I, that in this woeful case,
The Guard, and Moderator was
For Dido, and her Aeneas.


This kind Gentleman quickly posted away with the glad Tidings to the young
married Folks, that were longing for his return, and the Fruits of his Embassy;
which as soon as they understood, they all jollily and jocundly prepared for
their Journey home; where when they were arrived, their Mother gave them their
Blessing on their knees, tho at first with a little cold kindness, which by
degrees was warmed again into Affection.

The Young Couple's Apartments were fixed, and their Bedchamber assigned them in
that Green Room once her Maiden-Castle or Imprisonment, now the Nuptial
Bed-room, abounding with all the Freedom and Delights that Matrimony and the
Marriage bed could afford.

The Loving Pair, like two Turtles, would be always together, and often visit that
pleasant place of Retirement at the lower end of the Garden, and there (in
solitude more comfortable to them than the best Company) recount the variety of
their past Adventures, the Disappointments and Successes in their Amors. And
this said, Vicentina, This solitary Grove, be thou always Sacred to the God of
Love; in such, our Sires, the Ancient Druids, offered up their daily prayers,
and did not Sacrifices cease to thee Diana; to thee thou Goddess truly Chaste
and Virtuous, we would here erect a Monumental Temple to perpetuate the
Remembrance of our faithful Hearts here first plighted: No Amarillis or
Myrtillo ere did burn with purer Flames, nor readier were to offer up their
Lives to save each other's Life. 'Twas thou, O sweet and shady Solitude! that
in my silent Slumbers did appear, and draw before my waking Thought (tho
Senses slept) that curious Dream and Scene of painted Love; and that fantastic
Interview we had beneath this most obliging Shade, was really, was pleasingly
fulfilled. But far be from us, Dearest Armadorus! those dire presages in which
that Dream did make so dismal end: avert ye Fates; but that kind Heaven is
already done, and those malignant Stars that swelled with spite and venom, and
ready were to dart their pointed Influence down upon our Heads, like false
ones, now are fallen, fallen now, and like the Spawn of Toads or Frogs, we
tread the filthy Gelly now beneath our feet. With that the Lovers bill'd, and
coo'd, and kissed, no Turtles e're did mate with more delight; when on the covert
Boughs of Thickets percht, they murmur innocently forth their soft and harmless
Loves.

And thus the Lovers lived, and thus they Loved, prolonging days and nights for
fear that spend-thrift Time should speed too fast away, and make them Bankrupts
in the Trade of Love, who had laid in a ^^ock for both their Lives and what
they thought so much, that all could never waste, or they live long enough to
spend.

But ah! how vain are Human thoughts! how short falls our forecast of that
which is Divine! and how does fate enforce us to adore that Deity vile Mortals
would Contemn! what to our Clouded thoughts seemed Clear, and misty Reasons
darkened Cell, (tho in the brightest part of all the Brain it is placed; as
'twere Reserved for Reasons Sacred Soul; (as Sages say) a Seat and Receptacle
to reside) how yet does all this glaring light Like Fatuus fires before the
Rising-Sun, quite vanish, disappear, when an Omniscience Divine does to the
darkened Earth, in brighter Rays reveal what Man, the wisest Man, thought Heaven
it self could never bring about: How does it laugh at all our fruitless toil,
to compass that beyond our Heaven it self; which when obtained, enjoyed, it
turns to Hell and Torment? What blessings often do those wise Powers above (who
in that vast Eternal NOW all past and future see) by ways unknown, unthought,
bestow, by contradictions to our arguing Sense, by our vain Reasonings called
impossible, and by dire baneful paths securely lead where happiness hangs out
before our eyes, that nothing there but misery could see?

So does it act too often for thankless Man; that Wiser needs would seem then
Mighty He that made the silly Worm. When through a raging tempest, wild despair,
where Winds destruction soar above, while ghastly Waves do for (...) gape below,
how do laborious Wretches toil on board, bear up against kind Heavens and the
Wind, to reach some dangerous Port to be undone; who spite of their resistance
to their fate, to some far distant shore are born away, where by unthoughtof
happiness at last they find their lives not only saved, but Fortunes made.

Thus fared it with this Amorous Pair, whose Wits, Invention, daily thoughts
and Prayers, with all the faculties of Mind and Soul, were all at work by
Policy, Disguise, by Plot and stratagem, and all that art and cunning could
invent, to compass what they called their happiness, -- One Nights enjoymont of
untasted joy -- But Heaven, alas! smiled at this humane folly; much better far,
and happier had they been if only Lovers still; while midst the fullest gusts
of free Fruition, Luxurious Love spent all the vital heat that fed it, and on a
sudden surfeited, and di'd.

Armadorus after he began to recover breath, which the Blandishments and
Caresses of conjugal affection (we may suppose) had a little exhausted
especially in such eager Lovers, began to consider, that as he had married a
young Heiress, so it behooved him now as her Husband to enquire into he^ Fortune
and Estate, which she was t^ inherit; and upon enquiry began t^ perceive that
by some secret Conveyance, not usually so clandestinely practiced, she had been
prevailed upon, during her minority, to make over her Estate in Trust to her
Mother, so that should she die childless, all her plentiful Revenue would be
left wholly in the disposal of the old Countess; which Armadorus did not so
well approve of: And though he loved his Mistress much more than her Money and
Wealth, yet was he loath (Money being the best commodity in his Country) to be
supplanted in his Right to a Silver Mine, not so frequently found in the
Mountains of Helvetia; and to lose a rich vein, at which he had been working so
long; every Body knows the true Proverb which the French Tongue has so
peculiarly fastened upon them; Ne point d' Argent, ne point de Suisse.
No Switz's fights where no Money is.
But though Armadorus's Soul seemed elevated even above the Altitude of his own
Country, (in which by the way, are the highest Hills) though he could not
condescend to that meaness of Spirit, so as to be sordidly Mercenary; yet his
Sense directed him, there was no reason why he should be defrauded in any thing
that was his real right by the Laws of Marriage, no more than to be robbed of
what was his own by Birthright; and this put him often when alone with his
Vicentina, upon as king of questions relating to her Fortune and Estate: In
which the Young Lady indeed was not so well acquainted her self; the Old
Countess being a Woman that well understood the World, and was resolved to have
the management of those affairs left entirely to her self: so that the Lady
Vicentina could only reply to her Armadorus, that she would take a time to
discourse her Mother on that Subject.

Many days were not elapsed before the Old Countess gave a good occasion for
the entering upon such a discourse; for having her Daughter alone, she began to
instruct and advise her, that since she had unfortunately Married a stranger,
it would be proper to enquire into what Jointure or Marriage-settlement himself
or his Friends could make her, before she suffered the least part of her
Portion to come into her Husband's Hands; that he might at any time, when in
possession of what was her Fortune, cross again the Seas and the Alps too, and
leave her only so much worse as he found her; that there was a Conveyance of
her Estate made over to her self during her minority; and that as long as she
suffered that to stand, she could secure her self against his wasting and
embezeling any of it; that she must provide for her self and Children if she
had any; and since she had played her game so ill, she was to take care that the
after-game might be the better looked too, and the ^ast stake more wisely
managed.

These grave Dictates, and formal Instructions, though perhaps not unnecessarily
given, would have made out little impression on Vicentina's Heart, before the
wonders of Love had satiated all her Senses; for that is a passion that
surmounts the strongest Conviction of Reason, and Conscience too: It makes many
Fools, and as many Villains; It Is an infirmity Humane nature is subject to, to
be overcome easily by what is palatable and pleasing; and the not gratifying
Sense, seems to most a divesting themselves of Humanity; though indeed, it is the
Brute only that is then put off: But Vicentina now having seen and felt the
utmost efforts of that Love, she had unknowingly and so blindly admired, began
now to open her eyes, and consider her actions, and suffer her Mothers advice
and good Counsel to sink down into her Heart, and to ponder it in her
understanding, and so promised her Mother that those Settlements made in her
minority she would never revoke, but was ready rather to confirm.

This was well pleasing to the Countess-Dowager, who as she coveted to bring it
about for her Daughters sake; so 'twas plainly visible it was somewhat for her
own ends ^oo; for should the Young Lady Childless leave the World before the
Old (for the Young may, as well as the Old must) the Countess Dowager then had
been entirely possessed of all the Patrimonial, Allodial, Feudatory, Feesimple
and Tail, Real and Personal, Appendant and Appurtenant, all that Civil Right,
and Common Law, Codes and Pandects, Cook and Littleton could make her own: This
the cunning and crafty Countess, that knew how to butter her Bread, and when
the Cake was Dough, did excellently well understand; so that her good advices
to her Daughter were a sort of mixed Actions, as the Moralists call them, made
up with the good ingredients of Interest and Love; or in a pleasanter smile
stuffed up like Black Puddings, with her Daughters Blood and her own Oatmeal or
Girts.

Armadorus on the other hand presuming upon the fervent affection of his Dear
Vicentina, which he thought as constant and true as ever splendid Sun was to
the Gnomon of the Dial, did often desire her, that since so unjust a Settlement
was made of her Estate during her minority, (which as it had been suggested to
him, was by false Testimony of her full age, when all the while but a Minor)
this he desired she would revoke, since so fraudulent a Conveyance; but
Vicentina better instructed, and the fervency of love a^ little cooled,
answered her Inamorato^ as coldly; That it was impossible for her to comply
with such a request; that the power was in her Mother; that she could not be
undutiful to her that had done so much for her, and after she had so much
disgusted her, yet had after all received her into favor. Armadorus a little
surprised at this unexpected indifferency, from a thing that was so dear to him
as the Young Countess, his most adored Vicentina, or rather a downright denial
from her, for whose sake he had denied himself every thing, his ease, repose,
nay, his very livelihood and subsistence; for at her request, (when love ruled,
and had its absolutely Empire in her Breast) so tender was she of his person,
that she would never suffer it to be exposed to any other Artillery but that of
her Eyes; nor be encompassed with any other Arms but those longing ones she was
wont to clasp about him; so by her Importunity, or Requests, that with him were
Commands, did he quit Ingloriously all the Trophies and Triumphs, all the
Victories and Conquests that Mars had in reserve to reward his Gallant Actions,
ignobly thus to follow his Venus, and Enervate himself with a Woman. In short,
her love got him to throw up all his Commissions, and now her neglect began to
make him wish them all in his Pocket.

But, cruel Avarice, and wretched Gold, to what inglorious unworthy Actions,
and unnatural too, do thou, O glittering Dirt, dispose the noblest Soul!

For thee the faithfullest Friend does stand at Bay, and stares upon thy
shining tempting show, and pauses in his full career to serve his Friend,
ambiguous whether he had best betray him.

For thee! A Father greedy to be great, to gripe and grasp at Thee! Thou
Excrement lodged in the Bowels of the sordid Earth, will his own Son forget,
his very Bowels, and sell him Slave to Dig and Delve those Mines from whence
thou came; and like those Indians, (only brave in this, that they despise
thee) will Sacrifice his dearest Daughter, darling of his Soul, to some adored
Monster all in Falmes, some heated glowing Moloch of a Man, to gratify some
Satyr, Humane Brute, that has the name of Prince, the lust and shape of Goat;
thy very Color cost Mankind that Universal Curse: That Golden Fruit! brought
all the Ages since to Brass and Iron.

For thee! The dearest Brothers, the very Gemini of Love and friendship! shall
for thee turn mortal foes; and they who lay so lovingly involved within the
self-same Womb, shall sheath their Swords within each others Bowels.

For thee! whole Rivers reel in flowing Gore, and fatten'd Fields luxurious are
with Blood; whole Kingdoms shake like some Sicilian Town that at the Foot of
roaring Etna stands, which belches forth its liquid flames of less pernicious
Ore, whilst Crowns and Scepters totter like their Towers, and falling in thy
rapid Streams of Fire, are born away and melted down.

And it is for Thee alone, though never so much Resin'd, Thou filth even of the
finest Soul! that these two matchless Lovers, who not long before were
languishing in Love, have lived to see their very Loves to languish, as if they
now were come sor to outlive their very selves, and have their empty Carcasses
survive their transmigrated Souls.

Armadorus looked on her cold repulse a little hard, and took it much to heart;
but for the present would press her no further in the affair; fearing to
discompose her whom he still tenderly loved; but after he had suffered her
obstinacy (as he thought) to soften by degrees, and to supple her with
Lenitives, he took her aside one afternoon into some withdrawing Room, and
there with a look composed of Gravity and Love, delivered himself in these
words.

My Dear, were your kindness to me what once it was, when we first fixed our
Eyes upon one another, you would never have denied me the request I have so
often made you; and it is mighty strange, that Armadorus when a stranger almost
unknown to Vicentina, should have had more power over her, then after she has
hugged him in her Arms, and embraced him for her Husband! harder yet it is, my
dear, to deny me a possibility of subsisting by your means, that have made me
quit an honorable employment for your sake! Consider, should the sates rob me
of my Vicentina, in what condition should I be left; my Soul, my Life, indeed
will be gone with you, my Love; and so I may not long survive, but linger out
some years, in which I cannot be truly said to Live, much less to want: but how
will it please your Airy Ghost, when gliding by me in your stalking shade, to
see me pensive sit and mourn my fate; whilst your Triumphant Mother proudly
Reigns over all, and domineers in all the Palaces, that once my dear were
yours, and should be mine. Too late perhaps it then may be, for your relenting
Ghost to think to haunt your Salvage Motheir into humane nature; not that my
case so sad, deplorable, may be, but that I may find friends though never so much
a Foreigner; for this kind Isle is not a little famed for Friendship,
Hospitality, and Love: All which I have already found; but hitherto I must
consess in none, my Vicentina, more than you; yet should I be abandoned by you,
(which shivers me with horror but to think) my birth within my native Country
is not so obscured; my Father stands possessed of great Commands, in Civil and in
Military too; besides all what is Patrimonial-Land must be my own; And you have
brought no beggar to your Bed; all that I beg, is right and Common Justice;
what your own Laws allow, you will let me crave! The Custom of your Country is so
kind, so truly Courteous is your Common Law, 'twill let the Husband for his
Life enjoy what Land was ere his Wives, by Courtesy. Loath Vicentina do I talk
to you of Justice, Custom, Equity, and Law; Love was the wonted subject of our
talk; and still of what we talked we were agreed; I hate to name to Vicentina
LAW, it sounds Litigious, sounds a dying Love, and with a wrangling clashing
Peal of noise, to ring some parting Friend's or Lover's Kneel. -- But still of
this, my Love, be well assured, your Mother with her wiles shall never prevail,
for of what is yours and mine I Will be possessed, and Righting of my self is
Righting you.

The Young Countess melting into Tears with the softness of his Speech, and
disturbed with the tendency of it to Law and Discord, had her Soul divided, and
her Senses lost, between the Love she still retained for him, the Duty she
would seem to have for her Mother; but indeed the deepest regard that
disordered her, was what she had for her self: The Old Countess having
inculcated so often, that her Husband was a Man of no Fortune, and if of any
Fortune, at best but a Soldier of Fortune, with such like malicious
Insinuations, that made the poor Young Gentlewoman confounded, distracted
almost with variety of thought, and perplexity of mind, which way to manage her
self in such an intricate affair, where so many different passions and
affections, which like winds from several Quarters, were sporting with her
floating Soul like a bubble, both filled and agitated with each blast of Air:
Insomuch that these fluctuating thoughts immediately influence those Animal
Spirits to faintness (the finer and purer parts of which some Phisiologist
suppose to form the thinking Soul, distinct from what so Rational we call; for
that we grant infused us from above, all immaterial; yet on matter works by
strange Connection supernatural: But without that, we find brute Beasts to
think; and as those Spirits finer, purer are, so are those Animals more
thoughtful, cunning, docible and wise;) And these in Women soonest are
disturbed, and light emotions seem with them to move vast heavy loads, which
rising from below oppress the vital Sense above, and seem to strangle, without
suffocation, which Men of Art call, Fits Hysterical, and idly once fixed in the
Female Womb, then in diseased spleen, more wisely now in the Minds passion, and
disordered Spirits: This was the Countess's afflicted Case; she heard him
tenderly, attentively; but like Sabina still, that would not seem to hear, fain
would she have stopped, kept down, the rising Ball of grief, and strangled in her
Breast those struggling Passions, that would rise to Choke her; but too weak
alas! she was to bear up against the Tide of swelling Sorrow, or by Imrerial
Reasons wise Command, to Rally, Rank and File her fierce disordered Spirits;
and so with lift* up Eyes, and drooping Head she fainted, fell down in her
Lover's Arms.

Armadorus surprised at such an unexpected Disaster, did all he could to
recover her out of her fit, by chafing her hands, rubbing her Temples, and by
chance having a Bottle of Salts or Spirits about him, which he applied to her
Nostrils, all the while calling for help and assistance, which soon came in to
him; at last she began to open one of her languishing Eyes, letting them know
there was Life enough left, but only the wheels of it a little disordered by
some sudden Emotion in the Blood and Spirits; which being composed by degrees,
she soon came to her self: And seeing both her Mother and her Armadorus, both
at the same time busy about her, she recovered her Complexion a little the
sooner with a blush: And hardly knew whom she should thank first, for their
friendly offices, and care of her Recovery; she saluted both with Duty and
Affection; and all past over as an Accidental fit, though what indeed might here
be truly so called, A sit of the Mother; neither was this like to be the last
that the management of the Old Countess was like to bring her to;
notwithstanding which the poor Armadorus was traduced for it, as if by his
Severities, Threatenings, and even Violence offered, he had made her fall into
that Condition.

Armadorus, after several opportunities he had taken to prevail with Vicentina,
but with all the mildness imaginable, but all ineffectual and vain; was forced
at last to resolve to recover that by Law, which was denied him against Reason;
and so without molesting his Dear Mistress any more in a matter he found her so
averse to, prepared himself for a Journey to the Capital City, the Metropolis
of the Kingdom, there to Consult with the Men of the greatest Abilities in
their Professions, and the knowledge of the Customs an Co mmon Usuages, the
Civil and Municipal Laws of the Kingdom. His design he kept to himself, and
only made his Journey occasional. But Vicentina, tho Love had once blinded her,
was too quick sighted now to be easily deceived; and seeing him bent to
undertake this long Voyage against her will and inclination, was very ready to
mistrust the right matter and meaning of it; and so with more hasty Passion
than ordinary, which was once a stranger to her tender Love, told him, she knew
his design that he went about, that it was to get her Fortunes and Estates into
his possession; but if he moved one step toward the Law, he must never more
expect to see her Face.

The Young Hero, tho Love had got once the Ascendant, and somewhat Enervated
him by the Blandishments and softnesses of his Fair Venus, Vicentina, yet he
had not wholly Abandoned Mars and his wonted Courage; but answered her now a
little more roughly; That it was time for him now to look about for himself;
and since she was in a Combination with her Mother for his Ruin, he was
resolved to take up some Commissions again in the Army, which her Importunity
had caused him to lay down; and that this was the chiefest business he went
about: that he perceived her wonted Affection for him, that was once so warm,
was by this time very well cooled; and that the Dangers he should be Exposed to
in a Camp, might quickly rid her of an Husband, for whom she had so little
Kindness and Esteem, and one that with his continual Caresses had Courted after
Marriage more like a Lover, and not Governed, or Commanded her like her Lord:
and indeed, Armadorus his fondness (as 'twas generally thought) Fooled the
Young Lady into a more Refractory Obstinacy, than was Natural to her Temper and
Constitution; but as much Marble as she was, she melted into Tears at his
talking of exposing of his Person to the hazards of uncertain War. But the
Countess-Dowager, that desired nothing more than by some obliging Ball or
Bullet to be rid of her Son-in Law, persuaded her Daughter not to lay it so
much to heart; that there were Men enough going in the World, and better
Husbands to be had: However the piteous Vicentina was not become yet so
obdurate; she wanted a little more of her Mothers Stony Heart to petrify hers;
and so beseeched him earnestly not to think of any such thing, and she would
bear with his Absence for a while, if his occasions required it, if he would
promise a return to her, and not to the Army: Armadorus, that perhaps never
designed it, was easily prevailed on to promise so much; and so for that time
affairs seemed a little accommodated. He prepared for his Journey, with
Reluctance parted from his Spouse; who throwing her longing Arms about his
Neck, showed also how loath she was to part with him; they sighed by consent,
and their Tears mingled as they Kissed: They parted indeed, but pursued one
another so long with their looks, till a cruel distance cut off the
Communication of their Eyes.

Armadorus arrived no sooner among the Dispensers of the Law those Oracles of
the Courts of Justice, but you may be sure he received good encouragement for
the carrying on the Cause, which as yet carried somewhat of merit with it; so
it had with them a promising aspect of Profit too. He came to take Counsel with
a Mien that carried Gold in both Hands, and that did declare, he was not come
to Starve his Cause, In forma Pauperis; and that was able to make any Nokes a
Tertullus or John a Styles a Chrysostomus: For he Experimentally found verified
among the Gentlemen of the Law, what his Countrymen had always practiced in
their Arms.

What Swiss came e're to Beat of Drum,
Or, Bawling Lawyer was not Dumb,
To see no Gold nor Silver Come?
It is a happy thing for a good Cause, to have a good Client too, or ten to one
but it miscarries; Armadorus had the good luck to make both these ends to meet,
and so went on merrily with his Negotiation: and first to qualify himself with
the privileges to Traffic as a Native, obtained an Act of Naturalization, to
bring himself upon the same bottom with those that had dealt so Unnaturally
with him; this being compast, the Complainant Armadonus, (that indeed had very
good Reason to Complain) was advised to turn humble Orator, and to move in a
Court of Equity for Redress against those Perilous Women for withholding his
Right; while the good Women at the same time were Counselling to get hi, into a
Spiritual Court for detaining the^^ due: These Variances, this Cloud o^
Discord; that was like to raise such a dust, and on both sides a Cloud of
Witnesses too; was for a little while disspated and dispelled, by a sudden
seizure of the poor Armandorus with a violent Sickness, so that he could not
follow and dispatch his Affairs with that diligence; and therefore laying aside
those little resentments that contesting generally stirs up, (He being utterly
Ignorant that the cunning Old Countes^ had in his Absence, engaged his Dear
Spouse to declare her self his open Enemy, and sue for so Unnatural a
Separation, and cruel Divorce) while he lay Languishing on his Bed in a Fever,
which his Physicians looked on as Malignant, occasioned (as they said) by some
ill Planets that now seemed to Influence their Loves; for the Mars and Venus
had been lately in Conjunction, they were now like to come in direct
Opposition: Lumpish Satur^ seemed to Lower, and Libra could not keep the Scales
even between them; bold Sagitarius had shot Virgo thorough and thorough, and it
approaching toward the Vernal Equinox, where Aries might predominate, 'twas fit
for Husbands to show themselves very kind to their Wives, for fear of the
worst: That there was a great distance indeed in Trine, and many wide De^rees
of difference between the Old Countess, the Young, and Armadorus; they might
meet in the House of Strife, but their Horoscope had no Room for them in the
House of Life. Thus, out of Ptolomy, Haly, Cardanus, Olaus; all ^is Physicians,
Rosacrucians, and vere ^depti, having severally declared their opinions, and
confirmed them from ^^e Writings of Trismegistus, Mesue, ^^vicenna, Averroes,
Arabians, Egyptians, those Works and Words like the De^^ees of the Medes and
Persians, was ^ot to be Controverted; The poor ^^tient Armadorus that
understood their Jargon no more than they did his Helvetian, did only guess
that his Condition was but bad, and the worse for that his Doctors did not
understand it; and therefore as soon as their Gravities was descended Decently,
he dictated to his Amanuensis these few Lines for his Dearest Vicentina.

Dearest Vicentina,
AS nothing but Death can make a separation between us; (which is indeed an
Unavoidable Divorce) so as long as I have Life, nothing shall be more
Inseparably yours: but alas! how long that will be, I know not; for I am at
present in such a languishing Condition, that I cannot continue long under that
indisposition that oppresses me: A consult of Physicians I have had, who talk
to me much of Stars and Constellations; but understand no more my Disease, than
if they had studied nothing but Almanacks. It Is only you my Dear Heart that can
relieve me; I have nothing in this long absence left to enjoy you in, but
Thought and Contemplation, and out of that you never are; the great distance
cannot hinder me from enjoying you in a Dream; and my restless Nights afford me
only Dreaming slumbers; I long to see you, and that speedily, lest those Eyes
should close that have so much delighted in the Contemplation of yours, and
those other Features and Perfections of your Face. My hand is too weak to guide
that Pen, that should convey to you the Dictates of my Soul; and so am forced
to crave the assistance of a Secretary: But my Heart, as faint as it is, is
firmly yours; and your Idea the only Cordial that supports it. Pray Dearest
hasten your departure, and let no false Insinuations of an ill Mother detain
you, or make the least division between your beloved self, and your most
Affectionate

Armadorus.


The good soft humoured Gentleman, (as we have observed before) having not the
least in him of the Rough temper of the Helvetian, had habituated himself to
those Compellations to his Wife, that others commonly use in their Courtships
to their Mistress; and by his sweetness of Address endeavored to continue that
Affection when her Husband, which he had in Abundance, when only her Lover; but
alas! all was in vain: His absence had lain him open to the Aspersions and
Recriminations of an enraged Mother; and exposed his Lady to the frequent
Assaults, and constant Importunities of the Incensed Countess. The Allodial
Lands, the Patrimonial Money, and the Young Hero's going to Law for both, lay
like Lead upon her Heart, a load upon her Stomach, she could not digest it; and
so it made her Spleen to rise, and to resolve to ruin him: The Young Lady also
by his being out of sight, and far off, and so feeling nothing of those warm
Impressions that her Dear Armadorus was wont to make upon her, was more easily
prevailed upon by the Old Countess to forget those Caresses she had of late not
been accustomed to; and so suffered her self wholly to be governed by her
Mothers Directions; and having by the Post Received the foregoing Letter,
immediately almost communicated it to the Lady Dowager for her advice and
opinion how it should be answered; indeed she perused it by her self a little
at first; and the tenderness it expressed, and the danger that Armadorus (once
her Dearest) was in, did a little move her; but a sudden Fit of the Mother
moved more strongly; and so carried away both her self and the Letter to the
Lady Dowager, to Consider and Consult for an Answer.

And that you may be sure the Old Lady was not long to study for. The Young
Countess was the She-Scribe, while the Old seemed a sort of Female Pharisee;
the Young Lady not being quite so Obdurate, was beginning Innocently her Letter
with the wonted Compellation of My Dear; which the Mother observing, seemed
almost incensed at her inconsiderate Compellation, and asked her whether she
was Courting of him again; and made her blot out that tender fineness, and set
down plainly Armadorus; but then bethinking her self again, that such a Title
signified somewhat of Friendship and Familiarity still retained, to Estrange
and Alienate her self the more from him, she made her Daughter obliterate that
also, and at last without any more Ceremony, to Insert plainly, Sir; and to
vary nothing from what she should dictate, which was as follows.

Sir,
YOU seem already to have Divorced your self from me while you are alive, so
you have no need of Death to make a farther Separation; you may remember before
you deserted us, when you discoursed me on the subject that has caused this
separation, I told you, that if ever you went to trouble us with your
Litigiousness and Law, I would never Live with you, nor see your Face;
notwithstanding which, as close as you have carried your secret Machinations, I
am sufficiently informed of your practices; and since of my resolution I had so
forewarned you, your subsequent actions have demonstrated you neither desire to
see me, much loss to live with me. If Providence has surprised and visited you
with Sickness, you must consider it is for your Evil ways, and Wicked Practices
you are in, and for your dealing so basely, and barbarously with me: If you
want Attendance, you cannot expect that I should come to give it you: It is too
long a Journey, which you have purposely taken to be so far from me; and yet to
perplex me and my Mother at a distance; besides your usage of me, has made me
more sickly, and too weak for such an undertaking: and if you want Women to
attend you, you know where to find them in that vast and fine place you are in:
and I do not doubt, but Mrs. C. and Madam A. Mrs. F. and Madam K. will afford
you for old acquaintance sake all the kindness and assistance you can desire.

Yours, Vicentina.
P. S. When your Health permits, you may have now my consent to return to the
Army.




The Young Lady, that did not like to insist so long on so severe a Style,
began to incline to a close, and so more hastily than her Mother desired, was
Subscribing her self, Your Affectionate, etc. which as soon (...) the Old Lady
perceived, sho made her give it another dash; and to ^ave out all Compliments,
and any thing th^^ ^^^^nded like Love and Re^^rio^^, and (...) Elegant
Composure of (...) to a Sick-Man and Dying (...), was as handsomely (...)
decently sent away to the (...) Armadorus.

Tho this Gallant Youth had yet made no progress in his Lawsuit, only
qualified himself by his Naturalization to prosecute one if he had occasion;
yet the Cunning Old Countess had very good Intelligence, as appears by the
Contents of what she dictated to her Daughter; and those Anonymous Ladies which
she mustered up in the latter end of the Letter, were as cunningly inserted,
for the perplexing of Armadorus, and the amusing of Vicentian even to madness
and jealousy; some there were, that thought this bitter Answer was all of the
Young Countesses own penning; but so much cruelty could never be lodged in a
Breast that was once so loving and tender. Armadorus at the arrival of this,
had the happiness and good fortune to be recovering of his strength; and it is
well he was a little fortified against such surprising, such sharp and bitter
invective from one that he thought could never have been prevailed upon to hate
him; He read it over again and again, disbeliev'd his Eyes, and doubted his
Senses; thought the hand counterfeited, and her name forged; but his affection
he found forced only this fond fancy upon him; he knew her hand too well really
to doubt it; all the comfort he had left him, was the hopes that it was the
effect of that power her imperious Mother had over her; and though it might be of
her penning, yet he was persuaded it was all of the old Ladies inditing; but
then again it did not a little afflict him to find that Vicentina, who by all
her Mothers threats and stratagems, Caresses and Artifices, could not be
prevailed upon to refuse him for her Husband, could now be won to forsake him
when he was so, to put her helping hand to such severe Satyr and reproach, and
that to her languishing, (and for ought she knew) her dying Armadorus.

Ah Vicentina! cried he; (transported with such an unexpected alteration) Ah
cruel Creature! Could you write these lines, and drop no Tears to wash away
those Blots and black stains your Ink still left behind it! every Letter is a
Character indeed, but of your unkindness; and that Hand you once would have
wished to have withered, before it had been guilty of such cruelty to your
Armadorus, to deny him those last favors of officious Friendship; to catch his
dying sighs, and soft expiring Breath; to seal his closing Eyes, and warm his
trembling Lips with one relenting kiss; to make me barbarous and conducing to
your languishment: To make me suspected and false to your Bed, that always
cherisht you as my own Heart that I bear in my bosom; that never violated my
Marriage-vow, not so much as in thought; and then as the last instance of your
favor, to recommend me again to the Mouth of the Cannon from whence I only
came to dye at your Feet, God's Death these are Daggers to this Heart of mine, that
all the dying that I selt in my disease had not half the bitterness. Come,
unkind, ungrateful Fair; Come Vicentina, with your own Hand and pointed Dagger,
Stab this Heart of mine, and feel its throbbing pulse to beat its last; rather
than thus to wound it at a distance, and tear it asunder in Effigy. With that
his Heart too much oppressed and swollen with grief, sent forth an heavy sigh,
whilst his declining Head his Shoulder bore; and the weak spine unable to
support the lightened Trunk, though by late fickness made less burden some, the
yielding Body fell back on the Bed, upon the sides of which but just before it
made the first Essays to sit upright.

As good luck was, the Nurse and Tender was at Hand, and by the help of some
Spirits very strong and volatile, which by a Spoon clapped in between his fixed
Teeth, and fastened Jaws, she got within his rattling Throat; he began a little
to revive, and by an Emissary Groan, the Herald and Ambassador of Life, let her
know that all was not gone yet; and so by degrees she began to get him to
himself a gain, to which he was no sooner come, but to himself he seemed
another Man, and immediately repented for having had such hard thoughts of his
still admired Vicentina, and so would force a kind construction from a cruel
Letter of hers, that had no more mercy in it than an He Tiger can be said to
have Milk. Why, faith he, have I accused thus injuriously my render Vicentina
of cruelry? ^^^ only charges me with separating my self so far from her, and so
soon; it is my absence perhaps has made her sicken; And these accusations I
cannot deny but I have justly deserved; it is I that left her, and not she me;
and those Ladies she upbraids me with as Favorites, may be only the Effects of
some growing Jealousy for my long stay, which is the greatest sign of
substantial Love; and what other severities of expressions I see there, may be
all of her wilful Mothers dictating, whom she was afraid to disobey; all this
Enchantment will soon vanish when once I shall appear again in sight. And with
these Airy Consolations he seemed to solace himself, which indeed had this good
effect, that they helped forward his recovery; and qualified him the sooner to
take the Country Air, as he designed; for which he was no sooner capacitated,
but he took Coach directly down to Danmoniorum; and to the Capital Town of the
Province, where (neither considering his late weakness, nor his Ladies cruelty,
having forgot the one, and put the best construction on the other) he took
Post, and with a passion that no Cold could extinguish, hastened away to the
Embraces, as he thought, of his still Amorous Vicentina: Believing that only a
single sight of his sweet self would revive in her all those flames that were
wont to warm her Heart into Love and Admiration: But treacherous Love! With
what vain hopes do thou, dissembling Boy, feed the poor deluded flattering
Lover! Late it was by the time that Armadorus indeed arrived at the Castle of
Ogliana, but not so unseasonably but that any stranger might have found
admittance; the Candles were yet burning in the Socket as he knocked, when on a
sudden all the Snuffs went out, and all the Avenues were Barricado'd, and he
himself shut in between the outer great Gate of the Palace, and the Inner Porch
of the House; caught like a Vermin (as it were in a Trap) foreclos'd from going
forward; and his retreat shut up behind him: In this woeful condition, such as
had never yet befell him in all his wooing, was he almost at his wits end; often
went he under the Window where his dearest lay, and with a doleful voice called
up, My Vicentina! Then to the Porch as pensively returned, and with a gentle
knock admission craved, but all in vain. His Vicentina heard, but would not
hear; and the Fat Cook-Maid snor'd beneath her greasy Dresser, and could not
hear a Drum.

Thus locked up in a pound was the Hero fast, and forced to lodge all that night
on the cold ground, hardly faring so well as his Horse, who was better
accustomed to such a sort of lodging; and as it happened it was very happy that
his kind Host, where he last set up, had kindly forced upon him a good Campaign
Coat; otherwise the violent Rains that fell that night, had infallibly
penetrated to his tender Skin, though his doleful voice could not to his Ladies
hardened Heart; he had also been accustomed from his Youth to lie rough in the
Fields when they sorm'd a Campaign; otherwise his late distemper had
sufficiently weakened him, so that he could not have held out the hardship of
the Night; but wrapping himself up snug in his Serviceab^e Coat, crept close
into a Loo corner where he might be said to rest himself, but not to sleep: The
thoughts of this inhumane dealing did distract him. He could not guess at the
meaning, or what should merit so much barbarity: He could never imagine his Dear
Vicentina could have come to that excess of cruelty, so as to suffer him to be
shut out from her presence, and to lie exposed in such a night to the open Air,
without any thing but his Clothes, and the Heavens to cover him; and yet he was
satisfied she must needs have heard his voice, when so near to the Window of
the Chamber where she always lay; but for that she was provided of an excuse
from the panick fear that her Mother had put into her head, that he might fire
his Pistols at her, if she looked out.

Thus with pensive Heart, and most perplexing Thoughts he past away the tedious
and uncomsortable Night, till the next Morn broke with the Eastern Dawn,
saluted with approaching Day the longing Eyes of the disconsolate Armadorus: As
he had rested with the Lark that Night, (tho in a colder Nest) so he was up
with her too the next Morn; but had not so good Appetite to sing as that Bird
generally rises with; however, being a Person of a gay and good Humor, and apt
to put the best Construction upon the worst; imputed it to his fault, that he
came so late when all the Family was gone to Bed; and so being pleasant, even
under his misfortunes, thought it would be a pretty sort of Gallantry if he
should go and Serenade his own Wife under her Chamber-window, and surprise her
so early with his Voice and Approach: He had obtained with his Conversation,
and Facility of Apprehension, a tolerable and pretty intelligible Pronunciation
of the Language of the Country; and all the defect that he had, seemed only
like the little Lispings of a fine Lady, that at the same time advances her
Features, and graces her Discourse, and makes both to look more Amorous: He was
not to seek for Songs on any Subjects, having had so much of the Beaux, and the
Beauteous Sexes Conversation, and the Academy of Compliments, that Courtuous
Instructor of Strangers, had also past his hands; besides his Voice was pretty
tolerable, and more passable when his Face was seen; for a good Mien and Aspect
commonly give the pleasing turn of a good Air too; it was none of the strongest
Voice; soft and sweet, yet high enough to ascend one Story to reach his Lady's
Ear, if it could but have touched her Heart. Muses he had no need to invoke. His
Academy of Compliments had a couple of Sonnets in store, that seemed Set and
Composed for the very purpose; so setting himself under the Window, he began
the sorrowful old Song, tho indeed very apposite to his sad Condition; viz.

My Lodging is on the cold Ground,
And very hard is my fare,
But that which Troubles me most of all,
Is the unkindness of my Dear.
Then, etc.
So home was this woeful ditty to his lamentable Case in every Line of it, that
he thought she must needs listen to it, and melt into Tears; but Marble indeed
might have wept; she with her Mother's Enchantments was grown more obdurate;
perfect Flint or Adamant, and those hardened Minerals are best broken (we know)
on a Pillow, or a Feather bed; and that he knew too, but the matters were so
laid, that he was not like to come to her Bedside.

In this Condition the poor Gentleman stood like Fiddlers, that after long
Scraping, many times can get neither Answer nor Money; not a word could he get
for Love, nor all his kind Good Morrow; which made him think upon another Ditty
for her, to sing out of the same Author, to this effect, and what might serve
for an Answer,

Go from the Window my Dear;
For the Wind and the Rain,
Have brought him back again,
And thou can have no Lodging here, etc.
But all things were still and hushed; without the least reply, or so much as
looking out at the Casements.

The Accomplished Armadorus had a dexterous hand too at playing on the Base
Viol; but his Instrument was out of the way; and besides, his fingers were so
benumbed with the Wet and Wind, the Rain and Cold, that he could not have played
his part if the Instrument had been by him; wherefore trusting all to his
Voice, which he knew with less labor and straining, and such ado, had formerly
charmed and enchanted Vicentina; therefore laying aside the foresaid Sonnets as
old and obsolete, and so not so taking with her, tho the very Emblems of his
hard usage, he began to think upon some better words, that he might at last get
some Mouth-speech, (for Music without it, will a long time play, Loath to
depart) and so pitched upon a piece of more refined Poetry, and a Song that
heretofore he had often delighted in, even, when he little thought that the
Burden of the Song should have been that too of his Breast; and that was this:

Caelia, that I once was blessed,
Is now the Torment of my Breast, etc.
But most pathetically did he warble out the latter distich that touched both
Him and Her so near;

Cruel Creature! to deceive me,
First to love, and then to leave me.
But finding this as ineffectual as the rest, he was resolved only to make one
Essay and Effort further, and that was in a Stanza spick and span new, brought
down with him from the Court; and which could not be but a Stranger to the
Country; and being well* composed by a Master of Music, he thought might be
very moving; and so lifting up his Heart and Voice, tho with a disconsolate
Ela! like the dying Swan sung his last Dirge in the sweetest notes.

SONG.
Quench, quench in tears, those flaming eyes,
That make the World one Sacrifice;
Why should it in Flames expire,
Before the last and universal Fire?
If we it Cruelty can doom,
In the Proud Tyrant burning Rome,
When to the crackling Flames he played,
And triumphed in the waste he made.
How can the Crime in You be less?
When kindling the whole Universe
You Pride and Boast in all your Glorious Wickedness?
It was his humor to the very last to Court his beloved Spouse, as if she
still had only been his Mistress; and in all his Discourses, after the severest
usage, still would he admiringly, adoringly speak of his Dear Vicentina; and
whatsoever the Young Ladies (to whom he would be often repeating his lamentable
Tale) did compassionate and condemn, the guilt of it he would wholly lay on the
Countess Davager; and that his Dearest, whatover, she did, was only under the
Terror of her Despotick Power; to whom she had now wholly resigned her self as
well as her Estate.

After the Affectionate Armadorus had thus sported away an hour or so, in
Sonetting and Serenading; after a stormy Night, and bitter Morning, rising time
Approaching, between Six and Seven, he had this cold comfort, that instead of
the sweet Face of his Vicentina, an old Woman, a sort of Doegna or Governante,
let her fair Visage out of the Lettice or Casement, where he thought his Dear
Lady lay; and with a furrowed Brow that wrinkled sufficiently, if she had not
srown'd angrily, asked him what his business was there? That they did not care
to be disturbed so with Heathenish, profane Songs; but if he would come again
at Christmas, with a good Godly Caryl or Hymm, he should have a Pie (if any
going) and a piece of Money for his pains.

Armadorus smiled at the innocent Folly of the old Creature, which was a piece
they had entertained in his Absence; and so did not know him, nor his business;
wherefore finding the Domestics begin to stir, he went boldly to the Door, and
began more eagerly to knock for admittance, which now he soon had; and indeed,
't was time of Day; for during the Night there was no coming in: He asked
immediately for his Wife, of whom the Servants well-instructed could give no
account; then demanding to speak with the Old Lord of Ogliano, and the Countess
Dowager; but they were not yet come down from their Apartments; and going to
the Door where his Dearest was wont to Lodge, he found it fast locked, and no
admittance. Thus full of Doubts and Fears, he attended in the Great Hall the
coming down of the Old Folks, who by Breakfast-time did appear, having better
Stomachs than Armadorus, whose Appetite was a little pawl'd with his cold
Lodging; he Addressed himself to them with a Courteous and Kind Application,
that had used him so cruelly, and now seemed to estrange themselves so much,
that they hardly vouchsafed to know him; he demanded of them where his Wife
was? The Old Countess, (that was the Manager of all, and her harmless Husband
only the shadow of Authority, and who with all his Worshipful and Justitiary
Power, could never keep the Peace at home) pertly answered the poor Armadorus,
That she was no keeper of his Wife; that she was ignorant of her abode; and if
he doubted of the truth of what she said, he should have all the Keys, and
examine every Room in the whole House. A kindness, indeed, most generously
offered, for it seems they had taken care to dislodge her, and send her where
to be sure he was not like to find her out. So with a sorrowful heart (finding
himself deluded by the Craftiness of a Woman, and the easy Compliance of a
Wife) he was forced to return to the Town of Isca, his Ancient Post, and here
take up his Quarters at the same place where he set forth upon this
Knight-Errantry, to go in quest of this distressed Damsel, and to wait till
fortune favored him with a more Auspicious Aspect, and the Justice of the
Nation should restore him his Spouse with her Patrimony.

It Is not to be expressed, how the relenting Dames of the Province of Danmoniorum
did commisserate this Gallant Hero's Injurious Treatment, and Barbarous Usage;
which he still represented in all Companies with such a tender regard to his
Wife's Honor, and Vicentina's Reputation, that some did not stick to tell him,
that he treated her better than she deserved. That she had broke her Vow in
Holy Matrimony, by which she was obliged to forsake both Father and Mother, and
to cleave to her Husband. That it was too late for her to repent of a Choice
that she her self had made; and to cast off a Young Gentleman that she had
courted into her Arms, was as base, as is was ^arbarous.

All the Gentile Youths of the Province were alarmed at this unparal* lel'd
Treatment of an Husband. The Batchellors that were eagerly pursuing their hot
Loves, began to cool upon their Scent, to run counter when they saw the young
Ladies to use such Shifts and Doublings; they did not know how soon it might be
their Cases, should they meet with such Wives: And the young Married Husbands
began to be uneasy under their Condition, not knowing how soon theirs might
prove such. This made the Virgins fret to find themselves neglected by their
Lovers; and the young Married Women fume to find their Husbands so jealous of
their Constancy; so that in short, the whole Posse of the Province, almost from
Sixteen to Sixty, were ready to be up in Arms against the Old Countess and the
Young, as the Common Enemy and Disturbers of their Loves, their Enjoyments,
their Tranquillity and Repose; some execrated the old Lady, some cursed the
Young, and most condemned both; but the tender Armadorus, -- who never
complained, that his Dear Spouse ailed anything, but that she was troubled now
and then with some Fits of the Mother. And these general Murmurings and
Mutinies of both Sexes for a while, made the two Countesses a little Cautious
how they came abroad in Public; and as every Bodies house is the best Castle,
so they kept close in theirs at Ogliano; for as nothing is more menacing than a
raised and enraging Mobb, so no Multitude more dangerous than that which is
animated to Anger, by the abusing of their Love. It Is like a wild Stagg or
Bull, that is disturbed in his Amors, or Act of Coition; it shakes its
clashing Beam, or brawny Neck, and bellows as it goes to meditate Revenge.

The Chambers of Armadorus in (this) his abdicated Condition, were the constant
Resorts of the Youth of both Sexes to hear him with that humble modesty recount
his Memoirs of their Cruelty: Progne's Rape, Philomela's Story, or the Tale of
Itis, were never entertained with such attentive Abhorrence. The Ladies and
Gentlemen that had not that intimacy to qualify themselves to make him Visits,
yet would contrive the matter so as to introduce themselves into his
Acquaintance, and make Invitations to the Courteous Stranger, only to be
present at the Relation of his Wrongs; which the injured Armadorus did not
refuse, tho it was with unwillingness he was always brought to say any thing
that seemed to diminish or detract from the goodness of his Dear Vicentina,
upon whose Actions he would always cast a good Varnish, and place the Mother's
Picture in the best Light, that it might seem the more odious, and so serve for
a foil the better to set off Vicentina's; nay, the very Old Maidens and
Batchelors, that were mumping upon their musty Virginities, that were past the
hopes of Matrimony, would all desire his Conversation for the hearing of his
Tale, and the pitying his hard and barbarous Usage; insomuch, that the
Transported Armadorus would be often surpised at this Universal Friendship in a
Strange Country, and did so sensibly resent it, that he was often heard to say;
He could never have hoped to have found so many Friends in his own.

This universal agreement in the Commiseration of the hard Case of Armadorus,
made the Old Countess consider that somewhat must be done to wipe off that
general Odium that was fallen upon her. And so that the World might see that it
was not without some Reason that they had thus hardly treated the Helvetian,
she not only got her Daughter to complain of hard usage received from him, but
to go to a sort of Magistrate, Advoyers (I think) they are wont to call them in
his Country; and there solemnly make Oath, That she was afraid, that her Dear
Armadorus had some design upon her precious Life; indeed (as has been related
before) the Young Lady was deeply afraid of Dying; and that her Love was like
to kill her the very Wedding Night; but most People thought now that fear was
pretty well over; However swear it she would, and who could help it? The worthy
Magistrate was generally Condemned for admitting it, where the Act seemed Rash,
and the presumption of danger not so strong; but those Censures indeed were
undeserved; for what he did was ex officio, and so unavoidable; for should
Armadorus afterward have killed his Vicentina (tho it were but with kindness),
and she have Dyed within the Twelvemonth, the year and the day, (perhaps as he
might have been Indicted upon the Statute of Stabbing) so the Magistrate might
have been grievously Fined for not having bound him over to the Good behavior;
so after the Oath was Administered according to the form of Law and Justice, and
the Custom of the Country, the Advoyers Orders, Declarations, Warrants,
Placaets, were by consequence Issued out for the Apprehending, Securing,
Seizing, Arresting, Detaining, Conveying, Bringing into safe Custody the Body
of Armadorus, the Helvetian, late of the Canton of Bernino; and to bring it
before Him the said Advoyer, there to answer for such Infirmities and
Misdemeanors, Violences and Insults, Offered upon the Body of Dame Vicentina
his Wife, etc. And this Instrument of Power, Authorities, Jurisdiction, being
directed to all the Seneschals, Sbirri, Squardi, Constabularii, to execute at
their utmost Peril, there was no coming for Armadorus into that part of the
Country, where he would have been quickly surrounded by the Peasantry of the
Neighborhood, like a Fox in a Brake, that but the Night before had worried a
Lamb; but such was his good luck, and so well was he beloved, that one Advoyer,
or Officer of Justice, for his sake would supercede the Warrants and Authority
of Another: And our Helvetian had only the Diversion to see the Malice of his
enraged Mother frustrated; and by giving some slight security to the Public,
had his Liberty of going abroad without fear of the Sbirri, or Constables. But
indeed nothing Afflicted him more than this last procedure of Vicentina's; and
his Passion would often transport him into these Complaints; Cruel Creature! whom
till now I could never believe so, to make me such an Inhuman Monster as to
have offered thee Violence, much more to have designs upon thy Life! Cruel
Vicentina! To-turn that tenderness I did always show to thy Person, into the
Savageness of a Beast, a Beast of prey; as if I had no more Humanity than an
He-Tygre; no more mercy than that has Milk, to destroy the Wife of my Bosom,
the joy of my Heart, the delight of my Soul! You your self, my Dear Vicentina
(tho instigated by the malice of a Mother) do not believe what you have so
rashly Sworn; and how could you believe your Life in danger from him that to
preserve yours, was always ready to Sacrifice his own: All my Comfort is, the
World will never believe this, tho you have Sworn it: were it true, I should be
ashamed to look ever Human Creature in the Face, much less my Father, or any of
my Countrymen; it must have been with kindness if ever I attempted to kill
you; and where you never met with the least Violence, how could you fear so
much hurt? Remember how concerned I was always for your being but the least
indisposed, how you could perceive me to languish with you, and pine away by
Sympathy. Remember how when you would needs imitate the part of a Romantic
Lover, after the Reading of the Tragic Scenes of Cleopatra, of Lucretia, and
such Heroic Ladies as had killed themselves for Love and the like; when you
had a little overacted your part, and let the pointed Sword to pierce that
tender Skin: How the very sight of but one drop of Blood that it drew, was
enough to touch my Heart, and draw more from thence; and your acting Death as
it were to the Life, was enough to have made me dye with the sight, or even the
Apprehension of it: And is this the Man that you fear will bereave you of your
Life? Is this the Man by whose hands you are so afraid to fall? Is Armadorus
then to kill Vicentina! how would you once have startled at the very
Imagination; or abhorred your self, had it but entered your thoughts in a Dream:
but now you have verified the Catastrophe of your foreboding Vision, by making
all the Serene and pleasant Scenes of it terminate even in the blackest Cloud,
in Blood; and in the misery and wild distraction of us both.

These were his ruthful Complaints, that all that heard them regarded,
lamented, condoled, (but the hardened Mother, and unrelenting Wife); and
therefore finding he could make no Impression upon them, nor that Time that
softens Iron and Stone, had turned their Natures, nor all the Importunities of
Friends and Relations, the powers of Flesh and Blood could mollify their
petrified Hearts; he betook himself to the Courts of Equity and Justice, to
make his Complaints and receive Redress; who soon Authorized him by a Legal
Process to demand his Spouse wheresoever he might suspect her to be; which
accordingly he did, in a solemn manner of the Lord of Ogliano, at the Gates of
the said Lord's Castle, and afterward in the Mansion House it self; but she
being denied there to be, or that they detained any such Lady, he was left to
make out his proof by Law, and a solemn Trial; for which both sides prepared
amain: The Gentlemen of the Long-Robe were engaged with Gold, and to fight it
out like Switzers that were well paid (one against another). The Witnesses
were to be Mustred up by Multitudes, and to Swear lustily, and perhaps for Gold
too; And being thus ranged in Battalia, were all ready against the time
appointed to give Battle.

The adverse party had so packt their Cards, and shuffl'd the Young Lady from
place to place, that it was a difficult matter to fix that of her abode, and
prove where she was detained; for Vicentina, that was now brought to stoop to
all their Lures, began to disguise her self wherever she went; and she that
was once like Juno's Bird, or Venus Dove, the beauty and splendour of the Day;
like a Bat began only to buz about by Candlelight, or hover like a night Bird
in the dark; nor would she stir by twilight unless incognito, and (once like
the Italian in Masquerade, that would mimick at a Carnaval a Spaniard and
Frenchman, part per pale, at the same time both in dress and gesture) she was
observed to ride forth in a Cavalcade somewhat extraordinary pleasant, viz. a
good rich Velvet Saddle, and fashionable, upon a sorry Horse with a switch-Tail
that that used to carry Lime, and not Ladies; A gentile Surtout or riding-Suit;
with her Shoulders warmly wrapped up in a good White Serge whittle: A pretty
handsome Commode of the newest fashion, upon which was gracefully placed a good
homely Straw-Hat, with a long Pole like a Sugar Loaf, so that Cit and Bumpkin
seemed never better met or set off since the Creation.

Poor Vicentina! to what hard shifts, to what Obloquies and Reproaches, has thy
blind submission, thy Passive Obedience to an Imperious Mother reduced thee!
But 'twas too late for her to retract; she had her Irons in the Fire, she was
to strike while they were hot, though they burnt her Fingers; and the Lord of
Ogliano, he was drawn in to Espouse the Cause upon the account of the old
Countess his Spouse; and perhaps out of hopes, if all things went well, the
Signiory of Albania, the young Countess's Patrimony might come into his Family;
otherwise he had the Repute of a well-meaning person, that did not love any
litigiousness but what his Old Lady led him to; who having the ascendant, made
her good Lord submit to such conditions, sometimes that went down with
reluctance; and Armadorus himself would always do him that Justice, as not only
to think, but to represent him as unconcerned in those perplexities they had
brought upon him.

The time approacht in which this great Cause was to be decided, not by Combat
as of old, when Appellant and Defendant met to decide it by a Duel: The
Principals, as we have heard before, had been thus engaged on the Nuptial
Night, where it proved but a drawn Battle; here it was come to the Dernier
Resort, and almost the last Appeal, except the highest, and to be decided by a
Judicial Sentence and Decretum Finale; and for that both sides seem provided,
when the Learned Podesta or Judge took his place upon the Bench. After the
preliminaries of the Trial were come to be adjusted, and the Jurors and the
People full of expectation to hear the Evidences, Proofs, and Disproofs,
whether by error in process of the one, or distrust of their cause in the
other, at the instance of the adverse party, this so Remarkable Cause of
Matrimony and Love was put off to another sitting of the Itinerary Judges: to
the great disappointment of all the gay Youth and gallant Young Ladies, who
seemed all mightily concerned for the lovely Armadorus.

But this was only a Remora that for a little while retarded the Affair, a Rub
in the Way, or a Plank that their sinking Cause caught hold of; for before the
succeeding Podesta, or the next sitting of the Judges, it came again to be
Canvass'd and to have a full and fair hearing: The Gallant Armadorus appeared
in all his bravery and splendour, and the Court of Justice was thronged with all
the gay Ladies and Gallant Gentlemen the rich Province could afford, full of
eager expectation, and itching Ears, for the pleasantries and diversions that
the Dialogues and Discoveries of this Love-Intrigue and famous Amor might
afford them. The matter was modestly discust, and so might not answer
expectation, though it did all their hopes in the Cause being carried for the
Noble Armadorus: Cannon played on both sides; on both sides did the evidence
swear and thunder, that the Earth shook withal: But it being clearly made
appear, 1. That the Gallant Armadorus had actually married the Gay Vicentina,
2. That she had been detained from him in the Castle of Ogliano, contrary to
the Laws of Marriage. 3. That he had used to be very fond of her, and never
failed to exercise all his Faculties and utmost efforts, for the giving her all
imaginable satisfaction in her conjugal affection. 4. That this Elopement or
Kid-napping, or Spiriting away of his dear Spouse was to his great prejudice;
and to the hazard and temptation of a wicked violation of an Holy Conjugation.
5. That he had sustained great Damages, and that it had cost him very dear to
pursue his Daphne, that fled and had absconded her self from him only with a
design to deceive him, and by withdrawing her fair Face, to beguile him of her
fairer Fortune. 6. To consummate all, the illustrious Cavaliero, Signior
Armadillo, Commandant de Bernino, and Father of the gallant Armadorus, viva
voce testified that his Son (our Heroic Helvetian) had Overtures made him by
richer and higher persons, and that no less then 6. or 7000. Pistols had been
offered him for Dower in his own Country; an huge sum, and sufficient to
defray a Tax of an whole Canton in their Helvetique Body; amounting nearly to
77000. Livers. That the adverse party had brought an Ignominious scandal upon
their Noble Family by endeavoring secretly to deceive, and openly to traduce
his Son Armadorus, the flourishing Branch and greatest Hopes of it: That in his
Old Age he had undertaken a long Pilgrimage by Land and Sea, to vindicate his
Son, by his own presence, from the scandal of being of an obscure Birth. That
himself was Generalissimo to the vast Republic of the Canton of Bernino, and
his Son was to succeed him in that high Command; and that he hoped (tho
Strangers) they should receive Justice for their Injuries sustained.

The Adverse party on the other hand, undertook strongly to prove, that the
passionate Switzer, was able to swear Thundering and Lightning Oaths; that the
Young Helvetian had been so robust, that he had broke all the Bonds of
Matrimony: That he had taken his Ladies best Bits, and the Food she most
delighred in, and barbarously given it to the Dogs. Item that longing once but
for a Woodcocks Leg, he had before her face inhumanely thrown it into the Fire,
and made a Grillion of what she designed for a Fricazee: Icem, That being wont
to humble himself on his Knees whilst she did use to attire him in her best
Commode and most becoming dress, he was of late grown so stiff and stubborn, as
to force her to kneel while he attired her in his long Peruke, and cocking
Beaver. Item, That he had put his Lady often into many fainting Fits that she
could hardly fetch her Breath, and was ready to dye away, etc. -- All which
formidable Averments being made out upon Oath, made the whole Court of Ladies
mightily concerned for their admired Armadorus, as doubting what might be the
issue of so dubious a point; and sorry that his kindness to the Female Sex
should have all this sad occasion to be called in question; but to be short,
after the Eloquent, and the Learned Lawyers, and the Council on both sides had
sufficiently Harangu'd and Satyriz'd; after the Tres Sage, and Tres Reverend
the Jage, had impartially and ingenuously with much Judgment and Learning
summed up all that had been materially said in a little, and taken the merits
of along cause in shorthand; It was left to the Jurors, or 12. Persons
(according to the custom of the Country) to decide it by their final verdict,
or Decretum finale; which soon followed to this effect: That considering the
damages, and disappoinments he had sustained during the detention of his Wife
and dearest Spouse, to the peril of his Continency, and the impairing of his
health by abstinency, and also considering of what evil consequences it would
be to the whole Country, (and what might be every Man of them their own Case)
should their Wives be suffered to make such extravagant Elopements, and
unnaturally withdraw themselves from their Husbands to lie single when the Law
obliges them to be under Coverture; They therefore in terrorum to all such
Female Offenders, did award, declare, assign, decree, or give unto the
Illustrious Armadorus, Son and Heir Apparent of the Noble Signior Armadillo
Commandant de Bernino in the Country of Helvetia, the sum of 1200 Doppio's or
Pistols D' Espaign, amounting to 13200. Livers French; sufficient to purchase a
great Signiory or Lordship in the Canton de Bernino; and at any time to be
settled when she should return, and they two should better agree, on the Dame
Vicentina for her Jointure in lieu and recompense of her vast Fortune she
brought him, and what was justly due to the merits of her deserving Person and
extraordinary Dower.

This Verdict for Armadorus, as it transported him not a little, so it affected
no less almost the whole Court: The Adverse Party being but a few, could not
obscure with their cloudy Countenances, the Serenity that seemed to appear in
every Face. The Gallant Helvetian with a great deal of Modesty, and a graceful
Air, received the Caresses of the gay Gentlemen, his Acquaintance, and the
Compliments of the Young languishing Ladies, that did both admire and
commiserate him: and so far was his triumph from Exalting him to insult over
his vanquished Adversaries, or exasperating him against those that had given
him all this trouble, that he offered himself soon after to be ready to receive
any Proposals of Reconciliation with his Dear Spouse and her Relations; not so
much as leaving out of the Treaty, nor excluding from the Alliance, the
Countess-Dowager, that by most was supposed to have done all the mischief; and
did as openly and generously aver, That if his Dear Vicentina would return to
her Duty, he would enter again into a League Offensive and Defensive with her:
Love her more than e're she did him, or he her before; and for a more solemn
Confirmation of it, to Solemnize again his Matrimony, and Institute a new
Festival Wedding for the utter Abolishing of all old Feuds and former
Animosities.

Thus far (Gentle Reader) if the soft subject of tender and exalted Love, that
at last terminated in as Eternal and Extreme a Discord, can move thy Breast to
Admiration and Compassion, have these divided Lovers furnished thee with matter
for both be not severe in Censuring either; since neither of them can be truly
Criminated as faulty: The faults of Lovers at the worst are but Infirmities;
and instead of being their Crimes, are more commonly the Decrees of their Fate
and Destiny; and it is their Dispensations that have afforded thee here this
History (Reader) instead of a Romance. The Trojan Hero never past through more
difficult Adventures of Love and Arms than our Gallant Helvetian; hoth had an
angry Juno to contend with, as well as a Friendly Venus that favored them;
both were involved first in a Tempestuous Storm, by the furious blusterings of
Eclus; and the Foaming Billows of Neptune, before they could Land at the
Calm-Haven of Carthage, and have a sight of their Fair and Incomparable Dido.
It was both their fates to have their Queen of Beauty soon Enamoured with their
goodly Personages; and the stories of their Wars, and wanderings; both pledged
their Loves and Faith in a Storm, and me^ in Rain and Tempest; and both at last
sadly parted without leaving so much as a little Aeneas, or young Armadillo to
play with the Mother, or resemble the Dad: And this happy Disparity does alone
Discontiune the Parallel, that after all this falling out, both were agreed not
to Sacrifice themselves upon a Funeral Pile, and foolishly to follow the
Example of the most Effeminate Carthaginian, in falling Victims to that fond
Love and Passion which they had once so eagerly indulged, and in which of late
they were so deeply engaged.

And here it is time to stop the Course of History, where the Heroic Subjects
of it are at a sort of stand; as they proceed further in their Adventures, they
will afford the World farther Admiration in the Reading of their Lives; this
will appear but imperfect, a Chasm in Chronology, and an abrupt Fragment in
History, unless by their Progress in Heroic Adventures, they furnish matter
for a Supplement, and fill up the blanks in the next Edition, as handsomely as
the last Editor has done those of Petronius.

However, it is to be wished for Love sake, for Pities sake, for poor
Vicentina's and her Dear Armadorus's sake, and to prevent the sad influence
that such presidents and preposterous Examples of wrangling Lovers may have
upon raw and unexperienced Youth; to the quenching the heat of their Amors, or
perverting the Nature of Conjugal Affection, That a period was put to those
Unnatural Divisions between so Illustrious an Husband and so loving a Wife;
that Armadorus and Vicentina might meet and embrace again, and clasp each other
in those Longing Arms with the same Love that held his Torch to the Nuptial
Night. And who knows but that the Noble Armadorus might be sent to People her
Albania, as the famous Aeneas, that proper and personable Dardan, once (as
Bards do write) did populate and multiply upon the Fair and Fruitful Coast of
Italy? The Trojans in the former Ages were only famed for their Military
Exploits, as our Helvetians are in this. Armadorus and Vicentina may both
descend from as Martial Ancestors. Their very Names and Etymons, are fruitful
of far-b^ded Trophies, and big with Omens of their future Triumph: Armadorus
and Vicentina seem to sound forth War and Victory, and from whose Sides and
Loins may spring to populate their Land, a Noble Race of Warlike and Undaunted
Heroes.

FINIS.

