Advice for Choosing COMMON COUNCIL Men.
THE Common Council of London having a Trust of so great Concernment to the
City, and in it to the Nation, committed to them, it greatly concerns the
Electors, especially in this Critical time, to take a special care to choose
such as will strennously maintain the Rights and Liberties of the City, and
have demonstrated themselves to be of moderate and healing Principles.

Wherefore those are not to be chosen, I. Who were for the delivering up the
Charter and all the Liberties and Franchises of the City into the hands of the
King, at the instigation and persuasion of the King's Evil Counselors. For as
in the Primitive times, those Christians who at the threats of the Emperor's
Ministers delivered up their Bibles, that were the Charters of their Religion,
into those Minister's hands, were most hardly of all other Apostates censured
by the Faithful, (branded with the name of Traitors) and were not restored to
their Assemblies till they had undergone the severest Penances: So neither is
it prudent nor equal, that those, who did what in them lay to betray whatsoever
of Privilege or Immunity the City could lay claim to by Charter or
Prescription, into the hands of the King's Ministers, should be made Members
again of that Assembly, till they have at least for some Years approved their
repentance for so great a Treason, by cordially standing up for (in a private
capacity) what then they would have betrayed.

Nor II. ought any to be chosen who were so far Enemies to All Corporations, as
to make any Presents to Sir Rog. L' Estrange for his good Service in his
Observators, a good part whereof were writ to show the mischief of having so
many little Commonwealths (as he called them) in a Kingdom; and that the Crown
could not be safe, nor the King, indeed King, till His Majesty had the Power of
approving, putting in or casting out whom he pleased.

Nor III. any that were of Mr. Cornish's Jury, who by their Verdict showed
themselves to be persons of the greatest rancour and prejudice in the World.
How otherwise could they have found a person Guilty of so great a Crime upon so
slender and even scandalous Evidence, as that of those who swore to take away
his life, that they might save their own: (being not then pardoned) insomuch
that his greatest Enemies could not but confess he had hard measure.

Nor IV. Any of the late Regulators, or those that were persuaded by them to
promise to be for the taking off the Penal Laws and Tests, without exception.

Nor, Lastly, those who in the late times of persecuting Dissenters, were
violent against them even beyond the Law, in pulling down their Meeting Houses,
and finding them guilty or Riots, and so subjecting them to the Arbitrary Fines
of the worst of Men.

If it be said, That these things ought to be forgotten, because those that
were guilty, see their mistake, and are sorry for it; and therefore ought to
stand as fair as others.

I answer, Let them do something that may demonstrate their sorrow and
concern'dness for their faults, before they are forgiven them. And if they be
then past by, they will have no reason to complain. However I would not have
them served, as they served others: not turn them out from being Masters,
Wardens or Assistants of their Companies, or even of the Livery: but let them
enjoy all the Privileges that, as Citizens, they have right to. But it would
argue a too fond indulgence, to prefer them to the greatest Trust a Commoner is
capable of in the City, rather than those who for their Tightness to its
Interests and Rights, have suffered so much both in their Goods and good name.

For much rather ought those to be chosen who I. Were for maintaining the
Charter, so far as by Law they might.

II. Who were for maintaining the Freedom of Elections according to
Prescription, against the Vsuations of a Court-ridden Mayor.

III. Who always showed themselves to be Men of Moderate Principles, willing to
bear with those that dissented from them in the outward Modes or Circumstances
of Worship, or in Opinions of Religion, of less moment. Such as for their
Christian Love and Charity have sustained the ignominious name of Trimmers, and
been bated at by the Observator and his Admirers.

IV. Let those be chosen who have something of Religion, besides the Name of
Protestant, to ^ommend them. Such as are no Drunkards, Swearers, nor Profaners
of the Lord's Day: that ^ave a good reputation for Wisdom and Prudence, are
esteemed honest Dealers, good Neighbors, and truly Loyal Subjects.

If we have a Common Council made up of such, we may then expect wholesome
Orders, heal^ng and moderate Counsels, a lasting closure of the present
Breaches, and everything so managed (...) may become the Honor, and conduce to
the real Interest of this famons City. Amen.


