The Addresses Importing an ABHORRENCE OF An Association, Pretended to have
been seized in the E. of Shaftsbury's Closet, Laid open and Detected.
In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
I Perceive by yours of March 4th. that the Fermentation which the Nation is
put into, must be cherished by the same ways and methods that it was first
occasioned and caused: For should the heats and animosities among Protestants
be once suffered to assuage and abate, the Romish Designs against the
Protestant Religion and the Liberties of England, would not only miscarry and
prove abortive; but they who have been wheedled to betray God and their
Country, by contributing ignorantly to the promotion and service of their Ends,
would be the first to express their Indignation against the Papists, both as an
effect of their resentment, for having been through their influence, thrown
into a Lunacy and Delirium, and as an Evidence to the Kingdom that they are at
last cured of their Distraction. And therefore the Operation and Efficacy of
the Declaration against the two last Parliaments being wholly spent, I am not
surprised to find an advantage taken from a pretended Paper, importing an
Unlawful Association against the Government; for the perpetuating rancours
amongst His Majesty's Liege People, and the casting those back again into a
Fever, who were recovering their senses, and coming to a sedate mind: And as
all men are worse upon Relapses than they were of their first Diseases; so we
are not to think it strange, that people are more extravagant in their late
Addresses, than they were in the former. But there being so many things to be
said in return to your Letter, and being by Command confined to represent my
Thoughts in one Sheet, I shall Preface no farther, but apply my self to obey
you in the most compendious manner I can.

Nor shall I pronounce that of the late Addresses, which a Celebrated and
Court-Author does, concerning those made to Oliver Cromwell; namely, That they
were no other than Leagues Offensive and Defensive between him and the Faction;
^emento 2d Edit. p. 29.
and that while his Care was for engaging one Party, it was for destroying
another. For though some little Folk, who officiously manage this affair, may
have such a Project, yet it is impossible that His Majesty should either
propose or countenance so base and destructive a Design.

Nor will I say, That it had been but reasonable, That they who do embark in
new Addresses, should have first seen the fruits and effect of their former:
For whereas they seek to justify themselves in what they did, by the
Assurances which they suppose His Majesty gave them of having frequent
Parliaments, though he had Dissolved Two or Three, without giving them time to
perfect those Important Matters which the whole Nation apprehended they were
called for; so it would have been some Argument of the Candor and Sincerity of
their intentions in what they did before, if they had forborne their late
Applications, till they had found that they were not mistaken in the grounds
upon which they think to vindicate themselves for what they then did.

Neither will I insist upon this, That it had become them to be well assured
that there was such a Paper styled an Association found in my Lord Shaftsbury's
Closet, before they took upon them to talk so loudly of it, and vent themselves
in so strange and unaccountable expressions upon Mr Gwyns bare suggestion of
such a thing. For as it is most certain, that it was not the foundation of my
Lords Apprehension and Commitment, seeing the Bag into which it was put, when
said to be seized in his Lordships Study, was not opened till after his
Confinement in the Tower for High Treason; so it is not impossible but that
they who had the confidence to impose other things upon this Noble Peer in the
printed Relation of the proceedings at the Old-Bayly, than were deposed by the
Witnesses in Court, might with the same liberty and for the same end, forge and
invent this Paper, and ascribe it to his Lordship. For whereas Smith upon
giving his Evidence at the Bar said, that the Earl of Shaftsbury told him he
was sorry that the King saw not his danger, etc. They who undertook the
communicating those proceedi^gs to the World, make Smith declare upon Oath that
the said Earl told him, he was glad the King saw not his danger.

Nor shall I insist upon this, That it had been but congruous, and what became
English men, to have testified their detestation of the many late Sham Plots
whereby our Enemies have been endeavoring to destroy Loyal and innocent
Protestants, as well as their declaring an Abhorrency of a pretended
Association against the Monarchy; and the rather, because the forging crimes
for involving guiltless persons in danger, has been real; whereas such an
Association as the late Clamor is raised upon, was, for what yet appears, only
feigned and imaginary. We have seen some of the best persons in the Kingdom
cast into Prisons and arraigned in Courts upon malicious subornations, and
Popish Sham conspiracies; but no man can produce so much as a Name subscribed
to any Paper, whereby to persuade himself or others of a combination against
His Majesty and the Government. Nor can they be thought to bear any great
Loyalty to the King, who have not some regard for the safety of his Protestant
Subjects, and the preservation of the Protestant Religion. And therefore while
some are so busy here and there to gather hands to Addresses of another
Nature, it were but a seasonable piece of service to the King, and a duty which
all Law both Divine and Humane will justify, for others to make an Address to
His Majesty, that we may have the benefit and protection of his Government, and
that our Lives and Estates may be defended from the malice of those, who by
hiring and suborning mercinary Villians to swear forged Crimes against us, have
been unweariedly designing our ruin. And as it is not to be supposed that an
application of this nature would be unacceptable to the King, the end and aim
of his Reign being not only to look after our obedience to his Law, but to see
that we are kept safe from the wrath and rage of our Enemies; so it would tend
to the honor of London to lead the way to others in so useful, and at this
time so necessary a duty.

Nor shall I do more but barely intimate, that it looks ill, and seems
calculated for no good design, to find Addresses for dissolving Parliaments,
and abhorring all Associations, countenanced and promoted, while Petitions for
a Parliament were forbidden by Proclamation, and the Petitioners publicly
reprimanded. For supposing that some one Paper bearing the Name of an
Association, was unduly framed and worded; is this a justifiable ground to
ridicule and Abhor every Association, though never so well adapted for the
preservation of His Majesty's Person and Dignity, and promoted in a
Parliamentary way, and not to take till it receive the Royal stamp? How
strangely does it look in a well-governed State, to find such a one as the
Mayor of Gl. who was admitted into the freedom of that City, for the good
sevice which he did in fighting against Charles Steward at Worcester, (as the
words inserted in their Town-Book bear) to be hugged and embraced for advancing
Addresses of one complexion, while in the mean time many Loyal Gentlemen who
shed their Blood, lost their Estates and underwent Imprisonment and Exile for
the King are frowned upon for offering to appear in applications of another
figure. Men of Principles act always uniformly; whereas such as are swayed by
interest, are ready to engage with the same heat in every thing that lies in
subserviency to their gain. Some people think it not enough to atone for their
former actions by their future Loyalty, but they seek to expiate their Crimes
on one side, by running into illegal, rigorous, and mad excesses on the other.
And I heartily wish, that an eminent Magistrate in the City of London, may not
hope to make a compensation for having been a Clerk to a Regiment in the War
against the late King, by complying with and pursuing whatsoever some men about
the Court, or such who are influenced by those that are, put him upon. But what
is this age degenerated into, that they who have served themselves of
Dissenters in order to their getting into places of Trust, by proclaiming what
blessed opportunities they have enjoyed with that sort of men under this and
that Nonconformist Minister, should instead of expressing a concern for the
Protestant Religion answerable to the are of it and the stations they are in,
not only abandon, but from weakness, fear, or worse Principles, submit to be
Tools to accelerate its ruin.

However I am sure the Government has no cause of apprehending danger either
from Phanatick Preachers or Poeple, seeing some of the most famed amongst them,
after having been a hundred times deceived and imposed upon, are still ready to
be bribed by a dinner or a smile, or wheedled by a fair word to cooperate with
their enemies, and become instrumental of their own destruction. And therefore
it is to be desired, that some of the dissenting Ecclesiastics would be
contented with Grace, which is the Talent that God has given them, and not
pretend to Civil Wisdom, seeing it is evident to all the world, that the Great
Dispenser has withheld it from them.

These thing being briefly intimated, it is now time to advance those
Reflections and Observations which we judge proper to be offered upon the
occasion of the late Abhorring Addresses. Nor will it be amiss in the first
place, to take notice how some men's opinions concerning these kind of
Applications, do alter and vary according to, and in correspondence with the
design and interests which men serve. For the very person that is not only
principally employed in framing the draughts which are remitted into the
Country, where Lieutennants, Justices and Curates, are commissioned to procure
subscriptions to them, but whose Province it is to publish their usefulness to
the Government, and to make the world believe what security the State receives
from them in order to its support in the pursuance of present Councels: I say,
this very Gentleman had different thoughts concerning Addresses some years ago
when they came in sholes to Oliver Cromwell, and with great multitudes of hands
subjoined to them, from what he now has.

For says he, Those numerous and pretended Applications, as they were but an
Artifice to piece up the Protectors broken Power as far as well it could be,
See Mr. L'Estranges Memento p. 30.
so they were but false Glosses upon his Power, and Cromwell was too wise to
think them other. For being gained by contrivement and force, or at least by
importunity; half a score pitiful wretches styled themselves the people of such
or such a County, and there was the Total of the reckoning.

But we may the less wonder at this change of Judgment in some men, as to the
significancy or insignificancy of Addresses, if we consider how the opinion of
the Papists is much altered from what it was 90 years ago, as to the Right
which the next in the Royal Line has to inherit the Crown after the Ruling
Prince. For whereas we have nothing from them now, but that it is an
unpardonable Sin to exclude the Presumptive Heir, be his Principles what they
will, and our danger from him in case he succeed, never so visible; they spoke
another kind of Language toward the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when they
foresaw that a Protestant was likely after her to ascend the Throne; namely,
That Succession to Government is neither established by the Law of Nature, See
Doleman.
nor the Law of Revelation, but only by Humane Sanctions, which men may cancel
and alter as their interest determines them. For though they tell us now of the
indispensable Obligations we are under, of submitting quietly, in case His
Majesty should Die, to the D. of Y. albeit we cannot but think the subversion
of our Religion and the extirpation of our selves ready to ensue thereupon; yet
they were pleased to tell our Ancestors, that no Free people were under Ties to
the next of the Royal Line, but that they ought to put the Scepter into such a
ones hand, under whom they might promise themselves to live with Safety and
Honor.

But we may the more easily pardon the Papists for shifting Principles
according to the posture which their affairs stand in, if we will observe how
the Protestants of this Age differ from those of the former, in reference to
the duty of submitting to, or debarring a Popish Successor: For whereas
heretofore not only the whole Clergy, but the Nobility and Gentry, Courtiers as
well as others, derived their main Arguments against Mary Queen of Scots, from
the danger that the Protestant Religion would be in, if being in their power,
she were suffered to survive Queen Elizabeth: It is now come to pass, that many
of all Orders and Ranks, who pretend themselves Protestants, are not only
contented that a Popish Prince may be dispensed with as to his Religion
himself, and live quietly amongst them, but they seem uneasy in having a
Protestant King, and long to have one of Popish Principles to Rule over them.
See Bows Journals.
How disagreeable as to a Popish Successor, are the late Addresses, from the
Petitions, Votes and Acts of Parliament, and the carriage of the whole Kingdom
in the 14 27, 28 and 29 years of Queen Elizabeth? Then an Association to
Revenge the Death of the Queen upon the Papists, in case she came to an
untimely end, was esteemed a piece of Loyalty, and promoted by the Chief
Ministers of State; but now the Abhorring not only an ill-fram'd Paper bearing
that Title, but all kinds of Associations of this nature and tendency, if His
Majesty should fall by Popish hands, is accounted the Character both of a good
Subject, and a true Church-of- England man. Do we live in the same Clime that
our Ancestors did? or does the like generous Blood run in our Veins, which did
in theirs? Alas, by running counter to the wisdom of our Forefathers, we
proclaim our selves a degenerate Issue, and are a reproach to the Memory of
them who begot us, and who transmitted the Protestant Religion and English
Liberties down to us!

And as all Addresses of this Nature tend to render the King, who ought to
Reign in the hearts of all his People, the Head merely of one part, and that a
very inconsiderable one if compared with the bulk of the Nation; so they only
serve to publish to all the world the distractions of the Kingdom, and to
proclaim in the face of the Sun the weakness of the Government. What do the
foreigners say upon the perusal of our Gazets, but that either things are not
managed in England according to the ^^ws of the Constitution, or that his
Majesty of great Britain Reigos precariously, seeing his Ministers seek to
support the Transactions of State, by courting the applause of a few little
folk here and there through the Kingdom? Nor can any sort of men do the King a
greater disservice, than to administer grounds to our neighbors abroad, to
entertain such sentiments of us and our affairs. I tremble to think what the
wisest amongst our selves say of these proceedings; for though all men acquit his
Majesty from any intentions but what are gracious as well as just; yet they
cannot but judge that some ill men are by these Addresses endeavoring to number
the People, and to enroll Partisans for some hidden design.

But the most fatal effect and consequence of these Addresses, is the depriving
the King of that security which the wisdom of the Parliament had provided for
his Person against the Papists. For as nothing is so dear to a true English
Parliament, as the Life of their Sovereign; so the best expedient which our
late Parliaments could think of to preserve his Majesty from the dangers which
he was exposed unto from the conspiracies of the Romish Crew, was the proposing
an Association amongst Protestants to revenge his Death. And as they could
entertain no friendship for the King, who advised him to dissolve the
Parliament before that Bill was prepared and past; so it is apparent, that
whosoever countenanceth the abhorrence of all Associations, does what in him
lies to leave the King open and naked to the hellish designs of the Romish
Faction.

Nor is it unworthy the serious consideration of all Loyal persons, how they
have both provided against the revenge of the Nation, and for their own
establishment in Power, in case His Majesty should be taken off; for as they
have excluded all endeavors of revenging his Death, by getting every thing
ridiculed and abhorred, that lies in subserviency thereunto; so they have taken
care for their own safety after the perpetration of such a Villainy, by
obtaining all places Civil and Military to be filled with such in whom they may
entirely confide; and as it is not long since the King of Portugal was laid
aside and confined to the Tarcera's; so it is remarkable, That it was effected
without a Blow, and by this more than any thing else, That there was none in
public employ, but who were Zealots for his Brother that supplanted him, and
stepped into his Throne.

But are such as Subscribe these Addresses, sensible whereabout we are, and how
much the Popish interest is advanced within these two years? for has not the
D. of Y. intruded himself into the administration of affairs in Scotland,
without taking the Oaths which the Laws of that Kingdom do require? Has he not
at the same time that he caused Protestant Dissenters to be disturbed and
apprehended, permitted Mass to be said under the same Roof, or at the next
Door? Has he given any security to Protestants there, for their safety in the
Profession of the Protestant Religion, though he has gotten himself excepted
from all Tests that relate to the preservation or Liberty of it? Are not the
Papists in Lancashire arrived to that boldness, as to Murder His Majesty's
Officers in the discharge of their Duty, and to rescue Recusants out of the
hands of those that had taken them in Execution? Has not the High Sheriff of
Northumberland carried Esquire Riddel and Esquire Claverine, and diverse other Papists
who were Prisoners for the Popish Plot, to Edinburgh, to Kiss the Dukes hand,
and this both in defiance of all Law, and against his Trust? But it would
require a Volume to recount all I know of this nature; and therefore shall only
add, That they must be prepared to worship the Host, and wear Chains, who
either promote or subscribe the Addresses which are now carrying on.

I am Sir, entirely yours.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwyn, 1682.


