Advice To CREDITORS, Or a Safe and Sure way To Secure Bad Debts, Such Debts as
the Debtors are Poor and are not Able to Pay them; and that without Wronging or
Prejudicing the Poor Debtors: And showing how to Lend, so as not to miss of
being Paid again.
By one who is a Lover of Christianity.
Heb. 10.24. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto Love and to Good
Works.

Prove. 31.8. Open thy Mouth for the Dumb, in the cause of all such as are
appointed to Destruction.

Verse 9. Open thy Mouth, Judge Righteously, and Plead the Cause of the Poor
and Needy.


Licensed, October 1. 1687.

HOw shall he that has several Debts owing to him from such Persons that are
Poor and have nothing to pay, how may the Creditor secure himself so as to be
paid, and not hurt or prejudice the poor Debtors?

Answer. It is good for the Creditor in such a case to take good and sufficient
Security, that is able and willing to pay; and when he has engaged him to it,
to look for it and expect to receive it wholly from the Security, and not from
the first Debtor, he being not able to pay it.

Objection. But the Creditor may say I would be glad to take such Security as
you speak of, and I would do it with all my heart; but men that are able are
not so willing to engage themselves to pay other men's Debts for them; how then
can I do thus as you say to be paid?

Ans. First let me ask you this question: Do you believe the Scriptures, the
Old and New Testament to be the Revealed will of God?

Ans. Yes I do, for who that professes himself a Christian will deny that?

Quest. 2. And do you believe what is written in the Scriptures to be true, and
that the promises and threatenings will certainly be performed?

Ans. Yes I do believe this.

Then pray seriously consider this Scripture in Prove. 19.17. He that has pity
upon the Poor, lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given will he pay
him again.

Now if you should have so much pity on your poor Debtor, that instead of
Arresting of him and casting him into Prison, and taking the Rigor of the Law
against him, which you have power to do, yet if you should put forth such a
Noble Act of Grace and Mercy and Pity to your poor Debtor [he being not able to
pay you] as to give him all that is owing to you, and to give him a perfect and
full discharge from under your hand; and if you do thus, have you not then had
pity upon the Poor, and given him so much as your just Debt was?

Then for that which you have given to the Poor, you may take God for your
Security, who is able and is willing to pay you, and has promised in his word,
that he will pay you again. This promise is made as much to you as if your Name
had been particularly therein mentioned, if you have had pity upon the Poor,
and have given to the Poor: Then you are one of those that this Promise belongs
unto. O what Security is here! is God willing to be the Poor Man's Security, and
do you refuse to accept of him alone for your Security, so as to freely acquit
and discharge your poor Debtor without payment, he being not able to pay you?

Now so long as you do not discharge your poor Debtor of that which he owes
you, it is not given unto him, because he stands still engaged to pay it if
ever he is able; and tho he is not able to pay it, yet he is in danger of being
Arrested and cast into Prison for it, and there to live until the Debt be paid;
which he may never be able to do so long as he lives. And if you should serve
your poor Debtor thus, that is not able to pay you: consider this, If you were
in his condition, would you willingly have another deal so by you? Luke 6.31.
And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise: And
Mat. 7.12. Therefore all things whatsoever you would that men should do to you,
do you even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. Now this is the
Law that Christ lays down before men to be observed and obeyed; and the not
obeying this Law is Sin. Now this general Rule ought to be observed both by the
Debtor and Creditor: the Debtor ought to deal so to his Creditor as he would
willingly any Debtor of his at any time should deal so by him, his Debtor being
in the like condition; and the Creditor ought to deal so with his Debtor, as he
would willingly that any Creditor of his at any time should deal so by him, he
being in the like condition to his Creditor, as his Debtor is to him, 1 Timothy
1.8,9,10. the 8 Verse. But we know that the Law is good if a Man use it
Lawfully. Micah 7.8. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good, and what does
the Lord require of thee, but to do Justly, and love Mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God? God requires this of us, To love Mercy. Now those that will show
no mercy to their poor Debtors that are not able to pay them, let them have a
care that they do not shut themselves out from Mercy, James 2.13. For he shall
have Judgment without Mercy that has showed no Mercy, and Mercy rejoices
against Judgment, Prove. 11.17,18,19,20,21. the 17 V. The Merciful Man does good
to his own Soul; but he that is Cruel troubles his own Flesh, Gal. 6.7. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a Man Sows, that shall he also
Reap, Mat. 18.21. to the end of the Chapter.

V. 21. Then came Peter to him and said, Lord how often shall my Brother Sin
against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? 22. Jesus says unto him, I
say not unto thee, until seven times, but until seventy times seven. 23.
Therefore is the Kingdom of Heaven likened unto a certain King which would take
account of his Servants. 24. And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought
unto him which owed him ten thousand Talents. 25. But for as much as he had not
to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his Wife and Children, and all
that he had, and payment to be made. 26. The Servant therefore fell down, and
Worshipped him, saying, Lord, have patience with me and I will pay thee all.
27. Then the Lord of that Servant was moved with Compassion and loosed him, and
forgave him the Debt. 29. But the same Servant went out and found one of his
Fellow Servants which owed him an hundred Pence, and he laid Hands on him, and
took him by the Throat, saying pay me that thou owe. 29. And his Fellow
Servant fell down at his Feet and be sought him, saying, Have patience with me
and I will pay thee all. 30. And he would not, but went and cast him into
Prison till he should pay the Debt. 31. So when his Fellow Servants saw what
was done, they were very sorry, and came and told unto their Lord all that was
done. 32. Then his Lord after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou
Wicked Servant, I forgave thee all that Debt because thou desire me, 33.
should not thou also have had Compassion on thy Fellow Servant, even as I
had Pity on thee? 34. And his Lord was Wroth, and delivered him to the
Tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him. 35. So likewise shall
my Heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your Hearts forgive not every
one his Brother their Trespasses.

But some may say we ought to show Mercy unto our poor Debtors when they are
honest and would pay, but have it not to pay neither in Money nor in Goods; but
yet what need we give our poor Debtors a discharge, is it not as well if we let
them alone and do not trouble them, for though they are not able to pay us now,
we don't know but in time they may be able to pay us?

Ans. I must confess this is a kindness, and ought to be considered and owned
by the Debtor as a great favor, when his Creditor will forbear troubling of
him: and you that do for bear troubling your poor Debtors, God is able to
incline the Hearts of some that you may be Indebted unto, to show you the like
favor of forbearance, Mat. 7.2. And with what measure ye meet, it shall be
measured to you again. But forbearance is no payment, and as long as the Debtor
is under any Obligation to pay it, then it is not given; and if it is not
given, then you have only your poor Debtor for your Security; then God is not
engaged to pay this Debt, because it is not given to the poor* for they that do
not give unto the poor, have no right to those Promises that are made to them
that do give, but shut themselves out from the Bounds and Limits of all those
Promises, with their not giving: But God has promised to pay that to you again
which you have given unto the Poor; when a Creditor does freely discharge a
poor Debtor of a just Debt without payment, and acquit him as much as if he had
really paid him, then that which was really due to him before from his Debtor,
it is then, and not until then, declared to be given. Now if a Creditor
discharging a poor Debtor without payment, by giving him so much as their just
Debt was; then they that thus give, have a right unto all those Promises that
are made unto them that give unto the Poor, Prove. 19.17. He that has pity upon
the Poor, lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given, will he pay him
again. O what Security is here! who would not acquit or discharge a poor Debtor
that is not able to pay his Debt, to have the Debt removed from him to one that
is able and willing to pay it, and will engage himself to pay it: do you think
it is possible ever to find better Security then God himself, promising in his
Word to pay you again? There is no better Security in the World; no nor in
Heaven neither, then to have the Lord God of Heaven and Earth to be Indebted to
you by Promise. Now if you were not afraid to Lend unto poor Mortal Men, why
should you be unwilling to lend unto the Lord? which you may do by giving unto
the Poor, and that which you have given will he pay you again. Now how easily
may they that have several Debts owing them from such who are poor and have
nothing to pay, secure to themselves that which is owing to them, if they would
give their Debtors freely a clear discharge without payment or any conditions
to Oblige them to pay it. When a Creditor has done thus to his poor Debtor,
then has he given him so much as his just Debt was; and that which he has
given, will the Lord pay him again; the Lord is willing to be the poor Man's
Security: But what is the matter why you do not take his Word and Promise for
your Security? Do you think he is not able to pay you, or do you think that he
will not perform what he has promised in his Word? The Justice, Power, Wisdom,
and Righteousness of God are engaged to perform what he has promised in his
Word: why then are you so backward and so unwilling to take Gods Word, and to
believe that what he has promised shall not be performed. He who made the
Heavens and the Earth, and all that in them is, He who is Infinite in all his
Attributes, in Power, in Wisdom, Justice and Righteousness, and shall we refuse
to venture these small Temporal things upon the promises of Gods Word? Shall we
deny to give to the Poor according to the ability which God has given to us,
when that which we have given unto the Poor, the Lord does take it as lent unto
himself, and has promised to pay us again? How will you make it appear unto
others, that you are a Believer, and that you do believe God upon his Word,
with respect unto your Eternal Salvation, when you do declare by your Actions,
that you dare not take Gods Word or believe his Promises for five, or ten, or
twenty, or a hundred Pounds, which may be owing to you from your poor Debtor,
which is not able to pay you? Oh! how do you dishonor God with your Unbelief,
and cast a reflection upon God, as if either he had not power to perform what
he has promised, or else was not willing to do what he promised? Oh! how do
you cast a reflection upon the Power and Faithfulness, Justice and
Righteousness of God, who is infinite in Power and Righteousness, and in all
his Attributes? Now though Unbelief may speak thus, If I give unto the Poor,
this is the way to lack my self. But what says the Scripture? If the Scripture
speaks the contrary things, we ought to believe what the Word of God in the
Scripture says. See Pov. 28.27. He that gives unto the Poor shall not lack;
but he that hides his Eyes shall have many a Curse: Prove. 11.24.25. There is
that scatters; and yet increases, and there is that withholds more then
is meet, but it tends to Poverty. 25. The Liberal Soul shall be made Fat; and
he that Waters, shall be Watered also himself. Prove. 10.22. The Blessing of
the Lord it makes rich, and he adds no Sorrow with it: Psalm. 41.1,2,3. 1st.
Blessed is he that considers the Poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of
Trouble. 2d. The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive; and he shall be
blessed upon the Earth, and thou will not deliver him to the will of his
Enemies. 3d. The Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of Languishing; thou will make all his Bed in his Sickness. Deuteronomy. 15.1. to 12; the 7 th. If there be
among you a Poor Man of one of thy Brethren within any of thy Gates in thy Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden thy Heart nor shut
thine Hand from thy poor Brother. 8th. But thou shall open thine Hand wide unto
him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need in that which he
wants. 9th. Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked Heart, saying,
The seventh Year, the Year of Release is at hand, and thine Eye be Evil against
thy poor Brother; and thou give him naught, and he cry unto the Lord against
thee, and it be Sin unto thee. 10th. Thou shall surely give him; and thine
Heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him, because that for this
thing the Lord thy God shall Bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou
put thine Hand unto. 11th. For the Poor shall never cease out of the Land;
therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall open thine Hand wide unto thy
Brother, to thy Poor, and to thy Needy in the Land. 2 Cor. 9.6. to the end of
the Chapter. The 6th. But this I say, He which Sows Sparingly, shall Reap
Sparingly; and he which Sows Bountifully, shall Reap Bountifvlly. The 7th.
Every man according as he purposes in his Heart, so let him give, not
grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves a Cheerful giver. 8th. And God is
able to make all Grace abound toward you, that ye always having all
sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work. 9th. As it is
written, He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor, his Righteousness
remains for ever. Isa. 58. from the 1 to the 12 Verse. The 6th. Is not this
the Fast that I have chosen, to loose the Bands of Wickedness, to undo the
heavy Burdens, and to let the Oppressed go free, and that ye break every Yoke.
7th. Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor
that are cast out to thy House; when thou see the Naked, that thou cover him;
and that thou hide not thy self from thine own Flesh. 8th. Then shall thy Light
break forth as the morning, and thy Health shall spring forth speedily, and thy
Righteousness shall go before; thee the Glory of the Lord shall be thy
rereward. 9th. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry,
and he shall say here am I; if thou take away from the midst of thee the Yoke,
the putting forth of the Finger and speaking Vanity. 10th. And if thou draw out
thy Soul to the Hungry, and satisfy the Afflicted Soul, then shall thy Light
rise in obscurity, and thy Darkness be as the Noonday. 11th. And the Lord
shall Guide thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in Drought, and make Fat thy
Bones; and thou shall be like a Watered Garden, and like a Spring of Water,
whose Waters fail not. Matt. 5.42. Give to him that asks thee; and from him
that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away. Luke 6.27. to the 38. Verse the
24. And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for
Sinners also lend to Sinners to receive as much again. 25th. But love ye your
Enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again, and your reward shall
be great, and ye shall be the Children of the Highest, for he is kind unto the
Unthankful, and to the Evil.

Now for that which you Lend or Trust, so long as you hope or expect to receive
of your Debtor so much again, what thank have ye? This is not given: Then God
has not promised to pay this again, but your poor Debtors Bill or Bond, who is
not able to pay you, may be all that you may have to trust to for your Security
of being paid again; but if you lend unto such as are poor and are in want, and
at that time do not expect that you shall receive it of them again; and
afterward because they are poor, discharge them, and make it known to them
that you hope for nothing again from them; then this is given unto the poor,
and your reward shall be grea^t Luke 6.32,33,34. For if you love them which
love you; and if you do good to them which do good to you; and if ye lend to
them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? For Sinners also do even
the same.

Now these tbings may be found in those that are Unconverted: But for a Man to
love his Enemies, and do good, and lend hoping for nothing again, for a man
discharging his poor Debtors, and to take Gods Word and Promise for his
Security: These things are counted foolishness with Carnal and Natural Men,
Romans 8.7. 1 Cor. 2.14. But for those that are obedient to Gods Word and do
thus, it is a sign that God has wrought Grace in their Hearts, and has made
them his Children, and that such good Works as these are the Fruits and Effects
of that Grace, Faith and Love, that God has wrought in their Hearts; and these
Fruits appearing in their Lives and Conversations, therefore says Christ in
Luke 6.35,43,44,45,46. 35th. But love ye your Enemies, and do good, and lend
hoping for nothing again, and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the
Children of the Highest, for he is kind unto the Vnthank^ful and to the Evil.
43d. For a good Tree brings not forth corrupt Fruit; neither does a corrupt
Tree bring forth good Fruit. 44th. For every Tree is known by its own Fruit;
for of Thorns men do not gather Figgs; nor of a Bramble-bush gather they
Grapes. 45th. A good man out of the good Treasure of his Heart brings forth
that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil Treasure of his Heart,
brings forth that which is evil; for of the abundance of the Heart his Mouth
speaks. 46th. And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
say?

Now when you have trusted or lent unto them that you might think that they was
of Ability to pay you again, but afterward you find them poor and not able to
pay you; now if you should discharge them, then have you given to the poor so
much as was due to you; then may you by Faith lay hold on those Promises that
are made to those that give unto the Poor; then you may take Gods Word and
Promise for your Security. Prove. 19.17. He that has pity upon the Poor,
lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given will he pay him again.

Now which do you think to be the best Security, Gods Word and Promise, or your
Poor Debtors Bill or Bond, who is not able to pay you, judge you? Luke 6.38.
Give and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed down, and shaken
together, and running over, shall men give into your Bosom; for with the same
measure that ye meet withal, it shall be measured to you again. 2 Cor. 8.11,12.
Now therefore perform the doing of it, that as there was a readiness to Will,
so there may be a performance also out of that which you have. 12th. For if
there be first a Willing Mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and
not according to that he has not. Mat. 10.42. And whosoever shall give to
drink unto one of these little Ones a Cup of cold Water, only in the Name of a
Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. Mark.
12.41,42,43,44. Ephesians. 4.32. Colos. 3.12,13,14,15. Mat. 6.12,14,15. Mat. 7.1,2.
Mat. 18.35. Luke 7.41,42,43,44,45,46.47. John 13.34,35. John. 14.21,22,23,24.
John (...) 1 John 3.13. to the end of the Chapter. 1 John 4.7. to the 15. Mat.
25.13, to the end. Prove. 21.12,13. Zechar. 7.9, to to the 14. Prove. 1.20, to
the end. Prove. 3.7,8,9,10,13,14,15,16,17,18,27,28. Ephesians. 6.8. Phil. 4.1. to
the 20. James 1.27. Mat. 6.1,2,3,4. 2 Cor. 8 and 9 Chapters. Romans 12.8, to the
end. Dut. 32.35,36. Prove. 25.21,22. Gal. 6.6,7,8,9,10. Mal. 3.5, to the end.
James 2 Chapter. Prove. 14.20,21,31. Luke 14.12,13,14. Prove. 22.7,8,9,16,22,23.
Amos 5.11,12,13,14. Mal. 3.5. James 5.1,2,3,4,5,6. Psalm. 140.11,12,13. Luke
12.47,48. Mat. 19.16, to the end. 1 Timothy 4.7,8. Mark 10.17, to the 31. Luke 18
18, to the 31. Psalm. 84.11,12. Romans 28.32. Acts 20.33,34,35. Job 16. to the 23.
Acts 10.1,2,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,43,44. Acts 9.36,37,38,39,40,41. Luke
12.32,33,34. Acts 2.44,45,46,47. Acts 11.28,29,30. Acts 4.32, to the end.
Zecharia 7.8,9,10,11,12,13,14. The 8th. Verse, And the Word of the Lord came
unto Zecharia, saying, The 9th. Verse. Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying,
Execute true Judgment, and show mercy and compassion every man to his Brother.
The 10th. And oppress not the Widow, nor the Fatherless, the Stranger, nor the
Poor, and let none of you imagine Evil against his Brother in your Heart. The
11th. Verse. But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and
stopped their ears that they should not hear. The 12th. Verse. Yea, they made
their Hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the Law, and the words
which the Lord of Hosts has sent in his Spirit by the former Prophets;
therefore came a great Wrath from the Lord of Hosts. 13th Verse. Therefore it
is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear, so they cried, and
I would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts. The 14th. Verse. But I scattered
them with a Whirlwind among all the Nations whom they knew not: thus the Land
was desolate after them, that no man passed through nor returned; for they laid
the pleasant Land desolate. Prove. 21.12.13. verse 13. Whosoever stopeth his Ears at
the cry of the Poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. 1 John
4.20,21. 1 John 3.16,17,18. verse 17. But whosoever has this Worlds good, and
sees his Brother have need, and shuteth up his bowels of compassion from him,
how dwells the love of God in him? verse 18. My little Children, let us not
love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed, and in truth. Ephesians. 2.8,9,10.
Titus 2.13,14. Titus 3.3,4,5,6,7,8. Verse the 8th. This is a faithful saying,
and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have
believed in God might be careful to maintain good Works; these things are good
and profitable unto men. 1 Pet. 4.8. And above all things have fervent Charity
among your selves, for Charity shall cover the multitude of Sins. Verse the
9th. Use Hospitality one to another without grudging. Verse the 10th. As every
man has received the Gift, even so Minister the same one to another, as good
Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. Verse the 11th, If any man speak, let
him speak as the Oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the
ability which God gives, that God in all things may be Glorified through Jesus
Christ, to whom be Praise and Dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by John Guillim, Bookseller
within Bishopsgate, 1687.


