Advice TO PROTESTANT DISSENTERS, Showing It Is their Interest to Repeal the
Test, upon the offer the King makes by a firm settlement of Liberty.
PENAL LAWS are of so ill a Consequence, in the Hands of any Party, and so
uneasy to be parted with by that which predominates, that it is discretion in
Dissenters to take this oppertunity for the Repeal, now we have a Prince to
join with us to do it, when such an oppertunity may offer again is uncertain;
therefore to embrace this will be their Interest at the next Sessions, for upon
better terms we are not like to obtain it, because we have a Prince that wants
it for his own Communion.

But 'twill be Objected, The Penal Laws will readily be consented to, but that
cannot be done without we take off the Test too; the consequence of which will
be greater Prejudice then the inconveniency of keeping the Penal Laws; how that
will appear, when we consider the King has promised a settlement that is
unalterable, and indeed it is his Wisdom so to do, if he values the Liberty of
his own Religion in an after Reign, which may fall out to be in an Aversion to
Popery, that may then endeavor the suppressing it again.

It Is from, or however cannot be without the consent of the King, that we must
have this Liberty; Is it equal to expect it from him, without giving his
Community the same Advantages? Shall we ask that of him that we will not allow
his? it is unfair: Besides, the Test in the nature of it is unreasonable,
because it puts a Man upon a temptation to deny that which he believes he
cannot be saved without believing.

It may be Objected, It only hinders them from getting or keeping in Offices.
If no more then that, it is unreasonable, for 'twill amount to nothing short of
Persecution. As for Example, Suppose a Protestant has a Place in the Government
worth Five Hundred pound a Year, and nothing but his Place to Live on, upon
reading Books, or hearing Sermons, or discoursing Papists, he is persuaded to
their Faith, and so cannot take the Test, upon his refusal he is turned out,
and rendered incapable of procuring Maintenance for his Family; if this is not
a suffering for Conscience, I know not what is.

Again, since our Laws does not prohibit a Roman Catholic from being Heir to
the Crown, why should they be denied having those of their Family or Guard of
the same? By our Laws none of that Persuasion can come near the Court for fear
of endangering the Kings Person, now who is the most sutuable Judge of the
Kings Safety, either himself or a part of his People? I think all must allow
him, or else we act against our daily Experience and Practice* for who of us
would not choose Servants for our selves.

By this we may see when things are made partial, and not upon a Foundation of
Equity, and short of doing as one would be done by, that one time or other it
returns upon us.

It Is an ill thing to Test upon Peoples Religious Persuasions; if we must have
them, let it be upon an honest Foot, viz. For the renouncing any evil
Principle, that is either immorral or pernicious to the State, and then if any
Man refuse to subscribe, let him be dealt with accordingly, this would be
justifiable.

Why should any Dissenters boggle at the Repeal of the Test, when 'twill never
be done but with them? if so, surely they have Wisdom enough to make things
secure for the Protestant Interest, and their own Security, in a full enjoyment
of their Religion. Cannot they consider of such a method that may for the
future secure us from any attemps that may be made upon the violation of that
general Settlement; it is agreed on all Hands, that Law only can secure us,
which makes our Test so great a Bulwork; then if Law can secure us, why may not
the Wisdom of a Parliament think of another Security that may be more
universal? for to be sure that which takes in all Parties into its Interest is
the best Policy, for if any Party is excluded that to be sure will attempt upon
invading the safety of the rest, and if any one of these united Parties are
Predominate, the excluded will endeavor to work in with some, or one of the
Interests upon promise of bettering them, that they may assist to exterpate
that Association; but if our Settlement is Universal, and that no one
Persuasion can Predominate, but all in one united Interest; if any Party should
through Ambition desire to break this civil Bond, and try to set up for
themselves, all the rest would join against any such attempt, and through the
disproportion of Number must of consequence be defeated; so that upon the
whole, nothing can brake this general Liberty, that is equally settled, but
Force, and there can be no stronger Fence against that then Unity and
Universallity.

It is the Interest of the Roman Catholics to accept of this, and be content
with it, being the only Policy they can use for their own Safety, because they
know their Number is but small, and not able of themselves to do any thing that
may procure them a better Settlement. Now for People that really are for
Liberty in Religion, before hand to determine, that the King will not concede
to such a Settlement in Parliament, I think be-speaks them void of Charity: Was
it the intent of any Protestants to give up the Test without an Equivolent, but
rely upon Promises, that afterward the Settlement should be made, there would
appear some grounds of Jealousy? but as yet I never saw the Man that was so
inclined; but that which Repealed the one, should Ratify and Confirm the
other; if so, then where is the Trust? I find there is a sort of People among
Dissenters that harps upon this Point, I presume they are such in whom the
Church of England have by their skill prevailed upon by their Insinuations.
It Is true, a Man would not stop his Ears from any thing that was reasonable,
from any one; but a wise Man would be very cautious of his Adversary, or one
that speaks from private Interest; one if not both of these that Church will be
found in; as to the first, I need not go far for proof, their Severity when
they had Power sufficiently proves it, and their being now unwilling to part
with it in a Parliamentary way confirms it. As to the second part, Private
Interest, first, it is certain they gain nothing by this Liberty, for theirs is
Established, and the giving it to others will lesten them, for if theirs is a
reform from Popery, the Dissenters are a reform from them.

Again, shall we take the fair Offers of an Enemy, that may never be capable
(if willing) to perform what they promise, rather then embrace the present
Kindness of the King, who offers Liberty upon our own terms, viz. lasting and
unalterable, by no means; Providence has cast it unexpectedly upon us,
therefore let us not refuse it, least we be found dispisers of our own Mercies,
by waiting for that from the Church of England that they will not hold
themselves obliged to perform; for upon whom, if we should confide, can we
rely? or who is that Agent for them, that they will hold themselves obliged
when capable to perform that Engagement? for my part I am at a loss to find
that Person or Party.

But some may Object, Let us be careful that we disoblige not them, least they
reckon with us another Day. As to that, let us consider what we are a doing,
and how we do it; as to what, it is Liberty only to Worship our God securely,
without interruption either by Fines or Imprisonments; next how; that we do it
legally, and not with any prejudice or desire of infrlnging them of theirs. Now
if they are displeased at this, we are sure it is not from a Christian Spirit
that they act, and they will be found doing as they would not be done by, for
no Man that is Religious desires to be restrained from the exercise of it; but
I need not spend time to treat of Liberty of Conscience to Dissenters, for that
most Men either through Conviction or Policy will consent to; but the taking
away the Test is the great debate, for say the Church of England, and those
that give ear to their Insinuations, If that is gone there can be no securety o
the Protestant Religion. Now as to that, in a Roman Catholic Reign, what
service is it, are they keep for all that out of Offices and Places of Trust?
No; but although we cannot prevent them of that, yet the keeping them out of
the Legislative Power is our Security; but let me ask them one Question, Have
they not often charged them with these Doctrines, viz. Not keeping Faith with
Heriticks, or that they are not obliged, or don't account that of any value or
tie to them that they promise to us, and farther what ever they do to us,
provided it is to serve Holy Church, let the Act be ever so immorral, it is
Meritorious; if we consider this, I cannot see that great Bulwark in the Test
that many would have us believe; for if they may have Indulgences for these
enormities, I cannot believe they will be so squemish at the Test, when they
find the Promotion of their Church so mightily depends upon taking it; so that
I have reason to believe the Church of England either to be short sighted, or
intends not well to Dissenters, that endeavors so industriously to keep them
from joining with the King in Establishing a General Liberty; for if the
Papists finds that the Dissenters breaks with them upon this Civil Union, will
not they be obliged to betake themselves to the suerest way they can for their
own security, which I conceive will then consist in one of these two Points,
the first, To get a Dispensation to take the Test, or else to bring the Church
of England into their Interest. As to the first, the Church of England tells
us, as above, They can do things Tantamount; but if they have abusied them in
their Tenets, and they should refuse that way, but should fall in with them,
what Security can they give us that they will not accept of them into their
Favor, since our Prince is of that Persuasion? who knows but their ancient
pretense to Loyalty may spring again? if so, from whom must we expect Kindness,
for of theirs we have had woeful experience; and for the Romanists it is better
joining them when we can serve them, then to expect Favor from them, when we
have deserted them. Oh, that Dissenters would but be wise, and take Liberty
upon their own terms, and their own making, rather then to depend upon those
that have been and are our Enemies; for whatever they promise now, I look upon
it but the effect of Policy, not of Kindness, that we may be wheedled out of
our present certainty for hopes of Kindness when they may be capable to give
it; but if they should so prevail upon the easiness of Dissenters, as to refuse
the present oppertunity; when suffering comes upon us again, we shall be
obliged to take it patiently, first for Conscience, next for our Follies sake:
I have for all this no ill will to the Church of England, but do wish well to
her also, all that I desire is, that their ill Nature, together with the
assistance of Penal Laws, that have put them upon doing wrong, to their
Reproach, that she would now consent to the taking away that, that when the
same ill Nature predominates again may disable them from doing what they have
been so prone too; for a Man that is convicted of an Evil, will endeavor to
shun the oppertunity of a Temptation, and until the Church of England comes so
far, that is to be willing to part with that Pestilence they have been so
infected with, I cannot conceive any Reformation among them. For a Man to tell
me that has been given to Drunkenness, that he is Reformed, yet cannot forsake
the Tavern and his Familiers that continued in that excess, I should have but
small hopes of his Reformation; and although he might decline Drinking for the
present, I should only judge it some. Indisposition, for no Man loves to keep up
that which he Loathes; so it I would abandon Persecution I shall be willing to
part with that which would tolerate me in it, for fear of a Temptation; and
when we see the Church of England willing to part with all Penal Laws for
Religion, we may have hopes they are not in love with Severity, and till then
it is in vain to pretend to the contrary, for Actions speaks louder then Words,
and Performance is better then Promises. I look upon it a mere wheedle in the
Church of England to tell us, they are for giving Liberty of Conscience, and
yet oppose the Tests being taken away, for to be sure they conclude themselves
safe in the offer; for me to offer that which I imagine will not be accepted is
almost the same with no offer, which is the case of them. As for Example, If I
proffer a Man Fifty Pounds to be received of a Person, that it is at his
pleasure to pay it or no, and it is evident the doing it will prove inconvenient
to his Affairs; how unlikely would it be that he should comply with the
payment? Just so is the offer the Church of England makes to the Dissenters,
they promise to Repeal the Penal Statutes, which they cannot perform but with
the Concurrance of the King; and is it likely it should be obtained that way,
without taking off the Test too? for can we expect he should set us quite free,
and continue Bonds upon his one Communion?

It Is easy for Men to offer that which is out of their power to give, and hard
to get such Men to part with what is in their power to keep; but thanks be to
God, if the Dissenters will, it is in the Kings and their power (under God) to
make themselves easy whether the Church of England will or no.

With Allowance.

London, Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul at the Three Keys in Nags-Head-Court,
in Grace Church Street, over against the Conduit, 1688.


