Advice to Freeholders, and others, concerning the Choice of Members to serve
in Parliament, and the Qualifications that render a Gentleman worthy or
undeserving so great a Trust: With a List of Non-Associators.
I. AVoid all such as hold any Office of considerable value during Pleasure,
they being subject to be over-awed; for although a Man wish well to his Country,
and in the betraying thereof, knows that at the long run he mischiefs and
enslaves his Posterity, if not himself; yet the narrowness of Men's Minds is
such, as makes them more tenderly apprehend a small present Damage, than a far
greater hereafter. Such Men must of necessity be under great Temptations and
Distraction, when their Consciences and Interest look different ways. For to
say Truth, such an Office is but a softer word for a Pension, therefore since
these Men know before hand the Inconveniences that attend the trust of a Member
of Parliament faithfully discharged, it is very suspicious and reflecting upon
their Honesty, if any such stand for it; and I think we are bound in Charity,
nor can we do them a greater Curtisy than to answer their Petition in the
Lord's Prayer. Not to lead them into Temptation.

II. Suspect all these (especially if they are Men of ill Repute) who in their
Profession, or near Relations, has dependence upon the Court, for although to be
the King's Servant is no bar from being a Parliament Man, or from serving his
Country honestly in that Station, and no doubt several of them have at diverse
times well discharged the same, yet frequently such Persons (unworthily)
guessing at their Prince by themselves, are apt to vote right or wrong, as they
imagine will most please the Prerogative Party and it is a hard matter for a
Courtier to please that great (perhaps corrupt) Minister who supports him, and
those whom he represents at the same time.

III. Meddle not with such as have been or are like to prove Pensioners, or
receive Salaries for secret Services. I know they would now brazen it out, that
there were no such Men, no such Practices. But the contrary is notorious; did
not the House of Commons last Westminster Parliament take the thing into
Examination, nay did not Sir S.F. by his Memory (without the Books, which for
some reasons were refused to be brought in) name about 30 of them, and the
great respective Sums Yearly paid to each? And would not many more have been
discovered, and the whole knot of them severely and exemplarily punished if
that Parliament had a little longer continued? Now there is none more
implacably your Enemy than that Person whose interest is to destroy you that
must neither eat nor drink except you Starve; that must go in Rags except you
go Naked, are taught to fleece you, that they may keep themselves warm. To
prevent this, avoid not only all former Pensioners but such other as may be in
danger to become so. Therefore meddle not with Men of necessitous Fortunes or
much in Debt. The Representative of a Nation ought to consist of the most Wise,
Wealthy, Sober and Courageous of the People, not Men of mean Spirits and little
Figure, and sordid Passions, that would sell the Interest of the People that
choose them to advance their own, or be at the beck of some great Man in hopes
of a Lift to a good Employ. Those that have good Estates have in a manner given
Hostages to their Country, and must be Errant Fools before they can play the
Knave with you. But what cares the needy Passenger if the Ship perish if he can
save himself in the long Boat, or get some booty by the Wreck? What Protection
do you expect from them who cannot show their Faces with confidence, without a
Protection, either in or out of Parliaments? Who are no less apprehensive of a
Bailiff them of the growing greatness of the French; and dread not Popery half
so much as an Outlawry; will you secure them within the Wall of the House of
Commons, who were better secured within the Walls of a Common Goal; who can
never pay their Debts contracted by their Prodigality, but out of your Purses,
and must run you in to get themselves out of their Mortgages? These Men's Fears
of being dissolved makes them submit to any thing rather then to be left to the
unmerciful Rage of their hungry Creditors, who have so long fasted for their
Money. For all such Persons (tho some of them may be looked upon as honest,
fair conditioned Gentlemen and good Housekeeper) are in danger of being
tempted to repair the decays of their own private Fortunes by the ruin of the
Public. Moreover the choosing of such broken Fortunes, decays Trade and ruins
whole Families, in so much that I have known it drive away many Men (contrary
to their own Inclinations) to wish never to see Parliaments more in England. In
a word, if Beggars ever come to be your Representatives, how can they judge what
is expedient for the Nation to spare whose only care is to get a piece of Money
to spend.

Be not over-fond to receive Bribes and Gratifications from Persons that would
fain make a prey of you, and by their Purses, lavish Treats, and Entertainments
would allure you to prostitute your Voices for their Election; you may be sure
they would never bid so high for your Suffrages, but that they know where to
make their Market. Choose the Worthy unwilling Person before the Complemental
unworthy Man, whose extraordinary forwardness prognosticates he seeks not for
your Good, but his own separate from the public. Let us not play the Fools or
Knaves, to neglect or betray the common Interest of our Country, by a base
Election: let neither Fear, Flattery, nor Gain biass us. Consider with your
selves what Loosers you will be, if to laugh and to be merry one day, the
Person you choose, should give you and your Children occasion to mourn for ever
after. Say not, he is but a single Person, one Man cannot do much hurt. Silly
Man! what if all other Places should be as bad as your selves, then all the
House would be of a-piece; and besides, don't you know that sometimes a single
Man has carried a Vote, which perhaps was no less Mischievous than
Irretrievable! Think how justly the Gallent Ancient Heathens may upbraid this
Baseness of us Christians, when as they sacrificed many of their Children, nay
and oftentimes their own Lives for the good of their Country; so on the
contrary we sacrifice, or at least hap-hazard, both our Religion, Li^es,
Children, and Country, for the Swinish Pleasure of a Day or two's Debauchery.

Let not such Engagements put you upon dangerous Elections as you love the
Liberties and the Freedom of your Posterity. But tell them in this Affair they
must hold you excused, for that the weight of the Matter will well bear it,
this is your Inheritance, all may depend upon it: It Is more modest Request, if
they would desire you to give them that Freehold and Estate that qualifies you
for an Elector, than to press you to be for a Man that in your Consciences you
think not sit, or not so sit as his Competitor for so weighty a Trust: Men
don't use to lend their Wives, or give their Children, to satisfy personal
Kindnesses, nor ought you to make a swop of your Birthright (and that of your
Posterity's too) for a Mess of Pottage, a Feast, or a lusty drinking Bout:
There can be no proportion here, and therefore none must take it ill that you
use your Freedom about that which in its Constitution is the great Bulwark of
all your Ancient Liberties.

Lastly, As for you Citizens, Burgesses and Freemen, of Cities and Corporations
in parcicular, I shall only say, That whosoever is not sit to be chosen Knight
of the Shire, is likewise unfit to be chosen a Burgess: Neither let the more
specious Pretenses of any Man that shall promise to build a Town Hall, and
relieve your Poor with Money, or out of his adjacent Woods, or any such
Good-Morrow's deceive you; for if so, wherein are you wiser than your Horses,
whom you catch every day, and clap a Bridle into their Mouths, only by showing
them a few Oats which they are never like to eat? Even the very Mice are too
wise to be taken by an old Bait, but will have the Trap new baited before they
will meddle: And yet I have known a Corporation which has been taken TWICE with
one Bait. But suppose these Men do really perform what they promise, what
Compensation is that, if the same Men should lay a good swinging Tax upon your
Estates without any real cause or should give up the very Power you have of
taxing your selves for sending your Representatives in Parliament (for one bad
Parliament may ruin us) what good would the Money for your Poor do in such a
Case, more then that when you are reduced to beggary you might perhaps your
selves (the Gentry of the Country having no reason to relieve you) be found to
come in for a small share of this your Hypocritical Charity an excellent Reward
for Knavish Folly. Neither say, Oh! this is but one Man, and can have but one
Vote, he will do our Town a great deal of good, and can do us but little hurt
if he would. And 1st (as I told you before) one or two Voices have sometimes
carried a Vote of great Importance. 2. You know not what mischief your bad
Example may do in other Corporations and if all should do so what a miserable
Case would you be in, since the Voices of the Boroughs make two thirds of the
House; no Man can tell the Influence that one running Talkative ill Man may get
over the rest of the House, especially over those that weigh words more then
Sense, Reason, and the Interest of the Nation.

I shall only offer one thing more to your Consideration, which is, that since
His Majesty has in His most Gracious Speech wisely put so great a Stress on the
signing of the Association, which so firmly united us for our mutual Defense
against the common Enemies of our Country; it may not be amiss to refresh your
Memory with a Copy of that Association, and a List of those Members of
Parliament which refused to sign it: and you will by that guess what worthy
Patriots they are like to prove, if you once more make them your
Representatives.

WHereas there has been a Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy, formed and carried
on by Papists, and other Wicked and Traitorous Persons, for Assassinating His
Majesty's Royal Person, in order to encourage an Invasion from France, to
subvert our Religion, Laws, and Liberty: We whose Names are hereunto
Subscribed, do Heartily, Sincerely and Solemnly Profess, Testify and Declare,
That His Present Majesty, King William is Rightful and Lawful King of these
Realms. And we do mutually promise and engage to stand by and assist each
other, to the utmost of our Power, in the Support and Defense of His Majesty's
most Sacred Person and Government, against the late King James and all his
Adherents. And in case His Majesty come to any Violent or Untimely Death (which
God forbid) We do hereby further Freely and Unanimously oblige our selves, to
Unite, Associate and Stand by each other, in Revenging the same upon his
Enemies, and their Adherents; and in Supporting and Defending the Succession of
the Crown, according to an Act made in the First Year of the Reign of King
William and Queen Mary, Entitled, An Act Declaring the Rights and Liberties of
the Subject, and settling the Succession of the Crown.

This Association being agreed upon by the House, and ordered to be engrossed
to be Signed by the Members, near 400 of that August Assembly, which consists
of 513, have already (with great Alacrity) subscribed it. But some at present
hesitate, some others refuse it, their Names you find underwritten: Berks.
Sends 9 Members. WIlliam Jennyngs Simon Harcourt.

Bucks. 14. Alexander Denton Mountague Drake Sir James Etheridge.

Cornwall. 44. Henry Lord Hyde John Manley Daniel Eliot Henry Fleming Francis
Buller John Tredenham Seymour Tredenham Sir William Coryton John Mountstevens
Bernard Granvile Charles Lord Cheney Francis Gwyn.

Cheshire. 4. Sir Thomas Grosvenor. Derbyshire. 4. Sir Gilbert Clarke.
Devon. 26. Francis Courteney Sir Edward Seymour John Granville.

Dorsetshire. 20. Thomas Strangways Thomas Freke Richard Fownes

Chor. 30. Robert Byerly Sir Marmaduke Wivill Sir Michael Wentworth.

Essex. 8. Sir Eliab Harvey.
Gloucester. 8. Robert Pain William Frye Richard How John How.

Herefordshire. 8. Robert Price. Huntington. 4. Anthony Hammond. Kent. 18. Sir
John Banks.
Lancashire. 14. Leigh Banks Thomas Brotherton Sir Roger Bradshaw Peter
Shakerley.

Lincolnshire. 12. George Lord Castleton Sir John Bolles.

Norfolk. 12. Sir John Wodehouse.
Northampton. 9. Thomas Cartwright Gilbert Dolben.

Northumberland. 8. William Foster.
Oxford. 9. Mountague Lord Norris Sir Robert Jenkinson Heneage Finch Sir Edward
Norris Thomas Rowney James Bertie Sir Robert Dashwood.

Salop. 12. Edward Kynaston John Kynaston Andrew Newport George Weld.

Somerset. 18. Sir John Trevillian Edward Berkley John Sandford Sir Charles
Carterett Sir John Smith.

Southampton. 26. Henry Holmes Thomas Done.

Staffordshire. 10. Robert Burde^t Sir John Leveson Gower John Gray Sir Henry
Gough.

Surrey. 14. John Parsons.
Sussex. 28. Sir William Morley John Lewknor Sir Thomas Dyke William Stringer.

Warwickshire. 6. William Bromley Andrew Archer George Bohun Lord Digby Francis
Grevill.

Westmoreland. 4. Sir William Twisden Sir Christopher Musgrave.

Wiltshire. 34. Robert Bertie William Harvey Henry Pynnill Thomas Bennet
William Daniel.

Worcestershire. 9. Samuel Swist Henry Parker.

Wales. 24. Edward Jones Jeffery Jefferies Sir Richard Middleton Edward
Brereton Sir John Conway Thomas Mansel Sir William Williams.



(...) have talked Negatives and di^^^^ed (...) are not fit to be chosen; Now
we come p^ssitively to s^t before you, who are fit for such a Trust, especially
in such a dangerous Juncture as we are fallen into. In order to which we must
consider for what ends they serve, and they are principally two. The first is
the Preservation of our Religion from Popery, and the other is to preserve
inviolably our Liberty and Property, according to the known Laws of the Land,
without any giving way unto or Introduction of that Absolute and Arbitrary Rule
practiced in Foreign Countries, which we are neither to imitate or regard.

Therefore take care to choose such as are well known to be Men of good
Consciences fearing God, thoroughly principled in the Protestant Religion, and
of High Resolution to maintain it with their Lives and Fortunes. And amongst
these, rather cast your favor upon Men of large Principles (I mean in Matters
of mere opinion) such as will not sacrifice their Neighbors Property and Civil
Rights to the forwardness of their own Party in Religion. Narrow Souls that
will own none but those that bear their own Image and Superscription, will
sooner raise Persecution at home then secure us from Popery and Invasion from
abroad. The great Interest of England at this day, is, to tolerate the
tolerable, to bear with the weak, to encourage the Conscientious, and to
restrain none but such as would restrain all besides themselves.

2. As we ought as near as we can possibly judge, to Elect good Protestants
toward God, and just toward Men. Yet since in this corrupt Age wherein we
live, Men are not so spiritual as they ought to be, it is not amiss to seek for
those, whose Spiritual Interest are seconded by a T^mporal one. For tho Men
talk high and keep a great noise with Conscience and Love to their Country, yet
when you understand Mankind aright (not as it should be, but as it is, and I
fear ever will be) then you will find that private Interest is the String in
the Bears Nose, it is that governs the Beast. And therefore the surest
Champions for our Religion (C^^teris Paribus) Against the Papacy (...) our Abbey
L^nded-men, for notwithstanding the registered Dispensation to King Henry the
8th from the Pope, for the seizing of those Monistries and Lands, yet of late
they pretend the Pope had not power to alien them from the Church; so that the
present Possessors can never trust nor rely upon that, or any new Promises or
actu^^ Grants thereof, especially from him whose everlasting and declared Maxim
it is -- never to keep Faith with Heretics. Undoubtedly to make easy his
Assent into the Saddle he will proffer many Assurances and Grants, but if these
Abbey Land-men be not the most silly of all others, they will never believe him
for when he is once firmly settled, then will he with his Cannon Law
Distinction^, like Fire under Quicksilver, evaporate away all his Promises,
and violently resume the Lands, glorying in his own Bounty, if he require not
the mean Profits ever since they have been Sacreligiously withheld from Holy
Church.

3. Endeavor to choose Men of Wisdom and Courage, who will not be he hectored
out of their Duties by the Frowns and Scowles of Men: Never had you more need
to pitch upon the old English Spirit that durst be faithful and just against
all Temptations. What a degenerate Race have we known that could never yet
resist Smile or E^o^n, but tamely sunk below their own Conuictions and knew the
evil they did yet durst not but commit it.

4. Make it your business to choose such as are resolved to stand by and
maintain the Power and Privileges of Parliaments (for they are the
Heart Strings of the Commonwealth) together with the Power and Just Rights of
the King, according to the Laws of the Kingdomso as the one may not entrench
upon the other: And such as with a becoming true English Courage will prosecute
all Traitors whether already impeached or to be impeached; and to secure us
from Popery hereafter, and to get removed all Corrupt and Arbitrary Ministers
of State and wicked Judges, and all Stiflers of the Discovery of the late
accursed Conspiracy against His Majesty's Life, and Su^^mers, and Vile
Pamphleteers, that endeavor so industriously to clear the Papists and expose
the Protestant Religion and poison the People.

Lastly, Take particular notice of those who are Men of Industry and
Improvement; for such as are Ingenious and Laborious to propagate the growth
and advantage of their Country will be very tender of yielding to any thing
that will weaken or impoverish it.

If you conduct your selves thus prudently, honestly and gallantly in your
Choice, without putting the Gentleman whom you ^huse to serve you, to Charges:
The Consequence will be, that as you will be sure to have a good Parliament
when ever His Majesty shall please to call one, and such as will be zealous for
the Protestant Religion and Prosperity of the Nation, if they shall continue to
sit and act; so on the other side, if they shall be dissolved and never so many
new Parliaments called, yet you run no hazard for the same Canditates will be
still ready to serve you: And so we shall conclude our discourse of Parliaments
when I shall first have observed that anciently all Freemen of England (tho not
Freeholders) had a Right to choose their Representatives to the same, was
altered and limited by the following Statute, for the Reasons therein mentioned.

The Statute Anno 8 Hen. 6. Cap. 7. What sort of Men shall be Cqosers, and who
shall be chosen Knights of the Parliament.
Item. WHereas the Elections of Knights of Shires to come to the Parliament of
our Lord the King in many Counties of the Realm of England, have now of late
been made with very great outrageous and excessive Numbers of People dwelling
within the same Counties of the Realm of England, of the which most was of
People of small Substance, and of no value, whereof every one of them pretend a
Voice equivolent as to such Elections to be made with the most Worthy Knights
and Esquires dwelling within the same Counties, whereby Manslaughters, Riots,
Batteries and Division among the Gentlemen and other People of the same
Counties shall very likely rise and be, unless convenient and due remedy be
provided, in this behalf. 2. Our Lord the King considering the Premises has
provided ordained and established by Authority of this present Parliament, that
the Knights of the Shires to be chosen within the said Realm of England to come
to the Parliament of our Lord the King hereafter to be chosen, shall be chosen
in every County of of the Realm of England by People dwelling and resident in
the said Counties, whereof every one of them shall have Land or Tenement to the
value of 40 s. by the Year at the least above all Charges. 3. And that they
which shall be so chosen shall be dwelling and resident within the same
Counties. 4. And such as have the greatest number of them that may expend 40 s.
by the Year, and above, as before is said, shall be returned by the Sheriffs of
every County, Knights for Parliament, by Indentures, sealed betwixt the said
Sheriffs and the said Chusers to be made. 5. And every Sheriff of the Realm of
England shall have power by the said Authority to examine upon the Evangelist
every such Chuser, how much he may expend by the Year. 6. And if any Sheriff
returned Knights to come to the Parliament, contrary to the said Ordinance, the
Judges of Assize in their Sessions of Assizes shall have power by the Authority
aforesaid thereof to enquire. 7. And if any Inquest the same be found before
the Justices, and the Sheriff thereof be duly attainted, that then the said
Sheriff shall incur the Pain of 100 l. to be paid to our Lord the King, and
also that he have Imprisonment by a Year, without being let to Main Prize or
Bail. 8. And that the Knights of the Parliament returned contrary to the said
Ordinance shall loose their Wages.

Provided always that he which cannot expend 40 s. by the Year, as aforesaid,
shall in no wise be Chuser of Knights for the Parliament. 2. And that in every
Writ that shall hereafter go forth to the Sheriffs to choose Knights for the
Parliament, mention be made of the said Ordinance.

Note, Tho this Statute make the Penalty on the Sheriff but 100 l. for a false
return, yet the House may further punish him by Imprisonment, etc. at their
Pleasure, by the Law and Custom of Parliaments.

Anno 4. Ed. 3. Cap. 14. A Parliament shall be holden once every Year.
Item. It is accorded that a Parliament shall be holden every Year once, and
more often if need be.

Anno 26. Ed. 3. Cap. 10. A Parliament shall be holden once in the Year.
Item. For Maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and redress of diverse
Mischiefs and Grievances which yearly happen, a Parliament shall be holden
every Year, as another time was ordered by Statute.

BEfore the Conquest (as the Victory of Duke William of Normandy over Harold
the Usurper, is commonly tho very improperly called) Parliaments were to be
held twice every Year, as appears by the Laws of King Edgar, Cap. 5. and the
Testimony of the Mirror of Justices Cap. 1. Sect. 3. For the Estates of the
Realm K. Alfred causes the Committees (some English Translations of that
ancient Book read, Earls, but the word seems rather to signify Commissioners,
Trustees, or Representatives) to meet, and ordain a Perpetual Usage, that twice
in the Year, or oftener, if need were, in time of Peace, they should assemble at
London, to speak their Minds for the guiding of the People of God, how they
should keep themselves from Offenses, live in quiet, and have right done them
by certain Usages and sound Judgments. K. Edw. the First (says Cook, 4. Inst.
fol. 97.) kept a Parliament once every two years for the most part. And now in
this K. Edw. the Thirds time one of the most Wise and most Glorious of all our
Kings, it was thought fit to enact by these two several Statutes that a
Parliament should be held once at least every Year, which two Statutes are to
this Day in full Force. For they are not repealed, but rather confirmed by the
Statute made in the 16th Year of our late Sovereign King Charles the Second
Chap. 1. Entitled, An Act for the assembling and holding of Parliaments once
in three Years at the least; the words of which are as follow.

Because by the Ancient Laws and Statutes of this Realm, made in the Reign of
King Edw. the Third, Parliaments are to be held very often, Your Majesty's
Humble and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
the Present Parliament assembled, most humbly do beseech Your Majesty, that it
may be declared and enasted by the Authority aforesaid, that hereafter, the
sitting and holding of Parliaments shall not be intermitted or discontinued
above three Years at the most; but that within three Years from and after the
determination of this present Parliament, so from time to time, within 3 Years
after the determination of any other Parliament, or Parliaments, or if there be
occasion, more or oftener, your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, do issue out
your Writs for calling, assembling and holding of another Parliament, to the
end there may be a frequent calling, assembling and holding of Parliaments once
in three Years at the least.

By what has been said, you may percieve the work of an English Parliament is
not (as some would have it) only to be Keys to unlock the Peoples Purses. That
is but one part, and perhaps one of the least parts too, of their Office; they
are to propose new Laws that are wanting for general Good, and to press the
Abrogation of Laws in being, when the Execution of 'em is found prejudicial or
dangerous to the public, they are to provide for Religion, and the Safety and
the Honor of the Nation, they have a Power (as you have heard from Sir Tho.
Smith) to order the Right to the Crown (understand all this with the King's
Consent) and they have very frequently undertaken and actually limited the
same, contrary to and different from the Common Line of Succession. Nay by the
Statute of 13 Eliz. Cap. 13. It is expressly enacted, That if any Person shall
in any wise hold and affirm, or maintain, that the Queen with and by the
Parliament of England, is not able to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient
Force and Validity to limit and bind the Crown of this Realm, and the Descent,
Linitation, Inheritance and Government thereof or any other Statute to be made
by the Authority of the Parliament of England, with the Royal Ascent for
limiting the Crown, is not, are not, or shall not, or ought not to be for ever
good and sufficient Force and Validity to bind, limit, rest rain and govern all
Persons, their Rights and Titles, that in any wise may or might claim any
Interest or possibility in or to the Crown of England in Possession, Remainder,
Inheritance, Succession or otherwise howsoever; and all other Persons
whatsoever, every Person so holding, affirming or maintaining during the Life
of the Queen, shall be adjudged an high Traitor, and suffer and forfeit as in
Cases of high Treason is accustomed. And every Person so holding, affirming or
maintaining, after the Decease of our said Sovereign Lady shall forfeit all his
Goods and Chattels.

Which Clause and last mentioned Penalty is to this Day in Force, and ought to
be considered by any who shall now pretend that an Act of Parliament cannot
dispose of the Succession.

But nothing is more properly the work of a Parliament then to redress
Grievances, to take notice of Monopolies and Oppressions, to curb the
Exorbitances of pernicious Favorites and ill Ministers of State, to punish
mighty Delinquents as look upon themselves too big for the ordinary reach of
Justice, to inspect the Conduct of such as are entrusted with Administration of
the Laws, or dispose of the Public Treasure of the Nation. All Crimes of these
and and the like kinds are public Nusances, common Mischiefs, and wound the
whole Body Politic in a vital part, and can scarce at all times be found out
or redressed (by reason of the Power and Influence of the Offenders) but in
this great and awful Senate, before whom the haughtiest Criminals tremble, and
it has been observed that they scarce ever persecuted any tho never so great or
highly in Favor at Court, but sooner or latter they hit him, and it proved his
ruin. Take a few Examples, King Edw. II. dotes upon Piece Gravestone (a French
Gentleman) he wastes the King's Treasures, has undeserved Honor conferred on
him, affronts the ancient Nobility; the Parliament in the beginning of the
King's (...) Reign complain of him, he is banished into Ireland, the King
afterward calls him home, and marries him to the Earl of Gloucester's Sister.
The Lords complain again so effectually that the King not only consents to his
second Banishment, but that if ever he returned or were found in the Kingdom he
should be held and proceeded against as an Enemy to the State, yet back he
comes and is received once more by the King as an Angel, who carries him with
him into the North, and hearing the Lords were in Arms to bring the said
Gravestone to Jutice plants him for safety in Scarborrough-Castle, which being
taken, his Head was chopped off.

In K. Richard the 2d's time, most of the Judges of England to gratify certain
Corrupt and Pernicious Favorites about the King, being sent for to Nottingham,
were by Persuasions and Menaces prevailed with to give false and illegal
Resolutions to certain Questions proposed to them, declaring certain Matters to
be Treason which in truth were not so; for which in the next Parliament they
were called to account and attainted, and Sir Robert Tresilian, Lord Chief
Justice of England was drawn from the Tower, through London, to Tyburn, and
there hanged; as likewise was Blake one of the King's Council, and Vske the
Undersheriff of Middlesex, who was to pack a Jury to serve the present turn
against certain innocent Lords and others whom they intended to have had taken
off; and five more of the Judges were banished and their Goods forfeited. And
the Archbishop of York, the Duke of Ireland, and the Earl of Suffolk three of
the King's evil Councillors were forced to fly, and die miserable Fugatives in
Foreign Parts.

In the beginning of King Henry the 8th's Reign, Sir Richard Empsom, Knight. Edmond
Dudley, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, having by color of an Act of
Parliament to try People for several Offenses without Juries, committed great
Oppressions, were proceeded against in Parliament and lost their Heads.

In the 19th Year of King James's Reign, at a Parliament holden at Westminster,
there were shown (says Baker's Chron. Fol. 418.) two great Examples of
Justice, which for future Terror are not unfit to be here related; one upon
Sir Giles Mompesson, a Gentleman otherwise of good parts; but for practicing
sundry Abuses in erecting and setting up new Inns and Alehouses, and exacting
great Sums of Money of People, by pretense of Letter Pattents granted to him
for that purpose, was sentenced to be degraded from his Knighthood, and
disabled to bear any Office in the Commonwealth; tho he avoided the Execution
by flying the Land. But upon Sir Francis Mitchel, a Justice of Peace in
Middlesex and one of the chiefest Agents, the Sentence of Degradation was
executed, and he made to ride with his Face to the Horses Tail through the City of
London. The other Example was one Sir Fran. Bacon, Viscount St. Albons, Lord
Chancellor of England, who for Bribery was put from his place and committo the
Tower.

In King Charles the First time, most of the Judges that had given Opinions
contrary to Law in the case of Ship Money were called to account and forced to
fly for the same: And in the 19th Year of K. Charles the Second, the Earl of
Clarenden, Lord Chancellor of England, being questioned in Parliament and
retiring thereupon beyond the Seas, was by a special Act banished and disabled.
In a word, it was well and wisely said of that Excellent Statesman Sir William
Cecil, Lord Burleigh, and High Treasurer of England, that he knew not what an
Act of Parliament might not do: Which Apothegm was approved by King James and
alleged (as I remember) in one of his published Speeches.

I shall give a few Instances, besides those before mentioned, of what the
House of Commons has done in former Ages.

1. Anno. 20. Jacobi, Dr. Harris Minister of Beechingly, in Surry, for
misbehaving himself by Preaching, and otherwise about Election of Members of
Parliament upon complaint was called to the Bar of the House of Commons, and
there as a Delinquent on his Knees, had Judgment to confess his Fault there,
and in the Country, in the Pulpit of his Parish Church on Sunday before Sermon.

2. Anno. 21. Jacobi, Ingrey, Undersheriff of Cambridg-shire, refusing the
Pole, upon the promise of Sir Tho. Steward to defend him therein, kneeling at
the Bar, received his Judgment to stand committed to the Sergeant at Arms, and
to make Submission at the Bar, and acknowledge his Offense there, and to make a
further Submission openly at the Quarter Sessions and there also to acknowledge
his Fault.

3. Anno 22. Jacobi, the Mayor of Arundel, for misbehaving himself in an
Election by putting the Town to a great deal of charge, not giving a due and
general warning, but packing a number of Electors, was sent for by Warrant, and
after ordered to pay all the Charges, and the House appointed certain Persons
to adjust the Charges.

4. Anno 3. Car. 1. Sir Williaw Wray, and others deputed Lieutenants of
Cornwall, for assuming to themselves a Power to make whom they pleased Knights
and defaming those Gentlemen that then stood to be chosen, sending up and down
the Country Letters for the Trained-Bands to appear at the Day of Election, and
Menacing the Country under the Title of his Majesty's Pleasure, had Judgment
given upon 'em, to be committed to the Tower. 2. To make Recognition of their
Offense at the Bar of of the House upon their Knees, which was done. 3. To make
a Recognition and Submission at the Assizes in Cornwall in a Form drawn by a
Committee.

5. But most remarkable were the Proceedings in the same Parliament. Anno.
1628, against Dr. Manwaring, who being there charged with Preaching and
Publishing offensive Sermons, and the same being referred to a Committee, they
brought in their Reports, which was delivered to the House with this Speech, as
I find in Dr. Fuller's Church History, L. 11. Fol. 129.

Mr. Speaker,

I am to deliver from the Sub-Committee a Charge against Mr. Manwaring, a
Preacher and Dr. of Divinity, but a Man so Criminous that he has turned his
Titles into Accusations, for the better they are, the worse is he, that has
dishonored 'em, here is a great Charge that lies upon him, it is great in it
its self, and great because it has many great Charges in it: Serpens qui
serpentem Dovorat fit Draco; his Charge having digested many Charges into it,
is become a Monster of Charges. The main and great one, is this, a Plot and a
Policy to alter and subvert the Frame and Fabric of this State and
Commonwealth. This is the great one, and it has others in it, that gains it
more Greatness. For to this end he labors to infuse into the Conscience of His
Majesty the persuasion of a Power not bounding it self with Laws, which King
James of Famous Memory calls in his Speech in Parliament, 1618. Tyranny, yea
Tyranny accompanied with Perjury.

2. He endeavors to persuade the Consciences of the Subjects that they are
bound to obey illegal Commands; yea, he damns them for not obeying 'em.

3. He robs the Subjects of the property of their Goods.

4. He brands 'em that will not loose their property with most scandalous and
odious Titles, to make 'em hateful both to Prince People, so to set a division
between Head and Members, and between the Members themselves.

To this end (not much unlike Faux and his Fellows) he seeks to blow up
Parliaments and Parliamentary Power. Therefore being duly viewed, will make up
the main and great Charge a Mischievious Plot to alter and subvert the Frame
and Government of this State and Commonwealth. And now that you may besure
that Mr. Manwaring, tho he leave us no Property in our Goods, yet he has an
absolute Propriety in his Charge: Audite ipsam belluam, here Mr. Manwaring by
his own words making up his own Charge.

Here he produced the Books particularly insisting on P. 19, 29, and 30. in the
first Sermon. P. 35, 46, and 47. in the second Sermon. All which Passages he
hightened with much Elequence and Acrimony; thus concluding his (...). I have
showed you an Evil Tree, (...) forth evil Fruit, and now it rests (...) you to
determine whether the follo^^^^ (...) shall follow, Cut it down and cast it into
the Fire. Four Days after the Parliament proceeded to his Censure, consisting
of eight particulars, it being ordered by the House of Lords against him as
follows.

1. To be Imprisoned during the Pleasure of the House. 2. To be Fined a
Thousand Pounds. 3. To make his Submission at the Bar of this House, and in the
House of Commons at the Bar there, in verbis conceptis, a set Form of Words
framed by a Committee of this House. 4. To be Suspended from his Ministerial
Function three Years, and in the mean time a sufficient Preaching-Man to be
provided out of the profits of his Living, and this to be left to be performed
by the Ecclesiastical Court. 5. To be Disabled for ever hereafter from
Preaching at Court. 6. To be for ever Disabled of having any Ecclesiastical
Dignity in the Church of England. 7. To be incapable of any Secular Office or
Preferment. 8. That his Books are worthy to be burnt, and that His Majesty to
be moved that it may be to in London, and both the Universities.
And accordingly he made his humble Submission at both the Bars in Parliament,
on the 23d of June following, and on his Knees before both Houses, submitted
himself, with outward Expressions of Sorrow as follows.

I do here in all Sorrow of Heart and true Repentance acknowledge these many
Errors and Indiscretions, which I have committed in Preaching and Publishing
the two Sermons of mine, which I called Religion and Allegiance, and my great
Fault in falling upon this Theme again, and handling the same rashly,
scandalously and unadvisedly in my own Parish Church, in St. Giles's in the
Fields, the 4th of May last past. I humbly acknowledge these three Sermons to
have been full of dangerous Passages and Inferences, and Scandalous Aspersions,
in most part of them; and I do humbly acknowledge the just Proceedings of this
Honorable House against me, and the just Sentence and Judgment passed upon me
for my great Offense: And I do from the bottom of my Heart crave Pardon of God,
the King, and this Honorable House, and the Commonwealth in general, and
those worthy Persons adjudged to be reflected on by me in particular, for these
great Offenses and Errors.

It is therefore the indispensible Interest and Duty of all true Englishmen to
maintain these Privileges conveyed from their Ancestors through so many
Generations inviolable, upon which all our Earthly (and in a great measure our
Spiritual) Happiness, Safety, and Well-being depends. Nor can any Man in his
Senses but acknowledge that the only right way to attain that End is to look
well to the Means, and that is by taking due care what Persons they choose for
their Representatives, with whom they must trust their Estates, Lives, and
Liberties.

Now the Government of a Prince by and with Parliaments, when ever the
condition and necessities of the State require 'em, however according to its
Primitive Institution it was the best of all others: Yet as well in that as in
Christianity it self, there has been sound out ways of Corruption, and that is
when either they sit too long, or too seldom, or are too frequently dissolved:
(Too frequent Dissolutions being no less dangerous to the Subject, than too
long Sessions) nevertheless, it may be in the Electors Power to avoid the
Inconveniences (of both, and that is) by making a good choice.

Whereas if the Country People will sell ^ll that they have for a little Boast
Beef, a Glass of Sack, and a Pot of Ale, chosing him that will give them most
drink to day, tho they know him to be a Person who will sell both their
Religion, Liberties and Fortunes to Morrow: Then frequent Dissolutions we may
expect, which are as dangerous to the Subject as too long Sessions, which will
of necessity ruin us and utterly debauch this excellent Constitution: For the
honest Country Gentleman designs no other private advantage but the true
Service of his King and Country; has no reason nor is lie able once in half a
year to spend 4 or 500 pounds, only to purchase a place full of Labor, Charge,
Trouble and Danger, without any profit to himself, only to serve those who put
him to such an unkind Expense. And when honest Loyal Gentlemen are thus
discouraged, this sottish Humor amongst the Electors continue, the Papists and
their Faction, or necessitous Persons of prostituted Consciences will carry
their Votes; for they can afford to buy them at large Rates, being resolved to
repay themselves tho with the ruin of the Nation.

This is not vain Surmise or idle Speculation, but the very Truth of the Case;
and the meanest Countryman that has Eyes in his Head, and will use them,
cannot but see it: For did you ever know a Coachman or Groom buy his Place,
unless he designed to rob his Masters Bin? Therefore, whoever you put to charge
in your Elections blame him not if he makes Money again of what he bought, and
lays out his Vote in the House not for your good, and that of the Public, but
that way as will best please the Ministers of State, that so he himself may get
a good Place, or Preferment, or Title of Honor by the Bargain. I say, tho he
himself be a base Wretch for so doing, yet you cannot blame him, since you did
not lend him your Trust, but sold it him; and what a Man has purchased with
his own Money he may lawfully sell again.

Therefore that Man who does wilfully (...) endeavor to ruin both his Country
and Himself, and his Posterity, and to be as bad or worse than the Person he
chooses; and if the greater part of the (...) to be wiser or honester, it (...)
to him, he did as much as he (...) it; and therefore for his (...) one else
were concerned with him, (...) matter if he were forthwith made a Slave, and
his Children perpetual Vassels.

The (beforementioned) old Lord Treasurer Burleigh (who is thought to have
been the greatest Statesman that ever this Nation bred) did frequently deliver
as a Maxim, or rather a Prophesy, That England can hardly be ruined, unless by
her own Parliament; undoubtedly foreseeing that other Oppressions, as being
wrought by Violence, might perhaps by violence be in time shaken off again:
whereas when in a Parliamentary way we are undone by a Law that can never be
reversed but by a downright Rebellion, because the Parties advantaged by that
Law will never agree to the repealing of it.

Such is the happy frame of your Government, so prudently and so strong have
your Ancestors secured Property and Liberty, (rescued by Inches out of the
Hands of encroaching Violence) that you cannot be enslaved but with Chains of
your own making; for as you are never undone, till you are undone by Law, so
you can never be undone by a Law, till you choose the undoing Legislators: and
may not your Enemies add Scorn to their Cruelty, and pretend Justice for both,
when they can plead they had never trampled on your Heads, had not you laid
them on the Ground?

From what has been said, it evidently appears of what vast importance it is at
all times (when ever his Majesty shall be pleased to issue out his Writs for a
Parliament) to choose (as much as in us lies) a good House of Commons, as we
tender our Religion, Liberties, Estates and Posterity: Upon our well or ill
choosing depends our well or ill being: It Is here as in Marriage or War, there
is no room for second Errors; one Act may ruin a Nation beyond retri^^^

FINIS.

