ADVICE to the Patrons of the TEST
I Cannot but admire the Heat and Zeal of many Men, (perhaps some of the
Honorable House of Commmons,) who, to Support the Church of England, unhappily
take such measures, which in all probability must destroy That which they so
Vehemently endeavor to maintain. It Is true, Vox Populi had once a great
Influence; but now, since we have a Prince so Religious, whom none but Atheists
can dislike; and so Just, whom none but Traitors can fear; Give me leave to
say, That no People in the World are so Unjust to their Sovereign, or so Unkind
to themselves, as those pretended Patriots, who so obstinately promote the
continuing of the Penal Laws for Religion, especially the TEST, I mean that of
Shaftsbury, whose very Name alone one would think were sufficient to Damn it.

For sure I am, no honest Church of England-man can have the Confidence to
Vindicate that Man, or his Principles, who merely out of Malice to His present
Majesty (whom God long preserve) and not out of any kindness to the Church of
England, was the only Contriver of that Machine, which in It contains, or at
least aims at almost as much Blasphemy as the Alchoran, and ought to be as much
Exploded by any Man that pretends to the Name of a Christian.

I have often taken notice of the Common Scandal the English Clergy, without
any color of Truth, throw upon Catholics, and That they are the most Severe
and Sanguinary People imaginable in the Propagation of Religion; And then for
instance, my Learned Parson is pleased to urge the Inquisition of Spain, and
the Nick-nam'd Persecution of France, all of his own knowledge, though he never
was of the other side the Water, unless at Surrey Assizes to Prosecute some
Litigious Action against his Parishioners. Such Men would do well to consider
the Rigor of the Penal Laws of this Kingdom against Catholics, and then I am
sure they will be of another mind; For I defy any Impartial Man to instance a
greater Persecution of Christians, than that of the Protestants against
Catholics. If we enquire into the Statutes made since Henry the VIII. about
Religion. It Is true, under Dioclesian, and many other Roman Emperors,
Christians have been put to Death, and to the most Exquisit Torments
imaginable; But in these Statutes, Death in comparison is the least Punishment;
For thereby a Catholic, (though an Englishman, and of a plentiful Fortune,) is
made incapable of Enjoying his Estate, and his own Native Right and Property,
the Son of Inheriting his Father; and in fine, his Wife and Children turned out
of Doors to beg their Bread: Yet all this while the Protestants are the only
Peaceable, and Charitable Men in the World. Indeed I could wish they were so,
for then those Laws would soon be Abolished: But on the contrary, I find they
would Prosecute all other Men with the greatest rigor. Though they cry out of
Popery and Persecution, when they feel the least Restraint upon themselves; a
very great Injustice, and such as all good Men ought to blush at.

Of the same stamp are all the other Calumnies, and Malicious Stories imposed
upon the Church of Rome, by B. S. T. S. and many other Celebrated Raby's of the
Protestant Communion, who, instead of Argument, endeavor to represent
Catholics as the greatest Blockheads in the World, if all were true they say;
But since they themselves know it is all false, I am satisfied that Character
belongs to themselves; For by such Romances, instead of Preaching the Gospel,
they (besides asp^^sing the King,) Ridicule Christianity it self, and
endeavor, (as much as in them lies,) to introduce Atheism. Pardon this short
Digression, and be pleased to consider one thing further, That the Government
of England is absolutely Monarchical, and that the Prerogative of the Crown
cannot be Diminished, even si le Roy le veut. Now this being granted, (which I Am
sure no Gentleman of the Long Robe will deny,) I would gladly know whether
Magna Charta, (that great Diana of the unthinking Crowd,) Charta Foreste, the
Statutes of Metron, Marlebridge, Gloucester, Acton-Burnell, Westminster the 2d,
Winchester, Quia Emptores Terrarum, etc. (to omit many others,) are not, or at
least were Authentic Laws; if so, then the Kings of England had Originally the
Enacting Power in themselves alone. Those Statutes being (if I mistake not,)
created, and made by the Kings Supreme Fiat and Authority only, without the
formal phrase, By and with the Consent of, etc. Though now those words are
looked upon as Essential.

This sure is a great Prerogative of the Crown, and at any time may be
re-assum'd if it is the Princes pleasure so to do, for Nullum tempus occurrit
Regi. And therefore, if Subjects will Sawcily Vindicate their pretended Rights
and Properties, I see no Reason why His Majesty may not Legally Assert his own
Power and Prerogative.

These, (as well as many other Reasons now in Print,) one would think were
sufficient to persuade any Rational Man to a Compliance with His Majesty, for
Abolishing the TEST, and other Penal Laws concerning Religion.

But if nothing will do, and Men will still persist in their Obstinacy, I shall
leave them to reap the benefit of their own folly, and ever Pray that God
Almighty would Enable His Majesty to Trample upon His Enemies, and bless Him
with a Long and Prosperous Reign, Amen.

FINIS.

