ADVICE TO THE Confuter of Bellarmin, With some Considerations upon the
Antiquity OF THE Church of England.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel. 1687.

Advice to the Confuter of Bellarmin, with some Considerations upon the
Antiquity of the Church of England.
I Apprehend it is much easier Confuting Bellarmin over a Pot, than by taking
Pen in hand and Writing an Answer. And yet I fear, it is possible by the
Powerful Influence of an Ill Habit, that a Man may have so often knocked down
that Roman Champion with a Bellarmin thou Lie, under a Bush; that he may be
blown up with a Vanity, of being as Able to meet and overthrow him in the Field
of Controversy.

I don't pretend, that this is the case of him, who has undertaken to Answer
Bellarmin's Marks of the Church; but because I am sensible, he has engaged
himself in a Task of some Difficulty, I presume he would willingly so discharge
himself, as not to be thus censured by Adversaries; and upon this score I make
bold to present him with a short Advice, which are some Observations upon his
Second Paper, wherein he Examins the Second Note of the Church, viz. Antiquity;
for the First I had not the luck to see. If they prove serviceable in his
Undertaking, he will be obliged to an Unknown Friend; if not; there is only a
little Good Will lost, and half a Sheet of Paper.

My First Remark and Advice is, that when he is upon Confuting Bellarmin, he
would take care, that what he engages to disprove, should be something that
Bellarmin asserts; otherwise 'twill be almost impossible to Confute him. And
therefore I apprehend, the Papists will be apt to think, that in the First of
the Three things he undertakes to demonstrate, viz. That the Plea of bare
Antiquity is not proper to the Church, he has not at all Confuted Bellarmin,
because Bellarmin no where asserts, that it is. He says indeed, that whoever at
this time will find out the Catholic Church professed in the Creed, amongst so
many Pretenders, must not apply himself to any Vpstart Congregation, which was
never Visible in the World but of late Years; but to such a Church, which has
been of as long standing as ever since Christ and the Apostles days, and
consequently such a Church, to which Antiquity of necessity at this time
belongs. This Bellarmin asserts; but he no were says that Bare Antiquity is a
Note of Truth. And so the Confuting of this, will be thought only a knocking
down of an Imaginary Principle of the Answerers own raising, but no Confuting
of Bellarmin. And this leads me to my,

2. Advice, That when he Confutes Bellarmin, he would not say the same thing as
Bellarmin does: Which yet he seems unluckily to do in this Paper, p. 45. where
having owned, that Bellarmin by the Antiquity of the Church, means that the
True Church must necessarily be Ancienter than the False; as God was before the
Devil; he takes pains to explicate and prove the very same thing, and thus
strangely seems to Answer Bellarmin, by showing from Reason and the Fathers,
that what Bellarmin says is true; and that Antiquity, as by him explicated,
must of necessity belong to the True Catholic Church.

3. That he would be Cautious, not to Fight against himself, while he is earnest
upon Confuting Bellarmin. And therefore when he thinks he has made it out, p.
42. That Antiquity is not a Note proper to the Church, because there was a time
when the Church was New. He does not do prudently within three pages after, (
p. 45.) to assert, That the Scriptures are the True Antiquity. Because every
one of his Fresh Men in Learning, will begin to argue, That if with this Man,
Antiquity cannot belong to the Church, because there was a time, when the
Church was New; How can he say, it truly belongs to the Scriptures, since there
was a time when the Scriptures were New as well as the Church? This will not
seem proper Arguing for a Confuter of Bellarmin, especially since every body
knows, that the Church was before the Scripture or Written Word; and that if
Antiquity does not belong to what was First, 'twill be very difficult to make
it belong to the Latter, which was not in being till some years after.

4. That he would be careful not to Contradict himself: And therefore,
methinks, when he has asserted absolutely p. 42. That Antiquity is not a Note
proper to the Church, it does not make good Music with p. 45. where he has
found out an Antiquity, which is proper to the Church. This last sort of
Antiquity (says he) is the same with what is, First: Unto which we are desirous
to go, to which we are willing to stand, and by which we would be judged: Is
not this something like saying, Antiquity IS, and IS NOT proper to the Church?

5. That in Quoting Fathers, he would only make choice of such as seem to be
against his Adversaries, and not Those which Favor them. And therefore when he
is drawing up his Plea against Antiquity p. 47. he might very well have omitted
one, which Supports his Adversaries, and is the very ground of what they
maintain, and he opposes. The words are these; There is a short way for
Religious and Simple Minds to find out what is Truth; For if we return to the
Beginning and Original of Divine Tradition, Human Error ceases. Thither let us
return to our Lord's Original, the Evangelical Beginning, the Apostolical
Tradition: And hence let the Reason of our Act arise, from whence Order and the
Beginning arose. Is not this pleading for Antiquity, instead of writing against
it? Is not this the very Doctrine of Bellarmin; and the setting up the very
Tradition, which Catholics appeal to, whilst the way to find out the Truth,
according to the Fathers, is by following Divine and Apostolical Tradition?
What Is this against Bellarmin or his Antiquity?

Now I come to the Second thing he intends to prove, viz. That the present
Church of Rome vainly pretends to True Antiquity, i. e. to Ancient Truth. And
in the Perusal of this I must advise him,

First, That when he treats of any Church or Body of Men, he would not forget
Good manners, and Ordinary Civility: As he seems to have done p. 49. where he
is not contented to charge the Church of Rome with Errors only, but, in plain
English, with LIES too. As if he thought an Argument would not sound well in
Controversy, unless 'twere put in the Billings-gate-phrase. But he proves the
whole Charge thus Ib. That Church has not the Mark of True Antiquity, which
does not hold the same Christian Doctrine, it did at the beginning, but has
introduced Errors and Lies, under the pretense of Ancient Truth. But this is
the case of the present Church of Rome; as is evident by that Alteration they
have made in the Ancient Creed: Unto which they have added as many more
Articles as there were at first: Ergo. Upon the Consideration of which Proof I
advise him,

2. Not to be so blindly earnest in kicking down the Church of Rome, as to
overthrow his own at the same Blow. For if the Addition of Articles to the
Ancient Creed, takes off all claim to the Ancient Truth, what becomes of the
Church of England, which besides the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds, has another
of a latter date of Nine and Thirty Articles, besides another Plot-Creed called
the Test? Can she be the Ancient Church, which had only one Creed, and but
Twelve Articles?

3. That he would not advance Absurdities, whilst he pretends to show
Bellarmin's Ratiocination to be but Sophistry. Bellarmin shows, that in all
great changes of Religion, the Authors of the change may be assigned, the New
Doctrine that was brought in, the Time when it began, etc. That therefore, since
these cannot be shown in any change pretendedly charged upon the Church of
Rome; there was never any such change. This the Confuter undertakes to prove
Notoriously False; because, says he, the Body Spiritual, is like the Body
Natural, and therefore as a Man may be worn away with a Consumption to Skin and
Bone, though no body can tell the precise time, when or where his Blood began to
be tainted: So the whole Body of the Church may be corrupted with Error and
Heresy, though it crept in so secretly at first, and so indiscernably, that
'twas not suspected. And what is this to the purpose? This shows indeed that a
Great Change of Religion may be unknown as to it is beginning, while as yet it is
working in Secret and Indiscernable; for what wonder for things while
Indiscernable not to be seen? But dos it prove, that when the Change or
Alteration began publicly to be Abetted, Maintained, Propagated, appearing in
open Contradiction and Defiance to the True Church, condemning it is Doctrine,
and opposing the Articles of her Faith as Erroneous and Heretical; that then
such an Alteration in Religion could spread it self over the whole Christian
World, and yet the Authors, Promoters, Abetters, and Embracers of it, not to be
known, or taken Notice of? Let him prove but this, and he will come to the Point.
We don't doubt, but the Seeds of Innovation may, like the Tares in the Gospel,
lie for some time under ground, and not be taken notice of, while in all
outward appearance they are not discernable from the Good Corn. But that they
should grow up, choke the Wheat, every where break it down and consume it, and
yet not be seen or discerned, this he will never prove out of the Gospel. What
kind of Servants must the Householder have, to suppose this Absurdity? And yet
upon this ground stands our Confuter and his Whole Church of England. She to
wipe off the soul guilt of Schism, cries out; The Church of Rome has Erred, and
made Innovations; therefore we left her. And what Errors and Innovations are
these? Why She has brought in an Idolatry worse than that of the Heathens,
Infinite Superstitions, Abominations; coined New Articles of Faith, contrary to
all Sense and Reason, Stupid Doctrins, Absurd and Senseless Doctrins, Foolish
Doctrins, Monstrous Doctrins, etc. This is a very severe Charge, and the Crimes
of which she stands Endicted, are obvious to every Ordinary Reason, and Weak
Christian. Well, but how long has she been polluted with these Doctrins? With
some, Six hundred years, with others Nine hundred, Eleven hundred, Thirteen
hundred years. And these Errors she propagated over the whole Christian World,
and with them infected all the Kings of the Earth. Well, but did not the True
Church of Christ stand up against the Church of Rome, while she thus left the
Faith, and corrupted the Faithful? Where was the Church of England all this
time? Did not she withstand these Abominations, Preach and make Laws against
them and the Abetters? Did she assemble no Councils, Synods or Convocations to
Censure and Condemn them? No, there was no Church visibly appeared to oppose
the Growth of Popery, it spread Invisbly, it infected all Christians
Insensibly, and so came down all over Christendom Imperceptibly to the days of
Luther, who opposed it vigorously; though neither He, nor the Church of England,
(as many are apt to think) have so prosecuted those Errors, but they continue
infected with a great many of them still, and don't know it or perceive it.
Strange and Wonderful News; What Is the Forty thousand Pilgrims, and the Army in
Incognito to this Relation? Oates's Narrative is not half so big with
Absurdities, as this Wonderful Story of Changes and Alterations over the whole
Christian World, and yet Invisible and Insensible. The Errors, it seems,
brought in and propagated by Papists in those Alterations of Religion, are now
so Palpable, so Evident, so Clear; that it is not only every Beardless Divine
can disprove them, and show them to be Ridiculous; but every Smatterer in
Controversy, every Tinker and Cobbler sees them to be against Sense and Reason
forsooth, and undertakes to prove them Absurd and Foolish. And yet these so
Palpable, so Plain and Evident Errors were received over the whole Christian
World without the Opposition of the True Church of Christ for above a Thousand
Years. What! Never a Church of England Disputant never a Cobbler, Tinker, never
a Divine, all this time, to show and Confute these Errors? Where was this Pure
Church of England all this while? This Church, which our Confuter of Bellarmin,
is sure is the True Ancient Church; where was she, when these Errors, were
every where taught, publikly professed and propogated? Could she not then See
Errors so Plain and Obvious? But how should she See, when her Nine days were
not out till a Thousand years after? But the Confuter has found out Changes in
Religion which grew insensibly; as the Communion in one kind: And concerning
this,

4. I advise him in his next, to prove that a Diversity of Practice, is an
Alteration in Religion. And especially of such a Practice, which Christ left
indifferent in respect of the Laity, and without any Positive Command of their
receiving it in both kinds; as Luther owns, who says, that in this Point Christ
has left no Necessary Precept. In Ep. ad Bohem. And in his Book de Vtraque
specie. If you come (says he) to a place where the Sacrament is given only in
One kind, receive it in one. The like Indifferency is acknowledged by
Melancthon. Centur. Ep. Theol. p. 252. Spalatensis too, for whom I presume the
Confuter has some respect, l. 5. c. 6. de Repub. Eccles. has these words; I
affirm that the Receiving the Sacrament in Both kinds is not so under a
Precept, but upon a considerable cause, though Private and of Private Persons, it
may profitably and lawfully be received under the Species of Bread alone. And
certainly what Private Persons may lawfully do, when they judge convenient, as
this Author Ib. says, Exempla Antiqua docent, is evident from the Practice of
the Ancients, cannot be unlawful in the Church: And may be done without any
Alteration in Religion. Besides this he has found another change in Religion
and Faith, viz. concerning the Papal Authority; and here he pretends to show,
by whom this was brought into the Church. Victor, says he, p. 53. Began the
Dance, Zozimus followed it; Celestine carried it on: And in relation to this,

5. I advise him to be cautious for the future, how he goes so far back into
the Primitive times, to look for Authors of pretended Alterations in the Church
of Rome. Because it being Generally believed, that the Church of Rome was Pure
and Vncorrupt in those First Ages, his Readers will be apt to think, that what
was then Practiced and owned by those Primitive Christians, was no Error or
Alteration, but an Apostolical Truth; and that he that comes above fifteen
hundred years after, and urges such a Charge against those times, must have no
small stock of confidence. For how can Men possibly think otherwise, when they
consider, that Pope Victor, who is here endicted, lived in the Second Century,
and was chosen to that See of Rome in the Year 203. which was above an hundred
and twenty Years before the First General Council of Nice. The Some Others he
there mentions, as Maintainers of the Papal Authority, together with Zozimus
and Celestine, were all Bishops of Rome, either before or in the time of the
First Four General Councils Received and acknowledged here in England. And can
any Man think, that if the Exercise of that Authority, as maintained by those
Popes, was such an Alteration, such an Innovation, such a Tyranny, as it is now
pretended, that those First Councils, of so many Learned and Orthodox Prelates,
would have taken no notice of it? Is it not likely, in those Assemblies there
were some as Zealous for preventing Innovations, some as Wise and Learned, and
Understanding in the Scriptures as our Church-Divines are now a days? Or did
there want in those Councils, some Church of England Laymen, a Learned
Tradesman, some Quick-sighted-penetrating Barber, or perchance a Lecturer or
Confuter of Bellarmin, to put those Fathers in mind of their Duty, and tell 'em
of the Alteration brought into the Church; to show 'em Victor beginning the
Dance, Zozimus following it, and Celestine carrying it on? Well, these are very
hard things; and certainly, he that believes these, and afterward pretends to
boggle at Transubstantiation, must needs be a Dissembler. And the Absurdity of
this pretense still grows the more Monstrous, when we reflect that St.
Irenaeus, Optatus, Augustine, and other Ancient Fathers, urge the continued
Succession of these very Bishops of Rome, as an Argument of the True, Orthodox
Faith and Religion professed in that Church; without the least mention or hint
of any such pretended Alteration. And Fulk, Calvin, with other Protestants, say
that these Fathers specially named the Succession of Bishops in the Church of
Rome, because the Church of Rome, continued all that time in the Doctrine of the
Apostles, as it was founded by them. And yet now at last, when it is to serve
the turn, these same Bishops must be branded, as the Setters up and Promoters
of Tyranny and Usurpation. But what better shift can those make, who cannot
justify themselves, but in condemning the Church of Rome? The only way they
have to look Fair is by Blackning her, and what wonder they are so industrious,
in throwing dirt in her Face? Besides this the Confuter has brought a Third
Instance of Alteration in the Church of Rome, viz. The creeping in of Images
into the Church; And in reference to this,

6. I advise him to consider better for the future, what Alterations he charges
upon the Church of Rome; especially not to mention such, which, if to the
purpose, would as certainly lay his own Church and cause upon their backs, as
he thinks he dos the Church of Rome. For here among the Alterations relating to
Images, he says the Historical use of them came not into Churches till above
300 Years after Christ; and the Rhetorical use of them, viz. the stirring up
Devotion, not till 300 Years more, and for this reason, besides others, he
condemns the Church of Rome for Innovation in Religion. And yet these very
Practices are allowed too by the Church of England, as Mr. Montague confesses
in his Appeal to Caesar, c. 19. 20. 21. who likewise besides this, Ib. approves
the giving Respect and Reverence to them, as was done by Pope Gregory in
Rememoration, and more effectual representment of the Prototypes. Now if this
use of Images leaves the Church of Rome, without all Title to Antiquity, what
better has the Church of England? If this be enough to un-church the Church of
Rome, dos it not at least make the Church of England Stagger? But if these
Practices and the like be enough with the Confuter, to charge a Church with the
Guilt of Innovation and Alteration in Religion, I believe against the next
Edition, he may easily find more of the like Nature to add to his Margin; viz.
the wearing the Surplice, the Cope and Lawn Sleeves; the saying of Litanies and
Common Prayer, with many others, which were not all practiced from the time of
the Apostles, but are of a more modern date.

These are the chief Remarks I observed in the perusal of this Paper; if the
Confuter will but consider them well, I may expect his next to come out more
exact, at least as far as his cause will bear. I have only one thing more to
observe, and that is his Conclusion; in which, after he has Confuted (as he
thinks) all the claim of the Church of Rome to Antiquity, he asserts the Church
of England, as established by Law, for the only True, Ancient, Primitive
Church. And this is a thing I cannot tell possibly which way to make Sense of.
For how can this Church of England, which started into the World only an
hundred and fifty years ago, be the True, Ancient, Primitive Church of Christ,
which has been visibly extant in the World, above these sixteen hundred years,
ever since Christ and his Apostles? Where were her Pastors, her Teachers, her
Prelates, for a thousand years before Edward the Sixth? Where were her Nine and
Thirty Articles, her Homilies, her Common Prayer Book, her Test? Don't every
body know, that Christ and his Apostles had never a hand in these, they being
all framed of late years; the Where, the When, the By Whom, and the Wherefore
being as well known, as the way to the Parliament House. It Is true, the Act in
Confirmation of the First Common Prayer Book says, that this Book was compiled
by the Aid of the Holy Ghost: But the Great Alterations and Additions that were
made by the same Parliament, in the same Kings Reign, even in things of Weight
and Moment, are enough to make any Man Jealous; and to suspect that that Holy
Spirit which is Unchangeable, was not very particularly assistant in such a
Changeable Matter; and that if the Parties concerned had seriously thought, it
had been effected by his Aid, they had not so soon applied themselves to the
mending it. As to this Church therefore, as far as concerns it is being
Established by Law, the World knows when 'twas done; and that as Established by
Law it sometimes Prayed for the Dead, and as Established by Law it dos not Pray
for the Dead. But where this Church was before 'twas Established by Law, that
is not so easy to tell. We know that this Church separated from the whole Body
of Christians, and that it joined to no Congregation of Believers or Church
then in being; if it did, let it be shown, to which: If it did not, we must
judge it as Modern and Novel, as the Separation; and if She be True, that there
was before that time no True Church of Christ in being throughout the whole
Christian World, which is as Absurd as well can be. Let not the Confuter
therefore boast too much of his Church's Antiquity; it is not enough to pretend,
that She believes the Creed, but it is to be proved, that She believes it
entirely and fully in that Sense, as 'twas taught by the Apostles and professed
by the Primitive Church; this she must show as to those Four Articles, He
descended into Hell, I believe The Holy Catholic Church, The Communion of
Saints, The Forgiveness of Sins: She must show likewise, that besides believing
the Creed, She Denies nothing of what was taught by the Apostles, and was the
Belief of the Pure and Primitive Church. He that denies all the Sacraments, may
say he believes the Creed, and yet he is not of the Church of Christ. He that
should subscribe Negative Articles, in the denial of Original Sin, and the
Necessity of God's Grace, may boast he believes the Creed, and yet is nothing
better than a Pelagian. He that will be a True Member of Christ's Church, must
believe the Catholic Faith Wholly and Entirely, as we profess in the Athanasian
Creed. Let him prove this of the Church of England, and then he will show her to
be the Ancient Church. But alas! When this Pure and Entire Belief is denied to
the Church of Rome, notwithstanding her Continued Succession of Bishops and
Pastors from Christ's time to this, and her determining nothing, but in a
General Assembly of those Prelates, whose charge it was to do it: Who can
believe, that this is found in the Church of England, who awaking out of a
thousand years sleep, of Ignorance, Errors, and Idolatry, as they own; in a
confusion and hurry of affairs jumped into this Pure and Entire Faith of Christ
in the Parliament House, by the help of a few Bishops, Divines and Laymen?
Certainly if the Bishops of the whole Christian World erred for above a
thousand years, notwithstanding their frequent Meetings and Conferences about
Faith and Religion, it is very hard to believe, that our Parliament did not Err;
especially when the Spirit that moved in those times of Reforming, had so much
of Lust, Avarice, Rapine, Confusion, and Sacrilege, that it is not likely it
should protect from Error, but rather lead them to it: And if it did not, let
those believe it that can.

FINIS.

