AN ADDRESS To the Hopeful Young GENTRY OF ENGLAND. IN Some Strictures on the
most dangerous Vices incident to their Age and Quality.

Mors fera, Parce precor, vitam anticipare vel ipsam;
Vt moriatur Homo, sit precor ipse prius.
Couleius noster De Salvia.
Cur moriatur-Cui Salvia crescit?
By a perfect Honourer of their Worth.

London, Printed by E. C. for G. Walbancke, and are to be sold at his Shop near
Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1669.

Imprimatur,

Rob. Grove R.P.D. Episc. Land. a sac. Domest.
Mart. 26. 1669.
TO THE Nobly Accomplished, AND Honorably Descended John Burgoyne Esquire.
SIR,
IN the midst of the giddy and rapid turnings of the Affairs of this World, the
Malignity and Predominancy of Vice, clowding and obstructing Reason, violently
agitating the purest of its spirits and succors into the same commotions and
confusions: He that can stand steady and immovable is a greater Miracle, than
could have been the subject of Archimedes his bold Boast; That he would unfix
this whole Globe of Earth, might be have but a footing off from it. For beside
his vanity to promise the uncentring of that vast Body and unweildy, when he
could not give his own small active Carcass one remove from it; He would have
been as far to seek for a convenient distance and station where to effect the
operation: So that thorough the incertainty and impossibility of his
postulatum, the grand design must necessarily fall to the ground, as obscurely
as himself was erelong cast down, to measure his own lines and narrow
dimensions in the Dust. But granting it a demonstration, I must pay far greater
Admiration and Esteem to those brave Souls, who when the whole course of Nature
is under impetuous motions and tumults remain unconcerned and fixed, and, by the
conduct of singular Virture, retain their Sobriety and Prudence, when all about
them is mad, and under the fatal hurries of the great Disturbers of mankind, or
the furious Tempests of their own uncontrouled passions: This it is to bear up a
manly head above the Ruins, though the whole Fabric of the World be sinking,
and rolling into one Confusion.

That the slender supports of these few Lines are opposed against these
threatened mischiefs of bolder Vice, with ambition to act the part of any Atlas
(for our declining Age seems to want more than One) would be a presumption I
need not acquit my self from, by assuring you I dwell not so much abroad, and
from the notice of the dangers menacing my own Cottage: And indeed I here
expect the whole world to be my Compurgators, and fearing no such Calamity that
every one will excuse me that Labor, and as readily engage against any other
such Undertaker. The truth is [Sir] these short reflexes on Vice do exceedingly
enhanse to me the Beauty and Dowry of Virtue; the more I contemplate the
vacuities and deformities of that, I admire to find not so much as the least
shadow of either in this; And I am willing to proclaim aloud, That Virtue alone
is that noble and undaunted generosity; which not any single Engineer, but were
every vicious person an Archimedes, with all their Stratagems and force they
could not in the least shake or undermine. And where should I expect, however
wish, to find this Gallantry of Spirit, if not among our Nobless? I look on
them to be the Spirituous blood of the Body Politic; not their Purpurate
descent alone, but the unquestionable verity that the Blood is the vitals of
the Creature warrants my assertion; and it would be an ungrateful Argument to
evince it, from the infallible approaches Death, once enterr'd here, makes upon
all the fortresses of the Garrison, in every tide the blood beats up, to and
from the Heart. The fortyfying therefore of this Archeus, may it be as cordial
and acceptable, as if I now brought some nobler Liquor to be transfused into
the veins, and drein'd off the sheepish and vituline qualities so long fed upon
and imbibed, that, though we scorn the clothing, betray the sound of Wool in
our language.

But Sir I must stop here to meet your wonder, when understanding perfectly my
temperament, you see this close conception exposed and enduring the sight of
the Sun, and every ones readiness in Physiognomy: and that He you know me to
be, when the World can be no more advantaged by his mean capacity, than he is
like to be by its unexpected kindness; will yet put himself under the power of
suffering from it: why he is not content to sit still in private digesting his
resentments of the follies abroad, with the freedom they allow him to be quiet?
and if some will ever be found doing amiss, what should make him do worse, to
say he likes it not? He will first tell you every day produces something as
strange as this, and what may equally be the object of your wonder; unless you
are wholly exempt from it, and He from saying more of it. But if He much more
wonder at this himself and (if the regard He cannot dissemble for himself would
permit) do hugely condemn himself and it: Will you or any other like him, or
it, the better? If neither, Sir believe it, he will keep a little more good
opinion in store for himself, which shall make him esteem no better of himself
and the world, than if there were no relation intervening; He means so much to
favor himself, that that shall do him as little hurt as he can do it good. And
if you look for your friend, Sir, he is not yet turned Anchorite, he will
sooner be a Pilgrim with good Company, and the excellent Guide he is lately
acquainted with. Nor are his resentments in fear of Fermentation next Spring;
Nay he hopes to be as serene in the Canicular days, as now, when the humors
are close with the Earth locked up in the cold and innocent embraces of the
Snow. And let this clear him from being thought too invective to the evils of
our times; that as he is sensible of a monstrous conflux of instant vices, his
thoughts are calm, and pen but mild, to those fears he has of the next age, in
danger to be orespread with the Superfetations of that Impiety, which will be
too obdurate to feel the edge of a Satyr.

Sir all but your self will now expect large Encomiums to recommend you to the
view of the multitude; But I am sensible they stand but ready to devour you,
and this I call you to patronize For your self, Sir, I aver not so much
Jealousy over your inclinations to these vices, as Hopes that your life will
be a fair copy of all Virtues, presents you to this place, to supply the
draught I should have added to them: and may your Auspicious beginnings
continue me in acknowledgment of my defects and tenuity, deterring my pen from
entering on the Commendations will be your due. And for your Family, it is so
illustrious, that I shall be taxed by those that would find nothing good in it,
for daring to affix this Name to so mean a Front: and they will leave you in
have to come and revenge themselves upon me, if I cannot escape their stomach.
However be pleased my wishes, and well wished directions may be favorably
interpreted by your Noble mind, and all of your truly noble qu lity.

And Sir, for your friend, pray wish him well also, now fallen to be employed in
such a public Character; for you cannot tell what change he may not dare
venture next in his life, (if you will with him suppose it of his Life, which
every day changes; not of himself and his vowed constancy and integrity) for
there must, and will be found some so foolish, as not to fear the Printers nor
Readers Press they are to pass, any more than others do Matrimony: and there
may be Fatality to be pleaded for that also; which to fear is the next way to
the curse of continuing a Miserable Life, out of all hopes of a kind Reprieve
of Death to cut the halter of our fears. And methinks I am now acting my own
Departing; and have two words to say for my self before the last Farewell:
wherein (Pardon the digression) I seem to represent many of those we have seen
too much personating a public (not to say republic) death, as if their deaths
too were to be none of their own: not unlike to me they appear to the poor
Widow, who went out to gather two sticks to prepare a small cake, that they may
at least dye with a good morsel in their mouths. But not to forget to leave
off, though I do it less formally: For first I will not supplicate your
favor, no more than expect your thanks, for being prolix, but tell you my
design is honest, and an effect of my Honor to your Name and Person. Next I
know not how to entreat a good opinion or pardon of the Language, only assure
you, I took what words I thought most full and near to my Conceptions; and I
can sooner alter the natural Tone of my voice, to counterfeit any others, than
choose to fall into the Rectifiers or Body-makers hands, and suffer my Mind to
be pinched and shaped into the constraint of another dress and Mode of
expression. I shall but add, that all of it is but a Christma Letter: And you
know we are allowed our Masquerades, and longer festivous entertains of a
Carnival; So as you will admit it over your threshold, when I tell you under
the vizour in a whisper, That I am none other than Your very known Servant

January, 11th. 166 8/9.
AN ADDRESS To the Hopeful Young Gentry OF ENGLAND.
SINCE you are now entering upon those years, which entitle you the growing
hopes of England, and their fairest Care and Charge; from whom is expected the
strength and honor of your Age, the security and glory of the Nation: It
cannot be unworthy consideration to Advise, by what generous means the old
renown of our Ancestors may be vindicated from the threatened Evils of those
dangerous Vices, which, springing up with the young Nobless of our Country,
enervate their native vigor, deplume their Nobility; and in a viperous
combination attempt to strangle our Hercules in it is very infancy.

Your birth was in the midst of busy and tumultuous Times, wherein you may
remember, and could not but observe some of the later grand catastrophes, in
which part of your several families eminently acting, from the various
engagings and su^ccesses of those your relations you still received suitable
Impressions on your green years; and in those early days took in a ^^rge Map of
the World in a small Compass: You have seen enough in your sphere to make you
early commence Men, and furnish you with notices beyond the researches of
former Histories. It deserves to be reckoned among the effeminacies of mankind,
that so many are found to complain of their peculiar infortunacy, to be cast
into such a stirring and unquiet Age as we have lived in: Whereas an Heroic
spirit and virtue esteems it a proper exercise and test of it is worth, from so
great revolutions acquiring withal a knowledge and experience of the admirable
occurrences, we turn many years Chronicles to be acquainted with: there having
met so rare and quick a conflux of signal mercies and judgments together, that
we may judge them designed by Providence, either to make the utmost experiment
to resuscitate a lethargic people, and restore Spirits in the Compendium of
Elyxirs: Or as the Stage is always fullest and crowded with dispatches at the
winding up the Play, that the World it self near a period, is to fill up it is
short duration with an Epitome of all the wonderful events of past Ages, if not
laboring to exceed them all in delivery of a new world of Prodigies, e're it be
made the greatest by it is own conflagration.

But among all the unhappy Ones we have lived to see, none is so stupendous as
their unsuccessfulness; That when an hand from high has been exerted in all the
amazing Methods of Providence, we have closed our Eyes with a Malignant
obstinacy against the clearest evidencies and acknowledgments of a Deity; and
been so miserably incredulous as to dare the Divine Vengeance to farther proofs
of it is Power and Wisdom in our utter confusion. Thus of old, Vesuvius could
not satisfy some unreasonable Curios^s but by their addition to it is fuel, or
the difficulty of a recess; whence they brought the scars and stigmas of their
folly, who hoped to pry and wade through such clouds of smoke and gulfs of
Fire. You are therefore to contrast with a stupidly opining Age, which, having
forfeited the right use of it is Reason, will desperately expose all to the
hazard, rather than seem to be without it; and stumbling at the plain, most
familiar, and lucid Resolves of Reason and Nature, will yet blindly assay to
ransack all their most abstruse treasures, and discuss the Sacred Mysteries
Infinitely transcending either.

But the malice of this evil will assault you most dangerously, by corrupting
all the sound Rules of Morality in your converse; and having conformed your
manners to the licentiousness it practices, you must be forced to espouse those
principles which will patronize your exorbitancies. And this is a very
insinuative debauching of the mind, a Conquest without the formalities of an
attaque, which serve to alarm us against the Enemy. There are therefore of the
most pernicious habits which our young Gallants Indulge, which seem to me the
infallible prognostics of their ruin, and the fate of the common Body;
Against which I am to fortify you, as those that by their very familiarity and
obviousness are become more inimical and dangerous, gathering strength by not
being opposed, and by our long desuetude from the contrary renour of
unquestioned Virtue; which if you admit to become the Arbitres of your Life and
Conceptions, will render the various aspects of every Age as pleasant and
useful to your steady and clear optics, as they are confusive and unaccountable
to all other spectators.

He that expects after a Deluge the same vernancy disposition and order, the
soil was before adorned with; may also hope the Inundations of war will assuage
with the easy and silent progressions of Peace; and that the next Age will,
without interruption, prosecute and perfect the designs only, of their quiet
Grandfathers. How much of this is like truth, let us judge by what all former
Times record, if our own be yet too near the seed time, and the next be to
inherit the Crop. But this has as much truth as need be owned; That if the
Virtues of their progenitors be defaced by the succeeding audaciousness of the
sword, their Vices however will never want fostering by the next Generations:
Hence what were but the exposed stolen offspring of former years, are the
Legitimacies of later; and we have no copy left so foul, which too ingeniously
transcribing Vice does not every day out-blur. You may therefore, if you will,
owe the torrent of our enormities to the Time when nothing was unlawful; The
Fountain is too deeply embosom'd in our Natures, to lay so far off. But it is
not impossible to trace it from it is earliest footsteps, and where it begins to
spring into a stream; but that so sullyed in the puddle it flows from, that you
will conclude it to be rather one ditch and channel of mire. And it can be no
other, that scarcely can be said to rise out of the lap of Sloth; On the Basis
whereof might Vice be fixed, it would raise it is Pillars, and even stop you
here from farther enquiries after Honor and Glory, to sleep out the remaining
baleful minutes of Life in

IDLENESS,
The Capital of those Indulgencies, that conspire the delivery up of our
hopeful Youth, bound hand and foot into the vassalage and torures of imperious
Vice: the punishment of him who was bound to an heated Stag, that could neither
command himself nor the swift Beast; but tied and unactive, yet ran all the
Stages of his Bearers excursions, and was held fast to all it is petulant
vagaries: Such is the hurry of restless passions in the Idle Soul, through the
many regions of Fancy, and boundless Appetite; till it be tired and fall down
in some covert of obscene darkness. The Idle person is the only common Hackney,
and, having no employ of his own to work off Time and his faculties, stands
ready to let out himself Post, on the easy rates of the next stirring device
and lubency. A Play, a Ball, a Mistress, a Glass of Wine engage his Soul as
profoundly in contemplation of his dawning felicity, as the Turks Zeal is
enspirited by their brutish paradise. But We compassionate these poor Infidels,
whose knowledge is confined with the brandished Sword; and perhaps were ours
forbidden on as penal curiosity, it would become more desirable. While though,
we every day make bold plantations (how successfully I will not adjust) upon
every Creek and Point of Philosophy, and outbid all Antiquity on the fair terms
We proffer knowledge: to see the refined and most improvable part of our own
land uncultivated, the Youth and strength of our Nation lay fallow, and only
shoot forth into those spungy Mushroms and Wild-daisies, their softbrain makes
grow into it is entertainments; is enough to persuade us that true knowledge is
as inaccessible as the Tree of Life, and that Our Age is most unfortunate to be
debarred the proper scrutinies and direct approaches toward it. For certainly
knowledge and Wisdom it self is still the same pure and subtle concentration
of light; It cannot as to it is real worth and luster be depretiated, and would
always deserve the utmost insudation, the best of our Oil and Labor in it is
acquest. It must be therefore the dismal disaster of our time, that denies us
all possibility of discovery, where this lucid Pyramid is erected, and how we
may come under it is vital influences. Were we not thus lost with the Eden we
have lost, without doubt we should not be contented with our low and puerile
attempts after it; But awake from our sluggish velleities, vigorously to string
and strain our minds, to work some other furniture for them, beside Couches and
Pallets; we would break open some way to let in the bright rays of Knowledge
and Virtue, and not imagine we had lamps given us only to hang up against the
wall, to drowze, or be pensively befotted under them: while nothing but the
Chimaera's, follies and shadows of a dream, haunt the thin Ghosts in their
living Sepulchers, till these are commuted for a thicker, but not more heavy or
useless Arch of Stone.

But to free us from the enchantments of this kind of dead-sleep, and excite us
to a noble inquisition after Virtue and Science; let the whole World be
convinced, that they are as accessible as immutable, nor do on any parts of the
Universe vary their Compass, nor can be Retrograde on the Dial of any time. Our
age is as freely irradiated with their beams, as with that benignity of the
Sun, which ripened our Ancestors Cucumers, and now stripes and paints our
Melons; it is our want alone of rising will not suffer us to see day. While
beside Man (the lesser scheme of the Creation) the fairest portion of Mankind
(I mean those of your degree) and the Soul of Man (it is noble Heaven-born
inhabitant) nothing is found idle in nature. She is every where, and
continually, pregnant with new labors, and productions: see how in the
Vegetative World not a spire of Grass creeps out of the Earth, but is elevating
its head still nearer to Heaven: In the Sensitive the choicest Animals receive
our commands, and execute our drudgeries: That Coloss of life, the Elephant has
its understanding, strength, and service apportioned to its bulk; and among
Insects, the very Fly and Ant make a supplement to their close dimensions, in
their wonderful agility and industry; by which they fill up an equal space with
vastest bodies. In the fabric and constitution of Man, she is still busied in
accumulation of similary, or exporting useless and discordant particles. Life
it self seems to be but the result, and harmony of an even-flowing motion; and
that Automaton which keeps pace with every step of time, striking all its own
minutest and remotest wheels with a regular saliency, tells us lowdly by the
pulse against the pillow, that we were not born to slumber away our hasty time
and life; which hold more of a Race than walk in their motion and tendency to
their last pawse and rest. Nor does Nature with so much exactness elaborate and
exalt the spirits in the body, instantly to put off and lose their name and
nature, by being blended and perishing in an insipid Caput mortuum; or as if
they were so curiously contrived and designed, only to officiate in that scul,
once Head of the Roman Empire; which rivaled Jove, but stooped below his very
Eagle when turned into the device of a Most August Fly-Trap.

Can you have leisure to admire enough at that impertinency, which would summon
the utmost skill and consort of Music to play his Dormouse asleep? or would to
Oriental Bezoar and Ambar dissolve Gold and Pearl, to maintain a Mole? To no
higher archievements serve the fair Titles, Revenues, and Complexions of a
great part of Mankind; beside these, nothing is intelligible about them, nor
can more be said of them: so near to nothing do they shrink, whose souls
languish under the irreparable decays of tabific inactivity; or are broken with
pitiful low and sordid lubencies of idle entertainments; wholly superseding
those brave actions, sublime and profitable speculations, which would infuse
the life of men into them, and render them, off Men, immortal. Thus their
Heroic Progenitors traced Virtue and Honor, through all its intricate and
dangerous mazes; and this was the ascent they made to that high serenenes,
where every Pearl of their Coronets was stellified: And this only highway to
Happiness is still as open, and more delightful than you imagine the common
descent to Avernus. And indeed it can be no other than the very dregs of
Idleness that can sink the spirit (or may I not rather say, the Sediment of a
soul?) below all handsome action, in such an age as we live, which pretends to
such extraordinary Knowledge and Politeness; however must be most famous for
those Grand Actions to be enrolled in it, wherein Posterity will imagine none
could be born but to some laborious part.

Had we the generosity which did always breath with English spirits, it would be
so far from being extinguished in ignoble silence, and limited to the narrow
stage of our own Island, that it would break forth and display its valor
through all parts of the habitable Earth. Have we no Messieurs de Villa,
Fevillade, or St. Mont-brun kindled with the sparks of honor, that will fly to
the succors of that Chistian Garrison (before whose walls more blood has been
shed, than would serve for Cement to a far greater City) rather than expire at
home, as unknown as their Tombs will be to the Candiots! Certainly That place
is now the fairest Field of Honor, which has so long been the Christians
strongest shield (under their great Captain and Prince) against Infidels, and
it will be worthy learning with how vast expense of Treasure, and prodigality
of Lives, they study to defend their dearer Country. And in the long story of
that single Siege you will read all the old admired Roman Courage, Conduct, and
Felicity; which will be so signalized to after times, that our latest Nephews
will take a Voyage only to visit its venerable ruins; wherein are now enclosed
those gallant Souls, that have shaken off the softness, and stupifying
pleasures of Ease, with the grim terrors of Death, to sacrifice all in so
glorious a Quarrel, and for the common security. Can we lie immersed in wanton
Idleness, when Christianity is concerned for her battered Bulwarks, that suffer
again the Siege of Rhodes more nearly; and that in such sanguinary Scenes and
Tragedies, as the very naming them will fright the young Gallants out of the
Pit?

Where being brought by my discourse, I do not much admire to see the Theaters
crowded with our Idle Spectators; the hours here spent are a tolerable
exemption from lewder diversions, and with some obtain the credit of a School
discipline, periodic Lectures, and Academic exercitations; which teach as much
gravity and experience, as they think can amount to necessary aphorisms, to
regulate their own lives by, and be diagnostic of all others. I may not envy
the Dramatic Ingeniosos the Empire they here sway over Wit, nor the Models they
give of the world, and the delectable variety, in which they serve up the
humors that are abroad: May the Stage never want a florid Laureat to Chastize
predominant Vices, and troublesome Follies; but so prudently and industriously,
that they may no longer be feared to teach them. But I could wish our Nobless
would here always admit the but necessary ceremony of a Taster; that they may
have its salubriousness approved, before it take possession of their Stomach,
and it prove too late for an Antidote. But supposing the Stage less dangerous
and nauseous than some Pulpits; and that every day brought forth a work as
consummat as Father Ben's: Yet I would advize them against their common
frequenting Plays, if I took it not as an eviction, that they knew no more
congruous advancement of their Noble faculties; and were burdened with too
long and empty parentheses of Time. For, I conceive, whoever transmits his
affections to be wrought on by every fiction the Poet engages them in, shall in
a little time cease to be Master over them, and they will be at the command of
every passionate Romantique: Or they will be so broken or extirpated, wholly by
such continued and violent efforts, that they will altogether be unserviceable,
if he lose not all the due sentiments of Nature: Either of which extreme is so
palpable an imbecility of mind, as need not be pointed at, for it too easily
betrays it self in daily converse? Greater inconveniences you may hear
continually nursed up at the Stage, and fear worse; unless it be judiciously
purged and refined.

But indeed what place, time, and occasion is not poisoned in a dead Sea of
Idleness, though they be never so free and innocent in their own disposition?
Virtue and Generosity it self coming but near it, though but in a volatile
thought or Action, is suddenly suffocated with the noisome exhalations of this
almost Stygian lake. I have heard in a very serene Oratory affirmed; that two
parts of three, that are now sentenced under unquenchable flames, had those
first kindled here on earth, in the fire of their burning and impure lust.
However, it is scarce dubitable, that all those miserable Souls, now filling up
the regions of darkness, did first fit and adopt themselves to that state, by
contracting a supine torpor and negligence of Spirit: For without controversy,
idleness lets in upon the Soul all the inundation of Vice, and is that unhappy
plot oregrown with every weed and noxious burden of the Earth; so that as some
Gardens are a collection of the choycest and most usesul Plants, this becomes a
seminary of all the horrid excrescencies can grow out of a Dunghill.

We indeed see some of active lives and full of business fall into
exorbitancies of as dismal effects, as can be the offspring of the dullest
brain and hours: But you may not surmise this the genuine birth of any
honorable or necessary employ. Those public spirits were to be commiserated
more than they who offered their lives as their Countries Victims of old, if
there were any fatal connection of Vice with their Offices; which are
consecrated as the very Rewards and Asylums of Virtue, and are so many Thrones
on which she may display and dispense her Sovereign dignity and influences. No,
I must believe any vices nourisht under their protection to be the scrofulae,
and luxuriant impetigos of fowl humors. They will prove the disease of the
person not the office; and entrench so much upon the borders of Idleness, that
you will entertain the greater indignation against that evil, which can
prevail upon the strongest and noblest constitutions. For I grant that person
to be fallen beside his business, and to have quitted his own Station; that is
at leisure to contrive and pursue his private stratagems of ambition, avarice
and malice. This is a degeneracy and corruption growing upon the Soul, by a
vacation from his proper intendments of Time and Labor: while instead of his
attendance on the steerage of the common Vessel, the man is so idle as to row
forth his own Cock-boat for shells and pebbles. But whatever smaller and
justifiable gratifications are here to be gleaned up, their Country would add
their blessing to the heap, might it encourage every one nobly endowed to adapt
himself and fortunes for the honor and service of the Public. But let this
Idleness never bear the impudence to steal upon an honorable presence, it
being as indecorous, as to see a rude clown covered near the Chair of State.
And what distance that was to observe at Court, the very proud and barbarous
Turkish Sultans in their profession and skill of some mechanic art still teach
us; and we may better learn from our late Glorious Sovereigns Royal mouth, that
He thought He could earn a Livelihood were he so low reduced by any Trade he
knew of, but making of Hangings: his Clemency will allow you the allusion to
any fair fence of the word: and his constant instructions to the Nobless
craving his permission to travail, had this always inserted, to keep the best
Company, and never be idle. May it therefore by so canonized an example be
banished all Societies, as that which wherever it comes is sure to shut the man
out of doors; For it is the man of business gives denomination and life to the
world: And many an Age will be buried in oblivion, as silently as if it had
lost an entire succession of mankind, and all that was worthy recording.

Idleness may it once be expelled; I dare promise we shall obviate two
calamities, which become our mortal afflictions, and almost immortal
complaints; Our unreasonable dissatisfactions, and decay of Trade. Idle people
and such as have none of their own create business for all about them; and
their proper concerns being trivial or discarded, those of others to their
unexercised apprehensions appear strange and difficult: Hence Curiosity (the
idle man's Mephostophllus) posts through the air to catch intelligence, and
adviso's upon the several emergencies, being sure to meet some loose
dispatches, out of what quarter soever the wind does but breath. These still
conjure up new perplexities, fresh and fantastique conjectures, which first
creep forth in whispers and night discoveries, then more boldly come abroad,
and stand the censures of their full Burnt-to-water Conventions, or higher
Club-Assemblies; if in private affairs, they are insolent and disgustful; if on
public, their interpolate Jealousies, and wildly wise Apothegms every where
bring in growing discontents and murmurings: not without a miracle indeed can
it be expected, any thing should please and satisfy them abroad, who never
knew the Art to make content within, and at home. But if this ubiquitary
meddling seem to absolve these kind of persons from Idleness, and they will
hence be thought as active in the Intelligencies of the spheres, and the only
they that keep all in motion; Those that know what harmony is required to a
motion regular, and how sure a stop the least dust and check will cause in a
fine contrived piece of work, will wish them quiet, and uninterrupted rest, may
but the business of the sober and industrious part of mankind be removed out
of their troublesome Orb. And as to our increase in Riches, when every hand and
brain promote and encourage a prosperous diligence; None are found so idle as
to question it, though so d sobliging and unworthy of their native Country, as
to stigmatize and empoverish it with their sloth. For sensible will be the
decays of that body, from which you substract nourishment and exercise; the
latter whereof mends all the defaults of the former, stirrs up a kindly warmth,
facilitates digestion, discusses excrementitious humors, purifies and
exhilirates the depressed spirits. But no more need be added on this tenacious
subject, than that if your years and quality could get above the dross and
dregs of idleness, so as to lay out your selves vigilantly in the service your
Generation calls you unto, and may expect of you, if Idleness be exploded; We
shall have less news and more money stirring.

Having beheld the Soul under this close and obscure incubation; Let us view
the brood hatched by ignorance and Folly: and the earliest we meet up, is

PRIDE,
Breaking thorough the thick shel; which, hasting to be the first displaying
its gay Plumes abroad, forgets how much of its nakedness is exposed, and that
it ows all its pomp to a borrowed Gawdiness, Man enters the world bare and
unarmed, all other creatures growing into their furrs, shells, barks,
down-quilts and scaly Coats of Mail; each of which has as much of defense as
ornament: Yet none of these but willingly bequeath their spoils, to rob man of
his poor Pride, who cannot so much as shroud himself from the injuries of the
air but in some of their liveries. Yet who but computes the Drapery which
curious invention has spun us out of all the parts of the inferior creation;
some from its very bowels as fine drawn as the web of Arachne, the loom-work of
the Brain, and the very net of love it self; and considers withal how many
operose preparations, various interweavings and mistures of differing elements
meet in the meanest shreds of our Wardrobe; must necessarily inser that the
whole studies of man were to beguile the Creatures of their design; as if he
scorned to be indebted to them, for what they can never distinguish again, to
have been their old cast clothes; Or as if he intended in his very attire (not
contented with the covering of any single Animal) to stitch together another
Epitome of the Creation for his outside also; and, in the far distant growth of
his gorgeous apparel, would array himself daily with a new map of Geography.

But all this pageantry covers not the miserable inside, but like the ragged
embroidery of a Beggars patches, confess^s the wretched poverty within; the
poor mind neither knowing it self, nor any thing beside it self, from either of
which it would learn humility. But Pride is the spawn of Idleness, and the
foam of Ignorance: Where ever you meet her, give her rather your hat than your
tongue; for it is unreasonable you should reverence her in any other dialect
than that she wears, and you will otherwise run the hazard of being understood.
Is it not a splenetic divertisement to behold two Gallants as formally rigged
forth, as London, Amsterdam, or Venice can equip them, attaquing each other
with a full bearing up to the salute, sometime veiling down every inch of their
sails, streaming out all their loose colors, and pendents, and suddenly
closing with whole Broadsides of embraces? while not a word attends the
Ceremony, (which is like the great CZars dump representative of a sage Council)
and they come off perhaps with a furled cuff, a silken rope slack'd, or a curle
unpitch'd (I mean ungumm'd, or ungreas'd) This you may call the School of
Antiques, a very variation of Postures, a Trial of Agility, and such a mute
comparison of empty Noddles, as we make of Bottles by often and quick shaking
them.

And this is the stately outside and high-raiz'd Front of Pride: which content
your self to have thus superficially seen, if you will not rest here but enter
further, look for no reception or refreshment within, there are no commodious
rooms contrived to that intent; for this is a pile wholly loftyfied into
Garrets, and they either empty or the Frippery of all Trash and Lumber: but
here most of the world choose to dwell, as where they can best overlook
themselves, as well as their vicinage.

I may give Pride the Title (or she will take it) of Heir apparent in the
masculine, to the greatest portion of their Time and Care. With the other sex
let her be advanced for their Mirror, that which flatters them even out of
themselves into a kind of fond Apotheosis: You must no longer read there flesh
and blood no, the eyes, the lips and breath, are the very portals of the
radiant Apollo, the heavenly blushes of Aurora, and the fragrant incense that
must appease some such Deity. Thus Youth and Beauty in either Sex, kindled by a
constant reflection of its own beams, and having no other fair object to attract
it powerfully and virtuously, glows with a burning selfcomplacency, till a
rapid Zeal of Pride snatch the conceits of themselves beyond the terms of
mortality, and they deem they sensibly change regions, and step into a deifying
naturalization, so that you may no more expect a converse with them that savors
of humanity: all the rest of mankind are to be treated by them as their vassals
and creatures, and their very words must be thought to sound more then man. And
that they may command this devotion and maintain a just adoration, they appear
not without the pomp and splendour which are worshipped in the Images of Saints
and upon shrines and altars, that do not oblige vulgar veneration, unless
embellished with sumptuous ornaments, and glittering oblations: In such a
mantle of Gold they will imitate Jove, and conceive they have no imperfections,
which these ductile leaves do not gloriously hide and heal.

Thus Pride sacrifices to her self, not only with the grosser material
treasures and riches employed in her service, but with the refined odors that
rise from her own persumed delights with her self, and the high conveiv'd
pleasure in her own felicities. But can the rough bush of a quick-set hair
fence off all frigidity from the Brain, and shelter the tender Pia matter from
scratches? Does a bespangled Vest cast a greater heat and blaze on the hearth
of the Breast? To what then, serve the exquisite study and profusions lavished
out on our dressing? some Valet de Chamber, Player or Common woman, shall
surpass your bravery when you have born the patience of the nicest
accoutrement. Believe it, the Art you bestow and Value you set upon your dress
and habit, lay more open the ugliness, poverty and sickness of your Soul, and
show that first needed fucus and Emplaisters to palliate your inward sores and
defects.

But our Otioso's here plead the indispensable morality, and that they are
hound to the strictest observances of the Fashion; than which word none can
breath more infection, nothing appear in a better mode and more sure to
captivate and destroy us: As what allows us neither constancy in our present
fluctuancie's, nor any fair calculation of hopes for futurity, if it must be
omnipotent then also: It can introduce the most fanatique Metamorphoses of our
selves, and patronize all the Caprichio's of the famous Shrew-Tamer. To
instance but in one assimilative attraction in its very Capillaries, no less
remarkable than that which is perfective of nature: Observe how fashion has
prevailed against nature to Perruque all complexions with the fairest hair;
where many must be wholly drowned, as the Portuguez, Amorettaes at Goa their
Negro women, whom they dress up all in white, to make up their admired Beauty
of a Fly in milk. But as this shades and destroys the distinctions and native
features of each face, it may unluckily be brought to confound all distinctions
of birth too, by supposing those many indiscriminated (not to say unknown)
Heads to have had but one common Parent; At least that this connatural
similitude links them all under the same Hereditary Crasiness of the Brain.

How predominantly successful is this Supreme Legislative Fashion? Laws,
Examples, Rewards, Punishments cannot enforce an Uniformity in any other
Medium; while she alone translates and alters the world at pleasure, making it
solicitous to obey her, deriving her Formulaires and scanty Praescripts to it,
with the same Authority the Medes and Parthians sealed up their Laws, and that
alone in that these are most alterable.

But I am not at leisure to give longer attendance on Pride, who I doubt will
disdain to have its measures also taken by a country hand: Without a
Complement I assure her, I admire her inconceivable pleasure and self opinion
on which she lives; as much as I should have done Regiomontanus his Fly, if he
could have shut up life as well as motion in so narrow room. For to see a
Gallant flutter and buzze, with no other wings than his Tailor has imp'd on, to
strut like a dancing Mr. to speak by determined and unaccountable motions and
springs, and nothing to be significant without a multi-screwing body; can I
look upon him to be other than a fine articulate Engine, a Counterfeit of Man,
and the larger ingredients of some Puzzionello? And thus taken in pieces you
see the stuffing and crutches, Pride swells and stalks on. But what esteem wise
and sober men ballast themselves with, you can take from the true knowledge and
study of your selves only, to make your own sufficient instruction and support:
Where you will soon learn the ennobling of the mind to be the most perfect
accomplishing of the man; which, by its fairer accessions of virtue and
wisdom, debaseth the inferior gratifications and mistaken opinions of its own
Dignity; to keep it self up with an equal moderation, and magnanimity too great
to stoop to any Vice; especially the depravations of Pride, in the effeminacies
I have branded of those persons, whose highest seize are the dear
purchase, most accurate ostentation, and transcendent Vanity of their Attire.

That Hero, who is a Denizon of the Universe, no where devests himself of his
invariable habit of Virtue; which, as the richest, warmest, easiest, and
immaculate, can never be worn out of Fashion.

That Pride, which grows out of pregnant faculties and ample improvements of
Time and Parts, is so far from falling under our censure here, that we may
rather applaud and promote it; that it may retain its indignation and just
contempt of these insignificant Poppets and Mormoes; whose souls, bodies, and
clothes seem to be but one Composition; and as if they were all taken up at the
same shop and artificially bombasted and compacted to sustain a burden of
wealth, and fairly turn it self to all the Arrests of brutish sensuality. Of
this nobler and more substantial basis of Pride let this though be here said,
and considered with all the weight of seriousness: That their brave spirits
will bear an higher flight, and there is yet above them a pleasure as
satisfactory and durable, as this of their highborn Pride is certainly most
jejune, and no less low and transient.

But the Epicure must be served in the next place to Pride: and

INTEMPERANCE,
Is usually willing to yield unto her precedence, but on good provision to be
made for its Appetite immediately to succeed. For it well relisheth the Genius
of the Marcese in their reception of Messire, and this Honorific Titles return,
in discovering to them the rate preparation of the leaf of a Swine. So low a
rate has been set upon the Man, since the fairest part of his Character is,
that he eats and drinks well, and knows good food, nothing better. As if the
soul of the Glutton were bestowed upon him only to be a Cateresse to his
carcass, and see the larder of the stomach be not unfurnisht: Nay, it often
has no higher office than of a Cook, and feasts it self with the skill to
provoke, as well as allay Hunger and Thirst. What Adepti are those admired to
be, who can discourse learnedly on a studied dish, can anotomize it dexterously,
show you what contrary qualities meet in its temperament, give you all the
criticisms, and analize the various Gustoes of meats and liquors? To have the
presence of such a Vertuoso is the best countenance you can give your Treat,
and your Friend; you may be sure in his company you supped in Apollo: Such a
man's palate and Face (for there you may taste his assay) are as cautiously
observed by the whole Table, as if they were under his prescriptions for diet;
and as necessary as the previous infusion of the Unicorns horn to the patient
Herd. His frown is as fatal to the Cook as the Judges on the Bench, and
scorcheth all he sends up worse than at the rack. This man needs not Philoxenus
his wish, for whatsoever is born down the swallow of any at the board, I may
say, he has the pleasure of its gust; for it becomes Manna to all the Guests by
yielding the taste he put upon it, and he may easily be understood to have the
volupe of his Palate extended in all theirs.

Seems not this to be the instinct of a gallant and acute soul? is not this a
Gusto raised and fitted alone for Ambrosia and Nepenthe? Yes certainly. And you
may believe such choice Viands will yield a concoction of Spirits, that cannot
but colonize the brain with most defaecate and noble Conceptions. For they
farse themselves with the most exquisite delicacies, as if neither their bodies
were cast in the mould of Earth, nor their regalioes but the various-form'd
figures of the dust they raise, nor the spirits from them other than the brood
which other Animals generate out of the grass we trample on. But in truth do
they not by their excess and high feeding oppress the brain, and suffocate its
operations with fuliginous steams from the kitchen, obstructing the fine
channels and pipes, which should transmit the finer and nimble spirits to all
their stages, and for all their admirable dispatches and functions; while the
redundancy of dull pituitous moisture unstrings, and intercepts their vigorous
tension, and sensation?

No, they are phlegmatic souls who think a load of dainties enrich this soil
with any other product than what we cast out, and spread upon the common. The
mind is that dry and clear light, maintained in its Vigils by an even,
constant, and moderate confluence of pure and innocent Spirits: You drown it by
pouring in too much (though never so rich) Liquor; if you impregnate its oil
with too fat and drossy a Sulphur, it sends forth as noysom stenches as
Vulcan's Cave, and is orecast with an encircling shadow: if you fret it with
acid and saline particles, how disturbed is its flame and offensive with
continual crackling explosions of those busy bodies? While the poor soul
starves for want of its mean and kindly repast: The pampered body too,
surcharged with crudities, or an overgrown stock of flesh, becomes its own
unweildy impediment (needing some Engine, like the Chariot the Indians annex to
their sheep, to bear up their monstrous train of Tail) and not seldom is it an
Hospital of diseases, and its own House of correction too.

Into an unshapen bulk have we seen many extended, whose parts are as useless
to them as if growing in another Country; like the unvisited rooms of some
great Houses (so little the care and concern of the family) that Vermin have
come to nestle and borough in the wide tenements of their Flesh. And truly
they must of necessity devize some proportionable accretion and enlargement of
their Soul, if they would have all their apartiments and needless
superstructures well tenanted and kept in constant repair. But the direct
contrary is their ruin; for they appear with so little of the presence of a
Spirit animating them, that what they have of life is like that to be seen on
the bodies of Witches in their ecstasies; where the soul is withdrawn into the
most close and silent recess, (the state of the voluptuous Egyptian Calyphs of
old) while they dawb up the pores and outward chinks, to make the retiring room
more dark and warm, and guard the passes against foreign invasions. The soul is
in so little case in these additional out-jettings, and looser edifices; that
immuring a larger compass of ground, it is but more labyrinthally and securely
imprisoned. So some number of the world are buried under the curse of their
much building, and not a few masters famished to keep their beasts lusty: by
the inverted divine admonition to fortify the inward man upon the ruins of
the outward.

But our Apitii scorn to have their enjoyments straightened, though more safely
ensconced; they must every day rove abroad to fetch in sacrifices to their
Oesophagus, and lowdly solennize the festivals of Comus, crowned with fresh
chaplets of Ivy and Myrtles: offering up the most delicious morsels the world
has in store, in their Latitudinarian Targets of Minerva; as if she were here
to be again born out of the variety of far-fetched brains, and Tongues: with no
less libations of the Falernian grape, in their lofty surveying Tricongio
Goblets. By the full draughts they quaff off in the noblest blood of the Vine
you would guess they designed to imitate Jove and Mercury, and having filled a
bottle of an whole Ox hide (once the Continent of a City) with this caelestial
Liquor, would with equal advantage and authority, constellate it into an
Ethereal Urinal. Or if Orion may not owe his rise from so low springs, you
would conceive they had new cast themselves into humane alembicks, from whom
nothing less then Spirits of Wines should be extracted; and from the same
copious and rich luxury of meats they prey upon, that some Chemist had dearly
purchased their more terrene excrements, out of them to exalt his Occidental
cidental zibeth. So laboriously does Gluttony plough up land and seas; and
prohibit the free and open refuges of the ensna^ed Air; to serve up that plenty
to our surfeited Tables, which is in its second course must be exonerated at
the Esquiline port. This and the Vrinary evacuate those Oceans of
voluptuousness, and mountains of wealth, out of which you cannot on the
nearest research derive and gain one least grain of Profit, or the smalest drop
of remaining pleasure. There in corruption they all perish; where man himself
must at last alight from his Journey, to cast up the total of his expenses, in
the short conclusion of Vanity and Vexation.

We need no more admire the cup of Circe, and the fictitious mutatious Poets
have licenced: they relate men turned into ordinarily known Beasts: but we
every day see a new species of brutes, as cruel as monstrous, engendered in our
luxuries; which were I to digest into one collection, you would see a stranger
Pyramid and larger than great Abbess erected in his Capital City of Persia; you
might also fancy every dish, and glass of wine, productive of a different
kind of Animals. But what rubricks the nefariousness of our Times, is to be
drawn from drunkenness, which draws more swords and blood of our Nation in one
year, than any one battle spends in the same compass of time; The sanguine
quarrels of our Compotations, like the famous set of Teeth, whence so many
armed Champions grew, divide the Bravoes, and their interests, into new and
sober contests, and spring up into a warlike harvest of factions and Duels. For
we continually see these intemperancies creating more Enemies, than good nature
(to which none more pretend) can make Friends, and the strongest fidelity
shipwrackt and split in a small glass of wine drank or refused.

But beside this dangerous Service, wherein a man ventures his life as cheaply
and commonly, as a poor Soldier that for sixpence the day stands in the
breach, and tempts every shot; there is a secret poison envenoms this
Good-fellowship, a sting that makes a breach in a man's bosom, beyond his skill
ever to compose, and reconcile with a perfect cure. Wine for the most part
eludes the Guards every man ought to have upon his own breast, and breaks open
the locks of all his Conclave and Cabinet Secrets: He is then like a Vessel
full of Leaks, and the Liquor washes all before it: if he have any infirmity
of mind or latent Vice, this empties and disgorgeth all: he shall need no other
Indictment than his own treacherous evidence, and impotent folly; which the
most sober of his protests and retractations shall never expunge. Should
another be private to the confident trust and affection some One reposes in his
dearest Friend, to whom he embosomes his whole-self; should he break in upon
the free Caresses and Amors of the Conjugal Bed, about which the Night has
drawn a second and modest Curtain; should he hear his open Confessions to
Heaven of all his baseness, and and unworthy abuse of infinite condescentions:
As soon as this person who thought himself in the dark shall find himself
exposed and betrayed, I cannot imagine but his indignation will be all thought
too little to torment himself alone, without regard of any other Traitor. And I
am confident, were Windows thus made into our hearts and actions, Man would so
far hate converse, as rather to seek the most solitary and dismal Wilderness;
Nay, knowing his own misery by the view he would not have had of it, but from
others prying examinations, He would even fly his own shadow, and study how he
might run from and avoid himself, as the only derided and insulted on by all
the rest of the world.

The more noted disguises Ebriety put's upon men; with the detriment, mind,
Body, and Estate suffer by the irrevocable lapses of them all: The most sottish
of those, who most study to amuse their own heavy hours, thoughts, and company
with the condiment and fallacy of Wine, yet cannot measure it out, but with the
many observations from their own acquaintance they miss at the Club, and
rem^mbrance of their former jovialties together. I therefore industriously
dismiss them, having but insinuated the height of Passion it inflames, and
sometimes feeds with blood, and the life of Amity it self; with that exulcerate
feebleness of reason, which by an impotent tenesmus betrays the infirmities of
those, we almost Idolized, to scorn and hatred.

Those who indulge Gluttonous voracity fare no better, by exchanging sanity of
mind and Body for the corruption of both; the former in many, scarce owning the
preservative quality of being a living pickle to the latter. Not Cleopatra's
dissolved Union, the Spicery of Arabia, with the genuine Balsam and skill of the
Egyptian Embalmers, can long keep those bowels from putrefaction, which we so
solicitously pamper: These being the very first conceive it, on the
dissociation of soul and body. Methinks those very Fingers with which we carry
our dainties to our Palate, that with our Rings bear the Sepulchral heads of
some of our former familiarity, should indigitate to us a Lecture of our own
mortality, and tell us, we all the while feed our animated Sarcophagi. I shall
not determine whether Fire or Earth be the most faithful Heirs, Assigns, and
repositories of our Relics; for perhaps every Tomb may enclose in it a
self-subsistent lamp, as the Heart alive enjoys it is vital flame, and the
Spirits render the whole body luminous, as well as pervious, till Death breaks
open, and let us out the light. But I am sure our Glutton gormandizes, as if he
would make his Friends their last Treat of his own Corpse; and, that in which
has lived to devour so many Thanks giving meals, serve them up a bill of Fare
equal to the Princelike Archbishop of Yorks Inauguration Feast; and with the
same courtesy instal himself in the kind graves and Monuments of his last
Officious Friends surviving Stomachs.

From the good cheer and wine, that has disposed our Gallant to the embrace of
any near hovering and baser Form, we most usually trace him to the lap of his
Venus: the little busy Cupids of

LUST
Dancing about in the loose Air, instantly gliding into possession of his mind;
where all the weak characters of Virtue and sobriety are washed out, to make a
Table fair enough to render any Vice more legible that shall be first impressed
in it. The Citadel of the Heart thus unmann'd, is easily surpised and
garrisoned with a miserable woman; Who never thinks the Victory absolute and
secure till she have demolisht all the Fortifications of his reason and
modesty, triumphed over his cap^iv'd tame passions, and raised in it a Mosque
to the blind God of Love. Here you see another Cytherea born out of the
despumations of our Seas of Wine, with this only difference, she is not naked,
but appears more formidably armed to conquer man than Jove and Neptune, with
their Thunder and Trident. Upon this Ocean you may certainly fear the
incursions of this famous Rover, whom I may call a woman of war (with no
greater solaecism than that, which gives the feminine gender in ordinary
discourse of a man of War) dressed only with slight tackling, and wary
concealments drawn over her shot, to amuse you; or make a more speedy chase
after you when flying from her: Here lading is not worth reprizal whatever
damage she had done you: Her vessel suffers not by storms or repeated wrecks;
nor can you any way direct a shot to sink it; she only suffers by Fire, and
carrying so prodigious store of Ammunition is to be blown up not boarded.

Let me essay to give you some such Character of Venus, (if any be to be taken
of her, pozing us with her Protean disguizes, not perfections) and directions
in your obnoxiousness, by which you may avoid the dangerous incantations of
these Sirens. That which first betrays us is the supposed Beauty we drink
greedily in at our startled eyes, if not joined with the heats of some too kind
and close salutes: and how desperate madness is it, when the heart is the Mine
of so combustible Lust, to suffer the loose globuli of powder catch fire at the
eyes and lips, which with the twinkling of an eye spring the incendiary Train
to the magazine of its Wildfire? But indeed we are here fairly cheated in our
pursuits and reveries to single beauty; We admire that for Orient, sweet, and
perfectly symmetriz'd, which is but the tincture and odor she borrows every
morning from the Closet, and the Tailors ingenious farcings: For when she is
dressed, so little a part she is then of her self, as is the small Chapel of the
Lauretan Lady, under the great and rich cover they have clothed it withal:
and indeed a Woman undrest to her self dressed, is like a Cottage to a Palace;
Dressing is a Woman's Art of Architecture, and the extraordinary niceness and
expenses thereof the Curse and disease of too much Riches.

But supposing a face as lovely as ever you adored in a dream, or can fancy
without the help of one; This complexion is but vanishing and skin deep.
Sickness, Grief, or Age make as heavy devastations on it, as the barbarous
Tartars can do, in their inroads to a flourishing Country: Raise up but the
skarfe skin which covers this fine mould, and you never beheld a more ruefull
object: Or conceive it as the admired frontispiece of an excellent Fabric, and
but consider what is done within, how these fair embellishments are but neat
contrived emunctories to the Brain; and you must think of something loathsome
also. It Is your own fancy feasts it self with the perfections it has created
to worship; So prompt and cunning it is to cook up a known and ordinary
entertainment, into new and delicious blandishments. But if you are not to be
out of conceit with the face, consider what manner of deformed Inhabitant
inspirits this Beauty; and that a monstrous soul in an illustrious case, needs
your compassion on the inconveniency which is greater than that Galba paid rent
for* Nay it requires your utmost vigilance too: for this Creature feeds on
poisons, and kills with her looks and breath. For to suppose all must be fair
within, because of this specious superficies, and that a sweet countenance
necessarily dulcifies and clarifies the soul; is to place the Lanthorn of
Judas, and adore it among sacred Relics; because it lighted the Traitor to
the prodition of our Blessed Savior. If that sex, as virtuous as beautiful, be
Angelical, it is more diabolical by its Apostasy.

It is an unparalled slavery to bow your affections to the imperiousness of
such a lewd soul, who requires the quite contrary experiment of servitude, to
that the bestial Duke of Ossuna frighted his naked Barber into: for she expects
as easy command of your passion as her skill has perfected hers into by the
art of obeying wholly her libidinous appetite. What misery must it be to be
enthralled to a sort of inferior Animals than mankind, of whom I may almost
virifie the Turkish Religion; that such as these have lost their soul? Tacitus
himself aphorizeth no less in his short and poynant conclusion with Messalina.
Could you see the inside of this strange Woman, you would find it altogether a
practice of outsides; an exchange of diffring habits, looks, and phrases shaped
to every circumstance of dissimulation. Sometime she is as inaccessible as
Valentia, to which no other then a narrow bridge permits approach and all seems
to be horrid Alps about it, rocks frozen harder and colder with frost and snow;
and none but an Hannibal would hope to break thorough them. Anon, like the Town
Plura on a sudden fall of a rock subverted, and nothing to be seen of it but a
direful Lake.

Such an one indeed is a common sewer of Lust, and Druggs. For the latter like
the Hospital near the Churchyard of magnificent St. Peter's at Rome cannot lay
far off: and it is well if she have not the quick digestion also of that Earth,
once part of Holy ground. I am sure you know not what dangers and evils you
repose on. Inconstancy, Impetuosity, Fallaciousness are the composition of
their Love, Lust the informant. Scarce ever do any reassume chastity, who have
once deposed it. For immodesty straight enthrones a Plebeian usurping
community, that attaint the noblest spirits which use to blush at Baseness, and
by its hatred of all sense of Honor puts all that is honest and generous out of
countenance. Then you will too late groan under the Tyranny and fatigues which
mind and body are involved in, when you find your self both as far from the
satisfaction and happiness you sigh after, as in that hour you first became her
Votary; and no nearer liberty then the Galley-slave, who expects Death alone to
unchain him from the Oar. For like the labors of Hercules some new exploit will
still be conjured up to destroy or ensure your courage and obsequiousness, and
like him you will endure a dying life, in those flames Love, and Jealousy can
never make too hot for their Purgatory.

Yet at the no easy rates of a Gallican Limbus, our Age will buy the pleasure
of its Lust. Neither the disappointment of their hopes, vassalage of their
passions, nor Penances (At the price whereof they would renounce Heaven it
self) can make these maniac's temperate. And indeed they seem to be under an
high distemper of mind and body; the solicitude, insaciety, vicissitude of
violent affections, and distractions, are symptoms of that: the pale face,
vibrated eyes, inequal pulse, and their waking Coma show this to be under an
acute fever, which all their long sighs cannot hasten in breath enough to cool.

But if you obtain the utmost fruitions of your Amors, if you fear no Rival,
if your joint affections be embosom'd in one common breast, and you know not
how to express or entertain a more full indulgency of Love; All the history
hereof does openly confess this your happiness, to be empty, shallow, and
miserable: For the most pathetic Language of your melting affections can speak
or signify no more than bare commiserations, or bold wishes over your Beloved;
wherein you rather pity and bewail one another in the short capacity of Love,
than take or give any perfect proof or content in it: While your greatest
efforts of passion do but instruct the mind in its tremulous fluctuancies,
that it is at the wrong point of the Magnet; and only condole over its
affections to be so frustrated of their rest, and permanent satisfaction. For
the acquest then of no more; Consider you stake the All of your self, whatever
that can amount to, for the hectic fever of a consuming, uncertain, fugacious,
phantastic brutish pleasure, which concludes, without extorted acknowledgment,
that you are deluded, and infinitely short of that good, the Soul would quietly
rest in, without forming so much as one thought to uncenter it self.

None that finds Opinion the Empress of the world, but observes Passions to be
the ladders by which it ascended: Passions which supplant Reason, to whom they
were given in subjection and service, and gain the entire government of our
wills. So does lust assign it self to its ensnaring object, That it uses to
prefer it abundantly, before the particular content, which every individual
enjoys of his Creators goodness, to reckon himself abstractedly happy in: (had
not every one such an innate principle, emulation and envy would continually
torture the Soul, and we should wish to be any thing but what we are) now an
unlawful Love cancels this beatifying apprehension, and connatural emulgency of
delight, which is sucked from out of it self alone; and imposes another Standard
of your joy. What you love you live; Your passion, suppressing all other
concerns, erects a Court of Requests, out of which nothing is to be transacted,
and the whole business and design of living shall be to love: And that love,
adoreing its beloved so transportedly, never cease to consigne it self over
by its own exinanition; to become and be transformed into what it loves. I
could hence philosophize nicely on the cause of the distinct formation of
either Sex, contrary to the received Tradition, that the predominant virtue
determines the conception into its own similitude: which would solve diverse
subtleties, but it is excentric. From this discourse you have this sad
consequence, that the object possessing and impassionating you, will certainly
infuse into you all those vicious defects her degenerate mind has contracted,
and you yield up your own integrity to be deformed by her monstrous
depravations.

Thus much more you see you venture of your self for so remarkable an
infatuation; and if you will add unto it the diuturnity, and (I had almost
said) impossibility of vindicating your self from this Bondage; You have sound
out a State of direful misery, ineluctable and deplorable sadness. For Love
though it be slowly and late ascendent, seldom setts, but with our selves
descending into shades and oblivion. It Is not the first living, but of the last
dying emotions of the soul: You see it will strive under all the infirmities of
old Age, to render it as ridiculous as insufficient. You cannot when you please
divorce it your afflicted bosom: it wakes with you, and lays down beside you;
and when you court some soft repose and silence, it breaks in upon you withal
the noise tumult and lancination of distracted passions, holding your eyes open
to its ravishments, though you behold nothing therein but your own sufferings.
So have I seen a poor captive Bird, when attempting a free and open flight,
rudely checked with the short twine, and after a small hovering and fluttering
resistance in the affected air, fall breathless grovelling on the earth. On the
folly of poor stupid man, that, as much as it abhorrs the very shadow of
restraint and fetters, which are of another imposing, yet studies to build
himself a Labyrinth, and thinks himself not secure of his liberty; till he have
contrived how ingeniously to incarcerate his freeborn affections! Thus those
who dreaded the Roman yoke, by the same methods of Fear subjected the Nation to
their voracious Eagles, only having the election how to perish.

Should I after some dark and rough draughts delineating your misery, design to
heighten the few faint appearances of your imagined felicity and light
titillations of sense; and fill it up with the many deep shadows, and strong
grounded horrors which the passions draw upon amorous Gallants: You would think
it the very picture of that Carcass which had been martyred in Venereal fires,
and was conserved as a specific against Lechery. Or that you saw some dismal
night-piece, on which one loose touch of the Pencil had thinn'd the air, but so
as if it had but with a thought only followed the swift flight of an Angel
thorough it. So transient is the ecstasy of your delight and pleasure, over the
black visions of Lust.

Can I say more to prejudicate and arm you when your Soul will be endangered by
this assassination, knowing what circumventions will sometime be prevalent,
which these Salvages to our nature would wholly ensnare you in; and that all I
can say will be little enough to instruct your innocence, and I fear much too
weak to rescue it from a surprise, much more out of the fastnesses of a
securely accustomed and Familiar Vice? These kind of Creatures therefore the
Predatory spirits upon the life of man we have not a word in all the vocabulary
of evils bad enough to signify their hideous Turpitude, unless I could
pliancy it so completed, that they had nothing more to add to make it more
Fatal to us. Put the malice of these sorceresses is so fruitful of mischiefs,
that we are only happy that the Fount of Goodness is inexhaustible, when we see
all degrees of misery disseminated out of their circulating Pandora's Box. You
cannot comprehend the mystery of the sacramental Dedication they have made of
themselves in their Vow of Prostitution: Wherein they devote themselves to
corrupt and debauch Man from his Integrity and felicity: So difficult will it
be to prognosticate what villainies will not be broached by them, to poison the
world with a worse plague than that from Naples. Show me that sincerity
Grandieur, Sapience that has escaped their pernicious attempts: Show me the
greatest combination of nefariousness has but been meditated, and I will more
than exemplify it in some notorious impudence, or profligate treachery of a
woman. Our blessed Lord and Savior among all tentations, permitted not this of
the (...) so much as to be levelled against him; so immaculate Virtue could no
more admit a conflict with this impurity, than the Sun it self can be supposed
assaulted with midnight. And we know it the Guardian, as well as honor of
Innocence to be free from all suspicion and darings of a very tempting vice.
But the first, best, strongest, greatest and wisest of mere men, speak their
diminution in all these, by their unhappy connection to these indeclinable
particles of Levity. They are indeed themselves the nullity of all words:
Nothing they speak is more substantial than their very looks, which every
breath of yours, and (what is out of all compass more variable) their own
desultory phansy alters often in a moment.

I am angry with my invention to be so jaded in so fowl a Road, every
progression is more squalid and miry to me, yet I want dirt enough to cast upon
these seeming Viae Lacteae. Who (...) rubbed on so exquisite a dealbation, that
my very Ink loses its blacks upon them. Neither think me provoked or in
passion beyond the Antipathy every good Soul has to Hypocrisy. Believe me
then, these are the grand Favorites of Hell, or the aptest disciples Lucifer
ever schooled, that are so easily and naturally accommodated to that Art, that
what we say of common Liars own belief, that to them warrants at last their
often questioned, and therefore more cautelous Fictions, we may here apply,
That so industriously are these disciplined, that not their dearest friends,
but their vilest selves too fall by their own Cheats and Dissimulation. And
would the Imposture rot with themselves. But to see these Hyenae ensnare truly
generous Souls, that are guilty of betraying nothing but themselves, raises so
high an Indignation in me, that methinks every point I direct my pen to should
be the sharp Execution of a style at their hearts; for, if they have any, they
have more than the Creation formed in them.

But they have not yet their deaths wound, who outlive and outvie the
transmutation of Cats themselves: Suppose you saw such a beautiful countenance
at parting, orecast with an heavy cloud of seeming Sorrow, because it leaves
you perplexedly grieved: When instantly upon your vanishing it clears up all
its beams and displays, to melt the next face and heart into a warm thaw, and
court him as the Travailer out of his Cloak and modesty, into the barefaced
nudities of lust. Would you not wish with me such a common red Lattice were
always as pervious to the eye, as signal in the paint; to abhor at once the
Goatish stench, loathsome impurities, and treacherous embraces of a Brothel
Affection?

In the mean while how entire and meritorious soever your love be, it can have
no fairer reception in her breast, than that Room which is the thorough-fare of
a common Hostelry: and here your Heart will be lodged; not under so consecrate
custody and regard, as those donaries and votive Tables, which some Sts.
Chapels with ostentation reckon up: But rather strung up, as a long file of
fallen teeth, by which some vagrant Operator girds his Art about him; where if
there be any of the Catalogue of greater esteem than other, it is not for any
kindness he ows it, or any its native excellecy, but from some extraordinary
monstrosity in it. I could hazard so much intimacy with such a Publican Soul,
as might procure me but an inlet upon her thought, when she is casging, up the
roll of her Copyholders, and the duties they pay her: For I guess I should
find her caressing her self with greater delight, to have made so many
Proselytes, than pleasure of fully gratifying her enflamed Lust, She may well
admire that versatile sagacity of her skill, that has deluded and excoriated so
many Booties, over whose innocent credulity, she solennizeth and insulteth with
the Sovereignty and Triumph of the haughty Scythian upon Caged Bajazet.

Can a man be willing to serve only to fill up her Muster, to increase the
names must approve and license her skill; that she is one perfect in the
mystery of her Faculty; and of as refined dissimulation as the Trade can bear?
O Heavens! O tame Figures of Men! rather than want choler and indignation at
this indignity, may you be all over icteritious. Could I wish worse than these
Miscreants are forging upon themselves, it should be Cassandra's destiny, to
find none persuaded by them: So far I pity, so much just wrath have I against
these Megaera's, whose Hypocrisy may Entitle it self another Fury of Hell
(their bottomless Patrimony) and have Primacy of the other there. The very
Beasts can show us out of their brutal appetite and converse, nothing to be an
Hieroglyphick of this Synopsis of Vice: The bosoms of these Wretches only,
enclose this monstrous propagation of promiscuous evils, not to be conceived in
all Africa. These are the Ignes fatuae, and Precipices too, of benighted and
wandering Affections; the wanton touches upon pruriginous spirits, which
instantly gripe with the stings and pangs of a Scorpion; the Velitation of a
mad Sardian laughter, which terminates in mortal convulsions. Those haggish
Succubae, which not only drein the blood of its purest vitals, but by Aconite
to the parched heart.

Can I say more to awaken an Enchanted soul, than that it is upon the margin of
all horror? Open but your sight to one beam of sober and clear Reason, and you
will be amazed to see how insensibly you have been hurried and transported by
these infernal Emissaries, to such a distance from your own home and knowledge,
and that in so short a time: And if any good word may be now of force to
dissolve the charm you are under, what ever this folly has cost you; Believe me
you cannot pay too dear for a Repentance that will snatch you out of their
Gremial graves.

In a word, these mistresses of the Magistery of dissimulation, are the
greatest Enemies to the convers of the World. For whereas nature impressed one
royal and plain stamp on the noble mine of our Affections, These first debase
them with their dross then form what impress soever they list to transfer upon
them: So while we pay them with current and solid mass of unalloyed Love, they
cheat and beggar us with exchange of their base obtruded Gounterfeits. And this
is a mystery they anvile without any noise, it needs no load nor trial of
Artizans tools: Their Hearts are the mineral, their Breasts the hot forges,
their Brain Hammer and Vice, their impudent looks, lascivious words and wanton
gestures the exposing stalls to their cozenage: their ware and shop how cheap
and open soever, is yet too dark and dangerous to advance one step nearer
perdition. Thus like dancing Masters they are born with the Engines of their
Trade, and can set it up as easily as Tumblers vault; and without hardship of
an Apprentiship become free of any Corporation. This is enough to decypher them
to your knowledge without the infallibility of the Porphyry Chair. Avoid them
therefore as the most dreadful underminers of your liberty and happiness;
somewhat stolen upon the quiet of man again to cast him out and bar Paradise
against us: which shall be charge enough to impeach those seducing Spirits, and
confirm you in your blessed Innocence.

But I cannot have so great detestation to this herd of Satyrs, as veneration
to that Love which is pure, and refulgent in the Conjugal or Amical Love-knot.
I even adore that Affection, which springing from a sacred root sprouts forth
its still flourishing blossoms to enammel the fair plantations of Nature with a
perpetual Spring: The present, the after ages while time and mankind cohabite
shall rise up to honor you with their due benedictions, and with the whole
bank of Humanity shall acknowledge it ows its Stock to your liberal
improvements. Friendship I no less admire as one of the fragrantest flowers in
the garden of the Creation, that Odor which delights the Soul with the sympathy
born from the same spot of Earth into an uniting coalition of Affections: Which
in differing sexes may sometime grow into elegancies not otherwise educible:
and if the terrene nourishment thereof be not too rich and luxuriant, the
complacencies of nature will by their fair attractions, more powerfully and
engagingly corroborate and sweeten it. But a true principle of Amity in all
persons and Relations, will not cease to sublime it self into an Angelical
perfection, and innocence of Love; both in wishing nothing so much as one
another happiness, and pursuing it by all the amicable obligations and
assistances of Virtue, with a caelestial efflorescence of Joy, to have together
ascended above the dull and tumultuous cares and hurries of unreasonable
passions; and be so far emergent from sense, as to distinguish and palate a
condition that is serene, congenial, the Banquet of the most intelligent and
amiable Spirits, and a praelibation of what the happy Glorious above enjoy and
feast upon.

But lo, we are brought down again, to this gross Orb of Grief and loss, our
Gallants Tragedy of

GAMING
Where we find his Royalties and Manors parceld and rent into a small pack of
Cards, his money ebbing and flowing with the pace it keeps to the rifing and
falling Dice: all his hopes cast into a narrow box; his deeds and conveyances
in as little paper, as the Conqueror passed whole Countries over by. Not that
our Gallants love Abridgments of our voluminous laws, much less a sure and
speedy way to be rich: Nor do they curse the tedious formalities of Tribunals.
Only they admit of a distinct Court from Westminster Hall, from which no appeal
is allowed: Every Ordinary has its Solon and Lycurgus; and as a particular
Chancery expedites all the rules of its tried and well consulted Equity: and
from these you shall sometime meet our Gamesters return, with the countenances
of those that had just passed a Trial at Bar. The famous Painter Angelo might
from their looks have finished his last Judgment: The loosers bearing the gulfs
of despair in their very faces, being undone and ejected out of all their fair
affluences, and so much as the hopes and possibility of having one cast more
for a Fortune: not one minute more of the whole stock of time to turn up a
favorable revolution; They themselves Relations, dependents, expectancies
excluded, and for ever debarred approach near to their abdicated prosperity. On
the other side he might have the high spring-tides of exhilient Joy enlarging
their channels, oreflowing all its banks to import an Ocean of new raised
spirits, to welcome and take acquaintance of the great success and delight the
winner brings off: In whose look, not a Line Fear dares lay hold on, nor
thorough this crowd of exultations can one sad thought justle up to an
Audience: And our Painter may fear to begin a Face so full of life, as all his
skill and oil, will be too little to tarifie and air, to brisk and rutilate.

But those in whom our Gaming can draw so pleasant a Prospect are indeed herein
more like the blessed Heirs of Heaven; in that they are the rarer instances of
Beatitude, some few select reserves of the collection of mankind, like the
crowned Victors of the many that contended for the Prize, and lost it. Only
here our Gallants rashly commit the whole course to Fortune and chance. Those
who exterminate Providence may here behold, what fair provision they assign to
the prudence and industry of the World, and account it the unluckiest advantage
man could stumble on, to be born with eyes, endowed with understanding to
discern happiness, and a soul spirited to its enjoyment; but have no way
distinguishable to seek after and acquire it, nor any means to retain it longer
than the mutable contingencies of Affairs settle in one Posture: For when the
four stirring Elements, like the suits at Cards, are shuffled into another
hand, or such numbers fall into a benign or cross chance; there will be no
bearing up against these blind events, and the Age must be left to play its own
Game, and us; without any mediate disposures or motions of our own.

This would be to infatuate all the designs of reason and diligence. For though
we know we must hazard storms, unseen rocks and shelves of dangerous Seas; Yet
who puts out, without his skillful Pilot and Compass? Nay who puts himself upon
the perils of waves, but on the fairest expectancy of profitable returns? Only
our home Adventurers here, that contract their whole substance into so little
bulk, that they may easily heave all overboard at one lift, and cast all away
in one sudden wreck. Nor will they be adviz'd to beware of those armed
Land-Pirates, that lay ready to prey upon every ventured Estate, the arts they
have to make out a Prize, their stratagems to hunt it, their violence and
treachery invading it, and barbarousness to divide the spoil in the very sight
of the naked Gull. So do we often see an old stout Carrack, that has made many
a successful honorable and rich voyage; that has long carried all the fortune,
name, and venture of a brave Family embarkt in it: neither split on the fatal
hardness of the times, nor broken by fury of continual Tempests, or lost by its
old indiscoverably growing leakages; no, nor yet nobly sunk after manly
resistance by the prevailing enemy of its nation: But basely assailed by an
unsuspected crew of Villains in the very harbor; unladen, pillaged, and cleft
into so small planks, that you find not so much of it remain, as of our great
Drakes vessel to be but a narrow Seat of that once famous name.

What the admirable wisdom and conduct of your Ancestors gathered into one
safe Hive, to be the stock and shelter of the whole Tribe; to Head and
Countenance; to all the Lineage; One night surprizeth, destroys, the Economy
of the Family, extinguishes the fair Colonies it might have peopled the world
with; and there remains nothing of it but the shade of a great Name; the empty
curtail of its faint Echo. I know no law can be formed to prevent these
frequent miscarriages, wherein Posterity suffers abortion, and many a pregnant
Spirit is suffocated, in the straight enclosures of a confining vellicating
Fortune: who had they opportunity of fairly lanching forth, their sails had
been filled with the same breath of their Ages Honor, and Applause, which was
a propitious gale to their Grandfathers: whereas now your own farthest
extended Line shall remember your name, but to lash it with their heaviest
execrations. For the robbing of the whole by your exportation and alienation of
what was theirs more than yours, has also like the Peter-penny ship stranded in
Sandwich, together with it sank the Harbor; and made its convenient situation
more regretfully deplorable in the sad disaster. For it is a misery to be born
to the remembrance of those honors, which contemplation and sense of our
present indigencies suffer us only to grieve over, and sink in that also below
the calamity and loss it self.

I could wish there were kept a Register in each shire of all, who, by this or
any other profusion, end as the Snuffs of noble and wealthy descents, that
their Country may exclaim at and abominate the stench; And that some proportion
of every fair Revenue might by no Law niceties be alienable; but, upon such a
declination of the Family, immediately pass into the Counties possession: not
to erect Hospitals for the devastator, but be wholly converted to the education
of the most hopeful Youth can be recommended (those of that Name primarily
respected) for the making up the breach among them, and raising up as
flourishing a name again to the Nation. Nor can your severity be too rigid upon
the spend-thrift, who has submitted himself and Fortune (as the Military
discipline sometime does its offenders lives) to the lot upon the Drum-head,
and his posterity under the Spear to infamous slavery and sufferings: Spirits
so ignobly base, that, were their Fathers dust entrusted on their inheritance,
would even pawn their quiet ashes and old monuments, to build one poor bank at
play.

These are less worthy our commiseration, than the many Malefactors we with dry
eyes follow to Execution. He that salcheth or robbs on the highway is not in
hope of such booties, nor capacity to destroy more than single lives: Here we
see played away the lives and beings of those, they have no more just power to
dispose of, than the Church has, to alienate its consecrate rights to profane
abuses; or than we can force of satisfaction, for the cruelty, and rapines of
Romans and Danes upon our Forefathers. I might add to the shame of our
Gallants madness, what their hopes of gain can be upon their greatest success.
Did you ever see any great Family made greater by accessions at Play? Certainly
Industry and honest Labor raised all that we now see, bearing up above the
malice and fate of old Time: An Estate thus built has no one rafter but is
seasoned, every stone has the stability of a Quarry; it is cemented with long
wrought sweat, and is a morsel on which Saturn himself will break his fangs:
What we gain by fair diligence has a sweetness, which stolen waters shall
sooner become wine than emulate, a sweetness which from the soundness of its
constitution forbids corruption; and must needs conserve every particular, as
being the condiment of Time it self: which would be so burdensome to us, that
were there no industry necessary, to till, sow, and reap our fields, our bread
and life would be alike embittered to us. All your gains at play can never be
adopted to serious and noble uses, like the I holoze Gold, and all Sacrilegious
spoils, they rather bring a Coal to consume your own high-rais'd hopes and
Fortunes: Those that rob you, are anon under the pilferings of their own
vicious Lusts; and the Infidels that depend on Events of as great succes evey
day will find their own Family unprovided for.

I will join to this Quixotry its inseparable Sancho through all the adventures
of Gaming; that bears the weapons; and Portmantua full of Lightning and
Thunder: I mean the

SWEARING
That attends Gamesters; which is so much the more inexcusable, because all
this while our Gallants must play with as little concern and regret as the Don
had, whether he did beat or was beaten; the generosity of his spirit and glory
of the Adventurers would not bear a second beating by his own passions. But
certainly that great Isabella, who in her extremities of Childbirth covered her
face, and not so much as by her looks would derogate from Majesty; could not so
quietly look on the intrenchments upon her state and Sovereignty, but would
passionately assert it, against her own Ferdinand. And I will not believe Oaths
and Curses, because they accent our ordinary Language, and are used to veil
many natural defects, sound no more when we part with an arm or limb of an
Estate. If they are not all this while in passion, these might have been well
spared; if they be, these like bellows blow it into greater heat and fury: and
this can be but the very blowing away an overture to an excuse.

However these are the Gamesters, Artillery, and Trumpets too: if they come off
with a fair Atchievment, these proclaim the Prize; if worsted, they sound the
foil too. They have not Oaths enough to magnify and invoke Fortune in her
favorable aspect: Nor ever hope to be revenged of her frowns, by belching up
their hasty and fowl execrations on the Mignion. As temerariously and blindly
they cast round about them these firebrarnds and fatal ponyards, as she seems
to them wantonly to dispense her destinies. But where the Fire catches, and the
Wounds fall, the Nature of this fulminant Gold will lowdly direct you: You
think to blow and shoot it up against Heaven; but it kindles below, and breaks
downward, recoyling fearfully, with the noise and burning of a Cannon upon your
own bosom.

Might I enquire what these bold Gigantic Combatants think of Fortune, or a
surer hand guiding their Game: If there be none, why do the Brutes so rave, at
what do they discharge their continual brayings, why so tormentously rend their
weary throats? If there be a Fortune, She is blind and unconcerned. Why should
they commit their hopes and enjoyments to the Winds? But if indeed you strive
with Heaven; it is because you can subject its decrees to yours, or fear them
not: If the first, you only are in fault if you be not as happy as you would
be: Conquered, frighted Heaven must have stooped to your commands. Why complain
you farther of it? If the latter steel your audaciousness, They are very
impotent and despicable cannot reach, and punish your daring impieties. Be
confident however, this is not the way to call down caelestial auxiliaries (as
infernal Spirits are willing to answer hard and terrible words) your defiances
arm them against you, to power down greater fury, to complete and triumph in
your extremest misery.

But our Gallants plead not so much the ventilation of Passion, the explosion
only of some fired discontented Spirits by their cursed Oaths (where. I cannot
conceive the Devil for their Example) They use them as the Elegancies and
figures of speech, as necessary as the Ornaments of their dress. They are their
supplements unto all parts of discourse and Rhetoric: Oaths and imprecations
file off all rudeness and barbarisms, act the full force of persuasion, and the
very acuteness of a declamation and Satyr. They can be as ill laid down by our
Nobless as their Muffs in winter, so frigid and shrivel'd would their converse
be without them. They have a way to comprize much of their great minds in this
kind of Laconic brevity. Their Pages, Coachmen, and Watermen with but one round
mouthed Ejaculation, and a hand toward their sword, straight know what they
mean, and, as Spaniels are taught, readily execute their pleasure. The same
again breathed with a melting accent, smooth face, and bending body, serves in
the quintessences of complements, and protests of most oblieging friendship and
service.

O depraved times, and more degenerate Humanity! Is there no way left us to be
ingenious, and facetious, but by obscenities or monstrous abuse of all that is
sacred? Does Profaneness and contempt of Divinity encircle our Wits with that
Laurel, which will both dare the Thunderer, and evade the blow! Then let us
yield them immortality, and dread the strokes of their incensed Wit, as the
vulgar do the tails of Comets, and the multiplication of Suns. But if we
reflect on the genuine evaporations of these Ingenioso's, how like are they to
Meteors, and Hurricanes of wit, rather than fixed stars, or the Heaven born
placid and fructifying Dew: rather loud foaming forced and angry Torrents; than
the smooth and Chrystalline stream flowing easily from a pure Fountain of happy
invention? That which can run with an even uninterrupted vein of fertile ingeny
and knowledge, thorough all the windings of Art and Nature; Sometime emptying
it self in the profound speculations of abstruse Philosophy, to try the most
reaching fathom; Anon, playing with and turning up the looser sands, resting on
the sides of the courted shoars, crisping its light dividing waves into limpid
curls, with whispred purling murmurs; as if weaving into bracelets, and with
its studied music obliging its Muses stay and delight. It Is the facility and
fertility of Wit alone can impregnate the most barren Subject, make a Garden of
a Common, contrive an oregrown Forest into a Grove, or innocent Labyrinth; cut
a rocky Precipice into a delightful Grott, and Waterworks; and is at no knotty
emergency so stopped and plunged, that it needs to call a Deity down upon the
stage, to make its way open and disembogued.

Since then the essentials of true wit are of a different Origination and
progressions, from the Spurious attempts of those who laying their titles so
boldly from Heaven, are but the monstrous race of Centaurs, and far from
Demigods; Let the Nobles confess their mistake, when they find this cloud
break in noise and smoke, and include no other Juno: And may they the more
easily quit this superfluity of Vice, as what sounds with no other effect than
the vanity of Childrens Potguns and Crackers. It Is a wickedness yields so
little present satisfaction, and may so easily be shut out of all discourse;
that it is the huge amazement of sober men, that any will venture paying dear
for so fond a Lubency. That converse, which would be not only innocent but
delightful, is often thus orespiced, and made too poynant with sprinkling those
hot and high Oaths and Curses: that our spirits are in danger of the air they
breath, like needles and launcets piercing a tender and sedate Soul; at the
same time making the wounds deeper with regrett, to be so unhappily bound and
sowed up in a bag, with nettles and Wasps.

This Vice may more decently now also be relinquished as being the Familiar of
their very Lacquays, the Blazonry of the dregs of the Populace. In births,
clothes, diet, diversions, and the heightning your pleasures; in the
melioration of your minds by education and converse, in your hopes, designs,
and noble employments you far outstrip all their enjoyments, and attempts: But
here they can Rival (I do not say) outvie you, in number, volubility, and as
loud volleys of Oaths and execrations. Now it concerns your Honor to retire,
leave them the sport and quarry, which is not worth your Time, and does but
dishonest your truly noble Entertainments.

You may here make a most profitable experiment upon the world (most docible by
Examples that descend) You have conveyed this cursed sound through the whole
Island in an instant; as in the whispring pipes, the Roman wall is said to have
carried in so long a Traverse. Would you might be entreated to change these
harsh and terrible sounds into soft and peaceable, that the affrighments and
Furies, those have alarmed, may be appeased; and we may appear to be seriously
busy; not tumultuously startled and hurryed together as to an uproar and Riot:
You may hence inform us, whether signal Virtue can be as exemplary as Vice has
been by imitation destructive. So may you recover the reputation your births
have given you above the commonalty, and your Faith remain inviolable: That
your but necessary asseverations upon your Generosity and Honor, may be
reverenced in your selves, and sacred in the esteem of your Inferiors.

We should now at last be grossly deluded, if we expect to find Religion in
those Persons we struck at in the series of our discourse: For none of those
Vices can be the Rule of that Profession we have espoused: No softer a word and
power than

ATHEISM
Regulates these men's lives, and emboldens their impieties. With this
Generalissimo of the Powers of darkness, this skirmish shall be concluded, as
that (which some gloss) the race of man shall at last set and conclude in. And
now indeed, when we see the notion of a Deity usurped, but as the occult
qualities to be derided only and exploded: We cannot but find the shadows
growing and stealing apace upon us. But certainly it is an affectation of
obscurity envelopes us in night, and shuts out those rays, which cannot but in
every point clear up to us the being of a Creator. It Is gross Ignorance,
Inconsideration, malicious wickedness of the world, that dares not, will not
admit a God into their thoughts, to become the Supreme Arbiter of their hearts
and lives. Therefore they perplex their brains to dispute it off the stage. and
with far greater anxieties labor to entangle the conception of a Deity, than
they can so much as suppose in acknowledging their makers infinite perfections.

For shall fond man, whom we every day see crumbling into Earth, that knows not
his own beginning nor setting, his composition nor capacity, judge of those
things which as infinitely transcend our comprehension, as Nature; and could be
no longer adorable if not perfectly mysterious? shall shallow we, lost in
diving but to the bottom of every sensible, hope to fathom the immense Abyss of
all power, knowledge, goodness? Would you any longer worship, love, or fear
God, if you had an apprehension of his being, which you could any where
terminate in finite limits? This would be to heathenize the Earth again, and
reduce such a slight and formal veneration, as heretofore was bestowed on their
race of Gods, that once grew among themselves; and on the Idols they shaped
according to their own phansied Images. I need not say it is necessary, for it
is impossible, we should here have any more plain notions of our Maker, than
those in which He is pleased to reveal himself to us. All of the knowledge of
himself is mysterious, adorable, admirable, but most consummate: All of our
Duty plain, easy, and most necessary. I say enough for the reasonableness
thereof, that if it had been no Trial of the will and affections to renounce
the world and our selves, God would never have propounded it in the middle
between an Eternal Glory and Misery.

But it is a vain Curiosity (which first made the breach upon Man in the mass)
which will not be confined to its duty, under our present possessions, and
hopes, greater than man can raise his vast soul to contrive. The state of which
happiness, because entering upon no avenue of our senses; nay above all the
reaches of our what not amplifying Heart, and almost powerfully creating
Imagination; confounds our conceptions and belief of it. But do I believe God
the maker of this fair fabric of this visible Creation; wherein every one
phansies he could carve out portion large enough for his most importunate
desires: and in the poor pittances, fragments and Atoms whereof we every day
see many reposing their utmost felicity, and could be content to sing eternal
Requiems to their Souls over them? Do I not herein also admire the wonderful
delight, beauty, use, and harmony resulting from every part of it, and
concentring within my self in fullest pleasure and content, from my
contemplations and fruitions thereof? And shall I not now be confident, that
the most wise Creator, that raised this glorious frame but as a Pavilion to be
spread over Pilgrims, or a stately Theater for some few days exhibiting the
various Scenes and Actors upon the world, and then be taken down, has a Palace
of infinitely more excelling workmanship and entertainment; that the happiness
reserved must transcend what soever I can see lovely and desirable here in my
passage, and therefore must be Heaven?

Where the yellow clay, glass beads and pebbles we reckon our selves and
riches by (in our Sanguine dreams here) which we fear under our keeping, and
bitterly bewail being lost; All these will be contemptible to the diaphanous
yet solid Sun of the metals, pearls, and truly precious starry Gems; which are
not to be the treasures but materials of the Caelestial mansions. The
satisfaction I now take in one good word or work virtuously accomplished, will
then pass into a festival of Joy, by being asserted into a blissful activity of
all goodness, to the utmost of my enlarged powers. The refined pleasure my Soul
now takes in, with every fresh gleam, and discovery of New found knowledge, and
embracing a truth consentaneous to the principles of my own reason; shall then
be the quickening it still to move on the inexhaustible deeps of Science and
wisdom, with free expansions, and heliotrope conversions to that eternal
light; that will irradiate and inform the intellectuals with the Spirit of all
understanding. The affection of love, which here at some time carrys me out, to
a delight and union with any attractive amiableness, and my ravishments in the
harmonious repercussions of a Beloved, shall there transport me ^^^o one
endless Ecstasy of Love; where I shall enjoy what can alone (without grating on
any one affection) perpetually invite out and meet the Soul in its purest
ardencies and zeal, with inextinguishable freeness, and fullness of divine
goodness and bounty: so that this inconceivable energy the soul shall feel,
will carry it wholly forth to the Vision of Beatitude, and pass it into the
Glory it sees, adores, and loves with endless Delectation. Now then if I may
have leave to call the will of the Blessed Souls, purity; their understanding,
all eye; all their affections, Love: You will think the world you now live in a
sink of Vice; a Cavern of dark ignorance; and a den of monstrous and salvage
malice and cruelty.

Could I here also pourtray the horrors a dejected, guilty, astonished, broken,
despairing, and self-torturing spirit, which way soever it turns, feels, and
fears; I should from our own senses, which are often sabled with melancholy,
from the ravings of a Fever, the pangs and groans of acute pains, and deathbed
agonies and struglings, say enough to confess, though not constitute the misery
of an Hell. Both these states with all the notions our narrow conceptions form
of them, having all the demonstrations our understanding, and the nature of the
thing can admit, nothing being wanting to convince and support the most
penetrating and cautelous Reason; let us no longer deny their being and
certainty, because so incomprehensibly above us, and ours. For I am persuaded
as to a distinct and clear apprehension of them, we are as incompetent, as the
Embryo is in the close and dark womb to conceive of the vastness, order, and
beauty of this larger nest of Nature; wherein the comparison you will also find
to be more straightened. From your enjoyments here only consider whether you
think the Author of them could not have heightened and perpetuated them, had it
seemd good to infinite wisdom.

We in all these behold a continual vicissitude various interchanges and
successions of all things sublunary. And it may not be amiss to grant such a
rotation of States and families; as may suppose that they have all had their
equal portion of prosperity and adversity; so also that the very highest and
lowest pitch and fall of either have, in some age or other, made some of the
same stock most eminent in both conditions: that in every line some may be
accountable for the trust of Princely power, and trial of meanest debasement.
However in all the variations of our affairs here below, we may easily see and
admire a Providence disposing them, and bearing up a most constant tenor of
unerring regularity: That days and seasons have their unalterable returns, the
minds and shapes of each man their proper sentiments and impresses, every
nation its particular distinct genius, the levity and excellency of each so
counterpoiz'd (even to the turning with the two hundredth part of a grain) by
some other defects and virtues of a neighbor Country, to the setting of due
bounds to all: For the wilyness of that ballanceth the strength of this; the
heat and agility of another is tempered by the Phlegm and industry of their
Enemy: to their innate ambition, is opposed the inexpungnable zeal others have
to their native soil. Thus we see the Empires of the world have their periods,
declination and expiration; as well as a Rise, augmentation, and flourishing.

That the conceptions and designs of every individual admit so many
transmutations with their years; and that all of them sooner or later retire,
and clear the stage to another Generation, to which must be committed the whole
concerns of Mankind; and yet all this while among so different traverses, the
world has fallen into no decay; no Encroachments have been made on Nature; nor
such inundations on its Inhabitants as to drown any of their specific
temperaments, or so oreflow any one part of them, as not to be recovered in
some revolutions; does lowdly proclaim and justify the most wise decretals of
Heaven, managing so many dissenting heads, and new hands to the carrying on the
wonderful business of Providence. There is no novelty under the Sun, all will
still proceed with the measures of a man, if we do not put off our own natures
and principles. For it is Atheism alone can unhinge all, and invert the whole
order of things; by destroying all opinion of the wisdom and integrity of
former ages, the happy security of the present, and all concerns and hopes for
the future.

But had we a considerative view into the causes, actings, and terminations of
those grand occurrences, which first startle, then leave us as much careless as
unsatisfied; we should admire the deep agencies of Providence. Did every one
but seriously regard the wonders that have signalized a great part of his own
private concerns and contingencies; the notices arising thence would show how
he had been acted and guided by another hand and intention, beside and beyond
his own. Round about how many notable instances daily break forth to instruct
us, that Blind Nature alone could not so happily Time and finish her wise
mistakes? As Embryos we cannot conceive much of the Order and Power of the
Intellectual World. But I am persuaded much more is done among us by the
concurrence of good and Evil Spirits, in common converse and Accidents, than we
imagine or observe. Had we an history of those unaccountable remedies (which
are no small nor unwarranted part of Medicine) some from animals, other from
Vegetables, taken inwardly, or used as Amulets; we should acknowledge a great
deal to their benignity, or some permitted delusions in their discoveries. The
Temple of Aesculapius famous for its cures prescribed in dreams, and registered
into a Dispensatory on the walls thereof; beside many later remarkables of this
nature, justifies this my conceit.

Withal I suppose them very prone, if not by rule disposed, to concern
themselves in all sorts of Offices, wherein they may employ their powerful
activities; and have the pleasure unseen, to guide, assist, and patronize many
of our undertakings. Many sudden and uncouth friendships, antipathies, strange
deliverances, advices in extraordinary distances, solutions of intricacies,
presages, and powerful influences upon other Creatures I may favorably refer
to their presence and ministry; not denying but there are some persons by
nature and temper (without recourse to an Asterism) fitted to wonderful
intimations, and performances beyond the Vulgar. Yet I cannot but admire to see
some suddenly grown up into an opinion and repute with the World; wonderfully
made the darlings of Fortune, from one lucky article of an occasion instantly
outstripping all others, and their own thoughts; thrive and prosper to the
amazement of all, where every one before was defeated and wasted; in every
enterprise and but petty hazard successful and victorious: and all this without
anxious solicitudes, laborious insudations, or more than Common stock of
comprehension or contrivance. At the same time, a person wherein nothing is
wanting to the Ornament, as well as strength and vigor of Reason and Prudence,
no defect in industry and Art; sinking, unfortunate, every way oppressed, and
quite broken in all his designments: When I presently reflect on the admonition
given Mark Antonie, in his competitions with Augustus; and that there is more
truth and mystery in it, than we are aware of, and advized by. On a due
collection, you will conclude, even where all seems to lay open to the sports
and frolikes of Time and Chance, a most sure Hand from above, beyond our
determinations and reaches, disposes all events how casual soever in appearance
and (by many Instruments [perhap] of some nearer degree of Intellectual Agents.)

From the promiscuous successes and conditions, Virtue and Vice are here
equally involved in with industry and Imprudence, you may as necessarily infer
the consequence of a state of life after this; where one shall account for the
impious abuses of long provoked and most attractive goodness; the other meet a
remuneration, suitable to the exercise of a suffering, thoroughly tried, and
perfected integrity. To which I may join the insatiable thirst, the soul of man
pants under, toward a state of immortality: It beholds it self made to
distinguish, and comprehend, the truth and worth of all about it (beyond the
power it sees any other Creature born unto) But there remaining so great a part
of it undiscovered upon the Continent, as well as wide Ocean of knowledge; All
the principles hereof also being but precariously and dubiously admitted; How
does the Soul lay down and bewail it is sad condition, finding it is clearest
resolves and conclusions, subject to cavillation and torture, when raising up
an appetite large enough to take in the coveted delicacies, appearing only as
if but to tantalize it? But now that doctrine which meets us heated, tired,
dejected in despair of ever reaching, what our greediness has transported us
out after; how welcome, pleasant, satisfactory will it be to us; reviving and
raising us up again on our feet, so as to forget all our past toil and
weariness; Especially when to the possession of this Terrestrial knowledge, It
bids us look up to Heaven above, and reckon upon the innumerable Lights and
worlds of wisdom and understanding there, which we are created capable to look
and pass into, and shall eternally reside under their illuminations?

We shall suddenly then make up the arrears of the longest lives (and an
hundred years are brought into as small a point as twenty, to the review of a
dying person.) The Philosophy, we grope after all the short night of our
duration here, will (I conceive) by the first approaches of the light of our
never setting day, be plain and illustrate to us: The First and Wisest of Men
had not larger notices of the Creation, than the uncaptiv'd Spirit instantly
enters upon; for that (as Adam at first) is born and springs forth from it is
clay, arrayed with the same connate beams of knowledge as of life. And the
wisdom of Solomon was that Celestial Charisma, which in it is very illapses
enlarged his Soul to it is reception. Thus ennobled, the Spirit rises to the
dignity of an Empyreal Guest, presently as it feels it self unmanacled from
dust, and above it is distresses and fears, finding eternal joys set wide open
to him: Otherwise it would be a surprise of such amazing happiness, enough to
make it fall into such a Syncope it left the body in, were it not instantly
transformed and adapted with generous instincts of it is Glorious inheritance.
To demonstrate the quick dispatch of so great a transaction, it is means and
methods, you shall respite me; Till you find any one determine the instant and
manner of the Souls connection to the body, and the affections it brought with
it: Or let another tell me how long time he is learning to see, and by what
degrees he apprehends the benefit and use of light: Or a Third when he first
knew he had Reason, and what was to be done by it: Or another show, how an
Antipathy or Sympathy immediately break forth, and act all their violences,
without calling the Soul down to Counsel.

It Is enough, that these, and more inconceivable Truths, are not only the
subject of our rational examinations, but shall once be the convictions and
experiences of our apprehensions: which affords me a wide field of wonder, that
the unhappy curiosity of our Nature; which has (I believe) drawn many to
converse with any order of Spirits; Either that they might be satisfied in the
being of such Creatures, or from them gain some intelligence and notices above
ordinary disquisitions; does not produce in us all an extraordinary
satisfaction and delight, in the knowing that Truth which is our Light and Way
to arrive at a blessed Communion, and Union with the Father and Fountain of all
Spiritual beings. I cannot, to the highest Speculators, urge a greater cogency
of their duty to their Creator. The very addresses to the Father of our Spirits
intimate no less than our return to, and quiet, in that bosom which delighted
to give us a being: And to be brought to the knowledge and favor of the most
pure Origin of all Spirits as strongly imports our arrival, at that Center of
Truth and happiness, which is the Sum of All that created beings can possibly
know or enjoy. Neither will your capacities be contracted, but as infinite
Perfection is the object of your Fruitions, so will your Souls (emptyed of the
burdens, and coarctation of incumbring matter) be dilated and stretched out,
into your proportionable entertainments of overflowing Beatitude. And what more
can any desire than he can enjoy? The Soul it self can go no farther; because
it cannot, need not to, desire any thing more.

And those that are in such eager quest of the Chiefest Good and present
happiness, will find the Soul possessed of uninterrupted Joy, and Serenity;
only as enjoying the favor of the Moderator of all things. The quiet content
and fixation flowing from this assurance no distractions, incertitudes or
impediments abroad can intercept, or diminish: And hence you will have an
Argument as full as it is brevity will bear, to invite your Soul to trample on
all the dross and defilements, which steal away your hearts, and obstruct your
early engrossing of happiness and ascent to Heaven.

As ignorance is the Parent of Superstition, so is Atheism the unhappy birth of
Inconsideration: That is willing to rest on any thing; this repudiates, and
carelessly rejects all: that requires sobriety and attention; and this, because
the inconsiderate will not be at leisure, thoroughly to be acquainted with any
thing, much less themselves. Would they be so kind to their own Souls to hear
what they can say for their own Original, how they derive their Genealogy by
Authentic Patents from Heaven above; they would not so easily relinquish their
Title to it, and pass away their primogeniture for every ready mess of Vanity.
Nor do they understand more of the rest of the World, and regard all they know
as little, as if wholly Ignorant of it. They live as on a wide open Ocean,
where every wave and wind commands them from Anchor; whither they cannot, nor
care to learn. How it is with them they cannot inform you, nor how they would
have it, nor what they shall be next day, or year; much less, all their life
time.

While He that own's a Providence, and depends upon it, has one certain scope
to which he directs all his designs, and moderates all his hopes and fears, in
a certain persuasion of the Divine Wisdom Supremely disposing him, and all
Events for the best purposes. So that, among the greatest elegancies and utmost
beauty of the Creation, nothing is more fair and lovely, than the uniform
obedience, and constant acquiescence of the Good Soul with his Makers Commands
and Pleafure; to be without the rule and support whereof, would be his very
Hell, as tormenting as it would be destructive to him: For it is that extirpates
his doubts, and dark ratiocinations to a most satisfactory submission. Hence is
he that Cube, which way soever turned, still resting on the same equal Square.
So that he can be as infallible in the conjectures of himself, through the many
hidden changes of Futurity, and whatsoever shall on any juncture occur; as he
can safely and contentedly judge of his present state of life and enjoyment.

The rest of the world have their minds still under suspense, as so many Crows
met and hovering over some Carrion; Or as a loose flight of Atoms broken and
wafting away from them, and they left an empty lodging for the next kind gale
of a new life and intention. For here they live without any determinate and
proper designment of life to bind them together; they never account with
themselves for what purpose they live, not what they aim at, or where they
would rest: but from this, have to another delight, and so to the next; Still
upon the wing, and still frighted, or tired off, from their enjoyments. Thus
they, like mere sensitive beings, neither know, nor have any other business of
life, but still to live on, as far as they can go, in the mere determinations
of Matter and Motion: Like those Creatures altogether, who are but the plainer
and ruder pieces of Workmanship, to the nobler and most exquisite frame of the
body of man: they being as it were made but with one single and easy motion,
but we with the wonderful movements, of finer complications* of wheels within
one another: The observation of that Great Luminary of Philosophy and Physic,
from whose unwearied abilities and penetrations Anatomical, I beg leave to
borrow one of Singular consideration, distinguishing the enginry which our
Spirits employ, of more special and curious contrivances, than are to be found
in other animals.

In his accurate discovery of the use of the Intercostal nerves, in the fair
branches thereof Communicated to the Region of the Heart, He maintains: that by
these are kept up a continued commerce between the Brain and Heart: so that
hence are derived advices of each others affections, and all the diversity of
their phancies and sentiments. Divinity and Nature hitherto teaching us that
Wisdom's residence is in the Heart: we here (says the same admirable Person)
learn it to be rather in its clear conclusions, from the conferences and
constant intercourses between the Heart and Brain, and that this reciprocal
correspondence maintains the heat and light of mutual intelligence; and, duly
interchanged, perfects our most complete intendments of Virtue and Prudence.
Dissecting a Natural, this texture of Nerves was found very small and of fewer
strings than that branch in man oridnarily grows up with. In the body of an Ape
this shooting forth some few insertions toward the heart twined its fibers with
the Nerve of the Diaphragm. Hence he infers this Creature has its ingeny and
docility, not only expressing us in our gestures, but even to some faint
resemblances of our very manners and affections.

Thus far that Inimitable Professor gives us light to our Brain and Heart to
judge that they would be thought, in this stupendous Fabric, not the bare
conflux only of loose Atoms; But that we have a body instructed to execute the
orders of the Nobler Soul, and to act in joint Commission with it; in a
faithful observance of those distinct regular motions, their most wise Creator
designed them unto: beyond the utmost abilities of the nearest order, and most
similar of all inferior Creatures. So that for man to own no dependence on his
Maker, not to raise his thoughts to the contemplation, and adoration of that
hand, which stretched out the rule of his being and motions, and lengthens out
all his lines as seems good to It, is to renounce the Heart and Brain of a
reasonable being; And like the Assyrian Monarch while he views the stately and
glorious built of his body, Cry out in a Philosophic Rapture; Is not this the
wonderful Machine of Nature, which I with the strength of my deep wisdom have
found to be raised upon my own Atoms, and can to my Honor ennoble these very
particles with excellent Ornaments and Riches, out of the store of my own
admirable Understanding, which soars above the low and timorous flight of
Vulgar knowledge, and scorns to own any Deity to Rival me in the boundless
Empire of my self-advancing Reason, Will, and Affections? Do we not, presently
upon these haughty Rodomontad's, see the just decree of the Great Watcher
fulfilled upon the Romantic Sophies? Who turning themselves into Commons with
the Beasts, and refusing to hold of the Sovereignty of Heaven, forfeit the
shape and heart of Man: nor sill up the business of their life with the true
designs of Prudence and Virtue; to the happiness whereof, they were in their
very make and motions born and instructed.

But the Soul, whose foundations are laid on unerring Providence, and
affections enlarged and raised to a perfect dependence and conformity with the
mind of Heaven, can now truly say (what another Emperor as fondly vaunted, when
his vast Palace was contrived) that now at length it has began to live like a
man.

The sum of all is this, these Primates of the world of knowledge, lose
themselves and the knowledge of their God, in the Mist of their affected
ignorance and inconsideration. They that think nothing impenetrable to their
sharp Judgment, and that their understandings are large enough to draw in the
Ocean of all Science; a Fly straying into their Eye, blunts and blinds the one;
and a few Atoms on the breach, gravel and dam up the narrow entrance of the
other. While they imagine they comprehend and encircle Nature in a Girdle of
their own weaving, and know all the intrigues of indiscernible Wheels, as
plainly as the face and outside of the work: Take but the least part of this
Creature in pieces; You will at once admire their folly, and the fearful Art
shut up in so little room; and that all this unaccountable workmanship, and
cost is laid out on him, who so undervalues and abuses his Makers Wisdom, and
bounty still waiting upon him. For it is an incessant miracle that prolongs the
Creation, and maintains our lives with the even uninterrupted paces of so many
curious Wheels and Motions, as we turn upon; the unstringing of the least
whereof may dissolve the whole order, break the chain which links all together,
and put a full stop to the work and life of it. So little do they understand of
their own dreadfully organized Frame, and but just nothing how their
understanding acts that by which they are become such Monopolizers of knowledge.

Did they not rest on some aerie contrivances of the fancy, which comparing
one part of the Creation with another, blending the Originals, pawses and
periods of several beings with the pleasant power of creating; did not
ambiguous terms, and some bold defiances against Heaven, engage and confirm
them; they would confess a Providence: and would they consider and attentively
examine themselves, and the works of Time and Nature (which word retains with
me it is innocent power and subserviency) they would certainly acknowledge the
hand of God in all this. A light and desultory glance upon the Creation puffs
up Sciolists, with an opinion of their omniscience; but who ever seriously,
constantly, intimatly acquaints himself with any part and passage thereof,
shall behold such amazing mysteries of infinite Power, Wisdom, Goodness, as
will reduce him joyfully to resolve all into that Primary Great Mover, and
Ultimate Center of All.

Of whom to have any mean and unworthy apprehensions is as impious, as the
conception it gives to Atheism can make it: So that what represents God less
adorable in his Goodness and Justice, thereby destroying the hopes of an
invited and willing duty; or takes off our obligations, and dispenses with our
least indulgencies and relaxations; ought to be the abomination of our
conceptions, as much as they be the direct contradiction of the Nature of God,
and clearest manifesto's of his Will. Those seem to be the most Honorable
Apprehensions of the Divine Attributes, which debasing man most, do possess the
Soul with a pure Love, and awful dread of that Glorious Majesty, which our weak
intellectuals can more securely contemplate in the reflex, than the direct
essence and acts of tremendous Perfections.

Though Providence appear writing it self every where, with the point of a
Diamond darting a Sunbeam; Yet we endeavor to puzzle our interpretations and
acknowledgements of it with our confused shallow and biassed notions,
impeaching the equity of the great Ruler of the World. But may I advise such
subtle disputants, and aggreived peevishness, to await the Judgment of the last
day, not doubting but that all the most blessed Attributes will be then
vindicated from the silly interests, petty arguments, and calumnies, with which
wretched Creatures asperse their Great Maker and Judge, darkning the secret
Counsels of the Almighty, with words that want ingenuity and candor, no less
than knowledge and wisdom.

The Meditation of those summons to a General Account yields me another
satisfaction to the curiosity of busy and inquisitive man, which that day will
afford. How far would not an active prying brain travel, to make a faithful
collection and relation of the History of the whole World? even to an Amara for
the fragments of Livy, and as far for the Supplements of Tacitus would some
venture. What labor and price, nay, fraud is thought too great to unlock some
Cabinet Counsels, perhaps those no otherwise concerning our times, than for the
high opinion they left of their influences upon their own; with the notable
aims and instruments of their manage (in whose breasts they died) would be the
sweat of many brains to recover, and embalm, with politic remarks of their own,
from putrefaction in secret.

This may be no small inducement, considering our daily Inspection and bold
censures and examinations into the lives, actions and relations of all that are
round about us, and the accounts we make of all events; to enjoin us the
greatest care of our own particular duties: that so we may appear unconcerned
and acquitted in that great Rendezvous of spirits; and look for that blessed
day with desires, and expectations to receive in it a full narrative, and
faithful History, of the lives and most famous actions of all Mankind: when we
shall behold with what apprehensions and Justifications, Alexander, the
Coesars, and all the haughty Conquerors of the World will enter on that
dreadful Theater, and be brought also to the knowledge and admiration, of so
many Noble Souls most deserving of their Generations, by their unvaluable and
suppressed worth; who, trampling on the gayeties and follies of the World, with
their own Rich Stock of Virtue and content, have silently (like the kind of
subterranean fraternity of Bohemia) stolen into the dark and quiet of their
Graves. All the Mysteries of Providence we are now solicitously and too
curiously inquisitive into, so far as concerns our revolutions, shall be there
unfolded; and of Prophecy also, that we are strangers unto, as to the manner
of their accomplishment.

For may I have leave to suppose, many obscurities, in the last and constantly
mistaken Revelation of Futurities, cannot possibly be brought down to our lower
Stage of Earth, in the dress they are there represented. I should rather
suppose great part of those visions of the bosom Evangelist to figure out the
State, Glory, and Polity of the Great Court and Council of Heaven, giving
dispatches and orders to our Affairs below; which both speaks the care, and
consultations (as I may phrase it) our Maker graciously determines us withal:
And somewhere it seems to me, not unlike the great convention, wherein the
wicked King of Isreal's ruin was resolved. And considering so much of the
history thereof acted in Heaven, within the Veil (as I may say) of the Temple;
and our succeeding revolutions to be but the immediate consequents of those
mysterious Conclave results; and that Angels are Ministers of State to the most
High, and Guardians of Persons, Nations, and Places; with Reverence due to the
Arcana of the Empire, I should the rather retain this Opinion. For were it also
necessary to take place in our clear revealments of knowledge, or of use and
influence on our practice, I am assured, it would as clearly and fully answer
the name it bears unto us; unless that also be to be understood, of what
remains to be uncovered and revealed in after times.

Without breach however of Faith, and obedience unto the divine disposure: Let
us wait the opening of these grand Truths to us, so far as is fit for the
Courtiers and Favorites of Heaven to be acquainted with them. But if the
greatest part of its History be by its accomplishment to be explained, the
World has a duration beyond what we ordinarily allot it: And they are to be
reprehended who think their own Age so great a portion of Time, and of such
eminent regard; That there shall be no great instance of extraordinary moment,
which they will not bring down to be born therein: and that their own persons
and concerns are so wholly the peculiar care of divine benignity and conduct,
that there is no eye nor hand of goodness watching to be favorable to the rest
of the Family (which is an inveterate tincture of the spirit of Judaism) so
that if they feel any pressures or contradictions, the current of Providence
must be supposed at a stand, and no less than fire from Heaven fetched down, to
rescue their pitiful proper Concerns: If the times they live in prove
favorable, they gild them over with such transcendent Glories as must make
them outshine and overweigh all other: But if they encounter deserved or but
ordinary difficulties; esteeming themselves the only true Gold of their Age,
for whose refining these Trials are permitted, they will not want the pleasure
of heating the Furnace hotter than in those famous Persecutions, when the
Church was yet in the mint: In the midst whereof they are so far from the
Doxologies of the Primitive Martyrs; that a meek Christian would judge their
mouths had contracted the whole fire, and that their Tongues only were under
the scorching heat of tormenting Flames. But if thorough various emergencies
they land on a good old age, upon the secure brink of the Grave; as if when
their pa^ts are over, there was nothing more to be acted on the world, and it
became insignificant when they are to be left out: They unwilling to spare
their beloved Carcasses the time of a Patriarchs life (much less so long as
theirs have been under divorce from the flood) presently design with cruel
Nero's wish the conclusion, (if not confusion) of all the rest of mankind;
hastening the Funerals of the Universe upon their own, that nothing may retard
their private hopes and advantages: not reckoning up the Excellency of every
member to rest in the complement of the whole body; which considered
extensively, would enlarge the latitude of our converse and mutual Charity.

If then these will be persuaded to attend the infinitely wise motions of their
Maker, we may guess by them, the Worlds age not so full of the aggravated
symptoms of its senescency: Take but that one Intention, and the only for which
the Creation seems to have been raised from its nothing; the grand work of man's
redemption: wherein the Power, Wisdom, goodness of the Almighty concur, to give
us an evidence of all engaged for our redress: to the design whereof so
incomprehensively mysterious, to the work of it wonderfully gracious; All we
know or can desire beside, is but Vain and Despicable: and the whole not worthy
nor able, to be the shell of this ineffable transaction of mercy. Yet this we
see not till a full expired Period manifested; Heaven permitting some thousand
of years to ripen its birth, and so long keep off the desire and longing of the
whole Creation. So that if it shall now please the only Wisdom, to prolong
this free exhibition of Grace, and replenish every corner of Earth with the
joyful visits and abode of this light; That a day may spring forth
proportionate to the shades and twilight of a long morning (dwelling in the
dawning East of the Jews) by a culminating high Glory, and the leisurable
progressions of Time: if it have not yet ascended its Meridian Luster, and
greater beams and glories will be displaied unto after ages; if there be
reserved a succession of greater wonders, in which the whole world shall at
once see and adore the Scepter of their Redeemer, and every part of it feel the
power glory and Joy of their Deliverance from Death and Hell: Why should our
evil eye envy this happy exaltation of Light, and the munificence of our Lord?
Why should we bind up the hands, and restrain the sweet influences of Heaven?
Rather may we suppose that this late manifestation was no Niggardice to the
Happiness of man; but that it will be extended, with the most free and open
effusions and largesses of divine bounty.

But I dread to approach these Mysteries with a bold hand and profane foot; and
advise others against timeratious putting forth theirs to the Sacred Ark, which
needs not humane support. For we may be so mistaken in our dark conceptions,
and self relations; as to run into a quite contrary resolution, of the egresses
and motions of the Deity. And all the liberty we take in meditation on these
hidden verities, will be most allowable; which makes way for our enlarged
apprehensions and adorations of Infinite Goodness. And indeed a wise man is not
so much in prospective, and foreseeing Futurities; as (if I may use the word)
in a continued Retrospect, here he may attain certainty in his knowledge of
things Past; a sober conjecture of the following, an insight into himself
seeing the Errors overseen; and setting up a fair rule for the time to come.

But I would not be thought all this while apologizing for Christianity,
especially to those great Souls, who by their solemn initial Vows, more special
obliges, and all the marks and bonds of their Nobility are engaged to defend
the honor thereof with their utmost perils. For notwithstanding that Sarcasm
of railing Julian to the complaints of the poor persecuted Christians, To you
it is given to suffer: I am confident the greatest opposition of the mad world
cannot prevail against this greatest Truth.

I might spend Volumes, to give you the Arguments our Religion defends it self
withal. While Reason and the tongues of men and Angels can speak, they cannot
be silent nor want demonstrative justifications, of that Goodness, which formed
them to a communication and declaration thereof. Christianity (for I will not
divide and weaken it into factions) has of late been so powerfully vindicated,
that Atheism can find out no new irreligion, which has not been beaten down,
prevented and obviated. And may that Tongue be for ever useless, which will not
speak in defense of his glorious Maker: Our Profession having suffered of late
by ostentation of those who had no Religion; may not another Thief come on this
hand, and steal away that necessary Declaration and maintenance of our Faith
and hopes, in too nice and modest Concealment of the truly devote Soul.

I may fear a trespass on the Labors and Victories of our late Crowned
Champions of Christianity; whose Learning and Piety will render this our Age
notoriously famous, by the challenges they have answered of bold impiety. Nor
can I quit my self perfectly in the rules and method of my discourse; wherein I
have rather taken the liberty of a Letter (and pray allow it to be like what it
was born) the rest is most of the notions, and long retained Sentiments of my
own mind. And I believe would every one turn over those of his own Brain, many
would be found so connatural to the being of the Soul, and Truth it self: and
those in a distinct Character from others legible: that I may imagine, as God
has given each its specific Spirit, so by differing Ideas this Principle is
stamped and visible upon every one: for we see a Diversity of all faculties and
capacities distinguishing the minds of men, God revealing himself also
according to the module of our Intellectuals; Yet so, as all confess and read
this one great Truth of his Essence, though in various impressions on the Soul.

And that our conceptions of the Existence of a Deity so much differ, destroies
not the reality of what we diversely apprehend. For bring into any Company (how
great soever) some exotic and unknown Rarity, There shall not two agree
perfectly, in all the modes of apprehending it; because they have an essential
Diversity in the Faculties and Organs; as also a different stock and possession
of former Notions, to which they have recourse, and refer this present object.
If it be so in things incurring sense, and where often no affection is touched;
In this Pure Abstraction from all sense, and a notion that stirs up and works
on every passion (which are all so variable, that none of them can ever be said
to appear again in their former Phases) no wonder that our Conceptions hereupon
are as diverse as our Souls and Countenances. But that all have their proper
and innate notions of the being of their Maker, I have greatest reason to
affirm; and confidently appeal to any person, whether he found not this, the
only Indelible Principle upon his Soul, and after all his labor and art of
oblivion, if it does not yet fairly upbraid the sponge?

But this is a subject so copiously and methodically elsewhere, and by those
whose profession has exercised their notions and parts, eventilated; That I
refer all mine to their Better directed, and therefore more confident
Speculations; only craving pardon of those our venerable Guids in Holy things,
for any sudden escapes of long confined thoughts: which (without offense [I
hope] to their consecrate function) I have bundled up together to try how
consentaneous they will be one with another; and out of an humble hope to serve
our hopeful Young Gentry, in the early measures they are to take of themselves,
and their Age.

My whole design being, to gain but so favorable an influence on our young
Nobless, now fairly blossoming; that outliving the noysom Blasts, and Morning
Nippings of the dangerous Vices, their Age and Quality are too obnoxious unto
(no season being more bewailed than that of the forward and tender Spring,
killed by hard and unnatural Colds) They may yield a pleasant shade and
protection to Virtue, and derive the wholesome and lasting Fruits thereof to
succeeding Ages, flourishing in the Cions of their Noble stock. May you
therefore thus revive the high Renown of your Famous Grandfathers that their
great Images may seem inspired to live again in you the Genuine Heirs of their
Noblest Possessions. May you among all Nations recover, and advance the high
Honor and Interest of your dear Coutry. May the Glory and Puissance of your
long desired Sovereign be aggrandiz'd by the happy Aceessions of your wisdom,
integrity and courage: That the Sagacity and Gravity of your Heads may seem to
constitute under him a Judicature and Council as large as his Dominions: The
Loyalty and Generosity of your Hearts, be the Beams and Security of the Crown:
The Valor and Activity of your Arms, his Forts, and Navy Royal: and your very
private Families represent, and every where maintain the Splendour and Sanctions
of a Regal Court. Then shall that good hand of Divine Providence (which we have
seen to rise in a small cloud, and suddenly span ore the face of our whole
Horizon, with amazing darkness and desolations) turn all its terrors upon our
Enemies, and shower down [as of old] the wonderful Deliverances of his Power and
benignity upon us: which shall sill up our furrows, with the blessed increase
of Truth and Peace. And England cleared of all its noxious weeds and Briars:
under the constant irrigation of Heavenly munificence and care, shall no longer
bear the folly ingratitude and curse of so long Barrenness: but become a fair
planted Enclosure of all its former Plenty and Prosperity.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Principal HEADS, Herein contained.
IDLENESS Page 8. PRIDE Page 26. INTEMPERANCE Page 37. LUST Page 50. GAMING Page
75. SWEARING Page 85. ATHEISM Page 94.

