ADVICE FROM A Dissenter in the City, TO HIS Friends in the Country. Showing
it to be their DUTY and SAFETY, to Concur with those who are for ABOLISHING THE
PENAL LAWS AND TESTS.

Allowed to be Published this 7th. of September, 1688.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, MDCLXXXVIII.

ADVICE from A Dissenter in the City, TO HIS Friends in the Country.
IN Regard of the many Charms made use of, by a Virulent and Ill-designing
Faction, there was never more need of the Wisdom of the Serpent, then now: One
great part of which, is to stop your Ears against their Wheedle, and malicious
Insinuations; or at least, to hear both Parties before you make a Judgment.

You know that His Majesty has given us Liberty by His Declaration and
Promises, therein to Consult with His Parliament, about means, to make the same
inviolable for the future: What Objection against it, and Opposition to it, is
made by a Party of the Church of England, you are not ignorant of? And how they
represent the Manner as Tyrannical and Illegal, though the same Power, and a
greater, has been allowed by the Canons of their Church; several of their
Greatest and Learned Archbishops, Bishops and Doctors; as may be seen in Vox
Cleri pro Rege, etc.

But herein His Majesty has acted as a true Pater Patriae, and careful Master
of the Flock, by putting a Clog upon such as have gored, and still would gore
others, until he have a Convenience to cut their Horns. By the Judicial Law,
the Master was to make good the Damages done by his Goring or Pushing Cattle;
and His Majesty knowing himself answerable to God for it, if he suffered one
party of His Subjects to ruin another upon a Religious Score, in preventing
it, has done nothing but what was incumbent upon Him, as a Christian, and as a
King. I take it for a sure Maxim in Divinity, that we make our selves guilty of
the Evil which we have Power to prevent if we do not; and by this Maxim, any
Christian having Power, ought to have done for the Matter, though not in the
Manner, what His Majesty has done: And therefore, to oppose him in so doing, is
certainly Antichristian; becoming none but Ravening Beasts, who Roar and make a
Noise, when the Prey is Rescued out of their Devouring Chaps. No wonder then,
that a certain sort of men use all the Arts, that Wit or Malice can invent, to
frustrate so good a Design; seeing it destroys their Antichristian Domineering
over the Consciences of others, and their Trade of making Merchandise of the
Souls of Men, and His Majesty's Laws.

Does not His Majesty propound to throw the Cudgels in the Fire, (with which
the Church has beat out your Brains) and offers a legal Security against all
things of that kind, for time to come? But the Church Proposes only to lay them
aside, (which if she could do) yet she may take them up again when she pleases,
and then you have no Defense against them: Which Proposal then is most to be
trusted?

Has not the Church shamefully deceived you, in promising (upon your desisting
to Plead for Continuance of the Declaration in 1672.) to procure Ease for you
in Parliament, and afterward, instead of Rods, whipped you with Scorpions? Were
not their Pretenses for your doing so then, the same which they use to persuade
you now? And have you seen any Reformation in them since? Or, Did they cease
from Persecution, till His Majesty stopped it?

Did ever His present Majesty break Promise to you, or has he not been kinder
than you did expect, or could possibly have been, had he hearkened to the
Suggestions of the Church against you?

Did ever the Church make a Canon, in your favor, and has not His Majesty
Emitted a Declaration for your Ease?

Did ever the Church Rescue you out of the Hand of the Civil Magistrate? And
has not His Majesty Rescued you out of the Hands of the Church?

Tenderhearted Mothers, use to plead in behalf of their Children, when their
Father is threatening; and Rescue them out of his Hands when he is correcting:
But instead of so doing, the Church endeavored your Ruin, and flees on His
Majesty's Face for preventing it.

Has not His Majesty given good Evidence, that He is a compassionate Father,
and the Church Demonstrated her self an Unnatural Mother?

Will you then believe the Reproaches of her, from whom you never found Favor,
and distrust the Promises of Him who has showed you so much Love? Are you not
sensible, how falsely and maliciously they accused you to His Majesty? And will
you believe them now, when they accuse His Majesty to you? Was it not their End
then, to Exclude you from His Majesty's Favor, and is not the same Design now
carried on?

Ay, but says the Church, We were put upon the Persecution by the Court, We did
not engage in it voluntarily. Enquire of them, if King Edward the 6th. put them
upon Opposing His Dispensation to Bishop Hooper; and how they will Reconcile
that, and their Concurrence with Him, in disposing of the Crown by His Will,
which was, perhaps, the most Stupendous piece of Arbitrary Power, ever assumed
by a Sovereign; and yet, they not only concurred with Him in it, but put Him
upon it, which makes it evident, that they always joined with the Prerogative
in its height, except when favorable to Dissenters, and then they opposed it.
Enquire if King Charles the II. put them upon opposing His several Declarations
for Liberty of Conscience, in May and October, 1660, July 1661. and December,
1662. Repeated so often, that it may be evident His Majesty intended to fulfill
the same, if they had not hindered him; which yet appears further, if you
consider His Words in Declaration 25. October 1660. That No man shall be
Disquieted or called in Question for Differences of Opinion in Matters of
Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom; And if any have been
Disturbed in that kind, since our Arrival here, it has not Proceeded from any
D^rections of Ours.

Enquire at them further, who puts them upon Opposing His present Majesty's
Declaration for Liberty; And if they were so obedient to the Court in
Persecuting, why do they not testify their Obedience now, when the Court
Commands them to throw away the Instruments of their Persecution? And you will
find, the case is so plain, that we may reasonably conclude, that if His
Majesty was at any time displeased with us, they stirred Him up to Persecute,
by their Mis-representations, who accused us as Disloyal and Seditious, and not
fit to be Tolerated.

Do they not justify their Rigor against us, by Alleging the same to be a
Retaliation for what we did against them in the late Times? Can any thing be
more Disingenuous? Will they justify what they condem? Did not they begin with
Bishop Hooper, though the King opposed it? And Persecute their Brethren at
Franckfort, when there was no Court to put them upon it? And continue the same
in Queen Elizabeth's, King James, and King Charles the I. Time, till they had so
enraged the Nation, that they could no longer bear it; and yet they would
insinuate, that they were not the first Aggressors.

Is it possible then, that you can be imposed upon by their Apologies, and
pretenses of Moderation? Let them produce Instances. Yes, they give you a
famous one in their Apology, of their Moderation toward the Papists after
Queen Mary's Persecution: But we are sure, Protestant Dissenters found none of
it; they made cruel Laws against them, and put those Laws in Execution, even to
Death it self; they need not tell us of their Moderation toward Papists; we
always told them of their Partiality toward them, against whom they pretend
now to be so zealous, to have the Penal Laws continued; perhaps, they have
reserved the Dregs of the Cup for them; but they are like to be disappointed if
that were their Design. But because they know we would not be such Fools to
join, in continuing them against our selves, they tell us, It is only to be a
Curb upon the Papists, that they desire to have them continued; Credat Judaeus
Appella. Let their former Carriage witness the Truth of this.

Think with your selves, what a Mercy it is, not to be under a necessity of
complying with such Worship as you thought, neither appointed by, nor
acceptable to the Divine Majesty of God; or else, endure all the Miseries, that
invective and irreligious Men could affl^ct you with. What a Blessing is it not
to be under an Obligation of owning such for your Ministers, as were imposed
upon you, whom in your Conscience you did not believe called of Christ to that
Work; whose whole Practice from their Youth up, was Estranged from Piety; whose
Design in entering the Sacred Function, was no other, than such as men have in
entering upon an ordinary Trade, to get a Livelihood; whose way of entering into
the Church, was by the Patrons Presentation, against which you have complained
as Unscriptural; he (as alas it happens too often) having no care of his own
Soul, and therefore, very unfit to choose a Pastor for the Souls of others; all
that he designed in it, being perhaps, to gratify a Tennants Son, his own
Chaplain; or oblidge a Recommending Friend, which you have always looked upon,
as not coming in by the Door, but climbing up some other Way. The great Number
of Scandalous and Ignorant Preachers, shows also how remiss they have been, who
were entrusted to Examine their Qualifications; that as to often it happens,
being the Province of Domestic Chaplains, who concert the Matter with the
Youngsters, over a Glass of Wine; and thus he becomes a Minister to have a care
of Souls, who never took any of his own; and he must be entrusted with
Spiritual Affairs, when you would not trust with the oversight of your
Temporal.

These, and many other, though not chargeable upon all of the Church, yet are
too well known to be Spots in the Church, and stand in need of Reformation. Can
you then believe, either the Flatteries or Reproaches of such a Generation of
men, who so tenaciously adhere to these things, which they confess to be no
where commanded, and yet persecute others with the utmost Severity for their
Noncompliance?

And have you forgot, how at the same time, when the Flood of Persecution
overflowed you, a Deluge of Impiety overflowed the Nation, and few, or very
faint endeavors used by the Church, to oppose the same? No, Majus Opus
Morebant, they had a greater Work to do; they were so taken up in Persecuting
those of tender Consciences, that they had no leisure to look after them, who
made Shipwreck of good Consciences: They were so busy to disperse the Meetings
of those who seriously sought God, that they could not Animadvert to those that
Blasphemed the Name of God; They were so taken up in searching for
Conventicles, that they could not punish the Revels, in Taverns and
Bawdy-Houses: They were so eager to hinder us from Worshipping God on the
Sabbath, that they could not look after those, who did shamefully Profane that
day: They were so zealously employed in forcing Obedience to the Doctrines
Commandments, and Traditions of men, that they had no leisure to press
Obedience to the Commands of God: And yet these Men, at this time, would have
themselves looked upon, as the only Champions of Religion: But, O my Soul! Come
not thou into these their Secrets; unto their Assembly be not thou United:
Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce; and their Wrath, for it was Cruel.

Do you think their present struggling for preserving Penal Laws, under pretense
of Religion, can be sincere, when you consider the Conversation of many of
them? Do you think their pretended Tenderness is sincere, who refuse to Read
the King's Declaration for Liberty to you; but greedily swallowed down the
Presentment of Grand Juries against you? Do you think that they will consent to
Abrogate the Penal Laws against you, which they have formerly said, were too
easy and gentle for you? Upon what G^ound are you now induced to believe them,
who have formerly entertained such Observations of them, viz. That such as had
most Zeal for the Ceremonies, had least for the Substance? Those who were most
Zealous for Observation of Holy Days, least careful of keeping the Sabbath:
Those who were most for Excommunicating Conscientious Dissenters, were most for
Embracing Unconscientious Livers: Those who were eagrest to deliver others up
to Satan, were the most usual Invokers of his Name. In a word, Those who were
most for observing the Commands of Men, were least for observing the Commands
of God: Those who were the most Profane, were the most eager for putting the
Penal Laws in Execution; insomuch, that it can be Instanced when, and where
those Instruments of the Churches Fury, being in search for Dissenters; and
Apprehending others by Mistake, as soon as they heard them swear, dismissed
them, with the Character of an Honest Man, and no Phanatick; as if such
Practices had been the Shibboleth of the Sons of the Church: Then as you regard
your Religion, and would preserve the Credit of the Protestant Name, so much
aspersed by the Practice of such; say not a Confederacy to whom such say a
Confederacy; and join not with the People of those Abominations, to keep up
those Wicked Laws: But listen to the Voice of God's Dispensations, which call
upon you aloud to join Heartily with those that are resolved to acquit
themselves, and the Land, of this GVILT; lest you be Partakers of these Sins,
and of the Plagues justly due for the same. Neglect not this favorable
Providence which God has put in your Hands, of ridding your selves from this
Slavery; for a long Practice of such Courses Unrepented of, must needs
Accelerate Divine Vengeance.

The Terms upon which you may be delivered from the Fury of those Men, are very
easy, being only a willingness to shake off your Bonds; and that others may
have a share in the same Liberty with your selves, which you cannot in
Conscience, honor; nor Gratitude, deny; it being Consonant to the Rule of your
Great Master, to Do as you would be done by; and due in Honor and Thankfulness
to His Majesty, who so unexpectedly has delivered you, who were Represented to
Him as His greatest Enemies, out of the Mouth of the Lion, and out of the Paw
of the Bear.

Ay but say you, The Church Vpbraids us with concurring to procure a Liberty to
Idolaters, who as soon as they find themselves in a Capacity, will Ruin us?

Answ. 1. Of all People in the World, it becomes the Church of England least to
make such Reflections, whose Votes brought the Popish Lord into the House of
Peers, to Answer a Turn, which now is made the great Danger they so labor to
possess the Nation with the fear of, if the Parliamentary Test be taken off:
And is it not at reasonable for us to conclude, that the Popish Lords, will be
True to their Interest now, as they supposed they would be then, and
consequently Adhere to such Laws as shall be made to Secure themselves and
others against the Violences of an Vngratefnl Church, who after they had done
her such Service, threw them out again by their Act of Uniformity.

2. Have they not many times pronounced it from their Pulpits, That they would
rather join with the Papists, than the Presbyterians? And though there is not
the least Inclinations in either of these to join with the other, except in
what concerns their common Safety; how can they for shame, who have used such
Expressions, Upbraid us with it?

3. Whence comes this so sudden and vehement Zeal in the Church of England,
against the Church of Rome, whose Symphony in Rituals, and Exterior Form of
Worship, was made use of by Secretary Waslingham, to prevent Queen Elizabeth's
Excommunication by the Pope; and whose advances thither ward, have been
observable this many years, (though now their Irreconcilable Interest makes
them Halt and Clamor,) as long since observed by Dr. Du Moulin.

4. How can they look upon the Ordination of that Church, which they esteem
Idolatrous, as Valid, and yet disapprove of Presbyterian and others Ordination?
And in so doing (though they charge others hotly as Schismatics) make
themselves such from all the Reformed Churches.

6. Why did they not put the Laws in Execution against them, when it was in
their power? Have they not thereby, according to their own Principles incurred,
at least the Guilt of Idolatry? How many Presentiments of their Grand Juries and
Orders from their Bishops, to put the Laws in Execution against them, can they
produce? Or when did they complain, that the Laws were too Gentle and Easy for
them, as they have done against us?

6. Why did they Persecute us with more Rigor, and permit such whom they
accounted Idolators, and now by continuing those Penal Laws and Tests, put us
under a necessity to join with them to secure our own and their Liberty; and at
the same time Reproach us for it, though they pretend now to be for Moderation?

7. Where do they find it Prescribed by Christ or the Apostles, to Punish any
of a different Religion, as such? Did ever our Savior or his Apostles require
the help of Magistrates, to make Penal and Sanguinary Laws, to force People to
the Communion of the Church? Or, did they leave any Injunction to do so, when
the Magistrate should become Christian? Was not their way of making Proselytes,
by Preaching, and not Prisoning; Healing, and not Wounding; Curing, and not
Killing; Reasoning, not Ruining; Argument, and not Torment; his Command was, To
take up the Cross and follow him; but not to lay it upon others backs that
would not stoop thereunto; it is our Duty to keep our selves from Idols, though
we are not to fall foul upon Idolators. The Apostle declares, that the Weapons
of our Warfare are not Carnal; but I an sure Dissenters have found the Churches
Weapons such.

8. Where do they find that ever Christ or his Apostles made use of such
Instruments to press People to their Communion, as they have done? I do not
remember any mention of Proctors, Apparitors, and Informers; nor of Booted
Apostles, Armed with Weapons of Cruelty, as some of their Brethren of the
Clergy were; and who obtained from the Magistrates, as Saul did from the
Sanhedrim, Authority to hale Men, Women and Children to Prison, that would not
conform to their Church, which had no other effect, but to strengthen the
People in their Dissent, who Argued thus: Can that be the Church of Christ,
which acts so unlike Him; He commanded us to Love, Forbear, and Forgive one
another; and said, By this shall men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye Love
one another; and behold they Persecute to Banishment, Confiscation of Goods,
and Death it self, for Nonconformity, to such things as they themselves grant
he never commanded. Can these be the Successors of the Apostles, who declared
the Weapons of their Warfare not to be Carnal? And lo, they came against us, as
against Thieves, with Swords and Staves. Can these be Christians, who find our
peaceable Assembling of our selves, for Worshipping of God, to be Riots, and yet
use no censure against those that are really such? Can that be the Church of
Christ, which makes use of such Antichristian Instruments, as Perjured
Informers, Debauched, Swearing Proctors and Apparitors? Surely, if we may guess
at their Design by their Practices, they have a mind to drive us to Hell, not
to Heaven; for we cannot believe such men will lead us in a better way, than
they walk in themselves. Thus do men discover their Nakedness, when possesled
with that furious Spirit of Persecuton, which drives them headlong into such
absurd Practices.

As for the other part of the Objection, That when the Romanists find
themselves in a Capacity, they will Ruin us.

Answ. 1. There is no probability that ever they should equal us for number, or
in that respect, be any ways capable of working our Ruin; the very attempting
whereof, by Violence, will Infallibly issue in their own.

2. It is as improbable, that ever they should be able to do the same by Law,
except the present Penal Laws remain in force, and then we know who have been
their Tools hitherto; even the present Struglers for the continuance of these
Laws; and are as likely to be their Tools in time to come, to work our Ruin.

3. We have his Majesty's Wisdom, and that of a Parliament to rely on, for
finding out expedients to secure us; and why the breach of such Laws, as shall
be made for Establishing Liberty of Conscience, may not be attended with, as
dangerous, or more fatal Consequences to the Romanists, as acting contrary to
the present Laws, no man can Divine; and certainly, if you choose such men for
your Representatives, as have any Conscience themselves, they will take care
that it shall not be safe (if possible) for any party afterward to invade the
Liberty of Conscience to be Established.

For it is not to be supposed, as some maliciously suggest by impertinent
Queries, viz. That such Laws as shall be made for securing Liberty of
Conscience, will be without Penalties, which would indeed make them not able to
answer the End: But the Wisdom of the Nation is to be trusted to Annex such
Penalties for enforcing them, that whoever attempts to violate the same, though
it were even by Propositions in either House of Parliament, may thereby be
Ruined: Which does sufficiently answer the great Objection, That if Penal Laws
and Tests were removed, the Papists would be under no Awe to restrain them from
such Methods, as they think best, to make theirs the National Religion; for
that they cannot do without invading the Liberty of others; and consequently,
rendering themselves Obnoxious to the Penalties of the Law, and Resentments of
all Protestants, who will be sure to deal with them in that case, as Enemies to
Humane Concord.

But you will say, What avails Laws, so long as His Majesty has a power to
Dispense with them?

Answ. That Argues as much, and more against the present Laws, which are
admired as an Impregnable Bulwark, than against such Laws as shall be made by
his Majesty's Consent, and Act of his own Good Will; which for those very
reasons, will be more binding upon him, than those of another making; and
consequently, not the same reason for dispensing with them; nor will it be so
easy to dispense with the Breach of such Laws, as secure every ones
Birthright, as with the Breach of such as deprive them of the same; which is
the present case; the best at least, if not greatest part of Protestants
concurring with the one; but they will all unanimously oppose the other; but
that which is yet more, there have been proposals Printed with Allowance, That
His Majesty reserving all the other Rights of His Prerogative Inviolate, may
Renounce the only Right of Dispensing with this Law, or of Pardoning any
Transgressor of it in any case whatsoever. And the same has never been
contradicted by the Court: The Third Letter tending to demonstrate the Security
of this Nation against Persecution, etc.

In the next place Consider, how often you have poured out Prayers and Tears
before God, to grant you a Liberty; and how you will be able to answer to him,
if you do not concur with this Opportunity which he has put in your Hands, of
having the same Established by Law: Do but think, how your Brethren who have
been Exposed to Impoverishment, Imprisonment, Banishment, yea, Death it self,
for want of such a Liberty, would have valued it; yea, at what Rate you your
selves some years ago, would have purchased it, when you could not, without
manifest Hazard to your selves and Ministers, meet together to worship God
according to your Conscience; think on it; how then you used to be interrupted
in your Worship, by Ruffianly Train-bands and others; and how in the midst of
your Prayers, they would pour out their horrid Oaths and Execrations, hale you
to Prison, abuse the Women, vent their Rage against your very Pews, and carry
themselves like so many Savages. Consider how your Houses used to be Rifled,
and your Goods Seized; your Family frightened, and made an Object of Gazing to
all the Neighborhood, upon the Oath of a Perjured beggarly Informer: And how
in an Instant, though in a Flourishing Condition, you were Reduced to Beggary;
having neither a Bed to lie on, nor Bitt to put in your own Mouth, or those of
your Tender Wife and Dear Children, all in Tears about you: And all this for
Nonconformity to such things, as your Persecuters themselves acknowledge to be
indifferent, and which you reckoned absolutely Unlawful: Do but think how some
have been treated on their Deathbed, who could not have the Comfort of
Christian Friends to assist them with their Prayers and Conferences; yea, or to
visit them in a Neighbourly Manner, without having a Conventicle sworn against
them, the Bed in hazard of being pulled from under them; and being disturbed
by the Barbarities of ungodly Men, when they were wrestling with the Pangs of
Death. Yea, the Informing Trade was grown to such a height, that some
Dissenters could not have the Respects paid them, due from their own Children,
when married into other Families, but had Meetings sworn against them; and this
is the Churches Moderation. Can you then be persuaded of the Sincerity of these
men, who have yet given no signs of their Repentance, but rather justify their
Practices? All their Arguments to prove their Moderation, are but such Sophisms
as his, that would undertake to prove there was no such thing as Motion, but
was answered roundly by one in the Company, who rose up and walked before him:
Do but consult your own Senses, and you will be sufficiently able to answer
them, that you know the Instruments of Cruelty are in their Habitations.

In the last place, consider how little Peace you will have to reflect upon it,
if you lose your present Liberty, and be Reduced to the former Miseries, upon
believing the LIES of a Generation; whom you could never hitherto credit; and
for denying a share in the same Liberty to others, so agreeable to the Practice
of other Protestant Countries; and Consonant to the Divine Command, of Doing as
you would be done to.

FINIS.

