A Fannaticks Mite Cast into the Kings Treasury: BEING A SERMON Printed to the
KING, Because not Preached before the KING.

The Second EDITION, Corrected and Amended.

By HENRY ADIS, a Baptized Believer, undergoing the Name of a Free-Willer; and
also most ignomineously by the tongue of Infamy, called a Fannatick, or a mad
man.

Silver and Gold have I none, but such as I have give I Thee, Acts 3. 6.

First Read, then Judge; and Judge nothing before the time, because the Wise
Man says, That to him that Judges a matter before he hears it, it is folly
and shame, Prove. 18. 13.

LONDON, Printed by S. Dover, for the Author, 1660.

DElivered into the KINGS own-Hands by the Author, the 26th. day of Chisleu, in
Scripture so called, Zech. 7. 1. which is the 9th. Month, and therefore
vulgarly called November, 1660.

TO CHARLES the II, OF England, Scotland, France and Ireland, KING.
May it please Thee, O King,
I Am come now to present Thee with that MITE, the Composing of which I have
been very much pressed to in spirit, ever since Thou wast brought again into
this Land of Thy Nativity, with that great Solemnity and Triumph; the noise of
which has rejoiced the hearts of forregn Princes, daunted the spirits of thy
Domestic Enemies, made thy Friends merry, and the rude multitude mad, even to
the sadning the hearts of the truly virtuous (and as I judge) not because thou
art restored again, for the merely Rational may plainly behold in it an high
Act of Divine Providence: But the Moon-sick madness of the multitude, yet
unrepented of, together with the revived and daily continued Acts of
abomination in Stage Plays, May-games, and Pastimes, with the many bitter and
most horrid Oaths and Execrations, uttered almost in every corner, by
Nine-Pinn, Nine-Hole, and PigeonHole-Players, and to the poisoning the youth of
our Age, in that multitude of dammy and debauched Bawdy-houses, even the foul
and detestible shame of a Christian Kingdom; is that they fear is gathering
into a black thick Cloud over the Land, and in special over rude, revelling,
ranting London; out of which it is to be feared ( unless Nineve^s Repentance
intervene) will be poured out one or more of those three heavy Judgments of
God, Plague, Sword, or Famine.

Therefore, O King, I have brought Thee an Antidote, both for Thee and Thine,
the which happily may prove bitter to the taste, and will hardly go down; yet let
me assure thee upon the word of an honest man, there is nothing hurtful in it,
there is not so much as an unwholesome Bud, nor a stinking Weed, but all
precious Flowers and wholesome Herbs, newly gathered out of the Garden of God by
a faithful Hand, and tempered together by a sincere heart; and is a Potion of
that rare Virtue, that if it be willingly taken and well digested, it will take
down the Tinpany of Pride, and utterly dry up the Dropsicall humors of all
Abomnations; it will perfectly recover out of the Consumption of Virtues, and
fortify the heart against all vice whatsoever; it will strengthen the stomach,
both to receive and retain wholesome and sound Doctrine, and perfectly purge out
the Iniquity of all your Holy Things; it will purge the Brain from all
fansical, formal frenzy, and cause it only to study the Great Things of Gods
Law; it will perfectly purge out Melancholy, and generate Joy unspeakable, and
full of glory; it will dry up the overflowing Issues of Sin, and nourish up a
Soul unto Eternal Life; it will Operate upon the inward Man so, as that there
will be a sudden change in the outward; it will make the proud person, Humble;
the Lofty, Lowly; the Careless Careful; the Rich in this World, Rich in Good
Works; the Spotted and painted face, truly panitent: To be short, it will
operate upon the Luxurious, Lascivious and Licentious; and indeed upon all, so
as that it will take down the Inordinate beat of Lust, and make such a sweet
Composure, as that it will set Love, Joy, Fear, Zeal, Pity, and Piety upon
their right Objects; it will perfectly purge out all Envy and Malice,
Bloodthirstiness, Hatred, with all uncharitableness, and Create in the room
thereof, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, with Meekness
and Temperance; it will operate upon all Complexions and Sexes, and upon all
Ranks and Subordinations of men of all ages; and as I said before, if willingly
Received and well Digested, it will make the PRINCE Pitiful, Just and Pious,
and the SUBJECT Loving, Faithful and Loyal; it will make Great persons Noble,
with that true Berean Nobility, and join Goodness to their Greatness, (a Rarity
indeed) it will make the middle sort of men Moderate, and cause them to use the
World as if they used it not; yea, it will make the very Beggars of the Blood
Royal of Heaven, and Children of God, yea Kings and Priests to God, and to
Christ; it will make the Sluggish and Slothful, watchfully Vigilant, and the
Vicious, truly Virtuous; it will make the Child Dutiful, and the Parents
Indulgent, the Servant Painful, and the Master Pitiful; it will keep the
Virgin Chaste, and breed Loyalty in the Married; it will make Youth Sage and
Grave, and gray Hairs truly Honorable; it will make the Bondman Free, and the
Freeman a Fellow Citizen with the Saints, and of the Household of God; it will
make the Poor man, truly Rich, and the Rich by Poverty of Spirit blessedly
Poor; it will Corroborate the Cow-hearted, and cause the Coward earnestly to
contend for the Faith: In fine, it will so purge out the old Leaven, as that it
will make a man become a new Lump; it will make a mere Natural man, truly
Gracious, and cause him to put off that old man with all his deeds, and put on
that new Man, which after God is created in Righteousness, and true Hulyness:
And thus when old things are passed away, ye may evidently behold all things to
become new; for though a spiritual man be produced, yet he is not like a
Spirit, So as to be invisible, but apparently you may behold his Dialect
changed, and his Aspect altered; for that tongue that in the old man was an
unruly member, and full of deadly Poison, Oaths, Execrations, and debauched
Abominations; is in the new Man, an Instrument to set forth the Praise of God,
and to tell what God has done for his Soul, to talk of the Majesty of Christ's
Kingdom, and to declare his Power.

The Eye that was never better satisfied then when it was beholding vanity, is
now looking within the vail, where the Forerunner. is entered, it is now
beholding the goodness of the Lord, and enquiring in his Temple, and diligently
seeking after that one thing necessary, that once Mary chose.

The feet which before were swiftly running to shed blood, are now in Zions
Paths, readily running the way of Gods Commandments.

The hands which before were other ways employed, are now handling of the Word
of Life, which their Eyes have seen, and their ears have heard, the which their
Tongues also are now ready to declare; that so others may partake of that
Fellowship, which they have with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.

To conclude, It is an Antidote of such a transcendent virtue, that being
rightly applied, according to the ensueing Direction, it will translate a
Creature out of the kingdom of darkeness, into the kingdom of Gods dear Son;
and also cause him there with Enoch and Noah, to walk with God.

O King, Silver and Gold have I none, but such as I have give I thee; I give it
thee freely, dispose of it at thy pleasure, for freely through mercy I received
it, it cost me nothing that was worth the keeping, I parted not with so much as
one Mite for it, but that which for some time was my daily insupportable
burden, which at length grew so ponderous, that it weighed me down, even to
the very brink of Hell, the Horror whereof, Darius-like, caused me to forsake
my meat, and also my sleep to pass from me, it being a Mountainous confused
Lump of Iniquities, Transgressions and Sins, the fruits of my labors from my
Cradle some forty years in the Devils slavery, in which I was led captive by
him at his will; the parting with which was my great gain, not only by
lightning my burden, but by an enlightening the eyes of my understanding, to
the beholding and laying hold on him who is invisible. And thus O King, through
Grace I became a Fannatick, or a mad man, as some call me.

And now let me beg thee, O King; First, Neither to slight the Gift for the
meanness of the Giver, nor the Potion, because not compounded by the direction
of a College of Physicians, that have read many Authors; but the rather esteem
it, because it is an experienced Receipt, and because as the Physicians use to
say, Probatum est, is engraven upon it.

And secondly, let me beg thee, O King, to make use of it thy self; for, sure I
am, thou have need of such an Antidote; the whcih if thou do, I am confident
I need not then beg a third Boon of thee, to recommend it to thy great Family,
viz. to those that are under thy charge; for that is one part of the excellent
virtue that Souls are made partakers of, that well digest it, viz. that when
they are Converted, they will be provoked then, to strengthen their Brethren.

And now, O King, I shall at present cease to ask more at thy Throne, but shall
apply my self to the Throne of Grace, and there beg the Lord, to give thee as
much true joy in Reading, as he in mercy gave me in writing it, and that as he
has begun this good Work, to put this Antidote into thy hand, so he would
perfect the same, that he would sweeten it to thy taste, and help thy
disgestion; and seeing he has declared himself to be such an one that waits
upon Souls, that he might be gracious unto them, that he would wait upon thee
with the sweet incomings of his own Spirit; and in special, whilst thou art
taking this Potion, that he would visit thee with his loving kindness, So, as
that it may effectually operate upon thee, to the bringing forth the fruits
thereof in thy Life and Conversation, to the Honor and Glory of him, who has
already done such great Things for thee; into whose Care, Direction and
Protection, he shall now commend thee, who is, and by his Assistance shall ever
be,

Thy Loyal Subject to Pray, but neither to Swear, nor Fight for thee, yet
Faithfully to Obey thee in all things, that God requires in his Scriptures of
Truth; who never did fight against any of thy Predecessors, nor never shall
resolve to fight against Thee, nor any of Thy Successors, HENRY ADIS.

An After-Writing TO THE KING.
MArvel not, O King, at my single-hearted Conclusion, in that I said, I shall
neither Swear nor Fight for Thee, neither conclude me peremptorily Peevish, nor
factiously Rebellious, because I am so plain: But by the way know, That in
Conclusion, Thou will find him to be Thy truest Friend, that deals plainliest
with Thee, for one Dram of down right honesty, is of more true worth, than a
whole Pound of fawning flattery; for mine own part, although I am by Trade an
Upholdster, yet know, O King, I come not to sow Pillows under thy Elbows, I
fear thou have Artificial Workmen at that work already, and too many too, for
thy future good; but what I have received of the Lord, in the singleness of my
heart, and in plainess of speech, I declare unto Thee, Take it as Thou will,
and do with me for it as Thou please, the meaning of it I yet understand uot,
but sure I am, I have more than a common impulse to the Work, however it will
fare with me I matter not, I both Hope and Pray it may prove of good use to
Thee: Therefore I shall beg Thee in Gods fear, to consider seriously what Thou
do, when Thou shall force men to Swear; for he that will Fight for Thee, and
he that will Swear for Thee, being thereto constrained, will be as ready, if it
stand with his own interest, both to Swear and Fight against Thee; for men
generally make little Conscience of keeping constrained Vows.

O King, Thou have been Tutored by Experience, the best Master; and I need not
tell Thee, that Coustraint and Restraint are two Exstreams, and therefore
dangerous to deal withal.

Voluntarily some there are, but others being thereto forced, have already to
their hearts trouble Sworn against Thee: And now, if thou shall again compel
them to Swear for thee, what is it less than to ravish their Consciences, and
to force them most abominably to forswear themselves? A ready way to pull down
Gods Judgments upon the Nation; for so says the Prophet, Jer. 23. 10. For
because of Swearing the Land mourns: So also says another Prophet, Hos. 10.
4. They have spoken Words, Swearing falsely, in making a Covenant: Thus
Judgment springs up as Hemlock in the furrows of the Field.

And lest I be found guilty of such a heinous sin, I shall resolve to trust a
man upon his bare word, rather than force him to Swear; for he that for his own
Benefit will not regard the keeping his word passed before God to Man, will for
his own advantage be as careless both of God and Man, in slighting his
unwilling Vow.

Therefore in this, O King, be persuaded to leave men to their Liberties; and
know, that Englands Subjects will be sooner won by their Kings Kindness, than
brought under by his cruelty: It is the Love of Christ that constrains his; So
let thy Lenity allure thine.

And be entreated to shake off all slavish carnal fear, and cast thy care and
burden upon him, who has hitherto taken such care for thee, Render thou but
to him according to his Benefits bestowed upon thee, and confident I am, that
the Keeper of Israel, who neither slumbreth nor sleeps, will watch thy
Subjects hearts, So, as that they shall be kept close to thee; for when a man's
ways please the Lord, he will make his Enemies to at Peace with him. Prove. 16.
7.

And think not to make thy self strong, by forcing thy Subjects to forswear
themseves, in sweariug for thee, l^st he that Swore by himself, when he could
(...) by no Greater, stretch out his Sin-revenging hand against thee; but
rather say to thy Subjects, as the Lord Christ says to his, Mat. 5. 34. Swear
not at all: And I being one of his Subjects, this is one Reason, O King, why I
told thee in plainness of speech, that I cannot Swear for thee; and because he
farther requires me, thar I should love my Enemies, and do good to them that
hate me, and pray for them that daspitefully use me, Mat. 5. 44. This is
another Reason, O King, why I cannot Fight for thee: And I being a Branch in
that Vine, of which the Root and Offspring of David is the Root, and from whom
only I daily through mercy receive sap, vigor and fresh supplies of Grace,
for the strengthening and supporting of my inward man, dare not have so much as
a thought to Swear thee to be Supreme of that Body of which Christ is the Head;
and because the Lord by his Prophet, Jer. 18. 9. says thus, At what instant I
shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to Build and to
Plant it; if it do evil in my sight, so that it obey not my voice, then will I
repent of the good wherewith I said I would Benefit it: This is also another
Reason, O King, why I cannot Swear nor Fight for thee; for if thy Actings shall
nor answer Gods End (if his Word be true) thou must then expect a removal, and
a pulling down; and if I shall Swear, or Fight, to support thee, when by thy
Actings thou shall cause God to pull thee down; What is it less than for me to
he found fighti^g against God? And besides, A Servant of the Lord must not
strive, but be gentle to all, 2 Timothy 2. 24.

And by the way know, That these Resolves were not intended to thy self only,
but also to those that were in Power after thy Father, and before thee, were
these things manifested; as by my Declaration in the End of this Book, is
evident.

Therefore, O King, if thou shall seem to Counter-mand my Loyalty to him, who
bought me at so dear a price, as the shedding of his own precious Blood, Acts
20. 28. I shall desire thee to Judge between me and my God, and shall ask thee
in the words of Peter and John, Acts 4. 19. Whether it be right in the sight of
God, to hearken unto thee, more than unto my God? I shall desire thy self to be
Judge.

And thus, O King, having (I hope) given thee a Rational account, of my
downright and single-hearted Conclusion of my Epistle to thee Dedicated; I
shall now tell thee in the faithfulness of my Soul, that by the Law of the same
Lawgiver, I am bound not only to pray for thee, 1 Timothy 2. 2. but also to obey
thee in all Civil things, that are agreeable to the Mind of God, revealed in
his Scriptures of Truth; and also to render Tribute, Custom, Fear and Honor,
both to thee, as God has set thee over us, and to all others sent by thee,
Romans 13. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Whose Obedience upon the word of a Christian, without
(...) or Fighting, either for or against thee (God assisting) he shall
faithfully continue; who resolves (unless for his i^nocent Judgment, thou
either Deprive him of Life, or Banish him this Land of his Nativity) to remain
till Death,

Thy Loyal Subject, HENRY ADIS.

A WORD to the READER.
READER,
THE Common Proverb goes, That every Little makes a Mickle; and the Kings
TREASURIES being empty, whilst the Parliament and City are throwing in their
Rich Gifts, I (with the Poor Widow in the Gospel, have cast in my MITE, let the
King take it how he pleases, sure I am, he will take it amiss, if he take it
not well; for God is my Witness, I intended it for good, and so it will Prove,
if rightly improved; and is of that worth, that it may be said of it, as our
Savior said of the Widows Mite, It will Prove worth all; not for the Quantity,
but for the Quality of it; not for the Beauty, but for the Blessedness; not for
the Eloquence, but for the Excellency of it; theirs being Material, but this
Supernatural; theirs Perishing, but this Permanent; theirs only to Feed,
Cloth and Pamper the Body, but this to Nourish, Strengthen, and to Support the
Soul.

Reader, I was neither bred a Scholar nor a Courtier; therefore thou must
expect in it neither Complement nor Curiosity; neither was I ever out of this
Land of my Nativity; therefore look not for any foreign Rarities, but such
only as are to be found in the Garden of God.

It is a Homespun Piece, wherein there is little Eloquence, and less Flattery,
but store of down right honesty, with abundance of Fidelity; a Ponderous
weight, of the truest Love, wrapped up in an homely Garment of the best Loyalty.

To be short, it is that which I know, must undergo many Censures (if not my
self severely Sentenced for it) both by the Critical Churchman, and the Carnal
Churchmember, the Flattering Courtier, and the Flouting Citizen, the Learned
Lawyer, and the Illiterate Rustic; but let them say what they will, and do
with It and Me what they please, I much matter it not; for in my Composing of
it, I had a good Conscience; which, sure I am, in the midst of the worst of
Miseries, will be to me a Continual-Feast; for I look upon it, to be a part of
my Generation work, to speak a word in season, to the Cherishing of Virtue, and
the bearing my Testimony against Vice, as far as the Lord has enabled me to
the beating it down; and so, to be guilty of the blood of none, but to have a
Conscience always void of offense, both toward God, and toward Man, and to
have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but to Reprove them.

Reader, In fine, it is a part of my Talent, the which I dare not hide in a
Napkin; and seeing it cannot be permitted to be employed where it ought, at
mine own peril I dare not but Minister it where I may: Therefore take and read
it, after which, if thou find Benefit by it, bless God for it, and crave his
assistance, that thou may make a right use of it; for it is his, and mine no
otherwise, than from him, through Mercy I have received it.

Neither do I so highly praise it, for any thing that I have infused into it;
but for what through mercy I have been made partaker of by it; by Divine
assistance, I have Composed it, and the Shearcher of all hearts knows, it is
neither Pay, nor Praise I aim at, for my reward is with him: But if the Glory
of God, the Well- being of his People, the Good of the King, or the Benefit but
of one Soul be thereby produced, he has his End; who desires according to the
Ability received, to remain,

Thy Faithful Friend in the Truths of Jesus, HENRY ADIS.

An After-Word to the READER.
READER,
I Knowing the temper of the spirits of the generality of the Sons and
Daughters of men of this Nation, in this juncture of time, cannot but expect
that thou should be something unsatisfied with my plainness of speech; and my
Terms of Thy, Thee, Thou, and O King, in my Discourse to the King; and also, in
that I afford him not those Titles that some men are pleased to put upon him,
and therein I am persuaded thou will be ready to judge me, as one that am
either peremptorily slighting, or peevishly undervaluing the King, because I do
not say and do, to and for him, as thou happily can and do.

Or at the best, for the plainness of my speech, thou will conclude me to be
one of those New-lighted men of our age; commonly distinguished by the name of
Quakers, because that in their Speakings and Writings, they generally use the
same Terms; and to say Truth, if they did not speak the Language, and wear the
Clothing of the Sheep of Christ, they could not (Wolf-like) so easily deceive
as generally they do.

Therefore Reader, I do hereby assure thee, that I am not of that Synagogue;
for through mercy I can groundedly, and upon a good account let thee know, that
I walk by the direction of a more surer word of Prophecy, to which I shall
endeavor by the assistance of the Eternal Spirit, to take good heed to; and
from which I shall warrant the soundness and manner of my Speech (though it be
in such plainness and without flattery) to be of God.

And because these Notionists have some of Canaans Language in their mouths; I
shall therefore no more forbear the using of it, than the Apostle Peter did the
Confessing of Christ to be the Son of the living God, Mat. 16. 16. Because the
Devil in so many words acknowledged the same, Mat. 8. 29. Mark 5. 7. Luke 8. 28.

Neither shall I resolve to alter my Habit, because these men being deceived,
run up and down in the sheeps clothing, deceiving; but shall patiently wait
upon God for a Manifestation of them and all others, to be of the Synagogue of
Satan, who say, they are Iewe^, and are not, but do lie.

In the mean while Reader, in Christian love I shall further endeavor thy
satisfaction, and in the singleness of my Soul, I shall let thee know, that I
both do and shall Honor the King, with that honor and respect that the Lord
requires I should; as in this Discourse, compared with my Declaration in the
end of this Book folded, is evident; although as thou happily may Judge in my
so speaking, I rudely behave my self.

Therefore for thy farther satisfaction, know, That as I am a Servant to the
Most High God, and a Member of a Church of Christ; So I look upon it to be my
Duty, to Regulate my Conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and to walk
in the footsteps of the Flock of God gone before; who, though according to the
Requirement of God, they were obedient to Kings, Rulers and Governors, yet
they gave them no other Language than in this my Discourse I give to King
CHARLES; witness that Discourse the Prophet Daniel had wi^h that Head of Gold,
that King of Kings, (...) King of Babylon, Daniel 2. 29. who said, As for thee,
O King, thy thoughts came into thy head; and thou, O King, saw, etc. And in
ver. 31. And thou, O King, art King of Kings. Ver. 37. And thou art this Head
of Gold. Very 38. And in Dan. 4. 22. It is thou, O King, that art grown and
become strong, and thy greatness is grown and reaches unto Heaven, and thy
Dominion unto the ends of the Earth; yet they shall drive thee from men, and
thy dwelling shall be with the Beasts of the Field; and they shall make thee to
eat grass as Oxen; and they shall wet thee with the dew of Heaven; and seven
times shall pass over thee, till thou know that the Most High Rules in the
Kingdom of men, and gives it to whom he will, V. 25. Wherefore; O King, let my
Counsel be acceptable to thee, and break off thy sins by Righteousness, and
thine iniquity by showing Mercy to the Poor, is it may be a lengthning out if
thy Tranquillity.

But lest any man should say, that Nebuchadnezzar was a Heathen; and therefore
the Prophet gave him neither the Titles, nor that due Respect that otherwise he
would have done.

In Answer whereunto, I shall lay before thee the Prophet David, a King in
Israel, and a man after Gods own heart; who, if it had been his due by Gods
Appointment, could as well have become the Ti^le of Sacred, and Most Sacred
Majesty, as any He that I ever read or heard o^, either before or after him, to
this very day; yet we read, that when the Prophet came to him in the case of
Uriah the Hittite, he said no^, May it please your Sa^red Majesty; but Nathan
said unto David, 2 Samuel 12. 7. Thou art the Man. And V. 9. Thou have killed
Uriah the Hittite with the Sword, and taken his Wife to be thy Wife; now
the^fore the Sword shall not depart from thy House.

Neither did ^he Woman of T^koah, in Absoloms case, come with a, May it please
your ^st Sacred Majesty, for we may plainly understand what her Dialect was to
King David, 2 Samuel 14. 5. Even, Help, O King. Then said she, V. 11. I pray
thee, let the King Remember the Lord thy God, that thou would not suffer the
Revenger of blood to destroy. Many more Examples of this kind might be
sufficiently multiplied, if need^ul.

But to come nearer, even to the dispensation we are now under; Peter said unto
the Lord Christ, to Emanuel, even to God with us, Mat. 16. 16. Thou art Christ
the Son of the living God. And the Apostle Paul being a Prisoner, and coming to
make his defense, Acts 26. 2, 3. he said, I think my self happy, King Agrippa,
because I shall Answer for my self before thee, this day; for I know thee to be
expert in all Customs and Questions among the Jews; wherefore I beseech thee
(not your most Sacred Majesty) but I beseech thee to hear me patiently. And in
V. 13. and 14. At midday, O King, I saw a light from Heaven, -- And a voice
speaking unto me; Whereupon, O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the
heavenly voice, V. 19. And in V. 27. King Agrippa, Believe thou the Prophets?
I know thou Beleevest. And Paul said, V. 29. I would to God that not only
thou, but all that hear me this day, were both almost and altogether such an
one as I am, except these Bonds.

Even so shall I say to thee, O Reader, I would to God that as to my Judgment,
thou were even such an one as my self, that so thou might give to Caesar,
only the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods.

And, Reader, consider with thy self, that if the Lord Christ reproved him that
said to him, good Master; saying, Why call thou me good? There is none good
but One, even God, Luke 18. 19. Even so do I say to my self; Why should I dare
to call the greatest of Men, most Sacred? When it is an Attrib^te that properly
and peculiarly belongs to God himself, and was never given to Man by God; and
to me, it seems to be one of those names of Blasphemy upon the seven Heads of
the Beast, Rev. 13. 2. and no better than a flattering Title.

The which with another of the Kings Titles, had I but the privilege of his
Ear but one little pittance of time, I question not, but by Divine assistance,
I should so discover the unlawfulness thereof, as that he would himself refuse
to own them.

And for me to flatter him, or any man else, I dare not for these Reasons:

First, Lest thereby I bring my self and mine, under the Sin-revenging-hand of
God. And, Secondly, Lest I thereby ensnare others.
First, Least I endanger my self and mine; Because, if Jobs words be true, who
says, That he knows not to give flattering Titles; if I so do, my Maker
(says he) would soon take me away, Job 32. 21, 22. And should I be found so
doing, God would no more excuse me, tha^ him; for says the Prophet David, Psa.
12. 3. The Lord will cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks
proud things; and also says that upright man Job, He that speaks flattery to
his Friend, even the eyes of his Children shall fail, Job 19. 5. So that as I
tender the good of my self and mine, I dare not do it. And secondly, I dare not
do it, lest I endanger others; for a man that flattereth his Neighbor,
spreads a Net for his feet, says the wisest of men, Prove* 29. 5. for says
he, A flattering mouth works ruin, Prove. 26. 28.
And this is that which was the destruction of King Herod, Act. 12. 21. for
says the Text, On a set day, Herod arrayed in Royal apparel, sat upon his
Throne and made an Oration unto his Subjects; who upon the hearing thereof,
began to flatter him; for says the Text, The People gave a shout, saying, It
is the voice of a God, and not of a Man; and immediately the Angel of the Lord
smote him, because he gave not God the Glory; and he was eaten of Worms, and
gave up the Ghost: had not his subjects given him that flattering Applause, he
had not robbed God of his Glory, and so the Angel had not smitten him.

So that in this I question not, but I shall evidence my love to the King more,
than they that so flatter him.

Therefore this shall be my Resolution (the Lord assisting me) to continue
treading in the footsteps of the Flock of God gone before, and shall conclude
with my self, and say with that Queen, Hester 4. 16. And if therein I perish, I
perish; for I had rather suffer by man in obedience to my God, than by the
Sin-revenging hand of God, to be cut off in his displeasure.

And thus, Reader, having given thee an account of my manner of Speech to the
King, which is none other than what he Popple of God in former Ages used, both
under the Law, and under this Gospel Dispensation: I shall take my leave, and
desiring the Lord to set it home upon thy heart, and that it may be
satisfactory to thee, that so thou may not have a prejudice in thy spirit
against him, who desires to do nothing, either in word or Action, but what may
tend to the Glory of God, the good of his own Soul, and the enlightening of
those with whom he does Converse; who shall be ready in Christian love, to give
thee a Verbal satisfaction, to any thing that in this Discourse may be thy
dissatisfaction,

And to remain thy Friend therein, to serve thee, HENRY ADIS.

A Fannaticks Mite Cast into the KINGS TREASURY.
2 Chronicles. 32. 25. But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefits
bestowed upon him; but his heart was lifted up: Therefore there was wrath upon
him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.
THESE Words themselves have a Dependancy upon the Story going before, and are
no other but a Declaration, or Manifestation of the Kings unthankfuluess to
God, for his Mercies bestowed, and of the sad Consequences thereof.

But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the Benefits bestowed upon him;
but his heart was lifted up: Therefore there was wrath upon him* and upon Judah
and Jerusalem.

Had this Discourse been spoken as it is now written to thee, O King, many
distinctions might have been made, and several and remarkable Observations
hinted at, which might have been very useful (if diligently minded, and as
effectually put into practice) some of which for brevity sake I shall here
omit, and shall first run over the Story that occasioned the Spirit of God to
lay down these words, and therein briefly hint at some things I shall judge
useful; and then in the strength of the same Spirit, come to the handling of
the wo^ds themselves.

Good Hezekiah after the death of his Father King Ahaz, began his Reign, as we
may read, 2 Chronicles. 28. 27. who had set his Son so (...) a Copy, that in truth
he could not write after it without blotting* And therefore he leaves the steps
of his Father, and walks in the paths of David, and some others of his
Forefathers.

For Ahaz (his Father) Reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem, but he did not that
which was Richt in the sight of the Lord, like David his Father, Chap. 28. 1.
for he walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel (which were the ways of
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin) And also, or over and above
their abominations, he made molten Images to Balaam, v. 2. And burned Incense
in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burned his Children in the fire, after
the manner of the Heathen, v. 3. He Sacrificed also ^ and burned Incense in the
high Places, and under every green Tree, v. 4. For which mis-actings (...), God
delivered him into the hands of the Kings of Syriah^ and into the hands of the
Kings of Israel, who smote him with great slaughter, v. 5. Whence we may note,
That when Kings, Rulers or Governors, Act contrary to the mind of God, God
raises up Adversaries against them, as once he did against Solomon, 1 Kings
11. 14. And as Ahaz continues his mis-actings, so God increases his
Adversaries; for the Edomites also came and smote Judah, and carried away
Captives, v. 17. Yet for all this, Ahaz returned not to bim that smote him;
Therefore the Philistines also had invaded the Cities of the Low-Countreyes,
and had taken several Towns and Villages, and came and dwelt in his Land, verse.
18. Whereupon Ahaz sends out for help to suppress his Enemies, but all in vain,
so long as he continues an Enemy to God by wicked works. For at that time Ahaz
sent to the Kings of Assyria to help him, v. 16. To whom Ahaz gave gifts out of
the Lords House, and out of the Princes Houses; but they helped him not, v. 21.
but distressed him, v. 20. Whence we may further note, That whilst men continue
wicked, their Blessings become Curses, and their hoped for helps, hindrances.

And thus whilst Ahaz is under the sin-revenging hand of God, the saying of the
Prophet Isaiah is in him made good, Isaiah 1. 5. Why should ye be smitten any
more? ye will revolt yet more and more. For with our first Parents in the
Garden, Genesis 3. 8. Ahaz runs surther from his God, and returns not to him
that smote him. And with the fierce dog earnestly snaps at the stone that is
thrown at him, little considering the hand that threw it. And thus whilst men
are quarrelling at second causes, they loose both the Benefit and the Blessing
of Gods chastising hand; And therefore cannot with David (that man after Gods
own heart) say, as once he did, Psalm. 119. 67, 71. It was good for him that he
was afflicted, for before he was afflicted he went astray; but now (says he) I
have kept thy word. Thus whilst David is making a Right improvement of Gods
chastising hand upon him, he is made sensible of Gods faithfulness toward him;
which causes him thankfully to acknowledge the same; and to say, v. 57. I
know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have
afflicted me: He now sees the dealings of God herein toward him to be such, as
that he makes that Sanctified use of it, as once Moses the servant of the Lord
required of Israel, Deuteronomy. 8. 5. Thou shall also consider in thine heart, that
as a Father chasteneth his Son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee. And so
says our Apostle, Heb. 12. 5, etc. -- My son despise not thou the chastening
of the Lord -- For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son
whom he receives.

Men lie under the Chastising hand of God, as Wax and Clay in the heat of the
Sun, whose heat so Mollifieth the Wax, as that it becomes pliable and fit for
the Impression of the Seal; Whilst the Clay (though before soft) yet is thereby
hardened, made stiff, and so brittle, that it will rather break, than in the
least conform to the Seal.

And thus, it fares with King Ahaz, he grows worse and worse; for in the time
of this distress, did he Trespass yet more and more, says the Text, 2 Cor. 28.
verse. 22. For he Sacrificed to the Gods of Damaskus, which smote him; and he
said, Because the Gods of the Kings of Syriah helped them, Therefore will I
Sacrifice to them, that they may help me, verse. 23. Thus whilst men forsake the
true God, they trust on them which by nature are no Gods: And so become as
senseless, and as sottish as they. For they that make them, are like unto them;
And so are all they that put their trust in them, Psalm. 115. 8.

And as if these mis-actings of his were not enough to make him, and his People
sufficiently Miserable; he Crowns, as it were all his former Evlls, with this
tripple Crown of Abominations; First, he cut in pieces the vessels of the Lords
House. Secondly, he shut up the Doors of the Lords House. And Thirdly, he sets
up a false worship in every Corner of Jerusalem, to burn incense unto other
Gods, v. 24, 25.

Thus whilst men relinquish their knowledge of the true God, they are given up
to blindness of Eyes, and hardness of Heart; To commit all Abominations with
greediness; for so says our Apostle, Romans 1. 28, 29. And as they did not like
to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do
those things which were not convenient, being filled with all unrighteousness,
etc. And thus whilst Ahaz is committing sin with greedilness, Ahaz is made
partaker of its wages; for the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. And seeing
Ahaz will thus forget God in his life time, God at length will deprive him of a
possibility of remembering him at all; for in death there is no remembering of
thee; And who shall give thee Thanks in the Pit? Psalm. 6. 5.

Ahaz being thus deprived of life, Hezekiah now comes to succeed his Father in
the Crown and Government: And seeing the several mis-actings of his Father, and
the sad Consequences that attended both him and his People thereupon, is not
willing to heir his Fathers punishments; And therefore wlll not act in his
Fathers sins, but makes an evident Manifestation of his experimental knowledge
of them; and also of his utter Detestation to them; together with a Public
Declaration of the intentions of his heart, for a through Reformation throughout
his whole Realm; for he gathered the Priests and the Levites together into the
Eaststreet, Chap. 29. v. 4. and said, v. 6. Our Fathers have trespassed and
done that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord our God, and have forsaken
him, and have turned away their faces from the Habitation of the Lord, and
turned their backs, v. 7. Also they have shut up the Doors of the Portch, and
put out the Lamps, and have not burnt Incense, nor offered burnt-offerings in
the Holy Place, unto the God of Israel: Wherefore says he, v. 8. The Wrath of
the Lord was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he has delivered them to trouble,
to astonishment, and to hissing, as ye see with your eyes; for says he, v. 9.
Our Fathers have fallen by the Sword, and our Sons and our Daughters, and our
Wives are in Captivity ( for this) And now it is in mine heart to make a
Covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from
us, verse. 10. Therefore he calls upon the Levites and the Priests, to be active
in the Work, and not to be negligent in the places God had set them in, verse
11.

A glorious Reformation is likely to succeed, when a Prince, not out of
Custom, but out of Conscience, shall begin the Work; and the more likely it is
to prosper, when his zeal thereunto shall thus cause him to provoke them, who
indeed should have first stirred him up to the Work.

And in this Reformarion, the first work that he enters upon, is the opening
and Repairing the Door of the Lords House, and to cause the Levites to
sanctify themselves, and to sanctify the House of God, and to carry forth the
filthiness out of the holy Place, v. 3, 4, 5. the direct way to a happy
Reformation, and as ready a way to have with God a Reconciliation; for if the
iniquity of our holy things be not done away, what will it avail us, though we
thrive never so well in our secular affairs? for says our Savior, Mat. 16.
26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and loose his
own Soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?

In this Reformation, Hezekiah's speed equals his willingness; and like a pair
of Heisers accustomed to the yoke, they draw both together; for as it was his
first work, to have respect to the cleansing of his holy things; so it was his
care to do it in the first year of his Reign; and not late in the year, but in
the first month of that first year; for so says the Text, 2 Chronicles. 29. 3. He
in the first year of his Reign, in the first month, opened the Doors, etc.

And this is that which I am persuaded is well pleasing to God, when men sleep
not upon good Resolutions, but puts them into present and effectual practice;
for no man can call to morrow his: Therefore the Counsel of the Spirit of God
is good, which he has given by the Wise Man, Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy
hand finds to do, do it which thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go.

Hezekiah began to Reign when he was five and twenty years old, Cha. 29. 1. And
he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that
David his Father had dove, v. 2. And as by Faith Moses, when he came to years,
refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, choosing rather to suffer
Afflictions with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season; esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt ( because) he had respect to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 24. So
Hezekiah being five and twenty years old when he began to Reign, refused to
walk in the ways of sin, as Ahaz his Father had done, but begins with
discretion to consider what was well-pleasing to God; and therefore he learns
to write by a perfect Copy, he takes a Man after Gods own heart to be his
Pattern, though they that hated him without a cause, were more than the hairs
of his head, though his enemies were mighty, Psalm. 69. 4. though he became a
Proverb to many, verse 11. and though they that sat in the gates spoke against
him; and though he became a Song to the Drunkards, ver. 12. yet these and such
reproaches as these, shall not frighten him, but Hezekiah will do according to
all that David his Father had done; David we see was no Allower of Drunkenness;
for the Drnnkards made Songs of him, as they do now in this our days upon
those that desire to walk in the integrity of their hearts before the Lord, as
David did; David opened not a Door to any manner of licenciousness; neither
does Hezekiah, when he comes to Reign, go to the house of laughter, but to the
house of God; he runs not to Hawkings, nor Huntings, Revellings, nor Dancings,
Riotings nor Banquetings, he sets not up, nor tollerates Stage Plays,
May-games, nor Pastimes; but comes to a serious consideration what the mind of
God was, that so he might pleas^ him, to the Eternal well-being, both of
himself and those that were under his charge; therefere with speed he opens the
Doors of the Lords House, and begins to put away the iniquity of his holy
things.

Now know, O King, that Hezekiah was a good man, and went on in his Reformation
in Gods way; let me therefore beg of thee, as thou tenderest thy Souls good to
Eternity, take him for thy Pattern, begin thy Reign as he did his, look into
thy holy things, see what there is amiss there, consider the Common Prayer,
whence it came and whither it tends, weigh it with its appurtenances in the
Balance of the Sanctuary, try it by the Touchstone of Gods Word, see whether
it b^ not too light, of what God would have it to be; see also whether the
Inventions of Men have not made it too heavy, thou can not be too exact
therein; for he that does in his service to God, more than what God Commands,
does too much, and is no better than a Will-worshipper; he that does less than
God Commands him, does too little.

Consider also, which is the Door of Gods House, and open that, for Christ
himself says, That many false Prophets will arise, and shall deceive many; and
therefore he requires his Disciples, not to go out to them, Mat. 24. 24, 26.
Therefore the opening of any Door will not serve the turn; Hezekiah opened the
Door of the Lords House: Therefore for the Lords sake Consider what thou do,
take that Counsel from the Spirit of the Lord, which is Recorded in 1 These. 5.
21, 22. Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, and abstain from
all appearance of evil.

Take notice of the Dispensation thou art under, and do thy Generation work in
Gods way; the Church of Christ under the Gospel, is not National, but
Congregational; Hezekiah was of the Race of the Jews, and a King of Judah; it
was Hezekiahs work to open the Doors of the Material Temple, situate in
Jerusalem, where God had under that dispensation promised his presence, 1 Kings
9. 3. So that if Hezekiah had opened any other Door, he had been a sinner as
well as his Father Ahaz, who opened another, when he shut those Material Doors,
where the Jews had a Right to Worship, as they were in a National
Church Communion, upon the due administration of that fleshly Ordinance of
Circumcision, peremtorily upon the eight day, Genesis 17. 12. Under which he that
neglected to Circumcise his Male Infant upon the eighth day, did it too late,
and after Gods time, and that Infant was to be cut off from the People, V. 14.
and he that did it before the eighth day, did it too soon, and before Gods
time, and so became a transgressor. We usually say in our common Proverb, that
it is dangerous jesting with ^ged tools; so may I safely say, it is a dangerous
thing to cross the design of God; it is a desperate design to undertake to open
that which God has shut, or to shut that which God has opened.

God has shut the Doors of a National Church, then let men fear to open it;
and God has opened the Door of a Congregational Church, let Souls tremble at
the thought of shutting it; for so says the Lord Christ, John 4. 21, 22, 23.
Believe me (says he) the hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain,
nor yet in Jerusalem Worship the Father; ye Worship ye know not what: We know
what we Worship, for Salvation is of the Jews; but the hour comes, and now
is, when the true Worshippers shall Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth:
And says Peter, Now I perceive of a truth, that God is no Respecter of
persons, but in every Nation he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is
accepted of him, Acts 10. 34, 35. So that Churchfellowship and Sonship with
God, is entailed upon persons under the Gospel, not upon the account of the
bare Subjection to the Ordinances, as it was under the Law, but upon the
account of their Faith; for says the Apostle, Ye (Members of the Church of
Galatia) are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jefus (which Faith
working by love, has evidenced it self to be true, by working you to obedience
to Gods Ordinances) for so many of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have
put on Christ.

And as no uncircumcised person was to ^at of the Passover under the Law,
Exodus 12. 48. So of Christ our Passover, who is Sacrificed for us under this
Gospel Dispensation, 1 Corinthians. 5. 7. is no unbeliever to have Communion, 2
Corinthians 6. 14. to 17. And as under the Law it was charged upon the Jews as
a sin to bring the Uncircumcised into the material* Temple, Ezekiel. 44. 7, 9.
because Circumcision was the inducting Ordinance of Cod under that
dispensation: So also under a Gospel Dispensation, we dare not administer that
Inducting Ordinance of Baptism, without Faith in God be firct begotten.

So that if persons shall require from us the Administration of that Ordinance,
we shall no more dare to do it than Philip, who first would have an account of
the Eunuch's faith, before he Baptized him; for so says the Text, Acts 8. 37.
If thou Believe with all thy heart, thou may; who immediately made a
Confession of his Faith; and this is according to the Commission of Christ,
Mark 16. verse. 15. which says not, that he that is Baptized, but he that
Believes and is Baptized shall be saved; So that it is a dangerous thing to
make the strait Gate that leads to life, wider than God has made it.

Therefore know O* King, that thou art under that dispensation, in which the Ax
is laid to the root of the Tree, and wherein every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, is to be hewn down and cast into the fire, Mat. 3. 10. Under which
persous are forbidden to plead their Birth-Priviledges, V. 9. as that they are
Children of Believing Parents, or Sons and Daughters to Abraham; but under that
dispensation by which they are all the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus
(as aforesaid) who have actually manifested their faith by their obedience, in
their putting on of Christ by Baptism, as that Church did, Gal. 3. 26, 27. Such
as are chosen out of the world, John 15. 19. John 17. 6, 14. Separating
themselves according to the requirements of God, from false and Babylonish
worship, Revel. 18. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 17. Being begotten to the faith, Philemon
10. 1 Timothy 1. 2. 2 Timothy 1. 2. Titus 1. 4. By the Preaching of the Word, James
1. 18. 1 Cor. 4. 15. And quickened by the Spirit, John 6. 63. Romans 8. 11. Ephesians.
2. 1, 5. Col. 2. 13. Being born again, 1 John 4. 7. 1 John 5. 1. 1 John 3. 9.
Not of corruptible seed, but of incorrup^ible, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Not of flesh nor
blood, nor after the will of man, but of God, John 1. 13. Being born of water
and the Spirit; without which, if we may believe our blessed Savior himself,
John 3. 5. no man can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; the necessity whereof
is fully laid down by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3. 20. who speaking of the
preservation that Noah had by the Ark from that deluge of water, Genesis 7. 17.
The like figure whereunto even Baptism (says he) does now (under this
Gospel Dispensation) save us; not by washing away of the filth of the flesh,
but the answering a good Conscience toward God by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ; as if the Apostle should have said, it is not the washing the body in
Water, that is of this saving nature, but it is the going into the Water in a
Conscionable obedienee to the Command of God, to have our sins mystically
washed away by Faith in the blood of Christ; and so also says the Apostle,
Acts 22. 16. And now why tarriest thou, arise and be Baptized, and wash away
thy sins, calling on the Name of the Lord* and the same Apostle writing to
Titus, makes a clear discovery by what means God on their parts saved them,
Titus. 3. 5. Who has (...) us (says he) not by deeds of Righteousness that we
have done, but by the washing of Regeneration, or (as the old Translation
renders it) by the fountain of the new birth, and renewing of the Holy Ghost;
by Waterwork, and Spirit-work; the Spirit operating upon, and working up a Soul
conscionably to obey God in that holy (though amongst men that much despised)
Ordinance of Water Baptism.

And thus the Apostle tells us by what means Christ has clenfed his Church;
viz. with the washing of water, by (or according) to the Word, Ephesians. 5. 26. And
thus some in the Church of the Corinthians, who formerly were unrighteous, even
Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate, Abusers of themselves with
mankind, Thieves and Robbers; were by this Spirit and Water-work washed and
cleansed: For so says our Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you; but
ye are washed, but ye are Sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God: So that a Church of Christ, or House of God under a
Gospel Dispensation, is to be built up of lively stones, a spiritual House, an
holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices (that will be) acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Of which the building of the Material Temple
was a Type; for, as the House which Solomon built, 1 Kings 6. 7. was built of
stone made ready before it was brought thither; so that there was neither
Hammer nor Ax, nor any tool of Iron heard in the House, when it was in
building: So in the gathering or building a Gospel Church, persons are to be
fitted, hewn and squared, before they are laid into this Building; they are to
repent from dead works, and to have Faith in God, before they be Baptized; that
as that was a Material, so this a spiritual House; as those stoues were dead,
these lively; as those stones so soon as they were laid into the building, and
the work finished, they became a House fit to sacrifice in; so these lively
stones being brought together, are fit presently, actually to offer up
spiritual Sacrifices, such as God will accept; they being in Jesus Christ,
first mystically by Faith; and secondly, actually by their Obedience; and Faith
and Obedience being Gods Twins, we dare not in the least entertain so much as a
thought to separate them.

So that, O King, if thou with Hezekiah wilt open the Door of the Lords House,
it is not a National, but a Congregational Door thou art to open, which is not
to be compulsive, but persuasive; for so says a true Gospel-Minister, Knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. Now then we
are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; We pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, v. 20. Whence we may note, that a
Gospel Minister is not to be like the General of an Army, to frighten, beat or
fight men into faith; but as an Ambassador to persuade and invite, and gently
to treat with, and to entreat into the way of God; the one being Diabolical,
but the other Evangelical, and the way of Love being Gods Way; this is one of
the distinguishing Characters of a true Gospel-Minister, whom the Love of
Christ has constrained, which causes men to look upon them, to be Fa^naticks,
or mad men; for so says our Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 13. For whether we be besides
our selves, it is to God, or whether we be sober, it is for your Cause; for the
Love of Christ constrains us: And says he, in Chap. 12. 14. I will not be
burthensom to you, for I seek not yours, but you; (and he gives this in as a
Reason, for says he) The Children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but the
Parents for the Children; and I will very gladly spend and be spent for you,
though the more abundantly I love, the less I am loved; And such are made
Overseers of the Flock of God by the Holy Ghost, Acts 20. 28. who feed it, and
take the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not of filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind, 1 Pet. 5. 2. as good Stewards of the manifold grace
of God, 1 Pet. 4. 10. Such are good Shepherds, and not Hirelings, who will lay
down their life for the sheep, John 10. 11. Whilst others being made Overseers
by men, instead of feeding the Flock, feed upon the Flock; as those careless
Shepherds, spoken of* Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4. against whom a Woe is pronounced, Who
feed themselves, who eat the fat, and cloth themselves with the Wool, and kill
them that are fed, but feed not the Flock; who strengthen not the diseased, nor
heal the sick, nor bind up the broken, nor bring again that which is driven
away, nor seek that which is lost, but Rule them with cruelty; as the Prophet
says, Micah 3. 2, 3. Who hate the good, and love the evil; who pluck off their
skins from off them, and their flesh from their bones; who eat the flesh of my
People, and stay their skins from off them; who break their bones, and chop
them in pieces as for the Pot, and as flesh for the Chaldron, v. 5. Who bite
with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and he that puts not into their mouths,
they make War against him; who are Hirelings, and not true Shepherds; who
formerly, if a fatter Benefice came in the way, would not stay till the Wolf
came, but hearkened to that Call, and left the Sheep, to secure themselves from
the Wolves, if they would: But such are false Apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ: And no marvel, says our
Apostle, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. For Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of
Light, ver. 15. Therefore it is no great thing, if his Ministers also be
transformed into the Ministers of Righteousness; whose end shall be according
to their works; whilst the true Apostle is as free to give, as freely he has
received, who is ready to Preach the Word, and to be instant in season and out
of season, and to reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with all long-suffering and
Doctrine, according to that good Advice, 2 Timothy 4. 2.

And thus, O King, having in some measure given thee the Character of a
Gospel Church, and Ministry; I shall now beg thee in Gods fear, that thou have
a care thou open the right Door: open not the broad Gate that leads to
destruction, instead of that narrow way that leads to life, Mat. 7. 13, 14. If
^hou incendest to do Gods Work, have a care thou do it in Gods Way. And that
I may the better persuade thee there unto, I shall briefly lay before thee two
or three Examples, of Gods severity against those that have been careless
therein: Moses and Aaron the Servants of the Lord, Numb. 20. who but for
smiting the Rock, when they should have spoken to it, died in the Wilderness,
and were not suffered to carry Israel into the Land of Canaan, as we may fully
understand by comparing the eight verse with 11, 12, 23. to 29. with Numb. 27.
12. to 15. with Deuteronomy. 34. If Saul will save alive those which God will have
destroyed, Saul must deeply suffer for it, 1 Samuel 15. but more of this anon:
And if Akan will take of the accursed things, Akan must deeply suffer; for
says the Text, Joshua 7. 24, 25. And Joshua said, Why have thou troubled us?
The Lord shall trouble thee this day; and all Israel stoned him, his Sons and
his Daughters, his Oxen and his Asses, and his Sheep, and burned them with
fire: The Lord give thee, O King, an understanding heart, to consider things
aright.

But to proceed, Hezekiah does not only stir up the Priests and Levites to the
Work of Reformation, but also all Judah and Jerusalem, and wrote Letters, Chap.
30. 1. and made a Decree, and made Proclamation, that they must come up to
Jerusalem, to keep the Passover unto the Lord; for they had not done it of a
long time in such sort as it was written, ver. 5.

Whence we may note, That in Hezekiah's Reformation, he Reformed not according
to what had been their custom of a long time, nor to what his Father before him
did; but according as it was written, according to the Law of God: And this is
that which makes the Work to thrive in his hands; when he does Gods Work in
Gods Way. Therefore let me beg thee, O King, as thou tenderest thine own good,
now thou art upon thy Reformation, to take Hezekiah for thy Pattern, have the
Word of the Lord for thy Warrant, see thou do it according to the written Law
of God; for such a Reformation only will stand, and thou with it: But if thou
do it according to the former customs, and what thy Father did before thee,
thou saw that fell, and him with it: for what is of man, will come to
nothing, but if it be of God, it cannot be overthrown, Acts 5. 38, 39.

And know, O King, that much Knowledge and true Light has broken forth within
these twelve years, and what men might do in Ignorance, happily may be excusable,
which now cannot; for so says our Apostle, Acts 17. 3. In the times of this
Ignorance God winked at, but now he Commands all men every where to repent: And
let no man despise my Speech, in saying, much knowledge and true Light is
within these few years* broken out; if they shall, I must answer them after the
manner of Peter, answering those scosfing Jews, in that then so much
admired-at giving out of the Spirit, Acts 2. 14, 15. We are not Fannaticks or
mad men, as ye suppose in so saying; but this is that which was spoken of by
the Prophets, Dan. 12. 4. Many shall run to and fro, and Knowledge shall
increase; for says the Prophet, Haba. 2. 14. The Earth shall be filled with
the Knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea: Therefore
be sure, O King, thou have, Thus says the Word of the Lord, for thy Warrant;
for God is a jealous God, and will not be served with any thing, but what is of
his own.

And this did Hezekiah throughout all Jndah, and wrought that which was good,
and right, and truth before the Lord his God; and in every work that he began
in the service of the House of God, and in the Law, and in the Commandments, to
seek his God, he did it with all his heart; and says the Text, He prospered,
Chap. 31. 20, 21.

Whence we may note, That whilst Hezekiahs heart was upright to God, God
prospered him; and thus we find in Holy Writ, That whilst men with a perfect
heart, have a careful eye in all their undertakings to please God, God has a
tender eye over them to prosper them: And thus whilst Joseph is answering his
lustful Mistress, with a How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?
Genesis 39. 9. Though Joseph by her revengeful malice be cast into Prison, yet God
is with him, v. 21. And God gives him favor in the eyes of the Prison-Keeper,
insomuch that the Prison-keeper looked not after any thing that was under his
hands; and the Reason is added, verse. 28. Because the Lord was with him; and
that which he did, the Text says, The Lord made it it prosper.

And thus whilst Daniel in the Babylonish captivity, is resolved in his heart
not to defile himself with a portion of the Kings Idolatrous Meat, nor of his
wine, God brings Daniel iuto Favor and tender Love with the Prince of the
Eunuchs, Dan. 1. 3, 9. Insomuch that the Eunuch will venture his head to the
King his Master, rather than Daniel shall want that food he desires, V. 10, 14.

A good encouragemant for the People of God in the very worst of times, even to
take up a Resolution, to eye God in what he would have them to do in all
things, and not at all to fear the faces of men, though never so great; for if
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, will not bow to Nebuchadnezzars Image, but keep
themselves close to their God, God will keep as close to them; and one like the
Son of Man shall walk with them in that seven times hot fiery Furnace, to
preserve them, Dan. 3. 16, 25. Will Daniel Petition no other but the true God,
though against the Decree of the King? that God will send his Angel, to shut
the mouths of the Lions, that they shall not hurt him, Daniel 6. 10. 22.

Theresore suffer me to bespeak thee and thy People, O King, in the Language of
Azariah the Son of Obed, which he once uttered to King Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 1.
Hear thou me CHARLES, and all England, Scotland, Ireland, and in particular
thou proud, voluptuous and vainglorious City of London; the Lord is with you
whilst you are with him; if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye
forsake him, he will forsake you.

And let not the King be angry, if one that is counted a Fannatick speak once
more to him, not in his own Language, but in the words of the Spirit of the
Lord, in the Prophet David to his Son, 1 Chro. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my Son,
know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with
a willing mind; for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of thy thoughts; if thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but
if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. Thou know, O King, thou
have had a casting off, and that that casting off may not be for ever; be
persuaded to turn to thy God with all thy heart.

We usually say, That he that would move another to weep, must first cry
himself, he must first begin the passion; thus God has done, God has begun a
Work, God has first trodden a Path for thee, O King, to walk in, God has made
a Return to thee most miraculously, and far (I presume) beyond thine own
Expectation, or the Imagination of many others; therefore, O King, Prepare to
meet thy God, have a care thou walk not in any By-Path, but only and alone in
that Path of Returning, which God has trodden for thee; and as God has been
Miraculous in his Returning to thee, O be thou as Eminent in thy returniug to
him; this is that which I am confident the Lord looks for at thy hands; for
so says the Lip of Truth it self, Luke 12. 48. For unto whomsoever much is
given, of him shall be much required; and the same voice has the Spirit of the
Lord in my Text, But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the Benefits
bestowed upon him; therefore wrath fell upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.

And that I may come to the handling the words themselves, I shall briefly show
what God did for Hezekiah, that caused him to look for so suitable a return
from Hezekiah.

After these things, and the establishment thereof, Chap. 32. 1. That is, After
the Reformation that Hezekiah had made, as I have in part laid down, and as in
the three foregoing Chapters is more particularly discovered; Aster these
things, and the establishment thereof, Sennacherib, King of Assyria, came and
entered into Judah, and Encamped against the fenced Cities, and thought to win
them to himself.

Whence we may note, That though men walk never so close with God, yet they
cannot be exempted from the malicious endeavors of wicked men: David we know,
is Recorded in holy Writ, to be a man after Gods own heart, who in the
Confidence of his Soul, sometimes can say, The Lord is on his right hand, he
shall not be moved, Psalm. 16. 8. And anon in Psalm. 17. 8. he begs of the Lord,
to hide him under the shadow of his Wings, from the wicked that oppress him,
and from his deadly Enemies: Now he will not fear what man can do unto him; And
anon, he cries out, That one day he shall fall by the hand of Saul.

Good men are at an uncertainty of quietness, or tranquillity, on this side the
grave: If the Sons and Daughters of God had too much Happiness and Peace in
this life, they would then begin to settle upon the Lees, and satisfy
themselves with that which cannot profit: God knows what is fitter for his,
than they do themselves; and therefore it is that he suffers his dearest
Children to undergo great Trials, and that for several Reasons.

First, for the Trial of their Faith, according to that of Judge. 2. 21. I will
not, says the Lord, drive out any of the Nations which Joshua left when he
died; and the Reason is added: That through them I may prove Israel, whether
they will keep the Way of the Lord, to walk therein, as their Fathers did keep
it: therefore says the Text, The Lord left those Nations, without driving them
out hastily, neither delivered he them into the hands of Joshua, V. 23.
according to that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 7. That the Trial of your Faith
being much more precious than of Gold that perishes, though it be tried with
fire, may be found unto Praise, and Glory, and Honor, at the appearing of
Jesus Christ.

A second Reason may be, for the increase of their Graces, according to that
saying of the Apostle, James 1. 2, 3. Knowing that the Trial of our Faith
works Patience; and therefore the Apostle Paul did glory in Tribulations,
knowing that Tribulation works Patience, and Patience Experience, and
Experience Hope; and Hope, says he; makes not ashamed, Romans 5. 3, 4.

A third Reason may be, because Troubles and Afflictions being rightly
improved, works good to a Soul to Eternity; and so says our Apostle, 2 Cor.
4. 17. For our light Affliction, which are but for a Moment, works for us a
far more Exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory; whilst we look not at the
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things
which are seen, are Temporal; but the things which are not seen, they are
Eternal.

And further, God by these Actings keeps a Soul close to himself, and thereby
gives it opportunities continually, either to Pray, or to Praise him, for
Deliverances.

For this Invasion, together with the abominable Blasphemies of Sennacherib,
drives Hezekiah to his God; and so says the Text, For this cause, Hezekiah the
King, and the Prophet Isaiah, Prayed and cried to Heaven, verse. 20. Men that
walk close with God in time of Prosperity, can with boldness go to God in time
of Adversity, with an assured confidence of a gracious Answer: Hezekiah and
Isaiah no sooner Pray, but Speed; and another opportunity is now put into their
hands, to return again with Praises in their mouths, to the Throne of Grace;
for the Lord sent an Angel to cut off all the Mighty men of Ualour, and the
Leaders and Captains in the Camp of the King of Assyria: So he returned with
shame of face to his own Land; and when he was come into the House of his god,
they that came out of his own bowels, slew him there with the Sword, V. 21.

Whence we may note, That when Gods People cry to him, there is no staying the
raising an Army or Money, or the Making or Providing Ammunion; but when they
are in a Suffering condition, they dispatch a Messenger to Heaven in a moments
time, to the Captain of their Salvation, who himself was made perfect through
Sufferings, Heb. 2. 10. And such a Messenger who can neither be stayed by the
way, nor his Message intercepted, even the Spirit of Truth, who will tell the
truth of their Cause, and help their Infirmities, and express their Condition
with groans that cannot be uttered; and he that searches the heart, knows
what is the mind of the Spirit, Romans 8. 26, 27. God is a free Agent, and cannot
be limited to any means, but acts how, when, and which way he pleases.

For Hezekiah and Isaiah no sooner Pray, but an Angel is as soon dispatched
into the Camp of Sennacherib; ( for are they not all Ministering Spirits sent
forth to Minister for those who shall be Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14.) And
this Angel destroys his Mighty men, Captains and men of Valor: Hezekiah we
see spoke truth, when he encouraged the People, saying, Be not dismayed at the
King of Assyria; for there is more with us than with him; with him there is an
Arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help us and to fight our
Battles, ver. 7. and 8.

Happy it is then with the People of God, when they can trust God for their
Deliverance; and observe that Word of Command from the Captain of their
Salvation, Mat. 24. 6. Then when they shall hear of Wars, and rumors of Wars,
Nation against Nation, and Kingdom, against Kingdom, that then they be not
troubled; but can take that good Advice that once Moses gave to Israel of old,
Exodus 14. 13. Even to stand still and see the Salvation of God, which he will
work for them.

The Angel finisheth his work with speed, which causes Sennacherib with shame
and Confusion of face, with speed to return into his own Land.

Whence we may note, That whilst men depend upon an Arm of flesh, upon every
Defeat, their spirits are more or less dejected: whilst he that trusts in the
Lord, is not afraid of evil Tidings; for his heart is fixed, Psalm. 112. 7. When
Sennacheribs confidence in which he trusted; viz. His Great men, his Captains,
and his men of Valor were brought down, then Shame, as a Vail, begins to cover
his face; whilst the Righteous are bold as a Lion, and shall not be ashamed in
the evil time, Psalm. 37. 19. An Arm of flesh will fail; For all flesh is grass,
and all the goodliness thereof as the Flower of the Field; the Grass withers,
and the Flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it: Surely,
the People is grass, says the Prophet, Isaiah 40. 6. and 7. Therefore the
People of God trust in their God, because that in the Lord Jehovah is
Everlasting strength, Isaiah 26. verse. 4.

The Text says, That S^nnacherib, when he returned, he went into the House of
his god: Now, his god was one of the gods of the Heathens, which had neither
eyes to see, not ears to hear, hands to handle, nor feet to walk; and so
incapable of doing him good, as that he could not give good Advice, nor afford
good Assistance, neither to him, nor to his People; yet such is his Zeal,
notwithstanding his wickedness, as that he must into the House of this his god.

Whence we may note, That the worst of men generally are under some Form of
Worship, either to a false god, or to the true God after a false manner, in
which usually they are very zealous, although in other things desperately
wicked.

Whence we may further note, That it is not Zeal under any Form, that makes
that Form the true Form of Godliness; but it is the special Appointment of God
in his Word of Truth, that is the only and alone Way God will be worshipped
in; in which he requires men to be zealous: The Apostle Paul whilst he was in
his unregenerate condition, his Zeal led the way, and marched in the Van,
whilst his Knowledge lay behind in the Rear, which caused him so to make havoc
of the Church, as he himself confesses, Phil. 3. 6. Gal. 1. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 9.
And says he, Acts 26. 9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do
many things, contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazare^h; which thing I did in
Jerusalem, and many of the Saints did I shut up in Prison, having received
Authority from the Chief Priests; and when they were put to death, I gave my
voice against them, V. 10. And I punished them often in every Synagogue, and
compelled them to Blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I
persecuted them even unto strange Cities, v. 11. But this I did, says he,
Ignorantly in Unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13. And thus it fares often times with many
in things about Religion, according to that Principle of the Church of Rome,
that their Ignorance is the Mother of their Devotion. And is it not so in this
our Day with thousands in this Land of our Nativity, that are of lewd, wicked,
and debauched Conversations, yet are very zealous for their Common Prayer? And
though they will be Drunk many of them, and live in known abominations all the
week long, yet such is their blind Zeal, that they must needs to their
Common Prayer on the Sunday, they think themselves undone else: This I know by
Experience, it was so with my self for a long time together; but now through
Mercy, I can say with the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I thank God I am what I
am; though some call me a Fannatick, or a mad man. I would not be mistaken, I
do not here go to beat down Zeal; For it is good to be zealously affected
always in a good matter, Gal. 4. 18. But I would have Zeal ^oyned with
Knowledge, and so set upon its proper and right Object; for the Jews, we know,
had a Zeal to God, but not according to Knowledge, Romans 10. 2. By which Zeal of
theirs, they went about to establish a Righteousness of their own, and
Contrary, or, in Opposition to Christ, who is made of God unto His, both
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Thou, O King, as thou art now upon thy Work of Reformation, see thy Zeal run
not before thy Knowledge, lest thou with the Apostle Paul, make havoc of the
Church of God, and waste it; (sure I am, thou will not want Perswaders
thereunto:) But let me beg thee in Gods fear, first to Inform thy Judgment
aright, Regulate that according to the Rule of Gods Word; and then join Zeal to
thy Knowledge, that so they may draw in one yoke together; and suffer me to
bind this Pers^vasion close to thy Conscience, for thy Eternal good, with that
saying of the Apostle, James 4. 17. To him that knows to do well, and does it
not, to him it is sin.

The next thing considerable in this one and twentie^h verse, is, That those
that came out of his own Bowels, slew him with the Sword.

Whence we may observe, That whilst men are acting against Gods People, out of
a blind Zeal, to bring them at an under, and to root them out; God then appears
for his People, and brings their enemies low, and many times makes their
nearest Relations to become their greatest Enemies: for it is in vain for men
to fight against Christ; it is hard for them to kick against the pricks; yet
thus inconsideratly do all those that fight against his People, and he looks
upon it as done to himself; for so says the Lord from Heaven, Acts 9. 4. Saul,
Saul, Why persecutest thou me? And he that receives you, receives me, Mat. 1.
40. And in as much as you did it not to one of the least of these, you did it
not unto me, Mat. 25. 45.

Thus in a most miraculous manner, and without effusion of blood, God, on
Hezekiah's part, delivered Hezekiah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
guided him on every side: And thus God has done for thee, O King.

And this was one great Cause why God expected an answerable Return from
Hezekiah; and to me it seems as a Reason, Why thou, O King, should render to
the Lord according to his Benefits bestowed on thee; seeing God thus, or in
such a miraculous manner, has wrought such a Deliverance for thee and thy
Friends, without bloodshed.

The next thing that God did for Hezekiah, was, He recovered him from a mortal
distemper; for so says the Text, ver. 24. In those days Hezekiah was sick to
the death, and he prayed unto the Lord, and he spoke unto him, and he gave him
a Sign. This Text is but an abstract of what we have fully laid down to us, in
2 King. 20. 1, 2, 3. and Isa. 38. 1. The which Texts we must have some recourse
to, if we intend to have a full discovery of what God did for Hezekiah, in 1
Kings 20. 1. The Text says, In those days Hezekiah was sick unto death, and
the Prophet Isaiah the son of Amos came to him and said unto him, Thus says
the Lord, Set thy House in order, for thou shall dye, and not live; and
Hezekiah turned his face toward the Wall, and prayed unto the Lord, and said,
Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight; and
Hezekiah wept sore. And it came to pass after Isaiah was gone out into the
middle Court, that the Word of the Lord came unto him, saying, Turn again, and
tell Hezekiah the Captain of my People; thus says the Lord, the God of David
thy Father, I have heard thy Prayers, I have seen thy Tears; Behold, I will
heal thee, on the third day thou shall go up to the House of the Lord.

Many things there are in this Passage worthy Consideration; and the first
thing that I shall take notice of, is, That Hezekiah was sick unto Death, and
he must set his House in order, for he must dye, and not live; yet Hezekiah
prayed unto the Lord, and he healed him.

Whence we may note, That many of the Resolves of God, concerning the Sons and
Daughters of men, are not absolutely peremptory, but many times conditional;
for yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed; yet when Nineveh repents,
God repents of the evil he intended against them, Jonah 2. 4, 5, 10. And thus
says the Lord by his Prophet, Jer. 18. 7. At what instant I shall speak
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down,
and to destroy it; if that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their evil; I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And at
what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to
Build and to Plant it; if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice,
then will I repent of the Good wherewith I said I would Benefit them. So also
says the Lord to Ely (upon the misdemeanor of his Sons) by that man of God, 1 Samuel 2. 30. I said indeed, that thy House, and the House of thy Father should
walk before me, for ever; but now the Lord says, Be it far from me; for them
that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed.

Now know, O King, that God is about to Re-build and to Plant Thee and thy
People again, and if thou and they shall answer God in acts of Obedience, and
do that which is well-pleasing in his sight, he then will go on to perfect what
he has begun: but if Thou and thy People, and in especial this proud,
Prodigal, vainglorious, and most voluptuous City, that has all this while
sat as a Queen, and known no sorrow, shall not answer God in his Expectations;
then be it known to thee and them, that God will repent him of the good he
intended both to thee and them; and as he overturned thy Father, and those that
overturned him, and has been for some considerable time, overturning,
overturning, overturning in this Land of thy Nativity; so know, O King, that he
is as able to overturn thee as them, without thou and they make to him suitable
Returns; for of a truth, God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation,
he that fears him and works Righteousness, is accepted of him, Acts 10. 34,
35. Therefore in Gods fear consider thy Actings.

But to proceed, King Hezekiah prays, and God heals: And thus whilst the
Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, the Prayer of the
upright is his delight, Prove. 15. 8. And Hezekiah turned his face to the Wall,
and said, Remember I beseech thee, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, etc. He only is likely to thrive at the
Throne of Grace, who in his appeals to God can plead the uprightness of his
heart, and the sincerity of his Soul; and whilst some are questioning, how God
does know, and whether there be Knowledge in the Most High? Psalm. 73. 11.
Hezekiah is earnestly begging the Searcher of all hearts, before whose eyes all
things are naked and open, to remember the Actings of his former days. Happy
it is with thy Soul, that in his sickness, can plead with God the good Actions
of his health.

Thus whilst Hezekiah is praying to the Lord, the Lord shows himself to be what
in the Scriptures of Truth he is Recorded to be; even a God hearing Prayers,
Psalm. 65. 2. And Hezekiah must experience him to be such a one; For says the
Lord, Go, tell Hezekiah the Captain of my People, I have heard his Prayers, I
have seen his Tears. God is a tenderhearted God, and when his People are moved
to passion, upon a right account, he then shows himself a compassionate God to
them, and this he did to Israel of old, when they were in Egypt under their
hard Taskmasters; for the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my
People which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry, by reason of their
Taskmasters; for I know their sorrows, and I am come down to deliver them,
Exodus 3. 7, 8.

God is not only said to hear the Prayers, and see the Tears of Hezekiah, but
he is as ready to help; for so is his Promise, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in
the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. A good
refuge for all Gods People to fly to in time of distress.

And here note, God does not only raise Hezekiah from his Bed of sickness, but
he also promises to add fifteen years to his days. Thus he gives power to
the faint, and to them that have no might, he increases strength; even the
youth shall faint and be weary, and young men shall utterly fail; but they that
wait on the Lord, shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings of
an Eagle; they shall run and not be weary; they shall walk and not be faint.
Isai. 40. 31.

And seeing it is so then, O King, be persuaded to wait upon God, that so it
may be a lengthening out of thy Tranquillity; question with thine own Soul,
whether God has not added to thy days; remember with thankfulness the Hollow
Oak, with all Gods Transactions toward thee in that juncture of time, when an
Arm of flesh failed thee at Worcester; not forgetting thy safe Passage in that
little Vessel that Rides in thy constant view; and when thou look on that,
suffer me to be thy Remembrancer, to persuade thee, that with thankfulness of
heart, thou remember whence thy Deliverance came; and that thou give to God a
suitable return, for that I am confident God expects from thee; and withal
seriously to consider the sad Consequences of Ingratitude: For Hezekiah rendered
not again according to the Benefits bestowed upon him, but his heart was lifted
up; therefore wrath was upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.

God does not only promise to heal Hezekiah, and to add fifteen years to his
days; but further he gives him (according to his own request) a Sign, and
such an one, the like of which neither before nor since was known; for most
miraculously he alters the course of the Heavens, for the Sun who like a
Bridegroom coming out of the Chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run a
Race, Psalm. 19. 5. is by the great Power of God called back again fifteen
Degrees.

Whence we may take notice of the great Condescension of the great God, for the
satisfying his faithful ones. And this was his dealing with Gideon, Judges 6.
who requires a Sign, that the Angel talked with him, v. 20. And the Angel put
forth the end of his Staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh, and the
unleavened cakes that Gideon had provided, and there arose fire out of the
Rock, and consumed them.

And again, when Gideon by Gods Appointment was to relieve Israel from the
hands of the Midianites, Amalekites, and the Children of the East, that were
gathered together in the Valley of Jezrecl, Judges 6. 33. Gideon requires a
Sign, if God would deliver Israel by his hands, ver. 36. And Gideon also
propounds his own satisfaction; Behold, says he, v. 37. I will put a Fleece of
Wool in the Floor, and if the Dew be on the Fleece only, and it be dry upon
all the Earth besides, then shall I know that thou will save Israel by my hand,
as thou have said; and says the Text, It was so, v. 38. For he rose up early
in the morning, and thrust the Fleece together, and wringed out of the Fleece a
Bowl full of water: Yet this will not fully satisfy Gideon, but he must come
to the Lord, as once Abraham did, when he petitioned for Sodom, Genesis 18. with
an once more; for Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me,
I will speak but this once; let me prove I pray thee but this once with the
Fleece; let it now be dry only upon the Fleece, and upon all the ground let
there be Dew; And God did so that night; for it was wet upon all the ground. It
is good then for S^ls to be single-hearted to God, that God may be satisfactory
to them.

Thus having particularly discovered the manner of Gods merciful dealings
toward Hezekiah; I shall now come to the words of my Text; wherein is briefly
discovered Hezekiah's unthankful behavior to God.

But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the Benefits bestowed upon him,
but his heart was lifted up; therefore wrath was upon him, and upon Judah and
Jerusalem.

And because the main drift of the Spirit in the Text is, to discover
Hezekiah's neglect, in not rendering to God, and the sad Consequences thereof; I
shall therefore first consider what Rendering is, before I come to draw any
teachable Conclusions from the Text.

Rendering, then simply so considered, is none other, but a giving to God or Man
that which is their due; for so says the Spirit, 1 Chronicles. 16. 29. Give unto
the Lord the Glory due unto his Name; and Romans 13. 7. Render therefore to all
men their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to
whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor; as if he should say, Give freely to God and
Man that which belongs to them, according to the saying of the Lord Christ
himself, Mat. 22. 21. Give to Caesar the things that are Cesars, and to God the
things that are Gods.

There is also a Rendering spoken of in Scripture, by way of Requital, for some
Benefit bestowed, or Injury done; and this is sometimes called Rendering, and
sometimes Recompencing and Requiting, as in that of Luke 14. 12, 14. When thou
make a Dinner, or a Supper, call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren, nor thy
Kinsmen, nor thy rich Neighbors, lest they also bid thee again, and a
Recompense be made thee; -- But call the Poor, the Maimed, the Blind, and the
Halt, and thou shall be blessed; for they cannot Recompense or Requite thee;
and in 1 Timothy 5. 4. where Children and Nephews are required to requite their
Parents; and 1 These. 5. 15. where it is the Advice of the Spirit, that no man
should render evil for evil to any man.

So that there is a Rendering belongs to man from man, simply so considered, as
they stand in such or such Relations; as Children to Parents, Servants to
Masters, Wives to Husbands, or Subjects to Princes: And there is also a more
Respective Rendering due to men, as they are Benefactors, or better than
ordinary in those Relations; as from a Child to an indulgent Father, from a
Servant to a very bountiful Master, from a Subject to his Priuce, as he is Wise
and Prudentially careful, laying about him every way, for the better well-being
of his Subjects; one that refuses the way of Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, who
threatened to make the burdens of his Subjects heavier and heavier, and to be
worse to them than was his Father; 1 Kings 12. 11. But to such an one that will
undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free, according to that of
Isa. 51. 6^ I say, to such a Father, Master and Prince, there is a more Tender,
Respective, Affectionate Rendering due, and that by way of Requital, to answer
the Love, Bounty and Care of such a Father, Macter or Prince.

And this is that Rendering in my Text that God expects from Hezekiah, that as
he had been a bountiful and a full-handed God to him; so he expected that
Hezekiah, though a King, should have had his mouth filled with his Praises.

For when the King of Babylon sent Ambassadors to him, to enquire of the Wonder
that was done in his Land, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. God expected that then he should
have showed the Ambassadors, how miraculous God had been in delivering him
from his Enemies, and recovering him; and in satisfying his Request, in causing
the Sun to run retrograde, in token of the certainty of his recovery, and of
the fifteen years addition to his days; by which means God would have been
glorified in the eyes of the Heathen; which is that that God requires, That
his People should sing forth the Honor of his Name, and make his Praise
glorious, Psalm. 66. 2. And also says the Lord by the Prophet, Isai. 42. 12.
Let them give glory unto the Lord, and declare his Praise in the Islands.

A good Lesson for thee to learn, O King, that when Ambassadors are sent from
foreign Princes, to Congratulate thy condition, that then thou remember before
them, to glorify that God, and set forth his Praise, who has been so
miraculously bountiful unto thee.

But Hezekiah rendered not again according to his Benefits bestowed upon him,
but his heart was lifted up; therefore wrath fell upon him, and upon Judah and
Jerusalem.

Quest. But here it may be demanded, when a person may be said, to render duly
to God.

Answ. To this I Answer, A person may then be said to make suitable Returns, or
duly to render to God, when in the Relation he stands in, he shall as much
as in him lies, Act faithfully both to God and man, according to the mind of
God, whether they be Men or Women, as they stand in the Relations of Servants
or Masters, Children or Parents, Wives or Husbands, Subjects or Princes: And
because the subject matter of my Text is concerning Prince and People, I shall
not stand to particularize the duty of the other Relations, but shall as
briefly as I may, come to a discovery of what I know from the Scriptures, to be
the Mind of God in those Relations that concern my Text.

And first of the duty of a Subject to his Prince; a Subject may properly be
said duly to render unto God, when according to the saying of the Lord Christ,
Mat. 22. 20. He does give to Caesar the things that are Cesars, and to God the
things that are Gods; when he does that in the Worship of God that is agreeable
to the Mind of God, revealed in that plain Directory, the Holy Scriptures of
Truth: And when according to that Rule also he does render to his Prince
Tribute, Custom, Fear and Honor, according to the direction of the Spirit,
Romans 13. 7. A more full discovery hereof is laid down in my Declaration.

And secondly, A Prince may properly be said to render duly to God, when he
does also follow the direction of the same Spirit in the Directory; who says,
2 Samuel 23. 3. He that Rules over men, must be just, Ruling in the fear of God.
This fear of God, is that which made good Nehemiah, when he was appointed
Governor over the Land of Judah, neither he nor his Brethren not to eat the
Bread of the Governor, Nehamiah 5. 14. For says he, v. 15. The former
Governors that were before me, were chargeable to the People, and had taken of
them Bread and Wine, besides forty shekels of Silver; yea, even their Servants
bare rule over the People; But says he, So did not I: And he adds this as a
Reason, Because of the fear of God: And this is that which the Wise man tells
us, is the sum or substance of all that is required from Man, in the twelfth
Chapter of his Ecclesiastes, and the thirteenth verse. Let us hear the
Conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his commandments; for this
(says he) is the whole duty of Man: and so says the Prophet, Micah 6. 8. He
that showed thee, O man, what is good. And what does the Lord require of thee,
but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

Pritnces, Rulers, Governors and Magistrates then, are required to do tha work
for which they are set up, for they are Gods Vicegerents, set up by him for
the due Administration of Justice, and not to be a terror to good works, but
to the evil; and are continually to attend upon that very thing, Romans 13. 1, 3,
4, 6.

In that Ancient History of the Succession o^ the Saxon Monarchs, page 370. It
is Recorded to the yet lasting fame of Edgar, sometimes a King of this Island,
That he was so endowed with that Heaven-bred, and most Heroic Principle of the
due Administration of Justice; as in his Circuits he took so strick an account
of the due Execution of his Laws, and of the Demeanor of his great Men, and
especially of his Judges, as that he severely punished them, as often as he
found the Execution of their Places balanced either with bribery, or
partiality: So that (says the Story) there was never less Robbery, Deceit nor
Oppression, than in the Reign of this worthy King.

Therefore let me beg thee, O King, as thou tenderest thy own good, both here
and hereafter, Rule with Diligence, and with King Edgar let After-ages know to
thy lasting Praise, that thou had a delight to do thy Subjects good, in
seeking Judgment, in Relieving the Oppressed, in Judging the Fatherless, and
in Pleading for the Widow, in being a terror to Evil Works, and in showing thy
self a (...) of them that do well. Measure thy Subjects Actions by a direct
Rule: And as thou art a King over three Kingdoms, such as make much ad^ about
their Christianity, see that their Actions be Christ-like; for the assuming
either the Title or Form of Christianity cannot do it; for from such as have
not the Power of Godliness, there ought to he by the People of God a turning
away, 2 Timothy 3. 5. For, every one that names the Name of Christ, is to depart
from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. And it ought to be their only care, to have their
Conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ, -- striving together for the
Faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27 Not for the Promotion of Stage Plays,
Dancings, May-games, and Pastimes; for Christians are to abstain from all
appearance of evil, 1 These. 5. 22. And as Pilgrims and Strangers they are to
abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. And the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, is not of the
Father, but of the World, and must perish with the World, 1 John 2. 16.

Be careful therefore, I beseech thee, O King, of the Actions of thy Subjects,
it stands thee in hand so to do; for a fruitful Land God turns into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein, Psalm. 107. 34. Yea,
and thou may fare the worse for it too; For the Transgression of a Land, many
are the Princes thereof; But by a man of understanding and Knowledge, the state
thereof shall be prolonged, says the Wisest of the Sons of men, Prove. 28, 2. O
then, in the fear of him that accepts not the person of Princes, nor
regards the rich more then the poor, Job 34. 19. In the fear of him that
leads Princes away spoiled, and overthrows the strength of the Mighty; that
pours contempt upon Princes, and weakneth the Mighty; that takes away the
heart of the Chief of the People of the Earth, and causes them to wander in a
Wilderness, where there is no way, Job 12. 19, 21, 24. In the fear of him that
brings Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the Earth, as vanity,
Isai. 40. 23. In the fear of that God, that has done such great things for
thee, be persuaded for thine own good, to render to him according to his Mercy
bestowed, in seeing the due Administration of Justice without respect of
persons; that so thou may Relieve the poor oppressed of thy People, that of
a long time have groaned under the Administration of Male-Justice.

And know, O King, that as thou art to do justly; so thou art required to love
Mercy, it is that which God accepts before Sacrifice; for so says the
Prophet, Hos. 6. 6. For I desired Mercy, and not Sacrifice, and the knowledge
of God more than Burnt-offerings; for by Mercy and Truth Iniquity is purged,
and by the fear of God men depart from evil, Prove. 16. 6. For Mercy and Truth
preseve the King, and his Throne is upholden by Mercy; For he that follows
after Righteousness and Mercy; finds Life, Righteousness and Honor, Prove.
21. 21. A good man is Merciful and lends, and his Seed shall be blessed,
Psalm. 37. 26. Yea, Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy, Mat.
5. 7. But he shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has showed no Mercy; And
Mercy rejoices against Judgment, James 2. 13. The neglect of showing Mercy,
is that which caused the wrath of God to burn hot against Israel of old, Zech.
7. 9. For thus spoke the Lord of Hosts, saying, Execute true Judgment, and
show Mercy and Compassion every man to his Brother, and oppress not the Widow,
nor the Fatherless, the stranger, nor the Poor; and let none of you imagine
evil against his Brother in his heart: But they refused to hearken, and plucked
away the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear, etc.
Therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts, V. 12.

Then be persuaded, O King, to show Acts of Mercy, thou have Objects enough to
exercise it upon; and know, That pure Religion and undesiled before God and the
Father, is this, To visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, James
1. 27. Not to make Fatherless and Widows, to bring them to Affliction. And in
thy showing Mercy, take the Advice of the Spirit of God, in Romans 12. 8. To do
it readily, and with Cheerfulness.

Thou have begun already to tread in this Way, in thy Act of Oblivion, let not
the malicious endeavors of any, though never so great, pervert thy steps; for
it is one of Zions Paths.

A third thing that is required of thee, O King, is, That as thou art to do
Justly, and to love mercy; so also, to walk humbly with thy God.

But here it may be demanded, when a person may be said to walk humbly with God?

To this I Answer; A man may then be properly said, to walk humbly with his
God, when he goes not before God, or without God in his Actions; but that in
all his undertakings, he does that which is required of him by God, in order to
his humble obedience to God, whether it be in the Worship and Service of God,
or in his Actings toward men: Thus Enoch walked with God three hundred years,
Genesis 5. 22. And Enoch walking with God, God was so well pleased therewith, as
that he exempted him from the Pangs of Death; for so says the Text, V. 24. And
Enoch walked with God, and was not; for God took him: Enoch walked with God
faithfully; for without Faith it is Impossible to please God, Heb. II. 6. And
we find him so Recorded in that Catalogue of faithful ones, Heb. II. 5. By
faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was not found,
because God had translated him; and before he was translated, he had this
Testimony, That he pleased God.

Thus Noah also walked with God, Genesis 6. 9. And when a World of wicked Men and
Women, for their ungodliness must be drowned; the Lord said unto Noah, Come
thou, and all thy House into the Ark; for thee have I seen Righteous before me
in this Generation, Genesis 6. 1.

Thus also Zacharias and Elizabeth, the Father and Mother of John the Baptist,
who walked with God, Luke 1. 5, 6. who were both righteous before God, walking
in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless.

So that I say, To walk humbly with God, is to follow God fully in all his
Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and Appointments.

And thus the Church and People of God, are required to be Followers of God, as
dear Children, Ephesians. 5. 1. That as Children are to follow the Directions and
Appointments of their Earthly Parents; so Gods People should follow the
Directions and Appointments of their Heavenly Father; and should walk in the
footsteps of the Flock of God, gone before; who run neither before nor without
God; but with the Prophet David, Psalm. 119. 32. in the Laws, Statutes,
Ordinances and Appointments of God: Thus they walked humbly with their God. So
that this is that which I would willingly lay before thee, O King; and also beg
and entreat thee for thine own good, seriously to consider of, That to walk
humbly with God, is not to walk in any way, but in that which is well-pleasing
to God; in that way which is by himself directed, for his to walk in; for
persons cannot be said to be no more Foreigners and S^rangers, unless they
become fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God; being built
upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief Corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20. By which means only, they grow up an
Holy Temple in the Lord, in whom they also are builded together for an
Habitation of God, through the Spirit, ver. 21, 22.

Then consider thy standing, O King, and with Hezekiah purge out the filthiness
of thy Holy Things, in order to thy walking humbly with thy God; in order to
thy Rendering duly to God, for thy great Mercies received, considering the
danger of not Rendering.

For Hezekiah rendered not again according to the Benefit done unto him, for his
heart was lifted up; therefore wrath was upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.

Thus having showed in some measure the Occasion of the words of my Text; I
shall now come to the handling of the words themselves.

But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the Benefit done unto him, for his
heart was lifted up; therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and
Jerusalem.

The words in themselves contain these four Particulars.

1. Gods Benefits bestowed upon Hezekiah. 2. Hezekiah's Unthankfulness to God.
3. The Reason of Hezekiah's Unthankfulness. 4. The sad Consequences of his
Unthankfulness.
1. Gods Benefits bestowed upon Hezekiah, in these words, Accordcording to the
Benefit done unto him. 2. Hezekiah's Unthankfulness to God, in these words, But
Hezekiah rendered not again. 3. The Reason of Hezekiah's not rendering, in these
words, For his heart was lifted up. 4. The sad Conseqnences of Hezekiah's not
rendering. And they are two fold, and employed in these words: 1. Therefore there
was wrath upon him; And, 2. Upon Judah and Jerusalem.

But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the Benefit done unto him, for his
heart was lifted up; therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and
Jerusalem.

Thus having laid down the Occasion of the words of the Text, and the
Particulars contained in the Text; I shall now proceed to lay down, what
teachable Conclusions may be drawn from the Text; which are these three:

1. That God requires suitable Returns for Benefits bestowed, though from the
greatest of Men or Nations; upon the neglect whereof, God punishes without
respect of persons. 2. That many times God punishes a People, for the
miscarriages of their Governors, whether in Church or State, or in a
particular Family. 3. That outward enjoyments many times do so affect the heart
of man, as that they lift it up, even to the forgetting of God, and to their
own ruin.
To the first of these, That God requires suitable Returns for Benefits
bestowed, though from the great est of Men or Nations; upon the neglect
whereof, God punishes without respect of persons.

King David, I presume, was well acquainted with the Truth of this Assertion,
which made him so earnestly enquire, what he should render to God, in Psalm.
116. after a full Declaration of what God had particularly done for his Soul;
he oryeth out, ver. 12. What shall I render to the Lord, for all his Benefits
bestowed upon me? And in v^13. and 14. he gives in his Resolution, I will,
says he, take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord; I will
pay my Vows unto the Lord now, in the presence of all his People; and in Psalm.
58. 12. These Vows are upon me, O God, I will render Praises unto thee.

But for the proof of this point; consider, Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, who
dreamed a Dream, which to him was very terrible; insomuch, that his spirit was
troubled, and his sleep brake from him, Dan. 2. 1. Then the King commanded to
call the Magicians, and the Astrologers, and the Sorcerers, and the Caldeans,
to show the King his Dream; to whom he promised great Rewards, if they could
show him the Dream, and the Interpretation, (for it was gone from the King) But
if they could not, then he threatened death to them, and ruin to their Houses,
verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. The which they could not do; and thereupon a Command went out
from the King, to slay them: The Executioners of whose Will sought Daniel and
his Fellows also to slay them. Then Daniel enquired of Arioch the Captain of
the Kings Guard, the Reason of the hastiness of the Decree from the King, who
telling him the matter; Daniel went in to the King, and desired time that he
might show the King both the Dream, and the Interpretation; the which being
granted, he suddenly after came and told it the King, V. 31. Thou, O King,
saw, and behold a great Image; this great Image, whose brightness was
excellent, stood before thee, and his form was terrible.

This Images Head was of fine Gold, his Breast and his Arms of Silver, his
Belly and his Thighs of Brass, his Legs of Iron, his Feet part of Iron, and
part of Clay; Thou saw till that a Stone was cut out without hands, which
smote the Image upon his Feet, that were part of Iron and part of Clay, and
brake them to pieces.

Then was the Iron, the Clay, the Brass, the Silver, and the Gold broken to
pieces together, and became then as the Chaff of the Summer Threshing-floors,
and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them; and the Stone
that smote the Image, became a great Mountain, and filled the whole Earth. This
is the Dream (said Daniel) and I will tell the Interpretation thereof before
the King.

THOU O King, art a King of Kings, for the God of Heaven has given thee a
Kingdom, Power, and Strength, and Glory; and wheresoever the Children of men
dwell, the Beasts of the Field, and the Fowls of the Heaven has he given into
thine hand, and has made thee Ruler over them all; Thou art this Head of Gold.

By all which we see, that God had done very much for Nebuchad^, and made him
King of Kings, and higher than all the Kings of the Earth: Yet when
Nebuchadnezzar renders not to God according to the Benefits bestowed, God
takes him down from all his Pomp; when Nebuchadnezzar forgot God that made him
so great, and begins to Sacrifice to his own Net, as he did, Dan. 4. 30. For
said the King, Is not this Great Babylon, that I have builded for the House of
my Kingdom, by the Might of my Power, and for the Honor of my Majesty? Thus
whilst he was glorying himself, instead of glorifying God, God takes him down;
for so says the Text, V. 31. Whilst the word was in the Kings mouth, there
fell a voice from Heaven, saying, O King Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken,
the Kingdom is departed from thee, and they shall drive thee from men, and thy
dwelling shall be with the Beasts of the Field; they shall make thee to eat
grass as Oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the
Most High Rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whom he will; and
says the Text, V. 33. The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon
Nebuchadnezzar. So that in him we see the Assertion made good, That God
requires suitable returns for mercies bestowed, though from the greatest of Men
or Nations. This man was so great, as that there was none greater; for he was
over All; not a King over some few Countries, or an Emperor over seven
Nations, but a Monarch, one that had an unlimited and an universal Power, V.
36. Yet when he comes to walk contrary to God, God walks contrary to him; when
he refuses to glorify God, God will be glorified upon him.

The like we may see in King Saul, 1 Samuel 15. The Prophet Samuel came to him,
and appointed him his work from God; and in his so doing, he first lays before
him what God had done for him; and gives it in as a Reason, why Saul should
perform the Will of God; for says he, V. 1. The Lord sent me to Anoint thee to
be King over his People, over Israel; Therefore hearken thou unto the voice of
the Word of the Lord; Thus says the Lord, I remember what Amalek did to
Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, as he came up out of the Land of
Egypt; now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy All that they have, and
spare them not, but utterly destroy both Man and Woman, Infant and Suckling, Ox
and Sheep, Camel and Ass, Amalek lay in wait, to have destroyed Israel; now
God takes Isreal's Cause in hand, and Amalek must be utterly cut off. It is good
for the People of God, to let God alone with his own Work; for vengeance is
mine^ and I will repay it, says the Lord, Romans 12. 19. And Gods time is the
best time to revenge in; for so says the Lord by his Prophet, Zephaniah 3. 8.
Wait ye upon me, until the day that, I rise up to the prey; for my
determination is, to gather the Nations, that I may assemble the Kingdoms, to
pour upon them mine Indignation, even all my fierce Anger; for, All the Earth
shall be devoured with the fire of my Jealousy: for, says the Prophet, It is
the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of Recompenses, for the
Controversy of Zion, Isai. 34. 8. And says the Lord, I am jealous for
Jerusalem and for Zion, with a great jealousy, Zach. 1. 14. For precious in
the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints, Psalm. 116. 15. and Psalm. 9.
12. When he makes Iniquision for blood, he remembers them, and forgets not
the Cry of the humble. Had Israel been the Revenge of his own quarrel, it had
not made so much for Isreal's comfort, neither would Amalek have had his
deserved due; Israel might have under-done the Work; for Israel knew not the
bent of Amaleks spirit, so well as he that took the Work in hand; for God sees
not as Man sees, Man only knows the outward act, but God also the intention
and thought of the heart; God without all Question knew that Amalek intended
the utter ruin of Israel; and therefore Amalek must be utterly destroyed: For
God is a Righteous God, and commonly deals with men by the Law of Retaliation;
for Adoni-bezek said, Threescore and ten Kings having their Thumbs and their
great Toes cut off, gathered their Meat under my Table; as I have done so God
has done to me, Judges 1. 7. And Nathan said unto David, 2 Samuel 12. 9. Thou
have done evil in the sight of the Lord, thou have killed Uriah the Hittite
with the Sword, and have taken his Wife to be thy Wife; now therefore the Sword
shall never depart from thine House, etc. And I will take thy Wives before
thine eyes, and give them to thy Neighbor, and he shall lie with them in the
sight of the Sun; for thou did this secretly, but I will do this before all
Israel, and before the Sun. And the Prophet Samuel also said unto King Agag, 1 Samuel 15. 33. As thy Sword has made Women Childless, so shall thy Mother be
Childless among Women; and Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord.

It is good for men then in all their undertakings, to do to others, as they
would have others to do unto them: And this is that golden Rule, that the Lord
Christ himself lays down, Mat. 7. 12. All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you, do ye even so unto them; for this is the Law and the
Prophets: And that he might the better bespeak his People to a strict
Observation of this Lesson, he requires them in the first and second verses,
Not to judge, lest they be judged, for says he, with what judgment ye judge,
ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye met, it shall be measured to you
again: The perfect Law of Retaliation.

I am the willinger to say the more to this, though I am upon a digression,
because, if possible, I might keep others from transgression; for there are
many in this our day, I know, that are ready and willing to run headlong to
the ruin of the People of God here, though it be to the ruin of their own
Souls hereafter, and that to Eternity; for so says the Lord Christ himself,
Mat. 25. 41. Then shall the King say to them on his left hand, Depart from me,
ye cursed, into Everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; for
when I was an Hungry, ye gave me no meat; I was Thirsty, and ye gave me no
Drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in; Naked, and ye clothed me not;
Sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me not; for, inasmuch as ye did it not to
one of these little ones, v. 45. or the least of-these my brethren, ye did it
not unto me, v. 40.

Whence I would have all persecuting spirits to take notice, That if Christ at
that great day will be so strict upon men, for omitting the doing of that good,
that they might have done to the People of God; that he will be far more
stricter with them, for doing Acts of violence against them; for God is very
tender of his People, however men esteem of them; and so says the Prophet,
Zach. 2. 8. He that touches you, touches the Apple of his eye. God has been
Eminent in his Judgments of late days: And therefore let all persecuting
spirits, hear, and fear, and tremble, for the Lord will appear mightily for his
People.

But to return to our matter: King Saul being fully Commissionated for this
work of Amaleks destruction; and being persuaded to the faithful performance
thereof by Samuel, upon the account of what Benefits God had done for him; yet
Saul rendered not according to the Benefits bestowed upon him; and therefore he
was looked upon as a Rebel astainst God, 1 Samuel 15. 23. in that he saved the
best of the Sheep and Oxen, and King Agag alive; and this caused God to rend
the Kingdom from him, v. 28. And this is that, together with his going to the
Witch of Endor, that also cost him his life; for so says the Text, 1 Chronicles.
10. 13. So Saul died for his transgression, which he committed against the
Lord, even against the Word of the Lord, which he kept not; and also for asking
Counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to enquire of it: So that in Saul
also we see the Assertion made good, That God requires suitable returns for
Benefits bestowed, though from the greatest of Men or Nations; upon the neglect
whereof, God punishes without respect of Persons.

It is neither the Name, Dignity nor Power of the greatest of Kings, that can
exempt them from the sin-revenging hand of God; for Tophet is ordained of old,
says the Prophet, Isaiah 30. 33. yea, for the King it is prepared, he has
made it deep and large; the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the Breath of
the Lord like a stream of Brimstone does kindle it.

Neither is it the greatness of a Nation or a People, that can excuse them, if
they be found sinning against God; witness Israel of old, a Nation like the
Sands of the Sea shore, or as the Stars in the Firmament for number; yea, the
Lords Portion; for so says the Text, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. The Lords People are his
Portion, Jacob is the Lot of his Inheritance; the Vineyard that his own right
hand has planted, Psalm. 80. 15. Such as in their day had the highest
Privileges of any Nations under the Heavens; for so says the Prophet David,
Psalm. 147. 19, 20. He showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his
Judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt so with any Nation: And as for his
Judgments, they have not known them; yet for all this, by reason of Gods
sin-revenging hand upon them, the Apostle Paul takes up a great Lamentation,
Romans 9. the beginning, and tells us, That he could wish himself, that he were
accursed from Christ, for his Brethrens sake, concerning the flesh; who, says
he, are Israelites, to whom pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and the
Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises;
whose are the Fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ came.

Yet notwithstanding all these high Privileges, the Prophet is sent to them
with a Message from the Lord, Isaiah 6. 9, 10. Go, says the Lord, and tell
this People, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but
perceive not; make the heart of this People fat, and make their ears heavy, and
shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed.

And what is the Cause of all this, may some say?

Answ. The Prophet that was sent on this Message, with other of the Prophets,
will give a perfect answer, and tell you, That Israel did not render unto the
Lord according to his Benefits bestowed; and therefore wrath was upon them from
the Lord* for God had planted them a noble Vine, wholly a Righteous Seed; but
they were turned into the degenerate Plant of a strange Vine unto him, says
the Prophet, Jeremiah 2. 21. And the Prophet Isaiah sings the same Song, Isaiah
5. 1, etc. Now will I sing, says he, to my well Beloved, a Song of my well
Beloved touching his Uineyard. My well beloved has a Uineyard in a very
fruitful Hill, and he fenced it and gathered out the stones thereof, and
planted it with the choicest Uine; and he Built a Tower, and set a Winepress
therein, and he looked that it should bring forth Grapes, and it brought forth
Wild Grapes. V. 7. The Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, is the House of Israel,
and the Men of Judah, his pleasant Plant; and he looked for Judgment, but
behold, Oppression; for Righteousness, but behold, a Cry.

And therefore God calls themselves to Judge the Cause, v. 3. And now, O
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, Judge, I pray you, between me and
my Vineyard, What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not
done in it? And now, says he, Go to, I will tell you what I will do to my
Vineyard, I will take away the Hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and
break down the Wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down; and I will lay it
waste, it shall not be pruned nor dug; but there shall come up Briars and
Thorns. And for these Mis-actings of theirs, the Lord by his Prophet, Isai. 1.
2. takes up a great complaint, saying, Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth;
for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished and brought up Children, and they
have rebelled against me; the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters
Crib; but Israel does not know, my People do not consider: Ah! sinful Nation, a
People laiden with Iniquity, a Seed of Evildoers, Children that are
Corrupters; they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of
Israel to anger, they are gone away backward: By Reason whereof, we see the
Lord looks upon their Holy Duties as nothing, even as vanity; and their burning
of Incense, an abomination unto him.

Whence we may note, That though men be in the Perfect and Real Way of God, as
to his Worship; yet, if they do not render to God, if their Conversation answer
not their Profession, the best of their Worship is but vain and abominable in
Gods sight; and such as God is weary to bear, Isai. 1. 14. And such persons are
looked upon as Enemies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3. 18. And God looked
upon them to be so to him: and such as he will not long be burdened withal;
for so says the Prophet, Isaiah 1. 24. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the
Mighty One if Israel, Ah! I will ease me of mine Anversaries, I will avenge me
on mine E^emies: And we find this threatening was made good upon them, Zach. 7.
13, 14. Therefore, says the Prophet, it is come to pass, that as he cried, and
they would not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear; but I scattered them
with a Whirlwind among all the Nations whom they knew not, etc. and so they
continue a scattered people to this very day. So that we see the Assertion made
good in them also, That God requires suitable* Returns for Mercies bestowed,
though from the greatest of Men or Nations; upon the neglect whereof, God
punishes without respect of persons.

So that we see the point fully proved upon Nebuchadnezzar and Saul, two Great
and Potent Kings; and also ugon Israel, the greatest of Nations; and that not
only upon the account of multitude, but also the greatest Privileged Nation
under the Heavens.

I shall not spend time to lay down the Reasons of the Point; but in a word
shall say what the Lord Christ says, Luke 12. 48. To whom much is given, of
him shall be much required.

And so I shall come to some Uses, that may be made of the Point.

For, as Practice is the very life of Profession, So the Uses of a Sermon,
being well applied, become words spoken in season; which the Wise Man says,
Are like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, Prove. 25. 11.

And seeing it is so, that God requires suitable Returns for Benefits bestowed;
upon the neglect whereof, God punishes, etc.

This then may serve for a Use to great ones; and first, to thy self, O King,
to Exhort thee in the Name and Fear of Cod, seriously to consider particularly
what God has done for thee, how God has preserved thee both abroad and in
this Land of thy Nativity; and let me humbly beg thee once again; seriously to
consider the Hollow Oak, and that little Vessel which rides in thy constant
view, and those that were acting in and by them, for thy personal preservation
(the which, if report be true, thou have in a great measure already done, which
is very commendable) But this is that, O King, that I am chiefly pleading for,
that thou would endeavor to look through and beyond them, even to the Finger
and Power of that God that wrought in and by them; not only for thy Temporal,
but also (if thou be not wanting to thy self) for thy Eternal preservation,
if thou do make suitable Returns to him; that so wrath may not follow.

To this purpose, consider every one of thy Thoughts and Intentions, and
examine them before thou put them into action, see whether they tend to a
suitable Returning to God, for such great Benefits received from God, or not.

And if this, O King, be the bent of thy Spirit, and thy continued practice, I
can assure thee from the Word of the Lord, that it will be a lengthning out of
thy Tranquillity; for so says the wisest of men, by the assictance of the
Eternal Spirit, Prove. 16. 7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he will make
even his Enemies to be at peace with him; and not only so, but thou shall also
have a Benefit hereafter, and that to Eternity; for so says the Lord by the
mouth of a King, Psalm. 50. 23. Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me, and to him
that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of God.

And secondly, O King, seeing many Great Ones in this Nation have had a great
share in the Benefits God has bestowed upon thee; this may serve for a Use of
Exhortation also to them, to persuade them to consider seriously what God has
done for them in doing for thee; and further to examine what suitable Returns
they have already made, and what Rendrings they intend to make to God for such
great Benefits bestowed.

I desire to urge this the rather, because I see many of their Coaches standing
daily, where I fear they cannot duly Render to God according to such Mercies
bestowed; and therefore I shall desire to discharge my Conscience to them, in
letting them know, That without Holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.
14. and without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb 11. 6. Which Faith
comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God, Heb. 10. 17. and not by
Hearing scurrility in Stage Plays, May-games and Pastimes: Consider O ye Great
Ones, that are guilty of such actings; and know, that God requires other things
from you; and make suitable Returns to God, lest God Return his Judgments with
Indignation, and so the last be worse than the first: for we usually say, that
Relapses are dangerous, and many times prove worse than the first Distemper.

Thirdly, Seeing God requires suitable Returns for Benefits bestowed, though
from the greatest of Men or Nations; upon the neglect whereof, God punishes
without respect of Persons.

This then may also serve for a Use of Exhortation and Examination to this
Nation, considered as a Nation: And as some have said, They (to wit) the Nation
was a Body without a Head; meaning, they were without a King; for the King is
the Head, or Supreme, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. according to that of Samuel also to
Saul, 1 Samuel 14. 17. And Samuel said to Saul, When thou wast little in thine
own sight, wast thou not made the Head of the Tribes of Israel? And the Lord
anointed thee King over Israel, etc. So that now, O England, thou can not so
Complain, for by a miraculous hand thy Head is restored to thee again; examine
thy self now what Benefit thou have received; and also, how thou art bettered
thereby: Do thou render to God according to his Benefits bestowed? Art thou
grown more Holy than thou wast? Or rather, art thou not grow openly profane,
out of a sense of Gods Great Love to thee? Do thou rejoice before the Lord
with trembling? Or rather, is not thy rejoicing such, as that it would and
does, even make a truly Regenerate Soul tremble to behold it? Art thou rendering
to God, for bringing this great Design about without shedding of blood? Or
rather, is not thy Behavior such, as suddenly may cause God to open another
vein to the Effusion of thy Blood, even to the Confusion of thy face? Art thou
rejoicing, that the Sword in all visible probability is now sheathing again?
And is not that rejoicing such, that may justly cause God to Command it to run
through thy Borders a second time?

Art thou humble before thy God, O England, out of a Consideration of thine own
unworthiness, and of Gods great love to thee in these things? Or rather, art
thou not grown more haughty? And may not the Lord take up a Complaint against
thee and thy Daughters, O England, as once he did against his People of old?
Isa. 3. 16. and say to England, and in special to London, Because thy Daughters
are haughty, and walk with stretched out Necks, and wanton Eyes, walking and
mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet; therefore the Lord
will smite with a Scab the Crown of the Head of the Daughters of England; And
the Lord will discover her secret parts in that day: Or when the Lord shall say
so to England, Then will he take away the bravery of their tinkling Ornaments
about their feet, and their Cauls, and their round Tiers like the Moon, and the
Braslets, and the Mufflers, the Bonnets, and the Ornaments of the Legs, the
changeable suits of fantastical Attire; and instead of their sweet Powders, a
stink; instead of a Girdle, a Rent; instead of their crisped and well-set Hair,
Baldness; and instead of a Stomacher, a girding of Sackcloth; and Burning
instead of Beauty; and cause a second time their Men to fall by the Sword, and
their Mighty in War; for England is full of Distempers; so that God may justly
say of her, as once he said of Israel, Isa. 1. 6. From the sole of the foot,
even unto the head, there is no soundness in it, but mounds, and bruises; and
putrified sores; they have not been closed, neither bound up, nor mollified
with Ointments; for the Judgments nor the Mercies of God, have neither allured
nor restrained them from their Iniquities, but to this very day she has her
Tinpenny of Pride, being also full of the Dropsical Humors of all
Abominations; and yet in a deep Consumption of all true Piety, Pity,
Penitency, Patience and Purity; by which means she is become very Perverse,
Peevish, Profane and Pittiless.

Therefore, O England, Consider what God after all his Judgments and Mercies
requires of thee; and for the time to come, meet thy God with suitable
Returns, lest God meet thee again, in some or all his three fierce Judgments,
Sword, Pestilence or Famine; either to thy speedy rooting out, or thy Consuming
lingering Ruin. Consider what I say, and the Lord make thee wise.

And Secondly, Seeing it is so, That God requires suitable Returns for Benefits
bestowed, though from the greatest of Men or Nations, etc.

This then may serve for a Use of Reproof to all, from the Highest to the
Lowest, from him that sits upon the Throne, to him that grindeth at the
Mill, even to the Hewer of Wood and Drawer of Water; to all that have received,
and have not duly rendered, to such who like the Swine under the Acorn Tree,
have greedily swallowed down all the Benefits that comes from, God, never so
much as once looking to God, nor to him that sends them; And to say truth, it
fares generally with men as with those Leapers, Luk 17. 17. where ten were
cured, and but one found to return Praise: And indeed it is ten to one, whether
men generally know it really to be their duty, or not; therefore I shall
commend this Use to all that have not Rendered, and shall let them know in the
words of Solomon the wise, That he is in the way of Life that keeps
knowledge; whilst he that refuses reproof, erreth, Prove. 10. 17. For he that
hates reproof is brutish, Prove. 12. 1. And shame shall be to him that refuses
Instruction; whilst he that regards reproof shall be honored, Prove. 13. 18.
And therefore I shall desire all, seriously to consider the danger of not
Rendering.

For Hezekiah rendered not again according to the Benefits bestowed upon him,
but his heart was lifted up; therefore wrath fell upon him, and upon Judah and
Jerusalem.

And so I shall pass to the next Teachable Observation.

2. That many times God punishes a People for the misactings of their
Governors, whether in Church, State, or particular Families.

For the Proof of which Point, let us consider King David, who as to the
integrity of his inward-man, was upright before God; therefore we have this
Testimony of him, That he was a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13. 14. Yet
this integrity of his was accompanied with some imperfections, which caused
Gods wrath to burn hot against his People, as we may read, 2 Samuel 24. 1. For
King David by the instigation of that Enemy of mankind, was moved to number his
People, by which means the wrath of God was kindled against Israel; for so
says the Text, 2 Samuel 24. 1. And again the Anger of the Lord was kindled
against Israel; and He moved David against them to say, Go number Israel and
Judah.

Quest. But here it may be asked, How I prove this to be done by the persuasion
of that Evil One, seeing the Text does not in so many words say so?

Answ. To which I Answer; The Text in 2 Samuel 41. 1. nor in any other part of
the Chapter, does not in so many words prove it; but if according to the
teaching of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 13. We compare Spiritual things with
Spiritual; the Holy Ghost will make a clear Discovery; for compare this* 2 Samuel
24. 1. with, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. we shall find this, He that moved David in this, 2 Samuel 24. 1. is that Enemy of mankind, that Evil One, or Satan; for so says the
text, 1 Chronicles, 21. 1. And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to
number Israel.

Quest. But here it may be farther demanded, What was Isreal's sin? seeing (...)
(...), what had Israel done?

Answ. I Answer; Israel was not at this time (as we read of) acting in any
gross or known sin; yet Israel must be punished: Which proves our Assertion to
be true, That God many times punishes a People for the misactings of their
Governors, etc.

Quest. What then was David's sin, may some say?

Answ. I Answer; David's sin lay in numbering the People; for so says the text,
1 Chronicles. 21. 7. And God was displeased at this thing; therefore he smote Israel.

Quest. Was the numbering of the People then the only Cause, that moved God to
slay with the Plague threescore and ten thousand? as we read, verse. 14.

Answ. Yea, so says the text, v. 17. For David said unto God, Is it not I that
Commanded the People to be numbered? Even I it is that have sinned and done
evil* But as for these sheep, what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee,
be on me and on my Fathers House, but not on thy People, that they should be
punished.

Quest. Is it so dangerous a thing then to tell over, or number the People, may
some say?

Answ. I Answer; That to tell over or number the People, simply so considered,
is not sin; for then it were a sin for Joshua to number the People, Josh. 8.
10. Or to number the Eleven, Acts 1. 26. who were numbered; For they gave forth
the Lots, and the Lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with the Eleven.

But to number the People, so as to put Confidence in an Arm of Flesh; to
number the People so as to depart from the Lord, this is an accursed thing; for
so says the Prophet, Jer. 17. 5. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his Arm; and whose heart departs from the
Lord: And this I humbly conceive might be David's sin; for if we cast our eye
but into 1 Chronicles. 20. we shall find Joab, the Captain of David's Host,
destroying the Country of the Children of Ammon, and Rabbah, and slaying three
Giants in three several Overthrows of the Philistines; and the Devil knows
right well how to make his Advantages.

He knew, that God was jealous of his Honor; and if he could but work up Danid
to put confidence in an Arm of flesh, or to give glory to the multitude of his
Armed men; this was an advantage good enough against Israel; this was that
which would cause God to weaken his strength, by taking them away, and have a
Controversy with them: And thus God does in Mercy to his People, when they
begin to put ^fidence, or set their hearts upon Creature Comforts, God is then
rea^ (...) take them away; and thus God is said, to hedge up their way with
Thorns, Hos. 2. 6, 7. And to make a Wall that they shall not find their w^y;
and they shall follow after their Lovers, but shall not overtake them, they
shall seek after them, but not find them; for says the Propher, Isai. 57. 13.
The wind shall carry them away, vanity shall take them.

We may see this Assertion farther proved in the Egyptians, in those ten
Plagues that came upon them, for the hardness of the heart of Pharaoh their
King; What misery did they endure in that weeks time of the waters of the
Rivers being turned into Blood? Exodus 7. 20, 27. What did they endure by reason
of the Plagues of Froggs, Lice and Flies? Exodus 8. 3, 17, 24. in those Plagues
of Murrion and Hail? Exodus 9. 2, 10, 23. in those Plagues of Locusts, and
Darkness? Exodus 10. 4, 22. and in the Death of all their firstborn, both of
Man and Beast? Exodus 12. 29.

The like we may see threatened against Israel of old, by reason of the
misactings of their Princes, Judges, Priests, and Prophets, Micah 3. 9. Hear, I
pray you (says the Prophet) ye Heads of the House of Jacob, and Princes of the
House of Israel, that abhor Judgment, and pervert all Equity, v. 10. That
build up Zion with Blood, and Jerusalem with Iniquity, v. 11. The Heads thereof
judge for Reward, and the Priests thereof teach for Hire, and the Prophets
thereof Divine for Money; like the Priests and Prophets of England at this day;
and they likewise, as those of old, will lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not
the Lord among us, no evil can come upon us? But though they say thus; What
says the Prophet? Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a Field, and
Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the Mountain of the Lords House, as the high
places of the Forest.

So that we may see, That for the mis-actings of Churchmen, that teach for
Hire, and Divine for Money* Zion, or the Church, shall be punished, yea plowed
as a Field, and laid waste, and the Mountain of the Lords House become as the
high places of the Forest; As well as for the perverting of Judgment and
Equity by the Princes and Judges, Jerusalem, or the Kingdom, shall become
heaps; for there will be a scattering of the Sheep, for the negligence of the
Shepherd; yea, so says the Prophet, Isa. 10. 21. For the Pastors are become
brutish, and have not sought the Lord; therefore they shall not Prosper, and
all their Flock shall be scattered. And so says the Lord Christ by John the
Revelator, speaking to the Angel, or the Pastor of the Church of Ephesus,
Revelation 2. 5. Remember (says he) from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
and do thy first work, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove
thy Candlestick o^t of his place, except thou Repent.

As if he should say, Thou art the Light of the Church, and the Feeder of the
Flock; the Church or People, are the Candlestick that upholds thee, and the
Flock that employes thee, and unless thou repent of thy deadness, thy dullness,
thy drowsiness, thy coldness, thy carelessness, and thy carnality; I will
suddenly remove thy Candlestick, I will soon disperse the flock; And then, what
will become of thee? who will thou feed? who will thou light? Thy Talent will
then be under a Bushel, and not on a Candlestick, to give light to those that
are in the House.

This Assertion we may also see made good in or upon private Families.

That God many times punishes a People for the misactings of their Governors,
whether in Church, State, or particular Families.

When Abraham was journying into Egypt with his Wife Sarah, being driven
thither by a Famine, Genesis 12. he said unto Sarah his Wife, v. 11, etc. Behold
now, I know that thou art a fair Woman to look upon; therefore it shall come to
pass when the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This is his Wife,
and they shall kill me, but they will save thee alive; say I pray thee, thou
art my Sister, that it may be well with me for thy sake, that my Soul may live
because of thee.

Whence by the way we may note; First, That Famine and outward distresses
possibly may attend the dearest of Gods Children; for we see Abraham that
friend of God, was driven into Egypt by reason that the Famine was grievous in
the Land, v. 10.

And secondly, That the fear of the loss of life, may stand with the nature of
true Faith; for Abraham the Father of the Faithful, said, When the Egyptians
shall see thee, they will say, this is his Wife, and they will kill me;
therefore say, thou art my Sister.: And Paul the Apostle, a faithful Soul,
whose life being laid wait for, was let down by the Wall in a Basket, Acts 9.
25. Yea, the Lord Christ himself refused to walk in Jury, but walked in
Galilee, because the Jews sought to kill him, John 7. 1.

But to our Matter, upon Abraham's saying, that Sarah was his Sister, verse. 19.
and upon the Commendations of Sarah to Pharaoh by his Princes, Sarah was taken
into Pharaohs House, and Abraham was well entreated by Pharaoh for Sarahs sake,
v. 15, 16.

Yet the Lord Plagued Pharaoh and his house with great Plagues, because of
Sarah, Abraham's Wife, v. 17. Pharaoh sins, and that ignorantly too, in taking
Abraham's Wife into his House; for so says the Text, v. 18. For Pharaoh called
Abraham, and said, What is this that thou have done unto me? Why did thou not
tell me she was thy Wife? Why said thou she is my Sister? So I might have
taken her to me to Wife.

Though Pharaoh sins, I say, and that ignorantly too, as it is clear he did;
yet his House must be plagued with great Plagues.

Whence by the way, I would have all to take notice, That it is not ignorance
that will excuse or shroud, neither the meanest nor the greatest of men, from
the sin-revenging hand of God.

And secondly, That God takes special care for his faithful ones, so as that he
will not respect persons when they evilly entreat them; for so says the
Prophet, Psalm. 115. 14, 15. He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he
reproved Kings. for their sake; saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm.

And thus as Abraham was traveling toward the South Country, whilst he so
journed in Gerar, the Lord reproved Abimelech also, King of Gerar, for his
sake, Genesis 20. For Abraham (again) said of Sarah his Wife, she is my Sister;
and Abimelech King of Gerar sent and took Sarah, v. 2. But God came to
Abimelech in a Dream by night, and said unto him, Thou art but a dead man, (a
sharp Reproof indeed) And he gives him a Reason for his so saying, For the
Woman (says he) which thon have taken is a man's Wife, v. 3. Yet says the
Text, Abimelech had not come near her, v. 4. And Abimelech said, Lord, will thou stay also a Righteous Nation? Said he not, she is my Sister? and she, even
she her self said, He is my Brother; in the integrity of my heart, and
innocence of my hands have I done this, v. 5. And God said unto him in a Dream,
yea I know that thou did this in the integrity of thy heart, for I also
withheld thee from sinning against me; therefore suffered I thee not to touch
her, v. 6.

Whence I would note also by the way; First, That he who is the Searcher of the
heart, and Tryer of the reins, takes a perfect account of the bent of the
spirits of the Sons and Daughters of Men.

And secondly; That accordingly he either restrains Souls from sinning against
him, or else gives persons up to commit sin with greediness; for so says the
Text, And as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge; therefore God
gave them up to a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 28. But this is that in the seventh
verse, that makes the Assertion good; Now therefore (says the Lord) restore
the Man his Wife, for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou
shall live; and if thou restore her not, know thou, that thou shall surely die,
thou and all that thou have.

The like we may see made good in Achans Family, Josh. 7. That when Achan had
taken of the accursed things, that goodly Babylonish Garment, the Silver, and
the Wedge of Gold; the Judgment extended not only to the punishment of
himself, but also to his whole Family, and all that was his; for so says the
Text, Josh. 7. 24. And Joshua and all Israel with him, took Achan the Son of
Zerah, and the Silver, and the Garment, and the Wedge of Gold, and his Sons,
and his Daughters, and his Oxen, and his Asses, and his Sheep, and his Tent,
and all that he had: And v. 25. They burned them with fire, after they had
stoned them with stones.

Now the Lord Christ says, Mat. 18. 16. That in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every Truth shall be established; and I having proved each Particular
in the Assertion by two witnesses at the least; That God many times punishes a
People for the misactings of their Governors, whether in Church, State, or
particular Families.

And now, lest I make my lines too numerous, I shall forbear to lay down any
Reasons of the Point; but shall proceed to some Uses that may be for our
present benefit.

And seeing it is so, That God many times punishes a People for the misactings
of their Governors, whether in Church, State, or particular Families:

This then may serve for a Use of Exhortation to thee, O King, to thee, and to
all Kings, Princes, and Governors of Nations, Pastors, and Elders of
Congregations, and Masters of Families, as they tender their own good, and the
good of those that are under them, that they walk before the Lord, and go in
and out before their People in singleness of heart, and in the sincerity of
their Souls, as in the sight of God, having a single-eye to the Glory of God,
and the good of the Souls that are under their charge, carefully watching over
all their thoughts, words and actions, so as that they bring not the Judgments
of God upon their people by their misactings; and to be often with the Lord in
Prayer, that so they may have his Direction and Protection in all their
Enterprises and Undertakings, to the comfort of their own Souls, and the Peace,
Benefit and Well-being of those that are under them.

And secondly, This may also serve for a U^ of Exhortation to all Subjects,
though they be Pastors, or Elders of Congregations, and Masters of Families, as
well as Members of Churches, or Children, or Servants in particular Families,
that they be often at the Throne of Grace in the behalf of their Kings, Princes
and Governors; and in special, that Englands Subjects be often with the Lord
in the behalf of their KING, who from his long Exile and Restraint, is brought
again into this Land of his Nativity, which is so full of Licentiousnes, Luxury
and Lasciviousness, Revilings, Rendings and Tearings, Roarings, Rantings and
Swearings, with those Abominations of Stage Plays, May-games and Pastimes,
Pride and Prodigality, that God in Mercy would be pleased to direct his Heart
so, as that he be not won either to own, or allow of them; but to disown,
diswade and discountenance them: And that God would farther strengthen both his
Heart and Hand, to prosecute that lovely, laudable, prudent, pious,
Conscientious and Christian, that truly Noble and most Heroic Princely
PROCLAMATION, by Him issued forth at his first coming amongst us again, and
fince by him seconded by another; that so England, though now even a sink of
Abominations, may by the good hand of God upon us, by his industry, become as
it shall be once said of Jerusalem, to be a Praise of the whole Earth.

And that God would direct him so to consider of his Holy Things, as that he
present nothing to God, but what is Commanded by God, that so God may not only
Crown him with a Crown of Gold here, but also with that Crown of Glory, which
shall never fade away.

And that he be thus found Rendering to the Lord, considering the danger of the
neglect thereof.

For Hezekiah rendered not again according to the Benefits bestowed upon him,
but his heart was lifted up; therefore wrath was upon him, and upon Judah and
Jerusalem.

And Thirdly, This may serve for a Use of Exhortation, to Members of
Congregations, and Children, and Servants of particular Families; that they be
also constant in this Duty of Prayer, in the behalf of their respective
Pastors, Elders, Fathers or Masters, that they may be so directed by divine
Assistance, that as under their Prince, so likewise under them, they may lead a
peaceable, a quiet, and a godly life, in all godliness and honesty.

And so I shall pass to my Third and last Teachable Conclusion, viz.

Thirdly, That outward Enjoyments do many times so affect the Heart of man, as
that they lift them up, even to the forgetting of God, to their own ruin.

The great Jehovah knowing right well the nature of things, as he was the Maker
of thom; and the temper of Man's Heart, as he was the Former of it; when he
caused Moses to let Israel know the particular Privileges they should enjoy in
the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 8. he gives them this Caution, v. 12, 13, 14. That
when they had eaten and were full, and had built goodly Houses, and dwelt
therein, when their Herds and Flocks, their Silver and their Gold was
increased, that then their heart should not be listed up.

But the truth of this Assertion we may see verified in Belshazzar King of
Babylon; for when Daniel was sent for to Read and Interpret the Haud-writing on
the Wall, to Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 18. he said, O King, the Most High God gave
unto thy Father a Kingdom, and Majesty, and Glory, and Power; and for the
Majesty he gave him, all People, Nations and Languages trembled and feared
before him: whom he would he slew, and whom he would he kept alive; whom he
would he set up, and whom he would he put down; as thou do now, O King: But
when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in Pride, he was deposed
from his Kingly Throne, and they took his glory from him, and he was driven
from the Sons of Men, and his heart was made like the Beasts, and his dwelling
was with the wild Asses, they fed him with grass like Oxen, and his body was
wet with the Dew of Heaven, till he knew that the Most High Rules in the
Kingdom of men, and that he appoints over it whomsoever he will.

Whence we may note, That as his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in
Pride, so it was upon the account of his high enjoyments, to the forgetting of
God, who dispensed them to him; which we see was the Cause of his casting down.

The like we may see in Uzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26. 1. who after the death of Amaziah
his Father, was made King of Judah, And he Reigned in Jerusalem fifty and two
years, and he did that which was right in the fight of the Lord: And V. 5. He
fought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the Visions of
God, and as long as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper; And he went
forth and warred against the Philistines, and brake down the Wall of Gath, and
the Wall of Jabneh, and the Wall of Ashdod; and God helped him against the
Philistines, and against the Arabians; and the Ammonites gave gifts to him, and
his Name spread abroad, even to the entering in of Egypt; for he strengthened
himself exceedingly, and he built Towers, both in Jerusalem and in the Desert;
and dug many Wells, for he had much Cattle, both in the law Country, and in
the Plains; Husbandmen also, and Vine-dressers: Moreover, he had an Host of
fighting men, that went out to War in Bands; his chief men or Captains of War,
were two thousand and six hundred: And verse. 15. He made in Jerusalem Engines of
War, made by cunning Workmen, to be on the Towers, and on the Bulwarks, to
shoot Arrows and great Stones withal; and his Name spread far abroad, for he
was marvellously helped, till he was strong: But when he was strong, V. 16. his
heart was lifted up to his destruction; for he transgressed against the Lord
his God, and went into the Temple of the Lord; and burned Incense upon the
Altar of Incense. And he was struck with Leprosy, and died without cure.

Thus whilst Uzzia sought the Lord, V. 5. God made him to prosper: But when his
heart was lifted up, and he forgot God, God left him, and punished his sin with
a Disease, that to him proved mortal.

Whence we note, That when Uzziah separates himself from his God, hy forgetting
him; God by that Leprosy separated him from the Privileges of his House, and
the Society of men, and from all things that were the Cause of his hearts
lifting up; for so says the Text, ver. 21. And Uzzia the King was a Leper
until the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a Leper; for he
was cut off from the House of the Lord: And Jotham his Son was over the Kings
House, Judging the People of the Land.

And thus we see the Lord had a Controversy with the Prince of Tyrus, against
whom he gave out a Commission to the Prophet, Ezekiel. 28. 2. saying, Son of Man,
say unto the Prince of Tyrus, Thus says the Lord, Because thine heart is
lifted up, and thou have said, I am a god, I sit in the Seat of God, in the
midst of the Seas; yet thou art a Man, and not God, though thou set thine heart
as the heart of God. And the reason of the lifting up of his heart is rendered
in the fourth and fifth verses, which proves our Assertion fully; for says
verse. 4. With thy Wisdom and with thy Understanding thou have gotten thee
riches, and have gotten Gold and Silver into thy Treasuries. And v. 5. By thy
great Wisdom, and by thy Traffic have thou increased thy riches, and thy heart
is lifted up, because of thy riches. V. 7. Behold, therefore I will bring
strangers upon thee, the terrible of the Nations; and they shall draw their
Sword against the beauty of thy Wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness.
And v. 8. They shall bring thee down to the Pit, and thou shall die the deaths
of them that are slain in the midst of the Seas. And verse. 10. Thou shall die
the death of the Uncircumcised, by the hand of Strangers; for I have spoken it
says the Lord.

Thus whilst men's hearts are lifted up, and they forget God in the Enjoyment of
outward things; and with the rich Man in the Gospel, Luke 12. 19. begin to live
to themselves, and to sing a Requium to their Souls; the Lord we see brings
them down with a, Thou Fool, this night shall they require thy Soul from thee.

So that we see the Point also fully proved. viz. That outward Enjoyments, many
times do so affect the heart of man, as that they lift it up even to the
forgetting of God, to their own ruin.

Several Uses might be made hereof, the which for brevity sake I shall here
omit. And shall only this say,

That we see by common Experience, That they that are hungerbit, when they come
to their full of Diet, they run upon it with greediness, like Israel of old, 1 Samuel 14. 32. Who flew upon the Spoil, and took Sheep and Oxen, and Calves, and
slew them on the ground, and the People did eat them with the Blood: Which was
contrary to the Law of God, and which became their sin. Even so hunger-bit
Souls many times eat with that eagerness, that they do not only sin in their
Excess, but also Surfeit themselves to the loss of their lives.

This then may serve for a Use of Caution to thee, O King, that of a long time
have been a Stranger to this Land of thy Nativity, and have been forced to
wander from one Kingdom to another Nation, from one Language to another People,
in penury and want; and now being come to three Kingdoms of thine own, flowing
with Milk and Honey, and yet abounding in all manner of Excess of Riot; let me
Caution thee in the fear of the Lord, that thou surfeit not thy self upon the
profits nor pleasures thereof; nor, let thy Men of Valor, neither Domestic
nor Foreign, that are lately come over to thy assistance, cause thee to put
thy confidence in an Arm of flesh; lest thy heart be lifted up, and so thou
forget thy God to thine own ruin: Neither surfeit thy self with too much
bloodshed, lest thou make thy self Blood-guilty, and so God begin a new
Inquisition; but rather show Pity and Compassion, Love and Lenity, and rather
Lament than Lance; and rather Triumph over the killing thy Corruptions than
thy Subjects; and resolve to refer thy will to the Lord, who says, Uengeance
is mine, and I will repay it, Romans 12. 19. I would here be understood in a good
sense; for I do not desire the Obstruction of the due Administration of
Justice, but that it may be so administered, that Mercy may be intermixed
therewith; and also that Relenting and Sobriety, and not Exaltation and
Inhumanity, be in the Execution.

For I know, That it is an Ordinance of God; For Magistrates are set up for the
punishment of Evil doers, Romans 13. 3, 4. For the Law is not made for the
Righteous man, but for the Lawless and Disobedient, for the Ungodly and for
Sinners, for Unholy and Profane, for Murderers of Fathers, and Murderers of
Mothers, for Man-slayers, for Whoremongers, and for them that defile themselves
with mankind, for Man-stealers, for Liars and perj^red persons, or any thing
else that is contrary to sound Doctrine, 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10.

And seeing the Apostle says, That in many things we offend all, James 3. 2.
For if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us, 1 John 1. 8.

O then, be persuaded to bring thy self to the Bar of Gods Justice, and there
Arraign, Judge, and condemn thy self; for, says our Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 31. If
we would Judge our selves, we should not be Judged; but when we are Judged, we
are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World.

And this, O King, is the readiest way I know of, to render duly to God, and
to keep thy heart from being lifted up, that so wrath fall not upon thee and
thy Kingdoms.

I beseech thee then in the fear of the Great Jehovah, consider what I say; and
the Lord in Mercy make thee Wise; that as thou art an Heir to a Crown of gold
here, so thou may he made partaker of that Crown of Righteousness which
never fades away; which, says the Apostle, The Lord the Righteous Judge shall
give to (...) at that day, and not to (...) only, but unto all them also that
love his appearan^e, 2 Timothy 3. 8. And so, O King, let thy Soul in the
singleness, thereof Echo with mine, and say, Even so, come Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

A DECLARATION Of a small Society of BAPTIZED BELIEVERS, undergoing the Name of
FREE-WILLERS, about the CITY of LONDON.
WE well knowing, that we are and have been misrepresented to the People of
this and other Nations, as well by particular Letters from friend to friend, as
by public Intelligence in Pamphlets and News-Books, by which means we have
been rendered odious in the eyes almost of all, and, as it were, made a byword,
and a hissing to all; were notwithstanding willing, according to the
requirement of our Savior, Luke 21. 19. In our patience to possess our Souls,
and silently to wait upon our God, for a clearing of our innocence, and the
cleanness of our hands in his eyesight: But lately having had a view of a
Declaration, dated the 12th, of December last, made by some Persons of the
particular Judgment, in which some others of another persuasion have joined, to
the which in several particulars we cannot in the least assent; We therefore
thought it our bounden Duty for the vindication of that Truth, which we are in
present profession and practice of, as also fearing lest they having declared
to public view, we by our silence should be looked upon, either to be of the
same Judgment with them in what they have declared, or else guilty of all or
some of those five Particulars they in that Declaration say the Baptists in
general are charged withal; have therefore set pen to paper, and shall first
give a particular of the said five Charges, and then, as in the presence of
God, lay down our real Judgments, and Persuasions, grounded upon Scripture
record, to those Charges; by which it will be apparent that we are not guilty
of them at all, and that we differ from the said Declarers in point of
Judgment; and if we shall in any thing therein derogate from the mind of God,
we shall desire in the Spirit of love to be rectified by better Judgments, from
the word of truth, and shall think our selves happy gainers in such a Christian
reproof. Say they, we being misrepresented to the Nation;

1. As such as are opposite to Magistracy. 2. That we would destroy the Public
Ministry of the Nation, who differ from us in some things about Religion, 3.
That we do countenance the People called Quakers, in their irregular practice.
4. That we do endeavor a toleration of all miscarriages, in things
Ecclesiastical and Civil, under pretense of Liberty of Conscience. 5. That we
desire to murder and destroy those that differ from us in matters of Religion.
To the first, we positively say, that we are so far from opposing Magistracy,
as that it would be to us matter of great rejoicing to know who were our
Magistrates: But far greater to see such set up who are men fearing God, and
hating covetousness, that so (...) might be duly executed without respect of
persons, and Judgment (...) down like water, and righteousness like a mighty
stream; that so there might be no more leading into captivity, and that
complaining in our streets might have an end: But for our parts to take a
carnal weapon in our hands or use the least violence either to support or pull
down the worst* or to set up or maintain the best of men, we look not upon it
to be our duty in the least; much less to have a thought of endeavoring to
set up our selves, either directly or indirectly; for were we abilitated and
furnished with such endowments as might render us capable of being Rulers, yet
could we not allow our selves to act as Magistrates, because we are a People
chosen out of the world, John 15. 19. and look upon ou^ selves as Pilgrims and
Strangers in the earth, Heb. 11. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 11. But this we know to be the
mind of God, from Romans 13. the beginning, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Tit. 3. 2. that we are
to be subject to, and not to resist the Powers, because they be ordained of
God; and as God sets them up, so he requires his Sons and Daughters to render
to them Tribute, Custom, Fear and Honor, Romans 13. 7. And we further declare,
That it is our bounden duty i^obedience to our God, to pray for Kings, and all
that are in Authority, ^ Tim. 2. 22. So that we are so far from opposing them,
as that we say it is our duty to obey them, in all civil things that are
agreeable to the mind of God; and if they shall require any thing from us that
is contrary to his mind and will, revealed in his Holy Scriptures of truth, we
say we are not to resist them; but if in conscience we cannot obey them, then
we are patiently to suffer under them, whatever they shall inflict upon us for
our non-obedience to their requirements: And to this we yet further declare,
that it is our real Judgment, as to things Spiritual, not to own them as our
Lawgivers in the least, for there is one Lawgiver which is able to save, and
to destroy, Jam. 4. 12. which is the Lord, Isa. 33. 22. And therefore, if they
shall at any time impose upon us Laws in point of worship, that is, either to
worship a False God, or the true God after a false manner, we by Gods
assistance shall tell them with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 3. 16.
That we are not careful to answer them in that matter, yet shall not violently
resist, but with them patiently suffer under them, as aforesaid.

To the second, That we would destroy the public Ministry of the Nation, that
differ from us in some things about Religion; We do declare, that if there be a
destruction intended between us, we must leave it at their doors, and desire
them to Judge between the all-seeing God, the searcher of all hearts, and their
own consciences, what they have intended by their so often pressing Parliament
men, from time to time, for a suppression of all that are not of their Judgment
in matters of Religion: and upon search made, if they find themselves guilty of
a desire of any such destruction to us, we shall beg them in Gods fear, to
break off that evil by timely Repentance, and make their Peace with God; as for
our parts, we are so far from desiring any revenge against them, or any other
that shall desire or endeavor our ruin, as that in the presence of God, we
shall rather pity than envy them, and according to the requirement of our
Lawgiver, Mat. 5. 44. pray for them, and their conversion, not at all in the
least desiring or, endeavoring their confusion. That there are many things
wherein the public Ministry of the Nation and we differ, in matters of
Religion, both in Doctrine and Discipline, is very clear; and that we design
or so much as desire the destruction of them, or any other persons whatsoever,
for such differences, or any other matters concerning our selves, we hope in
our further answer to this, and to the fourth and fifth Particulars, we shall
manifest to be as clear; and also therein discover our selves to be the
peaceable Lambs of Christ* John 21. 15. the great Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. 1 Pet. 5 4. Heb. 10. 20. Who does require us to learn of
him, for he is lowly and meek, Matthew. 11. 29. Yet notwithstanding, we do
declare, when or wherever some of us shall conveniently meet with any of them,
either in private or in public, we shall resolve (God assisting* us) to
contend earnestly with them, for the Faith once delivered to the Saints,
according to that Exhortation of the Spirit of God by his Apostle, Jude 3. and
(...) them, and all oppositions, and (...) whatsoever, as good (...) of Jes^
Chri^, 2 Ti^. 2, 3. fight the good fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6. 12. In which
combat we are confident, we neither shall hazard life, nor draw blood; for
through mercy we can say, with our Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4. That though we
live in the flesh, yet w^ war not after the flesh, for the weapons of our (...)
not carnal.

To the third, That we (...) the People called Quakers in their irregular
practice. To this we answer, and God is o^ witness, we lie not, that we are so
far from countenancing the Quakers, or our selves in any irregular practice, as
that if we our selves be found i^ any such actings, we shall not violen^ly
oppose, but patiently subject to such penalties as the breach of such Laws
calls for: it would have been well, if the Afsertors had declared wherein this
Irregular practice does consist, that so we might have given a more particular
answer; yet we hope by what has and shall be declared, it will be easily
judged, that w^ for our parts are no such people as the Baptists generally are
reported, and some show themselves to be.

To the fourth, That we endeavo^r a tolleration of all misc^riages in things
Ecclesiastical and Civil, under (...) of Liber^y of Conscience* If by
endeavoring a tolleration of all miscarriages in things Ecclesiastical, the
Assertors intend amongst our selves in our own Assembles: we shall answer them,
as in the presence of God, the searcher of all hearts; That we are so far from
any such Toleration, as that we at this very day go under a reproach by that
people we formerly walked withal, because in the reallity of our souls, and the
integrity of our hearts, we cannot allow of some things, that we judge to be of
that nature amongst them; we well knowing, that the Lord Christ requires a
perfect observation of, and a universal obedience to all things whatsoever he
commanded, Mat. 28. 20. And that as well to what has been laid down by his
Apostles, given in by the incomes of that Spirit that was to lead them into all
truth, and to show them things to come, John 16. 13. which are also the
commands of Christ, 1 Cor. 14. 37. as to those that were laid down by himself,
John 18. 12, 15. So that we positively say, that if we shall allow of any
miscarriages either in Doctrine or Discipline amongst our selves, to 'thwart
the mind of Christ revealed in his Scriptures of truth, we can expect no better
answer from him, than a Proclamation of our Worship to be a vain Worship, as
once he declared against the Jews, Matthew. 15. 9. And therefore if miscarriages
rise amongst us, we are to bring such miscarriages to the the touchstone of
Gods word, and so weigh them in the balance of the Sanctuary, and finding them
either too heavy or too light, that is, either adding or diminishing from or to
the mind of Christ, we are the^ to repair to those wholesome Laws left us in
Scripture record, for the regulating of such miscarriages, according to the
(...) of them, as they are private or public, or more or less in their several
agravations; and as they are committed by persons standing in such o^ such
relations: We say the more of this, because most persons think, and many do not
stick to say, that we live and act in things Ecclesiastical, as Libertines, and
without Church Government, because we withdraw our selves from the public
Assemblies; But did such persons rightly consider, what the Discipline of the
Ministry of the Nation is, in their Parochial Assemblies, who profess
themselves to be the true Spouse and Church of Christ, and compare it with the
mind of Christ revealed in the Scriptures of Truth, who gives Law^ to his
Church, which is that body of which he himself is the head, Ephesians. 4. 15. 21.
22. Col. 1. 18. 2. 19. They would then find themselves to be the Libertines,
and not we; and therefore we shall earnestly desire all that are unacquainted
with the true Discipline of the Church of Christ, well to weigh, and seriously
to consider these Statute Laws of Christ, in that case provided, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Ephesians. 5. 11. Matthew. 18. 15. 1 Timothy 5. 12, 19, 20. 1 Timothy 6. 5.
1 Timothy 1. 20. Tit. 3. 10. 2 These. 2. 15. 2 These. 3. 10. 1 Cor. 5. 4, 9, 11. The
which, as we will answer the contrary at the great Day of account, we dare not
in the least wilfully violate or neglect. But if by miscarriage^ in things
Ecclesiastical, they mean that we endeavor a Tolleration of all miscarriages
amongst them in their Assemblies, we shall in the presence of God clear our
selves and say, we have nothing at all to do with them, in such matters; for we
say, they are without as to us, 1 Cor. 5. 12, 13. And so we look upon our
selves to be as to them: And if any one shall seem to be troubled at this term
Without, and object and say, that we are all the Creation of God, and what need
these expressions of, Stand at a distance, I am more holy than you; To such ^e
shall answer in the Spirit of Love and Meekness, and God is our Witness
without OSTENTATION, that it is true, all the Sons and Daughters of Adam are
the Sons and Daughters of God by Creation, but few by Regeneration and
Adoption, for Many are called, but few are chosen, Matthew, 20. 16. for not the
hear^rs of the Law, but the doors shall be justified, Romans 2. 13. And not every
one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he
that does the will of the Father, Matthew. 7. 21. We well know, that many will
say, these are hard sayings, and cannot well bear them; But to such we shall
give a direction in our Post-s^ript, where from one of us they may expect, and
we hope also find good satisfaction as to the term Without.

That we own Liberty of Conscience we confess; but under that or any other
pretense; to endeavor a Toleration of any Miscarriages, either in things
Ecclesiastical, or Civil, we have given (we hope) full satisfaction; for seeing
it is the will of our Master, to have the Tares and the Wheat grow together
till the Harvest, Matthew. 13. 30. And that our Heavenly Father does exercise his
long-suffering to the whole bulk of mankind, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. We look upon it to
be our Duty to follow God, as Dear Children, and thus to walk in love, Ephesians.
5. 1, 2. and therefore are like-minded, having the same love, Phil. 2. 2. And
therefore do further declare, that we are as free, that all others should enjoy
their Liberties, as we our selves, of what Judgment soever they be; we well
knowing, that some are called at the eleve^th hour, as well as at the first and
third, Matthew. 20. 1, 6. And had the Apostle Paul* been plucked up whilst he was
a Tare, a Persecutor, a Blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1. 13. and the chief of sinners, v.
15 he had never been such choice Wheat, to Satisfy, Refresh, Enable, Enliven,
Inlighten, Encourage, build up, and Instruct, Correct, and Reprove the Building
of God; 1 Cor. 3. 9. the House of God, Heb* 3. 6. the Household of God, Ephesians.
2. 19. the Sons and Daughters of God, 2 Cor. 6. 18. Nor that body of which
Christ is the head, Col. 1. 18. and therefore we cannot but say again, that we
are as free that all others should enjoy their Liberties in the things of God,
as we our selves; We well knowing, that every one must give an account of
himself to God, Romans 14. 12. for every one shall receive the things done in the
body, according to what they have done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.
10. Matthew. 25. 34, 41. But either to procure or maintain our own or others
Liberties by force of Arms, or the least violence, we can find no warrant from
the Scriptures of truth in the least, which is that only and alone Rule that we
walk by, for all the remedy that we find there recorded is, that if they
persecute us in one City, we may flee into another; and this we see acted by
our Savior himself, John 7. 1. and by his Parents, Matthew. 2. 14. and the
Apostle Peter, Acts 12. 17. and Saint Paul, Acts 9. 25, 26. 1 Cor. 11. 33. And
to follow our Master, and to tread in the footsteps of the Flock of God gone
before us, we judge it very safe; but to resist by force of Arms, or use the
least violence, we judge unwarrantable.

To the fifth and last particular, That we would murder and destroy those that
differ from us in Matters of Religion.

To this we cannot but answer, that so to do we judge were not so much as
common Humanity, much less Religion or Christianity; but our Religion is, pure
and undefiled before God and our Father, which is, to visit the Fatherless and
widows, not to make fatherless and widows; and to visit them in their
afflictions, not to murder and destroy their Relations, to bring them under
Afflictions: But to this we further answer, that this and the 4th Particular we
judge seem to contradict one another, for murdering and destroying for
difference in matters of Religion, and Liberty of Conscience cannot stand
together, nor in the eye of Reason can they be charged against one and the same
persons; for murdering and destroying for difference in matters of Religion,
destroys Liberty of Conscience; and Liberty of Conscience swallows up and
drowns murdering, and destroying for difference in matters of Religion; so
that it argues, that the Assertors of these things are yet in Babylon, and
Confusion, with those our Apostle writ of, in 1 Timothy 1. 7. not knowing well
what they say, nor whereof they do affirm; yet notwithstanding seeing we are
therewith charged, in order to the discharging our selves of this confused
burden, we shall in the singleness of our souls yet farther discover our real
judgments, as to the main intent of the Charge, which is murdering and
destroying; and add this further, that we read of a threefold Sword in
Scripture.

1. The Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, Ephesians. 6. 17. 2. The
Sword of Justice, which is the Magistrates Sword, Romans 13. 4 3. The Sword of
Steel, usually so called, which is the Sword of slaughter, Isa. 1. 20. Ezekiel. 9.
1, 2.
The first of these we are required to take to us, and put on, Ephesians. 6. 11,
13, 17. and thus to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, whose
might was evidenced once, again and again, by using this Sword skilfully,
Matthew. 4. 4, 7, 9. For it is mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong
holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing, that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity, etc. and having in a
readiness to revenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6. and is profitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. for we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but against
principalities, powers, the Rulers of the d^kness of this world, Ephess. 6. 12.
not for nor against the Magistrates, Parliaments, nor Armies of the world, the
best of whose strength is flesh and not spirit, who shall be destroyed
together, Isa. 31. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 26. 52.

As for the Sword of Justice, or the Magistrates Sword, we are to be subject to
it, as we have fully declared, and not to resist it, which Sword takes revenge
on no man before he be apprehended, charged, heard, and by good evidence
convicted, and sentence according to the fact proved, given, and then an
immediate Commission given to an Executioner, according to the Fact and
Sentence, for the putting this Sword in execution.

But the Sword of slaughter, without examination or due consideration, is many
times put in execution to the slaying and destroying of friends as well as
enemies; witness those slaughters, and woundings in this City, in the late
Insurrection.

And for our acting in this Sword, we can find no warrant from Scriptures in
the least, for that sword being once procured by Peter, and another of the
Disciples, and that by an immediate Commission from Christ, the work being
finished for which it was intended, we find an immediate and peremptory command
for the sheathing it again; and this reason rendered from the lip of truth it
self, for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword, Matthew. 26.
52. for whosoever will save his life shall lose it, Matthew. 16. 25. and we find
no tolleration in Holy Writ to the people of God for the drawing it again in
the least, neither by Precept or Example.

But lest this countermand should not be looked upon to be a sufficient warrant
for its continuance in its place, by the People of God for the time to come,
the Lord Christ, amongst several other weighty things, sent to the seven
Churches in As^a, and in them to us, by John the Revelator, is not backward to
remind them, and us in them of it again, as a matter of no small concernment;
and (as we judge) lest it should not be taken so much notice of by us in this
our day, as he would have it, he brings it in, in the midst of a Discourse,
not long before the rise of the Man of Sin, when one of the heads of the Beast
is wounded, as it were to death, and that deadly wound was healed, Rev. 13. 3.
intimating thus much, as we apprehend, That as Kingly power has had a wound in
these Nations, even as it were unto death, so we know, that the design of God
shall be brought about, and the Scriptures must be fulfilled, for that deadly
wound shall be healed, Rev. 13. 3. and we finding the spirits of the generality
of the People of the three Nations very high in this juncture of time, in the
behalf of Kingly Government, like Israel of old, 1 Samuel: 8, so that by the face
of things, as they appear to us in this last change, we do discern, as through
a glass darkly, that the deadly wound is now going to be healed, although we
do really judge, that several that are in present eminent power, intend no such
thing, no more then the Jews in the crucifying of Christ, intended the bringing
the great design, and fore-appointment of God about, Acts 2. 23. By all which
we judge, that Caution was intended chiefly to us upon whom the ends of the
world is come; and lest we should not be so mindful of our Duties as he would
have us, he makes as it were a Proclamation, to bespeak our better attention to
what he intends, and says, Rev. 13. 9, 10. He that has an ear to hear let
him hear; he that leads into captivity, shall go into captivity; he that
kills with the sword, shall be killed with the sword. Here is the Faith and
Patience of the Saints, that whilst others are leading into Captivity, and
killing with the Sword, to pull down, or set up this or that Power, Man, or
Government; to give a deadly Wound to Kingly Power, or to heal that deadly
Wound again, that then the People of God should in their Patience possess their
souls, and in the midst of these Revolutions, exercise their Faith, as once
that Prophet did, Hab. 3. 17. and faithfully to depend upon God for his
Preservation and Protection, keeping themselves pure and undefiled from leading
into Captivity, or killing with the Sword, lest they themselves be led into
captivity, and killed by the sword; thereby evidencing themselves to be the
peaceable Flock of Christ, chosen out of the world, Joh. 15. 19. and following
their Master the Lord and Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6. 2 These. 3. 16. being
regulated by his requirements in the Gospel of Peace, Romans 10. 15. Ephesians
6. 5. having received from the God of Peace, Romans 15. 33. Romans 16. 20. 2 Cor.
13. 11. that Spirit, whose fruits is Love, Joy, Peace, long-Suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meckness and Temperance, against which there is no
Law; that as they are Christ's, so they should evidence that they have crucified
the flesh with the affections and iusts, Gal. 5. 22, 23, 24. But lust being not
crucified, it breaks forth into wars and fightings; for when men lust and have
not, then they kill and desire to have, James 4. 1, 2. and when the People of
God shall act thus, the Spirit of God brands them with those Ignominious Names
of Adulterers, and Adulteresses, informing them, that what they are fighting
for, is enmity against God; and that if they obtain it, they are enemies to
God, James 4. 4. and we well knowing, that whilst we are Friends to the world,
we are Enemies to God; dare not in the least have to do in the world, so as to
set up our selves, or to side with any, either in setting up, or pulling down;
And how can a man's love to the world be evidenced more, than in venturing his
life for it? according to that saying of our Savior, John 15. 13.

And we further Declare, That as we are to be a peaceable People upon the
account of Action, so we look upon it to be our Duty, to keep our selves from
Oaths, Engagements, and Covenants, either For or Against this or that Person,
Government, or Persons whatsoever: For because of SWEAPING the Land mourns,
Jerem. 23. 10. For the Lord has a Controversy with the Inhabitants of the
Land, because there is no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in the Land;
for by SWEARING, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealling, and committing
Adultery, they break forth, and blood touches blood, says the Prophet, Hos.
4. 1, 2, 3. And says the same Prophet, Hos. 10. 3, 4. They have spoken words,
SWEARING falsely, in making a Covenant; THUS Judgment springs up as Hemlock
in the furrows of the field; and we not knowing what the Cabinet Counsel of God
is in this our day, upon the account of Government, dare not in the least have
so much as a thought to Engage in any such thing, lest we be found Fighters
against God; according to the saying of Gamaliel, though in another case, Acts.
5. 39.

And therefore do Declare our Resolution herein, That we shall not (God
assisting us) enter into any Engagement whatsoever, upon any such account; Yet
shall this say again, That we shall not violently resist the Imposers of any
such Engagements, but shall patiently suffer the penalty of our non-obedience,
as aforesaid.

And we further Declare, as in the presence of God, who is the searcher of all
hearts, That as it has been some of our great trouble for a long time, to see
some of those that are in the same Faith and Order with us, so acting; so it is
now become even an overwhelming burden upon our Souls, to see them generally
running such a precipitant course; by which actings of theirs, the mouths
almost of all men are opened against them, and that Truth they profess, most
ignominiously branded and reproached.

And therefore we further Declare, That in the sight of God, Angels, and Men,
that we bear our Testimony against them in their present actings, and cannot
stand by them, nor have Communion with them therein, nor with those that
strengthen their hands in standing by them; and must tell them in the words of
our Savior, Luke 9. 55. That they know not what Spirit they are of; for, the
Son of Man (their Master) came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. The
Premises considered, we shall Appeal to the Judgment of all Rational men,
whether we are guilty of what we are Charged withal, or not; Yet if they shall
still go on notwithstanding to use us Reproachfully, for the Name of Christ, we
shall be so far from Endeavoring or Desiring a Revenge, as that in the words
of Christ, we shall in our Requests at the Throne of Grace, cry out and say,
Father, Forgive them, they know not what they do.

POSTSCRIPT.
FOrasmuch, as the said Declarers, in their Answer to the First Particular in
their Declaration, do call the Independants and Presbyterians their Christian
Friends; the which, however it is they so complement with them, yet in reality
(we judge) they cannot own them as such upon a Scripture account; as also,
because one Mr. William Alleyn, in a Book lately by him Published, Entitled, A
Retractation to Separation: In which Book, in the whole current of it, all the
Scriptures that he brings which were written by the immediate directions and
Incomes of the Holy Spirit of God, to the Churches, as they were in the Faith
and Order of the Gospel, he applies to, and also for, and in the behalf of
Episcopals, Independants, and Presbyterians, who are opposite both to the
Doctrine and Discipline of those Churches, he intending thereby to persuade us,
if possible, to a Belief, That they are the true and visible Members of that
Body, of which Christ is the Head; the which Book, by Gods assistance, is
intended suddenly to be Answered by one of our Society, who Resolves to
entitle it, The Retractators Work, Scaned; Or, the Conceptions and Supposals of
Mr. W. Alleyn, regulated by Scripture Record: in which, with other things, a
Gospel-Believer, or a true Church of Christ, upon a Gospel account, is intended
to be stated; the which is hoped will be so plain, that it may prove
Instrumental to the Undeceiving of some that are under a Deceit, by means of
that, and such deceitful Discourses as that is; In which Answer it is farther
hoped, That those that are unsatisfied with our term Without, in our Answer in
our Declaration to the Fourth Particular, may receive also good satisfaction;
and in the mean time we desire all to take notice; That though we thus speak,
yet we have good thoughts of those Friends that go under those Denominations,
and do own them, and all others, of all other Opinions whatsoever, in Union, so
far as they own God, Christ, and their Truths; but to own the best of men to be
Members of that Body, of which Christ is the Head, and so to have Communion
with them, either to make them our mouth in Prayer to God for us, or Gods mouth
in speaking forth his Truths to us, or in Breaking of Bread at the Table of the
Lord, we cannot own them in the least; Our Reasons, we hope, will be fully laid
down in the Answer to the said Book.

Henry Adis. Richard Pilgrim. Abel Hutchins. William Cox. In behalf of
themselves, and those that walk with them.

LONDON:

Reprinted by S. Dover, in Christophers Alley, in Martins near Aldersgate,
1660. And formerly Printed the 12th Day of the 11th Month, Heathenishly called
in Honor to their god Janus, January, 1659.


