ADVICE TO THE NOBILITY, GENTRY, and COMMONALTY OF THIS NATION IN THE
Qualifications and Election Of Their Knights and Burgesses, Their
REPRESENTATIVES in PARLIAMENT.
Humbly offered unto their Serious Consideration,
By Robert Tell-Truth.
FAction in all Ages has been such, and ever had her Tricks, and played them
generally in the Fear of God, and with strange Success; but had the Ill-Luck in
Forty-Eight, to lose her Mask in that Pious Tragedy; and cannot again soon
appear with Confidence in her Religious Dress, because the Holy Cheat is too
well known, to Take twice in one Age: And therefore, the Godly Brethren begin a
New Game, (Look about you Gentlemen!) and not as before, in Nomine Domini, but
Populi; and make the Interest of the People, their Stall now, -- as they did
plead the Fear of God before.

One while we know, 'twas Puritan that did ^well in its Generation; after it
was the Godly; and then the Sober Party: But because True Sobriety, and
Godlyness, were at last a scarce Commodity amongst the Good Brethren, as well
as the Wicked; These Distinctions, by degrees began to wear away, and almost
quite to be laid by; and now they have a New Shiboleth, though but that same
Cause: And now it is Countryman, and Courtier; and in at this Country-Man's
Door, all Mischief is like to Creep: For though the Word in its Natural
Significancy, notes nothing but abundance of Plainness and Honesty; yet being
got into the Saints Dictionary, it now begins to be of the same Import with any
of the other Godly Names, and Phrases, they use to style Themselves and Party
by. And now it is a Word, that, like the Troj^^ Horse, is Milite Plenus, full of
Wildfire and Mischief; or, like Elimas the Sorcerer, full of all subtilty and
Craft: For, let a man be the bitt^rest Enemy to King and Church, yet if he can
but obtain this Title of Count^^y-Man, and set him declare at the Head of any
Faction whatever, That he will stand up for the good of the Country, in
Opposition to the Court-Interest, and his business is effectually done; he
shall most certainly be Chosen for any Place he stands for, and the most sober,
prudent, and worthy Patriot, and whatever, may not be fit to be a Competitor
with him. And this I, and many more, can speak upon too sad experience: For in
a little Election in our Parts, I saw a most incomparable Person thrown by,
with Shame and Disgrace, merely by this Stratagem.

I cannot therefore choose, but give the Country a Caution, and a just Sense of
this New Artifice; and how mischievous it is like to be to the King and Church,
if not in time detected. And this perhaps, may be a good Hint for others to
describe it better.

The Plot, Gentlemen, was this* To get this Parliament by any Arts whatever,
Dissolved: And why? Not that they ^o any thing that is short of the Wisdom and
Gravity of so great an Assembly; saving this, that they are Good Churchmen,
(and this Crime enough with the Brethren and they will not allow of either a
Romish or Scottish Phanatick; neither Tolleration, nor Comprehension, will they
swallow: And therefore, no Parliament say the Kir^-Men; and they must be sent
Home again, and a New One chose. But will the next be betrer in their Sense?
Ye^^ undoubtedly: For those busy Men have for some Years last past, so possessed
the Minds of the People against the Court and Bishops, and underhand, the King
too; and so endeared them to their public Spirited Men, which they called
Count^ey-Men; that now such Persons, as they give that Title to, shall
infallibly have the Peoples Hearts and Votes; and be the Lads that must make up
the next House of Commons, and Retrieve the Godly dying Cause, before it quite
Expire, and Bleed to Death. And the Cunning of these Designing Men is such,
that there are but some f^w neither, of these Good Contrymen (here and there
one) that shall be cried up as such: And those are either Earmarked already in
the late War; or such as are sprung out of that Holy-Seed, or as do secretly
give Testimony of their Antipathy against Court, Bishops, and (when with a
Confiding Brother) King too. But be sure, such are as hop^ful, at least, shall
have this Title conferred on them. So that now the Title begins to have
Rebellion, and Phanatisme in the Belly on it; and is all well, fitted for the
Phanaticks turn, if not better then any other of their Godly Names and Titles
were.

Anst indeed, it is so strangely taking, not only with the credulous Populacy,
but even the Old Cavalier. -- And the King's best Friends suffer themselves to
be imposed upon, and wheedled by it; and think, there is something that is Good
and Useful in it, for the Nation; which seems to Bode as ill to the King's
Interest, as any thing yet. For which Cause it is, that I am so bold to trouble
the Country with my Sense about it; and how the One came to be in so much
Esteem, and the Other a Note of Infamy and Disgrace.

The Word Courtier in its Primitive Sense, did note One that did attend on the
Person of the King, or was employed by him in any considerable Office at Court;
and that did him faithful Service in those Trusts. And originally, it was never
any Shame or Disgrace to the best of Men in the Cauntrey, ( Peers and Others)
to Serve at Court, and Attend the Pleasure of their Prince, till the Saints
made it so: Nay, it was always thought an Honor, to be admitted to these
Courtly-Attendance; and the Country thought; they could not do themselves a
greater Service, than to Choose such (neither indeed can they) for their
Representatives in Parliament, that were near the King; That so they might have
an occasion to make known the State of the Country, and the Wants and
Grievances of the People, when need required; and to have an opportunity to
Redress them. But how Courtier in our Days, should come to so degenerate a
Sense, as to denote (if some may Expound it) an Enemy to Law, and Liberty, and
Propriety, and every Thing that is dear to the People, is strange: And how
Countryman, which is a Word of great Plainness, Integrity, and Loyalty, if
Honest Men may gloss it; and how, I say, this Innocent name shall denote every
thing that is Mischievous to His Majesty, and directly opposite to the interest
of White Hall, is more strange. But the truth on it is, the Case now is come to
this, That no Man whatever, can attend the Person of the King, or serve him in
any of the most Honorable Offices at Court, and that sometime with the Exqence
of his own Estate and Fortune: but he must be looked upon as a dangerous Person
to the People, and as the worst of Men, that is a Courtier. And on the other
side, Let a Man be what he will, as bad as Twenty years Rebellion, and
Conversation with Blood and War could make him; yet if no Courtier, he shall be
the Darling, and the Delight of the People, and shall command their Votes and
Suffrage. Let him be a Man of Sacrilege and Violence to God, and his Church;
Let him hold his own and other Men's Lands, by the strength of two Acts of
Indemnity: Let him be for Rebellion, Schism, Faction, Tolleration,
Comprehension, or whatever else is Dear and Precious in the Saints esteem; if
he write but Countryman, he is sure to carry the Day. Not that I think it is
Essential to all Men that live in the Country, that have no Employ at Court; to
be endowed with these Excellent Qualities: God forbid! But this I say, But all
men of these Mischievous Principles, against King and Church, that have any
Design to insinuate into the People, to creep into Place and Power, where the
People can help them, they get in by this Artifice; And all Persons of the most
Eminent Loyalty and Integrity that oppose them, and are not Competitors with
them, are cast off with this Stratagem, These are for the Court Party, when
perhaps they have no Concern there at all. So that in a very short time it is
like to come to this, That none must be accounted Lovers of the Country, but
the Enemies of the King: And it is pretty near it now: For, let these Gentlemen
that seem to be so taken with this Distinction now, consider well, and consult
their own Experience, and they shall find, that all the Elections for Knights
and Burgesses of late, in any of the Counties, and Corporations of the Land,
have been endeavored to have been filled with such Leavenned Men; and under
that Notion of Good Countrymen only. And in a little time, it is to be feared,
that the Populacy will confirm it, as the Cunning Men design it to a Phanatick
only: And an old fashioned Loyal Cavalier, must not think to show his Head upon
any Public -- lest he be deemed a Courtier. For the people are taught to
believe, that neither the King, nor any about him, nor indeed, any that are
highly for him, have any true Love for the Country; but that they design to
Enslave them, and their Estates, and to bring all under an Arbitrary Power and
Bondage. And from this gross, lewd, and False Conceit, they conclude, That it
concerns all that Love Themselves, or their Posterities, to oppose with Might
and Main, the Court, and all that adhere to it: And he that so does, is a True
Lover of the People, and a downright Countryman. And we find this Name made
use of always, to serve the most Disloyal and Phanatick Ends, and Purposes, in
all Counties: and it seems to be as well fitted for those Ends, as any of the
former Religious Names of Sober and Godly Party were, and better for those that
will not be wrought upon by Pious Pretenses, and Religious Arts, and Wheedles:
Yet will be strangely affected, when they are told, that their Secular Concerns
are in Danger. And any that pretend so much Love to Them, as to stand up
against all Underminers of these their Dear Diana's, shall be sure to be their
Darling for ever: For we see, the Generality of the Country have more Care for
their Commons, and Country Privileges, than for their Consciences: Nay, will
often venture Them, to secure those. And those Persons, for instance, that
declare for this one thing, viz. Against giving away the Countries Moneys, (be
the Occasions of State, what the will) except by it, they can hope to make New
and Great Encroachments upon the Prerogative, shall be accounted the Countries
Friends for ever, and never want their Vote at any time.

So that you see it is a very serviceable, cunning, and mighty obliging
Distinction; and is the likeliest to pull down White Hall of any yet; and
principally for this reason, because it obtains so much amongst the Royal
Party. For as they were always a sort of good Natured Persons, and innocent
themselves, so were apt ever to believe well of others too, and to be caught
with fine Names, till they had believed themselves into the Saints Yoke, and
their Families into want, and their Estates into villainage; and so will do
Again, if they be not very wary.

The truth of it is, the suffering Cavalier had the most reason at first, to
allow this distinction of any Man; and I am almost in the mind, was the first
that made it, -- But then it was upon a particular reason, and that at a
particular time. I will not say how reasonable and just his discontents then
were; but certainly the then New Statesmen in Sixty and upwards laid the Ax to
the Root of the Royal-Oak, when they pursued that cursed Rule in their New
politics, Obliege your Enemies, you are sure of your Friends; which blew up
more of the Royal party, then either Cromwells Plots or Army; and was more
distructive to them, than that fatal Naseby; for then some Escaped, but this
Maxim Kills all if well followed, and that in their own Quarters; and makes
their dear Sovereign (for whom they fought) to be their executioner; this kind
of usage, no doubt, exasperated the Kings suffering friends, if not against the
Cause, yet against the then Court; and gave them too great occasion to believe,
they had worse enemies at Whitehall when the KING was come home, than before;
for before, they had but what they looked for; but to be split in their
Harbor, and to revive their greatest Stabbs from the Court-friends, went to
the very heart; and hence I fear, came the opposition between the Court and
Country. But now Gentlemen, consider those Statesmen are dead, and their
politics stink, as well as their names; and those New-ruling men, that drew
sword both against Father and Son, and sucked of the ones blood, and the others
Wine, are most of them gone to their place; and Loyalty that then Languisht,
begins now to revive, and meets with better encouragement, then when Rebels and
Regicides were in place and power; and now his Majesty sees with his own
spectacles and knows (God bless him) though at too dear a rate, that the old
Cavelier is the best Subject, and loves and serves him best, and is truest to
his interest; and that all others pretend they what they will, are hollow at
the heart, and will love as they obey, with abundance of distinction and
caution; that is, just so well as may consist with their brethrens, their own,
and their causes interest; Now then, there is not the same reason for these
men's prejudices against the Court, as once there was; for Sir. John Fresbyter
is now pretty well known, and perhaps is the most contemptible of all
pretenders to an interest there; and therefore is fain to use his old Tricks,
and his new Shibboleth, to creep into Place and Power to save a sinking, and
dying cause: and if the Gentry and Nobility would keep from a second time,
under the Fanatic Tyranny, and from Grinding any more in these Philistine
mills, they must not allow of such serviceable distinctions as those are for
their cuning purposes. Choose therefore of the Country men for your
Representatives, men of Religion and Loyalty, that love the Church and KING;
and be sure there is no danger in such; but all others whatsoever, let them
pretend what they will, are hollow within, and mean no good to either God or
Church, to King or Country, but are, by their old sly Tricks, and new
Artifices, seeking an opportunity of destroying a glorious Church a second
time; and of Acting the second part of the same Tragedy; and insinuating Again,
craftily into the good opinions of the people, by the pretenses of Love and
Zeal to their good and welfare. Of these beware, and take this as a certain
truth; that a house of Commons made up of such Countrymen as the pretended
Godly party cry up, will be the most Antimonarchical seditious, and Fanatical
Assembly in the Christian world. From which, Good Lord Deliver us.

FINIS.

