ADVICE TO Protestants.
IT IS not at all becoming Christians, Those especially who pretend to Reform
Christianity according to the Purity of the Primitive Times, to permit amongst
them such abominable Prophanations, as speak them rather to be Maintainers of
Judaism or Infidelity, than Professors of any Christianity at all. Upon this
Score it is I become an Adviser to Protestants, because I see their Indiscreet
Zeal against Popery, is like to betray them into such Practices, as suit better
with the Wilds of Africa and Unbelieving Turks, than with Those, who glory that
they are born in a Christian Soil, and bred up in the most Moderate and best
Tempered Religion in the World. For I appeal now to any Christian, whose Soul
is not wholly feer'd and stupefied, whether That Show, which on Thursday last,
March 17. was led through the Principal Streets of this Protestant City, viz.
Bears with Crosses in their Foreheads, a Bull with a Cross on each Horn, a
Mastiff-Dog with a Cross in his Forehead, was not a Mockery of Heaven; and a
most profane Ridiculing of the Chief Mystery of the Christian Religion? And
yet such was the Pastime of this City, while passing through so many Streets,
that Sacred Sign of Man's Redemption was exposed to the scornful Smiles of the
Ignorant Crowds, and met with None, as I can hear of, that had Religion enough
to disturb the Profanation.

If this had been acted in a City peopled with Jews, Infidels or Turks, it had
been only agreeable to their Principles, and would neither have called for
Advice or Wonder from any Christian Beholder; but that this should be done in a
Christian City, and in the middle of such Christians too, who pretend to take
up nothing of Christianity, but such as is Reformed, Pure and Vncorrupt, it is
matter of Admiration; and if it should pass without Censure or Reproof, 'twould
be a just entit'ling those Beasts that wore the Cross to the Christianity of
the Town, and give occasion to Foreigners to think, that the Title of Beast
did not belong so much to those that bore the Crosses, as to the Lookers on and
Permitters, and much more to the Promoters and Applauders of it. I must make
bold therefore to tell you, My Protestants, that this sort of Protestancy is
not at all becoming; and that it is something to be feared, that while some Hot
Spirits are teaching their Folowers to hate Popery, they will put 'em upon over
doing the work, and oblige 'em to be No Christians whilst they are teaching
them to be No Papists. throught we had enough of this kind of Protestantism,
when Oats and Bedloe, with Others that made Gospel of Their Divinity, taught
people to be Batbarous and Mad for Conscience sake; when Sir Wiliam Waller
joinng Jew and Christian all in one, Burnt Crucifixes and Crosses for the
promoting Christianity. But it seems, though these be out of the way, their
Spirit is yet behind, it is kept alive, it is encouraged, animated; They that can
expose the Cross to Contempt upon the Foreheads and Horns of Beasts, no doubt
are disposed enough, were the time come, to close this triumph by committing it
to the Flames. O how unlike this is to the spirit of the Primitive Christians,
whose Religion you pretend to follow. You say, you are of the Religion of
Constantine, Chrysostom, Augustine, etc. But do you think those Holy Fathers
could have seen, heard, or passed by such an impious mocking as this, without
just indignation and a zealous reproof? Constantine honored the Cross, and
laid it up for the preservation of his Regal City: Chrysostom tells us, that
Kings have a Cross on their Robes, a Cross on their Crowns, a Cross at their
Prayers, a Cross upon their Arms, a Cross upon the Altar; and that a Princes
Head is more honored with a Cross than with a Crown. St. Austin likewise
declares, That the Cross is made honorable now amongst Christians, and an end
put to its reproach, but not to its Glory: From Places of Execution, it is now
translated, says he, to the Foreheads of Emperors: But now how unlike are you
to these Ancient Fathers, whilst having torn the Cross from the Altar, you set
it out to scorn upon the Horns of Beasts, and from the Foreheads of Kings and
Christians, and even from your own too in Baptism, you most profanely
translate it to that of Bears and Dogs, as if it were they who are to fight
under the Standard of Christ. Is this the Religion of the Primitive Times? Is
this according to the Purity of the Gospel? This kind of spirit was too Active
indeed in the time of the Reformation, but sure the world has had enough of it;
there is no need now of trampling upon the Cross to teach us to be Christians.
And if this has been now done by the Ignorant Rabble; at least, why do not
others, that know better Reprove or Correct it? A Private Person cannot suppose
himself wronged, but he must presently clear his Reputation: but when
Christianity is injured, there is no body appears in its behalf: Will not the
World cry shame upon such Christians?

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
For his Household and Chapel, 1687.


