Advice to a Soldier, IN TWO LETTERS Written to an Officer in The Late English
Army, When the War with France WAS EXPECTED AND ONE TO A Commander in the
Fleet, IN THE LAST DUTCH WAR, Proper to be Exposed at the Present Time while
the PEACE OF CHRISTENDOM (If not the Liberty of it) seems to Be very
Short-Lived.

LONDON, Printed by John Shadd, for John Gay, at the Flying-Horse between St.
Dunstans-Church, and Chancery Lane, 1680.

A LETTER TO A Young Gentleman, Who by the Mediation of Great Friends, Had
Obtained the Grant of a CONSIDERABLE COMMAND In the English Army which Was
raised to assist the Dutch and their Confederates AGAINST THE Prevailing Power
OF FRANCE, In the Year, 1678.
My Dear Friend,
I Do highly approve the resolution you have taken, to serve His Majesty in the
Wars, if any happen, it being a Duty which every good Subject owes him;
especially the Gentry, who derive all their streams of Honor from that
Original Fountain: But it may possibly seem strange, that while all the rest of
your Friends are Congratulating your good Fortune, in the preferment profer'd
you, I only show my self dissatisfied; I will assure you I am so far from
envying your promotion, that no Man living does more heartily desire it then my
self; It is reality of my Friendship makes me jealous, that preferment is
arrived at your Port, before you are ready, before you are fit for it: It is no
small or trivial matter which he undertakes who receives a Commission from the
King, how light soever you and other young Gentlemen think of it, and I should
not be worthy any place in your esteem, if I did not deal very heartily and
plainly with you. And in the first place I will tell you, He cannot be a fit
Man to Command, who knows not the duty of those that are to obey him.

I doubt not but you have read Books relating to War, and may understand
something of the Theory of it, but all the reading in the Universe, will not
enable a Man to perform well, the meanest of the Mechanic Arts; We usually
allow seven years Experience for atteining the skill to make Shoes, etc. and
do you believe that the Military Science (upon the success whereof depends the
safety or the ruin, the standing or falling of Towns, and Citadells, Kingdoms
and Empires,) is to be learned a midst the softnesses and ease of Courts, and
rich Cities, and reposing on the laps of Ladys,? or by the imperfect Ideas of a
Battle, and a Seige represented in a Play? or at best by a little superficial
reading of Commentaries? No, the Art of War is to be attained by other Methods
and means more studious, more laborious, more manly: and if you accept of a
Command at this time, it is odds that you neither efficatiously serve the King,
nor your self; not the King, for the obtaining preferments by favor, without
merit, is the greatest discouragement in the World, to Men of low Fortunes and
high spirits, and such in times of danger, are the usefullest Men in a
Commonwealth; who having served many years in the Wars, and made themselves
capable of the greatest Offices, shall all on the sudden find themselves
defeated, by such young Gentlemen as you; Although if you come to speedy
action, you must necessarily be baffled, and disappoint His Majesty's Service,
or else owe your success wholly to chance, for which none but fools will
commend you. You cannot serve your self, because the main thing you aim at is
Honor: Now you must know, they lie under a vulgar Error, who think that to
have a great Office or great Title, is sufficient to make a Man Honorable.
True Honor does not so much consist in possessing great Offices, or great
Titles, as in the using those great Titles and discharging those great Offices
so, as the Prince may be well and faithfully served, and the public good
advanced and promoted.

Which can never be done by one who wants Experience, unless as I said before;
it be by chance, or by the discreeter menage of the under Officers. I will add
further, that what miscarriage soever happens under you, will be imputed right
or wrong, to your want of conduct, and the credit of all the good service you
do, shall be carried away by those of your Officers who have more skill, even
then when they do not deserve it. Wherefore my advice is, if you would serve
your Prince and your Country, as becomes a good Subject and a Gentleman, if you
would bring an addition of Honor to your self and Family; let your advancement
be the reward, rather then the Obligation of your merit. Content your self for
a time, to serve as a private Gentleman, a Voluntier, and you will find, that
one years experience in time of Action, will instruct you better then Twenty
Years reading without it. It has been always my manner to express my mind
freely, and so I do now, when I assure you I am,

Your Faithful Friend,
London Aug. 20th. 1678.
A Second Letter to the same young Gentleman, after he had Received his
Commission, wherein is chiefly Discoursed the Moral Part of MILITARY
DISCIPLINE.
My Dear Friend,
IT seems before my Letter came to your hands, you had received the Commission,
from which I was too late endeavoring to dissuade you; The wisest Men do many
things in their Lives, which they are sorry for when done, but cannot undo
without greater disadvantage: This Act of yours I look on to be one of those;
It was the desire of Honor made you take a Commission, and though now you wish
it had been deferred till another time; yet since you have put your hand to the
Plow, you must not look back, you cannot lay it down without shame, without
disparagement. Therefore I will give you such General advice as I can; for
particular or practical you know I do not pretend to.

It will be impossible for you at first, to conceal your unskilfulness in Arms,
from your Men, and therefore all attempts of that Nature, will be fruitless and
ridiculous; Wherefore it will be your best way to own it, to such of your
Officers as are ingenious, and do not think it any disparagement to learn of
your Inferiors. It is no shame not to know that which one has not had the
opportunity of Learning: but it is scandalous to profess knowledge and remain
ignorant.

In regard your Experience in Martial Matters is green, as well as your Years,
it will be needful that you use all the helps you can, to make some amends for
that defect.

And first, I would have you get intimately acquainted with some of the best of
our English Officers, especially some of those who have been either on the side
of France, or Holland, or both Engaged in the present War of Christendom; and
by a frequent converse with them, and by your own heedfull Observation, you may
the sooner make a good improvement of your time; And you would do well to get
your self provided with some of the best Books, describing the modern way of
Military Discipline, for Books are great assistances to those who every day
compare their reading and practice.

When you have made a choice of persons with whom you intend to be intimate, be
careful you are not by any of them drawn into private or particular quarrels;
And if any such accident happens in your presence between others endeavor what
you can to compose, not widen the breach: If the difference grow so high, that
nothing less then a Duel, can reconcile the feud in point of Honor, make them
sensible what a shame it is for Men of true merit, to receive the Laws of
Honor from faint Effeminates, the Hectors and Huffs of the Town, who possess
none themselves, but what they are indebted for, to their Schools of Honor and
Morality, the Play Houses; Ask with what Justice they can expect the Kings pay,
or hope for his favor or his pardon, while they show such contempt of him and
his Laws, and hazard their Lives in a quarrel, destructive to his service.
Remind them that the French, the great promoters of duelling in a more
pusillanimous Age, having now shaken off former fooleries, and put on the
bravery of a Warlike People, look on that Man who offers to lend a Challenge,
as a fellow fit to be kicked by their Foot boys, and that is the usual way the
Gentry of France think themselves obliged in Honor to answer him. He who
charges most briskly at the Head of his Troops; He who first mounts the Enemies
Wall, and he who is for wardest in attacquing their Fortifications, are the
only Men among them, who now obtain the Title, and the esteem of Honorable.

But if you meet with any so fond of false Honor, so false to the principles
of Loyalty and true Glory, that no reason can divert them, even in a Foreign
Country, from a^^^^ing the Enemy, by diminishing our strength, and making
factions in our own party; let them alone by themselves to destroy one another,
for it is pity they should live, and it is pity they should dye, by any
worthyer hands then those of the Hangman or their own.

If you would ever arrive at greater preferment then you have, or deserve that
which His Majesty has already bestowed, you must be beholden for it chiefly to
the valor and affection of your Soldiers; therefore endeavor what you can to
get them their pay in due season; and if that cannot be done, at least let them
see that it is not your fault; observe and abhor the example of some others who
detain the Soldiers Wages, the price of their blood, and throw it away on the
turn of a Dye, or spend it profusely on their pride and their Lusts.

Despise all base ways of enriching your self, either by cheating the King with
false Musters, or defrauding or abbridging your Men any part of their due; such
practices have been the undoing of many a good Cause, and are so far more
worthy a Gallows, then common Robberies, by how much the loss of a Battle is
more considerable then the loss of a Bag of Money, and the ruin of the
public, then that of a private single person. Consider, your Men are equal
sharers in the danger though not in the profit or Honor. of the War; and that
as you are the head, they are the body, containing beside the Trunk, the
usefullest Members, Hands, Arms, Legs, and Feet, without whose executive
power, all your contriving faculties will prove insignificant; so that you must
not think you discharge the duty of a good, or prudent Commander, when you only
show your self bold, and bring them on bravely to Battle; your care must be
both before and afterward, to see that they have as wholesome food, (and
Physic when ^^^eeds) and as good Quarters as the place will afford: And since
English constitutions, cannot so easily endure Famine, as the People born, and
bred up in less plentiful Countries; You must make it a principal part of your
endeavors, to have them sufficiently provided, and when upon any action, your
under Officers or other, have deserved well, you ought to use your interest to
get them encouraged and promoted.

A good Commander will use his Soldiers, just as a good Father uses his
Children; and he who governs otherwise, through Covetousness, Negligence,
Pride, or Illnature, shall never get any great Honor himself, nor ever do any
service considerable, for his King or Country.

But though I would have you love your Men well, because you can do nothing
without them, I would not have you spoil them with over much kindness. It is
the wise dispensing of rewards, and Punishments which keeps the World in good
Order. They never had their business well done, who through an excess of
goodness, reward mean services too highly: or punish great miscarriages too
lightly. Therefore as you must take care of the Back, and the Belly, the Pay
and Provision of your Soldiers, so you ought to be very severe in your
Discipline: The two former will gain you the Love of your Men, the later their
fear, and all mixed together, produce complete Obedience. Or, to express it
better in the Marshal phrase, Pay well, and hang well, makes a good Soldier.

The frequent Company of Women, and the tippling strong Liquors, debilitate
both the mind and body of a Soldier, rendering him soft and effeminate, lasy,
and sickly, unapt and unfit for Heroic exploits. Restrain therefore as much as
may be, the debaucheries of your Men, and be careful to refrain your own, and
take this along with you for a General Rule; That, when you teach your Men to
live innocent, you do at the same time make them valiant.

To the end you may with greater facility effect so good a Design, you ought to
be always attended with a good Chaplain; And if I were worthy to advise your
General, I would beg him to be as careful in the choice of his Chaplains, as
his Captains. Nay, I would adventure to say they are as necessary: and many
times have done, and may again, as largely contribute toward the obtaining
happy successes. And now there is as great an occasion for able Divines in our
Army and Navy, as ever there was, since England professed Christianity. For the
Fopps of this Age. under the notion of Wits, endeavor to Buffoon Religion out
of Countenance; talk Blasphemy and Atheism, in common Discourse, speak Treason
against the Majesty of Heaven, (a crime which no Prince upon Earth will endure,
at an easier rate then mortal punishment.) And so while nothing is allowed for
fashionable wit, which is not Atheistical, or profane, or impudently immodest;
the young Gentry (fond of that foolish humor called witty) are in a fair way
to be debauched. For what shall restrain their exorbitancies, who have learned
to despise the supernal Power?) and by their ill example, a door is set wide
open, to let in among the vulgar, all the lewdnesses and immoralities in the
World.

Therefore you should choose for a Chaplain, a man reserved in his Life, grave
in his deportment, fixed in his principles, and faithful to his Prince; one
that will not be abashed when fools deride him; one that will not be afraid to
exhort and reprove, as occasion requires; One that is patient enough to endure
scorn and reproach, and bold enough to oppose himself against the greatest
Torrent of impiety. And then you ought to show him respect, as unto the
Messenger of God, and to see that the Marshall Laws relating to Religion, and
good Order, be put in Execution; which truly of late have been just so
observed, as if they had been purposely made to be broken. If you begin the
good example, you shall hardly need to compel your Men to follow: They will be
ashamed to be vicious, if their Commander be virtuous; And shame is a more
effectual way to reform Vice, then pecuniary penalties, or corporal pains.

By this means the lives of many Men will be saved, who otherwise to support
their vices, neglect their duty, commit Thefts, and Robberies, and Rapes, and
the like; and bring themselves under the lash of Martial Law, great
punishments and ignominious Deaths.

You should be as frequent and regular, at your public Prayers, as time and
your affairs will permit; especially neglect it not before a Battle, or other
great undertaking. For Prayer by a strange and secret influence, (which none
can tell but they who use it.) brings from Heaven new Life, and vigor, and
courage, to the most weak and timorous.

And now I have happened to speak of courage that necessary qualification in a
Soldier, I will give you my opinion what it is, and whence it usually arises.

Courage is either Active, or Passive, and both are as useful for a Soldier
as a Sword and a Target. Active is that which does prompt and excite a Man, to
the undertaking and attempting great and hazzardous Enterprises. And passive is
a certain even temper and frame of mind, which dangerous accidents cannot
discompose, or divert from his intended purpose. On the contrary, fear amazes
and distracts, and disappoints the wisest Counsels, and most deliberate
Designs; hurrying Men into the danger they think to avoid, or into greater; as
the Heart in the Fable, to escape the Dogs, sought shelter in the Lions Den; so
it commonly happens in Battles, that those Men are killed in flight, who by
keeping the Field might have won the victory; and it is frequent for a Coward
who runs away from a Sword, to stumble upon a halter.

Inconsiderate rashness, is by some Men called courage, when it produces the
like effect, but is intruth no better then madness, and I intend only to speak
of that courage which is the product of reason.

True courage springs from a contempt of Death, or an opinon that one shall not
dye. Contempt of Death arises from a confidence in Gods Mercy, or a
consideration of Honor, or both. Confidence in Gods Mercy will naturally grow
as the fruit and effect of a good and virtuous Life, and those (...) will be
afraid of ^^^king, who are and who believe themselves (...) under the sacred
Protection of Almighty God. And (...) Honor (or the thirst after Public Fame
for well ^^ing) is added, I think there is all which is necessary to make a man
truly courageous. Honor by it self, (I mean a great Title, or public
applause) is but an empty Name, (not valued by wise Men save only when it comes
as the just reward of virtue, the fruit of worthy performances) and the
apprehension of Death and Damnation, are two weighty things, when nothing but
that empty Name is put in the balance against them; Now there are but a few
Atheists in the World so through paced, as to have totally extinguished the
fears of a future being; however they may boast of it when no danger seems to
be near them: I have seen some of those Gallants, who talk nothing but Honor
in the middle of a Sea Fight, look as silly as Sheep, and sneak themselves
behind the Mainmast.

But the far greater Number of those who go to the Wars, are persuaded they
shall not be killed, and that opinion is the cause of their courage, which
having a foundation so liable to uncertainty, is easily overturned by a little
adverse fortune: For when the Battle grows hot, when Death presents it self in
diversity of shapes; when one looses a Leg, and another both his Arms, and a
third is shot off in the middle: When Men and Horses confusedly come tumbling
down together, and a Man's best friends ly bleeding by his side, then that
confidence which was groundless vanishes of it is own accord, and quickly
follows disorder and rout, and down right running away.

No Man can promise himself before a Battle, that he shall be alive afterward,
and every prudent man should be provided, not only for that which must, but as
near as one can, for that which may happen. I mean every prudent Man should
think it may be his turn to be killed as soon as another, and therefore should
endeavor before hand to keep himself from all horrid, flagicious enormous
crimes, such as hinder one in times of greatest danger, from asking or hopeing
for Gods Mercy, and make a valiant Man turn Coward.

I have insisted the more on this particular, because we have lived to see the
best King, having the best cause in the World, ruined by his own rebellious
Subjects, toward which ruin, I have been told of the irregularities of some
of the Loyal Party, did in a great measure contribute.

And because it is reported, by some and believed by many, that Piety and
Devotion, Virtue and Religion, are only to be found amongst those who are
dissenters from, or Enemies to the Church of England. I would persuade you my
dear friend, by your own practice, to endeavor the contradicting that wicked
assertion: I would fain have you as eminent for your Piety, as your Native
bravery, and let one add reputation to the other. King David among the Jews,
Scipio Affrican among the Romans, and King Henry the Fifth among the English,
were in their times, the most Pious, and most prosperous Generals in the World.

It is very convenient, I think I may say necessary, that your Men be possessed
with the Justice of the Cause they Fight for: Let them be told by your Chaplain
this truth, that they are doing Gods work, by endeavoring to restore those to
right who suffer wrong, to bring an Universal Peace to Christendom, and
preserve it from falling into the slavery, wherewith at this time it seems to
be threatened, to put an end to that blood and slaughter, ruin and devastation,
which it has for several Years past, suffered under.

You may also do well at convenient times, to relate to your Officers and Men,
the great things their Ancestors formerly performed in France, and be stirring
them up to alike Emulation: But I cannot by any means approve of their policy,
who persuade their Men to despise their Enemies; Instead of that, I would have
you let them know, that they are not now to Fight against France, lulled a
sleep by a long Peace, and drowned in the pleasures of ease and idleness; but
against France awakened, grown watchful and wise, against Men whom a long War
has made Martial, and taught to be as good Soldiers, perhaps as are in the
World, and against Men who have taken the strongest Towns in Christendom, with
greater facility, and defended them with greater obstinacy, then any of their
Enemies, with whom they have hitherto been contending.

In my opinion the contempt of a crafty Enemy is one of the greatest advantages
you can give him, and he who Commands valiant Men, as the English are, need not
be afraid to make them sensible of danger; it will rather serve to inflame,
then abate their natural courage; Whereas if they be taught to slight their
Enemy, they will be apt to think of a Victory without Labor, without dangers
such an immagination will teach them to be careless and carelessness will lay
them open to inevitable ruin and destruction. But you must not dwell too long
on this Subject, you must put them in mind, that although the French are
politic and powerful, they are yet very far from invincible, their courage
will give way, when attacqued by Men of Resolution, who are not afraid of
dying: (the truth whereof appears by the shock and disappointment they lately
received before Mons.) And achievements against them, will be so much more
glorious, by how much they seem more difficult and dangerous.

Remember your Soldiers how unkindly the French used some of their fellows,
who had faithfully served them many years, and to whom they owed a good part of
their success; Use any Arguments which may heighten their courage, or whet
revenge, to a sharp and a vigorous prosecution; and always let them know, they
are in a place where they must owe their safety and success, and the very bread
they eat, only to the effects of their own valor, and vigilance.

The season for Act on this year, is now almost over, however you should not be
absent from your Men oftener, or longer then you need, although you have nothing
for them to do; for vulgar minds are generally busy, and depraved, and will
rather be contriving ill then doing nothing: It will therefore be an Act worthy
your prudence, to exercise them at convenient times, (above what is usual) in
Matches at Leaping, Running, Wrestling, Shooting at Marks, or any other manly
and innocent sports, which may render them healthy, and hardy, and give them no
leisure to study mutinies, or other mischief.

If thus by your example, by the strictness of your Discipline, by the
veneration you show Religion, by the encoragement you afford the Dispenser of
it, you can persuade or compel your Men to live well and temperate, you will
find when you come to Fight, that Soldiers so well paid and provided for, so
kindly used, and so strictly Disciplined, and prudently managed, will enter
Trenches, mount Walls, and Fortifications, endure steadily the Shock of
Enemies, run upon the mouths of Cannons, and perform Actions becoming gallant
Men, even such as seem to others impossible.

For your own Part.
As long as you have a Superior Commander, you must be a punctual Observer of
Orders, and when you are employed on any particular Design, endeavor to get
your Orders in Writing, so may you best avoid committing mistakes, and best
secure your self from fathering the mistakes of other Men. In any thing,
especially if the hazard be eminent, never attempt less then you are
Commanded, and without a very good reason, do not attempt more, for in such
case, if it succeed well, you shall only share the Honor, but if ill, you
shall bear all the blame by your self.

In a word, when it depends on your choice, be wary in undertaking, speedy in
prosecuting your Design. Caution in Resolution, and quickness in Execution,
being the two greatest Characters of a Wise Man.

Thus my dear Friend I have touched upon several particulars, which I did not
think of, when I first set pen to paper, and doubt I have too much exceeded the
limits of a modest Letter, and perhaps a great part, if not all of it, will be
rendered useless to you, by a General Peace, which is the end of His Majesty's
arming, and if it can be had on safe and reasonable terms without more
contending, is that which all good Men ought to wish and pray for. If it happen
otherwise, I shall then venture to write you something else, in another strain,
which for the present is not convenient. I hope you will accept kindly, what is
kindly intended, from

Your Faithful Friend, and Servant.
Aug. 30th. 1678.
A LETTER Written by an unknown hand Whereof many Copies were dispersed among
the COMMANDERS OF THE English Fleet, in the YEAR, 1673.
Dear Cousin,
GOing yesterday to your Fathers House, partly to see him, but chiefly to learn
when he heard from you, and what news was lately from the Fleet, he told me you
were in health, the Fleet near ready to Sail, and then showed me a Letter he
was just sending to you, wherein (among other things) I found these words.

Have a care of your self, be not foolhardy by venturing too far into the
Fight there are Ships enough to beat the Dutch without years; and Captains
enough in the Fleet, who will prudently show you the way to keep farthest off
when danger is nighest; and then you need not fear the aspersion of a Coward as
long as you have good Company: Therefore I say again be wisely cautious, for
your death would certainly break the heart of my Daughter and bring my gray
hairs with sorrow to the grave.

I had scarce patience to read out so much without tearing the Letter in a
thousand pieces, and I could not forbear such Language as did but ill agree
with the friendship between us: If you are (said I) so mighty fond of your Son,
send for him home presently, and let him run no other danger, then what he may
meet in a London Tavern, or Bawdy House; when he has a mind to Fight let Bowls
be his Bullets, and broad Oaths and Curses his Gunpowder: at other times, let
him have nothing else to do but treat his Wife, or, as the fashion is, his
Wench, at the Playhouse, Hide-Park, or Spring-Garden. As soon as I had vented
my passion and grew calm, I so far convinced your Father of his fault, that
himself burnt his Letter; and desired me to write one, more suitable to my own
inclination.

According to that little notice I have taken of Sea-matters, I think our
Captains in general (and you among the rest) rather need a Spur then a Curb,
when you are going to Fight: and therefore quite contrary to the former advice,
I will set before your eyes, the justice and the danger that attends a
Cowardly-Commander.

1. He robs the King and Kingdom, not only of the Money himself receives, but
likewise of so much as the whole charge of the Ship, with provisions and wages
amounts to, by rendering the same of no use, just when it should do the King
Service; he murders all those gallant Men, which are slain by the Enemy, and
loses those Ships which fall into their hands for want of being well seconded;
he betrays his own Party to the Enemy, by keeping back the expected assistance,
and the weakening of us and the helping of them is all one; Nay, as if he had
received a bribe to do mischief, he fires both over and into the Ships of his
Friends, so helping both ways to bring them to ruin he compleats in himself
the Character of a Traitor. By these means it is our Battles are lost, or at
best so balanced when they might have been won, that after a Fight the Enemy
sooner than we, are again in a condition of disputing the Victory. No common
High-way-robber, is half so great a Rogue, as that Officer who takes wages, and
dares not, or does not Fight bravely when there is an occasion.

2. As he largely contributes to the loss of the Battle so he hazards doubly
his own loss: For it is observable, (I am sure in Land-Fights) that where one
is killed standing stiffly his ground, five are destroyed in the running away;
and I am told in your Sea Fights too, you lose most Men when you fight at
greatest distance from the Enemy: But then besides the danger of the Enemy, the
Coward has more reason to be afraid of his Friends, they being likely to hate
him the most, who before had the best esteem of him; and a Gallows may easily
catch him at home whom a Bullet abroad could not reach. So that to him may be
well applied our Saviors saying, He that will save his Life shall lose it.

3. His fear impeaches the Divine Providence, which chiefly Glories to exercise
it self in times and places of most eminent hazard; I know some valiant Men who
have come off unwounded from the heat of at least twenty Battles; God
oftentimes makes those places safest where we apprehend the most danger and
those most dangerous we think most secure. Thus my dear Cousin you see, a
Coward with a Commission, is neither a good Subject, a good Christian, nor a
good or wise Man in any sense, but must be of necessity a Traitor to the King,
a thief to his Country, a Murderer of his own Party, and consequently detested
of God and Man. Consult therefore your own heart, and if fear dwell at bottom,
do not cozen any longer the Kings expectation, lest by staying another Battle,
you let all the World be witness of that shame which yet may be easily hid. You
may find fair excuses enough to lay down your Commission, and the Prince can
find Men enough to take it up, who better deserve it. But if you will stay and
Fight resolve to Fight bravely, so as you may do service to the King and gain
your self lasting reputation.

If there have happened any disgust between you and any other Commander in the
Fleet, either for wrongs really received, or supposed, or because he being a
Man of less desert, is preferred, and advanced before you: Consider that a
fraction of the parts, tends fairly to the ruin of the whole; and that your
safety, and success, does chiefly depend on your Unity, and a right
understanding. If therefore you would be thought faithful to the King, if you
would not be found false to your Country, let all private quarrels dye; or at
least go to sleep till the public ones are decided.

In the mean time assist one another, by all manner of kind Offices, as often
as it lies in your power, let the Enemy only feel the effects of your
indignation, and make it appear by the greatness of your Actions, that you are
the Man of most merit.

Where Duty bids go, never stay for the example of any others, but rather
strive all you can to make your self their example. In a good Cause God
prospers best the bold Adventurer; let gallant resolution lead the Van, and
glorious Victory shall bring up the Rear.

Sheerness, July 16th. 1673.
FINIS.

