AN ADVERTISEMENT From their MAJESTY'S General POST OFFICE, LONDON,
IT being Notorious, that many ill-minded Persons, for some wicked Designs
against the Government, have dispersed in Coffee-Houses, and other public
Places of Meeting, diverse most infamous Scandals of their Majesty's General
Post Office; giving out, that Letters are there stopped, broke open, and
destroyed at pleasure: And especially, that great Numbers of Letters about
Elections of Members for the next Parliament, have been burnt.

For the Suppressing of such malicious Falsehoods and wicked Insinuations, which
in consequence reflect on their Majesty's Just and Gracious Government, and
tend to lessen their Revenue from the said Office: It is hereby Notified, that
every good and honest minded Person may easily be satisfied by the Oaths of
near twenty Officers in the said Office, that the aforesaid Reports are utterly
false, and maliciously groundless; and that no Letters upon the said occasion
of Election, or at any other time have been destroyed, opened or stayed in this
Office, and it may be also made manifest to them, that such opening of Letters
as is falsely rumored and pretended, is wholly impracticable in the said
Office, if there were so vile a mind in the Master of the same, in regard the
Letters pass not his hands, and the time from the Receipt of the same to the
Posts going, is not in any kind sufficient for such a foul and villainous
Practice.

It is therefore heartily entreated of all that have respect to Truth and
Justice, that in love to the Honor and Reputation of their Majesty's
Government, and to Justice it self, they would desire every one whom they shall
hear telling and dispersing the aforesaid Scandals upon the said Office, to
discover the Authors and Inventers of the same: And if any can be found who
have the bold Malice to affirm any of the aforesaid Falsehoods, concerning the
Master of the said Office, or any other Officers thereunto belonging, he or
they reporting the same, shall be put upon the Justification thereof in the due
Course of the Law, or otherwise to Pay such Damages as shall be judged
answerable to their odious Offense.

JOHN WILDMAN.


