ADVICE TO THE ARMY, On their Going to France and Ireland.
IF I had not known (my Brave and Valiant Soldiers) that your Spirit and
Courage desires rather the Glory and Renown of God, than your own proper
safeties. I would never have ventured my self under your Affiance and Valor.
And for that I well know the Renown and Fame of our Predecessors, who have
obtained in France and Ireland so many Victories, will stir up in you (my
Loving Companions) Courage to follow their Steps and Honorable Endeavors, and
that the Memory of their Exploits, and Glorious Acts, may be as prevailent in
you, as they have been in your Predecessors, in considering the things which
may now Eternalize you; I doubt not at any Hand, but you will cause your
Valiantness and Virtues to appear through the World, and especially in those
Quarters, where we shall see more store of Enemies than Friends, and where we
must with the Edge of our Sword make our Passage; being in a Country which
most of us have never seen; where is no great Surety to repose any Confidence;
and where Infinite Dangers do abound; and the Armies which already are prepared
against the French, and Popish Party in Ireland, are Motives which may Induce
them to fear, of which we ought to make our Benefit; to cause our Prudence,
Wisdom, and Dexterity of Spirit to be known (which are Virtues more desired
than any other) in that thereby men shall see the Boldness and Courage of you,
and the Faith and End of that Inviolable Oath, which we all have made to the
Prince of Orange and Protestant Religion: Behold we are ready to Embark, which
should cause us all to rejoice; and not to follow Corporal and Effeminate
Pleasures, which make a Man weak, sickly, and Tender; but to aspire to Honor,
Riches, and Victory, and to have the Reward of our Honorable Deeds, such as
shall be yielded to us by Prosperous Fortune; which I doubt not but It will be
such toward us, that of Terrestrial Men, it will make us Celestial, and Sound
in the Air so Honorable a Brute of our worthy Names, that neither Time nor
Death shall obscure, nor rake it up in Oblivion; but we shall live time out of
Memory, yea Eternally. And for that we are now to deal with People, who differ
not much from our Customs and Manner of Living; of whom it behooves us to win
their Love and Liking by Policy and Discretion, to our Devotion, Will, and
Friendship; we must be very Modest, Temperate and Quiet, and must banish
Avarice, despise Voluptuousness, and contemn the Pleasures of the Body; and
above all must fly all Idleness, which how hurtful it is to an Army, and how
many Evils it brings with it, you sufficiently conceive. Besides, we must
avoid Robberies, preserve the Honor of Women, respect Ancient Persons, have
care of poor Children, to live amongst your selves as observers of true
Religion, to favor the Friends thereof, and pursue the Enemies; and think that
we being in a strange Country, and in another man's House, to do but that which
you would do at home: We seeing by experience that every Beast, though never so
little, being in his Den becomes as a Lion, in defending himself from the
injury and oppression, which is offered him; and Judging thereby how much more
they ought, and will become Courageous and hardy in their own Houses, if they
see, or feel themselves Out-raged by us. Besides, ye ought in all your Actions,
to have God always before your Eyes, for the Love and Honor, of whom we ought
to expose our Bodies and lives; and thereby manifesting our selves meek and
curious, one to another; and toward our Enemies, Fierce, Bold, Terrible
Fearful, Prompt, and Hardy; to cause others to Know that we are Courageous
without Fear, Wise, and full of Understanding; that by such means, you may
always have together with Health, a high way to Virtue, set open before you;
and that every one of you may with me, carry into his Country, Renown and
Eternal Memory: not refusing any Pain or Travel; for that no Weariness, nor any
Incommodities, or Crosses, can, or ought ever to enter into such Vigilent or
Heroical Spirits, whereby to darken or deface the desire, and earnest
affections, which proceeds from true Honor, and Glory: And especially, I
being with you; not as a Commander amongst you, but as a Father, or Brother,
and Companion, as well in adversity as in prosperity. And to that end you may
assure your selves, that it is true I have said, my self will be the first, and
will not refuse any danger that will befall me; to the end, that by this
Example, every one of you may learn, rather to esteem Honor and Reputation,
then his own proper Life, and prefer an Honorable Death, before a vile and
dishonest Life.

LONDON, Printed for James Fothergill.


