Advertisement by the Sheriff Deput of Aberdeen-Shire undersubscryving, in
relation to the Lords of Council their Proclamation against Forstallers, and
allowing Importation of Victual.
WHereas, I have received the said Proclamation of date the Ninth day of June
instant, and that the samen is of great import to be known generally to all in
the Country, there being few who may not be concerned therein; Therefore I am
advysed, and it is thought fit to cause Re-print the same, to be read at each
Parish Kirk within this Shire, and whereof the tenor follows,

PROCLAMATION
Against Regraiting of Victual, and Forestallers, and allowing the Importation
of Victual free of Public Burden.
WILLIAM by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland;
Defender of the Faith,
To Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, Conjunctly and Severally, Specially, Constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as by Several Acts of Parliament, the keeping up of Victual to a
Dearth, is strictly Prohibited, and particularly, it is Statute by the Acts,
James the Second Parliament Cap. sixth, twenty two and twenty three, that for
the Escheuing of Dearth: Sheriffs, Bailies and other Officers both to Burgh,
and to Land; inquire what Persons Buvs Victual, and holds it to a Dearth: And
that the said Sheriffs and Officers make such known, that in case they hold
more then will Sustain them, and their Meinzie to New-Corn they may be
punished, and Demeaned as Ockerers and Usurers; and the Victual Escheared to
Us* and that the same be Presented to Mercats, and sold as the price goes. And
by the Act James the Second Parliament ninth Cap thirty-eight and thirty-ninth,
it is Ordained that no manner of Victual be holden in Girnals by any man to a
Dearth, but allenerly what is needful for their own Persons, and Sustentation
of their Households and that the said Persons present all that they have more
to the Market, under the Pain of Escheat thereof: And Searchers are appointed
in Edinburgh and Lies to make the said Acts Effectual: As likewise, the Crime
of For-stalling is forbidden by several Acts and Statutes, and particularly by
the Act* James the Sixth, Parliament twelfth, Cap. one hundred and forty eight
it is Declared, that who Buys any Merchandise, or Victual coming to Fair or
Market, or makes any Contract or Promise for the buying of the same, before the
said Merchandise or Victual shall be in the Fair or Mercat-Place ready to be
sold, or shall make any motion by Word, Writ, or Message for raising of the
Prices, or Dearer selling of the said Merchandise and Victual; or who shall
Diswade any from coming, and bringing the foresaid Merchandise and Victual to
Fair or Market, shall be Esteemed and Judged a Forestaller; And it is Ordained
that all such Forestallers may be Pursued before the Justices, or Magistrates of
Burghs, and that without a special Libel, but only upon Forestalling in
General, and the Persons convict to be Fined for the first Fault in Forty
Pounds, for the Second in one hundred Merks, and for the Third to Incurr the
Tinsel of Movables. And seeing that through the not due Observance, and the
Execution of the foresaids Acts: The C^lamity of the Country, by the present
Scarcity and Dearth is greatly increased. THEREFORE We with Advice of the Lords
of Our Privy Council, have thought fit to Revive the same, and Ordain them to
be put to Strict Execution, and for that Effect, to Empower and Require all
Sheriffs of Shires; Stewarts of Stewartries, Lords and Bailies of Regalities,
and their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, as likewise all Commissioners of
Supply, and Justices of Peace, to cause Inquire, and search to be made, who
holds up, or Girnels Victual or keeps stacks contrary to the foresaid Laws, and
to Command and Charge the keepers up of the said Victual in Girnels, Stacks, or
otherways Contrary to the said Statutes either to Thresh out, bring, and
Expose the same for Sale, in open and ordinary Mercats, or otherwise to open
their Girnels, and other Houses where the Victual is kept, and there Sell the
same, as the said Sheriffs, Stewarts of Stewartries* Lords and Bailies of
Regalities, and their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, or any two of the said
Commissioners, shall find the ordinary Price to Rule for the time in the
Country not below the last Candlemass Fires, with Certification that if they
Failzie therein, they shall be Proceeded (...) and the Pains of the foresaids
Acts of Parliament Execute upon them with all rigor: And in the mean time the
Victual Girneled, and Unlawfully kept up as said is, Arreasted and Sequestrat
by the foresaid Sheriffs and others as Escheat. And further, We with Advice
foresaid, Command and Charge all Magistrates of Burghs, and other Officers of
the Land to take Care that all Mercats and Fairs be duly Regulat, conform to
the Laws, without Extortion, and to cause put the foresaid Acts of Parliament
against Forestallers to due and vigorous Execution: Certifying the foresaids
Sheriffs, Magistrates and others, who shall fail in their Duty in the Premises,
that upon information given to the Lords of Our Privy Council, they shall be
therefore severely Punished, as the Lords of Our Privy Council shall see*
Cause. And further, for the better Releif of the Country under the present
great Scarcity, whereby the Prices of Victual are a^sen above the Rates
mentioned in the Act of Parliament for prohibiting the Import of Foreign
Victual, We with Advice foresaid, do hereby grant Little and full liberty to
all Persons to import Victual and Corn of all sorts* from any foreign Kingdom
or Country, and that free of Custom, Excise, or other Imposition, and for that
effect Recommends it to the Commissioners of Our Thesaury, to Discharge the
Exacting thereof for the said Victual to be imported as said is, after the day
and date hereof, and that notwithstanding of any Act of Parliament or Book of
Rates Imposing the s^m^, Declaring, that this License and Liberty, is to Endure
until the First Day of September next to come, and no longer. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Mercat-Crosses (...) and others in Girnels now selling, or to be sold within
Shire, (...) shall not exceed the sum of nine pound scots per (...) in ready
money; as being the most ordinary current (...) for the time, and
proportionally, for greater or lesser qu^^tities of lawful and standart
measure: And in caice (...) be sold upon trust, that it be sold for such
reasonable (...) proportional rates to the said ready money, as may co^^ with
Law, and without extortion upon the buyers.

And these are also ordaining, that all in this Shire who have Co^ Bear in
stacks, or otherwise preserved, shall cause thresh or sell ou^ same at
reasonable Rates, proportinall to the foresaids Prices, as the^^ Corn and Bear
would yield in Meal or Malt, or make sell and dispo^^ the same in Meal or Malt
themselves* by due sale at the Rates fore^ And that none, whither Heretor or
Merchant keep up Girnels of Vic^^^^ Meal, Bear or Malt, or any quantity
thereof, any manner of way, t^^^ then will serve their own Families to
Martinmass next at farthest; ^ifying such, whither in Burgh or Landwart, as
shall do in the con^ or shall be guilty of any manner of Forestalling, or
contraveening the Laudible Laws and Proclamation abovementioned, either by
keeping (...) Victual of any kind, or taking for the same above the Rates
before ex^ or any way Forestalling of Mercats, prohibited by the said Laws,
upon complaint, or any discovery thereof, they will be persued legally punished
conform to the Acts of Parliament and Council made against transgressors, and
their Forestalled Victual, or other Goods, seized made Escheat in manner,
therein prescryved, and that with all ri^ competent in Law: And that none
pretend ignorance, their presen^^ ordained to be published at each parish Kirk
within this Shire, by (...) Readers thereat the next Lords Day immediately after
Divine Service, duly kept by them to be forth coming for the use of all
concer^^^ for which this is warrant.

Given at Aberdeen the twenty Fourth day (...) June, One Thousand six hundred
and ninety six Years, by me the said She^^^^ Deput under subscryving. ANDREW
FRASER.


