See here how Natures Book unclasped lies,
Whose Pages Aesop reads with pearcing eyes.
Who with wise Apologues from Beasts derived,
Tells man they for his conduct were contrived


AESOP's FABLES

With his Life In English French and Latin The English by Tho. Philipott Esquire.
The French and Latin by Rob. Codrington MA

Illustrated with one hundred and ten SCULPTURES By Francis Barlow

And Are Sold at his House The Golden Eagle In New-Street, near Shoo-Lane. 1665

engraved title page

AESOP'S FABLES WITH HIS LIFE: IN English, French and Latin.

The English by THO. PHILIPOTT Esquire The French and Latin by ROB. CODRINGTON M. A.

Illustrated with One hundred and Twelve SCULPTURES By FRANCIS BARLOW.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid for Francis Barlow, and are to be sold by
Ann Seile at the Black-Boy against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, and
Edward Powell at the Swan in Little Britain.

M.DC.LXVI.

TO THE HONORABLE The great Fautor and Promoter of all ingenious Sciences, in
which Himself is so great a Proficient, Sir FRANCIS PRVIJAN, Knight, etc.
Honorable Sir,
THe less knowing, and more illiterate sort of Critics may perhaps both accuse
and condemn me guilty of a piacular offense, in offering these Fables at the
Altar of your noble Name, whose most solid and profound Judgment renders you
incapable of conversing with things so much beneath you.

But yet again I am lulled into a well-grounded Belief, that the more
Intelligible and Scientifick part of Mankind will assoil me from the imputation
of this misprision, upon this sober and serious consideration, that Aesop, the
Phrygian Fabulist, was, when in his most unpolished and uncouthest shape, still
acceptable to the Breasts and Closets of the bravest Princes; and had a fair
Tomb erected to his memory, to witness what veneration and esteem those darker
Times gave to the Genius which seemed to illuminate that Part of the World with
his facetious Wit and Learning.

From these premises therefore (Honorable Sir) I have been ambitiously bold
to deduce this undeniable conclusion; that, if Aesop was so acceptable to all,
when in his native, rude, and homespun habit; how much more now, being
apparel'd in a variable dress, and appearing in public with the concomitant
attendants of two Foreign Languages, whose faces and graces you accurately
understand as clearly as your own.

And this, Sir, together with the grateful resentment of your multiplied
obligations, and your designed study to advance ingenious Arts and Sciences,
has encouraged me prostrately to dedicate this Piece to your indulgent
Patronage; and lay it and my self at your feet, with the elevation of my heart
and hands to the highest throne above, to bless you with length of days, and
all imaginable felicity; which is the most fervent prayer of

Honorable Sir, Your most prostrately devoted, and most gratefully obedient
Servant FRANCIS BARLOVV.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader, and those more curious in their knowledge as to Design in
Pictures;
AS there is none free from some more open or private Enemies, so I cannot
expect to reap a benefit beyond all men, although I do not know of any
particular one, and therefore presume on a favorable construction of what I
have done; being pressed on to this great Work, some years since, by the
persuasion of a much honored Friend of mine (since dead;) who conceiving it to
suit much with my fancy, as consisting so much of Fowl and Beasts, wherein my
Friends are pleased to count me most Eminent in what I do; that only being my
part, the Poetical part being performed by several others more Eminent: And
that it might be more useful for young Gentlemen and Ladies as well as others,
I have with great charge and trouble caused it to be (with his Life and Fables)
in English, French and Latin, that it might be more universal, and so improve
their knowledge in those several Languages, which I hope may prove delightful;
and have therefore accordingly placed in every Opening, the Fable Pictures with
the several Languages. Now as there is no Garden but amongst many Flowers there
may be some Weeds, so possibly some of my Designs may be questioned by the
more Critical; or at least, not being Graven, all of them appearing not so
pleasant to the Eye of many: truly, I shall presume to beg this favor from
you, first to consider I am no professed Graver or Eacher, but a Well-wisher to
the Art of Painting; and therefore Design is all we aim at, and cannot perform
Curious Neatness without losing the Spirit, which is the main. And as in
Garlands, Flowers together show well; being severed, many may prove not so
good: so I hope in the general I may in some measure answer your Expectation,
which will be the Crown of my so great pains, and the happy Accomplishment of
the desires of

Your Servant to command F. B.

A Brief Prospect of the LIFE of AESOP.
THE Egyptians muffel'd up their Knowledge of Things in the Clouds of
Hieroglyphics, and other mysterious Signatures: The Graecians folded up theirs
in Symbolls, and other Emblematical Allusions: But Aesop having unclothed it
from that dark Vesture in which it lay concealed, beheld Truth in its naked and
callow Principles, like those ancient Poets that saw her through all those
Veils and gloomy contextures they themselves had originally wrapped her up in.
The Life of this Sagacious Person in its whole conduct and Decursion, until it
was wound up in its Fatal and Calamitous Catastrophe (as its Scheme is drawn
from Planudes, and other Monuments of Antiquity) is here in a Compendious
Prospect represented to the Public.

He was born at Ammonius in Phrygia the Greater, a Town obscure in it self, but
made Signal and Illustrious by being the Cradle of Aesop, and might by a
successful Corrivalship have entered into competition with those Cities that
with a noble Emulation contended for the Birth of Homer.

As to the Features and Dimensions of his Face and Body, they were so shuffel'd
and hudled up, that Nature in his Production, did seem to insinuate that she
oftentimes does set the most refulgent Gems in the most uneven and ragged
Collets: for he was of a sharp Head, flat Nosed, his Back rolled up in a Bunch
or Excrescence, his Lips tumerous and pendant, his Complexion black, from which
dark Tincture he contracted his Name ( Aesopus being the same with Aethiops)
Large Belly, Crooked Bow-Legs; Thersites in Homer was but an imperfect
Transcript of so stupendous a Deformity.

But above all his Misfortunes, this was the most eminent, That his Speech was
slow, inarticulate and very obscure; such was his Body: But Nature by a more
even Retribution had endowed him with a most accomplished Mind, capable of the
most sublime and elevated Speculations.

And as the Dower conferred upon him externally by Nature was of cheap and
vulgar Estimate, so the Patrimony he was entitled to by Fortune, was no less
despicable and ruinous; for the first part of his Life was exposed to Poverty,
and the latter part of it grated upon by Slavery and a violent Death.

His first Master (under whose Dominion he then groaned) finding him incapable
of any Domestic Business, employed him in the Field, there by Digging to
cultivate the Earth, where not long after his Misfortunes obliged him to give
the first Testimony of his Ingenuity. At a certain Time, as his Master was
walking in the Fields, a Labourer presented him with excellent Figs, which he
transmitted to be preserved by the Care and Trust of Agathopodus (for so was
the Servant styled) till his Return from the Bath. But he (enamored with their
Delicacy) combined in an injurious Confederacy with his Fellow Servants to sat
themselves with them, and then to fasten the Guilt of the designed Crime on
Aesop. This being determined, they eat up the Figs, and when their Master
returned from the Bath, with much Noise and Importunity accused Aesop to have
devoured them; who, enra'gd at this Action, summoned him to appear, and then
asked him, What Impudence had egged him on to destroy those Figs which were
reserved for himself? Who making his Defense with some Slowness and
Haesitation, was even ready to be offered up to Stripes and Punishment; when
prostrating himself at his Masters feet, he implored him for some little space
to suspend his Punishment: in which Interval he ran and fetched some warm
Water, and swallowing it down, by the Force of his Finger vomited up the Water,
for as yet that Day he was Fasting; and after requested his Master his Accusers
might drink the same warm Infusion, whereby it might appear who had eaten the
Figs: His Master approving the ingenuous Artifice of Aesop, condemned them to
the same Draught, which by its Warmth and Moisture, making the Membranes of the
Stomach Limber and Ductile, engaged them to disgorge the Water and Figs
together: by which act the Innocence of Aesop was assoil'd, and his Enemies
given up to the deserved Animadversion of Whips and Scourges.

Upon the day following his Master returned to the City, and he being remanded
to his Labor, Accosted two Priests of Diana, who by Error stragled from their
designed way, who Adjur'd Aesop by Jove to direct them into the most regular
Track; which he not only performed, but refreshed them with Viands, and for his
Guidance and Hospitality had the wishes of their Hearts, and Prayers of their
Tongues. Aesop returning to his Task, oppressed with his Load of Care and
Labor, sunk into an easy Sleep, and in a Dream conjectured he saw Fortune
standing by him, gratifying him with Volubility of Language, and the Elegancy
of wrapping up his Notions under the contexture of Apologues. Immediately
starting up, O wonderful (says he) in what a charming Transe have I been
engaged! for behold I speak fluently, and by the favor of the Gods I can
register each Creature by its name; this propitious Success is the reward of
my benign Compliance with Strangers. And overjoyed with this extrasie, returns
to his designed Labor, where having committed some Error, Zenas (Overseer of
the Field) rewarded him with a Blow; on which Aesop cried out, You are always
punishing him that offends you not; my Master sure, upon due Information, will
revenge these Injurious Stripes. Zenas possessed with Animositie, and hearing him
speak whom he esteemed before so slow and unactive, by way of prevention, lest
he should be discharged of an unjust Stewardship, resolved to accuse him to his
Master, whom not long after when he had accosted, he desired the Gods to
protect: whereon his Master inquired, What was it that discomposed him? Zenas
replied, The Intervention of a Prodigious Accident in the Field had effected
it. His Master inquired, What Prodigy in Nature had provoked that Admiration?
He replied, Aesop that was esteemed Dumb, now had found Utterance and
Elocution. His Master answered, This will be ruinous to thee, in whose Estimate
he was reputed a Monster. Zenas rejoined, What he has contumeliously spoken
against me, I should have entombed in Silence, but against You, and the Gods,
he has disgorg'd intolerable Maledictions. Which injurious Accusation of his
so incensed his Master, that he commanded him to be exposed to Sale, as the
Recompense of his Ungrateful Impiety.

When Aesop was thus put under the Dominion of Zenas, he informed him how he
was to dispose of him. Do your pleasure (says Aesop.) Not long after a Merchant
designing to buy some Cattle, encountered Zenas, who informed him, that though
he had no Beasts, he had a Manslave who was ready to be offered up to Sale.
When the Merchant heard of a Servant, he desired to behold him, and upon the
interview broke into an incessant laughter, saying, Had I not been convinced by
his Voice, I should have esteemed him a blown Bladder: why did you divert me
from my intended design, to Assault my Eyes with such a Prodigy? Having thus
said, he was about to depart, when he was stopped by Aesop, who desired his
Stay. The Merchant looking back, said, Be gone thou filthy Cur. Aesop requested
him, that he would discover the Cause that engaged his Coming thither. He
replied, To buy something of Value or Estimate, and not any such unprofitable
worthless thing as Himself. Aesop urged, he would buy him, since he was able to
recompense the Price by his Service. The Merchant required him to inform him,
wherein such a loathsome Beast could Balance it? Have you at home any testy
Children (said Aesop) I shall supply the place of a Bugbear to terrify them
into Repose and Silence. On which the Merchant smiling, asked Zenas what he
would demand for that uncouth vessel? Three Halfpence, said he. The Merchant
discharged the price, intimating that with Nothing he had bought Nothing. After
their Journey, as they made a near approach to the Habitation of the Merchant,
two of his Children when they viewed Aesop, by Crying testified their Fear of
Him. Now Sir, said he, you see the Effect of my Promise. At which the Merchant
smiling, they entered his House, where he commanded Aesop to accost his
Fellow Servants with a Salute. Who when they beheld this collected mass of
Deformity, cried out, What Misfortune has engaged our Master to bring this
Witch or Prodigy into his Family!

Not long after the Merchant designed a Journey into Asia, and commanded all
things to be prepared that had an aspect on this Affair: And when every Servant
had his proportion of Burden assigned, Aesop desired, because it was his first
effort or essay, he might sustain the lightest; which being granted, he took up
a Basket of Bread; at which the other Slaves were filled at once both with
laughter and amazement, considering the Burden he went to support was in its
weight proportionate to the strength of two. When Dinner approached, Aesop
(that had with much agony and reluctance sustained his Carriage, was commanded
to set down his Load, and by an equal distribution to dispense a Dole of Bread
to the other Slaves; so that the moiety of his Basket being emptied, he (after
Dinner was expired) with much facility undertook the residue of the Journey:
And when Supper was near, Aesop was enjoined to disengage himself of his
burden, and with the moiety of the remaining Loaves, to appease the appetite of
the traveling Slaves; so that next morning, his Load being wholly exhausted,
he advanced with an empty Basket in the Van of his Fellow servants; and by this
dextrous artifice obliged those with applause to admire his Ingenuity, who
before with cheapness and contempt did despise his Folly.

The Merchant being now arrived at Ephesus, and having there to good advantage
vended diverse of his Slaves, he was persuaded (to improve his Market) to sail
to Samos, whither he transported the residue of his Servants, whose
now-remaining Inventory was very narrow, being only three; namely, Cantor a
Native of Cappadocia, and Grammaticus born in Lidia, two persons of a large
dimension; and Aesop, whose Character was pensil'd out before: Where when he
was arrived, that he might the better vend the two former, he new attired them;
but Aesop, because no Art or Improvement would adorn so deformed Lineaments,
was Invested with sackcloth, which made him to be exposed as well to general
derision as to sale. Amougst those that accosted the Merchant, was Xanthus, an
eminent Philosopher of Samos, accompanied with a retinue of his Scholars; and
having viewed these three persons designed for sale, he beheld Aesop placed in
the midst; whereby he conjectured, that the worst was fixed there that the two
other might appear the Fairer. The first that the Philosopher addressed himself
to was Cantor; of whom he demanded what he could perform? All things, says he.
Xanthus demanded of the Merchant what price or value he set upon that Servant?
He replied, A thousand Halfpence. Xanthus disgusting a price so vast, went
from this, and applied himself to the other, and asked him likewise what be
could do? He replied, All things. The Philosopher demanded again of the
Merchant at what rate he held Grammaticus? Three thousand Halfpence, said he.
But Xanthus not well resenting a rate of that bulk and importance, did declare
both to the Merchant and the Scholars that accompanied him, that he would buy
no Servants that were rated at so Extraordinary a value: whereupon the Scholars
suggested to Xanthus to buy Aesop, since that uncouth person might perform his
work, and they would absolve the price. It Is not fit (said Xanthus) that I
should buy him and you make good the payment: Moreover, my Wife would very ill
resent that so misshapen and discomposed a person should ever be subservient or
ministerial to her affairs. The Scholars replied, We are not always obliged to
comply with the desires of a Woman; therefore let us examine what Ingenuity is
resident in this deformed Lump. Wherefore addressing themselves to Aesop,
Xanthus bid him be comforted. Was I ever sad? replied Aesop. Of what place are
you a Native? said the Philosopher. I am a Negro, said Aesop. I do not ask you
this, urged he, but where you were born? Aesop answered, Of my Mothers belly. I
demand not this of you, said Xanthus, but what place you were born in? My
Mother never informed me, answered Aesop, whether it was above or below. What
can thou perform? said the Philosopher. Nothing, replied Aesop; the two
former whom already you have applied your self to can do all things, wherefore
nothing remains for me to do. Said Xanthus, Are you willing I should buy you?
You ought (answered Aesop) to reflect upon your own Bargain, must you needs
have my advice? If you are willing, pay down the price, and wind up your
business. If I buy thee (said Xanthus, thou will attempt to make an escape. If
I do (said Aesop) I will not come to you, as you now to me, for counsel. But
thou art Deformed, urged Xanthus. A Philosopher (replied, he) should not only
view the Body, but likewise reflect upon the Mind. The Scholars obliged by his
Ingenious Replies, requested Xanthus to Buy him: Whereupon Xanthus addressed
himself to the Merchant, and demanded what value he fixed upon him? The Merchant
answered, Thy design is sure to embase the value of my Commodities; thou have
declined the Fairest to take the most Misshapen. But Xanthus desirous of Aesop,
demanded again seriously his price of the Merchant. Which being discovered, the
Scholars disburs'd it, and Xanthus took him into possession. Whereupon the
Publicans came and inquired who had Sold? But they were all ashamed to reply,
the Bargain was so cheap and despicable. On which Aesop cried out, That is the
Seller, and this the Buyer; If they will not assert their own Contract, I am
Free. At which the Publicans smiled, and the others departed.

As Aesop accompanied Xanthus home, a necessity of Nature caused Xanthus to
raise up his Gown, and urine; which Aesop perceiving, caught him by the Gown,
and desired him to Sell him, otherways he should Escape. Why so? replied
Xanthus. Because (says he) I shall never be able to Serve such an indulgent
Master who will not contribute some time to Ease nature, but vents his Urine as
he goes: If such an accident should happen to me, your Servant, when I am
engaged in business, my necessity would oblige me to vent my Ordure as I fly.
Does this so much discompose you? said Xanthus; To decline three Evils I vent
my Urine as I pass; for had I stood still, the Sun had scorched my Head, the
parched Earth had burnt my Feet, and the odor of my Urine had offended my
Nostrils. Aesop replied, Advance Sir, I am satisfied.

When they were approached near Xanthus his house, the Philosopher commanded
Aesop to stay in the Porch, lest so deformed an object should discompose his
Wife, who had a nice and curious Eye; Xanthus entered and thus accosted his
Wife; Mistress, You shall have no cause for the future whereon to establish any
discontent, for there is now a Servant in the Porch, in whose person there does
concur so many amiable features as ever Eye shed a beam upon. The Maids charmed
into a belief of the truth of it, enter^d into contention which of them should
first oblige him. The Wife of Xanthus commanded one of them to summon him to
appear. As soon as Aesop heard her call, he prepared himself to enter: But the
Maid, amazed at so prodigious a Deformity, cried out, Art thou He? Yes sure,
said Aesop. Enter not into the house, replied she, unless thou intendest a
frighted Family should all dislodge. Aesop came in and appeared before his
Mistress; whom when she beheld, she applied her self to Xanthus, saying, What
Prodigy has here accompanied you? Disband him instantly; urging farther, that
in this action of his he had so disobliged her, that she desired him that he
would return that down with which before she had enriched him, and she would
abandon that unhappy Mansion. On this Xanthus rebuked Aesop, who had discovered
so much Ingenuity before, and was so silent now. Throw her into Hell, said
Aesop. Away with you Villain, replied he, my Love and my Life is so
incorporated into hers, as if one Heart did only manage two Bodies. At which
Aesop stamping, cried out, that Xanthus was subjected to the dominion of his
Wife: and turning to his Mistress, said he, Would you have had Xanthus offered
up to your service a Servant young, vigorous and comely, which might have
beheld you naked when you entered into the Bath, and engaged in a nearer
dalliance with you, to the obloquy and disgrace of severer Philosophy? O
Euripides! how well have thou asserted? Great is the Effort of the Sea when its
waves swell into Sedition, and Obey no Law; and the flame or impression of
Devouring fire: Poverty is a ruinous condition, and there are many things
intolerable, but nothing to balance an Impetuous woman. You being the Wife of
a Philosopher, should not be attended by such persons as should contract a
disrepute upon Philosophy it self. She being not able to contradict or oppose
what he had asserted, asked Xanthus where he had purchased this Beauty? The
handsomness of his Ingenuity does recompense the deformity of his person; my
dislike of him is extinguished. Your Mistress (said Xanthus to Aesop) is now at
peace with you. Aesop irronically replied, It Is a difficult matter sure to
appease a woman. For the future (urged Xanthus) be silent; I bought you to
Obey, not to Contradict.

The Day following Xanthus going to the Garden to buy Herbs, commanded Aesop to
accompany him; which when the Gardener had gathered, he entrusted them to
Aesop: and when Xanthus had defrayed their price, the Gardener demanded of
Xanthus, what was the natural Reason that the Herbs which he planted did not
improve with that quick and active Growth, as those which were of her voluntary
production? Xanthus not able to extricate this Question, thus replied, that it
thus happened from that order and series of Providence that threaded together
inferior Causes and their Effects. At which Aesop (being present) smiled. Do
you deride me? said Xanthus. I laugh at you, answer^d he, and not you only,
but him that taught you. Let me unwinde this Question. On which Xanthus
addressing himself to the Gardener, said, It is not fit for me who have
disputed in learned Auditories, to unravel Questions in a Garden, my Servant
here present will dissolve the Difficulty of your Question propounded. Is there
any knowledge treasured up in this sordid vessel? urged the Gardener. At which
Aesop incensed, demanded of the Gardener this Question; When a Widow is engaged
in second Nuptials, she is Mother to the Issue of her first Marriage, but
Stepmother to the Progeny of her second Husband: Those Children to whom by the
proper Obligations of Nature her Affections are entitled, she affects and
values much more, then those to whom she is a Mother only by accidental
relation: So is it here, the Earth is a Stepmother to those Plants which are
incorporated into her womb by Art, but a Mother to those which are of her own
free production. The Gardener much satisfied with this Reply, enjoined him,
when his occasions guided him to his Garden, without any retribution, freely to
collect those Herbs he wanted, as the recompense of his dextrous Solution of
the Question.

After some days were expired, Xanthus being gone to Bathe, where he mingled
with some Friends, commanded Aesop to repair to his House, and instantly boil
some Lentills; he went (as he was enjoined) and only boiled one: when Xanthus
had done Bathing, he engaged his Friends to accompany him to Dinner, where he
informed them that they should find his provision was wrapped up in a slender
Bill of Fare, namely Lentills; but he was confident they would proportion their
entertainment by his affection, not his viands. They all entering his House,
Xanthus commanded Aesop to refresh them with some Beverage, now coming from the
Bath. Aesop instantly taking up Water from the Stream of the Bath, presented it
to Xanthus; who with disgust and passion resented the ill relish of it, and
demanded of him whence he had collected it? From the Bath, said he. Xanthus
(because he would not discompose his Friends) at present concealed his
Resentment, and called for a Basin; which Aesop having brought, stood over
against him. Xanthus asked him, Do you not wash? He replied, It Is fit for you
to Command, me to Obey: But the putting of water into the Basin was no
Ingredient in his Injunction. Upon which Xanthus demanded of his Friends,
whether or not he had bought a Servant? They replied, in their vogue and
estimate he had rather purchased a Master. When as now they were preparing for
Dinner, Xanthus demanded of Aesop whether the Lentills were boiled? On which he
lodges one Lentill in a Cockle-shell, and presents it to his Master: Who making
an essay to try if it were sufficiently boiled, and judging it enough, enjoined
Aesop to serve up the residue: who immediately put all the decocted water into
Saucers, and offered it up to Xanthus; who questioned again, where the Lentills
were? You have had it already, replied Aesop. Did you boil but one? asked
Xanthus. No more Sir, replied he, since your command that I conducted my
Obedience by, did extend only to the Singular, not Plural number. At which
Xanthus incensed, cried out, The irregular Follies of this person would
disorder one into a Frenzy! That I may not defraud my Friends by any
pretended imposture or delusion of their designed Entertainment, instantly go
and buy four Hogs-feet, and boil them. Which Injunction of his being cheerfully
performed by Aesop, as they were boiling, Xanthus desirous to attaque some
occasion which might engage him to chastise Aesop, when he was embarked in some
other employment, stole one of the Feet out of the Pot, and concealed it. Not
long after Aesop came and discovered but three Feet in the Pot, and (suspecting
some clandestine artifice) applied himself to an adjacent Hogstie, and there
lopped off one of the Legs of a fatted Hog; and having sindg'd off the hair,
with it made up the diminished number in the Pot. Xanthus conjecturing that
Aesop missing the purloin'd Foot, might by Flight attempt to evade his destined
punishment, again added it to the former. Aesop discovering Five, when he was
to serve them up, Xanthus inquired what auspicious accident had improved them
to that number? Aesop replied, How many Feet have two Hogs? Xanthus answered,
Eight. Here then are Five present, said Aesop, and the fatted Hog by the
absence of one has but Three. Whereupon Xanthus (being chafed into passion)
cried out to his Friends, Did I not inform you, this Fellow will engage me in a
Lunacie? But tracing out no just cause to correct him, the tempest of his anger
was mollified into a calm.

The day subsequent to this, one of the Scholars with a liberal Treatment
caressed Xanthus and his Fellow Students: Whilst they were engaged at this
Banquet, Xanthus transmitted a choice Dish to Aesop, and enjoined him to
present it to Her that Affected Him best. Whilst Aesop was going to perform
his message, he considered that now an opportunity was offered to recompense
that Regret and Contempt with which his Mistress entertained him at his first
Arrival. And approaching the House, he sat down in the Porch, and then called
his Mistress, discovering to her the Dish he was entrusted with, and thus
addressed himself to her; Mistress (said he) my Master has devoted this present
to her who loves him best; not to you. Then calling his Masters Bitch Lycaena,
cast it to Her, and bid Her eat that which Xanthus had presented to Her. Then
returning to his Master, Xanthus asked him, whether he had offered up the
present to her who loved him best. All of it, said he; and she swallowed it in
my presence. Xanthus inquired what She said? Nothing to me, replied he; but to
you, She refunds the tribute of her Thanks. Xanthus his Wife entertained this
cheap Neglect with that Resentment, that she vowed to abandon his House. In the
mean space, whilst the Scholar and his Philosophical Guests were warm with
wine, one demanded, which should be the time of the greatest Disorder amongst
Mortals? Aesop (standing behind) replied, When the Dead arise, and attempt to
trace out their ancient possessions. The Scholars smiling at his ingenuous
Solution; another demanded, why Sheep die so calmly, and Swine with that
offensive noise and clamor? The Sheep (answered he) are usually milk'd and
shorn, and so are silent; and when they view the Knife, expect by Instinct
nothing but what was customary: But Swine, who have not been habituated to
these exercises, when they suffer the impression of the Knife, die with an
harsh and ungrateful outcry. The Scholars charmed with these Answers, were
melted into Mirth and Laughter. After Supper was expired, Xanthus returned to
his House, and (according to former usage) addressed himself with much
complacence to his Wife: But she accosted his application with passion and
contempt, urging that he should return her, her Dower, and not court her with
any of his Approaches, since he had consecrated his Dainties to his Bitch.
Xanthus astonished with a damp and amazement of spirit, asked if she had not
received his intended present? But she attested the Powers above it was not
sent to her, but his Bitch. Xanthus (calling Aesop) demanded to whom he had
offered the abovementioned Mess? He replied, To your Beloved. Whereupon
calling the Bitch, This is she (said he) that most constantly entitles her
Affections to you; for though you load her with stripes, and discard her your
house, yet still she returns both to fawn upon you, and accompany you. Your
Instructions ought to have directed your present to your Wife, not your
Beloved. You are now convinced, Mistress, said Xanthus, that it was not my
Crime, but his, that your Present miscarri'd: Sustain with patience this
Misfortune, and I shall trace out some opportunity to make Aesop 's Punishment
as signal as his Neglect. But this not charmed his Wife, who (enraged at this
affront) departed to her Father: which caused Aesop to triumph, saying, Now
Sir, you discover more evident symptoms of Affection in your Bitch toward you,
than in my Mistress.

Aesop seeing his Master engaged in a gloomy Melancholy, contracted from the
departure of his Mistress; and secondly her Refusal (though much importuned) to
return, addressed himself to Xanthus, and told him he would weave some Artifice
by which next day he would retrive her; and therefore desired he would dispell
that sullen Cloud that dwelt about him: Then taking Money he went into the
Market, where having loaded himself with Hens and Geese, as though they were to
furnish out some Nuptial Feast, with this Feathered stock he passed by that
House which had received his Mistress, pretending an Ignorance that it was the
Mansion of her Father; and accosting one of the Servants, he demanded of him,
whether there was any thing there to sell that might improve the magnificence
of a Wedding Banquet? The Servant enquired whose Marriage it was designed for?
Aesop replied, Xanthus the Philosopher to morrow celebrates his second
Nuptials. The Servant immediately gave Intelligence of this whole affair to
Xanthus his Wife. As soon as she had received this disastrous report, born on
the wings of Anger and Jealousy, she flew to Xanthus his House, and there with
a shrill acclamation did assure him, that no second Espousals of his should be
built up, or established, but upon her Urn. Thus Aesop who was the occasion of
her angry Departure, was the cause of her hasty and eager Return.

Not long after Xanthus by a new Invitation summoned his Scholars to a Dinner,
and enjoined Aesop to furnish his Table with the best and choycest Viands.
VVhilest he was going about to perform his Masters Injunction, he was likewise
designing by what Artifice he might intimate his Masters folly: Therefore when
he had disburs'd his money in Hogs-Tongues, he served them up, improved with a
poynant Sauce, to Dinner. The Scholars much commended the Dish, which had
furnished out an occasion for Discourse; but the Ingredients which composed the
second and third Course, were still Tongues. At which the Guests being
astonished, their Amazement engaged Xanthus to enquire of Aesop, if there was
nothing to re-enforce this Entertainment, but Tongues? Aesop replied, Nothing
else. Thou Lump of Deformity, urged Xanthus, my Commands did engage you to
prepare the most obliging Dainties. Sir, (said Aesop) your Reproof before
Philosophers does exact my Retribution of Thanks. What does out-paralel the
Tongue? This is the great Chanel by which the most refined Learning, and
polished Philosophy is conducted down to us: By this noble engine or organ,
Addresses, Commerce, Contracts, Caresses, Eulogies and Marriages, are completely
established; on this moves Life it self, therefore Nothing to be thrown into
balance with the Tongue. The Scholars (departing) asserted, that the
Philosophy of Aesop had outvied that of Xanthus.

Not long after, the Scholars upbraiding Xanthus with his Disservice and
Imposture, he replied, It was not his Design, but the Artifice of a Perverse
and Refractory Servant: But I now (says he) have waved my first Injunction, and
as I then enjoined Aesop to buy the best for Dinner, so I now command him to
collect the worst of Meats for Supper. But Aesop (constant to his first
purpose) furnished out the Treatment with no other Viands but Tongues again.
Xanthus (observing the Discontent that was writ in visible characters on the
Faces of his Guests, because they beheld both the second and third Course to be
made up of nothing else but Tongues) being incensed at Aesop, demanded of him
how he had now obeyed his commands, which did direct him to furnish his Table
with the worst of Meats? Aesop replied, he had exactly pursued his Directions;
for what was worse then the Tongue? Does not the Ruin of Empires and Cities,
and the Destruction of private Interests entitle it self often to its
Miscariages? Is it not the Forge of Calumnies and Perjuries? In brief, is not
the whole contexture of Life disordered frequently by its exorbitancies? When
the Scholars had heard Aesop's Reply, they affirmed, that the Crookedness of
his Body, was but the Transcript of his distorted and irregular Manners; and
gave Xanthus a caution, that these Extravagancies of Aesop did not engage him
in a Frenzy. To which Aesop answered, that they discovered the Symptoms of
Malice, in being Incendiaries between the Master and his Servant.

Xanthus (desirous by just Revenge to expiate these Affronts) sought to trace
out some cause which might supply him with an opportunity to punish Aesop, and
immediately commanded him (since he had accused them of too busy a curiosity)
to seek out a man that regarded Nothing. The next day Aesop traversing the
streets, discovered a man sitting in a negligent and regardless posture,
without any consideration or reflection on the state of Things. Him Aesop
accosted, and desired him he would accompany his Master at Dinner. The Clown
(without demanding the name of the person who made the invitation) followed
Aesop, and entering the House of Xanthus, approached his Table in his sordid
Habit: Which engaged him to demand of Aesop the condition of his new Guest? He
replied, it was a person Regardless. Xanthus intimated to his Wife, she should
perform any thing which he required, that he might arrest an occasion to
stablish his Revenge on Aesop: whereupon he enjoined his Wife to wash the
Strangers feet; for he believed the bashful nicety of the Stranger would have
refused it. On which she taking a Basin of water, and preparing to wash, the
Clown (regardless of her condition) stretched out his feet, that she might
perform that servile office; and after her Task was accomplished, applied
himself to Dinner. Xanthus enjoined a Goblet of wine should be presented to the
Stranger, which he (regardless of any priority in Drinking) soon quaff'd off.
When his Mess was offered up to him, Xanthus complained it was not well
seasoned, and chastis'd the Cook for that Neglect. The Clown (without any
Resentment of the Punishment of the Cook) said, the Dish was very well
accommodated to the relish of his Palate. Xanthus (troubled that nothing could
discompose the Rustic) commanded the the Cheese-cakes to be served up; which
the Clown, without any reflection on the other Guests, demolished and devoured.
Xanthus reviled the Neglect of the Baker, that had not mingled Honey and Pepper
in the composition of his Cheese-cakes. The Baker replied, the Guilt of that
Crime was to be lodged on his Mistress, not on him. Xanthus incensed, said, that
if the Neglect could be properly entitled to his Wife, she should expiate her
offense, by being burned; and immediately assayed to make his Wife an Oblation
to a prepared Fire, believing the Clown would have attempted her Rescue from so
calamitous a Fate. But he observing no cause that might produce so prodigious a
passion, desired Xanthus to respite his Wifes Tragedy, until he had brought
his Wife likewise, who might be offered up a Sacrifice in the same Flames with
Her. Xanthus observing the negligence and regardless simplicity of the man,
acknowledged that Aesop had punctually traced out his Injunctions, and in that
achieved a signal conquest, the subsequent Effects of which should be his
sudden Freedom.

The next day Xanthus enjoined Aesop to go to the Bath, and inform him what
company had prepossessed it: whilst he was going speedily to perform his
commands, he accosted the City-Praetor; who knowing him to be Xanthus his
Servant, demanded whether his Journey tended? Aesop answered, be knew not;
believing the Praetor had not observed him. But the Praetor (incensed at his
peremptory Reply) commanded that a Prison should be the reward of his contempt.
VVhilest he was hurrying away, Aesop cried out, Oh Praetor! you see now the
Integrity of my Answer, that I was going I knew not whether, since I am now
destined to Fetters. The Praetor charmed with his ingenuous Reply, dismissed
him. Afterward Aesop addressing himself to the Bath, saw a great Stone to
obstruct and intercept the passage; at which many stumbled, both entering in and
coming out: only one person that was preparing to enter the Bath, laid it
aside. Aesop returning, informed Xanthus that he discovered only one person in
the Bath. Xanthus arriving, and beholding this One improved to a Multitude,
demanded upon what grounds his false Information was built? Aesop replied, A
great Stone clogged the entrance into the Bath, whereat many stumbled, only one
removed the obstacle; so that there was only one man appeared, the residue
being such cheap and despicable objects, that they stood for ciphers. Not long
after Xanthus disburdening Nature by Seige, demanded of Aesop, why when men had
evacuated their Excrements, they looked back upon their Ordure? Aesop answered,
In times foregoing a man of great effeminacy did so long engage himself in the
House of Easement, that his Heart and Ordure were vented together: From that
commencement of circumstances, men have curiously beheld their Excrements,
fearing lest the Heart should be mingled with the evacuated Ordure. But Sir
(said Aesop) you need not dread that this Misfortune should accrue to you,
since you have no Heart at all.

Not long after a determinate day was designed for public Festivity, by
Xanthus and other Philosophers; and when they were suppled into an irregular
Mirth, with excess of wine, some Questions were winnow'd, which chafed Xanthus
into the disorder of a passion. Which Aesop observing, said, Master, Bacchus is
the parent of three temperaments; the first of Voluptuousness, the second of
Intemperance, the third of Calumny or Reproach; of which you being engaged in
Drink, should take a cautious view. Xanthus being now deeply ingulph'd in wine,
one of the Scholars demanded of him, whether it were not feasible to Drink off
the Sea? Very easy, replied Xanthus, I will engage to perform it my self. On
which the other entered a Wager with him, which was fortified by the reciprocal
deposition of both their Rings, and so departed. The day following, when the
fumes of wine were evaporated, Xanthus missing his Ring, desired Aesop to give
him an account of its loss. I know not, said Aesop, but this I am confident of,
you must dislodge from this House, since yesterday being infatuated with the
vapors of wine, you engaged your whole patrimony in a solemn covenant to Drink
off the Ocean; and to secure the Wager, you deposed your Ring. Xanthus replied,
What could I engage less? But can you discover any artifice by which I may
either accomplish this Engagement, or else evacuate the Obligation of it. To
perform it (said Aesop) is impossible; but how to untie it, I shall now
demonstrate: When you meet again, assert the performance of your Engagement
with as much confidence as you did when you first waged it. Command a Table to
be placed on the Shore, and persons prepared to lave the Ocean into Cups; and
when the multitude assembles, demand before them what was the purport of the
Wager? The Reply will be, that you should Drink up the Sea. Then applying your
self to them, thus declare: You Citizens of Samos, you are not ignorant that
many Rivers disembogue themselves into the Sea; my Covenant was to Drink up the
Ocean, and not those Streams which disgorge themselves into it: If you can so
obstruct their course, that they may not discharge themselves into it, I am
ready to quaffe it off. Xanthus received the Instructions of Aesop with
complacence and resignation, and affirmed, This was the only Expedient to
unravel his Engagement. The People then assembling to behold the Performance of
the Covenant, Xanthus acted and said as Aesop had instructed him; for which he
was both admired and applauded: But the Scholar prostrating himself at the Feet
of Xanthus, acknowledged himself subdued, imploring him to dissolve the Wager;
which Xanthus (softened by the united Desires of the Samians) did.

Upon the return of Xanthus to his Habitation, Aesop intimated to him how much
be had merited his Freedom: but Xanthus appeared warped with passion, that he
should no more confide in his Promise; and immediately he commanded him to
stand at the Door, and observe if he could view two Crows, and then inform
him, for it was an auspicious and successeful Omen; but if he beheld but one,
it was as unhappy and disastrous. Aesop returned, and informed him, he saw two
perched on a Tree: But when Xanthus went out to discover the Truth of his
Information, he could view but one, the other being dislodged; on which he
accosted Aesop with the ungrateful character of uncouth Villain, because he had
asserted there were two; urging farther, that his whole Design was to make him
the cheap object of contempt and derision; which repeated Affronts of his
should be now expiated with a meritorious Scourge. As Aesop was groaning under
the pressure of inflicted stripes, one entered who was summoned by an
invitation of Xanthus to Supper; to whom Aesop thus applied himself, saying, in
a sad Accent, You that beheld one Crow are rewarded with a Supper, and I that
discovered two, as a Result of that portentous Omen, am recompensed with an
undeserved Scourge. Which ingenuous Address of his so softened Xanthus, that he
enjoined his punishment should be superseded.

Xanthus desirous to obliege some Friends by an Entertainment, employed Aesop
to buy in those Provisions which might improve the Grandeur of the Feast: which
being by him exactly performed, and Dinner being prepared and served in, Aesop
discovered his Mistress engaged in Repose and Slumber on a Couch, whom he a
wakened, and requested to secure the Meat from the rapine of the Dogs; to which
(being incensed) she replied, she had eyes behind that would shed their
cautious Glances on the Provision. Aesop having fully marshalled the Feast,
endeavored to attaque an opportunity to retort; and instantly after viewing his
Mistress to be again wrapped up in a slumber, made a soft address to the Couch,
and heaving up her Garment, disrobed her uncomely Parts. Not long after Xanthus
entered with a Retinue of Guests, and beholding his Wife situated in that
undecent Posture, was discomposed at once both with shame and regret.

Not many days after, Xanthus (designing to caresse many Philosophers and
Orators) enjoined Aesop to stand Sentinel at the Gate, and give Admission to
none but the graver and severer Sages, but to exclude all illiterate persons.
Not long after several persons successively approch'd to the Gate, requesting
Admittance: all whom, Aesop did severally obviate with this Question, What
stirs the Dog? who all believing the contemptible character of Dog was fixed
upon them, departed with Resentment and Passion. At last one addressing himself
to the Gate, was accosted with this Question, What stirs the Dog? To which he
replied, His Ears and Tail. Aesop judging his Answer to be acute and apposite,
gave him Entrance, and accompanied him to his Master, saying, There was only
one Philosopher had desired Admittance. Xanthus resented it with Regret, that
his Invitation should be thus frustrated and undervalued by the cheap neglect
of his Friends. The Day following, when they assembled at the Schools, the
designed Guests reproached Xanthus with that dis-esteem and contempt he had
thrown upon them, in permitting that uncouth person Aesop, when they approached
the Gate, to accost them with the despicable Attribute of Dogs? On which
Xanthus demanded, if they were serious? They replied, Unless they were charmed
into a Sleep, that which they now declared was established upon a serious
Truth. Aesop being summoned to appear, was demanded by Xanthus, what had
tempted him thus to traduce and reproach his friends? To which he replied, Sir,
Did you not enjoin that no unlearned or vulgar Heads, but only Philosophers
should have Admission to your Entertainment? And what are these, (said Xanthus)
do they not merit that Character? No ways, answered Aesop; For when they
applied themselves to your Gate, and I demanded of them, What stirs the Dog?
Not one attempted to untie the Question with a Solution but departed; Therefore
I admitted none but this Person, who dissolved my Question with a proportionate
Answer. Upon this Reply of Aesop's, all present concentered in one Vote, that
Aesop had exactly been subservient to the Injunctions of Xanthus.

Not many Days after, Xanthus (accompanied with Aesop) went to visit the
Monuments, and with much Delight read the several Inscriptions endors'd on the
Tombstones. Aesop viewing these Letters, sc. a b d o e th ch registered in
Sculpture on one of them, showed them to Xanthus, and inquired of him what was
their Intent or Purport? But he after a serious Inquisition, did acknowledge he
was not able to unveil their latent sense. Master, (urged Aesop) if by the
Conduct of these Characters I shall trace out a concealed Treasure, what Reward
shall balance so rich a Discovery? Be confident (replied Xanthus) thy
Freedom, and the Moiety of the Purchase shall be thy Guerdon. Then Aesop
ripping up the Earth a Distance of four Feet from the Sepulchral Stone,
discovered a Treasure, which he offered up to Xanthus, and then demanded that
Recompense which was before secured to him by a signal promise. No sure (said
Xanthus) not until I can unravel the cloudy sense of the Letters; the knowledge
of which will by its value out-poise the discovered Treasure. Aesop (to
disperse all scruple) instructed him, that a prudent person had engraven those
Letters, whose Sense did import thus much; a going b paces d four o digging e
thou shall find th a Treasure ch of Gold. Xanthus replied, Thy Sagacity will
more improve my Interest than thy Freedom can thine, and therefore it shall be
respited. Then (rejoined Aesop) I will discover that the propriety of the Gold
is entitled to the King of Bizantium; for it is treasured here up for Him. How
discover you this? said Xanthus. The Inscription intimates thus much, replied
he: a restore b to the King d Dionysius o which e thou have found th Treasure
ch of Gold. When Xanthus understood the King was concerned in the discovered
purchase, he requested Aesop to divide with him the moiety of the Treasure, as
the Reward of his Silence. Aesop replied, This I receive not as the Effect of
your Bounty, but rather of his who concealed the Gold; for this is the genuine
and orthodox sense of the Letters, a taking b go your way d divide o which e
you have found th the Treasure. Xanthus replied, Come depart; the Moiety of the
Gold, and your Freedom too, shall be your united Recompense. As they were upon
their Retreat, Xanthus (dreading a Discovery from Aesop) enjoined he should be
dragged to Prison. Whilst they were hurrying him away to his designed
Thraldom, Aesop cried out, Do the solemn Promises of Philosophers, and the
specious Intimations of Liberty, determine thus in Prisons and Fetters? On
which importunate Clamor of his Xanthus ordered his Release, saying, he had
urged the Truth, though he was confident when he had achieved his Freedom, he
would amass those Designs together which might prejudice his Concernment. Aesop
replied, Maugre all your mischievous and malicious Artifices, I will obtain my
Enfranchisement.

On a Day, which the Citizens of Samos had devoted to Festivity, and other
Improvements of a general Mirth, an Eagle in his Flight snatched up the
Public Ring, and dropped it into the Lap of a Slave. The Samians amazed at
this ostentful Accident, consulted with Xanthus, he being both a learned
Philosopher and an eminent Citizen, being inquisitive to understand what would
be the effects of this remarkable Prodigy? But Xanthus (searching into the Time
when it happened) was engaged in a dull and unactive Melancholy, because he
could not untwist the Mystery of it. Aesop beholding Xanthus so discomposed,
addressed himself to him, and inquired what was the cause of so gloomy a
Pensiveness? To Morrow (when you appear in public) declare to the Samians,
that you are not dextrous in untying the knotty sense of Mysteries, but that
you have a Servant that can unwind the Intrigues of them; and when this shall
be untwisted, the Honor shall redound to you: But if the Solution shall not be
adaequate to this Portent, the Infamy and Obloquie shall be only thrown on me,
as either the Author or Abettor of such a distorted Interpretation. To this
Advice of Aesop, Xanthus assented, and the next Day informed the Samians what
Aesop had both suggested and prescribed. On which Aesop was produced: but when
the Samians viewed the disobliging Features of his Face, and Lineaments of his
Person, they with Derision and Contempt entertained him, and smiling, demanded,
Whether a Person of so unconcerned an Aspect, could untie so mysterious a
Portent, by a just Solution? Aesop waving his Hand, enjoined Silence, and
replied, You Citizens of Samos, you should not only view the Frontispiece of
the House, but the Tenant likewise that is lodged within; for frequently, an
even and composed Soul dwells in an uneven and disordered Body; for you know
Men set not their value upon the exterior Figure of the Cask, but upon the
Wine concealed within. Hearing this candid and modest Discovery, they desired
to receive his farther Application to the City. Then he confidently addressed
Himself to the Public, and made this Harangue or Preface to what he should
unravel, saying; You Samians, since Fortune, that still engages us in
reciprocal Contests, now propounds the glory of a Victory, either to the Master
or Servant: If the Servant shall not unveil those Mysteries that lie wrapped up
in this signal Accident, let stripes be the Recompense of his confident
Imposture; but if the Master be outvied by his Discovery, let his Freedom be
the Reward of so solemn a Performance. Then the Suffrage of the People was,
that Xanthus should give Aesop his Freedom, and gratify them in compliance.
With this request ( Xanthus replying not) the City Praetor rejoined; Xanthus,
If you will not in this be subservient to the requests of the Samians, I shall
this instant declare Aesop free, and then he will be corrival to thy self.
Hereupon Xanthus (warped with so great an Authority) pronounced Aesop free. On
which the City Crier proclaimed, That Xanthus the Philosopher had given Aesop
his Enfranchisement. Aesop instantly retorted on Xanthus, saying, That now
(despite of all his malicious Engines) he had atcheived his Freedom. Aesop
being now Enfranchised, thus accosted the People; You Citizens of Samos, The
Eagle (you know) is Monarch of Birds, and whereas the Public Ring was dropped
into the Lap of a Servant, it seems to insinuate, that some of the adjacent
Kings will attempt to supplant your established Laws, and entombe your Liberty
in Slavery. The Samians hearing this, were astonished with Melancholy. Not long
after Letters arrived from Croesus of Lydia, requiring the Samians to enrich
his Exchequer with an annual Tribute, or else prepare to suffer the calamities
of a destructive War. On which they embarked in a public Consultation, how
they might decline that Shipwreck of their Laws and Liberties, which was
menaced by Croesus; and endevour'd to strengthen it with the advice of Aesop,
who thus directed them. Our Fortune (said he) has represented to us a double
expedient; one of Liberty, which in the beginning is rough and difficult, but
in the Issue smooth and easy; another of Thraldom, whose beginning is easy,
but the conclusion fatal and ruinous. When the Samians heard this, they all
affirmed, That as at present they were free, so they and their Liberty would
find one Tomb together, and with this generous Reply dismissed the Ambassadors;
which so soon as Croesus was advertised of, he determined to engage in a War
with the Samians. On which his Ambassadors instructed him, He could not subdue
the Samians as long as they were supported by the Counsel of Aesop; rather
(they advised him) first to send for Aesop, with a promise that the exacting of
Tribute should be suspended, and then peradventure he might reduce them.
Croesus complied with their Instructions, and sent to Samos for Aesop, baiting
the Embassy with the former promise. The Samians charmed with this soft
Address, decreed to surrender him; who when he understood it, unbosom'd himself
in this Declaration, saying, You Citizens of Samos, I am ready to prostrate my
self at the feet of Croesus, but first I will rehearse one Apologue to you. In
elder Times when Beasts had speech, the Wolves commenced a war against the
Sheep, but the Sheep were secured by the generous protection of the Dogs; on
which the Wolves employed an Embassy to the Sheep, the purport of which was,
that if they desired the War should be wound up in an amicable Peace, they
should resign their Dogs; the timorous and unwary Sheep assented to this
Demand, and gave up their Protectors: The Wolves immediately destroyed the
Dogs, and then made the Sheep a cheap and easy Sacrifice. The Samians
unveiling the sense of this Apologue, determined positively not to offer up
Aesop: But he would not permit them to pursue this Resolution, but accompanied
the Ambassadors to Croesus.

They arriving in Lydia, offered up Aesop to the view of the King; whom when
Croesus beheld, he resented it with indignation, that so despicable a person,
should by his counsel rescue Samos from his intended Conquest. Aesop (observing
his Resentment) answered; Mighty Sir, Since neither Force nor Necessity, but
only the conduct and propensity of my own Will and Genius, has engaged my
voluntary Surrender, I request this Apologue may be offered up to your
Majesty's Ear. A certain man having gathered up many Locusts, killed them; and
having also surprised a Grasshopper, whom he designed to destroy; she thus
bespoke him; Sir, Do not kill me, for I am no ways destructive or injurious to
the Interest of Man, since in me you discover nothing but the accents of those
Ayrs with which I charm into soft and easy slumber the wearied Traveller. He
mollified with this Address, dismissed her. Thus I (Oh King!) prostrating my
self before your feet, desire my Life may be the monument of your Mercy, since
it cannot be prejudicial to any man; and in this rumpell'd Body, you shall find
an even Soul. Croesus (warped at once both with Amazement and Pity) replied;
Aesop, Not only thy Life, but a Donation of a Fortune also, shall be the
testimony of my Benificence: Demand therefore what you please, and it shall be
crowned with my Concession. May it then comply with thy pleasure (Oh King!) to
wrap up your Animosities against the Samians in an amicable Reconciliation. The
King replying, I am reconciled, he prostrated himself on the Earth, and with
the Humility of his Body, offered up his most humble Thanks.

Aesop having received Letters from Croesus full of the soft Intimations of
Peace, accompanied with a Release of the menaced Tribute; he not long after
arrived at Samos, where the Citizens (having their Heads adorned with Garlands)
made their Addresses with Dancing to him. He opened the Letters, which
specified that the King had made a free Concession both of Liberty and Tribute
to them. On which Aesop (as a testimony of Reward for such a signal
performance) was once more honored with a public Indenization or
Enfranchisement. Not long after he departed from Samos, and traversing the
World, engaged in Disputes with several Philosophers, till at last he arrived
at Babylon; where having demonstrated solemn Evidences of his Learning, he had
much entitled himself to a high repute in the opinion of King Lycerus; and in
those Times (Kingdoms being knit together in an amicable Peace) their delight
was to transmit Philosophical Questions mutually to each other; which whosoever
could unravel, received a Release of Tribute from him that sent them.

Aesop unveiling those Problems which were offered up to Lycerus, discovered
their latent Sense, and so improved the Reputation of the King. And Aesop (in
the Name of Lycerus) transmitted Questions of the same complexion to the
adjacent Kings; which being unresolved, obtained an Increase of Tribute from
those who could not untie them. Now Aesop (being Childless) had adopted a
Nobleman called Eunus as Heir of his Patrimony, and sought to endear him to
the Favor of the King: But not long after (having deprehended him mingled in
unlawful Embraces with his Concubine) he exauthoriz'd his first Adoption, and
discarded him. He incensed at his act, forged supposititious Letters from Aesop
to those who moved the former Philosophical Questions to Lycerus; which Letters
intimated his Alacrity to perform Services rather to them than the King; and
these Eunus offered up to Lycerus, sealed with the subborned signature of
Aesop's Ring.

The King (resigning his Belief up to the Imposture of Eunus) incensed,
enjoined Hermippus, without any winnowing of Circumstances, to deprive Aesop of
Life. But he (being knit to Aesop in a private confederacy of friendship)
declined the rigor of the Kings commands, and concealed Aesop in a Sepulcher,
and there supported him with nourishment. Eunus also by the Kings permission
was invested in Aesop's Patrimony.

Not long after, Nectenabo King of Egypt (informed that Aesop was dead) sent a
Letter to Lycerus, requiring Artificers who could erect a Tower which should
neither touch Earth or Heaven; and one that could resolve all that was
demanded: Which if he performed, then he should offer up Tribute; but if he did
not accomplish it, then he should exact it of him. Lycerus having viewed this
Demand, was engaged in Melancholy, since none could discover to him what the
Question that related to the Tower could import. On which the King cried out,
Aesop the Pillar of my Kingdom is by death crushed into ashes! Hermippus
beholding the King with so much Resentment to deplore the loss of Aesop,
applied himself to Lycerus, and informed him Aesop had survived his rigorous
commands; adding, that even for his Concernment he had not destroyed him;
because he was confident his Death would by himself be entertained with Regret
and Remorse.

The King rejoicing that Aesop was not offered up an oblation to his severer
Injunctions, he was produced before him all bespattered with the dirt of the
Sepulcher: whom when he beheld, with compassionate reflections, he commanded to
be assoil'd from his contracted pollution. After Aesop having supplanted those
Grounds on which his former Accusation was established, the King enjoined that
Eunus (to expiate his ungrateful Forgeries) should fall a Sacrifice to Justice.
But the pardon of his Life was the effect of Aesop's Intercession.

Not long after a Letter arrived from Egypt, which Lycerus gave up to Aesop's
perusal; who knowing how to untwist the propounded Questions, desired that this
Reply might be dispatched away; That after Winter was expired, one should be
employed, who should not only erect the Tower abovementioned; but also should
cleave in sunder all Demands with a just Solution. The King thereupon dismissed
the Egyptian Ambassadors, restoring both to Aesop and Eunus their former
Demeasnes. The last of which being again united to Aesop's Affection by a
second Adoption, was accosted by him with these or the like Admonitions: My
Son, Worship God, and honor the King: make thy Self considerable to thine
Enemies, and useful to thy Friends, that by Intercourse and other reciprocal
Offices, their Friendship may likewise be enlarged toward thee. Invoke the
Powers above, that thine Enemies be Indigent, that they may not offend thee;
and thy Friends as opulent, that by the happy supplies of their wealth they may
support thee. Be constant to thy Consort, lest thy wanderings cause her to
straggle likewise. Be not swift to Speak, but to Hear. Envy not those who do
well, since the Malignity of that vice will be most injurious to thy self. So
manage thy Domestic affairs, that thou may be looked upon not as a Master,
but adored as a Benefactor. Be not ashamed to learn better Things. Deposite not
thy Secrets in the breast of a Woman, for it will but improve her Insolence.
Let every days Stock be the pledge of to morrows Store; for it is better to
delegate somewhat to thine Enemies when thou die, than want for thy Friends
when thou live. Treat those with gentle Salutations who accost thee. Repent
not that thou have been Honest. Discard Parasites and Whisperers. Still act
that for which thou may have no cause to Repent. These Instructions of
Aesop's made so vigorous an Impression on Eunus, that being distorted with
Compunction and Remorse for his former detested Ingratitnde, it disunited that
vital Ligature which tied his Soul and Body together, and he expired in an
early Dissolution.

Aesop not long after this employed some Fowlers to attaque four young Eagles;
which being surpised, he (by an artificial discipline) taught to waft along
young Children in Baskets, and observe them in what they should command. The
Winter now expired, and Spring approaching, Aesop having made provision for his
Journey, transported the Eagles and Children into Egypt; which obliged the
Admiration of the People of the Country. Nectenabo being instructed that Aesop
was arrived; I am surpised, said he, for I was informed that Aesop was dead.
The King commanded the day following, that all his Officers should assemble
invested in White Robes, and he himself glittered with his Royal Attire, and
Imperial Diadem. When he was placed upon his Throne, he commanded Aesop to be
produced. To what do you assimilate me, said Nectenabo, and those who surround
my Throne? Aesop replied, You resemble a Vernal Sun, and your Attendants a
fruitful Harvest. The King showered many Favors upon him, as the Reward of his
accepted Answer. The day following the King appeared invested with White, but
enjoined his Retinue to be attired with Purple. When Aesop entered he demanded
the same Question, Aesop replied, You are an Emblem of the Sun; and those that
encircle your Throne, a Type of his effused Beams. Nectenabo inquired, What was
his opinion in relation to his Kingdom? and whether it was not to be preferred
beyond that of Lycerus? Do not flatter your self, replied Aesop; Your Kingdom
though it may dart forth a Luster like the Rays of the Sun, yet thrown into a
competition with his, its splendour would soon languish away into a gloomy
Darkness. Nectenabo applauding his Answer, inquired, where they were that
should erect the Tower? They are ready (said he) if you have designed the
place. The King departing from the City, discovered to him a capacious Plain.
Aesop attending him, produced the Eagles with the Children lodged in Baskets
hanging about them, and then furnishing the Children with working Instruments,
enjoined them to fly: they being elevated into the Air, demanded Stones,
Mortar, and Timber, as the fit Ingredients for Building. Nectenabo beholding
the Children thus transported by their winged Ministers, said to Aesop, I am
deficient in Men that can fly. Aesop replied, Lycerus is stored with such,
will you being a Man engage in a Contest with a King corrival with the Gods?
Nectenabo acknowledged himself subdued, but straight assaulted Aesop with
another Question, of which he demanded a Solution; saying, I have here Mares,
who when they hear the Neighing of the Horses of Babylon, immediately Conceive:
If you can dissolve this (said he) accomplish it instantly. Aesop replied, To
Morrow I will untwine your Question. When he was arrived at his Lodging, he
engaged some Boys to Surprise a Cat, and drag her about the City. The
Egyptians (that consecrated divine Honors to this Animal) incensed at this
irregular Action of his, reported it to the King. Nectenabo summoning Aesop to
appear, demanded, If he did not know that the Cat was in the Register of the
Egyptian Deities. It was very injurious to King Lycerus, replied Aesop; for the
last Night it destroyed that Cock that by shrill Alarums gave him Intelligence
how the Night did ebb away. Art thou not ashamed of this Falsehood? said the
King. How could the Cat in so small an Interval of time as one Night, transport
her self from Egypt to Babylon? Aesop replied with a smile, And how oh King can
the Mares of Egypt, that are divorced by so remote a Distance, Conceive upon
the Neighing of the Horses of Babylon? The King admired his Sagacity, and
extolled his successeful Genius. Not long after he summoned several Sages from
Heliopolis to Skirmish with Aesop in variety of Questions; and when their
Disputations were wound up, he refreshed all with a Banquet. When they were
marshalled at their prepared Feast, one of the Heliopolitans said to Aesop, I
am employed by one of our Deities to encounter you with this Demand. You
discover too much your Ignorance (said Aesop) by retrenching the Knowledge of
one of your Gods, since the Omniscience of the Powers above, cannot be improved
by our narrow and contracted Notions. A second urged this, and desired Aesop
would extricate the Sense folded up in it; There is a vast Temple, and a Column
supporting twelve magnificent Cities, each of which are sustained with thirty
Rafters, which two Women constantly circulate. To this Aesop replied; The
Temple is this World, the Cities the Months, the Rafters the Days of the
Month, the Day and Night are the two Women by interchangeable Vicissitudes
successefully attending each other. The Day following, Nectenabo summoned his
Friends to assemble, and said, The Tribute to be exacted of us by Lycerus, does
entitle it self to the Ingenuity of Aesop. One of them replied, We will assault
him with Questions, which we know not, nor ever heard of. To morrow (said
Aesop) I shall unmuffle those also with a Solution; departing therefore he
prepared a Schedule, wherein this was engrossed, Nectenabo confesses he is
indebted a thousand Talents to Lycerus. In the morning he produced this
Instrument before the King: But before it was opened, the Friends of Nectenabo
did all assert both their Knowledge and Hearing of it before. This candid
acknowledgement of yours (said Aesop) does exact the Retribution of my Thanks:
Did you ever know or hear that the King of Egypt was indebted to Lycerus a
thousand Talents? Nectenabo concluded, saying, Lycerus is fortunate to have his
Kingdom supported by so sagacious a person. And thereupon transmitted the
Tribute thus dexterously evicted, dismissing Aesop with much complacence and
valediction.

Aesop returning to Babylon, digested into a just Narrative the whole
contexture of those Affairs which had been transacted in Egypt, and with the
acknowledged Tribute, offered it up to King Lycerus; which so endeared him,
that his Commands did enjoin, that an eminent Statue should be Consecrated to
the Glory and Memory of Aesop.

Not long after he determined to sail into Greece, and with License obtained
from the King departed, solemnly attesting that he would again return to
Babylon, and there find his Sepulcher.

After he had surveyed all the Provinces of Greece, and by his prudent managery
of Affairs, had achieved to himself an eminent Character of Reputation and
public Fame, his desires engaged him to visit Delphos, the Treasury of those
Oraculous and Mysterious Dictates, which were entitled to Apollo.

When he was arrived at Delphos abovesaid, many resigned up their Ears to his
Eloquence, but entertained it with slender respect. He therefore beholding
them, said, You Citizens of Delphos, you justly resemble the Wood that floats
on the surface of the Sea; viewing it afar off, we esteem it of some important
concernment; but when it approaches, we contemn it: So I, when I was divided by
a far distance from your City, did admire you; but my mistake does engage me
now to fix upon you the Character of the most useless amongst men. When they
heard this, their fears suggested to them, that when he was departed he might
cast some disesteem upon them; and therefore they by some artificial snares
designed to destroy him: hereupon, taking a golden Cup out of Apollo's Temple,
they concealed it amongst Aesop's Baggage; he not resenting their destructive
Arts, departed to Phocide; the Delphians pursued him, and there impeached him
as guilty of the deformed crime of Sacrilege; he disavow'd the Fact; but they
untied his Baggage, and there tracing out the Cup, with much Emotion of Spirit
discovered it to the City. Aesop unwinding their malicious Stratagems, desired,
That neither his Life or Liberty might be made an Oblation to their Fury. But
they were so far from complying with his Request, that they first condemned him
to a Prison, and then (by an unjust Sentence) to a violent Death. Aesop not
able to extricate himself out of these Difficulties in which he was now
entangled, deplored his calamitous Fate amidst his Fetters; whilst he was thus
condoling his Misfortune, one (in the Register of his choicest Friends) named
Demas, applied himself to him, and implored him to discover the cause of so
eminent a sorrow. Aesop replied, A Woman having newly Enterr'd her Husband,
moistened his Vrne with her daily Tears; one Plowing not far off, being warmed
into an Affection toward her, abandoned his Oxen, and addressing himself to
the Grave, engaged with her in mutual Weeping. She demanded the Occasion of his
Tears? Because (replied he) I have lately entombed a Wife signally good, and I
find some abatement of Affliction, by opening the Sluices of Sorrow. The same
Fate has attended me, said the Woman. Since we are wrapped up in the same
Calamity (said he) why should not our Bodies be joined in Marriage, as well as
our Misfortunes? since I affect you as a Wife, and thou love me as a Husband.
Whilst they were engaged in this amorous conference, a Felon (with injurious
violence) ravished away his Oxen; repairing home, he determined to deplore
their Loss with Excess of Tears. The Woman again accosting him, said, Do you
weep still? Now (replied he) there is a just cause administered that summons
forth these showers of Sorrow. So I, that have declined many dangers, have now
an unhappy occasion for my tears, since I can discover no Art by which I may
disentangle my self of this. After this the Delphians approached, and drew him
from his Confinement toward the verge of a steep and craggy precipice, on
which he thus Addressed himself to them; When Beasts did parley, the Mouse
being an intimate Familiar of the Frog, by an Invitation caressed her with a
Supper in the Storehouse of a rich man, where there was variety of Viands, and
desired that there she would sat her self. After this Entertainment was
concluded, the Frog conducted the Mouse to Supper; and that he might not be
tired or faint with swimming, she with a slender thread linked his leg to hers:
this being performed, they endevour'd to ferry over the stream; but before they
were half wafted over, the Mouse was ingulph'd in the Current; who dying,
declared, that his Ruin was justly entitled to the Frog; but only some more
powerful than themselves, would vindicate his calamitous Tragedy. The Eagle
beholding the Mouse dead, and floating on the water, snatching at him,
surprises the Frog likewise, who was united with a string to his leg, and so
both became a Dole to his Rapine. Thus I that am ready to fall an untimely
Victime to your Injustice, shall not want an Expiation; for all Greece, and
Babylon, will concenter in a just Vindication of this my undeserved Tragedy.

But all this had no Influence, and made no Impression upon the barbarous and
unrelenting Delphians; and though Aesop sheltered himself in Apollo's Temple,
they dragged him thence, without any reverence to that Sanctuary, and conducted
him to a ragged Precipice; whither approaching, he thus bespoke them; You
Citizens of Delphos, The Hare being pursued by the Eagle, retreated into the
Nest of a Hornet: The Hornet implores the Eagle to compassionate the Hare: the
Eagle with his wing repulses the Hornet, and destroys the Hare. The Hornet
tracing out the Eagles Nest, invaded it, and demolished her Eggs. The Eagle (to
decline the like Misfortune the second time) erects her Nest in an higher
Airie. The Hornet pursues her with the same destructive Onsets. The Eagle
(ignorant by what Artifice he might evade these injurious Assaults) soars up to
Jupiter (whose Bird she is styled) and deposites her Eggs the third time,
between the knees of the Deity, invoking his preservation and protection of
them. The Hornet composing a Ball of Dirt, dropped it into the Lap of Jupiter;
who not remembering the protected Eggs, shook off them and the Dirt together,
destroying those which were entrusted to his patronage and tuition. But when he
was informed from the Hornet that this was the Expiation of a former Injury,
desirous that the Eagles progeny by these repeated Injuries might not languish
into decay, endevour'd that their mutual Feud might be entombed in a
pacification. But the Hornet being refractory, Jupiter respited the Hatching of
the Eagles, till that season the Hornets sally out. And you Citizens of
Delphos, contemn not this Deity from whom I have implored a Refuge, though his
Temple be narrow in its Dimensions.

The Delphians inexpugnable to these Instructions, hurried him away to undergo
the fatal Execution of the Sentence. Which when Aesop discovered, and that no
soft compliance could charm them, he made this rough Address unto them; You
cruel and obdurate Men; A certain Husbandman growing aged, that had never
beheld the City, enjoined his Servants to transport him thither, that before
his Decease he might take a prospect of it: whilst he was engaged in this
Expedition, he suffered under the anger of an impetuous Storm, which was
improved by a gloomy darkness, so that the Asses (which conducted the Wagon
wherein he was placed) erring in their way, guided him to a Precipice; where
being upon the verge of an approaching Ruin, he cried out, Oh Jove! What
Injury of mine has incensed thee to throw this Misfortune upon me? especially
since my Death is entitled not to generous Horses, or active Mules, but to dull
and inconsiderable Asses. And that is my instant calamity that I am designed to
fall not by persons of worth or estimate, but by the cheapest and ignoblest
Dregs of Men.

He now upon the margin of the Precipice, wrapped up his last Application in
this Apologue: A certain man warped with an unnatural Affection toward his
Daughter, employed his Wife into the Country, and in that Intervall, by an
incestuous violence assaults her Virgin-chastity: She cried out, Father, I
could have chose this uncouth crime had been acted by any, rather than by your
self, though my perpetual Infamy had been the Result of such illegal Embraces.
This I also urge against you, you unjust Delphians: I had rather my Fate had
thrown me upon Scylla or Charybdis, or the Syrtes of Africa, than to have
offered me up to those hands that are now ready to deprive me of Life, by so
extrajudicial a violence. I attest the Gods, I die a Martyr to my Innocence,
and I doubt not but those celestial Powers will by a just Revenge retaliate
this barbarous Assassination.

This said, the Delphians threw him from the Precipice, and he perished.

Not long after a destructive Pestilence having made a public Ravage amongst
them, they were informed by the Oracle that it was the Expiation of Aesop's
unjust Tragedy; wherefore they (to assoil their Guilt) erected over his
shattered Relics, a pompous Monument. But the Principals of Greece, and the
most prudent Sages, when they were informed of this deplorable Ruin, by a
serious Discussion reviewed this Sanguinary Fact of the Delphians, and by a
severe Revenge recompensed the innocent Effusion of Aesop's Blood.

The End of the LIFE of AESOP.
La VIE d' ESOPE: Composeepar 'Planudes surnomme le Grand: Translatee de Grec
in Francois.
PLusieurs hommes ont diligiment imploye leur temps a nous Mettre par escrit la
nature de chooses humaines, et laisser aux Successeurs; Mais Esope, comme ainsi
soit qu'il eust la cognoissance des enseignemens moraux, non, sans inspiration
divine, semble auoir surpass pleusieurs d'iceux; car il gaigne les caeurs des
auditeurs en les enseignant entierement par Fables, et ne determinant en rien,
ne concluant par raison, n' y alleguant rien des histoires, que ceux qui sont
bien garnis de sens, et raison, rougissoient de penser, ou fair ce que les
oyseaux, et Renards ne voudroient fair, ne penser, et d'aduantage de ne s'
employer es actions es equelles il feint plusieurs bestes brutales s' estre
imployes fort sagement en leur temps, enter lesquelles les vnes ont eschappe
plusieurs dangers prochains, les autres sont venues a leur attentes, et en ont
receu tres grand profit en temps, et lieu. Doncques cestuy cy qui se proposa
dans l'esprit l'image de Republique Philosophale, et qui ne mit pas tant la
Philosophy dans les paroles, que dans les oeuures, fut natif d'vne Ville
Phrygie nommee Ammorion, et surnomme le Grand, mais il fut de condition
servile, ce qui me fait croire ce qui dict Platon en Gorgias estre tres
veritable, Plusieurs fois (dit il) la Nature, et la loy sont contraires enter
else, car Nature auoit done l'esprit libre a Esope, mais la loy des hommes
auoit mis son corpse en servitude, toutesfois elle n' a peu corrompre la liberte
de son esprit, mais combien que elle luy transportast le corpse en plusieurs
lieux, et affairs, elle n' a peu fair remuer l'esprit de son assiette; Or
Esope ne fut pas seulement serf, mais le plus laid de tous les hommes de son
temps, car il auoit la test pointue, le nez plat, le col court, les leuures
grosses, il estoit noir, don't il eut le nom d' Esope, car Esope vaut autant a
dire, qu' Ethiopien, Auec cela, il estoit ventru, bossu, ayant les pieds torts,
parauanture surmontant en deformite le corpse de Thersites en Homere, mais le
pis du tout qui estoit en luy, c' estoit la parole lent, la voix casse, et
auec ce parloit indistinctement, toutes lesquelles causes semblent auoir este
cause de sa servitude, car on se fust esbahy, si estant ainsi laid, et deforme,
il eut peu euiter la condition servile, mais jacoit qu' il eust le corpse ainsi
desfigure, cela ne empeschoit qu'il n' eust naturellement ingenieux, caut, et
prompt a toutes sorts des inventions.

Son Seigneur, pource qu' il le pensoit inutile a tout besongne Domestique,
l'envoya a labourer aux champs, ou Esope estant arrive, besongnoit diligement;
son Seigneur advisa un jour d'aller en la metayre pour voir l'oeuure de son
nouueau Serviteur; sur ses entrefaits, un laboureur luy fit un present de
belles et grosses Figues: Le Seigneur, prennant grand plaisir en la beauty de
ce fruit, les donna a garder a l'vn de ses valets nomme Agathopus, jusques a
tant qu' il retourneroit des estuues. Or comme ainsi fut qu' Esope fut enter en
la maison pour quelque necessite, Agathopus, ayant trouue son opportunite,
donna tell conseil a l'vn de ses compagnons, Saoulons nous de ces Figues, et si
nostre Seigneur les demand, nous tesmoignerons nous deux contre l' Esope qu'
il est enter en la maison, nous controuuerons beaucoup des mensonges, car un
seul ne pourra rien contre deux, veu mesmement qu' il n'osera murmurer par ce
qu' il n' a point de probation. Quand ils eurent ainsi conlu, ils commencerent
a manger les Figues, et en les mangeant disoient a chacun morceau, Malheur sur
toy miserable Esope? Or, nuit approchant, le Maistre estant return des
estuues, le premier chose qu' il demanda estoit qu' on luy apportast les
Figues, et qu' on luy eust dit, qu' Esope les auoit mangees, il commenca a se
courroucer, et commanda qu' on luy fist venir Esope, auquel dit, Vienca
Malheureux homme, as tu fait si peu de compte de moy, que d'oser entrer en mon
sellier, and manger mes Figues, lesquelles j'auoie fait garder pour moy; Lors
le pouure escoutoit, et entendoit, mais a cause qu' il ne pouuoit pas parler a
son aise, il ne respondit nullement. Quand ses Accusateurs pressoient et
sollicitoient leur Maistre, et qu' iceluy estoit pres d'estre battu, il se
jetta oux pieds de son Maistre, et le pria qu' il eut un peu de patience, Or
apres qu' il fut accouru, et qu' il apporta de l'eau tiede, il la beut, et
mettant les doigts en sa bouche il vomit seulement l'au, car il n' auoit point
mange de ce jour; Il prioit donc que ses, Accusateurs fissent semblablement,
afin qu' on cognut celuy qui auoit mange les Figues, Cette proposition pleut
fort a son Maistre qui estoit tout esbaby du sens, et intendement du noueau
Seruiteur, et commanda que les deux autres beussent de ceste eau tiede, ce qu'
en effect les valets auoient bien resolu de fair, mais non pas de mettre les
doigts en leurs bouches, ainsi les tourner deca, et dela, a l'entour des
machouettes, or a grand peine eurent ils beut, que ceste eau tiede leur causa
un vomissement, et leur fit render gorge et les Figues sans autre contrainte,
le Maistre donc, voyant deuant ses yeux la malicieuse calumny de ses valets,
commanda qu' ils fussent despouillez tout nuds, et tresbien fouettes, lors ils
cogneurent la verite de ceste sentence, Qui machine tromperie contre autruy luy
mesme se forge le mal. Le jour ensuyuant, apres que son Maistre fut return en
la Ville, Esope ayant trauaille selon qu' il luy estoit commanda, les
Sacrificateurs de Diane, ou d'autres Voyageurs estant furuoyes de leur Chemin,
ayants l'encontre, luy demanderent, et prierent par Jupiter hospitalier qu' il
leur monstrast le chemin pour aller en la Ville; Lors il les fit seoir a
l'ombre d'vn Arbre, et puis apresta un petit banquet, et les ayant festoyez en
ceste sort, il leur seruit de guide, et monstrast le chemin qu' ils
demandoient; Iceux donc se sentant grandiment obligez a Esope tant pour son
hospitalite, que pour sa conduite, leuerent les mains au ciel, et auec prieres
remercierent leur Benefacteur: Mais Esope, apres son retour, commenca a dormir
a cause du travail continuel, et de la chaleur, et en dormant luy sembloit, que
Fortune luy assistoit, et qu' elle luy deslyoit la langue, et donnoit course a
sa parole, et la habile grace de bien parler, et la science des Fables, et
incontinent qu' il fut esueille, il dit; Voy, que j' ay dormi doucement, et
aussi j' ay song un gatieux song, Voicy je parle aysement, et tout ce que je
veux nommer, je nomme facilement, et j' appelle puis incontinent par leur noms,
un baeuf, un asne, un rasteau, vrayement j' entens d'ou m' est venu ce bien,
pour ce que j' ay este debonaire envers les estrangers, quelque bon Dieu m' a
este propice, Un bien fait est plein de bonne esperance. Ainsi donc Esope tout
esiouy de ceste belle adventure commenca derechef a travailler. Celuy, qui
auoit la charge de la Metaire, fut apelle Zenas qui vint pour voir comme les
laboureurs se portoyen^ en leur besongne et enter, autres, il en advisa un qui
ne travalloit pas assez diligement a son gre, pource il commenca a le frapper,
Esope voyant cela, luy dit, Maistre, Pourquoy frappez tu sans cause c'est homme
icy, qui ne to a point fait de tort? et pour neant nous chargez de coups tous
les jours, je raportera tout cecy a nostreSeigneur? Zenas oyant Esope dire cecy
s' estonna grandemment, et dit a part soy; si Esope commence a parler le
premier, ce ne me sera point de profit, par quoy je le preuiendra, et
l'accusera enuers mon Seigneur auant que luy mesme m' accuse, et auant quil me
met horse de sa recepte; Incontinent il se transporta en la ville verse son
Seigneur, ou demeurant, estant tout trouble, Dieu te guarde (dit il) mon
Maistre; l'autre luy dit, Pourquoy es tu tant trouble? Lors Zenas dit, Il est
advenu vne merueilleuse chose en ta maison aux champs. Comment (dit le
Seigneur) quelque Arbre a il port son fruit auant son temps? Ou y' a quelque
Best qui ait conceu contra Nature? Zenas luy dit, Non pas, Mais Esope qui
estoit parauant muet, maintenaut commence a parler: Ainsi te puisse il aduenir
(dit le Seigneur) qui as estime ceste chose monstreuse? A quo Zenas respondit,
Je suis bien content, et veux taire tres-volonteirs les injures qu' il m' a
dites, mais c' est vne chose intolerable des outrages qu' il dit contre toy, et
les Dieux. Lors le Seigneur tout courrouce dit, Zenas je mets Esopi en ta
puissance, vend le, done le, fay tout ce que tu voudras de luy. Or quand Zenas
eut Esope en sa puissance, et qu' il luy eut rapporte le Droit qu' il auoit sur
luy Esope luy dit, Fay tout ce qu' il te plaira? Sur ces entrefaits, passa par
la un Merchand qui vouloit acheter du Bestail, et pour ceste cause tournoit il
par la village, et demandoit a Zenas s' il auoit quelque Bestea vendre. Je n'
ay point de charge ( dit Zenas) de vendre aucune Best. Jay bien un esclaue
masle, le voicy, reguardez si tu le veux achepter. Le Merchand pria qu' on luy
monstrast, pourquoy Zenas fit venir Esope, que quand le Merchand l'eust advise,
il commenca a rire demesurement, Ou a tu prins (dit il) ce pot? Est ce un tronc
d'arbre, ou un homme? S' il ne parloit, je le prendrois proprement pour vne
cruche enflee, pour quoy m' as tu deturbe pour voir ce bell oiseau? Cecy dit, il
poursuiuoit son chemin, Mais Esope le suiuoit, disant, Demeurez Seigneur A ce
mot le Merchand tourna visage, et luy dit, Va to en d'ici, chien contrefait?
Lors Esope repliqua, Die moy pour quoy tu es ici venu? A quoy dit le Merchand,
Pour quoy molotru? Je suis venu d'achepter quelque chose du bon, mais je n' ay
que fair de toy, pour autant, que tu es un chose du tout inutile et gastee.
Esope luy dit, Achete moy? que si tu veux me croire, Je te peux aider
grandement; En quelle sort me pourras tu seruir? dit le Merchand, veu que tu
es odieux a tout le monde? Esope dit, N' as tu point en ta maison des infans
rioteux, ou pleurans; Fay que ^e soye leur Pedagogue, et il' s auront peur de
moy, comme d'vn faux visage; le Merchand donc se sousriant dit a Zenas, Combien
me veux tu vendre ceste malheureux. Zenas respondit, Donnez m' en trois oboles,
et l'emmene auecque toy. Le Merchand estoit content, et les luy donnant je n'
ay (dit il) rien despendu, et je n' ay rien achepte aussi; Or quand ils eurent
longuement chemine, et furent venus en sa maison, deux petit enfans, lesquells
tettoyent encore, furent tous estonnez, et troubles, et commencerent a crier;
Lors Esope dit au Merchand, Tu as l'accomplissement de ma promise: Le Merchand
en riant entra en sa maison, et luy dit, Salve tes Compagnons. Apres qu' il fut
enter, et qu' il eut done le bon jour a ses Compagnons, les autres le
reguardans disoient entr' eux, Quel malheur est aduenu a nostre Maistre qu' il
ait achepte un seruiteur tant laid, et deforme? Mais il semble, proprement
aduis, qu' il achete pour seruir de mal-encontre dans sa maison.

Quelque temps aprez que le Merchand fut retour en sa maison, il commanda a ses
seruiteurs de mettre en order plusieurs marchandizes, et qu' ils s'
apprestassent pour aller dehors, disant, qu' il vouloit partir le lendemain
pour aller en Asie, Iceux donc distribuoient a un chacun son fardeau: Et Esope
prioyt qu' on luy donnast le plus ledger, comme a celui qui estoit nouellement
achepte, en non encore bien duit, et exercite en tells services; les autres
remirent a sa Discretion qu' il portast quelque chose, ou non. Esope toutes
fois ne vouloit estre seul inutile, et n' estimoit point d'estre chose
raisonable que les autres trauaillassent, et luy seul fut sans fair service a
son Maistre; Lors ses compagnons permirent qu' il portast tell charge qu' il
voudroit; Apres qu' il eut reguarde ca et la, et qu' il eut amasse plusieurs
chooses, comme, vases, sacs, balots, et paniers, il vouloit en fin d'estre
charge d'vne corbeille plein du pain que deux persons deuoient porter, ses
Compagnons commencerent a se moquer de luy, disant qu' il n' auoit rien plus
sot, que ce malotru, lequel, jasoit qu' il eut requis la charge la plus legere,
neantmoins il eut choisi la plus pesante. Toutes fois pour luy complaire, ils
luy mettent le panier sur les espaules. Esope ayant le dos bien charge
s'ebranloit deca, et dela. Le Merchand en reguardant s' ebahist, et dit, Esope
a desia gaigne son argent, puis qu' il est si prompt au trauail, car il a port
la charge d'vn cheual, Or apres qu' ils furent arriuez au logis pour disner, et
qu' on eut command a Esope de distribuer a un chacun sa portion du pain, et
que plusieurs en eurent beaucoup mange, son panier demeura a demi vuide,
parquoy estant aucunement discharge de son sardeau, il marchoit apres disner
plus gayement. Semblablement, au lieu ou ils souperent il distribua des pains
aux autres, par ainsi son panier demeura du tout vuide, lequel il portoit
aisement sur ses espaules, et par ce moyen il alloit le premier deuant tous, en
sort que ses compagnons qui auoient apperceu qu' il marchoit deuant, mettoient
en doubt, si celuy quil's voyoient deuant eux, estoit ce vilain Esope, on bien
quelque autre, que luy, Et apres qu' ils eurent cognu que c' estoit luy mesme,
ils s' emerveilloyent, comment un homme de si petite valeur auoit plus sagement
fait qu' eux tous, pour ce qu' il vouloit porter les pains, d'autant qu' il
scauoit, que facilement, et auant toutes chooses, ils seroyent dependues,
cependant les autres portoient les balls, et de semblable attirail, don't ils
n' estoint pas possible de se defaire si aisement que des provisions de la
bouche. Le Marchand estant arrive en la ville d' Ephese, il y vendit plusieurs
autres seruiteurs auec grand profit, or il ne luy en demeura plus que trois, a
scavoir le Grammairin, le Musitien, et Esope; Apres que l'vn de ses amiss luy
eut conseille de nauiger jusque au Samos, il se laissa vaincre a ses
persuasions, car il scauoit que la il vendroit mieux ses esclaues. Estant
arrive en Samos il fit habiller le Grammarien, et le Musitien de neuf, et en
cette sort il les meit en la foire. Mais pour autant qu' en nulle facon il ne
pouuoit accoutrer Esope, pource qu' il estoit contrefait en tout son corpse, il
luy fit vne rob d'vn sac, et l'ayant ainsi repare, le mit au milieu de ses
compagnons, afin que ceux qui le verroyent s' estonassent, disants. Dou vient
cette abomination laquelle ainsi obscurit les autres? Or combien qu' Esope fut
mocque de plusieurs il les reguardoit toutesfois, hardiment, et assurement. En
ce temps la Xanthus le Philosophe habitoit en Samos lequel sur ces entrefaits
suruint au march, et voyant ces deux jeunes esclaues bien habillez, et Esope
estant au milieu d'eux s' esmerueilla de l'invention du Marchand, car il auoit
mis le laid au milieu d'eux, afin que par demonstrance de celuy qui estoit
deforme ses deux autres ieunes esclaues semblassent plus beaux qu' ils n'
estoient, Et s' approchant de plus pres demanda au Musitien, de quel pais il
estoit, lequel luy respondit qu' il estoit Cappadocien, Lors Xanthus dit, Que
scais tu donc fair? Le Musitien respondit Toutes chooses. A quoy commenca a
rire Esope; Or les disciples qui estoient auec Xanthus quand ils le veirent
rire, et monstrer ses dents, ils penserent incontinent que ce fut un monstre,
et l'vn d'entr' eux dit, Certes il est rompu, il a des dents, l'autre demandoit
pourquoy il rioit, l'autre disoit, qu' il n' auoit point ry, l'vn s' approchant
dit a l' Esope. Pour quelle cause as tu ry? Esope respondit, Reculez toy d'icy
Brebis de Mer, L' autre tout confus pour ceste parole se retira vistement. Puis
Xanthus demanda au Marchand, De quel pris estoit le Musitien, et ayant entendu
qu' il luy couteroit mill oboles, estonne de si grand pris, s' en alla a
l'autre; Mais aussi apres que ce Philosophe l'eut interrogue, de quel pais,
il'estoit, et il eut entendu qu' il estoit de Lydie, il luy encor demandoit Que
cais tu donc fair? et l'autre semblable a precedent, respondit, Toutes chooses,
Esope derechef se print a rire, parquoy l'vn des escoliers vouloit scauoir
parquoy il rioit ainsi a tous propos, Au quel un autre de ses compagnons
disoit, Si tu veux estre appelle, Bouc marin va to en l'interroguer.

Or Xanthus demanda derechef au Marchand de quel pris estoit le Grammarien. Il
te coutera trois mill oboles dit le Marchand, le Philosophe se rebutta d'vn si
haut pris, parquoy laissant la le Marchand, il s'en alloit, neantmoins il fut
retenu par ses escoliers, qui luy demanderent, si ces esclaues ne luy estoient
pas agreeables. Ouy bien (dit il) mais ie n'ay pas delibere d'acheter
seruiteurs de si grand pris; l'vn d'entr' eux luy dit, Puis qu' ainsi est, Il
n' y a nulle loy qui te deffende d'acheter le plus deforme de tous, car auec
ce, qu' il ne vous seruira pas moins bien que les autres, nous serons contens
de payer ce qu' il coustera, Auquels respondit Xanthus. Ce seroit vne
mocquerie, que vous paissiez le pris, et que j' acheptasse la Merchandise, D'
auantage, ma femme qui desire d'estre propre, et net, ne prendroit a gre le
service d'vn serviteur si laid, et mal propre, Et les escoliers luy dirent, la
Sentence est toute manifest, et euidente, laquelle dit, Qu' on ne doit obeir a
femme. Bien donc repliqua Xanthus, faisons march de cet Esclaue deforme, mais
auant que passer outre, voions s' il scait quelque chose, afin que mon argent
ne soit du tout perdu. S' approchant donc a Esope, Bien te soit, dit il, esiouy
toy? Pourquoy, respondit Esope, Estois je maintenant si triste? je te salve,
adjouta Xanthus; Et moy, je te salve aussi, dit Esope. Xanthus n' estant pas
moins estonne que ses escoliers d'vne si soudaine response, luy demanda Qui es
tu? Esope respondit, je suis noir, Xanthus repliqua, Ce n' est pas ce qui je
desire scauoir de toy, je veux seulement que tu me dises ton pais, ou, le lieu
d'ou tu es sorty. Esope respondit je suis sorty du ventre de ma Mere, Ce n' est
pas encore cela, dit Xanthius, C' est le lieu de ta naissance que je demand a
toy? Je ne me souuiens ( repliqua Esope) que ma mere m' ait iamais declare, si
le lieu, ou me conceut, estoit haut, ou bas. Le Philosophe luy demanda, Que
scais donc tu fair? Rien, dit Esope; Comment, dit Xanthus? Par ce que mes
compagnons, dit Esope, ont dit quil's scauoyent tout, et ils ne m' ont rien
laisse de rest, Les escoliers prennant grand plaisir en cette Response. Par la
Providence des Dieux dirent ils, il a tres-bien respondu, car il n' est point
d' homme qui scache toutes chooses, et pour cette cause il a ry. Derechef
Xanthus luy demanda, Veux tu que ie to achete? Et Esope luy dit, Tu n' as que
fair de mon conseil en cecy, fay lequel te semblera le meilleur, ou de m'
achepter, ou non? Null ne fait rien par force, Ceci gist en ta Volonte, que si
tu veux ouurir la port de ta bourse, compte l'argent, si non, ne brocarde
plus? Adonc les escoliers dirent enter eux, par les Dieux il a vaincu nostre
Maistre, Alors Xanthus s' addressant a luy derechef; Vienca, luy dit il, quand
ie to auray achepte, ne to enfuyras tu point? Esope riant respondit, si ie veux
fair, ie ne to en demanderois ton conseil, comme tantost tu n' auois que fair
du mien. Et Xanthus dit, Tu dis bien, mais ie suis fasche que tu es si laid; A
quoy immediatement respondit Esope, O Philosophe Il faut considerer l'esprit,
et non la face, Lors Xanthus vint a Marchand, et luy dit, Combien vends tu
cestuy cy? Le Marchand respond, Tu n' es icy, que pour mespriser ma
Merchandise, car tu as laisse ces deux Garsons, qui convenoyent bien a un tell
homme que tu es, pour choisir ce bossu, et contrefait; Achete l'vn de ceux cy,
et tu auras cestuy cy par dessus; Xanthus dit, Je ne veux point d'autre que
cestuy cy, Le Marchand donc dit, Pren le pour soixante oboles? Alors les
Escoliers incontinent deliurent les Deniers, et Xanthus demeura Ma^stre d'
Esope. Les peagers, apres auoir sceu ceste vente, estoient tous courroucez,
demandans qui estoit le vendeur, et qui estoit le Achepteur, Mais pour autant
qu' un chacun auoit honte de se declarer pour la petitesse du pris, Esope,
estant au milieu, s' escria, C' est moy qui ay este vendu, cestuy ci est
l'achepteur, et cettui la, est se vendeur, que si tous deux se taisent ie
demeureray affranchi, Les Peagers furent bien aises, et donnerent la peage a
Xanthus) puis s' en allerent.

Esope donc suiuoit Xanthus allant en sa maison, Or aduint, qu' en la grande
chaleur du iour, Xanthus, apres auoir retire sa robe, pissoit en merchant, ce
que voyant Esope, luy prennant sa robe par la derriere, le tira, et luy dit,
Vends moy tout incontinent pour ce que ie m' en fuiray, Et Xanthus demanda,
Pourquoy? Pour ce, dit il, que ie ne pourroye seruir a un tell Maistre, car si
toy qui es mon Maistre, et qui ne crains person, ne donnes point relasche a
ta Nature, ains pisses en allant, s' il aduient que moy, qui suis ton
seruiteur, sois enuoye a quelque affair, et qu' en cheminant, Nature me
contreigne a chooses semblables, je seray contraint de discharger ma Nature en
volant, Adonc Xanthus dit, Cecy te trouble il? Pour euiter trois maux je pisie
en allant, Quels maux? dit Esope. Xanthus repliqua, Si je fusse arreste, le
Soleil m' eust brusle la test, puis apres, la terre eschauffee m' eust brusle
les pieds; auec cela, le vehemente senteur de l'vrine m' eust bless le
cerueau, Et Esope luy dit, Je suis content de ta Responce.

Ils s' entretennoient ensemble de tells discourse, et apres qu' ils furent
arriuez en la maison, Xanthus commanda a Esope qu' il demeurast deuant la
port, pource qu' il scauoit que sa Femme estoit, mignonne, et propre, et
pourtant ne falloit il pas, que tout incontinent il presentast ce monstre a sa
femme, sans l'auoir prevennue par quelque bon mot, Il entra donc en sa maison
et luy dit ainsi, Dame, tu ne me reprocheras plus le service que te rendent tes
servants, car je to ay achete un valet, en qui tu verras vne beauty
excellent, et tell que jamais tu ne veis, lequel est icy deuant la port; Les
Servants pensans estre vray ce que leur Maistre auoit dit, else debattoient
enter else grandement qui auroit pour mari ce beau noueau seruiteur.
Ce-pendant la femme du Xanthus commandoit qu' on appellast ce noueau valet, et
qu' on fit entrer dedans, il y eut un qui courut a la port plus promptement
que les autres, estimant par tell charge, desia tenir arres de son marriage,
et appella le noueau seruiteur, qu' auec vne countenance asseuree ayant dit au
luy, me voicy, c' est moy! la seruante toute estonnee luy demanda, Es tu celuy
que j' appelle pour entrer? Esope dit luy, Certes, ce suis Je. La Chambriere
luy dit, Tout beau, mon amy, n' enter point en la maison, si tu me crois,
autrement ils s' enfuyront tous; Vne autre, toutes-fois, sortit apres, et le
reguardant, dit, Que ton visage premierement soit decouppe, et puis tu
entreras, mais n' approach point de moy?

Apres qu' il fust enter il s' arresta deuant sa maistresse, que, quand elle le
veit, detourna sa face arriere de luy, disant a son mary, D' ou m' as tu amene
ce monstre? Ostez le devant moy; Et Xanthus dit, Content toy Dame, ne te moque
point de mon noueau seruiteur; Elle luy dit, Il semble que tu m' as en desdain,
et que tu veux auoir vne autre femme, et parauanture, pource que tu as honte de
me dire que je sort de ta maison, tu m' as apporte ceste belle test du Chien,
afin que je me fasche de son service, et que ie m' en aille; Pource, done moy
mon douaire, et l'argent de mon marriage, et lors je m' en iray. Adonc Xanthus
reprenoit Esope de ce qu' en chemin il luy auoit tant facetieusement parle de
son urine, et maintenant il ne respondoit rien a sa femme; A quoy Esope
respondit, Jette la dedans un gouffre? Xanthus dit, Tay toy meschant? Ne scais
tu mesme que je l'aime comme moy mesme? Esope dit, Aimez tu ta femme? Et
l'autre dit, Pourquoy non, meschant, banny? Je l'ayme, voirement, et je l'ayme
bien, Lors Esope, frappant du pied, cria hautement, O Dieux. Xanthus le
Philosophe se laisse governer par sa femme; Et se tournant deuers sa
Maistresse, luy dit, Dame, voudrois tu que ton Philosophe to eut achepte un
jeune seruiteur, de bonne countenance, de bon vigueur, et de bonne grace pour
te contempler toute nue en ton bain, et pour se jouer auec toy, au deshonneur
de ton mari? O Euripides je voudrois auoir ta bouche d'or, pour dire auec toy,
Grande est l'impetuosite des vagues d'Ocean, grande est celle des fleuues;
Merveilleuse est l'ardeur du feu chaud; C' est vne chose dure a supporter la
pouurete, Il y a d'autres chooses infinies lesquelles sont difficiles, Toutes
fois il n' y a rien si fascheux que la femme mauuaise, Mais toy ma Dame qui es
femme d'vn Philosophe, ne desire point le service des mignons, et plaisans, de
peur que tu ne face tort aucunement a ton mary? A ces mots la femme du Xanthus
ne sachant que respondre, Mon mary, dit elle, Ou a tu pris ceste belle beauty?
Ce babilliard, ce malotru, et contrefaict semble estre plaisant, et fecetieux,
Je feray donc mon appointement auec luy; Lors Xanthus dit, Esope ta Maistresse
veut estre remise en grace auec toy, Esope parlant par feintise respondit. Cest
grande chose que d'appaiser vne femme, Tay toy, luy dit Xanthus, car je t'ay
achepte pour me seruir, et non pour me contredire.

Le jour ensuiuant Le Philosophe commanda a L' Esope de le suiure, et le mena
en un jardin pour acheter des herbs, or apres que le Jardinier eut amasse un
faisseau des herbs, Esope le print, et quand Xanthus voulut payer le
Jardinier, Seigneur, dit le Jardinier, Je veux que tu me donnes la solution
d'vne question? Quelle question? dit Xanthus; Pourquoy est, dit autre, que les
herbs lesquelles j'ay plants combien que je les cultiue soigneusement,
toutesfois else ne prennent point leur accroissement, si non que bien tard? et
celles que terre produit de bon gre, jacoit qu' on n' y met nulle peine,
neant moins sont plustost auancees, Adonc Xanthus (combien que ce fut vne
question de Philosophe) ne peut dire autre chose, sinon, Ceci entr' autres
chooses est govern par la providence des Dieux, ce qu' oyant Esope qui estoit
la present se print a rire, et son Maistre luy dit, Ris tu? ou tu me moques?
Esope respondit, Je me moque voirement, mais non pas de toy, ains de celuy qui
to a enseigne, Car ce que tu dis, que toutes chooses sont gouernees par la
providence divine est la solution vulgaire des sages gens. Mets moy donc auant,
et je resouderay sa question, parquoy Xanthus tournant se, verse le Jardinier,
dit, Mon amy, Je trouue qu' il ne seroit pas bien seant que moy qui ay dispute
en tant de fameuses assemblees, m' amusasse maintenant a resoudre des
difficultes en un jardin, mais, je m' assure, si tu proposes a cetuy mon garson
qui scait tresbien les consequences de plusieurs chooses, te fera la resolution
de ta demand? Lors le Jardinier dit; ce Turlupin cognoit il les Lettres? O le
grand malheur que c' est? Sus donc bon homme, a-tu pas bien autant d'esprit qu'
il en faut, pour satisfaire a ma question? Alors Esope prennant la parole, dit,
Quand la femme est remarriee en secondes nopces ayant desia enfans de son
premier Mary, elle est bien mere des enfans qu' else a amenez, mais marastre a
ceux lesquells elle a trouuez au sein de son noueau Mary, elle demonstre donc
vne grand difference es vns, et aux autres, car elle aim et persevere
soigneusement en la nourriture de ceux lesquells elle a engendrez, mais elle
hait la portee d'autruy, et vsant d'envie elle diminue de leur nouriture pour
la donner a ses propres enfans, car elle aim les naturels, comme siens, et
hayt ceux de son mary, comme estrangers, De tell sort est la terre, elle est
mere de ce qu' elle a engendre, mais elle est marastre de ce que tu plants,
pour ceste cause elle aim mieux, elle nourrit mieux, elle entretient mieux ce
qui est sien comme chose legitime, mais elle ne done point tant de nourriture
aux herbs que tu plants, comme si c' estoient herbs bastardes. Le Jardinier
estant tout recree de cecy, Croy moy, dit il, que tu m' as releue en un grand
souci, and dubitation? Va to en, et emporte ces herbs pour neant? et toutes
fois, et quantes fois que tu en auras affair, enter en ce jardin, comme en ta
propre heritage, et y' pren des herbs tant que tu voudras?

Quelque temps apres, Xanthus s' en alla aux estuues, et ayant la trouue aucuns
de ses amiss, il commanda a Esope d'aller en sa maison et qu' il feit cuire vne
grain de Lentille, Esope estant arrive en la maison mit cuire dedans un pot un
seul grain de Lentille. Apres donc, que Xanthus se fut tresbien nettoye et
essuye, auec ses amiss, il les invita au disner, protestant toutes fois que le
banquet seroit bien petit, a scauoir des lentilles, disant aussi, qu' il ne
falloit point juger un amy par la diversity des viandes, mais plustost lover sa
bonne volonte. Or apres qu' ils furent sortis des estuues, et entrez en la
maison, Xanthus dit a Esope, Apporte nous a boire du bain, Esope courust aussi
tossed prendre de l'eau du bain, et leur en donna; Xanthus rempli de ceste
puanteur, Que est cecy, dit il, Esope? Esope luy respondit, C' est du bain,
comme tu m' as command; Xanthus retenant un peu sa cholere a cause de amiss qui
la estoient presens, commanda a Esope qu' il apporta le bassin, et tout
incontinent se tenoit debout, deuant la compagnie ayant le bassin en ses mains.
Lors Xanthus dit, Ne donnes tu point a lauer? A quoy respondit Esope? Il faut
que je face ce que tu me commandes, Tu ne m' as point dit, mets de l'eau dans
le bassin, laue mes pieds, apporte mes pantoufles, tu ne m' as rien dit de tout
cela, Lors Xanthus dit a ses amiss, Je n' ay pas achepte un Seruiteur, mais un
Maistre, Apres qu' ils furent assis a la table, et Xanthus eut demand si la
Lentille estoit cuite, Esope print la cuilleir, et tira le grain de Lentille du
pot, et leur ministra, Xanthus prennant ce grain, et pensant qu' il luy
presentast pour fair essay s' il estoit cuit, ou non, le froissant des doigts,
disoit, elle est assez cuite, apporte la? Lors Esope ne vuidoit rien dedans les
escuelles, que l'eau toute pure, et en distribuoit a un chacun, Quoy? Xanthus
luy dit, N' as tu cuit qu' un grain seul? Non certes, dit Esope, car tu m' as
dit en singulier, que je fisse cuire vne Lentille, et non pas des Lentilles en
pluriel. Xanthus donc tout desole, Mes amiss, dit il, cet homme cy me fera
enrager; Puis tournant se verse Esope luy dit, Afin que mes hosts ne se
plaignent de moy, seruiteur inutile, va to en, et m' achepte quatre pieds de
pourceau, et les fay diligemment cuire, et les nous apporte? Esope s' y en alla
tout aussi tossed, et fit tresbien ce qui luy estoit command, et cependant que
les pieds cuisoyent, Xanthus voulant trouuer vne just occasion, pour battre
Esope, a l' heur qu' il estoit empesche a quelque autre affair, deroba
secrettement l'vn des pieds, et le cacha. Un peu apres, Esope retourna de son
affair, et en fouillant dans le pot, il ne trouua que trois pieds, et par ce
il cogneut qu' on luy auoit fait vne fourberie, et couraut a l'estable il
couppa l'vn des pieds a un pourceau, qu' on y engraissoit, et le mit dedans le
pot, auec les autres, pour le fair cuire; Or Xanthus craignant qu' Esope s'
enfuit, apres qu' il auroit apperceu le larcin de l'vn des pieds, le remit
derechef au pot, Et quand Esope vuydoit les pieds au plat, Xanthus en veit
cinque, et dit, Qu' est ceci Esope? Comment il y en a cinque? Esope luy dit,
Combien de pieds ont deux pourceaux? Huit respondit Xanthus, Et Esope dit, Il y
en a donc cinque, et le porceau, qu' on engraisse la bas, n' en a que trois,
Xanthus bien mary dit a ses amiss, Ne vous auoy je pas un peu deuant predit que
ce malheureux homme me feroit enrager? Lors Esope dit, Seigneur ne scais tu
pas, qu' on ne peut inferer, qu' il y ait erreur en vne sum en adjoustant, ou
diminuant, selon la sum de la quantite; Xanthus donc ne trouuant nulle
honest occasion pour battre Esope s' appaisa.

Le lendemain l'vn des escoliers appresta un banquet sumptueux, auquel il
invita Xanthus, et les autres Disciples; En disnant Xanthus choisit des viandes
les plus exquises et delicates, et les donna a Esope qui estoit apres de luy.
Va to en, dit il, et port cecy a ma bien aymee. Or Esope s'en allant pensoit
en soy mesme; J' ay maintenant trouue l'opportunite pour me vanger de ma
maitresse, pource que quand je vins nouellement, elle me brocardoit, On verra
donc si elle aim mon maistre; Pourtaut, apres il fut entree en la maison, il
appella sa Maitresse, et meit deuant elle les viandes qu' il apportoit; et
did; Dame, Mon Maistre envoye tout cecy non pas a toy mais a sa bien aymee La
dessus, ayant appelle a soy vne petite chienne qu' on nourrissoit dans le
logis, Tien mignonne, dit il, voila ce que mon Maistre a command que j' to
apportasse, et ce disant, il luy donna toute cette viande, morceau par morceau;
Cela faict il retourna verse son Maistre sequel luy demanda, s' il auoit tout
donnes a sa bien aimee, Tout, dit Esope, et a tout mange en ma presence,
Xanthus luy demanda derechef, Qu' a elle dit en mangeant? Elle ne m' a rien dit
certes, did Esope, mais a par soy elle te remercioit. Toutesfois, la Femme du
Xanthus tout trouble de cecy, voire de ce, que son mari aimoit mieux vne
chienne que sa propre Femme entra en sa chamber, et toute desolee elle protesta
de n' auoir jamais sa compagnie.

Durant ces chooses, qu' un chacun ait bien beu, et qu' on eust propose beaucoup
des questions d'vn cost, et d'autre, l'vn d'entre eux demanda, Quand sera ce
qu' il y aura grands troubles, et dissensions enter les hommes? Esope estant
pres de luy, did Quand les morts se resusciteront, lors ils redemanderont ce
qu' ils possedoient en ce monde; Les escoliers commencerent a rire en disant,
Ce nouueau Compagnon est tout ingenieux; Et un autre proposa ceste question;
Pourquoy est ce, que la Brebis laquelle on mean a la Boucherie ne cry point,
et le Porceau groigne incessament? Pour ce, dit Esope, qu' on accoutume de
tirer le laict a la brebis, et de luy tondre la lain, et non obstant elle ne
laissa pas de suiure paisiblement, parquoy aussi quand on les prend par les
pieds, ne se doubt point qu' on luy veuille fair du mal, ny qu' elle doiue
endurer plus que l'ordinaire; Il n' est pas ainsi d'vne truye, qui n' est
tiree, ny tondue, et n'a point accoustome de la trainer a chooses semblables,
mais scachant qu' elle n' a rien du bon sur soy, que sa chair, a bon endroit
elle se plaint, et cry. Ces chooses dites, les escoliers se prendrent encor' a
rire, et le louoient grandement.

Apres qu' ils eurent disnes, Xanthus retourna a sa maison, et commencoit a
deviser auec sa femme, selon qu' il auoit de Coustume, mais sa femme le
dedaignant luy dit, Ne to approach point de moy, Done moy mon Douaire, a fin
que je m' en aille, car je ne demeureray plus auec toy; Quant a toy, va
flatter, et fair chere a ta chienne a qui tu as envoie la viande? Adonc
Xanthus tout estonne dit, Esope me fait encore quelque encombrier, et dit a sa
Femme, Dame, Je ne m' enyuure point, mais es tu point enyuure toy mesme? A qui
ay Je envoye les viandes si non a toy? Sa femme repliqua, Non par le Dieu
Jupiter, tu ne me les as point envoyees, mais a ta chienne, Xanthus appella
Esope et luy did, A qui as tu present ce que je to auois done? Esope dit, A
ta bien aimee, Et Xanthus demanda a safemme, N' as tu rien receu? Rien, dit
elle, Et Esope dit, A qui m' as tu Command Maistre de fair le Present?
Xanthus respondit, A ma bien aimee, Esope donc faisant venir la chienne, Cettui
cy, dit il, to aim bien, car ta femme jacoit, qu' elle se dise ta bonne amie,
toutesfois si elle se fasche de la moindre chose que ce soit, elle maintenant
contredit, elle dit iniures, elle s' en va, mais frappe ta chienne, chasse la
tant que tu voudras, non pourtant elle ne s' en ira pas, ains mettant en oubli
toutes iniures et menaces elle applaudit a son Maistre, et le caresse de la
queue, Il falloit donc O Seigneur que tu me disses, Port cecy a ma femme, et
non pas a ma bien aimee? Lors Xanthus dit a sa femme, Dame ne vois tu pas, que
ce n' est point ma fault, mais de celuy qui a apporte les viandes? Ayes donc
patience, et Je trouueray bien tossed un occasion pour le battre? Or elle ne le
creut point, mais s' en alla chez ses Parents, Parquoy Esope dit a Xanthus,
Maistre, ne to auois je pas bien dit, que ta chienne to aimoit mieux que ma
Maitresse?

Quelque jours apres Xanthus voyant qu' il ne pouuoit flechir sa femme, ne
fair sa paix auec elle, luy enuoya aucun de ses alliez pour la fair retourner
en la maison, mais elle n' y vouloit consentir, Parquoy Xanthus estoit en
angoisse, ce que voyant Esope s' addressa a son Maistre, et luy dit, Ne te
tourmente point mon Seigneur, car je scay le vray moyen de fair en sort, que
demain, auant qu' il soit nuit ta Femme reuienne icy bien viste, et de son bon
gre; Cecy fait, Esope ayant receu argent de son Maistre, accourut au march, et
apres qu' il eut fait Provision de Gallines, Oyes, Lapins, Becasses, et autres
friandises pour fair un banquet, en s' en retournant, il alloit par les
maisons; Or passoit il par le deuant la maison des parens de sa Maitresse,
feignant, de ne scauoir que ce fut leur maison, et que sa Dame fut la logee, Et
quand il eut appelle quel-qu'-vn dedans, il demandoit, si ceux de la maison n'
auoit rien qui fut for-bon pour fair nopces, et qu' ils luy vendissent, le
seruiteur qui estoit dedans, sortant, luy dit, Qui est celuy qui en a affair?
C' est le Philosophe Xanthus, dit Esope, car demain il doit espouser Femme. Le
valet oyant ces belles nonelles laissa la Esope, et montant en la chamber, il
fit scauoir a la femme du Xanthus ce que l'autre venoit de luy dire;
Incontinent, et sans delay, elle accourut a son mary, et commence a crier
contre luy, disant enter autres chooses, Tant que je viuray Xanthus tu ne
pourras remarrier a vne autre, et par ce moyen elle demeura en la maison par
l'inuention d' Esope, tout ainst aussi que par son moyen elle s' en estoit
allee.

Quelques jours s' estans escoulez, Xanthus convia ses disciples a souper, et
commanda a Esope qu' il allast acheter tout ce qu' il trouueroit de bon, et
d'excellent, Il s' en alla, et en chemin il disoit a part soy, Je monstreray a
mon Maistre, comme il ne faut point commander sottement, Apres donc qu' il eut
achete des langues de pourceau, et leur eut tres bien dressees pour ses hosts,
il donna a chacun sa langue rostie auec la sauce. Les escoliers louoient ceste
belle entree, comme viande propre pour Philosophes, pource que la langue sert a
bien parler, En suite de cela, il seruit encore de langues bouilliez, et
combien qu' ils demandassent d'autres mets, et viandes, toutesfois il ne
seruoit que des langues; Les Disciples faschez d'vne mesme viande tant de fois
seruie, Jusqu' a quand, disoient ils, cesseras tu d'apporter les langues, ne
vois tu pas que nous auons escorche les nostres, a force de manger de celles
que tu nous as seruies? Xanthus tout courrouce luy dit, N' as tu autre chose
Esope? Non certes, dit Esope, et Xanthus repliqua, Ne to auois je pas command
vilain babouin, que tu achetasses tout ce que tu trouuerois de bon et
excellent? Esope respondit, Je te remercie grandement de ce qu' en la presence
des Philosophes tu me reprens, Car qui a to il donc en ceste vie meilleur, et
plus excellent, que la langue? car toute Doctrine, toute Philosophe est
monstree et enseigne par la langue, par icelle nous donnons, nous receuons, par
icelle fleurit l'eloquence, par icelle accomplit on les Marriages, on bastit
les citez, par icelle les hommes sont gardez. Bref par icelle toute nostre vie
consiste, parquoy il n' y a rien meilleur que la langue; A ceste cause les
Disciples disants qu' Esope a tres bien dit, donnerent le tort a leur Maistre,
et s' en allerent.

Le Lendemain les Disciples du Xanthus l'ayans blame de ce qui estoit pass, il
respondoit que cela n' auoit este fait de son consentement, mais par la malice
de son meschaut seruiteur; Mais, dit il, Je le changera aujourd'-huy de souper,
et moi mesme parlera a luy en vostre presence, Xanthus donc appella son
seruiteur, et luy commanda d'acheter toutes chooses mauaises, et de nulle
valeur, disant que ses Disciples deuoient soupper auec soy. Esope alla au
march et sans rien changer, il derechef d'acheta des langues, et apres qu' il
eut dresses il les seruit sur la table; Les Conviez murmuroient entr' eux, et
disoient, voici encores les langues de porceau! mais sans s' arrester a leur
discourse, Esope on apporta d'autres, e^ d'autres encore, jus qu' a la
troisieme fois. Or Xanthus ne prennant point en bon gre cecy, Qu' est cecy? dit
il, Penses tu meschant, que je to eusse dict derechef, que tu achetasses toutes
chooses bonnes et excellentes? Mais au contraire, ne to auois je pas command a
ceste fois que tu achetasses tout ce que tu trouerois de mauais, et de nulle
valeur? Esope respondit, Et qui a il pire que la langue? Ces villes ne sont
else pas destruictes par icelles? Les hommes ne sont ils pas tuez par icelles?
Les nopces, et les Magistrates, les Seigneuries, les Royaumes ne sont ils pas
rompus et renuersez par icelles? Bref toute nostre vie, n' est elle pas rempli
d'eareurs infinies par icelles? Apres qu' Esope eut dit cecy, l'vn des
assistans dit a Xanthus, Certainement, si tu ne te gardes, cestuy cy te fera
enrager, car tell est son esprit, quel est son corpse, et Esope luy dit, Tu me
sembles estre un homme de mauuaise sort, de mesler d'affaires d'autruy, et qui
veux irriter le Maistre contre le seruiteur.

Xanthus oyant cecy, et ne desirant rien plus que de trouuer vn' occasion pour
battre son lourdant, Banni, dit il, puis que tu as ose tancer mon amy de ce que
se meslant des affairs des autres il auoit un peutrop de soucy, monstre moy
quelque homme qui n' a point de souci? Esope donc, estant le lendemain sorti en
un place ouuert, et regardant tous le passants, il en vid un qui estoit assis,
de long temps en un certain lieu, lequel il jugea, selon sa fantasy, simple,
et sans souci, et s' approchant a luy le convia a venir disner auecque son
Maistre. Ce paisant n' enquerant de rien, ny demandant qui estoit celuy qui
l'invitoit, il entra en la maison de Xanthus, auec ses souliers ordes, et
salles, ou il se mit a la table, Xanthus demanda Qui est cestuy cy? Esope
repliqua, C' est l' homme sans souci; Xanthus dit a l'oreille de sa femme, Fai
ce que je te diray, et obei moy un peu, a fin que je trouue just occasion pour
bien frotter Esope, puis apres il dit a haute voix, Dame mets de l'eau dans le
Bassin, et laue les pieds de nostre Host? Or pensoit il en soy mesme, ce
rustique ne voudroit pour rien accepter le service d'vne si belle Femme, et par
se moyen Esope deuteronomy estre bien battu, pource que l'autre ne seroit trouue un
homme sans souci; La Dame donc ayant mis de l'eau au bassin alloit pour lauer
les pieds de son Host, mais le pauure simple scachant que c' estoit la
Maistresse de maison, il parloit ainsi en soy mesme, Elle me veut fair
honneur, pour ceste cause elle veut lauer mes pieds de ses propres mains,
jacoit qu' elle puisse commander cela a ses chambrieres; Apres donc qu' il eust
etendu ses pieds, la Dame luy dit, laue toy? et il se laua, et puis il se mit a
la table: Estant assis, Xanthus commanda qu' on donnast de boire a son host,
L' autre pensant encore ainsi a part soi, C' est bien raison qu' ils soient
seruis les premiers, mais puis qu' ils veulent ainsi, il ne me faut point que
je suis curieux d'auantage, et il beut; Or en disnant, on luy apporta de
quelque viande, et il en mangea de bon appetit. Xanthus blasmoit son cuisinier
de ce qu' il auoit mal appareille ceste viande, et pourtant le feit despouiller
tout nud, et le frotta tres bien; Et ce bon homme disoit en soy mesme, La
Viande est certes bien cuite, et apprestee, et est si bonne a mon goust, qu' il
ne luy manque rien, ce me semble, pour estre bien assaisone, Mais si le Pere de
la Famille veut sans cause battre son seruiteur qu' en ai je a fair? Xanthus
estoit marri, et ne prennoit bas bien en gre de ce que son host n' estoit
nullement curieux, et ne s' enqueroit de rien, Finalement on apporta le
gasteau, et ce Paisant le maniant, et tournant de toutes costs en mangeoit
comme du pain, et comme s' il n' en eust jamais gouste de semblable. Or Xanthus
se courroucant a son boulenger luy dit, Meschant pourquoy n' as tu mis du miel,
et du poiure en ce gasteau? Le boulenger respond, Maistre, si le gasteau n' est
cuit, frappe moy? Mais s' il n' est accoutre, comme il doit estre, done en le
blasme a ma Maitresse, et Xanthus dit, Si la fault vient de ma femme, je la
fera maintenant brusler toute vive; Lors il fist derechef sign a sa femme qu'
elle lui obeit a cause d' Esope, Apres donc qu' il eut command qu' on luy
apportast les sermens, et fagots, il meit le fen au monceau de bois, et tira sa
femme aupres du feu, en sort qu' on croyoit qu' il la voulut mettre dedans le
feu, toutesfois differoit il aucunement, et reguardoit de tous costs le
paisant, si en aucune sort il se leueroit point pour le destourner de ceste
grande temerite; Mais iceluy pensoit encore en soi mesme ainsi, Puis qu' il n'
a nulle cause de se courroucer, pourquoy se courrouce il? Puis le dit,
Seigneur, si tu penses qu' il soit raisonable de fair ainsi, attens moy un
peu, jusques a tant que je sois all en ma maison, et a mon retour je to
ameneray ma femme, a fin que tu ses brusles toutes deux ensemble. Xanthus oyant
parler ainsi ce bon homme, et voyant qu' il n' auoit point de malice en son
fait, s' en estonna grandement, et dit a Esope, Vrayment, voicy vu homme sans
soucy, Tu auras le guerdon de ta Victoire Esope, Content toy, pour l'aduenir,
car je to affranchiray, et te mettray en liberte.

Le jour en suiuant Xanthus commanda a Esope qu' il allast aux esteuuez pour s'
enquerir au quelq' vns, s' il y auoit beaucoup de gens; Or en passant il
rencontra fortuiment le Preteur, le quel sachant qu' Esope estoit auec Xanthus,
luy demanda ou il s' alloit, Esope respondit, Je ne scay, le Preteur pensant
qu' il ne tint compte de sa demand, et qu' il se mocquast de luy, commanda qu'
on le menast en prison, Quand donc on tranoit Esope, il s' escria disant, Ne
vois tu pas (O Preteur) comme j' ay to ay bien respondu? Et certes je ne
pensois pas aller, ou je vay? Je to ay rencontre, et maintenant tu me fais
mener en prison; Lors le Preteur estonne de ceste soudaine Responce, le laissa
aller.

Esope donc estant venu aux Estuues y veit vne grande multitude de gens, et
veit aussi vne Pierre au milieu de l'entree, a la quelle hurtoient tous ceux
qui entroient, et sortoient, A quoy prennant guard un certain qui s' en alloit
aux Estuues, il osta la piere, et la mit ailleurs, Esope donc estant return
verse son Maistre luy dit Si tu, te veux estuuer, Je n' ay veu qu' un homme aux
estuues, Xanthus y alla, et voyant vne grande multitude de gens dit, Qu' est
ceci Esope? Ne m' as tu point dit, qu' tu n' auois veu qu' un homme? Ouy bien,
dit Esope, car j' ay trouue ceste pierre (la monstrant de la main) mise a
l'entree a laquelle heurtoient tous allans, et venans, mais un certain homme,
auant qu' y hurter, l'osta de sa place, et la mit ailleurs, Parquoy j' ay dit
que je n' auois veu qu' un homme, plus estimant cestuy que tous les autres,
Lors Xanthus did, il ny a rien qui puisse retarder Esope qu' il ne respondit
promptement.

Un jour Xanthus retournant des lieux priuez, demandoit a Esope, Parquoy est ce
que les hommes regardent leur ordure apres qu' ils ont purge leur ventre? Esope
respondit, Au temps pass il estoit un homme, lequel viuant delicieusement
demeuroit long temps a retrait, y prennant un grand plaisir, en sort qu'
estant la trop longuement assis, il mit horse ses entrailles, Depuis ce temps la
donc, les autres ont eu peur, et pour ceste cause ils regardent l'ordure de
leur ventre, afin qu' ils ne tombent en tell Inconvenient; Mais quant a toy
Maistre, ne crains point de perdre ton coeur, car tu n' en as point.

Un jour enter autres, Xanthus faisoit un banquet, et estoit assis auec autres
Philosophes, et apres qu' un chacun eut desia assez bien beu, on proposoit
plusieurs questions, Et Xanthus commencoit a se troubler, Parquoy Esope estant
aupres de luy, dit, Mon Maistre, Bacchus a trois attrempemens, Le premier est
de Volupte, le Second d' yurongnerie, le troisesme est de paroles outragieuses,
Vous donc qui auez desia assez beu, et estes tout joyeux, contentez vouz, et ne
touchez plus au rest; Lors Xanthus estant desia yure luy dit, Tay toy? Va
porter ton Conseil aux enfers? Et Esope dit, Tu seras donc tire en enfer, Or un
des Disciples voyant que Xanthus estoit a demy-yure, et a fin, que je die tout,
auoit perdu l'entendement, Maistre (dit il) aucun peut il boire la mer? Et
Xanthus did, Ouy bien, car moi mesme la boiray, Et son Disciple luy dit, Que
s' tu ne peux fair, en quelle amend veux tu estre condamne? Lors dit Xanthus,
Je gage toute ma maison, et cependant ils meirent leurs anneaux pour gage, pour
confirmer ceste gajeur, et puis s' en allerent.

Le lendemain au matin quand Xanthus fut esueille, et qu' il eut lau e sa face
il ne trouua point son anneau en son doigt en se lauant, Il demanda a Esope, s'
il ne l'auoit point veu; Esope respondit, Je ne scay que tu en as fait? Vne
chose, scay je bien, que tu n' as plus de droit en ta maison, Lors Xanthus
demanda Parquoy? Pource, dit Esope, que quand tu estois hier yure, tu fis
accord du boire la mer, et en ceste accord tu as mis ton anneau pour gage, Et
Xanthus dit, Quelle chose ay je plus grande en ma puissance que ma foy? Mais
maintenant je te pry que fi tu as quelque cognoissance, quelque prudence,
quelque experience, tu me vueille assister, a fin que je puisse accomplir ma
promise, ou dissoudre le pacte. Esope respondit, Il est impossible, certes,
que tu accomplisse ta promise, mais je feray que tu pourras dissoudre les
pactes. Quand vous serez derechef aujourd'-huy assemblez ensemble, ne tu fay
nullement semblance que tu ayes peur, mais die hardiment en sobriety ce que tu
as conuenu, estant yure. Command donc que to on te dress vne table, et
quantite de paille, et du feurre au riuage de la mer, et qu' il y ait des
garsons tout prests pour te verser a boire l'eau de la mer: Et quand tu verras
que tout le peuple sera assemble pour voir ce beau spectacle, apres que tu
seras assis, command qu' on te remplisse d' l'eau vne tasse, et l'ayant
prinse, die tout haut a celuy qui a les gages, afin que tous les assistans
l'entendent. Quelques sont nos conventions? Et iceluy te respondra que tu as
accord de boire toute la mer. TO addressant donc a tout le peuple tu diras
ainsi, Hommes de Samos, vous' scauez vous mesmes que plusieurs fleuues entrent
en la mer, or j' ay fait seulement accord de boir la mer, et non pas les
riuieres qui entrent dedans, Que ceste escolier done guard de color les eaux
des riuieres premierement, et puis apres je boiray la mer. Xanthus preuoyant
que par cecy les pactes seroient rompues, fut grandement resiouy, le peuple
donc s' assembla au riuage de la mer pour voir l'issue de l'entreprinse de
Xanthus, et apres qu' il eust dit, et fait ce que luy auoit enseigne Esope, le
peuple s' esmerueilla, et le loua grandement, Lors l'escolier se jettant au
pieds du Xanthus confessoit s' estre vaincu, et prioit que les pactes seroient
rompus, ce que fit Xanthus a la reqneste du peuple.

Apres qu' ils furent de retour en la maison, Esope vint parler a son Maistre,
et luy dit, Je to ay fait plaisir toute ma vie, Seigneur, n' ay je pas merit
d'estre affranchy? Mais Xanthus le reprennant aigrement le repoussa disant, N'
ay je pas bone volonte to affranchir? Sors? et te tien a la port, et Reguarde
si tu verras deux corneilles, et le m' en vien dire? que s' il y en a deux, ce
sera bon sign, et s' il n' y en a qu' vne, ce sera mauuaise augure, Apres donc
qu' Esope fut sorty, et que d'auantage il eut veu deux corneillees branchees
sur un arbre il retourna l'annoncer a Xanthus, Cependant, que Xanthus sortoit,
l'vne s' enuola, et n' en uoyant qu' vne, il dit, Malheureux homme ne m' as tu
pas dit que tu en auois veu deux? Ouy, dit il, mais l'vne s' est volee, Lors
Xanthus dit, Tu n' auois autre chose a fair banny, si non que tu te mocquasses
de moy? parquoy il commanda qu' il seroit tres bien battu, or quand on le
battoit, le Preuost inuita a souper Xanthus, et Esope receuant les coups
disoit, O moy miserable, j' ay veu deux corneilles et je fuis battu, et toy qu'
n' en as veu qu' vne, tu vas fair grand chere, parquoy la Divination fut
fausse, Lors Xanthus ebahissant de la viuacite de son esprit commanda qu' il ne
fut plus battu.

Quelque temps apres Xanthus donna charge a Esope de luy apprester le banquet,
car, disoit, il, mes disciples doiuent venir disner auec moy. Esope alla au
march, et acheta de toutes bonnes viandes necessaires pour un banquet, et
apporta en la salle toutes ses provisions, Il trouua sa Dame sur lict qui
dormoit, et luy dit, Madame vous garderez, s' il vous plaist, que les chiens ne
touchent a ces viandes, et qu' ils ne mangent, car il me faut returner en la
cuisine pour pouruoir au demeurant, Va, dit elle, ou tu voudras, et ne te
soucie pas de tes viandes, car mes fesses ont des yeux.

Apres qu' Esope eut dress toutes les autres provisions il les apporta en la
salle, et pource qu' elle auoit dit que ses fesses auoient des yeux, il la
descouurit par derriere, et la laissa dormir; Et Xanthus suruint auec ses
escoliers, et voyant ce beau menage dit a Esope, Paillard, qu' est cecy? Esope
respondit, Seigneur, quand j' ay mis les viandes sur la table, j' ay dit a
Madame qu' elle gardast que les chiens ne les mangeassent, et elle me dit que
ses fesses auoient des yeux, et pource qu' elle dormoit je les luy ay
discouuertes, Xanthus luy dit, Banni, tu passeras par mes mains, mais pour
ceste heure je te pardonne par l'amour des mes amiss.

Un peu de temps apres, Xanthus conuia a disner les Philosophes et Recteurs, et
commanda a Esope de se tenir a la port, et qu' il ne laissast entrer homme
quelconque, qui ne fut scauant, mais seulement les Philosophes et gens doctes,
Or a l' heure du disner, Esope estant assis dedans la maison aupres de la
port, l'vn des inuitez vint a la port, et heurta; Esope luy demanda, Que
remue le chien? l'autre pensant qu' on l'appellast chien, alla tout courrouce,
et ainsi les autres s' en retournerent marris, et pensant estre injuriez.

Il en suruint un enter les autres, lequel aussi frappa a la port, et Esope
luy demanda, Que remue le chien? L' autre respondit, La queue, et les oreilles,
Esope jugeant qu' il auoit tres bien respondu, le mena a son Maistre, et dit,
mon Seigneur, Il n' est point venu de Philosophe a ton banquet que cestui ci.
Xanthus fut bien marry, pensant estre deceu de ceux, qu' il auoit inuitez. Le
lendemain, apres que les escoliers furent venues aux escoles, ils le blas
moient, disants, Quoy nostre Maistre? to auons nous done subject de nous
mespriser jusques a ce point, qu' il ait fallu que pour nous empescher d'aller
chez toy, tu ayes mis a la port ce puant Esope, pour nous injurier, et nous
appeller chiens? Xanthus repliqua, Est ce song ce que vous dites, ou chose
vray? Si nous ne dormions, dirent ils, c' est verite Incontinent il appella
Esope, et tout Courrouce luy demanda, Pourquoy il auoit chasse ses amiss, auec
honte et diffame, Esope luy dit, Maistre, Ne m' auois tu pas command que je ne
laissasse point venir pas bestes, et lourdants a ton bancquet, mais seulement
Philosophes, et gens scauants, Lors Xanthus dit, Et ceux cy, quelles gens sont
ils? Ne sont il pas scauans? Nullement, dit Esope, car quand ils heurtoient a
la port, et que je leur demandois, Que remue le chien? il n' y en a pas un qui
entendist ma demand, puis donc qu' ils me sembloient estre toutes bestes, Je
n' en ay laisse entrer pas un que cestuy cy, lequel m' a sagement respondu,
Quand ils ouyrent ainsi parler Esope, ils accorderent tous qu' il auoit tres
bien parle.

Vne autrefois Xanthus ayant Esope aupres soy, vint aux Sepulchers, et lisant
les Epigrammes qui estoit sur les tombeaux y prennoit grand plaisir, Or Esope
apperceut en l'vn d'iceux aucunes lettres gravees, Les quelles s' estoient
tells, R.P.Q.F.I.T.A, et les monstra a Xanthus et luy demanda s' il scauoit la
signification de ces lettres? Xanthus (combien qu' il y pensast profondement)
il ne peut toutesfois trouuer la Declaration, et confessa franchement, qu' il
en doubtoit; Adonc Esope luy dit, Maistre si par la conduit de ce petit pillier
je te monstre un thresor, comment me recompenseras tu? Fie toy en moy, dit
Xanthus, que tu auras ta liberte, et la moitie de l'or? Lors Esope, recedens du
monceau de terre quatre pas, commenca a fouiller, et trouua le tresor, et le
porta a Xanthus, disant, Tien a moy ta promise? car j' ay trouue le tresor, et
Xanthus luy dit, Je ne suis pas si fol de le fair, si premierement tu ne m'
expliques ces lettres, car ce me sera vne chose beaucoup plus pretieuse de
scauoir cela, que le tresor trouue, Et Esope dit, Celuy qui a cache en terre
ceste tresor, comme homme scauant, il a grave ces lettres cy, lesquelles
disent, Recedens passus quatuor, fodiens, inuenies thesaurum aureum, C' est a
dire, Si tu recules quatre pas, tu trouueras en fouillant un thresor d'or;
Xanthus did, Pource que ton esprit est si vif, et plein de cautelles tu n'
auras point ta liberte, Esope did, Maistre Je rapporteray, qu' il faut render
cet or au Roy de Bizance, car il a este icy cache pour luy. Comme le scais tu?
dit Xanthus, Par ces autres lettres, repliqua Esope viz. R. R. D. Q. I. T.
lesquelles signifient cecy, Read Regi Dionysio quem inuenisti thesaurum, C'
est a dire, Rends au Roy Dionysius le tresor que tu as trouue.

Xanthus oyant ce, que c' estoit l'or du Roy, dit a Esope, Pren la moitie du
tresor, et te tay? Et Esope luy dit, Tu ne me donnes point cecy, mais celuy qui
a icy cache le tresor, et qu' ainsi soit, escoute ce que disent les autres
lettres suiuantes, A. E. D. Q. I. T. A. lesquelles signifient cecy. Acceptum
Euntes diuidite quem invenistis thesaurum aureum? C' est a dire, Diuisez enter
vous le thresor d'or que vous auez trouue, en vous allant, Adonc Xanthus luy
dit Allons en la maison, afin que nous partissions le thresor, et que tu
recoiues ta liberte?

Or apres qu' ils furent venus en la maison, Xanthus craignant le caquet d'
Esope, le feit mettre en prison, En allant, Esope did, Sont ces les promesses
des Philosophes? Non seulement tu me denies ma liberte, mais ausi tu me fais
mettre en prison? Xanthus donc commanda qu' il fut deliuure, et luy dit, Certes
tu dis bien, afin que quand tu seras affranchi, tu m' accuses de plus grande
affection, Si est ce pourtant, respondit Esope, qu' apres me fair du pire que
tu pourras, il faudra, malgre toy, que tu me remettes en liberte.

Il advint en ce temps la vne chose estrange en la ville de Samos, Lors que
publiquement on celebroit quelque feste, un Aigle vola tout soudain, et
arrachant l'anneau public, le laissa cheoir au sein d'vn Esclaue, Parquoy les
Samiens tous estonnees, et contristes de ceste mesauanture, s' assemblerent
tous en un lieu, et prierent Xanthus, pource qu' il estoit le premier de la
ville, et, auec ce, Philosophe, qu' il leur manifestast le jugement de ce sign
terrible, mais Xanthus doutant entierement, demanda term pour y respondre,
Estant donc de retour en sa maison, il deuint tout pensif, et se plongea dans
vne profonde melancholy, parce qu' il ne pouuoit juger parfaitement de cela,
Or Esope voyant la tristesse de son Maistre, vint a luy, et a luy dit,
Pourquoy, Seigneur, perseueres tu si long temps en ta fascherie? Ne me cele
rien, et chasse ceste melancholy dehors? Done moy la charge de fair ce que
tu as a fair? Quand tu seras demain venu en la place public, die simplement
aux Habitans, Messieurs Je n' ay point apprins de declarer les chooses a venir,
ne diuiner les mes-aduentures, may J' ay un rustique en ma maison qui faict
beaucoup des chooses, il vous resoudra vostre question; Or mon maistre, si je
viens a bout de la solution, l' honneur en sera tien, qui as en ton service un
tell valet, si non, le deshonneur sera a moy seul. Xanthus donc le croyant, se
trouua le lendemain en la maison de la ville, et estant an milieu d'
l'assemble, selon le conseil d' Esope, il parla aux assistans, parquoy ils le
prierent incontinent qu' il feit venir Esope, Et quand il fut venu, il se
tenoit debout au milieu d'eux, qui bien estonnez de voir un homme de ceste
mine, s' en rioient ouuertement, et disoient tout haut, Ce bell homme icy, nous
pourra il nous declarer les signs? Que pourrions nous jamais ouir de bon, de
ce contresait? Et en ceste sort se moquoient ils, mais Esope, etendant la
main, et ayant impetre silence, dit, Hommes Samiens, pourquoy vous moquez vous
de ma face? Il ne faut point regarder la face d'l' homme, mais son esprit, car
bien souuent Nature a mis en vne laid figure un bon entendement, Considerez
vous la form exterieure des bouteilles? N' avez vous pas plus tossed regard au
goust interieur du vin?

Quand tout le peuple ouit ce que disoit Esope, ils luy dirent, Esope, si tu
nous peux aider, die le nous? Il parla donc ainsi hautiment, Messieurs pource
que Fortune (laquelle aim dissensions) a propose un pris de gloire au
Seigneur, et a son serf, si le seruiteur est moindre que le Seigneur, il sera
tres-bien battu; que s'il est trouue plus excellent, neantmoins il ne lairroit
d'estre bien frotte aussi; Par ains le Seigneur a tousiours victoire soit a
droit, soit a tort, et le seruiteur est tousiours fouille; Si, en luy faisant
donner a moy ma liberte et vous me permettez de parler, Je vous declareray
vrayement ce que vous demandez, Lors le peuple tout d'vn accord crioyt a
Xanthus, Done liberte a Esope? Obei aux Samiens, Fay ce bien a la Cite? Mais
Xanthus ne s' y vouloit point accorder, Pourquoy le Preteur luy dit, Xanthus,
s'il ne te plaist, d'obeir au peuple, desmaintenant j' affranchiray Esope, et
lors il sera pareil a toy. Adonc Xanthus luy donna sa liberte, et la trompette
de la ville cria. Le Philosophe Xanthus done la liberte d' Esope aux Samiens,
Et a cette heure la, se troua veritable ce qu' un peu auparauant Esope auoit
dit a son maistre par ces paroles Je to advise, que mal gre toy, tu m'
affranchiras.

Esope donc affranchi, estant au milieu du peuple did, Messieurs, I aigle,
comme scauez, est le Roy des oiseaux, or pource, qu'ayant raui l'anneau de
l'Empereur, il la laisse cheoir au feign d'vn seruiteur, cela veut signifier qu'
il y a un des Rois qui sont maintenant viuans qui veut rediger vostre liberte
en seruirude, et casser, et annuller vos loix desia establies, et fermes.

Ceci entendu, les Samiens s' attristerent bien fort; Or en peu de temps apres,
ils receureut lettres de Cresus Roy de Lydiens, par lesquelles il leur
commandoit, que tous les ans ils luy payassent tribut, que s' ils ne luy
vouloient obeir, ils s' attendissent d'auoir la guerre, Parquoy ils
consultoient entr' eux, car ils craignoyent d'estre sous la Domination du
Cresus; Toutesfois ils pensoient estre chose vtile et profitable de demander
conseil a l' Esope, Ce qu' ils feirent, Esope donc leur did, Quand les
principaux d'entre vous auront done sentence, qu'il faudra payer tribute au
Roy Cresus, vous n'aurez plus besoin de mon conseil; Mais je vous feray un
recit par lequel vous scaurez ce qui vous est bon de fair; Fortune nous monste
en cette vie deux moyens, l'vn de liberte, le commencement du quel est
difficile a attaindre, mais l'issue est belle, et plain; l'autre de servitude,
le commencement duquel est facile et accessible, mais la fin laborieuse, et
fascheuse. Ceci any, les Samiens commencerent a protester; Comme ainsi soit,
que nous soyons francs, et libres, nous ne voulons point estre seruiteurs pour
neant. Parquoy ils r' envoyerent l'Ambassadeur sans accord de paix; Ce qu'
ayant entendu Cresus, il delibera de fair guerre aux Samiens; Mais
l'Ambassadeur luy dit, Tu ne pourras vaincre les Samiens tandis qu' Esope sera
auec eux, et qu'ils besongneront par son conseil; Or tu feras bien mieux (O
Roy) si tu leur enuoyes Ambassadeurs, et leur demandes Esope, leur promettant
que tu les recompenseras en d'autres chooses, et que tu leur donneras relasche
de ce que tu leur demandes, Lors parauanture tu les pourras surmonter, Cresus
le croyant, y enuoya un Ambassadeur, par lequel il leur demandoit Esope, Et les
Samiens consulterent de donner Esope; Ce qu' Esope ayant entendu vint au milieu
d'assemble, et leur did, Habitans du Samos, Je n'estime pas peu de chose,
certes, que je vay seruir aux pieds du Roy Cresus, mais Je vous veux raconter,
vne fable; Au temps que les bestes parloient ensemble, les loups menerent
Guerre contre les brebis; Or les chiens estoient du cost des brebis et
^hassoient les loups; Les loups leurs envoierent Ambassadeurs, et leurs
manderent, que si else vouloyent viuure en paix, et oster tout soupcon de
guerre else leur enuoiassent les chiens. Les ouailles facilement induites a
cette sottise donnerent les chiens, parquoy les loups meirent en pieces les
chiens, et faciliment tuerent les brebis; Les Samiens donc entendants le sense
de la fable conclurent entr' eux de retenir Esope, mais il ne voulut point,
ains il desancra auec l'Ambassadeur, et s' en alla au Roy Cresus.

Or quand ils arriuerent en Lydie, le Roy Cresus voyant ce beau tronc deuant
soy, se courrouca, disant, Voyez, comme ce petit homme m' a empesche de
subjuguer vne si grande Isle; Lors Esope did, Roy tres-puissant, Je ne suis
point venu verse toy ny par force, ny par necessite, mais seulement de mon bon
gre; Je te pris, permets un peu, que je parle a toy; Il y eut iadis, un homme
qui prenant et tuant des sauterelles, print aussi vne cigale, et quand il la
vouloit tuer, la Cigale did, Ne me tue point fans cause, car je fay null
dommage aux bleds, et ne fay tort en chose quelconque, mais seulement je
rejouys les passans par l'agreeable son qui se form du mouement de mes aisles;
Tu ne trouueras rien en me, que le chant; Cecy dit, l' homme luy donna conge,
et la laissa aller sans luy fair mal; Et moy aussi (O Roy magnanime) Je ne
peux attaindre plus haut qu'a tes pieds; Ne me tue point sans cause, car je ne
peux fair dommage a autruy, mais en ce laid corpse, je parle franchement.

Le Roy oyant ainsi parler Esope non seulement s' esmerveilla, mais aussi en
eut Compassion, et luy did, Tu n' as pas ta vie sauie de par moy, mais par la
divine Destin, Parquoy, Demand ce que tu voudras, et tu l'auras, Esope luy
did, Sire, Toute la priere que j' ay a te fair, c' est qu' il te plaise
laisser en paix les Samiens. Ce que le Roy luy accorda; Et Esope se jettant a
ses pieds le remercia tres-humblement.

Ce fut en ce mesme temps, qu' Esope composa ses Fables, lesquelles il laissa
auec Roy Cresus, et sont encore aujour-d'-huy en sa royale Maison de Lydie; Or
ayant charge de l'Ambassade, et des lettres du Roy pour l'accord fait auec les
Samiens, il retourna en la ville de Samos. Les Samiens donc vindrent au deuant
de luy, et luy apporterent chappeaux de fleurs, et a cause de luy, ordonnerent
Danses, et jeux publiques, Esope leut les lettres du Roy, et par icelles il
leur demonstrast, comment il recompensoit sa liberte que le peuple luy auoit
donnee par vne autre liberte, laquelle il auoit impetree du Roy; Puis apres,
delaissant l' Isle de Samos il alloit par tout le monde disputant auec
Philosophes, Il arriua donc en Babylone, et en demonstrant la sa doctrine il
acquist la grace du Roy Lycerus, tellement qu' il fut un des plus Grands de sa
Court.

Or en ce temps la, les Rois auoient paix ensemble, et pour plaisir s'
entr'-envoioyent l'vn a l'autre par lettres, des questions Sophistiques, et
ceux qui les pouuoient soudre receuoient des autres tributs, selon qu' il
estoit accord entr' eux, et ceux qui ne pouuoient soudre, payoient les tributs
eux mesmes. Esope donc entendant tous les problemes qui estoient enuoiez a Roy
Lycerus rendoit la solution d'iceux, et par ce moyen le Roy acqueroit grand
bruit, Il enuoioit aussi, en Nom de Lycerus, plusieurs questions aux autres
Rois, lesquelles ils ne pouuoient resoudre, parquoy son Roy receuoit grands
tributs.

Or Esope se voyant, sans enfans, adopta un Gentil-homme lequel auoit Nom
Ennus, et le presentant au Roy, le luy recommanda comme son propre fills; Mais
un peu apres, Ennus eut affair auec la concubine d' Esope qui l'auoit adopte.
Esope, scachant ceci, vouloit chasser Ennus de sa maison, lequel soudainement
contrefit vne lettre, par lequelle il donnoit a entendre, au nom d' Esope, qu'
il estoit pressed d'adherer plustost a ceux qui enuoioient au Roy Lycerus des
questions et problemes, qu' au Roy Lycerus mesme, Et ayant seelle la lettre de
l'anneau d' Esope, la donna au Roy, Le Roy adjoustant foy au seau, tout
incontinent fut enflamme d'ire, et commanda a Hermippus que sans examen
quelconque, il allast tuer Esope comme traitre; Mais Hermippus, qui autrefois
estoit amy d' Esope, luy fut encore pour cette fois amy, car il le cacha dedans
un sepulcher, en sort que null ne le sceut, et secrettement il le nourrit. Or
Ennus eut toute la charge, et government qu' auoit Esope par le commandment du
Roy. Quelque temps apres, Nectenabo Roy des Egyptiens ayant entendu qu' Esope
estoit mort, envoya incontinent vne lettre a Lycerus, et luy mandoit qu' il luy
envoyast des maistres massons qui peussent edifier vne Tour qui ne touchast ny
le ciel, ny la Terre, et un autre qui respondist a toutes chooses qu' il
demanderoit, que s' il le pouuoit fair, il receueroit tribut, si non, il le
payeroit. Lycerus ayant leu les lettres fut remply de tristesse, pour ce que
null de ses amiss ne pouuoit entendre la question de la Tour; Or disoit il, qu'
il auoit perdu le pillier et establissement de son Royaume c' est ascauoir
Esope. Hermippus cognoissant le douleur qu' auoit le Roy pour la mort d' Esope,
s' addressa au Roy, et luy did qu' Esope viuoit, et qu' il ne l'auoit voulu
tuer, scachant que le Roy se repenteroit de cette execution; Le Roy fut
resiouy, parquoy Esope lui fut amene tout ord, et crasseux, et quand le Roy le
vid, il pleura, et commanda qu' il fut laue, nettoye, et accoustre d'vne autre
sort. Cecy fait, Esope se purgea de ce que faussement il auoit este accuse, et
respondit pertinement aux causes de son accusation, parquoy le Roy vouloit
fair tuer Ennus, mais Esope impetra pardon du Roy pour Ennus.

Puis apres, le Roy Lycerus donna la lettre de Nectenabo a Esope pour la lire,
laquelle, quand il eut leave, il entendit incontinent la solution de la question
et se print a rire, et feit rescrire au Roy Nectenabo que quand l' hyuer seroit
pass, on luy enuoyeroit des Ouuriers qui luy bastiroient sa Tour, et un Homme
qui respondroit a toutes ses questions. Lycerus donc renvoya les Ambassadeurs
d' Egypt, et redonna a Esope toute sa premiere administration, et luy rendit
Ennus, et tout son bien.

Ennus estant return, Esope le receut benignement, et ne le contrista en
rien, mais le traitta derechef comme son propre fills, et enter autres chooses
luy donna plusieurs belles Instructions, don't les principales furent celles-cy.

Mon Fills aim Dieu sur toutes chooses, Honor le Roy, et monstre toy terrible a
tes ennemis, a celle fin qu'ils ne te mesprisent; Sois a tes amiss prive,
facile, affable, et benign, afin qu'ils soient enclins a te bien vouloir.
Souhaite, encore que tes Ennemis deuiennent malades, et soient pauures, afin
qu'ils ne te puissent nuire, mais en toutes chooses pry bien pour tes amiss. Ne
te depars jamais de ta femme, de peur qu'elle ne vueille fair essay d'vn autre
homme, car le sex des femmes est ledger, et volage, et quand else sont
amadouees par flatteries, else pensent plus du mal. Rejette toute parole
legiere; Sois sobre de ta langue, Ne port point d'envie a ceux qui font bien,
mais esiouys toy auec eux, car estant enuieux, tu en rapporteras le plus grand
dommage, Aye soin de tes domestiques, afin que non seulement ils te craignent
comme seigneur, mais qu' ils to ayent en reverence comme Bienfaicteur, N' ayes
point de honte d'apprendre tousiours de mieux en mieux; Ne descouure point ton
secret a ta femme, car elle cherche tousiours occasion comment elle puisse
estre ta maitresse, Amasse tous les jours pour le lendemain, car il vaut mieux
mourir, et delaisser a ses ennemis, que viure, et auoir besoin de ses amiss,
Salve volonteirs ceux que tu rencontres, scachant que la queue du chien done
du pain a son Maistre. Ne te repens point de ta bonte. Chasse le mes disant de
ta maison, car ce que tu fais, et dis, il le r' apportera aux autres. Fay chose
qui ne te contriste point; Ne te fasche point de ce qu'il to aduiendra. Ne
recoy jamais mauuais conseil, et n' ensui point la vie des meschans.

Ennus estant instruit de toutes ces chooses par Esope, et ayant frappe ainsi
que d'vne fleche, tant par la parole d' Esope, que par sa propre conscience
mourut incontinent apres.

Apres ce, Esope appella tous les oiseleurs, et leur commanda de prendre quatre
poussins d'aigles; Or il les eut, et les nourrit (comme on dit) et les
instruisit, (a quoy toutesfois nous n' adjoustons pas grande foy) et les aprint
a porter, envolant bien haut, des enfans dedans des corbeilles pendues a leur
col, et les duisoit a ceste obeissance, en sort qu' ils volassent ou les
garcons voudroient aller, ou en l'air bien haut, ou en bas en terre, Apres que
l' hyuer fut pass, et que le printemps commencoit a rire, Esope appresta tout
ce qui estoit necessaire pour un tell voyage, et print les garcons, et les
aigles, et s' en alla en Egypt, estonnant, et mettant en diuerses pensees tout
le monde par un tell spectacle.

Incontinent que le Roy des Egyptiens entendit qu' Esope estoit arrive, il did
a ses amiss Je suis trompe, car j' auois ouy dire que Esope estoit mort. Le
lendemain Nectenabo commanda que ses conseillers fussent tous vestus de pour
robbes blanches, et il en luy prit de pour d'vne rouge, se mettant sur la test
vne couronne des pierres pretieuses, Et estant assis en son seige Royal il feit
entrer Esope, et en entrant luy demanda A qui me compares tu Esope, et ceux qui
sont auec moy? Esope respondit, Je te compare au soleil du printemps, et ceux
qui sont a l'entour de toy aux espics meurs; Le Roy l'ayant en l'admiration,
luy offrit des grands dons.

Or le lendemain, le Roy estant au contraire vestu d'vne rob blanch, en feit
a ses conseillers prendre de rouges, et feit entrer derechef Esope, et luy
demanda, Qui te semble je, et ceux qui sont auec moy? Je te compare au soleil,
did Esope, et ceux qui sont aupres de toy, aux rayons du soleil, et Nectenabo
luy dit, Je n' estime rien Lycerus au prix de moy, et Esope souriant dit Ne
parle point ainsi legerement de Lycerus, O Roy, car si tu compares ton regne a
ton peuple, il reluira comme le soleil, mais si tu viens a to esgaler a
Lycerus, il s' en faudra bien peu, que toute cette eclat ne paroisse vne grande
obscurite. Nectenabo estonnee de ceste responce tant bien faite a propos, luy
demanda, Nous as tu amene des massons pour bastir le Tour? Esope luy dit Ils
sont prests, et il ne rest plus, qu' a leur monstrer le lieu, ou tu veux qu'on
fasse les bastimens.

Le Roy donc sortit horse de la ville, et vint a la campaign, et luy monstra un
lieu compass. Esope donc amena aux quatre coings de ce lieu, lequel luy auoit
este monstre, les quatre Aigles, auec les quatre juuenceaux, pendus aux
corbeilles, et apres qu' il eut done en main a chacun son instrument de masson
il commanda aux aigles de s' envoler, Else s' enleuerent incontinent, et lors
que ces maistres ouuriers se virent bien haut, ils se mirent a crier ensemble,
Donnez nous de pierres? Donnez nous de la chaux? Donnez nous du Bois, et toutes
autres chooses propres pour bastir? Nectenabo voyant ces garcons monter en haut
par le moyen des aigles, dit, D'ou nous sont venus ces hommes volans? et Esope
luy dit, Lycerus a plusieurs de tells, et toy, jasoit, que tu sois homme, tu te
veux comparer a un Roy, semblable aux Dieux? Nectenabo luy dit, Esope, Je suis
vancu, Il ne me rest plus qu' a te fair certaines demandes pour voir si tu me
scauras respondre, J' ay icy, dit il, les juments, qui me semblent
merueilleuses, car quand else oyent hinner les cheuaux qui sont en Babylone,
else concoiuent incontinent. C' est a toy maintenant a monstrer, ( si tu es
assez habile homme) la cause de cette merveille, Esope luy dit, Sire, Je te,
respondra demain.

Estant donc de retour en son hostellerie il feit prendre un chat par les
valets du logis, et le mener par toute la ville publiquement, et le battre en
allant. Les Egyptiens, qui auoyent c' este best en reverence, le voyans ainsi
mal mean, ils accourent tous, et arracherent le pauure Chat des mains de ceux
qui le battoient et r' apporterent au Roy ce qui auoit este fait. Le Roy
appella Esope, et luy did, Ne scauois tu pas que nous auons le chat en
reverence comme nostre Dieu? Pourquoy donc as tu feit ceci? Esope luy dit, Sire
Nectenabo, ce chat, la nuit passee, a fait dommage au Roy Lycerus, car il luy a
tue son coq qui estoit aspre au combat, et magnanime, et luy sonnoit, et
chantoit toutes les heures de la nuit, Le Roy luy dit, N' as tu point honte de
mentir? Comment est il possible que le chat en vne nuit seule soit all d'
Egypt en Babylone, Lors Esope en souriant luy dit, Et comment Sire, peuuent
conceuoir les juments d' Egypt en oyant hinnir les cheuaux de Babylone? Le
Roy, ceci entendu, estima grandement la prudence d' Esope.

Puis apres, le Roy fit venir de la ville d' Heliopolis hommes expertes en
questions Sophistiques, et leur parlant de la vivacite d' Esope les inuita en
un banquet, auquel se deuoit trouner Esope, Apres qu' ils furent assis a la
table, l'vn de ces Heliopolitains dit a Esope, Je suis enuoye de par mon Dieu,
pour te demander la solution d'vne question; Esope luy dit, Tu ments, car Dieu
n'a besoin de s' enquerir, et apprendre d'vn homme, Or non seulement to accuses
toy mesme, mais aussi ton Dieu, un autre luy dit, Il y a un grand Temple et en
iceluy un pillier contenant douze villes, et chacune d'icelles est soustenue de
trente poutres lesquelles deux Femmes enuironnent; Lors Esope dit, Les enfans
de nostre pays soudront bien ceste question. Le Temple, c' est ce monde; Le
pillier c' est l'An, les villes sont les mois, Et les poutres sont les jours du
mois, le jour et la nuit sont les deux femmes, lesquelles succedent l'vne a
l'autre.

Le lendemain Nectenabo appella ses amiss, et leur dit, Cet Esope sera cause que
nous deurons payer le tribut a Roy Lycerus, et l'vn entr' eux dit, Nous luy
proposerons des questions lesquelles nous mesmes n'auons jamais sceues, ny,
ouyes. Et Esope leur dit; Je vous feray demain responce sur cecy; Il s' en alla
donc, et fit un petit escrit, auquel estoit contenu, Nectenabo confess deuoir
a Lycerus mill Talents, et retournant le lendemain, il bailla cest escrit au
Roy, Or auant que le Roy l'ouurit, tous ses amiss luy dirent, Et nous scauons
cecy, et l'auons ouy, et vrayement nous le scauons; Et Esope leur dit, Je vous
remercie de ce que vous accordez a la debte Or quand le Roy Nectenabo eut ouy
la confession de la debte, Il dit a ses gens, Je ne dois rien, et toutesfois
vous tesmoignez tous contre moy, les autres changeant d'opinion dirent, nous en
scauons rien, ne nous n' en auons ouy parler, Lors Esope dict, Si est ainsi
vous auez la resolution de vostre question; Adonc Nectenabo s' esbaissant dit,
Le Roy Lycerus est heureux d'auoir un personnage si scauant en son royaume,
Parquoy il deliura les tributs accordez a Esope, et le r' envoya en paix.

Esope retournant en Babylone raconta au Roy Lycerus tout ce' qu' il auoit fait
en Egypt, et luy donna le tribut que Nectenabo luy enuoioit; Pour recompense
de quoy, Lycerus luy fit eriger vne statue d'or. Un peu de temps apres, Esope
delibera d'aller en Greece, et ayant fait son accord auec le Roy, et prins conge
de luy, il partit de Babylone, soubs cette promise toutesfois, qu'il y
retourneroit, et qu' il y passeroit la rest de sa vie. Or apres qu' il eut
pass par les villes de Greece et demonstre son scauoir, il vint aussi en
Delphos, Les Delphiens s' ouyrent volonteirs parler, mais ils ne luy feirent
honneur, ne reverence, Et regardant a eux, il leur dit, Hommes Delphiens il me
vient en fantasy que vous ressembles a quelque piece du bois qui va flottant
sur la mer, car en le voyant de loin quand il est agite par les vagues, nous
l'estimons beaucoup, mais quand il est pres de nous il'apparoit de petit pris,
Et moy aussi quand j' estois loin de vostre ville, je vous auois en admiration
comme dignes de grande louange, mais depuis que je suis arrive a icy, Je vous
ay trouuez (si ainsi il faut dire) plus inutiles que tous les autres, parquoy
j' ay este deceu, Les Delphiens oyants ce propos, et craignans qu' Esope
passant par les autres villes, ne mesdist aucunement d'eux, conspirerent de le
tuer meschamment. Ils prindrent donc vne phiole d'or, de temple d' Apollon
lequel estoit en leur ville, et la mirent secrettement dedans la malle d'
Esope. Or Esope, ignorant la conspiration des Delphiens, et sortant de leur
ville, s' en alloit en Phocis; Mais le Delphiens le suyuirent, si bien que
l'ayant atteint, ils s' en saisirent, et l'accuserent du Sacrilege; Esope nioit
auoir commis aucun larcin; Les autres fouillans par force en ses malles, et
bouges, trouuerent la phiole d'or, laquelle ils prindrent, et montrerent a tous
les citoyens auec grand bruit et tumulte, Esope donc, cognoissant leur
tromperies et meschantez, les pria qu'ils le laissassent aller; mais non
seulement ils ne luy donnerent conge, ains ils le meirent en prison comme un
sacrilege, ayants touts conclu en sa mort pour la voix d'vn chacun. Or Esope
voyant que par nulle subtilite il ne pouuoit eschapper de ce malheur, il se
plaignoit soy mesme, estant assis en la prison. L' un de ses amiss, lequel auoit
nom Damas, vint a luy, et le voyant ainsi plaindre luy demanda la cause de sa
plainte, et Esope luy dit, Vne femme auoit nouellement enseuely son mary, et
allant tous les jours au tombeau pleuroit, Or un rustique labouroit pres de ce
tombeau, et fut surpris de l'amour de ceste femme, et delaissant ses baeufs, s'
en alla jusq' au tombeau, et estant la assis, pleuroit auec la femme, La femme
luy demanda pourquoy il pleuroit ainsi, pource dit il, que j' ay perdu ma femme
qui estoit belle, et honest, et apres que j' aura pleure, je sera releue de ma
tristesse. Et la femme luy dit, Il m' est aduenu semblablement, et le paisant
luy dit, Si tous deux sommes tombez en semblable Inconvenient, qui empesche que
nous ne soyons mariez ensemble? car je to aimeray comme j' aimoy ma femme, et
tu m' aimeras comme tu faisois ton mary; La femme le croyant ils s' accorderent
ensemble. Et un larron vint cependant, et delia les baeufs, et les chassa
deuant soy. Or le laboureur retourna, et apres n' auoir trouue ses baeufs
commenca a se lamenter, et grandement plaindre; La femme vint apres, et le
voyant ainsi pleurer luy demanda, Pourquoy, pleures tu encores? Il luy dit,
maintenant je pleure a bon escient; J' en fay de mesme, conclud Esope, qui
estant sauue cy-deuant des plusieurs Dangers, je ne voy point maintenant qu' il
y ait moyen de de me tirer de celuy cy, et n' attens d'aucun lieu la
deliverance de mon mal.

Ces chooses estant passees, les Delphiens vindrent a Esope, et le tirerent horse
de prison pour le menir en quelque haut lieu pour le jetter d'iceluy en bas. Or
il leur disoit ainsi, quand les bestes brutes parloient le Rat deuint amy de la
Grenouille, et la conuia a souper, et l'ayant mener au cellier d'vn rich
homme, ou il y auoit beaucoup de sorts de viandes, luy dit, Mange m' amie
Grenouille? Apres qu' ils eurent fait grand chere, la Grenouille aussi l'invita
a son festin; Mais ne te trauaille point, dit elle, en nageant, J' attacheray
bien ton pied au mien auec un filet delie, Cecy fait, elle sauta en l'estang,
et ce pendant qu' elle nageoit enter deux eaux, le pauure Rat s' estouffoit, et
en mourant, il dit, Helas tu me fais Mourir, mais un plus grand que toy me
vangera, Le pauure Rat ainsi mort nageoit sur l'eau, et lors un Aigle volant
par la, l'attrappa, et quand elle attira a soy, il attrappa aussi la Grenouille
qui estoit attache au fillet, et en ceste sort elle les deuora tous deux; Et
moy icy, dit Esope, Je suis mean par force a la mort, et sans raison vous m'y
trainez; mais j' aura qui me vengera, car Babylone, et toute la Greece vous
feront payer cher pour ma mort. Toutesfois les Delphiens ne luy pardonnerent
pas pourtant, Or Esope se retira au temple du Appollon, pour y estre en
seurete, mais iceux tous courroucez l'en retirerent, et le menoient encore au
lieu du supplice, ou auparauant qu' arriuer, il leur conta ceste Fable,
Escoutez moy Hommes de Delphos, l'aigle poursuiuoit le lieure, le pauure lieure
ne scachant ou se cacher se retira en la cauerne de l'escarbot le priant qu' il
le gardast du peril ou il estoit, Or l'escarbot, prioit l'Aigle qu' elle ne
tuast point le pauure suppliant, la priant de par le grand Dieu Jupiter qu'
elle ne dedaignast point sa petitesse, l'Aigle toute courroucee, frappant de
l'aile l'escarbot, mit le lieure en pieces et le mangea; l'escarbot irrite de
l'injure qu' on luy auoit faict, s' enuola auec l'Aigle, pour scauoir le lieu
ou estoit son nid, et y estant, roula ses oeufs du haut en bas, et les cassa;
l'Aigle imputant cecy a grand fascherie contre celuy qui auroit entreprins un
tell faict contre elle, fit son nid en plus haut lieu, et derechef l'escarbot y
alla, et jetta ses oeufs, parquoy l'Aigle despourueue de conseil, monta a
Jupiter (car on la dit estre sous sa guard) et mit en sa sauuegarde a ses
genoux la troisjeme portee de ses oeufs, les luy recommandant, et supliant qu'
il les gardast; Mais l'escarbot ayant feit vne pillule de fiens monta en haut
et la meit au sein du Jupiter, Jupiter se leuant pour secouer l'ordure, ayant
mis en oubli les oeufs de son Aigle, les jetta en bas, et les cassa; Mais apres
auoir sceu de l'escarbot qu' il auoit fait cela pour se vanger de l'Aigle (car
non seulement elle auoit faict injure a l'escarbot, mais aussi elle a commis
meschancete contre Jupiter) il parla ainsi a l'Aigle a son retour, C' est
l'escarbot qui to a insi contristee, et certes il a fait justement, Jupiter
donc ne voulant point que la Race des aigles defaillist, il conseilla a
l'escarbot qu'il feist son appoinctement auec la Aigle, l'escarbot ne s'y
voulut accorder, parquoy Jupiter remit la procreation des Aigles en autre
temps, que les Escarbots ne se monstrent point. Vos donc messeiurs de Delphos,
ne meprifez point ce Dieu a qui je me suis retire; combien qu' il ait qu' un
petit temple, car il ne lairra pas les meschans impunis.

Les Delphiens ne se soucians pas beaucoup de ce qui disoit Esope le menoit
droit a la mort, Esope voyant que nullement il ne les pouuoit amollir, leur
dit, derechef. Hommes cruels, et meurtriers, oyez! Un laboureur devint vieil
aux champs, et pource qu'il n' auoit jamais veu la ville, il prioit ceux de sa
maison qu' il la peut voir; Ses gens attellerent les asnes, et mirent le pauure
veillard sur le chariot, et le laisserent aller tout seul, En allant, l'air
deuint obscur a cause des orages, et de la pluye, et ainsi par ces tenebres,
les asnes se fouruoyerent du chemin, et allans deca, et dela, jetterent ce
pauure homme en un fosse, Lors en ce mal-encontre il disoit, Helas Jupiter en
quoy to ay Je offense que tant miserablement je suis icy occis, et
singulierement que je ne suis point tue par cheuaux courageux, ne par bons
mulets, mais par mal heureuses asnes? Et maintenant, Esope conclud, Je suis
aussi marri de ce que je suis tue, non pas par nobles gens et honourables, mais
par gens inutiles, et meschans.

Estant pres d'estre jette en bas il dit encore ceste Fable. Un Homme, aimant
fort sa fille, enuoya sa femme aux champs, et estant seul auec sa fille, il la
print a force. La fille luy did, Mon Pere, tu fais meschamment, j' aymerois
beaucoup mieux estre deshonoree par plusieurs autres, que de toy qui m' as
engendre, Je die aussi cecy maintenant contre vous (O meschans Delphiens) que
jaymerois mieux tomber en tous les perils de la mer, aux gouffres, et Syrtes en
Affrique, que mourir injustement, et sans cause par vos mains; Je maudis donc
vostre pays, et appelle les dieux en tesmoignage que je meurs contre toute
justice et equite, lesquels m' exauceront et vengeront; Ils le mirent donc sur
le coupet d'une roche, et le jetterent du haut en bas. Or un peu de temps
apres, estans affligez de peste, ils sceurent par dinine responce, qu' il
failloit que Reparation fut faite de la mort d' Esope; lesquels se sentans
coulpables, et scachans qu' injustement il auoit este tue, luy esleuerent vne
pyramide, Et les principaux de Greece, et tous gens scauans, quand ils
entendirent ce qu' on fait a Esope, allerent en Delphos, et s' estans enformez
de ceux qui estoient cause de la mort d' Esope, ils en firent eux mesmes la
vengeance.

Fin de la VIE d' ESOPE.
AESOPI, Philosophice Fabulantis, VITA.
MUlti, et magni Nominis, viri, rerum humanarum Naturam assecuti sunt, and
Posteritati commendarunt, Aesopus vero, non sine Numine, videtur multis
parasangis superasse omnes in ea Philosophiae part quae ad Ethicam, seu
moralem disciplinam, pertinet; nam neque definiendo, nec ratiocinando secundum
Aristotelem, neque ex Historia admonendo, secundum Socratem, and Platonem, sed
fabulis prorsus erudiendo, pro statu illius temporis, sic audientium animos
aucupatus est, ut pudeat homines ratione praeditos facere, aut sentire quidem,
quae bruta animalia deliberate evitasse singuntur, ex quibus aliqua, pericula
imminentia diverterunt, altera maximam utilitatem opportune consecuta sunt.
Aesopus igitur, qui vitam suam, Idaeam Reipublicae Philosophicae, constituerat,
and qui rebus, magis quam v^rbis, Philosophum egit, Natione fuit Phryx, ex
Ammorio oppido Phrygiae cognomento Magnae, sed Condition fuit Servus: Quam
pulchre igitur and quam vere fuit illud Platonis Dictum, in suo Gorgia,
Plerunque inter se sunt contraria, Lex et Natura.

Aesopi animum Natura liberum praestabat, sed Fortunae lex in servitium
tradidit; At ne sic quidem Animi libertatem potuit corrumpere, sed quamvis ad
res varias, and ad incerta loca, corpus transtulerat, a propria tamen sede
animum movere non potuit. Aesopus enim non solum servus fuit, sed and omnium
hominum, in aetate qua degebat, deformosissimus, nam obstipo fuit and acuto
capite, depressis naribus, collo reclivi, labris prominentibus, color niger,
unde and nomen adeptus est (Idem enim Aesopus significat quod Aethiops;)
praeterea ventrosus fuit, valgus, and incurvus, forsitan and Thersiten in
Homero turpitudine formae superavit; sed quod pessimum omnium in eo fuit
tardiloquentia, and vox blaesa, and inarticulate, Quae omnia videntur
servitutem Aesopo destinasse; mirum etenim fuisset si tam inhabili and
indecenti corpore servitutis jugum aufugere potuisset: sed quamvis corpore
tali, animo solertissimo natura extitit, and ad omne figmentum faelicissimus.

Magister ipsius, tanquam ad nullum domesticum opus utilem, ad fodiendum in
agris emisit; Aesopus egressus alacriter operi incumbebat, profecto ad agros
Hero ut laborantes observaret, unus ex agricolis egregias ex arbore decerptas
ficus dono tulit; Ille vero fructus delectatus pulchritudine Agathopo Ministro
(hoc enim erat Puero nomen) transferri jussit, ut sibi a balneo revertenti
apponeret: Quum vero sic evenisset, ut Aesopus ob quandam necessitatem Heri
Domum ingrederetur, Agathopus occasion capta consilium tale conservo cuidam
obtulit, Impleamur, dixit, si placeat, ficubus, ac si Herus noster forsan
requisierit, nos contra Aesopum testes crimus, quod, in Domum ingressus, ficus
clam comederit, and huic figmento multa alia mendacia superstruemus; Nihil,
creed mihi, unus ad duos valebit, praesertim quum sine ullis probationibus
quicquam diducere conabitur.

Hoc consilio inito, ad opus accesserunt, and ficus devorantes, dicebant
singuli cum risu, Vae tibi infaelix Aesope! Quum igitur Herus a Balneo
rediisset, and sicus petiisset, audivissetque quod Aesopus eas comederat, ira
excandescens Aesopum ad se vocari jussit, and vocato ait, Itane (O execrande)
me contempsisti, ut in penu non dubitaveris ingredi, and paratas mihi ficus
comedere? Aesopus audiebat quidem and intelligebat, sed ob linguae tarditatem
nullo modo respondere poterat: Quum jam ad verbera traheretur, and delatores
vehementer instarent, procumbens ad heri pedes, ut paululum morae sibi
indulgeret, petivit; quo concesso, tepidam aquam attulit, and quum bibisset,
digitis in os demissis, rursus aquam tepidam solum ejecit, nondum enim per
totum illum diem cibum attigerat. Rogabat, igitur, ut idem and accusatores
facerent, ut manifestum fieret quisnam fuit qui ficus devorasset: Herus,
ingenium hominis admiratus, sic facere alios pepulit; Illi autem deliberaverunt
bibere quidem aquam, sed non in guttur demittere digitos, at per obliqua tantum
maxillarum, huc, illuc, circumferre. Vixdum autem biberant, quum, per tepidam
illam aquam nausea potantibus inducta, sicus comesas redderent: Tunc igitur and
maleficio Delatorum and calumnia ante oculos posita, Herus jussit servos flagro
vapulare, qui moesti dictum illud agnoverunt, Qui in alterum dolos struit sibi
inscius malum fabricat.

Sequenti die, Hero in urbem revecto, Aesopo vero, quemadmodum jussus fuerat,
in agris fodiente, Sacerdotes Dianae, five alii quidam homines in via errantes,
in Aesopum inciderunt, and per Jovem Hospitalem efflagitabant, ut viam
ostenderet quae in urbem duceret: Ille, quum sub Arboris umbram viros prius
adduxisset, frugalemque apposuisset coenam, in viam quam quaerebant induxit;
Viatores itaque tum ob hospitalitatem, tum ob conductum, mirum in modum, viro
devincti, manus in coelum elevarunt, et multis precibus benefactorem remunerati
sunt.

Aesopus reversus, et in somnum lapsus, prae assiduo labor, and torrido solis
aestu, visus est fortunam sibi astantem videre, and solutionem linguae, and
sermonis habilitatem, and Fabularum Sapientiam l^^gientem, and non longo post
tempore excitatus, Papae, exclamavit, ut suaviter dormivi, et quam pulchrum
somnium videre mihi visus sum, and ecce expedite loquor, Bos, Asinus, Rastrum,
et omnia alia verba, facile pronuntiare possum; and been intelligo unde mihi
Bonum hoc accesserit, quia enim pius in hospites fui, propitium mihi Numen
consecutus sum: Ergo benefacere bona plenum est spe. Sic Aesopus facto laetatus
rursum coepit fodere. Sed Praefecto, agri, cui Zenas nomen erat, ad operarios
profecto, horum unum, quoniam erraverat in opere, fuste punivit; Aesopus autem
exclamavit, Cur sic verberas eum qui nulla injuria te affecit? Cur omnibus tam
temere plagas quotidie ingeris? Renunciabo Hero profecto. Quae quum Zenas
accepisset, non mediocriter obstupuit, and secum ait, Quod Aesopus loqui
coeperit nihil mihi emolumenti foret; Praeveniens igitur, ipsum coram Domino
accusabo, antequam ipse hoc idem faciat, and me Herus procuratione privet. Haec
secum murmurans, ad urbem conversus, domi illius se contulit: Caeterum quum
turbatus and front parum laeta accessisset, Salve, inquit, Here; cui Ille,
Quid perturbatus ades, Zenas respondebat? Res quaedam miranda in agro accidit:
Et Herus, Nunquid Arbor ante tempus abortivum fructum tulit? An Jumentum
aliquod praeter Naturam genuit? Et ille, Non, Non, Sed Aesopus, qui antea pene
mutus erat, nunc loqui coepit; Et Herus, Sic tibi nihil boni eveniat
existimanti hoc monstrum esse: Et ille, Mitto opprobria quae in me Aesopus
contumeliose dixit; In te autem, and in Deos ipsos horrende conviciatur. His
Herus percitus, Zena, ait, tibi Aesopum trado, vende, dona, quod vis de eo
facito.

Quum Zenas in potestate sua Aesopum accepisset, and in eum absolutum imperium
haberet, Aesopo renuntiavit; cui Aesopus placide dixit, Quodcunque volueris
effice. Forte vero quum Mercator quidam Jumenta quaereret emere, and propterea
per agrum illum ubi Aesopus laboravit iter faceret, and Zenam pro Jumentis
rogavit; Zenas respondit, Jumenta non habeo, sed si masculum mancipium emere
vis in promptu habeo. Quum vero mercator ostendi sibi servulum petiisset, et
Zenas Aesopum accersisset, mercator eum intuens, and cachinnatus, dixit, Vnde
tibi haec olla? Vtrunt truncus est arboris, an Homo? Hic, nisi vocem haberet,
plane mihi videretur esse uter inflatus; Quare mihi Iter rupisti hujus Piaculi
gratia? Haec dicens abivit. Aesopus autem insecutus ipsum; Mane, inquit: cui
Mercator conversus, Abi, inquit, a me sordidissime canis: Et Aesopus, Dic mihi,
cujus rei gratia huc venisti? Et Mercator, Sceleste, ut aliquid boni emerem,
tui non egeo, quod tam inutilis es: Et Aesopus, Eme me, and si qua est fides,
plurimum te juvare possum: and ille, Qua in re, quum penitus mihi odium sis,
utilis esse potes? Et Aesopus, Nonne domi habes pueros stentes and turbulentos?
His praefice me Paedagogum, and omnino eis pro larva ero; Ridens igitur
Mercator, Zenae dixit, Quanti, malum hoc vendis? cui Zenas, tribus obolis;
Mercator statim tres obolos solvens, Nihil, dixit, exposui, and Nihil emi.

Quum igitur iter fecissent, ac pervenissent in suam Domum, pueruli duo qui
adhuc materna sugebant ubera, Aesopo viso, perturbati exclamaverunt, Et Aesopus
statim Mercatori dixit, Habes jam mei promissi probationem: Ille vero ridens;
Ingressus, inquit, saluta conservos tuos? Introgressum autem ac salutantem quum
viderunt illi, Quodnam malum, inquiunt, Hero nostro contigit, ut servulum tam
deformem emerit? sed ut videtur prosascino Domus, ad avertendum omne malum,
hunc adeptus est. Non multo vero post Mercator, apparari res ad iter servis
mandavit, quod postridie in Asiam profecturus esset. Illi igitur statim vasa
distribuebant; Aesopus autem provide rogavit, levissimum onus sibi concedi,
utpote nuper empto, and nondum ad haec ministeria exercitato; His autem, and si
nihil portare velit, veniam praebentibus; Ille, non oportere, dixit, omnibus
laborantibus se solum inutilem esse: His igitur, quod portare vellet
permittentibus, quum huc, and illuc circumspexisset, and vasa diversa
congregasset, una cum saccis, stramentis, and canistris, unum canistrum panis
plenum quem duo portare debebant sibi imponi poscebat; Illi autem ridentes, and
nihil stultius esse Aesopo affirmantes, qui paulo antea levissimum rogabat
portare onus, and nunc omnium gravissimum elegerat, oportere tamen desiderio
ejus satisfacere dicentes, sublatum canistrum Aesopo imponebant: Aesopus,
humeris onere gravatis, huc and illuc dimovebatur; Hunc videns Mercator,
admiratus est, and inquit, Aesopus est ad laborandum promptus, and jam suum
pretium persolvit, jumenti enim onus, misellus portat. Quum autem in Hora
prandii divertissent, Aesopus, qui jussus fuit panes unicuique distribuere,
semivacuum canistrum, multis comedentibus, fecit, unde post prandium leviore
onere facto, alacrius incedebat; Verum vespere quoque pane illic quo
diverterant distributo, postera die, vacuo humeris sublato canistro, primus
omnium ibat, ita ut conservis hunc praecurrentem videntibus, dubium esset,
utrum deformis esset Aesopus, an quispiam alius; Et quum propius accedentes
cognovissent eundem esse, admirabantur quod nigellus homuncio solertius omnibus
fecerit, quoniam qui facile consumerentur panes sustulit, quum illi stramenta
and reliquam supellectilem bajularent.

Mercator quum esset Ephesi, alia quidem mancipia cum lucro vendidit,
remanserunt autem tria, Grammaticus, Cantor, and Aesopus: Quum vero quidam ex
familiaribus Mercatori suasisset ut in Samum navigaret, tanquam ibi cum majori
lucro vendituro servulos, quum illic pervenisset, Grammaticum, and Cantorem
utrunque nova vest indutum in foro statuebat; sed Aesopum, quoniam totus erat
mendosus, and deformis, vest ex sacco ei circumposita medium inter utrunque
constituit, ut and videntes stuperent, dicentes, Vnde haec abhominatio quae and
alios obscurat? Aesopus autem, quamvis a multis morderetur, constanter tamen
stetit, ad ipsos intuens.

Xanthus Philosophus, qui tunc habitabat Sami, profectus in forum, and cernens
duos pueros belle ornatos in foro astantes, and in medio illorum Aesopum,
admiratus est Mercatoris Commentum, quod turpem in medio collocaverat, ut
appositione deformis, pulchriores quam re vera erant, alteri adolescentuli
apparerent; Et propius accedens percontatus est Cantorem, cujas esset? Et is,
Cappadox; Tum Xanthus, Quid igitur scis facere? Omnia respondebat Cantor; Ad
haec Aesopus risit: Sed Discipuli qui cum Xantho una erant, ut viderunt ipsum
ridentem, dentesque ostendentem, statim monstrum aliquod se videre
arbitrabantur, and little uno, Certe Hernia est, habens dentes, dicente; and
alio, Quidnam videns risit? Alio, non risisse sed rugisse: Omnibus autem
volentibus cognoscere cur risisset, unus illorum accedens Aesopo, inquit, Cujus
rei gratia risisti? Et is, Abscede marina Ovis: Illo vero, eo sermon funditus
confuso, repenteque secedente, Xanthus inquit Mercatori; Quanti pretii est
Cantor? Illo autem, mill obolorum, respondente, ad alterum ivit, insolito
vexatus pretio; Atque and hunc rogitante Philosopho, Cujusnam foret, and audito
Lydum esse, rursusque rogante, Quid ergo scis facere? Et illo respondente,
Omnia; iterum risit Aesopus: Ex Scholasticis autem quodam sciscitante, Quidnam
hic ad omnes ridet? alius ei dixit, Si and vis tu marinus vocari Hircus, roga,
quaeso. Interea Xanthus rursus rogavit Mercatorem, Quanti pretii Grammaticus;
and illo tribus millibus obolorum respondente, Philosophus aegre tulit tam
immensum pretium, and domi se ferebat. Discipulis autem petentibus, An non
placuerint ei servuli? Placent, respondebat, sed non in animo est emere
Mancipium pretiosum. Uno autem dicente, Sed quid impedit, ne turpis hic ematur?
qui idem obsequium, idem ministerium afferet, quod and alii; nos ergo pretium
illius exponemus. Xanthus respondet, Absurdum and ridiculum prorsus erit vos
solvisse pretium pro servulo, and me emisse: Praeterea and uxor mea, munditiae
studiosissima, nunquam feret a tam deformi serviri mancipio. Scholasticis
rursus dicentibus, sed nobilis est Sententia quae docet, quod, Foeminae non
sunt parendae; Xanthus dixit, Faciamus prius periculum, An sciat aliquid? ne
pretium incassum pereat. Accedens igitur ad Aesopum, Gaude, inquit; Cui statim
Aesopus, Numnam tristabar? Xanthus procedit, Saluto te: Et Aesopus, Et ego te.
Xanthus una cum aliis stupefactus inexpectato responso, rogavit, Cujas es? Ille
respondet, Niger. Xanthus iterum, Non hoc peto, sed unde natus es? Et is, Ex
ventre Matris meae. Et Xanthus rursus, Non hoc dico, sed in quo loco natus es?
Et ille, Non renunciavit mihi matter mea, Vtrum in loco sublimi, an in humili.
Et Philosophus, Quid autem facere nosti? Et ille, Nihil. Et Xanthus, Quomodo?
Aesopus respondet, Quoniam Hi duo se omnia novisse professi sunt, and mihi
nihil reliquerunt. Ad quae Scholastici vehementer admirantes, Per Deos dixerunt
optime respondet: Nullus enim Homo est qui omnia novit, and ob hanc Causam
etiam and ridebat. Rursus Xanthus inquit, Vis ut te emam? Cui Aesopus, Non hac
in re me consultore eges: Vtrum tibi melius esse videbitur, aut emere, aut non
emere, facias; Nemo enim quicquam vi facit; Hoc in tua positum est Voluntate:
Et si volueris, crumenae Januam aperi, and argentum numera; sin vero minime, Ne
mihi vitio vertas. Rursus igitur Discipuli inter se dixerunt, Per Deos nostrum
Praeceptorem antecellit. Xanthus vero quum dixisset, Si te emero, an non a me
ausugies? Aesopus ridens respondebat, Hoc si vellem facere nullo modo utar tuo
consilio, ut and tu, paulo ante, meo. Et Xanthus, Been dicis, sed deformis es.
Cui Aesopus, Mentem inspicere oportet, O Philosophe, and non gibbosum, non
deforme Corpus. Ad Mercatorem igitur accedens, Xanthus dixit ei, Quanti hunc
vendis? Cui Mercator, Cur tali modo vituperas meas merces? formosis etenim
pueris omissis deformem hunc elegisti: Alterum horum eme, and in illorum
Gratiam, Hunc autem Auctarium accipe. Non certes, respondit Xanthus, Deformem
hunc solum modo emam, praeterea Neminem. Habeas igitur, dixit Mercator, pro
sexaginta obolis: Et Discipuli, qui ad Xanthum pertinebant, obulos confestim
collatos liberaliter exposuerunt.

Aesopo, in Xanthi ministerium tralato, Publicani ingruentes aderant, and
venditione cognita, sciscitantur, Quis vendiderit, and quis emerit? At quum
utrumque puderet notos esse propter vilitatem pretii, Aesopus in medio stans
(sicut amictum exposuimus) exclamavit, Qui venditus est, Ego sum; Qui me emit,
hic est; Qui me vendidit, Ille est; Si vero ipsi prorsus tacuissent, quid
obstat, quo minus ipse liber sim? Publicani, diffusi risu, abierunt, donato
Xantho Vectigali. Aesopus igitur sequebatur Xanthum domi proficiscentem: Quum
autem meridianus Sol aestuabat, Xanthus inter ambulandum pallium attollens
mingebat; quod Aesopus observans, vestibus illius prensis, retro ad seipsum
Philosophum traxit, and inquit: Quam celerrime ut me vendas velim, aliter pocul
dubio aufugiam. Cui Xanthus, Quam ob rem? Quoniam, inquit, gravissimum est
taliservire Hero; si enim tu qui Herus es, and neminem times, non relaxationem
Naturae praebes, sed eundo mingis, si obtigerit me servum tuum ad aliquod mitti
ministerium, and inter eundum tale quid Natura exigat, necesse omnino fuerit
(turpe quidem dictu) currendo cacare. Et Xanthus, Hoc te turbat? Rationem tibi
quia sic feci, reddam; Stanti mihi Sol perussisset caput, and pedes torridum
terrae Solum, and urinae acrimonia olfactum offendisset. Et Aesopus, Vade
igitur, persuasisti mihi. Postquam autem usque ad domum Xanthi profecti sunt;
Xanthus jubens Aesopum manner ante vestibulum, quoniam elegantiusculam sibi
uxorem noverat, neque illico debere talem turpitudinem illi ostendi, antequam
aliquis illi urbaniora diceret: Ipse ingressus dixit, Domina, non etiam posthac
rejicies ministerium quod tibi meae pedissequae praestant; Jam enim ego Puerum
tibi emi, in quo videbis pulchritudinem qualem nunquam vidisti, qui and jam
ante vestibulum stat. Famulae Xanthi vera existimantes quae dicta fuerant inter
se non mediocri gaudio contendebant, cuinam ipsarum Sponsus destinatus sit.
Xanthus interea novum mancipium intus vocari jussit, una ex illis magis
accelerans and, ut arrhabonem, mandatum arripiens Aesopum foris quaesivit, and
non inventum, nomine vocavit; cui Aesopus confestim, Coram, quem quaeritis,
adsum. Ancilla autem stupefacta; Tune, inquit, es Aesopus? Et ille; Aesopus
sum. Ne ingrediaris, dixit Ancilla, sin facies, omnes illico fugiemus: Illa
haec dicente, egreditur and altera Ancilla, ac ut Aesopum vidit, Caedatur tua,
dixit, facies, and ingredere, sed ne appropinques mihi.

Aesopus autem Ingressus stetit coram Domina, quae ut eum vidisset, oculos
avertens ad Virum, Vnde hoc monstrum mihi attulisti, dixit, abjice ipsum a
facie mea: Et Xanthus, Satis tibi Domina, Ne nimium mordaciter succenseas servo
meo: Et illa, Videris mihi Xanthe jam me odisse, and causam quaerere uxorem
ducendi alteram, and forsan dum pudebat tibi aperte mihi dicere, Discede a Domo
mea, Canicipitem hunc apportasti, ut ejus aegre latura ministerium, a Domo tua
fugiam; Retribuas igitur mihi Dotem meam, ut abscedam.

Haec quum Xanthus audivisset, Aesopum objurgavit, quod nullum Responsum Uxori
dedit, quum inter eundum in Itinere faceta quaedam de mictu locutus fuerat:
Aesopus tandem iracunde protulit, Projice ipsam in Barathrum. Cui Xanthus, Tace
scelus! An nescis me illam ut meipsum amare? Et Aesopus, Pulchre sapientiam
profiteris, An Philosophus amat mulierculam? Et ille, Admodum quidem; Ad quae
Aesopus pulsato pede exclamavit, Xanthus Philosophus Vxorius est: Et versus
deinde ad Dominam, ait, Tu velles, O Domina, quod Dominus meus emisset tibi
servum Juvenem, bono habitu, and vigentem, qui te nudam in Balneo spectaret,
and tecum luderet in dedecus mariti. O Euripides, ut veneror te and aureum os
tuum talia dicentem; Multi sunt impetus fluctuum marinorum, multi fluminum and
Ignis calidi flatus; Dura est res paupertas, and Dura alia Infinita, tamen
nihil aeque durum ut mulier mala. Tu vero Domina, Philosophi quum sis Vxor,
serviri tibi noli a venustis adolescentulis, ne quo pacto contumeliam aliquam
viro tuo inflixeris.

Xanthi Uxor quum haec audisset, and nihil contradicere potuisset: Unde secum
aiebat, Vir meus pulchritudinem hanc venatus est; Nihilominus quamvis
sordidissime se gerit, and loquax nebulo est, and facetus, Reconciliabor ei:
Tum Xanthus, Aesope, reconciliata est tibi tua Hera; Et Aesopus, Ironice
loquens, Magna est res, inquit, placare mulierem. Et Xanthus, Cave, posthac ut
taceas, emi etenim te ad serviendum, non ad contradicendum.

Postera Die Xanthus, Aesopo sequi jusso, ad hortum quendam ivit, empturus
olera; Quum vero Olitor fasciculum olerum messuisset, Aesopus in manum accepit,
and Xantho soluturo Hortulano Pecuniam; Pace, inquit Hortulanus, tua, Domine,
Problema unum a te desidero: Et Xanthus, Quidnam est? Tum Ille; Quaenam est
Causa quod quae a me plantantur olera, quamvis and diligenter fodiantur, and
quotidie irrigantur, tardum tamen accipiunt Incrementum, quum illa quibus
spontanea est a terra germinatio, and si nulla cura adhibetur, iis tamen
celerior germinatio? Xanthus, licet ad Philosophum quaestio pertinebat, quum
nihil aliud sciret dicere, and hoc etiam ut caetera omnia a Divina Providentia
gubernari, inquit. Ad haec verba Aesopus risit; Ad quem Philosophus, Ridesne?
an derides? Et Aesopus, Derideo, inquit, sed non te, sed qui te docuit; Quae
enim a Divina Providentia fiunt, a sapientibus viris solutionem sortiuntur; Si
mihi permittas, ego hoc solvam problema: Xanthus ergo conversus Olitori dixit;
Dedecus mihi foret, qui in tantis Auditoriis disputaverim, nunc apud hortulanos
solvere problemata: Si autem Puero huic meo, qui rerum multarum consecutiones
callet, sophisma tuum proposueris, solutionem habebis quaesiti. Et statim
Hortulanus; Hiccine tam turpis literas novit? O Infaelicitatem nusquam
credendam! Sed narra, O amice, si quaesiti sensum nosti? Et Aesopus, Mulier,
inquit, quum ad secundas nuptias iverit, liberis ex priore viro susceptis, si
virum quoque invenerit filios ex priore Vxore genuisse, quos ipsa filios
eduxit, horum matter est, quos autem inven^ penes virum, Horum est Noverea.
Multam igitur in utrisque ostendit differentiam: Nam quos ex se genuit, amanter
and accurate nutrire perseverat, alienos vero partus odit, and invidia utens
illorum cibum diminuit, suisque filiis addit; Illos enim, quasi Natura
proprios, amat, odio autem habet qui ^iri sunt, quasi alienos. Eodem modo and
terra eorum quae ipsa ex se genuit matter est, quae autem tu plantas, little est
Noverca; cujus rei gratia, quae sua sunt, ut legitima, nutrit ac sovet, a te
autem plantatis, ut spuriis, non tantum alimenti tribuit. Hoc responso
delectatus Hortulanus, Creed mihi, inquit, magna me sollicitudine and
meditatione levasti; Abeas igitur, and gratis capias tecum tua olera, and
quoties tibi illis opus est, tanquam in proprium Hortum vadens accipe.

Paucis diebus praeterlapsis, Xantho iterum in Balneum profecto, quibusdam
amicis ibi inventis, Aesopum mittit, ut lentem in ollam ejectam coqueret; ille,
ut jussus erat, unum lentis granum in ollam jecit, quo cocto Xanthus una cum
amicis ad prandium venit, praefatus tamen quod tenue admodum esset futurum
prandium, utpote ex lent solummodo, quodque non oporteret varietate ferculorum
amicos judicare, sed probare voluntatem: Amicis annuentibus, and in domum
ingressis; Xanthus inquit, Da nobis a Balneo bibere, Aesope: Illo vero ex
defluxu balnei accipiente, and tradente; Xanthus faetore repletus, Hem, quid
hoc, inquit, Aesope? Et ille, a Balneo at jussisti. Xantho autem praesentia
amicorum iram compescente, and pelvim sibi apponi jubente; Aesopus pelvi
apposita stabat; and Xanthus, Vbinam est Aqua? Tum ille; Quae jussisti facere
effeci; Tu non dixisti injice aquam in pelvim, and lava pedes meos, and pone
soleas, and quaecunque deinceps? Quo audito, Xanthus amicis ait, Non Servum emi
sed Magistrum: Discumbentibus itaque ipsis, and Xantho Aesopum rogante, An
cocta sit lens? cochleari acceptum lentis granum tradidit; Xanthus accipiens,
and ratus gratia faciendi periculum coctionis, lentem accepisse, digitis
conterens, ait, Been cocta est, Affer: Illo aquam solum vacuante in scutellas,
and apponente, Xanthus rogat, Vbi est lens? Et Aesopus, accepisti ipsam. Itane
vero, inquit Xanthus, an unum saltem granum coxisti? Tum Aesopus, Maxim,
lentem etiam in singulari numero dixisti, non lentes in plurali, quod plures
significat. Xanthus ergo prorsus consilii inops, Viri socii, ait, Vilis hic
Homuncio prorsus ad Insaniam me rediget: Conversus deinde ad Aesopum, dixit,
Sed improbe, and ommum petulantissime, ne videar amicis injuriosus, abiens eme
quatuor porcinos pedes, and perceleriter coctos appone.

Dum pedes coquerentur, Xanthus causam quaerens ut Aesopum flagris caedat, quum
Aesopus fuit in re aliqua occupatus, unum ex pedibus, ex olla clanculum
auferens, occuluit; Paulo post Aesopus veniens, and ollam perscrutatus, ut tres
solos pedes vidit, cognovit statim sibi aliquas insidias esse factas, and in
stabulum cucurrit, and saginati Porci unum ex pedibus cultro amputans, and
pilis nudans, in ollam jecit, and cum caeteris concoxit; Xanthus vero veritus
ne Aesopus subreptum pedem non inveniens fugeret, rursus in ollam ipsum
injecit: Aesopo autem pedes in patinam evacuante, and quinque pedibus
apparentibus; Xanthus, Quid hoc, inquit, Aesope? quomodo quinque? Aesopus dein
interrogavit Xanthum, Quot pedes habent duo Porci? Xanthus respondebat, octo.
Tum Aesopus, Sunt ergo in hac patina quinque, and saginatus Porcus inferius
tripes pascitur. Quod Xanthus admodum moleste ferens, amicis inquit, An non
paulo dixi quod celerrime hic me ad Insaniam rediget? Et Aesopus, Here, An non
nosti id quod ex additione, and subductione, in quantitatem secundum rationalem
summam colligitur, non esse errorem? Xanthus igitur, nullam honestam inveniens
causam verberandi Aesopum, quievit.

Postridie autem unus ex Scholasticis sumptuosam apparans coenam, cum aliis
Discipulis and praeceptorem Xanthum invitavit: Coenantibus igitur, Xanthus
electa accepit fercula, and Aesopo pene stanti dedit, and Dilectae meae, haec,
inquit, trade. Ille vero discedens haec secum cogitabat, Nunc occasio mihi
oblata est ulcisci meam Dominam, propterea, quod me, quum novitius veni,
scommatibus multis lacessivit; Videbo igitur an Hero meo been velit: Profectus
itaque domum, and sedens in vestibulo, and Hera accita sportulam ferculorum
coram ipsa posuit, ac inquit ei, Hera, Dominus haec omnia misit, non tibi, sed
Dilectae; and cane vocata, atque dicto, Veni Lycaena, veni, comede, tibi enim
Herus haec jussit dari, particulatim, cani omnia projecit: Et post hoc ad Herum
regreslus, and rogatus, An Dilectae dedit omnia; Omnia respondebat Aesopus, and
coram me omnia comedebat: Illo vero iterum interrogante, Et quid dixit inter
edendum? Et Aesopus, Mihi quidem nihil dixit, sed secum tibi (ut puto) gratias
habebat. Uxor interea Xanthi calamitosum esse arbitrans se Cani esse
posthabitam, concludebat, se in posterum non amplius cum eo cohabitaturam, and
ingresso cubiculo ploravit. Poculis autem vicissim sese alternantibus, and
quaestionibus propositis: Quando futura esset ingens inter Homines turbatio?
Aesopus pone stans ait, Quum resurrexerint mortui, repetentes ea bona quae
possederint; Scholastici ridendo dixerunt, Ingeniosus est Hic novitius: Alio
vero rursus proponente, Quamobrem ovis ad caedem tracta non exclamat, Sus autem
miserrime vociferatur? Aesopus interponens rursus, ait, Quoniam ovis assueta
mulgeri, aut velleris gratum onus deponere, tacit sequitur; Ideo etiam,
quamvis pedibus arrepta, and grande pedum videns, nihil grave suspicatur, sed
illa familiaria solum sibi videtur passura; Sus autem qui neque mulgetur, neque
tondetur, neque novit ad Bonum aliquid trahi, sed carnes suas tantum usui esse,
merito vociferatur; His sic dictis, Discipuli rursus laudaverint eum.

Finito vero convivio, and Xantho in domum reverso, and uxorem, pro more,
aggresso alloqui, illa ipsum aversata, inquit, Ne propinquius ad me accedas; Da
mihi dotem meam, and abibo, non enim ulterius tecum mansero: Tu autem abiens
cani adulare, cui dapes misisti. Ad haec verba Xanthus stupefactus dixit, Non
contra me majus malum machinari Aesopus potuit; Et Uxori inquit, Domina, numne
poto tu ebria es? Cui dapes misi? Nonne tibi? Non per Jovem, inquit illa, sed
cani. Xanthus accito Aesopo dixit ei, Cuinam Aesope dedisti dapes quas Vxori
misi; Aesopus respondebat, Dilectae tuae. Xanthus ad Uxorem conversus dixit, Et
tu nihil accepisti? Et illa, Nihil omnino. Aesopus interponens dixit, Cui,
Here, jussisti parts dari? Et ille, Dilectae meae: Aesopus, cane vocata, Haec,
inquit, te Here diligit, nam mulier etsi videtur tibi been velle, tamen pro
minima quaque offensa contradicet, convitiabitur, and abibit; Canem vero
verberato, aut a domo expellito, non tamen discedet; sed oblita omnium, benign
statim blanditur, ut cum Hero gratiam ineat: oportebat igitur dicere, Here,
Vxori has parts ferto, and non Dilectae. Tum Xanthus, Vides Domina non meam
esse culpam, sed ejus qui tibi dapes far jussus erat; Patienter fer igitur,
non deerit mihi occasio qua eum verberem. Illa vero non credente, ad parents
suos clam regressa est; quapropter Aesopus Xantho dixit, An non recte tibi,
Here, dixi, Canem tibi magis been velle quam Heram meam?

Diebus aliquot praeteritis, and uxore irreconciliata manente, and Xantho
affines quosdam ad ipsam ut reverteretur domum mittente; Illa vero quum credere
nollet, and Xanthus plenus moeroris erat. Aesopus adiens, ad eum dicebat, Ne te
affligas, cras enim sponte and citissime etiam faciam venire adte; Et accepta
pecunia, in forum ivit, ac emptis anseribus and gallinis, and aliis quibusdam
ad convivium idoneis, ambulans domos circumibat: Transibat igitur, and ante
Domum parentum Herae fuae, ignorans simulans Domum illorum esse, and in ea
Heram manner; Et quum in quendam ex domo illa incidisset, rogabat, An aliquid
ad nuptias utile Domestici habuissent vendere: Illo autem, and cui opus est?
Rogitanti and Aesopo, Xantho Philosopho, respondente, cras enim uxori ducendus
est: Servulus statim penetralia ascendit, and Uxori Xanthi, quae audivisset,
renuntiavit. Xanthi Uxor commotavalde tam turbido Nuntio and propero pede ad
Xanthum ivit, and contra ipsum clamavit, dicens inter alia, and haec
petulantioris animi scommata; Non me vivente, O Xanthe, alteri faemellae tibi
nubere dabitur; Et sic mansit in Domo, honesto Ingenii figmento, quemadmodum
propter Aesopum a Domo discesserat.

Post dies rursus aliquot, Xanthus invitavit Discipulos ad prandium; Et Aesopo
inquiebat; Ito, Eme optimum quodque and quod tibi praestantissimum videtur;
Aesopus inter eundum, secum dicebat; Ego docebo Herum meum, non tam stulta mihi
committere mandata; Quum linguas igitur suillas solum emisset, and apparasset
discumbentibus linguam assatam singulis cum condimento apposuit.

Discipulis laudantibus, ut Philosophicum, in Incipio, ferculum, propter
linguae ad loquutionem ministerium; rursus in secundo ministerii cursu, elixas
iterum Aesopus apposuit linguas, atque iterum etiam cursu alio, atque alio
petito, Aesopus nihil aliud nisi linguas apposuit: Discipulis autem eodem
repetito cibo indignantibus, and quaerentibus, Quousque linguas? An non and nos
per totum prandium, nostras linguas edendo doluimus? Xanthus iratus fatur,
Nihil aliud in praesto est, Aesope? Et is, Non certes: Xanthus dixit, Nonne,
sordidissime Homuncio tibi mandavi, optimum quodque and praestantissimum
obsonari? Cui Aesopus, Multas tibi gratias habeoincrepanti me coram Philosophos
omnes qui hic adsunt; Nam quid est lingua melius aut in tot a hominum vita
praestantius? Omnis Doctrina, Omnis Philosophiaper ipsam articulate monstratur
and traditur; Per ipsam celebratur Largitiones omnes, Acceptiones, Fora
salutationes, Benedicentiae, Musa omnis; Per ipsam celebrantur Nuptiae,
civitates eriguntur, Homines servantur, and ut breviter dicam, per ipsam tota
vita nostra consistit; Nihil ergo lingua melius. Ob haec Aesopum recte loqui
Discipulis pronuntiantibus, Xanthum vero errasse, singuli in suas abiere domos.

Postridie vero, Ipsis Xanthum accusantibus, quod in hesterno prandio non tam
generose se hospitibus commendaverat; Xanthus respondebat, Non secundum suam
voluntatem haec facta fuisse, sed inutilis tantum servi petulantia,
suggessitque Hodie prandium permutaturum, and ipse praesentibus vobis cum eo
colloquar: Aesopo statirn vocato, vilissimum unumquodque and pessimum opsonari
jubet, quoniam Discipulos quos in hesternum prandium invitasset, secum hodie
pransuros expectasset; Aesopus autem nihil mutatus, rursus linguas emit, and
apparatus discumbentibus apposuit; Hi autem inter se obmurmurabant, Porcinis
iterum linguis pascimur? Aesopus autem rursus alias, post alias, linguas
apposuit, and rursus, iterum, iterumque. Xanthus autem hoc inique ferente, and
Aesopo accersito, quum increpasset illum dicens, Et quid nobis cum Crambe tua
tam saepe cocta? An tibi hodierno mandavi die optimum quodque and quod
lantissimum est mercari? an non potius quod est pessimum, and vilissimi pretii
and ante omnia nauseandum? Aesopus, sine ulla deliberantis animi mora, statim
respondebat; Et quid, O Here, est pejus lingua, An non urbes per ipsam
corruunt? An non homines per ipsam quotidie interficiuntur? An non maledicta
omnia and Mendacia? An non omnia perjuria per ipsam perficiuntur? An non
Nuptiae, Principatus, and Regna per ipsam evertuntur? Et, ut summatim dicam, An
non per ipsam vita omnis infinitis erroribus referta est? Aesopo in haec verba
Philosophante, quidam ex discumbentibus cum Xantho dicebat, Hic nisi multa
Providentiae and Patientiae cautela uteris, non dubia erit tibi Insaniae Causa,
Mores enim Animi sequuntur temperamentum Corporis: Et Aesopus conversus ad eum
dixit, Tu mihi videris, O Homo, pravus quidem and curiosus esse, quia Herum
irritas contra servum! Cui Xanthus, occasionem quaerens verberandi Aesopum,
Fugitive, quoniam curiosum dixisti amicum, ostendas velim, Incuriosum Hominem.
Aesopus igitur, quum sequenti die in heriles agros egressus erat, and omnes qui
praeteribant circumspexerat, observavit hominem sub umbra diu sedentem, quem
judicans otiosum and simplicem esse, accedens propius, inquit, Heus tu Bone,
Herus meus invitat te hodie secum prandere.

Rusticus nihil aliud sciscitatus, neque quis esset a quo invitaretur, cum
Aesopo ingrestus est Xanthi domum, and cum ipsis calceis, ut essent putridi,
discubuit: Rogante autem Xantho, Quis est hic? Aesopus statim in aurem
susurravit, Incuriosus Homo est; Xanthus interea, quum Uxori tacit persuasit,
ut sibi inter prandendum obsequeretur, and quod ipse jussit faceret, ut honesta
causa plagas Aesopo inferret, coram omnibus convivis dixit, Domina aquam in
pelvim injice, and Hospitis pedes lava; Cogitabat enim secum, Hospitem
recusaturum, Aesopum vero, illo Curiosum esse apparente, verberibus caesum iri;
Illa igitur jacta in pelvim aqua, pedes ibat Hospitis lotura: At Ille,
cognoscens hanc esse Doms dominam, secum loquebatur, Multo me Honor prosequi
vult, atque hujus Rei gratia suis Manibus pedes meos lavare vult, quum Ancillis
hoc officium mandare queat; Extensis igitur pedibus, Lava, inquit, Pedes, Hera:
ac pedibus lotis discubuit.

Xantho paulo post jubente, vinum hospiti dari ad appetitum provocandum, rursus
ille secum considerabat, Ipsos antea oportere bibere, sed quia ipsis sic visum
fuerit, non opus mihi haec inquirere; Accipiens igitur, liberaliter bibebat.
Inter prandendum vero, and ferculo quodam Hospiti apposito, and illo suaviter
comedente; Xanthus coquum quod male condivisset criminabatur, and nudum in
conspectu hospitis flagellabat: Rusticus autem secum dicebat, Ferculum quidem
optime est conditum, and nihil deest quo minus recte paratum sit; si autem
absque causa suum velit flagellare servum, quid ad me attinet? Xantho autem
aegre ferente, neque jucunde affecto, quod Hospes nihil curiose inquirebat,
tandem placentae allatae sunt; Hospes vero, ut nunquam antea placentam
gustasset, convolvens and accipiens ipsas, ut panes comedebat; Xantho autem
pistorem accusante, and Cur, O execrande, dicente, absque melle and pipere has
placentas praeparasti? Pistor respondebat, Sieruda est, O Here, placenta, me
verbera, sin vero ut oportebat praeparata est, non me sed heram accusa; Et
Xanthus, Si a mea hoc factum est Vxore, vivam ipsam comburam, atque iterum
Vxori innuit ut sibi obsequeretur propter Aesopum; Sarmentis igitur jussis in
medium afferri pyram succendit, and arreptam uxorem prope pyram secum tulit, ut
expectaretur ipsam in ignem mittere; Differebat autem aliquantisper and
circumspiciebat Rusticum, si quo modo assurgens a tali facinore prohibere ipsum
moliretur: Sed Rusticus rursus secum considerabat, Nulla est Causa, ut mihi
videtur, quod sic irascitur; Deinde, ad Xanthum conversus, dixit, Si hoc, O
Pater-familias judicas oportere sieri, exspecta me parumper dum digressus
adducam and ipse meam ex agro uxorem, ut ambas simul comburas.

Quum Xanthus haec a Rustico audivisset, sinceritatem and generositatem Viri
admiratus, Aesopo inquit; Ecce vere homo incuriosus, habeas accepta praemia
Victoriae, Libertatem tuam assequeris: Postridie autem Xanthus jussit Aesopo in
balneas ire and scrutari an multa adesset turba, velle enim in Balneum
discendere; Abeunti Praetor occurrens, and Xanthi servum esse cognoscens,
interrogavit quo iret; Quod quum is se negasset scire, Prator, iratus quod tam
flocci penderetur, Aesopum in Carcerem conjecit; Quum igitur Aesopus
abduceretur, clamavit, Vides Praetor quemadmodum recie responderim, quae enim
non expectavi, and occurri tibi, and in Carcerem jam trahor; Tum Praetor,
attonitus Responsi promptitudine, perm isit abire: Aesopus autem profectus in
Balneas, multam turbam in ipsis intuitus est, sed and lapidem videbat in medio
Ingressu positum, in quem singuli ingredientes and egredientes pedem
offendebant; Hunc autem unus quidam ingrediens ut lavaretur sublatum
transposuit: Reversus igitur ad Herum, Si vis, inquit, Here, lavari unum
hominem tantum in balneis vidi; Xantho autem profecto, and multitudinem
lavantium vidente, dixit ad Aesopum, Quid hoc sibi vult, nonne unum solummodo
hominem dixisti te vidisse; Et Aesopus, Ita, inquit; nam lapidem illum, manu
ostendens, ante Ingressum positum repperi, in quem ingredientes omnes, and
exeuntes, offendebant; unus vero quidam, antequam illideret, elevatum
transposuit; Illum igitur unum Hominem dixi vidisse, pluris faciens quam alios;
Tum Xanthus, Nihil apud Aesopum tardum est ad Responsionem.

Aliquando Xantho ex latrina redeunte, and interrogante Aesopum, Quaenam est
Causa quod homines, post purgationem ventris, excrementa intuentur? Aesopus
respondet, Antiquis temporibus, Vir quidam, delicatius vivens, multo tempore
prae delitiis in latrina sedebat, ut and sua, diutius illic immorans,
expurgaverit viscera; Ex illo igitur tempore timentes caeteri homines ventris
inspiciunt sordes, ne quo modo and ipsi hoc patiantur; Sed tu, Here, ne time,
non enim sunt tibi praecordia. Die autem quodam celebrato convivio, and Xantho
cum aliis discumbente, and potu jam invalescente, crebrae questiones inter hos
versabantur; Atque Xantho incipiente turbari Aesopus astans ait, Here, Bacchus
tria possidet temperamenta; Primum, Voluptatis; Secundum, Ebrietatis; Tertium,
Contumeliae; Et vos igitur poti, and laetati, quae reliqua sunt omittite: Tum
Xanthus jam ebrius ait, Tace; Inferis Consule: Cui Aesopus, Igitur and in
Inferos distrahere. Ex Discipulis autem quidam Xanthum jam ebrium videns, and,
ut in universum dicam, temulentum, O Praeceptor, inquit, potestne aliquis
ebibere Mare Homo? Et ille, Admodum quidem, Ego enim ipse ebibam: Et
Discipulus, Ac si non poteris quam tibi mulctam irrogabo? Tum Xanthus, Domum
meam depono totam. Atque interim depositis annulis pacta firmaverunt, and
discesserunt.

Postridie diluculo excitato Xantho, ac faciem manusque lavante, and annulum
inter lavandum non vidente, and Aesopum de eo interrogante: Nescio, inquit
Aesopus, quidnam factum fuerit; Hoc unum scio tantum, quod a Domo decideris
tua. Tum Xanthus, Quam ob rem. Cui Aesopus, Quoniam heri ebrius pepigisti Mare
ebibere, atque in pactis annulum deposuisti: Et is, Quomodo fidem persolvam
quae ante omnia observanda est; Verum te rogo, si quod Commentum, si quae
Versutia, si quae experientia, praesto sis, ac opem porrige ut aut vincam, aut
certes pacta dissolvam: Cui Aesopus, Vincere quidem haud licet, sed ut solvas
pacta efficiam; Quum hodie rursus in unum conveneritis, nullo modo videaris
timere, verum quae hesterno die pactus es been potus, eadem nunc sobrius dic;
Jubeas itaque stramenta, and mensam in littore poni, and pueros paratos cum
poculis porrigere tibi marinam aquam; Quum autem omnem videritis turbam
concurrisse, ad spectaculum, ipse discumbens, jube ex Mari impleri Poculum,
atque hoc accepto, dic elata voce ut omnes audiant; Quaenam apud nos foedera
inivimus? Atque is respondebit tibi, Pepigisti Mare ebibere: Conversus igitur
tu ad omnes sic dicito; Viri Samii, Scitis and vos omnes, quod plurimi sunt
fluvii qui in Mare se exonerant; Ego autem pactus sum Mare solum ebibere, and
non exeuntia in ipsum flumina; Hic itaque Scholasticus eat prius retenturus
flumina omnia, deinde Mar^ solum ebibam. Xanthus autem futuram ex hoc pacti
solutionem cognoscens, vehementer laetatus est; Populo igitur confluente ad
Spectaculum, quum Xanthus quod edoctus fuerat ab Aesopo fecisset, ac dixisset;
Samii acclamarunt laudantes ipsum, and admirantes; Sed Scholasticus ad Xanthi
pedes provolutus, and victum sese fatebatur, and pacta rogabat dissolvi, quod
Xanthus fecit exorante Populo.

Profectis autem ipsis in Domum, Aesopus adiens Xanthum inquit, Per omnem Vitam
tibi gratificatus sum, and indignus tibi videor libertatem consequi? Sed
Xanthus objurgavit illum, dicens; Nolo facere, sed exi ante vestibulum, and si
duas cornices videris, renuncia mihi; nam pulchrum est augurium, quod si unam
videas, hoc malum est. Abiens ergo Aesopus, and quum forte duas Cornices super
quadam arbore sedentes vidisset, accedens Xantho renuntiavit: Exeunte autem
Xantho, altera Cornicum evolavit, and Xanthus alteram solam videns, ait, Nonne
dixisti, Execrande, duas te Cornices vidisse? Ita, dixit Aesopus, sed altera
evolavit: Tum Xanthus, Reliquum er at tibi, Fugitive, ut derideres mihi? Et
jubet eum denudatum verberari. At dum Aesopus verberabatur, Praefectus quidam
invitavit Xanthum ad coenam, ac Aesopus inter verbera exclamavit; Hei Misero
mihi! Ego enim qui duas vidi Cornices verberor; Tu vero qui unam tantum, in
convivium abis: Tum Xanthus solertiam ejus admiratus, cessare jussit verbera.
Non multis autem post Diebus, Philosophos and Rhetores quum invitasset Xanthus,
jussit Aesopo ante vestibulum stare, and nullum Idiotam ingredi sinere, sed
sapientes solos: Hora autem prandii, clauso vestibulo, Aesopus intus sedebat;
Ex invitatis autem quodam profecto, and januam pulsante, Aesopus intus ait,
Quid movet Canis? Ille putans se Canem vocari iratus discedit, and sic
unusquisque veniens redibat iratus, credens se injuria affici; Aesopo eadem
omnes interrogante. Quum autem unus eorum pulsasset, and Aesopo ut prius
interrogante, Quid movet Canis? Caudam, and aures, respondit: Aesopus ipsum
recte judicans respondisse, aperta janua, ad Herum duxit; ac inquit, Nullus
Philosophus ad Convivium tuum venit, O Philosophe, praeter hunc solum; Et
Xanthus valde dolebat, deceptum se existimans ab illis quos ad Coenam invitavit.

Postridie, quum venissent invitati ad Ludum literarium, accusabant Xanthum,
dicentes, Vt nobis, videtur, cupiebas quidem contemnere nos, and pro hac causa
putridum illum in vestibulo constituisti Aesopum, ut nos injuria afficeret, and
canes vocaret: Quibus Xanthus, Somniumne id est, an res vera? Tum illi, nisi
omnes stertimus, verum est. Quapropter celeriter vocatus Aesopus, and rogatus
cujus rei gratia amicos Xanthi tam ignominiose amolitus esset, respondet, An
non tu mandasti, Here, ut nullum vulgarem aut indoctum permitterem in tuum
venire Convivium, sed solos sapientes? Tum Xanthus, Et quales Hi? An non
Sapientes? Cui Aesopus, Nullo pacto; Ipsis etenim pulsantibus Januam, and me
intus rogitante, Quidnam moveat Canis? Non quisquam eorum intellexit Sermonem:
Ego igitur, quum indocti omnes viderentur, nullum ipsorum introduxi, nisi hunc
qui sapienter respondebat. Sic igitur quum Aesopus respondisset, re intellecta,
recte omnes ipsum dicere confirmarunt.

Rursum, post dies aliquot, Xanthus, sequente Aesopo, ad monumenta accessit,
and quae in hac vel illa Arca erant Epigrammata cum delectatione legebat:
Aesopus in quadam ex ipsis, quum has literas insculptas vidisset, R. P. Q. F.
I. T. A. Xantho ostendebat, rogavitque An noscet quid intelligerent? Diligenter
ille scrutatus, non potuit illarum invenire declarationem, ac fassus est se
omnino dubitare: Tum Aesopus, Si per hanc columnulam, O Here, Thesaurum
ostendam tibi, qua re me remunerabis? Cui Xanthus, Confide mihi; Accipies
libertatem tuam atque Dimidium Auri: Tunc Aesopus abiens a cippo passus
quatuor, and fodiens, accepit aurum, and tulit Hero dicens, Da mihi promissum,
cujus causa inveni Thesaurum: Et Xanthus, Non ego, si sapiam, nisi and sensum
literarum mihi exposueris, nam seire hoc multo re inventa est mihi pretiosius:
Tum Aesopus, Qui Thesaurum infodit hic, ut vir sapiens, literas has insculpsit,
quae and inquiunt, Recedens Passus Quatuor, Fodiens Invenies Thesaurum Aureum.
Et Xanthus, Quoniam it a solers es, and astutus, non accipies tuam libertatem.
Et Aesopus, Renuntiabo hoc, O Domine, Regi Byzantinorum cui aurum dandum est,
namque illi est reconditum. Cui Xanthus, Vnde hoc nosti? Et ille, Ex literis
hisce, R. R. D. Q. I. T. quae hoc significant, Read Regi Dionysio Quem
Invenisti Thesaurum. Xanthus, quum audivisset Regis esse Thesaurum, Aesopo ait,
Accepto dimidio lucri taceto: Et ille, Non tu mihi hoc praebes, sed qui aurum
hic insodiebat, and sic ex aliis literis juxta positis agnoscas; literas
intuere, A. E. D. Q. I. T. A, quae hoc inquiunt, Acceptum Euntes Dividite Quem
Invenistis Thesaurum Auri. Et Xanthus, Veni ergo, inquit, in domum, ut and
Thesaurum dividamus, and tu libertatem accipias. Quum a Monumentis abierunt,
Xanthus timens Aesopi loquacitatem, in carcerem ipsum jussit trahi; Et Aesopus
inter abducendum, Haeccine sunt, inquit, Promissa Philosophorum? Non solum enim
non accipio libertatem, sed in carcerem jubes me injici.

Xanthus igitur jussit ipsum solvi; and ait, Nimirum puto, ut, parta liberate,
vehementior fias contra me accusator; Aesopus dixit, Quodeunque malum mihi
potes facere, facito, omnino vel invitus liberabis me. In illa tempestate
hujusmodi Res Sami obtigit, Quum public Festum celebraretur, repent Aquila
devolans, and publicum rapiens annulum in Servi sinum demisit; Itaque Samii
perterriti, and in plurimum ob hoc prodigium quum incidissent moerorem, in unum
coacti, coepissent rogare Xanthum, quoniam primus Civium esset, and
Philosophus, ut sibi judicium prodigii manifestaret: At ille omnino ambigens,
tempus petiit; Et profectus domum, multum erat tristis and variis
sollicitudinibus immersus, ut qui nihil certi judicare possit; Sed Aesopus,
moerore Xanthi cognito, adiens ad eum, aiebat, Qua ratione, Here, tanto dolori,
crudelis tibi-met ipsi, indulgeas? Dic mihi, obsecro, and melancholicam
tyrannidem discute? Cras igitur in Forum profectus Xanthus dic tu Samiis,
Equidem neque ego prodigia solvere didici, neque augurari; sed puerum domi
habeo multarum rerum peritum, ipse vobis quaesitum solvet: Et si ipse
consecutus fuero solutionem, Here, tu gloriam reportabis tali utens servo; sin
minus fuero consecutus, mihi soli erit dedecus. Persuasus igitur Xanthus, and
postero die in Theatrum profectus, and secundum Aesopi admonitionem, stans in
medio, concionatus est iis qui convenerant: Illi vero statim rogabant Aesopum
acciri, qui quum venisset, and in medio positus staret; Samii facie illius
observata deridentes clamabant, Haeccine est facies quae prodigium solvet? Ex
deformi hoc quid unquam boni audiemus? atque ridere coeperunt. At Aesopus
extenta manu, and silentio facto, Viri Samii (inquit) quidfaciem meam
cavillamini? Non faciem, sed Mentem respicere debitis; Saepe etenim in turpi
forma bonum animum Natura imposuit: An vos exteriorem testarum formam solum
consideratis, and non potius interiorem vini gustum? Haec quum ab Aesopo
audivissent, omnes dixerunt, Aesope, si quid potes dic Civitati. Tum ille
audacter ait, Viri Samii, quoniam Fortuna quae studiosa contentionis est,
gloriae certamen proposuit Domino, and Servo; and si Servus inferior videatur
Domino verberibus coesus abibit, sin autem praestantior nihilominus and
verberibus lacerabitur; si vos per libertatem loquendi fiduciam mihi
indulseritis, Ego nunc vobis intrepide quaesitum narrabo. Ad haec, Populus uno
ore clamabat ad Xanthum, Da libertatem Aesopo, obtempera Samiis, and largire
libertatem ejus Civitati. At Xanthus non annuebat; Et Praetor ait, Xanthe, Si
tibi non placeat auscultare Populo; Ego hac hora liberate donabo Aesopum, and
tunc tibi aequalis fuerit: Tum demum Xantho libertatem largire Aesopo placuit;
Et Praeco clamavit, Xanthus Philosophus liberum Aesopum facit; Atque interim
fidem sermo Aesopi accepit dicentis Xantho, Vel invitus me liberate donabis.
Aesopus itaque libertatem consecutus, stans in medio eorum, dixit, Viri Samii,
Aquila, ut scitis, Regina avium est, quoniam autem Imperatorium annulum haec
raptim demisit in Servi sinum, hoc significat, Regem quendam velle vestram
libertatem in servitutem redigere, atque sancitas leges irritas facere. His
auditis, Samii moerore repleti sunt, sed non multo post tempore, Literae a
Croeso Lydorum Rege venerunt ad Samios, jubentes eis, ab illo tempore tributa
sibi pendere, quod si non obtemperaverint, ut ad Bellum se parent: Consultabant
igitur Universi, timuerunt enim subditi fieri Craeso, conducibile tamen esse
Aesopo consulere; Et ille consultus ait, Quum Principes vestri jamdudum
dixerint, obtemperandum esse Regi, consilium jam nullum, sed narrationem vobis
afferam, ut sciatis quid conducat; Fortuna duas vias ostendit in vita; unam
Libertatis, cujus principium accessu difficile, sed fims planus; alteram
Servitutis, cujus principium facile, and accessibile, finis autem laboriosus.
His auditis, Samii exclamaverunt, Nos quum sumus liberi, servi esse gratis
nolumus, and Oratorem re infecta demiserunt.

His rebus cognitis, Croesus decrevit bellum in Samios movere; Sed Legatus Regi
rettulit, Non potes Samios debellare, quandiu Aesopus est apud eos, and
Consilia suggerit; Potes autem magis, ait, O Rex, legatis missis petere ab
ipsis Aesopum, pollicitus eis pro eo and gratias alias relaturum, and
solutionem ipsorum Tributorum, and tunc forte poteris eos superare: Croesus his
persuasus, Legato misso, dedi sibi Aesopum petebat: Samii autem hunc
decreverunt tradere. Quo cognito, Aesopus in media concione stetit, ac inquit,
Viri Samii, and ego permulti facio, ad Regis pedes proficisci, sed volo vobis
unam Fabulam tradere; Quo tempore animalia inter se loquebantur, Lupi bellum
Ovibus intulerunt; sed Canibus pro Ovibus praeliantibus, Lupi legato misso
dixerunt Ovibus, si voluerint in pace vivere, and nullum suspicari bellum,
Canes sibi traderent; Oves vero quum obstultitiam persuasae essent, and Canes
tradidissent, Lupi nullo Negotio and Canes dilacerarunt, and Oves voraverunt.
Samii, Fabulae hujus sensu percepto, decreverunt apud se detinere Aesopum: Ille
vero non permisit, sed cum Legato una solvit, and ad Croesum Regem se
conferebat. Profectis itaque iis in Lydiam, Rex ante se stantem Aesopum videns,
indignatus est, dicens; Vide qualis Homuncio obstitit mihi ad tantam Insulam
subjugandam! Tum Aesopus, Maxim Rex, non vi, neque egestate coactus ad pedes
tuos me prosterno, sed sponte adsum; Sustine autem parumper me audire; Vir
quidem quum locustas caperet, occideretque, cepit and cicadam; quum and illam
vellet occidere, Cicada pro se veniam petebat, dicens, Obsecro ne me innocentem
occidas; Ego enim neque Spicam laedo, neque in alia re quapiam injuria te
afficio, motu vero membranularum quae in me sunt suaviter canto delectans
viatores, praeter vocem in me nihil invenies; Et ille, quum haec dixisset
permisit, abire: Et ego itaque O Rex, tuos pedes attingo, Ne me sine causa
occidas, non enim possum injuria quemquam afficere, sed in vili corpore
generosum loquor sermonem. Rex autem and miratus, simul and miseratus ipsum,
ait, Aesope, Non ego solum vitam tibi largior, sed potentiam habe quicquid a me
vis petendi; Ergo quod vis, pete, and accipies: Et ille, Rogo te, O Rex,
reconciliari Samiis: Quumque Rex dixisset, Reconciliatus sum; Aesopus,
procidens in terram, gratias agebat Regi.

Post haec suas conscripsit Fabulas quas in hunc usque diem exstantes apud
Regem reliquit. Acceptis demum ab ipso literis ad Samios, quod Aesopi gratia
reconciliatus illis fuerat, and multis oneratus muneribus, in Samum navigavit.
Samii igitur hunc videntes, coronas ei intulerunt, and tripudia ejus gratia
constituerunt; Ille autem and Regis literas quas illis mittebat, legit, and
ostendit quod sibi donatam a Populo libertatem, liberate rursus remuneratus
fuerit.

Post haec ab Insula decedens circumibat orbem, ubique cum Philosophis
disputando. Profectus autem in Babilonem and suam ipsius doctrinam
demonstrando, magnus apud Regem Lycerum evasit; Illis enim temporibus Reges
invicem pacem habentes, delectationis gratia quaestiones Sophistarum vicissim
scribendo mittebant, quas qui solverent, tributa pacta a mittentibus
accipiebant, qui vero non solverent aequalia praebebant; Aesopus autem
problemata quae mittebantur Lycero Regi intelligens dissolvebat, and illius
Sapientia clarum reddebat Regem, and ipse Lyceri Nomine altera itidem Regibus
remittebat, quae quum remanerent insoluta, tributa Rex quam plurima exigebat.

Aesopus, quum non genuisset silios, nobilem quendam, Ennum Nomine, adoptavit,
atque ut legitimum filium Regi allatum commendavit: Non multo autem post
tempore, cum Aesopi Concubina rem habuit; Hoc sciens Aesopus expulsurus erat
domo Ennum; qui correptus ira, epistolam fictam ut ab Aesopo, missamque ad eos
qui problematibus cum Lycero certabant, quod ipsis paratus esset magis quam
Lycero adhaerere, Regi dedit: Ficta haec epistola, majorem dolis incutere
fidem, signata erat Aesopi annulo; Rex sigillo credens, atque inexorabili ira
percitus, confestim Hermippo mandavit, ut nulla Examinatione facta proditorem
occideret Aesopum: At Hermippus fuerat Amicus Aesopi, and in illo temporis
articulo amicum se esse ostendebat; In sepulchro enim quodam, nemine sciente,
occultavit Hominem, and secreto nutrivit: Ennus autem Regis jussu omnem Aesopi
administrationem suscepit. Sed quodam post tempore Nectenabo, Rex Aegyptiorum,
audiens Aesopum occidisse, mittit Lycero statim Epistolam, jubentem Architectos
sibi mittere qui Turrim aedificent, neque Coelum, neque Terram attingentem, and
responsurum semper Aliquem ad omnia quaecunque rogaverint; Quod si fecisset,
Tributa exigeret, sin minus solveret: His lectis, Lycerus moerore affectus,
quum nullus ex amicis quaestionem potuit de turri intelligere, Rex columnam sui
Regni Aesopum dicebat interiisse.

Hermippus autem dolori Regis ob Aesopum intellecto, adiit Regem, and vivere
illum affirmavit, addiditque ipsius Causa se non interimisse Aesopum, sciens
quod aliquando Regem sententiae poentieret. Rege autem non mediocriter super
hisce exhilarato; Aesopus, totus sordidus, and squallens, adductus est: Quumque
Rex, ut eum vidit, illachrymasset, atque ut lavaretur, and aliis vestibus
indueretur, jussisset; Aesopus ante Regem de quibus accusatus fuerat causas
confutavit, ob quae quum Rex Ennum esset occisurus, Aesopus ei veniam petiit.

Post haec autem Rex Aegypti Regis Epistolam Aesopo legendam dedit; At ille
solutione quaestionis statim cognita risit, ac rescribere jussit, ut quum
Hyerns praeteriisset, se missurum and qui Turrim essent aedificaturi, and
responsurum aliquem ad Rogata; Rex igitur Legatos Aegyptios remisit: Aesopo
autem tradidit omnem pristinam Administrationem, and Ennum etiam in suas manus
tradidit. Aesopus acceptum Ennum nulla Injuria affecit, sed ut filio rursus
recepto, aliis atque hisce admonuit verbis; Fili, ante omnia Deum cole, Regem
Honora, Inimicis tuis terribilem te praebe ne te contemnant, amicis facilem,
and communicabilem, quo long benevolentiores tibi sint; Item precare ut
Inimici tui male se habeant, and ut gravi paupertatis onere opprimantur, ne te
possint offendere; At amicos in omnibus been valere velis: Vxori tuae semper
adhaere, ne alterius viri periculum facere velit, leve est etenim mulierum
genus, ac adulatum minus malum cogitat; Velocem ad Sermones ne praebeas aurem;
Linguae ante omnia continens esto; Been agentibus ne invide, sed congratulare
potius; Invidens enim seipsum offendit: Domesticorum tuorum satage, ut te non
solum ut Dominum timeant, sed etiam ut Benefactorem venerentur; Ne pudeat
semper discere meliora; Mulieri non unquam secreta credas, sic enim semper
armata erit ut tibi dominetur; Quotidie in diem crastinum reconde, melius enim
est mortuum Inimicis relinqui quam viventem amicis indigere; Salutes facile qui
tibi occurrunt, sciens and catulo caudam panem comparare; Bonum esse ne
poeniteat; Susurronem Virum ejice Domo tua; nam quae a te vel dicuntur, aut
fiunt, aliis communicabit; Fac quae te non moestum facient; Contingentibus ne
tristare, neque prava consulas unquam, neque mores malorum imiteris. His ab
Aesopo Ennus admonitus, tum sermon, tum sua conscientia, ut sagitta quadam,
percussum habens animum, paucis post diebus e vita discessit.

Aesopus interea Aucupes omnes accersivit, atque ut caperent quatuor Aquilarum
pullos mandavit; Sic itaque captos nutrivit, and quotidie sic instruxit (cui
Rei non magnam fidem adhibemus) ut pueros in sportis appensos gestando in altum
tollerent, atque ita morigeri pueris essent, ut quocunque illi vellent,
volarent, sive in altum, in aere, sive in terram, humi.

Praeterito vero hyemali tempore, and vere jam ridente, quum ad iter omnia
Aesopus paravisset, and pueros accepisset and Aquilas, in Aegyptum discessit,
multa Imaginatione and opinione ad stupefactionem illorum Hominum usus; Sed
Nectenabo, audito adesse Aesopum, Insidiis circumventus sum, amicis dixit, quia
intellexeram Aesopum mortuum esse: Postridie autem jussit Rex ut omnes
Magistratus candidis amicirentur vestibus, ipse purpuream induebat, and coronam
habuit gemmis and smaragdis gravem; quumque sedens in alto solio Aesopum
introduci jussisset, Cui me assimilas, ingredienti dixit Aesopo, and cos qui
mecum sunt? Et Ille, Te quidem Soli verno, qui vero te circumstant maturis
Aristis. Rex Aesopum admiratus, donis eum pluribus prosecutus est. Postero die
Rex candida indutus vest, amicis autem purpureas accipere jussis; Ingredientem
Aesopum iterum Rex rogavit, and iisdem verbis quibus die praecedenti usus est;
Te, inquit Aesopus, comparo Soli, and hos qui te circumstant radiis Solaribus.
Nectenabo subjunxit, Existimo nihil esse Lycerum prae meo Regno; Aesopus
subridens, Ne facile de eo sic loquere, O Rex; nam genti vestrae, vestrum
Regnum collatum instar Solis lucet; at si Lycero comparetur, nihil aberit quin
splendour hic tenebrae appareant: Nectenabo apposita verborum responsione
stupefactus, Attulisti nobis, ait, qui Turrim aedificent? Et ille, Parati sunt,
si modo locum ostendas.

Postea, Rex egressus extra urbem, in planitiem demonstrat dimensum locum;
Aesopus itaque quatuor Aquilis adductis ad quatuor demonstratos loci Angulos,
una cum pueris in sportulis stantibus, ac Puerorum manibus Fabrorum datis
Instrumentis, jussit Aquilas evolare; Pueri autem, qui per Aquilas evecti, in
sublimiorem Aeris Regionem tollebantur, clamaverunt, Date nobis lapides, date
calcem, date ligna, and alia quae ad aedificationem apta sunt: Sed Nectenabo,
visis Pueris ab Aquilis in altum sublatis, dixit, Vnde mihi Volucres Homines?
Et Aesopus, sed Lycerus habet; Tu autem quum Homo sis, vis cum Rege Diis
aequali contendere? Et Nectenabo dixit, Aesope, victus sum; quaestionem autem
tibi proponam; Et ait, Sunt mihi foeminae hic equae, quae quum audiverint eos
equos qui in Babylone sunt hinnire, confestim concipiunt; Si tibi ad hoc est
Doctrina, ostendas causam: Et Aesopus, Respondebo tibi cras, O Rex.

Profectus vero ubi hospitabatur, jubet pueris Felem comprehendere, and captum
public circumduci verberando: Aegyptii autem illud animal colentes, and sic
male tractari ipsum videntes, concurrerunt, and Felem e manibus verberantium
eripuerunt, ac rem celeriter Regi renuntiant; qui vocato Aesopo, Nesciebas,
inquit, Aesope, tanquam Deum a nobis Felem coli? Quare igitur hoc fecisti? Et
ille, Lycerum Regem injuria affecit praeterita nocte hic Felis, Gallum enim
ejus occidit pugnacem, and generosum, and qualibet nocte, horas noctis,
cantando, ei nuntiontem. Et Rex, Non pudet te mentiri, Aesope? Quonam enim modo
in una nocte Felis ab Aegypto ivit in Babylonem. Tum ille subridens, inquit, Et
quomodo, O Rex, Babyloniae Equis hinnientibus hic Equae Foeminae concipiunt?
Rex autem, his auditis, prudentiam Aesopi foelicem esse dixit.

Posthaec autem quum accivisset ex Heliopoli viros quaestionum Sophisticarum
peritos, atque invitavit eos una cum Aesopo ad Convivium; Discumbentibus
omnibus, quidam Heliopolita dixit Aesopo, Missus sum a Deo meo quaestionem
quandam te rogare, ut ipsam solveres. Cui Aesopus, Mentiris, Deo enim ab homine
nihil opus est discere; Tu autem non solum teipsum accusas, sed and Deum tuum.
Alius rursus ait, Est Templum ingens, and in eo Columna duodecim Vrbes
continens, quarum singulae triginta trabibus fulcuntur, quas circumcurrunt duae
Mulieres; Tum Aesopus ait, Hanc quaestionem apud nos solvent Pueri; Templum
enim est Mundus, Columna Annus, Vrbes Menses, and Trabes Dies; Dies autem and
Nox, duae Mulieres quae vicissim sibi succedunt. Postridie convocatis amicis
omnibus, Nectenabo inquit, Propter hunc Aesopum tributa debebimus Regi Lycero;
At ex his unus ait, Jubebimus ei quaestiones nobis proponere quae neque scimus,
neque audivimus; Et ille, Cras hac de re vobis respondebo: Decedens igitur
Aesopus, quum scriptum composuisset in quo continebatur, Nectenabo confitetur
se mill Talenta Lycero debere, mane reversus Regi Scriptum reddidit; Regis
autem Amici, priusquam charta aperiretur, dixerunt una Voce Omnes, Et scimus
hoc, and audivimus and vere scimus; Tum Aesopus laetabundus, Habeo vobis
Gratiam: At Nectenabo, confessione lecta mill Talentorum quae Lycero
debebantur, dixit, Vos Omnes Testes estis quod nihil Lycero debeo; Et amici
Regis, animis mutatis, omnes subito acclamaverunt, Neque seimus, neque
audivimus; Tum Aesopus, Responsis illorum, ut optabat, compositis, repent
suggessit, Si ita haec se habent solutum est quaesitum. Nectenabo ad haec,
Foelix est Lycerus qui talem Virum in Regno suo possidet; Tributa ergo pacta
tradidit Aesopo, atque in Pace remisit.

Aesopus vero in Babylonem profectus narravit Lycero omnia quae in Aegypto
transacta fuerant, and tributa reddidit; Lycerus autem jussit statuam auream
Aesopo erigi. Non multo post tempore, Aesopus in Graeciam decrevit navigare,
atque Rege concedente discessit, juratus ei prius, proculdubio se rediturum in
Babylonem, atque in illa Civitate reliquum vitae acturum: Peragratis autem
Graeciae Civitatibus, and sua Doctrina omnibus manifestata, profectus est ad
Delphos; Et Delphi disserentem quidem libenter audierunt, sed nullo honor eum
affecerunt; Quod Aesopus sinistre ferens, Viri Delphi, inquit, In animo mihi
est vos ligno comparare quod in mari fertur; Illud enim remotum ab oculis
videntes, dum sluctibus, huc, illuc, agitatur, magni pretii esse existimamus;
Postquam autem proxime advenerit, vilissimum apparet: Eodem modo, and Ego, quum
procul essem ab Vrbe vestra, vos admirabar ut admiratione dignos, nunc autem ad
vos profectus, omnibus aliis quoscunque vidi, ut ita dixerim, inveni vos
inutiliores ad Philosophiae Doctrinam capessendam, and sic deceptus sum. Quum
haec Delphi audivissent, and formidabant, ne aliquo modo Aesopus, and ad alias
Urbes accedens, male de se diceret, decreverunt hominem dolo interficere, and
auream Phialam ex Sacello Apollinis accipientes, clam in Aesopi absconderunt
stragulis: Quum vero Aesopus in Phocidem iturus erat, prorsus ignorans quae ab
ipsis dolo machinata fuerant, Delphi aggressi detinebant eum, and
percontabantur ut Sacrilegum; Illo autem vehementer negante se aliquid fecisse
ejusmodi, Delphi, vi stragulis evolutis, auream invenerunt Phialam, quam, non
sine magno tumultu, omnibus Civibus ostenderunt: Aesopus igitur, cognitis
illorum Insidiis, rogabat eos ut solveretur; Delphi autem non solum non
solverunt, sed ut Sacrilegum in carcerem injecerunt, morte ejus suffragiis
decreta. Aesopus quum nulla astutia a mala hac Fortuna liberari posset, seipsum
solus in Carcere lugebat: Unus autem ex ipsius Familiaribus, Damas nomine, ad
ipsum ingressus, and videns eum tanto moerore affligi, quaesivit Causam; Et
Ille, Mulier quaedam quum recenter suum virum sepelisset, quotidie profecta ad
tumulum ploravit; Arator autem quidam non procul a Sepulchro, amore captus
mulieris, derelictis bobus, ivit and ipse ad tumulum, ac sedens una cum muliere
plorabat; Cum illa parumper a Lachrymis desiisset, quaesivitque, Cur nam and
ipse sic lugeret? Quoniam and ego, inquit, decentem mulierem sepelivi, and
posteaquam ploravero, moestitia levor: Illa autem, Idipsum and mihi accidit; Et
Ille, Si igitur in eadem incidimus mala, cur nam invicem non conjungimur? Ego
etenim amabo te ut illam, and tu rursus me ut tuum virum. His persuasit
mulieri, and convenerunt. Interea fur ad Aratrum proficiscens, solvebat boves,
abegitque; Ille autem reversus, non inventis bobus, lugere vehementer coepit;
Mulier lamentantem iterum inveniens, inquit, Dic, quaeso, Cur rursum ploras? Et
Ille, nunc, ait, vere ploro, and multis evitatis periculis, totus sum in
lachrymis, quod solutionem hujus mali nusquam invenire possum.

Post haec affuerunt Delphi, and extrahentes Aesopum a Carcere violenter
ducebant in Praecipitium; Ille autem, quamvis moriens, hanc Fabellam illis
tradidit, Quum bruta Animalia colloquebantur, Mus Ranae amicus factus, ad
Coenam eam invitavit, and quum in penuarium Divitis abduxisset, ubi multa erant
esculenta, Comede, inquit, amica Rana: Post Epulationem, and Rana Murem in suam
invitavit Coenationem, and Ne fatigatus sis natando, inquit, silo tenui tuum
pedem meo alligabo, Atque hoc facto saltavit in paludem; Rana autem natante, in
profundum Mus suffocatur, and moriens ait, Ego quidem per te morior, sed mox
alter aderit qui me vindicabit; Supernatante igitur mortuo Mure in palude,
devolans Aquila hunc arripuit, and una etiam cum eo appensam ranam, and s^c
ambos devoravit: Et ego etiam qui per vos morior habebo ultorem; Babylon enim
and Graecia omnis meam a vobis exigent mortem. Delphi nihilominus in Malitia
obstinate perseverantes, ne sic Fabulanti pepercerunt; Ille autem in Apollinis
confugit Sacellum, sed and illinc extraxerunt irati, and in praecipitium rursus
traxerunt: Aesopus quum abduceretur, dicebat, Audite me Delphi; Lepus, Aquila
insectante, in Scarabei domicilium consugit, obnixe petens ut ab eo servaretur;
Scarabeus autem rogabat Aquilam ne occideret supplicem, obtestando ipsum per
maximum Jovem ne despiceret parvitatem suam; Aquila vero irata percutiens
Scarabeum ala, Leporem raptum est depasta; Scarabeus autem quum Aquila
avolavit, tacit sequebatur, ut nidum ejus disceret, and loco invento, ova ejus
devoluta disrupit; Illa autem grave existimans quod quis hoc ausus fuisset, in
altiore loco nidum suum erexit; Et illic rursus Scarabeus ova rupit,
disjecitque; Sed Aquila, prorsus inops Consilii, ascendit ad Jovem (in ejus
enim tutela esse dicitur) and in ipsius genibus tertiam foeturam ovorum
deposuit, Jovi ipsa commendans and supplicans ut custodiret. Sed Scarabeus,
pilis e stercore compositis, ascendit, and in sinus Jovis eas demisit; Jupiter
exsurgens ut fimum excuteret, etiam and ova oblitus disjecit, contrivitque: Sed
quum didicisset a Scarabeo, quod haec fecisset ut Aquilam ulcisceretur, non
enim in Scarabeum tantum injuriosa fuisset, sed in Jovem ipsum impia, consuluit
Aquilae, ut Scarabeo reconciliaretur: Quum autem Scarabeus consentire
recusavit; Jupiter in aliud tempus transposuit Aquilarum partum, quum propter
inertiam frigoris, Scarabei non apparent. Vos igitur O Viri Delphi, inquit
Aesopus, ne despicite hunc Deum ad quem profugi, etsi parvum apud vos sortitus
est Delubrum, Magnum etenim capit Ira Jovem, Memoresque Malorum
Sollicitat Vindicta Deos. --


Delphi vero, parum curantes quae Aesopus praedixerat, recta ad mortem itidem
agebant; Aesopus quum nulla ratione flecti and inexorabiles prorsus observavit,
rursus ait, Viri crudeles and Intersectores, Audite; Agricola quidem in agro
consenuit, and quum nunquam ingressus esset in Vrbem, precabatur domesticos,
ut, ante mortem Vrbem saltem videre liceat; Murmurantes illi, junctis asellis,
atque Hero in curru imposito, solum jusserunt, currum agere; Eunti autem
Procellis cum turbine aerem occupantibus, and tenebris factis, aselli a via
aberrantes in quoddam Praecipitium deduxerunt senem; At Ille jam
praecipitandus, O Jupiter, inquit, qua in re Injuria te affeci, quod sic inique
occidor; praesertim neque ab equis generosis, neque a bonis mulis, sed ab
asellis vilissimis. Et ego eodem plane modo nunc doleo, quod non ab honoratis
Viris, aut elegantibus, verum ab inutilibus and pessimis intersicior.

Jamque praecipitandus supremam hanc dixit Fabulam; Vir quidem suam perdite
amans filiam, in agros Vxorem misit, and filiam solam domi manentem violavit,
Illa autem, Pater, sceleste facis, mallem etenim a multis viris dedecore hoc
affici, quam a te qui me genuisti: Hoc nunc and in vos, O iniqui Delphi, dico,
quod eligerem potius in Scyllam aut Charybdim incidere, aut in Africae Syrtes,
quam per vos injuste and indigne mori; In Patriam vestram Diras mitto, and
moriens Deos omnes testor, qui me ulciscentur exauditum, me, nulla ratione, vel
legibus humanis vel divinis, habita, injuriosissimam subire mortem.
Praecipitarunt autem Delphi Aesopum de Rupe, and mortuus est; sed aderant
ultores Dei; Non multo enim post tempore, pestilentia laborantes, ab Oraculo
acceperunt expiandam esse Aesopi mortem, quod and fecerunt, and conscii quam
injuste eum interimerunt, etiam Cippum in Aesopi Memoriam erexerunt. Primates
autem Graeciae, and Sapientissimi quique, quum quae in Aesopum patrata fuissent
intellexerunt, in Delphos profecti, severa Inquisitione habita, and ipsi
ultores Aesopi mortis extiterunt.

Finis Aesopi Vitae, Graece a Maximo Planude conscriptae, and Version^ Latina a
multis quibus antea abundaverat mendis castigata.
LE COMMENCEMENT Des FABLES D' ESOPE.
FABLE I. Du Coq, et de la pierre brillante.
LE Coq grattant en un fumier, et fortuitement ayant trouue vne pierre
pretieuse, De quoy me sert, dit il, d'auoir trouue vne chose tant belle et
brillante, Si un Lapidaire l'eust trouue, il ne seroit de rien plus joyeux,
d'autant qu' il scauroit bien le prix; Quant a moy elle ne me profit de rien,
et je l'estime si que j' aymerois mieux un grain d'orge que toutes les pierres
pretieuses.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEcy nous confirm Qu' on se pass bien plustoft des chooses superflues, que
des necessaires, Quant au Coq, il est pris, pour l' homme fol, et celuy qui est
plein de ses plaisirs, qui met tout dans l'indifference, hormis son ordure
propre, representee par le fumier; Or les fols haissent les Arts liberaux,
d'autant qu' ils ne scauent l'vsage d'iceux, l'on peut dire, que les hommes
d'aujourd'-huy sont d'vn Naturel si deprave qu' ils se portent plus volontiers
a la Connoitise d'vn Bien apparent, qu' au desire d'vn Bien Veritatable; C' est
la que plufieurs demeurent attaches par ses luxurieuxs appetits, qui sont les
seules delices de leur vie; D' auantage la plus part des chooses nous deuiennent
pretieuses par l'opinion, et nous desirions ardamment la possession d'vn bien
plus^ost que d'vn autre, mais hommes de plaisir n' ayment rien que toutes
voluptez.

A grain of Ba^ly and a lern did dwell
In The Caskett of a dunghill as their Cell
Till the rude claws of a keen hungry Cock
Did that d^ll Cabinett of Dirt unlock
And having rak'^ them forth with cheap disda^^^
Waves ye bright le^^ to taste ye coo^ser gain
Some earthly natures choycer pleasures sind
In sordid joys then in a ^ertouous mind.


FAB. I. De Gallo Gallinaceo.
GAllus gallinaceus dum armato pede sterquilinium dissipando disijcit invenit
Gemmam, Quid, inquiens, rem tam fulgurantem reperio? Si Gemmarius invenisset,
laetabundus exultaret, quippe qui scivit pretium, mihi quidem nulli est usui,
nec magni aestimo, unum etenim Hordei granum est mihi long pretiosius, quam
omnes Gemmae, quamvis ad Invidiam micent Diei, opprobriumque Solis.

MORALE.
HOmines sunt Natura tam depravati, ut ad perituras Divitias, et fallacia
Gaudia citius feruntur, quam ad Nobiles Virtutum Dotes, quae non solum Corpus
Honor afficiunt, sed Animum etiam et coelo Beant.

FABLE II.
LE Loup beuuant a la source de la fontaigne veid un Aigneau loin de soy,
lequel aussi beuuoit au bas du cette ruisseau, A l'instant il accourut, et
aigrement tancoit le pauure Aigneau de ce qu' il auoit trouble son eau, Alors
l'Aigneau trembloit de peur, et prioit le Loup qu'il pardonnast au pauure
Innocent, luy remonstrant, qu' en tant qu' il beuuit bien loing, au dessous de
luy, il ne luy pouuoit troubler son eau, et qui plus est, il n' en auoit pas
mesme la volonte a fair, Mais pour tout cela, le Loup au contraire luy cria,
Tu parles en vain mechant, En vain tu me fais ces belles excuses, car c' est ta
coutume de m' estre nuisible, Ce mal la te vient de race, Ton Pere, et ta Mere,
et toute ta race mes sont Enemis, et me haissent au mourir, Ne treuue donc pas
estrange si tu seras aujourd-huy puny.

Le Sens MORAL.
IL est dit par un vieil Proverb, Si tu veux battre un Chien faciliment tu
trouueras un baston; Par cette Fable on represente des petits, par les grands,
qui est si generale dans le Commerce des hommes qu' il n' y en a point de
foible, ou de mal accommode qui ne soit sous la domination de plusieurs tyrans;
La honte de nos jours est venue a ce point d'extremite que c' est vne espece de
crime d'estre pauure, et vne espece de Jurisdiction pour le punir d'estre bien
en ses affairs, et si est ce, que les plus artificieux ont accoutume de
colorer leur cruante d'vn faux pretexte de Justice; La plus-part des Riches
d'aujourd'-huy font accroire aux Pauures, qu' ils ont manque de respect envers
eux, et mesprize leur authorite, combien que leur Ame toute simple ne soit
nullement capable de malice, et qu' ils n' ayent failly en un respect, Ainsi
Tyrans se plaisoient a susciter des Accusateurs au gens de bien, pour diminuer
en cela le nombre de leurs ennemis, et s' enricher de la despouille des
Innocens; Et pleust a Dieu que tells impostures ne fussent point paruenues
jusques a nostre Age, et qu' au deshonneur de la Religion Christienne, nous ne
fussions si meschans que de surpasser en injustice, et en frauds les plus
insupportables Tyrans des siecles passez.

The Wolf and Lamb.
A Lamb his thirsty scorchings did essay
From a cool brooks clean margent to allay
Which made a Wolf in sullen m^rmurs chyde,
Cause he dist^rb'd ye. springs; the Lamb replied
The seeming cause (Great Sir) of my offense
Results from ignorance not insolence,
To which the Wolf reioyn'd have I not seen
How eager thou and and all thy s^ock have been
To thwart me still, therefore false Lamb thy fate
Shall be as cruel as my wood vish hate.
So greatness often oreswayes with. armed might
Oppressed inocence against Law or right.


FAB. II. De Lupo and Agno.
SItibundus Lupus dum ad caput Fontis accedit ut sitim levaret videt innocentem
Agnum, vivum procul fluminis pudorem haurientem, Accurrit igitur, Agnum
increpat quod vitreum turbavit fontem; Trepidus ad haec supplicavit Agnus vt in
Innocentem ne saeviret, se quidem, quum tam long infra biberit, potum Lupi ne
potuisse quidem turbare, nedum voluisse; Lupus contra fremebundus intonat, quid
vanas Sacrilege innectis moras? Pater, Matter, et omne tuum invisum Genus sedulo
mihi, et semper, adversantur. Tu autem hodie mihi paenas dabis.

MORALE.
FAbula innuit, molesta semper and gravia esse onera quae Divites pauperum
Humeris imponunt, Potens etenim, si libet nocere, facile capiet nocendi Ansam,
Satis peccavit qui resistere non potuit.

FABLE III.
QUatre Taureaux s' assemblerent, et firent vne ligue de ne s' abandonner
jamais l'vn l'autre, mais quiconque frapperoit l'vn, frapperoit l'autre; Le
Lion les veit paistre ensemble, qui combien qu' il eut faim, toutesfois il ne
les osa assaillir estans ensemble, premierement il trouua moyen par feintes
paroles de les separer, si bien, que de cette facon il luy fut aise de les
mettre tous en pieces, l'vn, apres l'autre.

Le Sens MORAL.
LA ligue de ces quatre Taureaux qui assemblerent leur force pour resister au
Lion, et furent invincibles par le moyen de leur bonne Intelligence, contient
un Discourse assez commune, Et ce qu' Esope a judicieusement invente du
Laboureur nous auons veu en la person d'vn Roy de Scythie nomme Silure, qui
appella ses enfans a l'article de la mort, et leur fait fair la mesme
Experience qui est contenue dans le discourse de cette Fable, and nous apprend
que plus nos forces sont vnies, moins faciles else sont a vaincre, Tesmoin ce
fameux Axiom des Philosophes naturels, Que toute Virtue est plus forte quand
elle est vnic, que lors qu' elle est dispersee. C'est facile parcourrir les
grands Estats pour prouuer cette verite et pour fair voir combien la Discord
leur a este dommageable. Pour toucher seulement par celuy des Perses, N' est il
pas vray que la Ruin de ce grand Empire a pris sa naissance des discords de
Cyrus? Les Grecs ne perdirent ils point leur liberte par le moyen de leur
Divisions intestines? Donnons doncques cet Euloge a la Concord, Qu' elle est
entierement bien seante et vertueuse, Qu' elle establit les maisons, Qu' elle
augmente, et affermit les Empires, repousse les forces estrangeres, maintient
les Intestines, rend les hommes sociables, et perfectionne les Arts; Bref, Qu'
elle est le plus desirable Bien qui se puisse rencontrer parmy les mortels, Car
il n'y a rien plus ferme que bon Accord, mais Discord rend voire les plus
puissans imbecilles.

The Lion and four Bulls.
Secure from rage of beasts four Bulls did feed,
Whilst they ith Sircuit of a flowery Meade
Vni^ed keep, nor did the Lion dare,
To assaul^ this heard; till they divided were
And by his arts to a disunion led,
Then straight he rusht upon each single head
And by relayle them into Morcells tore,
On whom his Im^ger durst not prey before
Concord with union all things does Cement,
Which into ^^in are by Discord w^^^


FAB. III. De Leone, and quatuor Tauris.
QVatuor fuere Tauri qui inter se invicem societate inita faedus faciebant
communem ipsorum esse salutem, et commune periculum, Hoc observavit esuriens,
and indignabundus Leo, qui quamvis grandi premeretur fame, conjunctos tamen
aggredi non ausus est, hoc ergo consilium cepit, primum verbis fallacibus unum
ab altero segregavit, deinde segregatos facile laniavit.

MORALE.
ADmonet haec Fabella, Concordia nihil esse stabilius, nihil securius, formosa
est Faelicitatis comes, qua mentes hominum aeque ac maenia in unum stabilita
coeunt, qua Civitates and Imperia augentur, qua vires hostiles repelluntur,
propriaeque crescunt, qua homines sociabiles and politici fiunt, qua Arts and
Ingenia florent, and ut cum Lucretio concludamus, Non pretiosa magis Virtus
contingere possit.

FABLE IV.
LA Grenouille sortant de Marescage s' en alla au Bois, ou deuant les Bestes
sauuages elle voulut fair profession de Medicine, se vantant que Galen, ny
Hippocrate n' en scauoient pas d'auantage qu' elle, Les autres Bestes la
creurent d'abord, horsmis le Renard qui se mocquant d'elle Comment se peut, il
fair, dit il, que cette vilaine qui a la bouche si pasle, et si liuide scache
des remedes aux maladies? Si cela est, pourquoy ne se guerit elle? En effet ce
trait de raillerie que luy donna le Renard ne fut pas mauuais, car la
Grenouille a les leures de couleur bleue, et toutes fletries.

Le Sens MORAL.
C' Est vne sottise, et chose digne de Mocquerie se vanter de ce qu' on ne fait
pas. La Grenouille y est mocquee par le Renard de ce qu' elle s' attribue vne
gloire qui ne luy est aucunement deue, et veut passer parmy autres Bestes pour
tres scauante en la Medecin. Combien a to elle aujourd'-huy d' Imitateurs en la
person des Charlatans qui flattent le Monde pour le destruire? Tells Fourbes
qui n' ont ny Science, ny Method, se vantent neantmoins de tout scavoir, et
traittent les Malades par un tas de Remedes Imaginaires qu' on peut appeller de
seconds maux; Il vaut donc bien mieux auoir des affections plus Moderes, ne
corrompre pas son Estime propre pour la desirer plus grande, Car ce que
plusieurs appellent Gloire n' est pas vne chose si pretieuse, ny si exquise qu'
on doiue dire vne mensonge pour l'acquerir; C' est donner trop de prise a vne
Vanite que de jouer un faux personage pour elle, Et sans mentir cette ardente
soif, que nous auons des louanges s' augmente a mesure qu' on nous les done.

The Fox and Frog.
Abandoning her moist and Spungie Cell
The ambi^us Frog designed among beasts to dwell.
Pretends to Physic and yt each disease.
She can with charms of powerful arts apease,
Most beasts do credit her except ye Fox
Who with Just Laughter her imposture mocks.
Saying, could her dull Skill So much prevail.
Whose meager Aspect is so lean and pale.
She to reform her own defect Should try.
And not to them her vain receipts aply
Experienced Doc^ers are declared so
Not from Loud boasts but from their cures we know
Pretenses which no real action prop.
Like crazy Structures Straight to ruin drop


FAB. IV. De Rana, and Vulpe.
RAna paludibus valedicens, and novo vivendi genere acquisito, in sylvam
gloriabunda sese tulit, and bestiarum coronis circumstipata, Medicinae Artem
public profitebatur, and in herbis quae ad corpora curanda pertin^nt,
nobiliorem se vel Galeno, vel Hippocrate esse clamitabat. Credula Bestiarum
gens fidem facile adhibebant, vulpe solummodo excepta, quae sic glorianti
irridebat, Insulsum, vagumque animal! Quid tam vana blatteras? Quid Artem
nobilem prae te fers quam minime calls? livida pallidaque illa tua labra
respice? Quin Domi abi, and teipsum cura Medice? Deinde ad nos redeas meliora
forsan de te speraturos? Nihil respondente Rana, sed tacitis secum gemente
suspiriis, tota bestiarum chachinnis resonabat sylva.

MORALE.
STultitiam eorum arguit haec Fabella qui multum promittendo and parum
praestando dum speciose certant alios antecellere, sibimet ipsis miserrime
imponunt.

FABLE V.
UN Asne charge des beaux viandes alloit en chemin, ou fortuitement il encontra
le chien de son Maistre qui le voyant tout along mangeant des chardons, il dit
a luy, Lourde Best et paresseuse! tu manges des chardons, mais tu ports sur
ton dos tells provisions qui peuuent prouoquer le plus delicat Appetit, et de
quels Je moy mesme sera participant. L' Asne repliqua a luy, Les croustes;
paraduanture, et les os a toy peuuent partenir, Mais quant a moy, ce que je
mange en allant, est plus agreeable a mon palate que toutes les diuersites de
la laniene, ou les veins superfluites de le Cuisinier, ou de Pastisseur.

Le Sens MORAL.
PAr cette Fable nous apprenons, qu'vne honest Mediocrite joynte a naturel
appetit et a l'assurance de la Sante est preferable aux tous les Delicats;
L'Ambition de ceux est trop foible qui ne viuent pas que pour le orgueil, ou
par le Luxe, et songent tant seulement a fair voir leur magnificence a leurs
semblables; Voila tout ce qui peut dire en faueur des persons veins, qui ne
consiste qu' en certaines chooses extremement foibles, et fort peu
considerables. Pour ce, qui est des delices, don't se vant l'impertinent chien
qui sont les viandes exquises, et delicates, les Vins excellens, et quantite
d'autres douceurs qui accompagnent la vie des persons releuees en condition,
le pauure Asne a beaucoup des chooses a y respondre, principalement qu'il n'est
point au dessous le chien en cela, puis qu' il ne l'enuie pas; Car c'est vne
Maxim receue parmy tous les gens d' Esprit, que l' homme qui ne desire point
vne chose, n' est pas moins heureux que celuy qui la possede; De plus le chien
compte ses delices, l'Asne allegue la purete de ses fontaines, et le goust
naturel de ses bleds, par ou il semble qu' il nous apprend que la vraye volupte
ne consiste pas dans le trop, mais dans Mediocre; Et que ceux la sont bien plus
heureux qui scayent en tout temps se garantir des exces, que ces autres qui en
peuuent tousiours fair.

The Ass eating Thistles.
A sordid Ass whose loaded back did bear
A Gugo of ye Noblest viands there
Wau'd those choice cates and his cheap diet made
The Rougher thisthe and ye courser blade,
They yt by brooding on yeir. wealth are poor
Without inioyment amidst all their store,


FAB. VI. De Cane Rubos comedente.
CAniesculenta messoribus in agro portanti, occurrit herilis Canis; cui dixit,
Tu panibus cibisque onustus es, quorum mox ego particeps ero, interim dum per
viam incedis, tu ipse Rubos comedis; Huic Asinus respondebat, Frustula
fortassis, and Ossa ad te pertinebunt, verum Rubi quos ego comedo sunt
gratiores mihi, and magis meum palatum sapiunt, quam omnes in Macello Carnes,
anr Bellaria in pistorum officinis.

MORALE.
VT non omnis fert omnia tellus, sic non omnia unicuique arrident stomacho, hic
lacte vescitur, illi pingui ferina, alter, perpetui tergo bovis; Asinus sort
sua contentus silvestres Rubos, omnibus eduliis praefert.

FABLE VI.
L' Alouette commanda ses poussins diligemment d'attendre a tous ceux qui
alloient par le chemin, et dire a luy si quelque Mention seroit fait quand le
Jour de la Recolte commenceroit. Le soir (comme elle retournoit de la Forest)
ses poussins disoient a luy, qu'ils oyoient que le Maistre de champ eut done
order a se voisins commencer la moisson sur le jour venant, L' Alouette
repliqua. Ce n' est point de Danger en cela, car les promesses des amiss sont
incertains; Mais le Jour suiuant les poussins disoient a leur Mere, que le
Maistre de ce champ auec son fills aisne commenceroit a moissoner le jour
ensuiuant. Allons donc, disoit l'Alouette, a ses poussins, car J' ay ne peur de
voisins, mais je scay, que ce qui le Maistre, et son fills ont print en leur
Resolution, ils commenceront sans delay.

Le Sens MORAL.
NAture qui aim sa conservation, et son bien estre, arm nos desirs de nos
preserver, et nos fait industrieux de rencontre les trauerses qui nous
attaquent, et nous fait souhaiter ardemment de nous en voir tossed garantis, Ce
qui estant vne fois conclud, presque toutes les operations de nostre
entendement nous conduisent a la voye de nostre preservation; Nous deuons
tousjours estre soigneux, a ne nous enfler jamais outre mesure, n'y d'estre
trop securs des perils qui nous peuuent suruenir; Mais au Contraire, il arrive
la pluspart du temps, que nous auons des parens, ou des amiss qui, pour mieux
participer a nostre Fortune, nous consillent folement de la porter au dela de
l' Impossible, au lieu, que s'ils nous aymoient veritablement, ils nous
prescheroient sans cesse la Moderation, et tascheroient de retenir nos Ames
dans les limits de Discretion et Sagesse. De tous les passions qui ont
accoustume d'attendre l'Esprit des hommes, il n' y en a point plus louable que
le soin de bien viuure, et securement.

The Lark's Nest in the Corn.
Alanke in standing corn had habcht a brood
Which she intployes when they persu'd their food
To gain advises when ye full eard heap
The Sickle should as its due victirne reap
When trembling they told her ye. ensuing morn.
The neighbors join to fell ye. owners corn.
Fear not said she those will not yett approach.
Then a wild noise, his friends will come they broach
Dread not says she ye. m^ursions of his friends,
The owner lastly they assert intends,
Joined with his son, next morn to reap ye field
Nay then it is time said she our nest to yield.
Neighbors and friends are backwards who, intends
TO effect things well must make his hands his friends.


FAB. VI. De alauda, and pullis ejus.
ALauda positos in segete pullos monet, ut dum ipsa abest diligenter attendant
praetereuntium sermones de mess; Redit a pastu matter, pulli anxii narrant,
dominum agri operam illam mandasse vicinis; Respnodet, nihil esse periculi,
Item, alio die, trepidi aiunt, rogatos ad metendum esse amicos; Jubet iterum
illa ut sint securi; Tertio ut audivit ipsum Dominum cum filio statuisse,
postremo mane, cum falce messem intrare; Jam inquit est tempus ut fugiamus,
Dominum enim agri timeo, quia probe scio, quod illi Res cordi est.

MORALE.
QVisque quoad potest animum ad id advertat quod suae parti, and causae putat
potissimum prodesse, si quid recte curatum velis, alteri ne mandes, sed citres
ipse.

FABLE VII.
LE Chien et le Coq entreprirent un voyage ensemble; Le soir venu, le Coq se
jufcha sur le haut d'vn Arbre, et le Chien au Pied; Mais a quelqu e temps de
la, Le Coq s' estant mis a chanter a son Accoustumee, il attira le Renard qui
luy dit, que s'il vouloit descendre, il luy apprendroit vne fort belle chanson;
Le Coq a l' heure mesme se doubtant bien de la tromperie; Je m'y en vay, luy
respondit il; Mais esueille un peu mon Compagnon qui dort la bas, a fin qu'il
apprenne aussi; Le Renard bien aise, pensant que ce fut encore un autre Coq,
esueilla le Chien qui se jetta sur luy tout aussitost, et le mit au bout de ses
finesses.

Le Sens MORAL.
IL n'est point d' Animal si ruze qui ne trouue bien souuent son maistre en
matiere de Fourberie. Te crois tu si remply de finesse, O fallacieux Renard,
que de pouuoir tromper impunement les gens accorts, sans courir fortune d'estre
toy mesme affine? Cet Animal, qui n' est qu' un Coq, te rend la pareille de
fort bonne grace, et te feit porter la peine de ta mocquerie. Ne scais tu pas
que chacun a son defaut, et chacun a son advantage. Tu sers bien d' Exemple a
ces Artificieux qui conuersent parmy les hommes pour leur apprendre que toutes
les ruses ont leur contre-ruse, et qu'il est mal aise de fair profession de
dupper tout le monde, sans estre duppe de quelqu' un; Ce qui est certes vne
chose honteuse aux maistres de ce mestier. Ils ont beau fair ainsi que
Lysandre le plus ruze des Lacedemoniens; mais ne de s' aider, comme il disoit,
de la peau du Renard, quand celle du Lionne suffit point a leurs fourberies;
Ils ont beau deguiser leur malice d'vne specieuse monstre de courtoise, Ils ont
beau recourir au mensonge pour ne point render suspecte leur mauuaise volonte.
Si faut il, en fin, qu' elle se descouure, car elle ne peut long temps estre
cache, non plus que la fausse monnoye, qui est vne des plus grand tromperies du
monde. Le temps, qui ne peut rien tenir cache, fait vne monstre public de
cette engeance de mocqueurs, lors qu' ils y pensent le moins, et les expose
comme ils meritent a la risee de tout le monde. Pour preuue de cette verite,
outre l'experience commune, il y a quantite de raisons qui le persuadent ainsi;
Car il faut de Necessite que ses fourbes se mocquent en paroles, ou en effet,
ou par les Actions de ceux qu'ils jugent contemptibles et ridicules. Nous auons
des preuues irreprochables dans les Histoire que la Fraud tomb d'ordinaire
sur son Autheur, car les sentiers destournez, par ou les trompeurs se croyent
sauuer, les conduisent insensiblement en des precipices; Ce qui monstre assez,
que c'est vne chose tout a fait indigne d'vne bonne Ame d'vser de deguisement
en ^es matieres, si ce n' est d'aduanture que l'on y soit convie par les
^orberies, et les artifices d'autruy.

The Fox and Cock in a Tree.
A Cock to shun a Fox asends a tree
Erom which more safe retreat, to court him she
Tells him twixt Beasts and Birds all feuds, are doomed.
In kind Oblivion now to be entombed,
And yt this League does Beasts with. Beasts combine
Lambs safely now themselves to Wolves resign
Whilst they thus parly'd straight a clamorous pack
Of Hounds, a deer sought With swift speed to attaque,
If peace vrgd he, why is yt. Deer thus pressed,
They Are not (says Reynard with its same possessed.
The Cock replies, i will not my strength forgo,
If true to day, to morrow 'twill be so.
Would you live safe: then those reports still gleane,
That do on truth, as their firm basis lean.


FAB. VII. De Vulpe, Catte, and Gallo.
CAnis and Gallus Rus obambulabant, Nocte appropinquante Gallus altam
ascendebat arborem, Canis autem ad pedem Arboris securus dormiebat, Intempesta
Nocte Gallus canoram vocem edidit, Vulpes praeteriens audit, accurritque and
inter salutandum promisit, quod, optimam doceret novamque Oden, si ab Arbore
descenderet, Discendam subito respondebat Gallus, saltem a te peto ut Comitem
expergiscaris meum qui infra in utramque aurem dormit, Vulpes novae praedae
avida Canem expergiscitur; Canis subito in eum irruens, apprehendit, laniatque.

MORALE.
ODio digna est simulatio, and simulatione capienda; Non est timendus hostis
qui hostem prae se fert, sed qui quum hostis sit benevolentiam simulat, is
demum timendus est, and odio dignissimus.

FABLE VIII.
LE Renard estant tomb dans un puits, et en grand danger d'estre noye, requist
le Loup qui estoit en lar margelle qu' il luy jettat vne cord en bas pour le
tirer horse du Danger ou il estoit, Le Loup luy did, Pauure malheureux!
Comment^es tu la tomb? auquel l'e Renard repliqua, C'est ne pas maintenant le
temps de jaser, Quand me tu auras tire d'icy, lors Je te raconteray le tout par
order.

Le Sens MORAL.
PLusieur fois, il faut beaucoup mieux'd estre supply d'vn seul Conseil,
moyennant qu'il soit vray et efficatieux, que de plusieurs machinations et
Conseils friuoles; Mais cette Fable n' a pas besoin d'vne trop grande
explication, pour estre assez claire de soy mesme, Car qu'y a to il Rien de si
ridicule, que de vouloir apprendre jusques a la moindre Circonstance de nostre
malheur, par la bouche de celuy qui ne l'a ouuerte que pour implorer nostre
secours a son extreme besoin? N' est ce pas vne Impertinence plus cruelle qu'
un Assassinat, puisque non seulement on y fait perir celuy qu'on aim, Mais
encore on le fait perir auecque languent, au lieu de haster le temps de son
secours, autant qu' il, est possible a la Diligence human; Mais Je tomberois
en la fault que Je reprens en autruy, si par des paroles superflues, Je m'
arresterois d'auantage, ou a deduire, ou de prouuer le sentiment d' Esope en ce
discourse, puis que cette Verite est de soy mesme plus manifest que le Jour.

The Fox in the Well.
A sad disaster in a Neighboring well
A Fox engaged, who from that watery cell
With hollow prayers did a treare wolf implore
That with quick aid his freedom he would reston
The wolf then questioned, friend what gloomy fate.
Did this black accident on you instate,
What Crooked traverse or what dire aspect
Did you to this moist residence direct,
Who half drowned said ask not how I came in
But me instruct how to get out again.
Wounds of import'nance claim a speedy cure
Nor will prolixity of time endure.


FAB. VIII. De Vulpe in Puteo.
VVlpes and Caper sitibundi in quendam puteum descendebant, in quo quum
perbibissent, Vulpes dixit circumspicienti reditum Capro, Bono animo esto
Caper! Excogitavi etenim quo pacto uterque reduces simus; obtemperavit consilio
caper, et Vulpes ex Puteo prosiliens, prae gaudio in margin cursitabat,
Caeterum quum ab Hirco ut faedifraga incusaretur, respondit, Enimverd Hirce, si
tantum tibi sensus esset in Mente, quantum est setarum in mento, non prius in
Puteum descendisses, quam de reditu exploratum habuisses.

MORALE.
VIr prudens debet finem explorare, antequam ad Rem peragendam veniat; Finis
enim coronat opus.

FABLE IX.
COmbien que la Guerre fut de tout temps enter les Loups et les Brebis,
neantmoins il aduint vne fois qu'ils firent alliance ensemble, et donnerent
ostages de deux costs, Les Loups donnerent leurs Louuetaux, et les Brebis
leurs chiens; Mais pendant que les Brebis estoient en repos, et qu' else
paissoient a leur aise, il se fist vne emotion du cost des Louuetaux qui se
mirent a hurler bien fort, et a demander leurs meurs meres. Les Loups sortirent
incontinent, et sous pretexte qu' on leur auoit fausse la foy, et rompu la
treuue, ils se jetterent sur les pauures Brebis qu' ils mirent en pieces bien
aisement, pource qu' else n' auoient plus leur guard ordinaire.

Le Sens MORAL.
C'Est vne grande sottise, si en faisant accord auec autruy, tu bailles pour
otage ton Aid, et Confort, Car celuy qui to a este Ennemy, parauanture prendra
il occasion de to assaillir, quand il te verra delaisse de tout secours; Il ne
faut pas inconsidereement se fire a un Ennemy reconcilie, car il ne coute rien
aux meschans de supposer un faux pretexte pour enuahir, et perdre leurs
Ennemis, Celuy qui se confie a son Ennemy monstre bien qu' il ne luy veut point
de bien luy mesme, puis que c' est un Act d'vn veritable Hostilite contre
quelqu' un, de se jetter confidement dans le party qui luy est contraire: D'
ailleurs, comment pouuons nous estre asseurez qu' il a mis en oubly toute sa
haine, puis qu'il y en a plusieurs qui-la perpetuent jusqu' au tombeau, car
quiconque a conceu vne animosite sans subject est capable de la continuer long
temps, pource que c' est vne espece de raison en un chose qui n' en a point,
que de la poursuiure pour cela seulement qu' on la commencee; Les Ennemis
reconciliez a faux, ne demandent qu' vne pretexte pour nous attaquer.

The Wolves and Sheep.
A Leagu Concluded was twixt Wolves and Sheep,
Those did their Dogs as a firm hostage keep
Whilst they to those their young ones do resign:
The truce as pledges strongly to Combine.
But 'twas not long, this peace ill grounded stood
For these with houlings calling for their food
The Older Wolves ye truce did straight revoke
And upon neighboring flocks like to^^ents broke
Whom they deseneles in their Pastures take
And an Oblation to their rapin make
Never in any league with those combine
Whose lawless power will straight ye pence vm wine


FAB. IX. De Lupis and Ovibus.
Foedus aliquando fuit inter Lupos and Oves, quibus natura discordia est;
Obsides utrinque tradebantur; Oves in suam partem, vigilem Canum custodiam,
Lupi suos catulos tradiderunt; Quietis ovibus ac pascentibus, Lupuli Matrum
desiderio ululatus edunt; Tum Lupi irruentes foedus fidemque solutam clamitant,
Ovesque Canum praesidio destitutas laniant.

MORALE.
INscitia est, si in foedere, praesidia tua hosti traderes, nam qui hostis
fuit, hostis fortassis nondum esse desiit, forsan and ansam caeperit, cur te
nudatum praesidiis adoriatur.

FABLE X.
L' Aigle et le Renard eurent amity ensemble, parquoy ils conclurent de
demeurer l'vn aupres de l'autre, pensans que leur amor seroit plus ferme par
conversation mutuelle, L' Aigle done bastit son nid sur vne haut arbre aupres
du quel le Renard fit sa terriere, et mit ses petits dedans les buissons, Or un
jour, cependant que le Renard estoit sorty pour leur chercher quelque proye,
l'Aigle qui aussi auoit besoign de viande, vola droit au lieu, ou estoient les
petits Renardeaux, lequels il rauit promptement, et les donna a manger a ses
poussins; Le Renard ne fut pas plustot de Retour, qu' il reconnut le cruel
carnage qui s' estoit fait en son absence, et en fut extremement fasche; Or
comme ainsi fut, qu' il ne se pouuoit venger de l'Aigle, pour estant qu' il
estoit quadrupede, et n' auoit point des ailes pour poursuyure son Ennemy, il
s' ayda d'vn Souerain remede des malheureux, et de ceux qui n' ont nulle
puissance, c' est a scauoir il se mit a maudire l'Aigle, et souhaita que toutes
sorts de maux luy aduinssent, tant de pouuoir a la haine apres vne amity
violee. Il aduint donc en ce temps la, qu' on sacrifioit des chevres aux
champs, et l'Aigle en rauit un loppin auec des charbons embrasez, et toute
ceste proye elle porta a son nid, et d'autant qu' il estoit fait de foin, et de
semblable matiere seiche, et legere, joint qu' il faisoit fort grand Vent, le
feu ne tarda guere a s' y mettre, et le consomma; Les poussins de l'Aigle
sentans ardeur de la Flamme, pour ce qu' ils ne pouuoient encore voler, se
laissent cheoir en terre, Le Renard les print tout incontinent et les deuora en
la presence de l'Aigle.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEla nous apprend, que les meschans qui faussent vne amity recoi^ent en fin
la punition qui leur est deue, voire mesme qu' ils ont outragez, Car ceux qui
corrompent l'amitie, ja coit qu' ils euitent la vengeance de ceux, qu' ils ont
blessez, toutesfois ils ne peuuent echapper l'ire Divine.

The Eagle's Nest.
From a bitch Fox, a Cubb. the Eagle tore,
And to his nest the tender pillage bore
To the Eagle she a calm adress aply'd
Her Cvbb might be restored, which being denied
She with a firebrand strayt Attempts to turn.
The Eagles nest into ye Eagles Vrne
And seeks with swift assault to Scale the tree.
But when ye cautious Eagle that did see
She bayles her nest from ye aproaching fire
By rendering to ye Fox her Cubb in fire:
Trample not on ye meanest, since even they,
May that assault with lust revenge repay.


FAB. X. De Vulpe, and Aquila.
DVm Vulpis proles fores excurrebant, ab Aquila comprehensae matris fidem
implorabant; Accurrit Vulpes, Aquilamque rogat, ut captivam prolem dimittat,
Aquila nacta praedam ad pullos subvolat, Vulpes correpta face quasi nidum
incendio absumptura esset, insequitur; Trepidans Aquila, Parce, inquit, mihi
paruisque liberis, et tuum quicquid habeo reddidero.

MORALE.
PER Aquilam potentis atque audacis animi homines intelligendi sunt, per
Vulpem, pauperculi; Verum quando and sua formicis est Ira, impotentes etiam
acceptam Injuriam interdum probe uleiscuntur.

FABLE XI.
UN Loup vestu de peau d'vn brebis, se mesla parmy le troupeau, et par tous les
jours, il vora les Brebis; Ce qu' en fin le Berger espiant, il le prit, et
l'ayant bien cherche, il le mit a Mort; Les autres Bergers demandant que c'
estoit la Cause d'vne si grande Cruaute, il respondoit' Vrayement la peau est
la peau d'vne brebis, Mais les faicts sont les faicts d'vn sanguinaire Loup.

Le Sens MORAL.
LE Loup en cette Fable imite la cruaute de certains hommes denaturez, qui sous
l'apparence des Innocents rendent les plus pernicieux offices aux Innocens, et
sont mourir quelques-fois ceux qui se fieroient en eux de leur propre Vie. La
trahison de ces felons va jusqu' a ce poinct, qu' il s' est trouue plusieurs
qui se sont seruis d'vn festin pour empoisonner leur amiss, violans meschamment
le droict d' hospitalite qui est la chose du monde moins violable. Cette
Perfidie est vne Marque visible, non seulement de haine, mais encore de
laschete; Et ce qu' il y a de pire en cela, et qu' on peut appeller proprement
un Crime contre Nature, et insupportable aux gens de Bien, c' est l'infame
profanation des caresses et des temoignages d'amitie. Qu' elle honte est, que
les hommes creez sociables par la Nature, et susceptibles de bien veillance,
semblables a le Loup in cette Fable d' Esope, se seruent des Actions les plus
humaines en appearance, pour executer des cruautez inouyes, et les plus
tragiques effects de leur vengeance? Quelle abomination est, de voir que ce
noble Animal, a qui l'excellence de son estre a fait doner le tiltre de
Raisonable inuente tous les jours de nouueaux appas pour tromper ses Ennemis,
et comme ce Loup ils s' aydent du bon semblant, pour la Ruin d'autruy, et font
perir ceux qu' ils haissent, en les attirant par des feints embrassemens, et
par visages deguisez, et faisans de beaux semblans pour seruir a leur vengeance
vne amor dissimulee? Leur Brutalite va quelquesfois jusques la, qu' ils
prennent l'occasion de fair mourir leurs amiss dans les amoureux accouplemens,
Il se trouue mesme, gens qui recherchent pour cela des finesses
extraordinaires, et qui font gloire entr' eux d'en inuenter des nouelles.

The Wolf in Sheeps Clothing.
A Wolf to Act more safely a surprise
Did with a fleecy vest himself disguize
Whilst ye dull sheep with. this false veil he mock
Annoyes the pastures and subverts whole slocks,
At last unmasked, his life these spoils allayd
Which was to a deserved Hallter paid
Hypocrisy dressed like a seeming Saint.
Improves its guilt by that religious paint.


FAB. XI. De Lupo Ovis pelle induto qui gregem devorabat.
LVpus ovis pelle indutus, ovium se immiscuit gregi, quotidieque aliquam ex eis
occidebat, quod quum pastor animadvertisset, illum in altissima arbore
suspendit; Interrogantibus autem caeteris pastoribus, cur ovem suspendisset,
respondebat; Pellis quidem est Ovis, opera autem erant Lupi.

MORALE.
FAbula innuit; Homines non ex habitu, sed ex operibus judicandos, quoniam
multi sub vestimentis ovium Lupina faciunt opera.

FABLE XII.
L' Oyseleur auoit tendu ses rets pour prendre des oyseaux; la Colombe le
regardant de loing, luy demanda, Que fais tu la? L' oysele respondit, Je basty
vne ville, Et quant, s' en alla un peu plus loing, et se cacha; Le Columbe
croyant a ses paroles s' approcha de la viande que estoit aupres du rets, et
fut pris, Lors accourut Oyseleur, et la Colombe luy dit; O homme si tu bastis
vne tell ville, tu n' auras pas beaucoup de citoyens; Mais un peu apres,
l'oyseleur prennant son harquebuse pour fair mourir vne autre Colombe, comme
il commencoit a la tirer, un serpent casuellement le mord; Paure chetif, que je
suis, dit l'oyseleur, Moy cogitant de destruire un autruy, je suis perdu moy
mesme.

Le Sens MORAL.
LES Ruses ne font qu' auancer la Ruin de leur Autheur; Il n' y a point d'
homme si aueugle, a qui l'on oppose vne finesse qui ne trouue presque tousiours
le moyen de s' eschapper par vne autre, De plus celuy qui s' est engage dans
les Ruses s' egare le plus souuent dans vne Labyrinthe, tout de mesme, qu' on
ne peut quitter le grand chemin pour brosser a trauers la Compagne parmy les
haliers, et les espines, sans se perdre, ou du moins sans s' eloigner du lieu,
ou l'on desire arriuer: Aussi est il fort mal aise de discerner, et de
reconnoistre vne Realite parmy plusieurs apparences adroittement colorees, sur
tout, quand on est procupe d'vne violente Inclination d'en venir a la pratique;
Et s' esgarer du chemin de sincerite, c' est proprement de s' eloigner de la
voye moins dangereuse, et plus honest. Pour conclure, selon le sens Moral de
cette Fable, Celuy ne craint rien qui ne fait aucun tort aux autres, et ne
craignant rien, il march sans artifice, et soupcon, ne jugeant digne de luy
que la voye la plus ordinaire, et la plus naifue.

The Ringdove and Fowler.
Whilst the quick forder, fought with busy skill
A stock Dove on a neighboring tree to kill.
An Adder lurking in ye grass beneath
His death did with a fatal bite bequeath
Who now from his assaulted heart did Feel^
Whilst he eyed her the viper eyed his heel
Thus often those ills yt. we for others spread,
Upon our selves by equal fate are shed.


FAB. XII. De Aucepe, and Palumbe.
IT for as Auceps, videt nidulantem procul in altissima arbore palumbem,
adproperat, et dum insidias molitur, premit forte calcibus anguem, qui ex
improviso mordebat; Auceps subito exanimatus malo, Me miserum, inquit, dum
alteri insidior, ipse dispereo.

MORALE.
MOnemur hac Fabella cum consideratis ambulare, saepissime etenim videmus eos
circumveniri, qui res novas moliuntur.

FABLE XIII.
LA Truye estoit vne fois en trauail de ses cochons, Le Loup promet qu' il luy
seruira de sage femme, et qu' il luy guardera bien sa portee. La gisante luy
respondit qu' elle n' auoit a fair de son aid, et s' il vouloit fair plaisir
et chose agreeable, quil s' en allast bien loin, car le service du Loup, disoit
elle, consiste en son absence, et non en sa presence, et le plus grand plaisir
qu'il scauroit fair, c' est de s'en aller.

Le Sens MORAL.
LA meilleure aid que nous pouuons tirer d'vn meschant c' est de ne le point
voir quand mesme il nous pourroit estre profitable d'ailleurs. Le Vicieux a
quelque secret auersion contre celuy qui ne l'est point. Et quel appearance y a
to il que le Vertueux se puisse preualoir des offerts d'vnEnnemy clandestin? Ne
doiuent else pas estre suspectes? Et mesme, ne luy vaut il pas mieux refuser
ses presens que les receuoir? Il seroit bien aise d'alleguer des Histoires de
grands et excellens personnages qui ont refuse l'amitie des vicieux, bien
quelle leur semblast estre profitable dans le monde, et repute leur louange a
blasme, comme fist un ancien Philosophe qui scachant qu' un homme fort disborde
disoit tousiours bien de luy; Et moy, dit il, je me plaise a le blasmer
incessament. A celles paroles furent semblables celles d'vn autre Philosophe
qui voyant qu' vne person suspecte de disseruer la Patrie le supplioit
instamment de vouloir estre son Amy, Je seray (luy respondit il) ce que tu
voudras, pourueu que tu sois ce que tu dois estre; Nous ne doiuons pas receuoir
vne petite faueur des meschans quand il nous promettent de nous en point fair,
Il ne se faut point fire de toutes chooses a tout le monde, Plusieurs promettent
leur pain et trauail, non pas pour l'amour de toy, mais pour leur prosit
particulier.

The Sow and her Pigs.
A wolf did offer to a teeming Sow,
Her Litter with. his patronage to eudow,
Which might her young from all rude onsets
And any force on them designed diseard;
But ye sage Sow replied she needed none,
TO assert her piggs, her Self could do^ alone,
Knowing how safe still was his absence, She
Affected more his room then Company.
Credit not those that still thy good pretend,
When it is designed to improve Some partial end.


FAB. XIII. De Lupo, and Sue.
PArturiebat Sus, Pollicetur Lupus se custodem fore faetus; Respondet puerpera,
Lupi obsequio se non egere, oratque si velit pius haberi, longius abeat, Lupi
enim benevolentia constabat non praesentia, sed absentia.

MORALE.
NON sunt cuncta cunctis credenda; Multi enim suant operam pollicentur non tui
amore, sed sui, suum quaerentes commodum, non tuum.

FABLE XIV.
LE Cheual tres-richement barde, et pompeusement accoutre s' en alloit courant
par les Rues, et faisant ecchoer l'air de ses hannissements; Lors que
rencontrant un Asne charge qui nuisoit a sa course, il s' enflamma de colere,
et s' estant mis a ronger son frain tout pleine d'escume; Lasche et paresseux
Animal, luy dit il, Es tu bien si hardy que de seruir d'obstacle au Cheual? Va
to en bien viste d'icy, autrement je te souleray aux pieds; Ces paroles
effrayerent l'Asne, et l'effrayerent si bien, que n' osant ouure la bouche pour
braire, il se retira, et luy fit place tout doucement, Ce pendant le Cheval, se
remit a courir, et fit un si grand effort qu'il Creua en l'hayne, Lorsestant
tout inutile a la course, ny plus propre a la parade, il fut depouille de tous
ses beaux ornemens, et puis apres vendu a un Charrier, Le jour ensuyuant,
l'Asne l'ayant rencontre comme il traisnoit la charette, Hau, Compagnon, dit
il, Quel bell accoutrement est cecy? En quel equipage je te voy? Ou est ta selle
doree? ou sont tes belles Bardes? Ou ton Mords si reluisant? Certainement, mon
Amy, ainsi falloit il, qu' il aduint a l'orgueilleux.

Le Sens MORAL.
PLusieurs sont tant esleuez en leur prosperity qu' ils oublient eux mesmes, et
tout modesty, Mais pour autant qu' ils estoient arrogans en leurs bons jours,
ils tombent en l'aduersite, Je voudrois que ceux qui semblent estre heureux
fussent bien aduisez, car, si Chance se turn, ils cognoistront que ce fut un
grand malheur d'auoir este heureux. Auec ce leur sera un grand Mal qu' ils
seront Mesprisez, qu'ils ont eu en mispris, et mocquez de ces ceux qu' ils ont
eu en mocquerie: Pour remedier de bonne heure a toutes ces cho ses, proposons
nous sans cesse, deuant nos yeux l'example de l' Inconstance de la Fortune, qui
n' a jamais si bien fauourise quelqu' un qu'il ne luy ait done le change bien
tossed apres. Nous deuons souffrer patiement nos afflictions, pour l'espoir d'vne
future prosperity et de n' estre si transportez par la jouyssance des Biens
presens, que de n' apprehender pas les maux a venir.

The Horse and Ass.
A Horse whom gaudy trappings did array
Commands a loaded Ass to yield the way
Which ^^^ely he obeyes, when straight a sprayne
Was the expiation of this wild disdain.
This having made his active sinews la^e
He straight devoted to the dull Car became
Which when ye gladed Ass behold says he
I now with joy court my lean drudgerie
Great fortunes are distorted still with care
Whilst cheaper do both envy want and fear


FAB. XIV. De Equo and Asino.
EQuus phaleris, sellaque, ornatus cum ingenti hinnitu per viam currebat.
Currenti onustus Asellus forte obstabat, Cui Equus fremebundus, Quid (inquit)
Ignave obsistis Equo? Cede, inquam, aut te proculcabo pedibus; Asellus rudere
non ausus cedit tacitus; Equo provolanti crepat Inguen; Tum Cursui inutilis
ornamentis spoliatur, Postea cum Carro venientem Asinus affatur; Heus, mi
Amice, Quis ille Ornatus est? Vbi aurea sella? ubi, splendidum Froenum? Sic
Amice; necesse fuit evenire superbienti.

MORALE.
ACcedit ad cumulum infaelicitatis hoc saepe Mali, quod contemnentur ab iis
quos ipsi contempsere, and illudent eis illi, quos ipsi risere.

FABLE XV.
LE Loup encontra un Aigneau en la Compagne d'vn Bouc, et demandoit a luy pour
quelle Cause elle abandonnoit sa Mere pour suiure un olide Bouc, Il le
persuadoit a retourner a les tetins de sa Mere qui estoient pleins de pure
laict, esperant par ces paroles de le seduire, et mettre en pieces; Mais
l'Aigneau repliqua, Ma Mere me commettoit a la charge et la tuition de cette
Bouc, qui maintenant me guarde, et il me faut render toute obcissance a ma Mere.

Le Sens MORAL.
QUi n' estimera l'obeissance de cet Animal innocent? Qui n' approuuera sa
bonne conduite? Sa Mere luy defend de n' abandonner la Compagne de le Bouc, Et
voila qu' un moment apres, leur perfide Ennemy s' en vient pour deceuoir la
pauure Aigneau, et luy persuader d'vne voix feinte qu' elle retourna a sa mere,
Mais elle bien advise, ne se depart pas d'un seul poinct du Commandment de sa
Mere; C'est ainsi qu'en doiuent vser tous les Enfans bien-nais, et mettre le
plus haut poinct de leur gloire a se render tousiours souples a la Volonte de
ceux qui les ont mis au monde; Aussi a vray dire, les plus beaux fruicts qu'ils
puissent cuellir des Instructions, qu' on leur done en leur bas age, sont ceux
de l'Obeissance. Les Enfans doiuent obeir a leurs Pere et Mere, et se render
ponctuels a l'obseruation de tout ce qui leur est ordonne par eux mesmes. L'
Aigneau de cette Fable leur apprend par les grandes precautions, qu'il apporte
a ne se laisser surprendre au Loup. Il n'est rien de si hazardeux que les
entreprises des jeunes Gens qui ne daignent suiure les advis des hommes sages,
et de ceux mesmes que la Providence commet pour leur Government; Nous ne deuons
pas croire, que le sens et l'Experience manquent aux jeunes gens; Dieu ne les
abandonne jusques-la, que de ne leur rien laisser de ce don't ils ont besoin
pour vne bonne Conduitte; Ce seroit vne grande Injustice de le penser, puisque
sa divine Providence nous ne refuse jamais les chooses qu' elle scait nous estre
vtiles, et necessaires. Il nous done des parens et precepteurs qui prestent
leur Judgment a nos actions, et sont les guides preuoyantes de nos mouuemens
impetueux; Il nous suscite des Exemples exterieurs qui se presentent a nous
autant de fois qu'il est necessaire pour nostre Bien, Et pendant que nous
sommes agitez des tourbillons de la jeunesse, il est bon de nous deferer a
l'advis des plus estimez, croyant que le Ciel nous les a proposez pour les
modelles, et Exemples.

The Wolf and Goat.
A Wolf a Lamb whom his wyld hopes ingrost
Already for their victime, did accost.
Secured by a he goat, whom with. false Art,
He begs from his rank guardian to depart.
Saying his dam did with full vdder bleat
Him to refresh with an Indulgent teat
My Damm (said he) Obliged me to attend,
The conduct still of this her constant friend.
Whom i will obey, which will yt. life preserve
Whose loss will be thy feigned love to serve.
This does assert yt. Maxim to be true.
Change not thy old friend to embrace a new.


FAB. XV. De Lupo and Hirco.
AGno comitanti Caprum Lupus fit obviam, rogatque cur relicta Matre olidum
sequatur hircum, suadetqne ut ad ubera Matris distenta lacte redeat, Ille vero,
Matter mea huic hirco (O Lupe) commisit, Huic summa cura meae salutis data est;
Parenti potius quam tibi obsequendum, qui me seducere istis dictis quaeris, and
subductum postea decerpere.

MORALE.
QVid agimus semper inspiciendum est, and quomodo in obsequium ruimus, Multi
etenim dum aliis videntur velle prodesse, sibimet ipsis interim solum
consulunt.

FABLE XVI.
LES Colombes eurent jadis guerre contre le Milan, et, a fin, de le vaincre
plus facilement, ils eleuerent le Faucon pour le Souerain; Mais luy se voyant
declare Roy il les gouernoit comme Ennemy, et leur estant aussi cruel que le
Milan mesme, les rauissoit, les mettoit tout en pieces, et les mangeoit. Else
se repentirent donc de leur sottise, et dirent, Qu'il leur eust este beaucoup
meilleur d'endurer la guerre du Milan, que la tyranny du Faucon.

Le Sens MORAL.
LA propriete du sage c'est de ne se laisser conduire qu'a la Virtue: Et la
premire sin de l'Establissement des Roys a este pour contenir les peuples en
l'obseruation de ce qui est honneste, et Vertueux. D' ou il ensuit, que les
Gens du Bien n' auroient jamais besoin de Maistre, s' ils ne sortoient horse des
limits de leur Deuoir. Mais comme il n'y a celuy qui pour confirm qu'il soit
dans l'exercice des actions vertueuses, n'y puisse faillir quelques fois, la
pluspart des hommes n' ayant que de foibles estincelles de Probite, c' est
asseurement un Bien moindre mal, pour eux d'estre gouernees, que de ne l'estre
pas, a Cause de la grande facilite qu' ils auroient a chopper, s'ils n'
estoient retenus par la crainte de quelque puissance: Mais d'imiter les
Colombes de cette Fable en elisant leur Ennemy pour leur Roy, c' est, a mon
aduis, vne Fault insupportable, et digne de toute Reprehension. Cela soit dit
seulemeut pour les monarchies electives; car quant a celles qui ont authorize
d'age en age le droict de la succession, il est absolument necessaire de n' en
pas sortir, a Cause des grands Inconueniens qui s' y rencontrent, et du Zele
deuotieux que les peuples ont a certaines Familles; comme l'eurent anciennement
les Romans aux Descendans d' Auguste, les Egyptiens aux Ptolomees, les Perses
aux arriere-neueux de Darius; Et de nostre temps les Anglois, a la Royale Tyge
de STVARTS.

Cette saute neantmoins en matiere d' Election n'a pas laisse d'estre commune a
diverse peuples du monde, qui ayants eleu les Tyrans pour leur Roys, porterent
bien tossed la peine de leur Imprudence, C'est alors que ces Subjects
inconsiderez representent le personage de Colombes en nostre Fable, et qu'ils
ont recours aux pleurs, et au repentir, a la maniere des Femmes, regrettant
l'estat de leur premiere Fortune, et souhaittans en vain d'y estre rappellez.

The Parliament of Birds.
The winged nation did in Council meet
When thus the Peacock did that Iuncto greet
Saying since this day's fixed a king to elect
We ought his full endowments to detect
And first a graceful personage should be
The prime apendixe unto Majesty
This being voted the bold Peacock struts
And in his clame for sovereigntie puts,
Saying his Features might the crown extort
Which vote they all but ye wise Pie support
Who said a king should not be gay alone
But should have courage to assert his throne.
A Prince elected should be still indu'd
Not with gay form but inward fortitude.


FAB. XVI. De Columbis and Accipitre.
COlumbae olim cum Milvo haud incruentum gerebant bellum, and ut Milvum penitus
expugnarent delegerunt sibi Regem Accipitrem, qui Rex factus hostem agit, non
Regem; Nam non segnius, ac Milvus, Columbas rapit, laniatque Poenitebat igitur
Columbas incepti, satius fuisse putantes bella pati Milvi, quam Accipitris
subire tyrannidem.

MORALE.
QVamvis pauci admodum sort sua contenti vivunt, Nemo tamen aut Fortunam aut
Rationem petulanti lacessat lingna, Multi nova sort quaesita, veterem rursus
optavere; Ita Natura sumus omnes comparati, ut nosmet nostri saepe consilii
poeniteat.

FABLE XVII.
LE Rat de Ville se voulut promener aux champs, le Rat de Village ayant
l'encontre fortuitement s' aduisa de le convier a un festin qui fut incontinent
appreste, puis ils se meirent a souper ensemble; Le Rat de Village mit en auant
tout ce qu' il auoit amasse pour son hyuer, et vuida toute sa provision a fin
de traitter magnifiquement un si grand host, toutesfois le Rat de la Ville se
refrognoit, et se plaignoit de la pauurete des Villages et auec ce louoit
l'abondance des villes; Il ramena donc auec soy le Rat Villageois en la Ville,
a fin pour fair eprouuer en effet ce de quoy il s' estoit vante de parole, et
luy fit un sumptueux banquet de tout ce qu' il y auoit de meilleur. Cependant
qu' ils faisoyent grande chere ils ouyrent le bruit d'vne chef en la serrure,
Alors ils trembloyent et regardoyent le lieu, ou ils se chacheroyent; Le
Villageois n' ayant experimente tell frayeur, et ne scachant les addresses de
lieu, a grand peine trouua il sa seurete. Un peu apres, le Valet qui les auoit
ainsi effrayez s' estant retire, le Rat de Ville se mit a manger, et appella
son compagnon qui vint a la fin tout espouuante, ne se pouuant bien remettre de
sa frayeur, et comme il se remit a la Table, il demanda a son host, il estoit
souuent en de semblables dangers, Le Rat de la Ville s' luy respondit, que tous
les jours il estoit en ce danger, et pourtant, dit il, il ne s' en faut soucie;
Tous les jours? dit la Villageois; Certes ton banquet a plus de fiel que miel;
Fay donc si bonne chere que tu voudras pour moy, J' aim mieux pauurete auec
asseurance que ton abondance auec tell chagrin, et souci.

Le Sens MORAL.
LEs Richesses ont quelque appearance de Volupte, mais si nous regardons jusques
au fond, else sont pleines des perils, et amertume; Il y eut un homme nomme
Eutrapilus lequel quand il voulut bien nuyre a ses ennemis, il les faisoit
riches, disant qu' il se vengeoit d'eux en cette sort, d'autant qu' auec leurs
richesses ils receuoyent un grand fardeau de solicitude. D' auantage, cette
Fable nous monstre bien que toute sort d'incertitude estant ennuyeuse, il n' y
a point de plaisir qu' elle ne corrompe, pour ce qu' elle est mere de la
Defiance.

The City Mouse and Country Mouse.
The Country Mouse, the City Mouse myites
That she may be refresht with those delights,
Her Larder yields the other Mouse again,
Conducts her to her City Pantry when
As she was Marshalling a Pompous feast
Which wa^ designd to oblige her Country Guest
A Servant enters, whose unwelcome sight
Does both into a Dusty cavern fright,
(He ^o^) they sally to the feast again
But fear the Country Mouse had so o'traine
That she Departs and said no fears molest
Our homelier cells or our course fare infest
When dangers Cater to your choyer meat
Which got with hazard, you with terror ^a^e
More pomp in splendid palaces does dwell
But more content wayts on ye humble cell


FAB. XVII. De Mure Vrbano, and Mure Rustico.
MVS Rusticus videns Vrbanum Murem Rus deambulantem ivitat ad coenam,
depromitque omne penu, ut tanti hospitis expleat lautitiam; Vrbanus Mus ruris
damnat inopiam, urbisque copiam laudat, secumque in urbem ducit Rusticum qui
inter epulandum attonitus insolitis clamoribus, quum intellexerat periculum
quotidianum esse, dixit Vrbano Muri, Tuae dapes plus fellis quam mellis habent,
Malo securus esse cum mea inopia quam dives esse cum tua anxietate.

MORALE.
DIvitiae quidem prae se ferunt voluptatem, sed si penitus introspicias habent
Pericula et amaritudinem. Majori etenim Curarum Mole opprimuntur divites, quam
pauperes.

FABLE XVIII.
AUtemps que l'on commencoit a semer le lin, l'Arondelle conseille aux autres
Oyselets d'empescher la semence, disanr qu'il y auoit espies sur les champs
pour leur fair des embusches, mais else se mocquerent d'elle, et luy dirent
qu' elle estoit vne sotte Deuineresse; Apres ce temps, quand le lin commencoit
a croire, et reuerdir, derechef elle les admoneste d'en arracher la semence,
mais ils ne firent encore que s' en mocquer, A la fin, comme elle vid qu' il
commencoit a meurir, elle leur donna conseil de s' en aller pillar les bleds,
et encore ne la creurent ils point, Alors l'Arondelle, delaissant la compagnie
de tous les autres Oyseaux, rechercha celle de l' homme, auec qui, elle fit
amity, d'ou vient qu' elle demeure maintenant auecque luy, et le rejouyt de
son chant, quand tous les autres Oyseaux furent pris aux lassets, et rets faits
de ce lin.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEtte Arondelle nous apprend combien un bon et sage Conseil importe a
destourner les maux de la vie, sans lequel toutes les entreprises s' en iroient
en ruin, De la aussi proceed que l' homme prudent ne fait jamais rien sans
l'aduis des sages, pource, que des diuerses opinions des plusieurs il en tire
vne Resolution qui ne luy peut estre que profitable, mais le grand mal est, que
les fidelles conseillers ne rencontrent souuent point de foy parmy ceux qu' ils
entretiennent, encore qu' ils leur donnent de vrais et salutaires
aduertisements, car la jeuuesse emportee des tourbillons de son ardeur mesprise
les sages enseignemens des vielliards, et se precipite inconsiderement en mill
sorts des perils, causez par sa incredulite. Il y a certaines persons aussi,
qui, par je ne scay quelle stupidite, ne recoiuent pas un bon conseil;
Plusieurs ne se scauent conseiller eux mesmes, et ne veulent croire a ceux qui
leur donnent bon conseil; Mais quand ils sont au milieu des dangers et
dommages, lors ils commencent a deuenir sages, et blasmer leur bestialite, lors
seulement ils ont preuue de bon conseil, C' est un dangereux effect parmy les
hommes, quand rien est leur laisse pour remede que ces paroles. O que si je
l'eusse pense.

The Swallow and other Birds.
A Cautious Swallow who a Clown beheld
With fatal Hempseed to have strewed his field.
Invok't ye other Birds that they would destroy
Its teeming growth yt would so much annoy,
(When 'twas improved to Hemp) their winged state
But they attended with a sullen fate
With cheap neglect her numerous Council slight
Then she secures her self by early flight
Whilst busy foulers with those twi^^ed snares
Which of this Hemp were framed with frequent car^
Infest ye winged tribe who near could be
Ere since from those more close contextures ^ree
Thus they who oftneglect severe advice
Pursue to build though on a precipice


FAB. XVIII. De Hirundine and aliis Aviculis.
HIrundo quum linum coeptum esset seri, suadebat aliis Aviculis impedire
sementem, dictitans omnibus fieri insidias, Irridebant illae, garrulamque
vocabant; Surgente lino rursum monebat evellere sata; Irridebant iterum;
Maturescente lino hortabatur populari segetem; Et quum ne tunc quidem
consulentem audiret Hirundo, cum homine faedus init, cohabitatque cum eo;
Caeteris e lino avibus retia fiunt, et laquei.

MORALE.
MVlti nec ipsi consulere sibi norunt, nec recte consulentem audiunt, sed quum
in periculis versantur, tum demum incipiunt suam damnare socordiam.

FABLE XIX.
SI nous deuons croire les Maxims des Philosophes, les Bieur es demeurent a la
pluspart en Marescage; Les testes de Bieure sont souueraigns pour plusieurs
chooses qui appartient a la Medecin, et c' est la Cause que quand il apperceut
les Veneurs approchant a luy, il est si industrieusement provident par un
naturel Instinct qu' il a, qu' il se desmembre de ses testes, et les laisse a
les chasseurs, par quel violence a soy mesme, il trouue le moyen pour sauuer sa
vie.

Le Sens MORAL.
CES sont pas les plus haut es Instructions de Philosophes qui disposent au
mespris de la Mort, et a la souffrance des calamites. Car comme il est plus
aise de pousser un cheual a toute bride que de le retenir au milieu de la
Carriere, il est de mesme bien plus difficile de degourdir nostre Ame, et armer
contre les miseres, et la porter dans le chemin de la Consolation, que
d'arrester tout a coup ses mouuemens, quand la bonne Fortune, ou le peur de
Mort l'emporte auec violence au de-la ses limits. Le Bieure en cette Fable
nous apprend, combien importe a destourner les maux de la vie auec un bon et
preuoyant Conseil, a quoy s'accommode le sentiment d'vn memorable Poet en
Angleterre La Force qui n' a point le Conseil pour soustein,
Se destruit d'elle mesme, et ne vaut jamais rien.
La vie est doucee, et il vaut mieux estre dismembre en son Corpse, que souffrir
la violence des cruels et sanguinaires persecuteurs. Ilest vray que nous tenons
de la naissance un certain Instinct qui nous port ordinairement aux actions
qui tendent a la sauuegarde de nostre vie, et qui se fortifient par
l'experience, Il est donc bon que nous suiuons cet Instinct, si nous voulons
reussir agreablement en nos Actions, A quoy certes il est difficile que nous
manquions, nous laissans conduire aux secrets mouuements des chooses auquelles
l' Ingenieuse Nature nous a fait naistre. Cette bonne Mere veut que ses Enfans
ne s' esgarent point des secrets Instructions qu' elle leur a marquees.

The Hunted Beaver.
Beavers by Eager Hunters often perfir'd
Cause nature with Castorium had Indu'd
Their pregnant Testacles, they by instinct
Knowing to what cause their persuit is linckt
Byte of ye Bagg which does yt Drug comprize
And bail their Lives by that rich Sacrifice.
Thus we are often safe by temporary Loss,
To Keep his gold would not part with Dross.


FAB. XIX. De Castore.
CAstor est Animal, in paludibus sese nutriens, cujus testiculi variis medelis
utiles esse dicuntur, Itaque quum quispiam eum sequitur, venationis causam non
ignorans, fugit ad speluncam ubi ab hominum conspectu, Canumque odoratu securus
testes dentibus exscondit et venatoribus appropinquantibus relinquit, et hoc
pacto se securum praestat.

MORALE.
QVAE putamus nobis profutura, cum vitae periculo saepe experimur; Sapiens ut a
periculis se eripiat nihil intentatum relinquit.

FABLE XVIII.
LE Renard, deuisant auec le chat, se vantoit qu' il auoit tant de sorts de
finesses qu' il auoit vne pleine bessase de tromperies, A quoy le Chat
respondit, qu' il n' auoit qu' vne seule subtilite, mais il tenoit bien
asseure; Et parlant familierement, comme ils estoient sur ce discourse, ils
ouyrent aboyer des chiens qui s' en vinrent tout droit a eux; Alors le Chat
monta vistement sur un arbre qui estoit prochain, Ce que le Renard ne pouuant
fair, il sut a l'instant enuironne d'vne multitude des chiens qui le prirent.

Le Sens MORAL.
PAR cette Fable nous sommes aduises que la naifue prudence est plus pure en
toutes chooses qu' vne Conduite pleine d'artifices, et de captieuses subtilitez;
Ce qui sera mal aise a persuader Vulgaire qui admire extraordinairement les
finesses, et repute bien heureux ceux qui en scauent abondamment inventer, Mais
ces autres, qui sont veritablement sages et genereux, se viennent au dessus de
cette method, et mettant la vraye address en vne discrete sincerite, en vsent
accortement, et y conuient tout le monde a leur Example; Or que chemin la soit
le plus vertueux, c' est vne chose si manifest qu'elle n' a besoin de preuue,
ny d' Experience; Il faut seulement scauoir qu'il est le plus asseure, et que
les Ruses ne font qu' auancer la Ruin de leur Autheur, si ce n' est d'auanture
quand il est question de s' opposer aux pieges d'vn Ennemy et de chercher son
salut dans la contre-finesse, Car comme un chemin couuert de Brossailes, et de
Buissons est a bon droit plus suspect au voyageur, qu' vne voye toute plain et
vnie, ainsi un Proceed, plein d'embusches traistres et dangereuses, est
incomparablement plus a craindre qu' vne suite des actions vertueuses. La
principale Raison est tiree de la multiplicite; Car a fouiller dans l'obscurite
des affairs, il n' y a point d' homme si aueugle a qui l'on oppose vne
finesse, qui ne trouue presque toujours le moyen de s' eschapper par vne autre.
De plus, celuy qui s' engage dans les Ruses, s'egare plus souuent dans un
Labyrinthe, tout de mesme, qu' on ne peur quitter le grand chemin pour brosser
a trauers la Compagne parmy les haliers, et les espines sans se perdre, ou du
moins sans s' eloigner du lieu ou l'on desire arriuer; Aussi est il fort mal
aise de discerner ce qui semble vray, d'auec ce qui l'est veritablement, et de
reconnoistre vne realite parmy plusieurs apparences adroittement colorees, sur
tout, quand on est preoccupee d'vne violente Inclination d'en venir a la
pratique; Or s' egarer du chemin de la verite c' est proprement, s' eloigner de
la voye plus honneste, car a la pluspart un Conseil vaut beaucoup mieux
moyennant qu' il soit vray, et d'efficace, que plusieurs machinations, et
conseils friuoles.

The Fox and the Cat.
A Ranting Fox boasts to ye Catt, how he
Himself with. numerous wily shifts could free
The ingenious Catt replied she had but one,
And if yt frastrate was then she had none.
A noise of full Mouthed Hounds did straight posses
They^ frighted (...), which made ye Fox adfresse
Himself to Flight, whilst ye more active Catt
Scaling a tree declines an angry fate.
Whilst by ye sent the Dogg^ ye Fox pursue
And force him from each winding avertue
His stra^agems not sh^onding him at all
Now he is thus ^^^^ed to his firnerall
Heaps of u^ake Arts are not so s^^ng as one
With solid pruden^^ (...) on.


FAB. XX. De Cato and Vulpe.
COntrahebant inter se amicitias Catus, et Vulpes, cui Vulpes astutiarum suarum
grandem recensebat numerum, Catus replicuit; Ast ego uno tantum consilio, and
quod Natura ad meipsum preservandum suggessit, contentus sum. Inter haec,
odoram Canum vim appropinquantium audiunt, Catus confestim altissimos Arboris
scandebat ramos and secure despectans sedebat; Vulpes autem and hic, and illic
trepide currebat, and nulla aufugiendi spe relicta, nulla uspiam latebra
inventa, a canibus apprehensus laceratur.

MORALE.
GEnuina and Naturalis Prudentia omnia figmenta fraudesque superat; Qui aliis
insidias molitur, sibimet ipsi plerunque imponit, and est indeploratus artifex
suae ipsius Mortis.

FABLE XXI.
LE Chat sentant qu' en vne maison il y auoit plusieurs Rats, Il y entra, et
maintenant il prenoit un, et maintenant un autre, de manier qu' a force d'aller
a cette chasse, en peu de temps, il en tua plusieurs, Les Rats cependant voyant
qu' il ne se passoit guere jour qu' il n' y eust quelqu' un des leurs demange
ils firent vne Assemble entr'-eux pour y Consulter de leur Affair, Il ne faut
plus, disoient ils, que nous descendions la' bas, si nous ne voulons fair
estat d'estre tous perdus, Demeurons donc plustost en haut ou nostre Ennemy ne
se peut aduancer. Le Chat apprit ce Dessein des Rats, et ne l'eust pas plustost
decouuert, que faisant le mort, il se pendit par les pieds de derriere a vne
perch attachee a la Muraille; Comme cela se passoit ainsi, Il y eust un des
Rats qui jettant veue en bas connut tout de bon que c' estoit le Chat, Hola mon
Amy, dit il, Quand Je te prendrois pour un Souflet, ou quand mesme Je scaurois
veritablement que tu serois tell, encore ne descendroy je pas en bas.

Le Sens MORAL.
IL ne faut pas tomber pour la second fois enter les mains des meschans, mais
se mesfier touiours d'eux, et interpreter toutes leur Actions a mal, quand
mesme else seroient pleines d'vne Appearance de Piete, Car comme le Diable qui
est leur Prince, se desguise quelque fois en Ange de lumiere pour seduire les
hommes, Il arrive tout de mesme, que les meschans se couurent d'vne fausse
contrition de leurs malices, et tesmoignent un feint Repentir, pour r'
attrapper dans leur pieges ceux qu' ils y ont vne fois tenus. Mais qui sera l'
homme si Ennemy a soy mesme que de se fire a leurs Impostures, principalement
si pres en auoir port la pennitence? Et toutesfois il se void assez souuent
que les plus gens de Bien ne laissent pas de s' y fire, soit pour estre
naturellement enclins au pardon, soit pour n' auoir pas l'esprit assez fort
contre les stratagemmes, et les mines secrettes que font tousjours tells hommes
contagieux a tous les Estats; Car ils sont de tell sort, que pour les separer
du Commerce des Gens de Bien, ce ne fut pas sans cause que Philippe Roy de
Macedoine fit amas vne fois de ceux, d'entr' eux, qui estoient les moins
supportables dans son Royaume, lequels il reliqua en un lieu, ou ils bastirent
vne Ville qui fut appelle Poneropolis, c' est a dire, la Ville des meschans. Ce
qui nous doit remettre a memoire que l' homme prudent s' il a este vne fois
trompe, il ne fiera plus aux hommes feints et dissimules.

The Cat and Mice.
A Morde Committee do their suffrage join
How by some solemn siguall to decline
The approaching Catt, when a severer Mouse
Did this proportionate expedient Choose:
About grim Ma^^kins neck a Bell to place,
Whose signal might ensuing dangers trace:
But then quoth one I like the project well,
But who le adventure there to fix the Bell.
Good Councell's eas by given, but the effect
Ost renders it (...) to transact.


FABLE XXI. De Cato, and Muribus.
CAtus quum Pistoris domum ingressus est, quam plurimos invenit Mures, and nunc
unum, nunc alterum devorando tam caute Patri-familias providebat ut paucos
reliquisset; Mures interim, quum ante oculos habuissent diuturnam illorum
caedem, consilium ceperunt, quo pacto Catum vorabundum evitarent; Post varias
disceptationes, concludebant tandem, ut in locis occultis, altissimisque
remanerent, ne descendendo, in praedam Cato venirent; Catus hoc consilio
intellecto, se mortuum fingebat, quum unus ex Murium senioribus, ab alto
exclamavit; Euge amice, non Cato credendum est, ne mortuo quidem.

MORALE.
CAvendum est cui fidem adhibemus; ea lege etenim vivitur, ut multi etiam
faedissima consilia in obsequium vertunt, and adulantur quos dente Thronino
dudum lacerarunt; Mordet Invidiae livor, assentatur favor, nusquam tuta fides
apud blandos, vel obnoxios.

FABLE XXII.
LE Lion ayant fait accord auec la brebis et quelques autres Bestelettes
d'aller a la chasse ensemble, et que la venaison qu' ils prendroient seroit en
commune; Il arriua, qu' ils prirent un Cerf, et comme il fut donc question de
le partager, ainsi qu' il auoit conclud entr' eux, chacun voulut emporter ce
qui luy appartenoit, Lors le Lion rugist et se corrouca; l'vne des portions,
disoit il, est mienne pour ce que je suis plus digne que vous toutes; L' autre
semblement est mienne, a cause des grands advantages que ma force m'a done par
dessus vous, Et l'autre portion aussi m' appartient pource que j'ay plus
trauaille que vous a prendre le Cerf.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEtte Fable represente les injustes auantages que les Riches prennent sur les
pauures, qu'ils ont accoustume de tromper; mais la Feaute a este tousiours bien
clair semee en ce monde, et singuliement enter les plus puissans et grandes,
parquoy il vaut mieux viure auec ses equales, car celuy qui vit auec un plus
puissant que soy il luy est force bien souuent de delaisser du sien, Auec ton
pareil tu auras un pareil droit; Mais contre ces effects de Tyranny il me
semble que les pauures n' ont point de remede que la patience, parce que quand
les assistances humaines venant a leur defaillir, ils doiuent tirer leur
satisfaction de seule virtu, et attendre a l'epoir d'vne meilleure vie; Aussi a
vray dire, c' est nullement en chooses humaines et tranfitoires cette Felicite
perdurable que les hommes recherchent; Tous y aspirent, mais non y paruiennent
a fault de la connoistre; Les vns mettent leur felicite au Biens du Corpse, tells
que sont, la Beauty, la Bonne mine, la puissance, Les autres en la possession
des honneurs, et des voluptez, Et sont ceux qui s' outrecuident en les dons d'
Intellect, Mais il ne scauent pas que la cognoissance de Dieu est la source de
toute felicity tellement que pour estre heureux a jamais, il faut nous
attacher a cette science salutaire qui nous monstre a renoncer aux vanitez de
la terre pour nous acquirer les bien du ciel, ou la beauty, la puissance et
toutes commoditez temporelles n' ont point de part.

The Lion and other Beasts.
With the other Beasts the Lion fixed a day
T'invade a Heart as their designed prey
Which being acheiv'd as they cons^^ting were
In equal portions to dissect each share
The Lion urged, ye first to him was due
Which dos to me by sovereign right acrew
My strength exacts a second, and I claim
A third, 'cause chiefly I subdued the game
A fourth part vndispos'd the which I know
As Larges you will on me your Prince bestow.
So the deluded Beasts ye prey forsook
Without regret, checked by his awful look.
Thus Poverty its right has often forgone.
When by injurious greatness trod upon.


FAB. XXII. De Leone and quibusdam aliis quadrupedibus.
COnvenere Leo, and ovis, and alii Quadrupedes, pepigerantque inter se
Venationem fore communem, Itur venatum, Procumbit Cervus, spolia dividunt,
singulas singulis parts tollere incipientibus, irrugiens surgit Leo, una
inquit, Pars mea est, quia sum dignissimus; Altera item mea est, quia viribus
sum praestantissimus, Porro, quia in capiendo Cervo plus sudaverim, tertiam
mihi partem vendico, Quartem denique partem nisi concesseritis, Actum est de
Amicitia, Ilicet periistis. Reliqui, hoc audito, discedunt vacui, and taciti,
non aussi mutire contra Leonem.

MORALE.
APud Potentes rara semper fides. Quocirca satius est cum pari vivere, Qui enim
cum potentioribus vivit, necesse habet de suo, saepe, Jure concedere,
Tranquilla Vita aequale petit.

FABLE XXIII.
LE Lion estant less de chaleur, et de trauaille, se reposoit a l'ombre sur la
verdure d'vne Arbre. Cependant qu' il dormoit vne troupeau de Rats couroit sur
sa croupe. Mais luy s' estant esueille il en saisist un de sa patte, qui, se
voyant pris, luy demanda pardon, disant qu' il n' estoit pas digne, qu' vne si
noble Best se courroucast contre luy. Le Lion pensant que celuy seroit
deshonneur de tuer vne tant bestiolle relascha son prisonnier. Or un peu de
temps apres, Le Lion courant par la Forest il tomba fortuitement dans les
filets des Chasseurs, ou il put bien rougir a loisir, mais non pas de sortir,
le Rat suruint a ce bruit, et recognut par le rugissement que c' estoit le Lion
qu' on auoit pris, Il se festina donc pour le secourir, et sceut si bien
chercher les noeuds des cordages, que les ayant trouues, il se mit a les
ronger, et par ce moyen le Lion s' eschappa de ses liens.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEtte Fable nous done a entendre qu' il ne point si chetiue person de qui
les grands ne puissent auoir besoin, et par consequent, qu' il est bon d'vser
de Clemence enuers eux, ce qu' il ne faudroit pas laisser de fair, quand mesme
on n' en deuroit esperer aucune sort de recompense, Or de toutes les Vertus c'
est ne pas la moindre qu'est la clemence, ou la miserecorde enuers les foibles,
tant pour ce qu' elle est meslee de Generosite, qu' a cause qu' elle appartient
a la Justice. D'auantage, par cette Fable touts sont confeillez, les riches, et
puissants de garder la clemence et douceur, car, selon que les chooses humains
sont inconstantes, ils ont le plus souent affair de l'aide des plus petits,
Parquoy, l' homme sage, jacoit qu'il puisse, toutesfois craindra il de nuyre a
person. Or celuy, qui ne craint de fair desplaisir a autruy, est un grand
fol, pource qu' il soit des maintenant puissant, neantmoins il aduiendra
parauanture, qu' il a cause quelquefois de craindre, car est tout certain que
les excellent personages ont eu souuent besoin de l'amitie, et ont craint le
courroux des petits compagnons.

The Lion and Mouse.
A Lion was Entangled in a Snare,
Non could his teeth or paws ye. amb^^h ^eance
Since his wild Struglings more engaged him in:
The treacherous foldings of ye. under Gin.
When a kind Mouse by gnawing did untwine
The Snarled Cordage of the raveld line
So did the Lion Life and freedom get.
Infranchis'd from ye Prison of his Nett.
Do not ye himble with negleel despise.
A Mouse a Lion rescued from Surprise.


FAB. XXIII. De Leone and Mure.
LEO aestu, cursuque defessus in umbra quiescebat, Murium autem grege tergum
ejus percurrente expergefactus unum e multis comprehendit, Supplicat misellus,
clamitans Indignum se esse cui irascatur; Leo reputans mhil laudis esse in Nece
tantillae bestiolae captivum dimittit; Non multo post, Leo dum per segetes
currit incidit in plagas, rugire licet, exire non licet, Rugientem Leonem Mus
audit, vocem agnoscit, repit in cuniculos, and quaesitos laqueorum nodos
invenit, corroditque, quo facto Leo e plagis evadit.

MORALE.
INterdum and ipsi potentes egent open servorum humilimorum, Vir prudens igitur
etiamsi potest, timebit tamen, vel vilissimo homuncioni nocere; Nihil est quod
magis commendat Reges quam clementia, and annexa potestati Moderatio.

FABLE XXIV.
LE Rat ayant ronge les noeuds des Cordages par quel moyen le Lion s' eschappa
de ses Liens, en lesquels il estoit enveloppe; pour reconnoissance de ce bon
Office le Lion le mena dans sa cauerne, ou il estoit quelque fois nourry de ce
qu' il auoit plus delicat; Mais en fin il arriua que le Rat deuint amoureux de
la fille du Lion, qui promettoit a donner luy en marriage, mais la jeune Lionne
dedaignant la petitesse de son Aymant, enter les premiers entre-ueues,
inconsiderement le tua auec sa pate.

Le Sens MORAL.
ESOPE nous done a entendre par cette Fable, qu' en la Marriage, il nous faut
choisir judicieusement, et auec les proportions conuenables a nostre Condition,
car pour un pauure Rat d'estre Mary d'vne jeune Lionne est tout impossible qu'
vne tell Femme ne se degouste, et qu' elle ne se console de ses desplaisirs
auec vne plus agreeable Compagnie que celle de son Mary. Et sans mentir, si les
plus retenues ont bien de la peine a demurer fideles aux Maris de bonne Mine,
et qui sont bien a leur gre, quelle appearance y peut il auoir, qu' else ainsi
sient a un Pigme despourueu de tout vigueur, et de toute consolation? Mais nous
auons ailleurs un memorable Example de la Reconnoissance d'vn Lion en l'
Histoire d'Androde, Esclaue d'vn Seigneur Romain qui estant contraint de s'
enfuir a la Tyranny de son Maistre, il s' Address aux lieux deserts, ou il
vid venir a luy un Lion d'excessiue grandeur, qu' au lieu de le menacer, il le
flattoit doucement, jettant de hauts cris qui tesmoignoient apparemment un
douleur excessive; Androde ayant apperceu, que la Cause en procedoit d'vne
longue Espine que le pauure Lion auoit dans la pate, le luy tira, et fist
suppurer l'Aposteme qui s'y estoit amassee. Pour cette bon office le Lion luy
menoit chez soy, ou il sut long temps, En fin il arriua que le malheureux
Androde, fut reconnu, et reconduit a son ancien Maistre, qui le destina a
seruir au Spectacle des bestes farouches. Or il aduint de bonne Fortune, que le
mesme Lion, don't il auoit este le Medecin, luy fut present a combattre, qui,
au lieu d'esgorger l'Esclave, se prosterna tout a coup a ses pieds, luy
applaudissant de la queue, que l'Androde voyant il se mit a raconter a le
peuple la generosite, et la Reconnoissance de ce Lion, dequoy les Romans
esbahis, ils voulurent que tous deux fussent deffrayez aux despens du public,
portant chacun vne Inscription auec ces mots. Voicy le Lion Host de l' Homme,
voicy l' Homme Medecin du Lion.

The Lion and Mouse.
The Lion did ye Mouse to Court invite
That he his Signal service might require.
And then oblige him any boon to crave
Or filt for him to grant or him to have
When haueing seen his princely daug^er spyde
He beggs ye royal virgin for his bride
Whilst thus with pride and love ye Mouse was fird
He unawares crushed by her paw expired
Those yt from Schools and warm disputes de come.
Are vnawar^s by beau^^s charms struck drunk.


FAB. XXIV. De Leone and Mure.
LEo laqueo captus, quum ita se irretitum videret, ut nullis viribus sese
explicare potuit; Murem rogavit, ut abroso laqueo eum liberaret, promittens
tanti beneficii se non futurum immemorem, quod quum Mus prompte fecisset,
Leonem rogavit, ut filiam ejus, sibi traderet in Vxorem; Nec abnuit Leo, ut
Benefactori suo rem gratam faceret; Nova autem Nupta ad Virum veniens, quum eum
non videret, casu illum pede pressit, and contrivit.

MORALE.
INnuit Fabula, Matrimonia and caetera Consortia esse improbanda, quae ab
imparibus contrahuntur. Moderanda sunt vota, nam qui plura quam decet quaerit,
interdum etiam and Mortem festinat suam.

FABLE XXV.
IL y eut autresfois un Chien si accoustume a mordre tous ceux qu' il
recontroit que son Maistre fut contraint de luy attacher un baston au Col, a
fin que chacun se done guard, Luy cependant pensant que ce Baston luy estoit
comme un marque d' honneur, et vne recompense deue a sa Virtue commenca a
mespriser ses Compagnons; Mais parmy eux, il y en eust vne que son Age, et sa
grauite rendoient venerable qui pour luy fair rebattre son orgueil, luy dit,
Mon amy, Ne croy point que ce baston soit honorable pour toy prends le donc
plustost pour vne Marque de ton Infamy?

Le Sens MORAL.
LE Glorieux bien souuent estime a honneur ce qui luy tomb en reproach, Car
les hommes au lieu de ne s' appliquer qu' a la just louange qui est deue a
l'action de mediocrite, pource que la Virtue ne consiste point qu' en elle
seule, ont outrepasse le point du Milieu, et sont Venus a lover l'Extreme, non
pas celuy qui demeure au deca de la Medio^rite, mais cet autre qui estend au de
la de ses limits. Ce defaut proceed du seul dereglement de nostre defir qui se
port tousjours au trop, et condamne absolument le trop peu; Nous auons fait
consister la Louange en l'Excez, et non pas en la Justesse appellant louable ce
qui ne l'est nullement, et qui tient beaucoup moins de la Virtue que du Vice;
Aujourd'-huy tout est pass en la Loy des Duels, l'on a voulu render toutes
Disputes egalement mortelles; L' on a voulu que l'Honneur ne se gaignast que
par la perte de la Vie, Et quiconque a plus fait de Duels sur vne mine, et sur
un demi mo to est celuy a qui l'on done des hautes louanges, bien que
toutesfols else ne soient ny justes, ny legitimes; Voyla comment on se mit a
tirer vanite du Crime, et a fair passer pour belles et louables des Actions
sanguinaires, et forcenees, et en un mot, plus un homme en a fait Mourir
d'autres, plus on estime digne de viure, comme si les vrais effets du Courage
ne consistoient qu' a imiter la Cruaute des Ours, et des Tygres a s' entre-tuer
inhumainement sur vne simple Imagination, et pour la moindre picoterie.

The Dog with a Clog.
Sly in his Onsets yet a testy Dog
His Master loads with an uneasy clog,
Whose pressure might to calm^^es him invre
And men from his more keen assaults secure,
The dog insults, deeming his yoke to be
Some solemn Symbol of new dignity,
Since no such clog his follows did invest
To check his pride, one graver then the rest
Urged 'twas his pompus folly to embrace
That for his honor, which was his disgrace.
So bold impiety does often boast,
In those loose actions men dishonor most.


FAB. XXV. De Cane Mordaci.
CAni saepius homines mordenti illigavit Dominus nolam, silicet ut sibi quisque
caveret, Canis ratus Virtuti suae tributum hoc Decus esse, populares omnes
despicit. Accedit tandem ad hunc Canem aliquis jam aetate, and Authoritate
gravis, monens eam ne erret, Nam ista nola, inquit, data est tibi in Dedecus,
non in Decus.

MORALE.
EO sunt Ingenio plerique, ut nobiles se esse jactant quum sunt pauperes and
miserrimi, Gloriosus interdum illud sibi ducit laudi, quod ipsi est Vituperio.

FABLE XXVI.
LA Greno ille desirant deuenir aussi gross que le Boeuf, s' entendoit, de
quoy son fills s' estant apperceu; Ma Mere, luy dit il, Quittez-toy-la cette
entreprise, car il y a nulle comparaison d'vne Grenouille a un Boeuf, Elle
toutesfois n' en voulut rien croire, et s' enfla derechef plus qu' auparauant.
Ce qui fit peur a son fills qui pout ne la perdre, Ma Mere, luy cria to il
derechef, Il est force que tu creues, tu ne surmonteras jamais le boeuf, Or
apres que pour la troisiesme fois elle s' estendit, elle creua.

Le Sens MORAL.
CHacun a son don, l'vn est beau, l'autre puissant, l'vn a des amiss, l'aure des
richesses; Que chacun soit content de ce qu' il y a, Ton Compagnon a la Beauty
du Corpse, et toy tu as la viuacite d'esprit, Parquoy que chacun se conseille
soy mesme, qu' il ne soit point enuieux de la pre heminence d'autruy, qu' il ne
debate point pour vne chose miserable, ne folle; Ce qui nous auons dit cy
dessus de la Grenouille pourroit estre rapporte a vne autre Fable, c' est
l'Exemple des Gens du peu, qui se veulent render egaux en despence, et en mine
a ceux de haute condition, Ces presompteux imitent Icare, en ce qu' ils
prennent un vol trop haut, et voila pourquoy, comme Icare aussi, pour n' auoir
que des ailes de Cire qui fondent comme au Soleil aupres de la person des
Grands ou ils tombent dans le precipice, ou ils demeurent au milieu de leur
Entreprise, et creuent comme la Grenouille ou de despit, ou d'Impuissance.
Cette Grenouille plaide la Cause des Ambitieux qui ne viuent que pour
l'orgueil, ou par le Luxe, et songent tant seulement a fair voir leur Grandeur
a tout le monde; Tout ce qui peut dire en faueur de tells persons que tous
jours ils laborent en chooses extremement foibles, et fort peu considerables.

The Ox and Toad.
An euvious load (...) with regrelt did view
An Oxes spreading bulk and comely hue,
Her self did with. dilated venom swell
That she those vas^ demensions might excel,
Then asskt he^ daughen whether yet or not
Her bulk was up to the Oxe's ssature sho^^
You never said she (therefore this strife rebate)
To his huge volume can your self dilate
Yet she twice more extends her self again
Hoping ^o^bpoyze his size, butall in vain
For the angry venom now too much peut in
Dismanteld the thim Cloyslure of her skin.
Na^^re in one does not her guists in^wine
Therefore se^ none at his sixth state vepine.


FAB. XXVI. De Rana and Bove.
RAna cupida aequandi Bovem se distendebat, Filius hortabatur Matrem coepto
desistere, Nihil enim esse Ranam ad Bovem; Illa autem, posthabito consilio,
secundum intumuit; Clamitat Natus, Crepes licet Matter, Bovem nunquam vinces;
Tertium autem quum intumuisset, crepuit.

MORALE.
CVique sua Dos est, quocirca quisque sibi consulat; nec invideat superiori,
quod miserum est, nec quod Stultitiae est, aequare optet.

FABLE LXXVII.
LA Lion deuint malade; Tous les Animaux le vifitoient et consoloient, Le seul
Renard faisoit difficulte de l'aller voir; Il luy enuoya donc un messager auec
vne lettre, par la quelle il l'aduisoit, qu' il l'obligeroit extremement de le
venir voir, et que sa presenc^ seule luy seroit plus agreeable, que celle de
tous les autres; Il disoit d'auantage, Qu'il ne deuoit point entrer en defiance
de luy qu' ils auoient este bons amiss de tout temps, et que pour ce subjet il
defiroit fort de l'entretenir; outre, qu' il n' auoit point d'apparence qu'
estant malade dans un lict, il luy peut fair aucun Mal, quand mesme il en
auroit la volonte, qu' il n' auoit pas neantmoins, A tous ces terms de
Compliment, le Renard ne fit point d'autre Response, si non qu' il luy
souhaittoit, un Recouurement de Sante, et que pour cet effet il prieroit les
Dieux immortels; Mais que pour le demeurant, il luy estoit impossible de
l'aller trouuer; Pource, disoit il, que je ne puis voir qu' a Regret, les
traces des Animaux que to ont visit, Car il ne s' y en remarque pas vne qui
soit tournee en arriere, et qui ne reguarde ta Cauerne; Ce qui me fait craire
que plusieurs Bestes y sont voirement entrees, Mais Je ne scay si else sont
sorties.

Le Sens MORAL.
IL ne point Animal si ruze qui ne trouue bien souuent son Maistre en matiere
de Fourberie; Nous deuons tousjours tenir en haleine nostre Conjecture en
matiere d'occasions suspectes de tromperie; Pour les euiter, il doit suffire a
l' homme bien advise de prendre soigneusement guard aux Actions de ceux qu' il
soupconne procedant de tell forte qu' a la maniere du Renard, il s' embarrasse
auec eux le moins qu' il pourra, principalement en Visites, et en Complimens.

The Lion and Fox.
When first the Fox the Shaggy Lion saw,
Congealed with. fear and child with reverend awe,
He his stern looks adored with. low Address;
But when ye Lion caludy did express.
That his approaches nearer should be made
His hopes did bourgeon, and lus seares did sade
Then at his next access he grew so bold,
He d^^st a parley with ye. Lion hold.
Most Knollie and perplexed things often are.
By Custom polished, made somiliar.


FAB. XXVII. De Leone and Vulpe.
LEonem aegrotantem visebant animalia, Vulpes solummodo distulit Officium, Ad
hunc Leo legatum mittit indicans gratissimam rem aegroto fore ejus unius
praesentiam, Respondet Vulpes optare se ut Leo convalescat, caeterum se minime
visuram, terreri enim vestigiis quae indicabant, multum quidem animalium
introisse, sed exiisse nullum.

MORALE.
NVlla fides adhibendaVerbis quae ni cavemus saepius nobis dabuntur, Capienda
enim est Conjectura tum ex Verbis, tum ex factis, and ex illis alia, and alia
sunt judicanda.

FABLE LXXVIII.
LA Singe pria le Renard de luy donner vne party de sa queue pour ses fesses,
disant que ce luy estoit vne chose trop fascheuse, et a luy seroit profit, et
honneur, Mais le Renard luy dit pour le Response. Qu' il n' en auoit pas plus
qu' il ne luy en falloit, et qu' il aymoit beaucoup mieux balayer la terre de
sa queue, qu' en couurir les fesses d'vn Singe.

Le Sens MORAL.
LES vns ont fault, les autres ont superfluite; Toutes-fois il n' y a point de
rich qui ait accoustome de survenir aux pauures de ce qu' il a d'abondance.
Mais quant au Refus que le Renard fait au Singe de la moitie de sa queue, on le
peut interpreter en deux facons, viz. a Bien, et a Mal; et de toutes les deux,
il est aise d'en tirer de l' Instruction; La premiere s' entend de la Chichete
des Riches, qui font gloire de refuser aux persons Incommodees, les chooses
mesmes qu' ils ont auecque superfluite; Ce qui doit apprendre a pauures, qu'
ils n' ont guere a esperer des Grands Seigneurs, Mais que le meilleur pour eux
c' est de s' attendre a un honest labeur, et tirer de la le Soustien de leurs
Familles; L' autre sens qu' on peut donner a ceste Fable, c' est la
Reprehension des Demandeurs impertinents, qui exigent de leur Amiss beaucoup de
chooses indiscretement, quoy qu' a la Verite il ny en cust pas vne d'elles qui
les peut accommoder, et qui n' incommodast extremement le Donneur. En ce sens
la, Je trouue fort louable le Refus de cet Animal, qui juge, qu' il ne se peut
desaire de sa queue sans vne douleur extreme, ny l'appliquer a l'vsage du Singe
quand clle sera de faite.

The Ape and Fox.
An Ape invokes a Fox with Flattering Art
That he would to him some of his tail impart
Since from yt bush he might a fragment spare
And yett his stone not with that dole impair
Better said he yt in ye dirt should traile.
Then yt one hayr thy callow back should veil
So greedy Misers on yir gold doc brood
Presering private, not the public good.


FAB. XXVIII. De Simia and Vulpecula.
SImia a Vulpe petit, ut partem caudae sibi donet ad nudas tegendas nates, Illi
etenim esse oneri, quod sibi foret and honori; Respondet Vulpes nulla mora
habita; Nihil se nimium habere, et se malle humum cauda sua verri, quam Simiae
nates tegi.

MORALE.
MVlti sunt qui egent, alii sunt qui abundant, vix ulli tamen Divitum contigit,
ut vel re superflua pauperem fratrem suum, foelicem reddat.

FABLE XXIX.
LE Chien estoit couche en vne creche des Boeufs, Le Boeuf vint pour manger du
foin, Mais le Chien se souleuant l'en empescha, ce que voyant le Boeuf, Malheur
to aduienne, luy dit il, puis que tu es si envieux que tu ne veux ny manger du
foin toy mesme, ny permertre que j' en mange.

Le Sens MORAL.
PLusieurs sont envicux du Bien d'autruy, tant sont ils de malin Esprit, et ne
pouuant pretendre a vne bonne Fortune s' opposent toutesfois a la pretencion
d'vn Autre. Non pour aucune haine qu' ils ayent conceue contre luy, mais
seulement par vne enuieuse qualite qui les empesche de consentir a
l'aduancement du Prochain; Estrange certes Maxim de se plaire a destourner par
artifices, et par Intrigues, le bon heur d'vne person que ses Vertus en
rendent digne, de fair dependre son Contentement de l'ennuy des autres, et de
vouloir nuire a celuy qui ne nous en donna jamais sujet; Cette Envy consiste
en la douleur que nous conceuons du Bien; et de la Prosperity d'autruy, et il
suffira a conclure qu' il ny a point de crime au monde si pernicieux ny si
desagreeable a Dieu que celuy-cy. Car il ne sonde sur aucun plaisir des sens,
ny sur aucune esperance de Fortune, ou de Gloire, Mais c' est vne infame, et
vile passion qui ne s' enrichit des depouilles qu' elle oste, et ne trouue
point d'autre profit en sa malignite que celuy de se satisfaire; Il faut que l'
homme qui se sentira inclin a l'Envie, s' exerce ardamment a lover, et a bien
fair, en des Sujets mesmes qui sont indignes de l'vn, et de l'autre; Il faut
que se mortify a tell point que d'estouffer jusques a moindres pensees qu' il
pourroit auoir de nuire a quelque person que ce soit; Et sur toutes chooses il
se donnera le soing d'estendre ses bons offices jusques au persons mesmes qu'
il envy, puis qu' il est certain qui nous aymons d'ordinaire plus que les
autres, ceux a qui nous auons fait plaisir, et que cela nous oblige a les
considerer comme un ouurage de nostre Main; De plus, il se proposera mill fois
deuant ses yeux l'extreme impertinence de cette facon de viure qui ne nous
scauroit apporter aucune forte ny de gloire, ny de profit, et les meschans
mesmes feignent au moins de la detester, et auoir en horreur.

The Dog and Ox.
An envious Dog that Broading lay,
Upon a Cribb Repleate with Hay,
Suarles at the Ox that thither came,
An eager appe^a^e ^o ^ame.
And fored him back, inceus^, whereat
He on the Dog invoakes, this Ea^e,
May the lust Gods so purmish thee,
As thy Rude Spleen has ^j^^, d^ me,
Who Does prohibit me the mea^e,
Whereon thy Self disdaines to ea^
Some with ke^n Eurie would themselves anoy
Se those they Emulate they might Destroy


FAB. XXIX. De Cane and Bove.
IN Praesepi faeni pleno decumbebat Canis, venit Bos ut comedat foenum, quum
Canis confestim sese erigens tota voce elatravit; cui Bos Dii te cum ista tua
Invidid perdant inquit, nec enim faeno ipse vesceris, nec me vesci sines.

MORALE.
ITa sumus Natura comparati ut aliis invideamus quod ipsi vel Naturae
Imprudentia, vel Mentis inopia nullo modo consequi possimus.

FABLE XXX.
LES Oyseaux auoient fort Guerre auec les Bestes a quatre pieds, ou
l'Esperance, la Crainte, et le Danger balancoient des deux costez, La
Chauue-souris fut la seule qui abandonna ses Compagnons pour se jetter dans le
party des Ennemis; Toutesfois elle en porta bien tossed la punition, car les
Oyseaux ayant gaigne la Victoire sous les auspices de l'Aigle, la bannirent de
leur compagnie, la condemnant a ne se point mesler parmy eux a l'aduenir, et, a
ne voler jamais de Jour; Voyla par quoy l'on ne la void d'ordinaire, que lors
qu' il est presque de nuit.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEluy ne merit pas d'auoir part a l' heureuse Fortune de ses Amiss, qui ne l'a
voulu prendre a leur disgrace, Si quelqu' un nous abandonne pendant nostre
querelle, il le fait, sans doubt, pource que la Cause de nostre Ennemi's luy
semble plus just, ou plus assuree que la sienne, Mais quoy qu'il en soit, s'
il la trouue plus just, il offense de la nostre probite, si plus assuree, il
fait tort a nostre bonne conduite, et en tous les deux sens il tesmoigne vne
manifest poultronnerie jointe a vne plus grande legerete, Ce seroit bien vne
Action charitable de luy pardonner, mais elle seroit Imprudence de le reprendre
en amity, puisque de soy il n' est ny Amy, ny Homme de valeur, et de Fermete:
Il faut bien plustost l'auoir en horreur, puisque, comme Traistre il est
indigne que le Soleil l'esclaire, que les Elemens le nourissent, et que la
Terre sur tout le souffre dans sa vaste Estendue, non plus qu' elle fait le
Serpent apres qu'il a bless l' Homme. Car quiconque refuse d'estre Compagnon,
du Danger, et de l'Aduersite, il ne merit point de participer en la
prosperity, La Trahison souuent accommode, mais les traistres sont odieux.

The Birds and Beasts.
The Beasts against ye hinds in league combine
Curse they disdeyn'd their Aerys to resign
Whilst ye dull Batt did his own right divest.
And made a tame Succender of his Nest.
A fatal fights commenc't with various toil
The winged Army said both field and spoil.
The Batt is Captive made whom all de^^st
Cause be forsook his Country when Opreft.
All should with hate resent (...) look.
Who has his Bince and las own side forsook^.


FAB. XXX. De Avibus and Quadrupedibus.
AVibus, cum Bestiis asperrima pugna erat, utrinque spes, utrinque ingens
Metus, utrinque periculum, quum Vespertilio, relictis socris ad hostem defecit;
Ad postremum vincunt aves, duce and auspice Aquila; Transfugam vero
Vespertilionem damnant, ut nunquam iterum inter Aves numeretur, nec amplius in
luce videatur; Et haec Causa est, our Vespertilio nunquam nisi nocte volat.

MORALE.
QVI cum sociis, Infortunii, and periculi particeps esse renuit, prosperitatis
and salutis expers erit.

FABLE XXXI.
LE Veneur un jour alloit a la chasse auecque son Arc, Le Tigre commanda a
toutes autres bestes de Forest de se reculer arriere, et que luy seul
acheueroit bien ceste guerre, Cependant le Veneur poursuiuoit tousiours sa
chasse, et tiroit des grand coups des Fleches, don't il y en eust vne qui
atteignist le Tygre, et le blessa grandement, Le Renard le voyant de retour de
la Guerre, et bien empesche a tirer la fleche horse de sa play; Et quoy, luy
dit il, un si facheux Accident peut il estre arrive a toy, qui es si vaillant?
Qui est celuy qui a tant de force de nauurer vne si genereuse Best? Je ne sccy
rien, respondit le Tygre, toutesfois par le grandeur de la play, Je juge que
c' estoit quelque homme.

Le Sens MORAL.
LES vaillans sont volontiers fols, et outrecuidez; L'Art et Engine surmonte la
Force, Un jour on fit voir au Roy Antigonus vne troop de Soldats qu'on luy
debitoit pour les plus vaillans hommes de la terre, et ceux la estoient tous
percez de Coups, et desguises de larges et profondes Cicatrices; Ce qu' ayant
veu le Prince, il dit au Capitain qui les luy monstroit; Il me semble voirement
que ceux-cy sont braues gens, Mais j' estime encore plus braues ceux qui les
ont ainsi marquez, par les quels mots il demonstrast, qu' en matiere de
Courage, il nous faut jamais donner des raisons tres legitimes, Et premierement
on peut dire, que ces Ennemis fires et presomptueux vont la pluspart dans le
Combat auec tant de Negligence contre les foibles, qu' ils dedaignent de mettre
en oeuurer tout ce qui est d'ordinaire pratique pour la securete des Combatans;
Et bien souuent Nature repare les Defauts du Corpse par les qualitez d' Esprit,
de forte qu' il arrive presque toujours aux hommes, qui non sont pas robustes,
d'auoir Entendement, plus que mediocre, au lieu que ces grands Colosses, et ces
Members de Geans fortifiez, et munis, en guise de Citadelle, sont bien souuent
depourueus de Conduite, D' ou il ensuit qu' il est aise a l' homme Industrieux
de les surmonter, et de render son Esprit victorieux sur les Forces Ennemis,
car les plus meschans rencontrent souuent leurs maistres, et l'Equite est
ordinairement victorieuse de la Force, pourueu, qu' elle soit toutesfois
accompagnee d'vn bon Courage.

The Tygre and Fox.
An Archer wounding many Beasts the Fearce
And Savage Tiger, thinks no Chaste can pearce
His Dapled, Skin; and vrgd that they ^discard
Their abject fears, since he^d from danger
Their fai^^ing troops, whom when ye Arder (...)
He Lodged a Eatall arrow in his side:
Which wound he meets with an afrightfull start
And in his flight tears out ye barbed dart,
The Fox demands which of ye Beasts had made
That wound; when he with a faint murme^ said
He not discri'd the Author but did scan
By its wide Orisie, it was by some man.
Some with msh vallov warpt their sat pursue.
Which prudence by its conduct might eschem.


FAB. XXXI. De Tigride and Vulpe.
VEnator jaculis agitabat feras; Tigris jubet omnes feras absistere, inquiens,
sese unam bellum confecturam, Pergit Venator jaculari, Tigris oppido sauciatur,
fugientem, telumque dentibus extrahentem percontatur Vulpes, Quisnam potentem
Belluam tam valde vulnerasset? Respondet Tigris se Authorem vulneris Ignorare,
verum ex vulneris magnitudine capere se conjecturam, aliquem fuisse inter viros
venatorem.

MORALE.
SVmmae confidentiae sua insunt Mala, and humili animo sua Bona, Considentia
elati sunt temerarii, Interim Ars vim, Ingenium fortitudinem superat.

FABLE XXXII.
LA Lionne et la Renard disputoient ensemble de leur Nobilite, Le Renarde se
vantoit, de le nombre de ses petits, et disoit au Lionne, qu' elle ne parturoit
seulement qu' vne, anquel le Lionne respondit, Ce vray que tu dis, J' ay un
seulement, mais c' est un Lion.

Le Sens MORAL.
LA vraye Felicite ne consiste point en nombres, mais en Noblesse, Les genereux
sont dignes d'estimation, et cette Responce du Lion a Renard a estre tres
sagement inuentee par Esope, pour nous apprendre que les fourberies, par ou les
trompeurs se croyent sauuer, les conduisent in sensiblement en precipices. Ceux
la s' abusent extrement qui par le Nom de Felicite entendent un grand nombre
des Infans; Il y en a vne autre plus excellent qui ne contient rien de
perissable, ny d'imperfait; La Gloire du Lion est en sa noblesse, qui est
autant plus sublime, qu' l'Ame est infinement plus excellent que le Corpse; Le
nombre des enfans peuuent se diminuer par la Mort, Mais noblesse de l'Ame nous
jamais accompagne, et a mill fois plus de splendeur, et de gloire; Je
manquerois plustost de temps que de matiere, si je voulois rapporter au long
toutes les preeminences de la noblesse de l'Ame d'vn Lion, par dessus celle de
nombre des petits d'vn Renard, Il vaut donc mieux se contenter de ce que nous
en auons dit, et mocquer de la Renarde, qui se mocqua de Lionne, pource qu'
elle auoit un plus grande nombre de petits; Vne Lion vaut plus mieux qui tout
la gens des Renards, et le nombre corporelle est tousiours moins reguarde que
noblesse de l'Esprit, Et les plus excellens visages ne doiuent estre estimez,
qu' vne chetiue Sculpture des finesses et fourberies, s' ils ne sont animez par
l'interieur, ou par mieux parler, s' ils n' ont autre noblesse que les nombres
des enfans.

The Lioness and Fox.
A Lioness and Fox did, strongly vy.
Which of them two was by yir. progeny.
Enobled most; the Fox ye Estimate
Of hers, does from yir firtile number date
The other said yt she produced but one,
It Was true, but he straight rose unto a throne
Whose awful Septer and Imperial sway,
She and her Cubbs were both obliged to Obey.
Things of high rate not in yir swelling lift
But in their nobler virtues do Consist


FAB. XXXII. De Leaena, and Vulpe.
LEaena, quum a Vulpe saepe exprobraretur, quod quolibet partu unum duntaxat
catulum parturiret, respondit, Vnum sane, at pol Leonem.

MORALE.
PVlchritudo non in Copia Rerum; sed Virtute consistit, plus valebat unus
Themistocles apud Graecos test Plutarchos quam numerosus Persarum Exercitus
sub Rege Xerxe. Nobilitas raro in turba invenitur.

FABLE XXXIII.
L'Arbre et le Roseau debatoient ensomble de leur Constance, force, et firmete,
En ce Contraste, l'Arbre disoit Injure au Roseau, et se mocquoit de luy comme
d'vn Inconstant, et variable a tous vents; A cela la foible Roseau ne scauoit
que respondre, mais en silence attendoit quelque peu de temps, pour en estre
venge; Il aduint donc un peu apres, qu'vn vent merueilleux estonnoit toute la
Forest de son Orage, Le Roseau, qui n' estoit pas loin de la, rendoit se
souple aux secousses du Vent, et baissoit la test ca et la, Mais l'Arbre
voulant orgueilleusement resister a la force, et Impetuosite des vents, fut
arrache par le pied.

Le Sens MORAL.
PI us sages sont ceux qui pour quelque temps font place aux plus forts, que
ceux qui veulent resister, car le sage homme fait quelquesfois gloire de ceder
au Temps, et qu' il ne s' oppose pas tousiours orgueilleusement a la violence
des plus Forts: Cette Verite est si connut de tous les hommes qu'ayant pass en
Proverb parmy l'Anglois elle contient le plus grand Secret de la Prudence,
ascauoir, d' s' accommoder au Temps. Quant au Sage, considere en particulier,
c' est proprement celuy, qui detache de tous les Interests mondain^, demand
plustest d'en estre Spectateur, que party; Il est vray, que toutes les Vertus
se doiuent establir en l'Ame d'vn homme prudent, qui ne s' esbranle par aucuns
Orages, ne cede a pas vne aduersite; mais quant aux hommes d' Estat et d'
Affairs, il n' y a point de doubt, que le Deuoir de leur charge les oblige a
suiure un autre genre de vie; Ces sont ceux qui doiuent apprendre a s'
accommoder a toutes les deux Fortunes, plus pour Respect de la multitude qui
est remise soubs leur Conduite, que pour leur Interest propre. A quelqu'vn
d'iceux, la plus terrible des chooses human qui est la Mort passera en son
endroit pour Indifferente, et mesme pour mesprisable. Quand Phocion conseilloit
aux Atheniens de ne se pas roidir ouuertement contre Alexandre, mais de ceder a
la Violence de ses conquestes, en estoit il par cela moins Vertueux, ou moins
resolu? Pouuoit on dire que ce grand Homme eust flechy sous l'Apprehension
d'vne Guerre, ou qu' il eust descheu de son ordinaire egalite? L' on peut voir
par la, de quelle sort le Sage doit s' accommoder, a l'Occasion, sans decheoir
toutesfois de l'egalite de son Esprit, a l'imitation de nostre Roseau qui ploye
veritablement soubs l'effort de la Tempeste, mais qui conserve ses racines
fermes et durables, quand l'Arbre orgueilleux, pour estre roidy contre les
coups de l'Orage, se troune entierement deplace de son Assiette, voire mesme
enueloppe de ses propres Ruins. Sa cheute donc apprend aux Hommes d'Affaires,
a ne se hurter jamais contre un puissant Ennemy, mais a reguarder adroictement
ses attaques, s'ils veulent que leur Desseins ayent un heureux succez.

The Oak and Reed.
The wind, an Oak, with its rude onsets, threw,
Into a River on whose bancke it grew,
Which (Floating) espied a tuft of reeds yt stood,
Mauger the asaults of the wild storm or flood;
The Oak admiring at it, did demand,
How a weak read against wind and storm could stand
When straight ye ductill reed replied againc,
By mooving thus, I vnremoov'd remain,
Which you by grapling with an angry wind
The price of pride, did in your ^^rin find
Contend not with the powerful but giuc way
For their wild rage (like time to) will decay,


FAB. XXXIII. De Quercu and Arundine.
VAlidiore vento effracta Quercus, huc, illuc, in amnem pracipitata fluitat,
and Ramis suis in Arundine forte fixis, haeret, miraturque Arundinem in tanto
turbine stare incolumem; Arundo respondet cedendo, and declinando se esse
tutam, inclinare se etenim, ad Boream, ad Notum, ad Eurum, denique ad omnem
flatum, Nec mirum esse si Quercus exciderit, quae non cedere, sed resistere
molita est.

MORALE.
NEMO alterum contempserit, si quis tua virtute caret, sort virtutes habet
quibus tu indiges, Potentiori nemo resistat sed cedendo, and ferendo vincat.

FABLE XXXIV.
LE Soleil et le Vent concertoient entr' eux que estoit plus puissant, ils
enter se determinent pour fair l'Experience sur un pelerin, Ce fut Resolu qu'
il seroit adjuge plus fort qui faisoit le pelerin deponer son manteau, Le Vent
faisoit grand bruit, et le pauure peletin fut fort battn par luy, pour quelle
cause il enuelepoit son manteau plus pres a son corpse; Mais un peu apres, le
Soleil jettoit ses rayons auec grande violence qui faisoit pauure le voyageur
se reposer en l'ombre d'vne Arbre, et se devestir de son manteau, et ainsi le
Vent fut vaincu, et le Soleil victorieux.

Le Sens MORAL.
QUI ne rira de la vanite de cet Vent qui tout rampant, et turbulent qu' il
est, ose neantmoins se comparer au Soleil, Cela me fait souuenir de ces hommes
brocards, qui n'ayant rien remarquable en eux, que l'enflure, la veulent fair
passer pour en bon point. Ils s'imaginent, tant ils sont fols, qu'vne appearance
fastueuse doiue tromper les eux clair-voyans, et ainsien faireaccroire aux
Jugemens les moins foibles, et les plus solides. Mais ils se trompent eux
mesmes, de ne voir pas, que tout ce qu'ils ont d'ostentation est un sujet de
mespris, plustost que d'estime, a ceux qu' ils pensent assujettir a leur humeur
Imperieuse, Par elle, ils se persuadent vainement d'accroistre en un instant
leur puissance, et ne s'aduisent pas cependant qu' il est comme des fueilles
qui tombent sur la terre. Un grandeur precipite n' est jamais durable, non plus
que l'orage Impetueux, Les Exemples en son frequens dans l' Histoire, Je n' en
trouue plus considerable qu' en la person de deux prodigieux Architectes,
Almagre et Picarre. Ils estoient montes au comble d'vne puissance si haute, qu'
ils auoient presque partage entr' eux un Empire, Les Princes mesmes estoient
deuenus leur tributaires. Mais quel en fut le Reuers? Vne Revolution
effroyable; Apres, auoir, comme le vent en cette Fable, port leur test
jusques dans les nues, ils le porterent en fin, sur un eschaffaut, ou ils le
perdirent.

En trosiesme lieu nous sommes aduertis par cette Fable, soumettre a nos
Superieurs, et ne concerter point auec ceux qui nous feront le pitieux object
de leur puissance, et de nostre infirmite.

The Wind and Sun.
The Sun and Wind ^o competition grow.
Which of them should most vigrous Influence throw
Upon an Obvious Traveller; and make.
With their known power him his thick cloak forsake
Strayt ye loud wind assaults its woolly folds
But as the more it roares ye more he holds
Next the warm Sun the man dissolves with. heal
Then he deserts his Cloak thus being slept in sweat
Thus ye calm sim with. conquest closed the day,
Whilst ye rough wind deseated shrunk away.
Empires by mildness still have lottger stood
Then by ye rough support of sorce and blood.


FAB. XXXIV. De Sole and Vento.
SOL and Aquilo certabant uter sit fortior; Conventum est experiri vires in
Viatorem, ut palmam ferat, qui excusserit viatoris Manticam; Boreas horisono
turbine viatorem aggreditur, At ille non desistit, amictum gradiendo duplicans;
Assumit vices Sol, qui nimbo paulatim evicto, totos emolitur radios; Incipit
viator aestuare, sudare, anhelare; Tandem progredi nequiens, sub frondoso
nemore, objecta mantica, resedit, and ita Soli victoria contingebat.

MORALE.
QVod non es, nec te esse simules, and quicum certes etiam atque etiam vide nam
esi tu fortior esse tibimet ipsi forsan videris, est forsan alius te fortior,
aut si non fortior, certes callidior, ut consilio suo tuas evincat vires.

FABLE XXXV.
LE Rat faisoit guerre contre la Grenouille, leur debaut estoit de Royaute de
marescage, En ce Combat qui estoit aspre, et douteuse, le Rat faisant des Ruses
sous l' herb, ou il s' estoit cache, assailist par trahison la Grenouille,
Mais elle, de son cost, l'attaqua de plein Guerre, car la Grenouille estoit la
plus puissante, et de corpse, et d'estomach, et plus agile a l'Asssaut; Et l'vn,
et l'autre auoient pour arms des lances de Jong; Mais le Milan voyant de loing
ce Combat furieux, s' en alla fondre sur eux, et cependant que tous deux
estoient eschauffez a la battle, et qu' ils ne se donnoient point guard de
luy, le Milan ravit les deux champions, et il les mit en pieces.

Le Sens MORAL.
CE Combat du Rat, et de la Grenouille, nous figure vne sotte et impertinente
animofite conceue enter gens qui n'ont aucun sujet de se hayr, ou de se rien
demander, mais qui sont tous esgalement interessez contre quelque fascheux
voisin, don't ils peuuent a toute heur apprehender les embusches, principalement
tandis qu' ils sont mal ensemble, car bien souuent un gaignera tiers tout le
profit du dommage de ses deux Concurrents, et lors qu' ils se trouuent
affoibles de coups mutuels, et espuisez par des guerres continuelles, ils sont
reduits a ce poinct d'aueuglement, que d'appeller a leur aid cette person
qui leur doit estre le plus suspect; Nous ne voyons guere un friar divise
d'auecque son friar, qui donnera occasion a leur commun Enemy de les ruiner par
brigues, ou par procez, Jamis deux amiss ne tombent en necessite, qu' un tiers
ne vient a jouyr du prix de leur contestation, et tire toute seule l'auantage
de la querele des autres; Ainsi to il aduient communement aux Citoyens mutins,
lesquels emenz de conuoitoise de Grandeur, cependant qu' ils debatent ensemble
pour les offices, et superioritez, ils mettent en dangers leurs richesses, et
bien souuent leur vie.

The Kite, Frog, and Mouse.
The Eroggs and Mice in a rude war engage
Nor could ye. Calm of peace this storm assuage.
Whilst ye: two Cheifes attempt by mutual fight
To espouse ye. conunon cause, and public right;
Thus factious men with. they to inlguine la^tw
When a ferce Kyte having exactly vieu'd
Their fatal clashings and their deadly fend.
Wild as a winter Catamet descends
And by devouring both, the Combat ends.
That being wasted with their mutual wounds
Fix on their Conweys such destructive scarrs.
A foreigne force their interest confounds


FAB. XXXV. De Mure, and Rana.
POST longa exercita odia, Mus and Rana in bellum ruebant, causa certaminis
erat de Paludis Imperio; Anceps pugna fuit, Mus insidias sub Herbis struebat,
and improviso Mart Ranam adoritur; Rana viribus melior, and pectore,
insultuque valens Hostem aggreditur, Hasta utrique erat juncea, and paribus
formosa nodis, sed certamine procul viso Milvus adproperat, dumque, prae pugnae
studio, neuter sibi cavebat, Bellatores ambos egregie pugnantes Milvus secum
attollit, laniatque.

MORALE.
SAepissime hoc evenire videmus litigiosis civibus, qui dum inter se certant,
quis grandior fiet, tertius aliquis ex improviso apparet, qui pretium
certaminis eripit, spoliisque fruitur duorum tam ambitiose sese gerentium
aemulorum.

FABLE XXVI.
LE peuple des Grenouilles estans en pleine liberte supplioit Jupiter de leur
donner un Roy, mais Jupiter se mocqua de leur sotte affection, toutesfois
icelles se sollicitoient de plus, jusques a ce qu' il fur contraint de leur
accorder ce qu' else demandoient, Il leur jetta donc dans l'eau vne gross
poutre qui par sa cheute, et sa pesanteur fit trembler toute la riuiere, Les
Grenouilles toutes estonnez, s' imposerent silence, et peu apres ils se mirent
a saluer ce nouueau Prince, et a luy fair honneur, et a s' approcher peu a peu
de luy; Mas en fin toute crainte laissee a part, else s' appriuoiserent si
bien, qu' else sautent, et resautent du haut en bas, else se mocquent de leur
Roy qu' estoit sans esprit, et sans mouuement, et ne pouuant le reconnoistre
pour tell, else importunerent Jupiter de luy done la Cigoigne; Ce nouueau Roy
vaillement se pourmena par les marescages, et autant des Grenouilles qu' en
rencontrast en chemin, autant il en deuora; Les Grenouilles bien fasches
formerent vne nouelle pleinte, mais ce fut tout en vain, car Jupiter ne les
voulut plus ouyr, C' est pour cela qu' else se plaignent encore aujourd'-huy,
car sur le soir, quand la Cicoigne se va coucher, else se tire nt du Marest,
et par leur coassemens ils hurlent, je ne scay quoy d'effroyable, mais ils
perdent leur temps, Car Jupiter veut, puis qu' else n' ont peu souffrir le Roy
clement et doux, qui leur estoit done a leur Request, que maintenant else
endurent et gemissent sous la Rigeur d'vn auaritieux Tyran.

Le Sens MORAL.
DE cela on peut inferer, que c' est vne pernitieuse adventure pour un peuple
de changer non seulement la form, mais encore le Prince, a cause des tragiques
euennemens qui ont accoustume de s' ensuire, car il aduient au peuple tout
ainsi qu' il est aduenu aux Grenouilles, lequels s' ils un Roy ont peu benin,
et debonnaire, il disent qu' il est sot, et desire d'auoir un autre, et quand
ils l'ont obtenu, il blasme sa cruaute, et love la debonnairete du premier.

Jupiter and Frogs.
The Froggs Implore a King, but love detests
Their fond desires, till tix'd with their requests
A Logg he bumbles down whose weightier blow
So awed. ye Froggs, themselves they prostrate throw,
Till a dull block to be, it was discride,
Then with. coutempt they their mild king bestride,
Next they beg love, one to bestow, who may,
With awful Scepter their moist empire sway,
Jove then trausnutts ye. Storke, whose keener power
As much too active, does ye. Froggs devour,
Tired with his rigor, they repiue again,
But their addresses love does now disdain,
The stark must govern still, since no^ content,
They with. regrett, scorned a mild Government
If kings are misde they are dull, if delive, we
Still blast them with ye. guilt of tyranny.


FAB. XXXVI. De Ranis and earum Rege.
GEns Ranarum supplicabat sibi Regem dari, Jupiter dejecit trabem cujus moles
quum ingenti fragore quassabat fluvium, territae silebant ranae, Mox Regem
venerantur, and tandem accedentes propius, omni metu abjecto, iners Rex lusui
and contemptui est; Lacessunt igitur Jovem rursus, orantes Regem sibi dari qui
strenuus sit; Jupiter dat Ciconiam qui perambulans paludem, quicquid Ranarum
obviam fit, vorabat, De cujus tyrannide quaestae sunt, sed frustra, nam Jupiter
non audit, decrevit enim ut quae Regem clementem sunt deprecatae, jam ferant
inclementem.

MORALE.
Praesentium nos semper paenitet, credentes nova veteribus esse potiora.

FABLE XXXVII.
VNE Vielle auoit plusieurs Servants, lesquelles elle chez luy nourissoit, et
faisoit else tousiours se lever, pour s' en aller trauailler a le premier
chant du le Coq: Les Sernantes estants mal aisez de ce touble tant matutin,
else consulterent entr' eux mesmes, et mirent le Coq a mort, lesquel quand la
vielle cognut, elle les faisoit se lever a la minuict.

Le Sens MORAL.
PLusieurs ne se scauent conseiller eux mesmes, et ne veulent croire a ceux qui
leur donnent bon conseil; Mais quand ils sont au milieu du danger et dommage,
lors ils commencent a deuenir sages, et blasmer leur bestise; Lors ils ont proud Conseil. Il falloit, disent ils, fair, cecy, et cela, Mais il vaut beaucoup
mieux estre Prometheus, que Epimetheus; Le grand Mal est, que les sidelles
Conseillers ne rencontrent souuent point de foy parmy ceux qu' ils
entretiennent, encore qu' ils leur donnent des vrais et salutaires
aduertissemens; La mesme chose se void presque tous les jours dans les
Concurrences humaines, ou la Jeunesse emportee des tourbillons de son ardeur
mesprise les sages enseignemens des Veillards, et se precipite inconsiderement
en mill sorts des perils causez par son incredulite. Quant a la Cause, elle
prouient de diverse endroits, car quelquefois elle proceed de nostre oysiuite,
ou de nostre Arrogance qui nous fait imaginer toute autre sens estre moindre
que le nostre; quelquefois aussi c' est un effet de nostre Impetuosite qui ne
nous permet pas d'ouurir la Oreille a ce qu' on nous dit, et entraisne nostre
appetits, et nostre Raison. Mais l' homme prudent ne fait jamais rien sans
l'aduis, pource que de deliberes propositions, il en tire vne Resolution qui ne
luy peut estre que profitable.

The old Woman and her Maids.
An Aged Beldame many Maids did keep
Who when their eyes were feller'd up with. sleep
Disturbd theye sh^^bers. when first Chanticlere
With his shrill note proclaimed ye morue was nere
At Length ye Maids sinned with repeated loyle,
Behead the Cock and his alarums spoil,
Hopeing that he nemovd, till day suppressed
Dull night, the Crowing would not assault yir rest
But thence forth she, see what new Change befell
Disorders them at Midnight with a Bell
When ^ou'e decline a thing disqusifull see
Neu not contract a (...) Calaimtie
So haples seamen often to save themselves
Dee sh^^ the Rocks to split upon ye Shelzas,


FAB. XXXVII. De Anu, and Ancillis.
ANVS quaedam domi habebat complures Ancillas quas quotidie antequam
lucesceret, ad Galli gallinacei quem domi alebat cantum excitabat ad opus;
Ancillae tandem, quotidiani negotii commotae taedio, gallum obtruncant,
sperantes jam necato illo, sese in medios dormituras dies, sed haec spes
miseras frustrata est; Hera enim, ut interemptum gallum rescivit, ancillas
intempesta nocte surgere deinceps jubet.

MORALE.
MVlti mortales sub otti specie aliis inquietudinem and periculum machinantur,
and dum unum malum student evitare, in alterum diversum incidunt.

FABLE XXXVIII.
LE Lion, et l'Ours alloient a la chasse ensemble; Il arriua qu' ils prirent un
Cerf; Comme il fut donc question de le partager, Contention fut sigrand, qu'ils
auoient vne fort cruelle guerre entr' eusmemes, tellement qu'estans tous deux
lassez, ils se reposerent vis a vis soubsdeux arbres pour recouurir leur
halein; Cependant le Renard qui de loin eut apperceu ce sanglant combat, et
l'extreme lassitude des Combatans, un profond sommeil obreptant sur leurs yeux,
il s' approcha doucement, et desrobant la proye, il l'emporta a sa cauerne.

Le Sens MORAL.
IL plusieurs fois aduient, que quand deux combattent entr'eux mesmes pour
quelque chose desiderable, ilsurvienne un tiers qui emporte auec soy la proye,
ce qu' il fait ou par violence, ou par tromperie; C' est vray, que les
vulgaires admirent extraordinairement les finesses, et reputent bien heureux
ceux qui en scauent abondamment inuenter, mais ces autres qui sont sages se
tiennent au dessus de cette method, et mettant la vray Address en un
sincerite, en vsent accortement, et y convient tout le monde par leur Example.
Car de toutes les passions qui ont accoustume de saizir l'esprit des hommes, il
n' y en a point de plus detestable que celle de Tromperie; Elle flat l'Esprit
d'vne douce Imagination, ou par l'espoir de posseder ce qu'elle desire, ou
parle souuenir d'en auoir jouy. Elle est la seule chose du Monde qui n' est pas
susceptible d'aucun Repos. Celle ne peut estre jamais un sujet de Consolation
pour nous, car a mesme temps cete Peste, que nous couuons dans l'Ame, cherche
de nouueauz objects pour se nourrir, et s' address aux prosperites, et delices
des autres hommes. Celle est vne Hydre renaissante de soy mesme, Elle s'
attaque sans cesse a ceux qu' elle connoit bien fortunez, et demeure brocarte
jusques a la mort. Les Poets la comparent a l'Enuie; Mais la Comparaison n'
est si prafaitement absolu que se tenir au bout en tons reguards, car la
Tromperie est joycuse et grass, mais au contraire l'Envie est pass, et
tremblante comme la Faim, meurtriere comme la Parque, maigre comme la Phtisie,
affreuse comme la Mort, injuste comme l'Ambition, et surueillante comme
l'Auarice. C' est vray que la Tromperie a trouue moyens pour destruire grandes
Armees, et grandes Cittez; Combien de fois a to elle renuerse des Royaumes
florissans? Combien de fois a to elle enuenime les Familles des Potentats?
Quelles Crimes n' a tell pas commis? Et quels maux ne luy verra to on point
fair? Elle a pourtant cela de Remarqueable, que de sa propre Ignominy, don't
elle est Mere, s' engendre bien souuent le bon-heur d'autruy. Mais pendant que
je m' esgare apres ces veins Exclamations, Je laisse en arriere nostre
Autheur; passons a un autre Discourse.

The Lion and Bear.
A Bear and Lion a feirce combat wage,
And for the acquist of a slain Eawn Engage,
When being faint with. that profirse expense
Of blood, the ^^ees of their wounds dispeuce.
They panting leave; the Fox in Ambush lies
And the object of their Combat makes his puize
Which they unable to retrieve, detest
Their strise, that only served his interest
Thus often from walmes by mutual conflict (...).
Amay by a third power, the Seepter's boune'


FAB. XXXVIII. Leo and Vrsus.
LEO and Vrsus simul magnum adepti hinnulum de eo concertabant; Graviter autem
a se ipsis affecti, ut ex multa pugna etiam vertigine corripeperentur,
defatigati jacebant; Vulpes interea circumcirca eundo, ubi prostratos eos
vidit, et hinnulum in medio jacentem, hunc, per utrosque percurrendo, rapuit,
fugiensque abivit; At Illi videbant quidem furacem Vulpem, sed quia non
potuerunt surgere, Eheu nos miseros dicebant, quia Vulpi labor avimus.

MORALE.
INnuit haec Fabula, Multos ut latranti satisfacerent Stomacho, plurima subire
pericula, et quam vel Hic, vel Ille summa Industria ambivit, tertius aliquis
est lucratus proedam.

FABLE XXXIX.
LA Corneille ayant soif trouua vne Cruche pleine de l'eau, Mais la Cruche
estoit si profonde, que la Corneille ne pouuoit pas toucher jusques a l'eau,
pour qu' elle cause elle assaya de la rompre, et n' en peut venir a bout, elle
choisit alors des pierrettes qu' elle jetta dans la Cruche, par ce moyen l'eau
se leua, et la Corneille beut.

Le Sens MORAL.
CE que nous ne pouuons fair par force, nous le ferons aucunefo is par
Prudence et Conseil; Il n' y a null Homme quel qu' il soit qui ne se rende
tres-suffisant en certaines chooses particulieres, l'vn aux lettres, l'autre au
Jeu; L' un en la Conduite des Empires, L'autre aux Affairs priuees, et
quelques vns sont suffisans en l'Art de prouuer leur Insuffisance; Mais ces
Bestes, qui nous surpassent toutes en quelque chose Corporelle, comme en la
viuacite des yeux, en l'Excellence d' Odorat, en la force, et en l'agilite,
nous cedent neantmoins entierement, et mesme a moindre de nous en toutes les
puissances de l'Entendement, Car else ne font aucune Reflection, et ne se
connoissent point, A quoy l'on peut adjouter que si les Bestes auoient la
moindre lumiere de Raisonnement, else l'employeroient a trouuer la moyen de
leur Conservation; Vrayement cette Fable ne signify proprement, sinon que le
Conseil, et l' Industry sont capables de plus de chooses que n' est la Force.
Homere nous a voulu persuader cela fort subtilement dans son Poem, ou il done
tousjours l'aduantage a Vlysse sur tous les autres Heroes de Grecs, qui
neantmoins estoient en party plus vaillans, mais tous ensemble moins
ingenieux, que luy. C' est la Prudence qui nous tire des dangers, Elle qui
conduit nos entreprises a un heureuse Fin, Elle qui fait les Loix, et les
Legislateurs, qui rend heureux les Amans, et qui fauorise les Guerriers; En un
mot, c' est elle mesme qui produit tous les effets qui nous semblent admirables
dans le Commerce du Monde. Cette Reyne apprend aux petits a se deffendre contre
les Forts, aux Grands a commander en Asseurance, et aux Republiques a se
maintenir en liberte; Auec elle jamais un Homme n' a este deshonoree pour un
long temps, ny un Estat perdu tout a fait; Nous pouuons donc a bon Droit
l'appeller le fill de nos Labyrinthes, et la Consolatrice de nos peines; Car il
est si veritable que nous luy deuons ce que nous faisons de grand, et de
memorable, que sans elle, toutes nos Actions seroient imparfaites.

The Crow and Pot.
A Crow each verdant meadow did Survay,
Her thirsty house with water to allay,
But none could ^^ee, but that whose treasury.
The bottom of a vessel was: which she
Atempts in Vain ^' attacque, when straight^ ye Gill
She with a stock of pebles strone to fill.
Which buoyed the water up, by which. she gaind
That from which else her with had bin ressrav^'d
Thus often ^^mes we when force cannot prenaile
The ^ions ^kin piece with the Foxes (...).


FAB. XXXIX. De Cornice, and Vrna.
SItibunda Cornix reperit Vrnam aqua plenam, sed erat Vrna profundior quam ut
exhauri a Cornice possit, Conatur igitur vano molimine aquam effundere, sed non
valet; Lectos igitur ex arena Lapillulos injectat, Hoc modo Aqua levatur, and
Cornix bibit.

MORALE.
VEtus est Proverbium, Necessitas est Ingenii Matter; Ingenium valet, quum Vires
fallunt, quod non viribus possumus efficere, Prudentia and Consilium peragent.

FABLE LX.
LES Coleuures prennans pity des Herissons qui ne scauoient ou se retirer,
durant le mauuais temps, les receurent dans leur petit loge, a condition qu'
ils en sortiroient aussi tossed que la pluye seroit passee; Mais comme les
Herissons se veirent a Couuert, ils s' estendoient tout a long, a leur aise,
sans se soucier d'encommoder les Coleuures. Else cependant se murmuroient bion
fort, et se pleignoient enter ceux mesmes d'auoir receu ches else si
fascheuses hosts, qui n' estoient point seulement a Charge a ceux, mais qui
les frottant a leur peaus molles et glissans, les faisoient sentir leur traits
herisses, qu' else ne pouoient aucunement souffrir.

Le Sens MORAL.
LES Couleuures, et les Herissons nous representent icy deux chooses entierement
contraires, ascauoir l' Hospitalite, et l' Ingratitude. La premiere est un Act
de Charity, et des plus Insignes qui soient, et vne Virtue si necessaire qu'
elle ne peut estre assez recommendable; Mais pourtant, nous ne deuons point
abuser, ny imiter les Herissons de cette Fable; Nous ne deuons jamais estre
trop importuns aux nos Hosts, ny les incommoder de tell sort, pour les en
assister par dessus nos forces. Tells sont veus neantmoins, parmy eux, quelqu'
vns si temeraires, que de commander en Maistre dans des Maisons, ou l'on ne les
souffre que par Compassion, et sont si denatures aussi, que d'en vouloir mettre
dehors ceux qui leur y donnent le Couuert. Ces Herissons font bien d'auantage;
Car ils se seruent de traicts picquans, soit de leur langue, soit de leur
Arms, pour en blesser la Reputation, et quelquefois la person mesme de ceux
qui les recoiuent en leur logis. C' est pourquoy, auant que de les y admettre,
ils doiuent bien considerer qu' else gens ce sont pour ne se repentir apres,
comme faisoient les Coleuures en cette Fable. Or il ne faut pas aussi, que les
Hommes, ou Estrangers, ou autres, qu' on traitte si fauourablement, s' oublient
de leur deuoir qui est de prendre tousiours en bonne part l' honneste Reception
de leurs Hosts, et de ne point fair comme ce Milesien peu civil, qui dans la
Ville de Sparte en tous les lieux on il estoit loge vantoit tellement les
delicatesses de son pais, et mesprisoit si fort la frugalite des Lacedemoniens
qu' il leur donna sujet de luy reprocher son extrauagance, et sa vanite, par
ces paroles Face qui voudra le Milesien chez soy. mais non pas icy? Ceux qui
seroient si fols que de l'imiter, et de se plaindre du traittement que leur
feroit un honneste homme qui les auroit receus en sa maison propre, comme les
Couleuures receuoient les Herissons dans leurs loges, ne commettroient ils
point vne raute irreparable, et ne meriteroient ils pas aussi d'estre tances
d'vne extreme Ingratitude?

The Porcupines and Adders.
The Adders did the porcupines divest
Of those retreates of which. they were possessed
Nor could their cells be by assault retreiv'd
Which were by foree and stratagem Atcheiv'd
By subtilty ye. benure first was gayn'd
And now by force ye. title is mainteyn'd
Empire by fraud is often times made good.
By ye. more rough designs of war and blood


FAB. XL. De Herinaceis Viperas hospites ejicientibus.
HErinacei hyemem adventare praesentientes blande Viperas rogaverunt ut in
propria illarum Caverna adversus vim frigoris locum sibi concederent, Quod quum
illaefecissent, Herinacei huc atque illuc se provolventes spinarum acumine
Viperas pungebant, et vehementi dolor torquebant. Illae male secum actum
videntes blandis verbis orabant Herinaceos ut exirent, quandoquidem tam multis
locus esset angustus nimis; Cui Herinacei, Exeunt, inquiunt, qui hic manner non
possunt; Quare Viperae sentientes ibi locum non esse, cessere Hospitio.

MORALE.
Fabula innuit, eos in Consortia non admittendos quos non ejicere possumus.

FABLE XLI.
LA Forest agitee des vents faisoit plus de bruit que de coustume, et pour
cette cause les Lieures espouuantez commencerent a fuyr vitement; En fuyant ils
trouuerent un Marest qui les empescha de passer outre. Ils demeurerenr donc en
doubt, estans surprins de Danger de tous costez; Et pour les espouuanter
d'auantage, ils voyoient les Grenouilles se plonger dans l'eau; Lors un des
plus vieux, et de plus venerable entr'eux, pleine de sagesse et d' Eloquence
leur dit, pourquoy craignons nous ainsi sans propos? Il nous faut prendre
courage, car nous sommes agiles du corpse, mais nous auons fault de coeur, Il ne
faut point que nous fuyons le danger de cette tourbillon, mais n' en tenir
conte.

Le Sens MORAL.
EN toutes chooses, il faut auoir Courage, la Virtue est esteinte sans
asseurance, Car l'Asseurance est Conductrice, et la Royne de Virtue. La sotte
crainte de ces Lieures qui s'alloient precipiter, pour se tirer de la peine, ou
ils s' estoient mis, represente la foiblesse de ceux qui meurent de peur de
mourir, et s' abandonnent a des maux certains pour n' euiter que l'effect de
leurs soupcons. Quant a la sage Remonstrance que leur fit le plus vieil d'entr'
eux, par l'exemple des Grenouilles, cela nous apprend que c' est vne excellent
consolation a nos maux de les comparer a ceux d'autruy, quand ils sont plus
malheureux que nous, Ce qu' on trouue de pire est que nous croyons estre par
dessous tous ceux que Fortune a persecute. La parallele des infortunes d'autruy
nous est vne espece de Consolation bien grande, quand else se trouuent estre
plus grandes que nostres, Car il n' est point d' homme si desespere qui ne se
plaise a viure, s' il jette les yeux sur vne infinite des mendians chargez d'
Age, et de Maladies qui toutesfois s' estudient a se conseruer, comme si leur
vie estoit accompagnee de tout ce qu' on appelle Bonheur en ce Monde. Le
Fondement de nostre Fortune ou bonne, ou mauuais, gist en nous mesmes, a quoy
contribue sur toutes chooses la Disposition de nostre Esprit.

The Hares and Storm.
Affrighted with a storm the Hares forsake
Their Open forms and closer thickets take
From whence amazed with hollow noise, they drop
But straight their speed an obvious pale does stop
At Length they find a breach from whence, they fly
But then a sen spread with dead Frogs discry,
Backward they dare not, forward cannot run
Whilst one more grave, in this confusion,
Thus did advise, storms cannot always last
But will themselves in their own fury wast,
Whilst against their rage our furs arm us, this said
The onsets of the tempests are allayd
Do not to invading ills thy self resign
But qainst their fo^e with. greater strength combine
For when the are scauerd a serene repose
Will all thy ranquisht dificulties close.


FAB. XLI. De Leporibus and Ranis.
SYlva insolito mugiente turbine, trepidi Lepores rapide incipiebant fugere,
Fugientibus quum obsisteret Palus, stetere anxii, utrinque comprehensi
periculis, Quodque majoris esset incitamentum timoris vident in paludem
insilientes immergi Ranas; Tum unus ex Leporibus, caeteris Prudentior, Quid,
inquit, inaniter timemus? Animis opus est, Corporis quidem agilitas nobis
adest, sed animi desunt, Hoc periculum turbinis non fugiendum, sed
contemnendum.

MORALE.
AVdaces animos etiam ipsa pericula evitare solent, Nihil in Artibus Belli,
Pacisve inclyte geritur, si non Confidentiam tanquam Ducem Rerum gerendarum
habemus.

FABLE XLII.
LE Loup ayant fait des provisions pour un assez long temps menoit vne vie
oysiue, quand le Renard, qui s' en apperceut, le fut visiter, et luy demanda la
Cause de son Repose, Le Loup se douta tout aussi tossed qu' il auoit envy de luy
jouer quelque tour de soupplesse, et qu' il n' en vouloit qu' a la mangeaille,
parquoy il feignit, que sa malady estoit la Cause qu' il se reposoit ainsi, et
pry le Renard qu' il allast prier les Dieux pour luy; Le Renard fasche de ce
qu' il n' estoit point venu a ses atteintes, s' addressa a un Berger, et luy
conseilla de s' en aller a la taniere du Loup, l'asseurant qu' il luy seroit
facile d'accabler cet Ennemy, pource qu' il ne se doutoit de rien, et se ne
tenoit point sur ces gardes; le Berger s' en alla donc assaillir le Loup, et
fit si bien qu' il le tua, tellement que par cette mort, le Renard demeura
Maistre et de la tanniere, et de la proye. Toutesfois comme sa perfidie estoit
grande, la joye qu' il en receut ne fut pas aussi de longue duree, car un peu
apres le mesme Berger le prit, et le tua.

Le Sens MORAL.
L'Enuie est la seule chose du monde qui n' est susceptible d'aucun repos, ny
d'aucune consolation, Elle naist en le mesme temps que les plaisirs des autres,
et se turn en rage, Elle a tousiours este si fort en Horreur aux homestes
gens, qu' a peine nous trouerons un Autheur qui ne l'ait peinte si odieuse, que
Tisiphone mesme paroistroit aymable aupres d'elle, Toutes persons qui sont
atteintes de cette malady contagieuse n' ont jamais de repos en leur ame, qu'
else n' ayent dress quelque embusche a ceux qu' ils enuient, mais il ne
portent pas loin la peine de leur forfait, car bien souuent ils sont punis de
la facon qu' ils meritoient, et sont fait compagnons de la mesme Disgrace qu'
ils ont procuree.

The Fox and Wolf.
An empty Fox did a gorged wolf accost
Which to himself ye spoils of flocks ingrost
The Wolf to null his hopes did him insure
That he then struggled with a Calenture,
The Fox resents his craft, and vexed does tell,
To Neighboring Swaynes; where was his bloody cell
Who straight with. Dogs ye loaded wolf subdued,
And next ye Fox with the same fate pursued,
Who being both thus made by Justice twins,
In death, a dole is made of both their skinns,
Envy's own poison still it self does' frett.
Who starves it self to see another eat


FAB. XLII. De Vulpe and Lupo.
VVlpes quum in puteum fortuito incidisset Lupum in ripa praetereuntem vidit,
rogavitque ut funem sibi compararet, opemque daret ad seipsum a tanto periculo
extrabendum, cui Lupus; Miserrime Vulpes condoleo tuum Infortunium, Dic precor
quomodo in hunc puteum incidisti? Respondebat vulpes, Non opus est ambagibus,
Quin tu funem comparato, et deinde omnia tibi in ordine expediam.

MORALE.
QVI in imminentibus versantur periculis non verba superflua, sed praesentes
suppetias quaerunt.

FABLE XLIII.
LE Chien ayant faict adjourner la Brebis, disant, qu' elle luy deuoit un pain
a cause de pressed, le pauure Brebis le nia, mais le Milan, le Loup, et le
Vautour sont appellez pour tesmoins, et ils deposent contre la Brebis qui fut
condamne a render le pain, que Loup luy osta en mesme temps, et le deuora.

Le Sens MORAL.
PLusieurs sont opprimez par faux tesmoins, et bien souuent il aduint que ceux
mesmes qui connoissent le mieux, dressent a nostre vie des pieges si dangereux,
qu'il est presque impossible d'en eschapper, Ce qu' Esope a sort bien done a
connoistre, en faisant le Chien accusateur de la Brebis, quoy que neantmoins il
la deust proteger continuellement, estant destine a cela par la Coustume, et
par la Nature: Il nous enseigne par cette Fable, que ceux, en qui nous deuons
auoir plus d'esperance sont quelques fois nos pires persecuteurs, et de render
nostre calamite plus certain ils induissent des faux tesmoins contre nous; Et
s' ils ne laissent toucher ny aux loix humaines, ny mesme aux menaces qui sont
faites dans les Saints lettres; Nous deuons estre soigneux de ne voir, s' il
est possible, que des gens de Bien, et de fuyr le Commerce de tous meschans,
combien que la Proximite du sang nous conuieroit a les aymer; Mais quant au
faux tesmoins, et calomniateurs, ils n' ont rien de sacre, ny d'inviolable; Ils
leuent la maine deuant leur Juge, Ils appellent leur Creature a tesmoin, ils
jurent mesme sur l'Evangile, pour render croyable leurs Impostures, et ostent
la Vie, ou l' repos a l' Innocent qui n' a pas moyen de se garanter du tort qu'
on any fait, et n' en peut demander Justice qu' a Dieu seulement, L' on ne peut
accuser Esope d'auoir mal traitte les faux tesmoins, les comparant au Loup, au
Milan, et au Vautour, puisque mesme ils sont pires que les Demons. Cela nous
oblige d'auoir ce Vice en Execration comme la plus contagieuse Peste de l'Ame,
Que si nos Alliez, ou nos prochains demandent quelque fois nostre tesmoinage,
donnons le tousiou rs a la Verite, non pas a la Bien veuillance, Refusons
hardiment leur faueur en cela, et leur respondons, que nous sommes Amiss de nos
Amiss en tout ce, que la Conscience et le Deuoir enuers Dieu nous peut permettre.

The Dog and Sheep.
A Clamorous Dog does in full Court implead,
A Guilties Sheep, cause she a loaf of bread,
From him detaind, and for its proof does cite
Th'testate of a vultur, Wolf and kyte.
Who all with complicated oaths, averr
An Obligation due to the Dog from her,
Justice who cannot into secrets pry
Or win now hearts, warpt by vile perjury
The rigor of ye. law Obliged, to lay
Upon ye. Sheep, yt. must (though wronged) obey
The Dog ye sentence past, with. blood to cloy
The perjurd luncto, did ye. sheep destroy.
Virtue it self, bribes and black peiuries.
With their injurious Arts, do often surprise.


FAB. XLIII. De Cane and Ove.
LItigiosa Canis Ovem in Jus vocat, Panem ex mutuo debere clamitat, Ovis
innocenter it inficias; Milvus, Lupus, and Vulpes statim accersuntur, falsique
Oves contra Ovem subornantur; Misera damnatur Ovis, Damnatam omnes confestim
rapiunt, deglubiuntque.

MORALE.
IN dolosos hos latrones Aequi, Bonique, falsos scilicet testes, Nemo satis
cantus esse potest; Falsis etenim testimoniis quam plurimi opprimuntur, and
saepe fit, ut qui de nobis optime merentur, vel Honori nostro, vel Commodo, vel
ipsi vitae saepe insidiantur.

FABLE XLIV.
LA Paon et la Crew souppoient ensemble, mais le Paon meprisoit la Grue d'vne
estrange sort, et se vantoit fort en luy faisant monstre de ses belles Plumes,
Mais la Grue ne pouuant souffrir ses Vanites, Je confess, luy dit elle, qu' il
ne se peut rien adjouster a la Beauty de ton Plumage, pourueu que tu m' aduoues
aussi, Mais pour tout cela, tu as bien de la peine a voler sur les maisons,
quand d'vn vol courageux je perce les nues.

Le Sens MORAL.
LA Nature a dove chaque Animal de quelque Virtue capable de render tout le
monde satisfait, et cela auec tant de Justesse, et Proportion, que null n' est
mecontent de son partage; Il est vray neantmoins, qu' il s' en troue plusieurs
qui s' enflent de leurs bonnes qualitez, et ne jugent pas les autres dignes de
leur estre mis en comparaison; Ces mesdisans (comme le Paon en nostre Fable)
blasment les defauts d'autruy auec vne langue qui ne scait point epargner, C'
est le dangereux Outil que les Hommes lasches ont accoustume d'employer contre
les persons mal-assorties des dons de Nature; Au contraire, s' ils ont
quelque chose de louable en eux, ils se mettent a si haut prix qu' il semble
que tout le monde leur en doiue beaucoup de rest, et qu' ils sont uniques in
leur espece. Tells effets de Presomption sont autant les Marquis de leur Folly
et autant de rejettons de leur Vanite qui les font hair vniuersellement; Que
s' ils ont quelque d'eminent par dessus autres, Je ne voy point que pour tout
cela ils les doiuent mespriser, puis que Dieu qui a fait toutes chooses
justement n' a pas traitte les hommes auec tant inegalite, que les vns
dedaignent la Compagnie et conversation des les autres, Il done a chacun ce
qu' il juge luy estre propre, et le fait auec tant de Justesse, que null ne le
voudroit changer contre vne autre, quoy que toutesfois il se puisse fair, qu'
il eut en envy les dons et les qualites particulieres; Que si quelqu' un n'
est pourveu de ces Vertus que l'on appelle Heroiques pource qu' else brillent
hautiment en la person d' Heroes, il ne pas impossible que pour Recompense il
ne possede les plus solides qui sont la Tranquillite de l'Esqrit, la Constance,
la Moderation, et la Modesty, Il ne faut pas donc que le Paon se targue de son
beau plumage aupres de la Grue, s' il ne veut qu' elle luy reproach sa
pesanteur, et qu' au contraire qu' elle met en auant la haute maniere qu' elle
a de voler jusques dans les nues.

The Crane and Peacock.
The gay plumed Peacock with a nice disdain
Slights ye cheap clothing of ye longbeakt Gane
And vants how much she of her pomp did want
Thy outsid's fairer quoth the Gane ^guuit
But to what intrest serves thy painted pride,
Since I with. mine the Licquid air divide
When all that pagentry thy train displayes
Tends only to attract the vulgar gase
Scorn^ not ye Indigent, their minds may be
Richer then all thy gaudy pedigree.


FAB. XLIV. De Pavone and Grue.
PAvo and Grus foedus inter se ineunt, unaque caenant; Inter coenandum Pavo
nobilitatem suam jactat, formosam ostentat caudam, Gruemque hospitem contemnit,
Grus fatetur Pavonem formosiorem esse pennis; se tamen quum vix tectis
supervolitat Pavo, animoso volatu penetrare nubes.

MORALE.
HOmines jactabundi quum magna profitentur, eo ipso tempore vel maxim in
minimis redarguuntur. Nemo igitur alterum contempserit, sua cuique est Dos, sua
cuique Virtus.

FABLE XLV.
LE Serpent trouua vne Lime en la forge, et commenca a la ronger. La Lime se
print a rire; Que fais tu, disoit elle, sotte Best? Ne vois tu pas que tu te
briseras toutes les dents, auant que de me pounoir consommer, et qu' auec les
miennes, J' ay accoustome de mordre le fer quelque dur qu'il soit.

Le Sens MORAL.
REguarde bien a qui tu as affair, Si tu aiguises tes dents contre un plus
fort que toy, tu ne luy nuiras pas, mais a toy mesme; Et quant a cette vain
entreprise du Serpent qui s' afforce de ronger vne Lime, elle nous enseigne, a
ne nous point jouer aux Grands, de nostre foiblesse, ne nous soit en fin un
fascheux subject de Confusion et de Ruin. Tout le Dommage qu' on pretend fair
a un Ennemy de cette Nature la retombe sur celuy qui l'attaque; C' est sapper
un bastiment, qui nous accablera, Bref c' est s' exposer a un Ennemy, pour
estre condemn comme un ledger, et uncertain.

The Viper and File.
An angry viper did with furious Law.
A fyle (obdurate to his onsetts) gnaw:
The fyle with. scorn resents his faint attempt
Since this from his assaults was so exempt.
That its indented tongue could fore like rust
Both Brass and Steel to crumble into Dust.
(...) where when thou'r^ overcome.
Both shame and loss make up (...) fatal doom.


FAB. XLV. De Vipera and Lima.
VIpera in officina Fabraria inveniens Limam coepit rodere; Subridens autem
Lima, Quid, inquit Inepta? Quid agis? Tu tuos contriveris Dentes, antequam me
atteras, quae duritiem ferri praemordere soleo.

MORALE.
Innuit haec fabula, monetque, ne cum superioribus contendamus.

FABLE XLVI.
LE Coq passoit un Jour auec l'Asne que le Lion attaqua, Mais il s' enfuit bien
viste pource qu'il ouit le Chant du Coq qu'il abhor naturallement; l'Asne
cependant s' alla imaginer, que c' estoit a Cause de luy qu'il fuioit, et
persuade par cette bonne opinion de soy mesine, se mit a courir apres; Mais
comme il l'eust poursuiuy si loin, que le Lion ne deuoit plus craindre le chant
du Coq, ne pouuant l'ouyr, cet Ennemy qui fuioit n' aguere, retourna sur ses
pas, et le deuora; Miserable et insense que je suis, s' escria l'Asne, auant
que de mourir, a quel propos ay Je voulu me fair vaillant, et me hazarder a un
Combat, moy qui n' ay point pris naissance des parens aguerris?

Le Sens MORAL.
LA crainte que le Lion a du Coq est marque irreprochable que rien n' est si
assure, ny si accomply de sa Nature, qui n' ait son sujet d'achopement, et de
honte, Nous ne manquerons pas d'exemples pour confermer cette Verite; Il n' y a
point si grand homme, don't les actions n' ayent este souuillees de quelque
tasche difforme; Ce que l'ingenieux Esope nous represente accortement, par la
Fable du Lion, qui estant Roy absolu sur tous les Animaux, comme plus vaillant
qu'il est, et plus courageux, recoit neantmois la honte de s' enfuir, en oyant
chanter un simple Coq.

Nous deuons aussi remarquer l'orgueil de l'Asne qui pour voir fuyr le Lion
deuant luy, vient a tell point de stupidite que de croire que ce soit a son
occasion; Tell espece d'orgueil est fort ordinaire a ceux qui viuent
familierement aupres de la person des Princes, ou des gens extremement
qualifiez, qui ne reguardant le Respect qui est deu a ceux, s' enflent horse de
Raison, comme l'Asne en nostre Fable; pour nous donner a entendre qu' vne fault
si lourde, que celle, cy ne peut prouenir que d'vne extreme Ignorance, Ce que
l'Experience ne nous prouue pas moins, que l'explication de la Fable, puis que
tous les jours nous voyons tomber en pareille presomption la pluspart de ceux
qui se picquent ou d' Esprit, ou de Courage.

La troifiesme consideration, qu'il faut tirer de cette Fable, est
l'Extrauagance des Fanfarons qui s' esloignant du lieu de leur Azyle, ou par
mesgarde, ou sous esperance de trouuer un Ennemy fuyant, ou d'estre separez en
leur combat, succombent laschement sous l'effort de celuy qu' ils ont mal
traitte, et se laissent battre sans defense; Or de ces gens la, il y en a vne
si grande quantite qu' a peine en trouuera to on un seul qui ne participe de
cette humeur, mais laissons jouyr de la fausse gloire, qu' ils pensent auoir
acquise, et detestons non seulement cette vain et trompeuse appearance de
Valeur, mais encores toutes Disputes, et Contentions de cela.

The Lion, Ass, and Cock.
An Hungry Lion hunting for his prey
Discry'd an Ass and Cock to thwart his way.
The Cock by Crowing forced ye. Vobler beast
To a retreat, the which. so much increast
The Asses Courage, who straight deemed yt.
Was only Cause of this ti^erite.
With Eager speed pursues ye Royal game
Far from ye. Cock. the which. did so inflame
His Princely soul and heigh then his desire.
Naught but ye Asses blood, could quench yt. fire
So often through grand mistake ye do pursue
A subtle for (...) seems to Fly from you.


FAB. XLVI. De Asino, Leone, and Gallo.
GAllus aliquando cum Asino pascebatur, Leone autem aggresso Asinum, Gallus
exclamavit, and Leo qui Galli vocem timet, fugere incipit: Asinus ratus propter
se fugere, aggressus est Leonem; Vt vero procul a Gallicinio persecutus est,
conversus Leo Asinum devoravit, qui moriens clamabat, Justa passus sum, ex
pugnacibus enim non natus parentibus, quamobrem in Aciem irrui?

MORALE.
FAbula innuit, quod plerique Homines inimicos illos aggrediuntur qui se de
Industria humiliarunt, atque ab illis saepius victi, occiduntur.

FABLE XLVII.
LE Geay s' estant vestu des plumes du Paon deuint tout a coup si fort amoureux
de sa gentillesse, et de sa beauty, qu' ennuye de sa premiere condition, il s'
alla mesler auecque les autres Paons, qui recognoissans sa fourberie, le
denuerent de ses plumes empruntees, et le battirent tres-bien.

Le Sens MORAL.
EN tell maniere nous voyons aujourd'-huy de gens, qui poussez d'vne aueugle
presomption se jettent affrontement parmy les Grands, sans y vouloir mettre la
difference, que l'Extraction, er la nourriture y ont mise, Ce, qu' ils en font,
est par un vain espoir de s' acquerir de l'esclat en leur compagnie, et de
jetter, dans l'esprit du Peuple, autant de Respect qu' il en a pour les plus
qualifiez, Ces Arrogans se parent des superbes depouilles, comme le Geay de
nostre Fable, Ils frequentent incessament des Gens de haute condition, sans
leur vouloir ceder en aucune chose; Mais qu' arrive to il de cette Imprudente
facon de viure? Rien autre, qu' un becquettement general de vrais Paons contre
le faux, vne risee honteuse, vne fuitte pleine de desespoir; Il ne faut donc
tant donner a l'esclat, et a la monstre exterieure, qu' a la vray et parfaite
Virtue de l'Ame, Ce seroit vne chose extrauagante de confirmer cette verite par
des Histoires; La Cour n' est que trop pleine de gens de cette sort; Nous
voyons tous les Jours, le Commencement, le Progrez, et la Fin de ces
Presomptueux, Il faut donc laisser bien loin tells frequentations, et se
degager de ces Pratiques. Ces hommes falsifiez qui n' ont soin, que de la
Beauty superficielle doiuent estre fuis, Le Proverb est commun, et bien dit,
Cognoy toy mesme?

The Jay and Peacock.
With ^audy feathers the Ambitious lay
Purloind from Peacocks, did her self a^ray.
And ye other lays with coy neglect disdaines
Her self (among Peacocks mixed) a Peaeock sayns.
But they her borrowed pride do soon de^^ct.
And her dis^b'd of her faiee plumes reject
When being confined again to live with lays.
Her trivial pride each with Just scoffs repayes.
Those ye to acts pretend they have not don
Will nere ye guilt of pompous boasting shun.


FAB. XLVII. De Graculo and Pavonibus.
ORnavit se Gracculus plumis Pavonis; Deinde, pulchellus sibi visus fastidito
suo genere, contulit se ad Pavones, qui intellecta fraud stolidam avem
coloribus nudarunt.

MORALE.
EXterna pulchritudo, si adsit intena, grata est; Quod si alterutra carendum
est, praestat ut externa quam interna careas; Non debemus nos gerere aequo
sublimius, praesertim si cum illis vivimus, qui and ditiores sunt, and magis
nobiles, quoniam illi inopes qui sunt saepe fiunt, and sunt ludibrio?

FABLE XLVIII.
LA Mouche auoit un grand Debat auec la Fourmis, l'vne se vantoit d'estre
noble, et de voler comme les Oiseaux, de frequenter chez les Roys, d'estre
tousjours en Festin, et de n' auoir rien a fair; Au contraire la Fourmis
estoit de basse naissance, ne faisoit que ramper a terre, ne se nourrissoit que
de quelques chetifs grains qu' elle rongeoit, ne beuuoit rien que de l'eau, et
se tenoit tout le jour cachee dans les cauernes, Mais pour responce a ces
objections, la Fourmis disoit, Que pour son particulier, elle se contentoit
fort de son extraction, qui n' estoit pas si vile que la Mouche le faisoit, Qu'
vne Demeure arrestee luy plaisoit autant, qu' a elle, vne facon de viure
inconstante, et mal assuree, Que les grains de bled don't elle se nourrissoit,
et l'eau des Fontaines luy sembloient d'aussi bon goust, qu' a son Ennemie ses
pastez et ses vins delicieux; Qu' au rest, elle jouissoit de tous ces Biens
par un honneste trauail, et non par vne infame paresse; Auecque cela, elle se
disoit estre tousjours joy euse et en seurete, aymee de tous, et le Modele du
vray Trauail, qu'au contraire la mouche estoit en un perpetuel Danger, odieuse
a un chacun, et finalement l'exemple de la faineantise; Elle adjoutoit pour
conclusion, que le Souuenir de le Hyuer l'obligeoit a fair ses provisions en
Este, au lieu que le Mouche viuoit du jour au lendemain, et qu' ainfi il
falloit necessairement, qu' elle mourust de Faim, ou de froid.

Le Sens MORAL.
VNe honneste Mediocrite jointe au repos, et a l'asseurance est preferable aux
pompes, et aux Richesses mal establies, Si la Fortune est trop favorable, ou
trop contraire aux hommes, elle leur nuit, ou par abondance, en les faisant
mesconnoistre, ou par indigence en les portant dans le Vice, pour se garanter
de la Faim; La vraye et parfaite noblesse procedant de la Virtue, et derechef
toute Virtue consistant en la Moderation, celuy la, sans doubt, aura plus de
longueur et securite: Car c' est vne Maxim receue parmy tous les gens d'
Esprit, que l' homme, qui ne desire point vne chose, n' est pas moins heureux,
que celuy qui la possede.

The Ant and Fly.
The gaudy Gras hopper, in winter hyes.
Unto the thristy Ant, to beg supplies,
For his support, of whom this Ant did ask.
How he in Summer had performed his task,
When all ye. feilds with. the su^^s light attired
A vesture had of corn, and grafs aquir'd.
I by my music (said the other then).
And its shrill airs, obligd the ears of men
The Ant replied, since in yt. fruitful time
You with. your charming notes so well could chime
Now the earth's crusted with. a frost, ^^mhance
A seasonable warmth you ought to dance
(...) youth who will not with. the busy Ant.
Improve (...) stock in age are checked with. want.


FAB. XLVIII. De Musca and Formica.
MVsca contendebat cum Formica, clamitans sese esse nobilem, illant ignobilem,
se volitare, illam repere; E regione Formica praedicabat, se non ignobilem
esse, sed natalibus suis contentam, Muscam vagam esse, sese autem stabilem, and
laetam, omnibusque Charam, and magni denique exemplar laboris; Muscam, omnibus
molestam esse, omnibus invisam; Sese hyemis memorem alimenta reponere, Muscam
in aestate vivere, in hyeme aut esurituram, aut morituram.

MORALE.
MVsca si been dixiisset, pulchre audisset; Vita obscura cum securitate est
multo magis optabilis, quam cum sollicitudine, and periculo splendida.

FABLE XLXIX.
LA Cygale voyant la Fourmy qui, sur la Fin de l'Autumne, faisoit un grand amas
de Bled, dans sa petite grange, s' approcha d'elle aussi tossed, et luy en
demanda un grain; pourquoy did la Fourmy, a mon Example n' amasses tu en Este
ce que tu peux, pour to en seruir en Hyuer? Cigale luy respondit, que, tout
l'Este, elle pass fort joyeusement son temps, et ne faisoit rien que chanter;
La Fourmy se mocquant luy dit, si ainsi est qu' en Este tu sois paresseuse, et
tu ne faces autre chose que de chanter, et n' as plus de preuoyance, tu merits
bien maintenant de mourir de faim.

Le Sens MORAL.
ESope nous represente fort bien, par l'Exemple de Fourmy, que durant l'Este
nous ne deuons fair autre chose qu' assembler des grains pour nous nourrir en
l' Hyuer, Car comme il ny a rien de plus fascheux, qu' vne vieillesse
accompagnee de Pauurete, aussi n' y a to il rien si bien-seant au monde que
labourieuse Jeunesse, et a ce propos est le Verse du Horace Parvula nam Exemplum
est magni Formica laboris,
Ore trahens quodcunque potest, atque addit acervo.
Cependant ce beau temps, l'imprudente Cigale consomme vainement ses jours a
chanter, et se trouue reduite a la fin a mandier son pain durant le rigueur de
l' Hyuer, ce qui luy est d'autant plus insupportable qu' elle y est moins
accoustume; Cette Allegory sert d'vn bell Exemple a le Homme faineant, et
voluptueux, Car d'auoir employe presque tout son Age dans la mollesse, et dans
l'oysiuete est vne chose horse de toute consolation; Que si sortir d'vn mal pour
entrer dans l'autre est vne peine tres difficile a supporter, que ne sera ce
point de passer du Bien a l'extremite de tout Misere; Nous lisons de Diogene
qu' ayant mesprise, toute sa vie, le soin d'acquerir des richesses, il sut
attrappe sur ses vieux jours d'vne extreme necessite, de sort qu' il s'
exercoit a demander l'aumosne aux statues, a fin d'apprendre a n' auoir point
de honte de Mendier, Il supporta toutesfois cette Incommodite auec vne
merueilleuse Resolution, car c' est vne chose tousjours louable de fair part
de nos Biens a toute maniere de Necessiteux, qnand mesine ils si seroient par
leur mauuaise Conduite.

The Ant and Grasshopper.
The boasting Fly, did ye. sage Ant upbraid
That she in mosehills her dark mansions made
Where her course food was meaner then her Cell,
When she in splendid palaces did dwell
And for her daily beverage did sup
(Rival with. Kings) of ye same royal cup
The Ant replied all thy acheivments are
Obtayn'd by theft, and still preserved with. fear
Since glu^^ouy with sloth vuited, has
The product been of thy dull life whereas
As my support was by lust Labor gaind,
It Is with coutent and calm repose maiutaind
Some melt away, that by profuse expense.
Others improve by Art, and providence.


FAB. XLXIX. De Cicada and Formica.
DVm per aestatem Cicada cantat, Formica suam exercet messem, trahendo in antra
grana, and in hyemem reponendo; Saeviente autem Bruma, famelica cicada venit ad
formicaut, and mendicat victum, renuebat autem Formica, dictitans sese
laborasse, dum illa cantabat.

MORALE.
MVlti ita capti sunt libidine gloriae, ut omnibus sese, and praedicent and
jactant; Monet praeterea hac fabula, quod qui segnes sunt in Juventute, egebunt
in senecta, and qui hodie non parcunt, olim mendicabunt.

FABLE L.
UN laboureur trouua dans la neige vne couleuure presque mort du froid qu' il
emporta en sa maison, et l'approacha du feu, La couleuure, un peu apres, ayant
receuant sa force, et venin par le feu, et n' en pouuant supporter la violence
de chaleur, infecta toute la maison par son sifflement, le Laboureur y
accourut, et prennant un baston, il adjouta les coups, aux paroles, en
plaignant du tort qu' elle luy faisoit, et en cette sort luy reprochoit; Quoy,
maudit Serpent, me rends tu le mal pour le Bien? Veux tu oster la vie a celuy
qui te l' a donnee?

Le Sens MORAL.
LEs Ingrats rendent ordinairement le mal pour le bien, et toute Nature declame
sans cesse contre enormite de leur Crime, Car celuy qui manque de
recognoissance enuers son Bien-facteur, n' est pas capable d'en tesmoigner
aucune a Dieu, a ses Parens, ny a se Patrie. Nous lisons a ce propos, qu'
encore qu' Alexandre et Caesar se fussent rendus recommandables, a tout le
monde par leur clemence, si est ce, qu' ils ne pardonnoient jamais a ceux qu'
on auoit manifestement convaincus d' Ingratitude. Les Annals sont toutes
pleines de semblables cruautez, Je li des enfans qui s' opposent mes chantement
a leurs Peers, et qui desirent la mort de celuy qui les a mis au monde, voire
mesme qui les a comblez de bien faits; Je voy des freres qui font inhumainement
la guerre a des freres officieux, Je voy des Seruiteurs reuoltez contre leurs
maistres, O vile, et deplorable Condition des hommes! O Engeance pire a
pluspart du temps que les Bestes brutales! Car quand nous vsions pas d'
Ingratitude les vns enuers les autres, nostre vie qu' est elle autre chose qu'
vne perpetuelle mesconnoissance enuers Dieu? Et en effet qu' y a to il de plus
execrable en ce qui reguarde les Demons que ceste Circomstance d'auoir este
meconnoissant des bienfaits de Dieu, qui les auoit creez si lumineux, et si
beaux.

The Countryman and Snake.
When with a frost ye Crusted Earth was sealed
A Clown brings home a snake almost Congeald
Who having war^d his venom by his fyres
Darts out his sting and spreads his sinewy spies
And grown more insolent attempts with black.
Ingrattitude his freehold to attacque
But ye. bold peasont his own right asserts.
And with. just wounds ye. vuthankfull snake subverts
Thus often our obligations are persu'd
By worthles men with rude ingratitude.


FAB. L. De Rustico and Colubro.
RVsticus repertum in altiori nive Colubrum, and frigore prope enectum, domum
tulit, and ad Focum adjecit; Coluber ab Igni vires virusque recipiens, and non
amplius flammam ferens, totum tugurium sibilando infecit; Accurrit Rusticus,
and correpta sude verbis verberibusque cum eo Injuriam expostulat; Number haec est
quam retulit Gratia, eripiendo vitam illi cui vitam debuit?

MORALE.
COntra Ingratos perfidosque Natura declamat ipsa; In Ingrato etenim uno, omnia
numerantur Crimina; Qui ab Alieno acceptum Beneficium non agnoscet, and
patriae, and parentibus, and Deo ipsi infidelem se praebebit.

FABLE LI.
LE Lion tardif, et paresseux se cachant dans sa cauerne, imaginoit beaucoup
des moyens pour attraper de la proye, pour se nourrir sans beaucoup de peine.
Mais apres y auoir beaucoup pense il s'aduisade dre, qu' il estoit malade, et
que tous les animaux, qui le viendroient voir, luy seruiroyent de nourriture,
apres qu' il les auroit deuore. Il dit donc qu' il estoit malade, de sort que
beaucoup d'animaux le vindrent voir, qu' il deuora tous, les vns apres les
autres. Un seul estant eschape par hasard, rencontrant le Renard luy dit, n' as
tu pas entendu que le Lion nostre Roy est malade, et que nous l'auons este
voir? Je le scay bien dit le Renard, et j' ay veu les pas de beaucoup
d'animaux, qui sont entres dans sa caverne, mais je ne vois point de vestige de
ceux qui en sont sortis, c' est pourquoy je crois qu' il m' est fort dangereux
de prendre guard a la sancte incertaine du Lion mon Roy, sans un grand danger
asseure pour moy.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEtte Fable nous apprend, qu' il se faut deffier des finesses des grands, qui
le plus souuent soubs de fausses apparences nous tendent des ambuches pour nous
ruiner, et pour nous perdre.

The Sick Lion.
A Lion worn with. age and long decay
Unable now t'approach the hunted prey
Pretends a sickness and each Beast yt. makes
A visit to him, by rude seizure takes
Next to ye Fox by summons did express
That heed a visit to his denn address.
Nor could he now Consiun'd with pain, offend
Should he design to do it so choyee a friend
Says he i will seek by pray^ for to retreive
His tottering health but dare no visit give
For to his Denn those footesteps yt do steer
All forwards go none backwards do appear
Whereon you your belief exact beware
Since Specious overtures are often a snare


FAB. LI. De Leone Aegrotante.
LEO se simulabat aegrotum, ad Quem quum visendi, and consolandi gratia Ferae
catervatim a convenerant, Ille omnes paene ad unum devoravit. Vna vero erumpens
and occurrens Vulpi, quaerit, Cur Ille non Leonem viserit aegrotantem; Cui
Lepide sic respondit vulpes, aedipol audivi quod aegrotavent Leo, sed vix
credo, quia video gressus and vestigia multarum ferarum ad Illum
proficiscentium, sed ne unum quidem indicium reperio redeuntium.

MORALE.
MOrale monet nos cavendum a dolis, and Eos minime condolendos Qui incaute per
incuriam, aut temeritatem interficiuntur.

FABLE LII.
UN Jeune Taureau, don't le col delicat, et gras n' auoit jamais encore, este
soubsmis a aucun Joug, regardoit un jour un Boeuf dans un pasturage prochain,
qui estoit attache a la charrue, et la tiroit auec beaucoup de peine, et auoit
les costs tous sanglants des points des aiguillons qu' il auoit soufferts.
Alors le Taureau commencant de sousrire, luy dit, O malheureux Boeuf! qu' elle
disgrace to est il arriuee, de paroistre auec un corpse, si maigre, et si
desfait, et de marcher auec des costs tous cribles de coups d'aiguillons.
Considere de grace, ma peau delicate, et l'embompoint de mon corpse. Le Boeuf
escouta patiemment les approbres du Taureau, Mais en fin le jour de feste des
Sacrifices opprochant on emmenoit le Taureau couronne de fleurs, pour seruir de
victime, et estre immole bien tossed sur l'Autel. Alors le Boeuf le voyant
passant, s' escria d'abord, O miserable Taureau! ou vas tu; N' eut il pas mieux
valu pour toy d'auoir este dans la condition ou tu mas veu; que d'aller
maintenant seruir de victime aux hommes?

Le Sens MORAL.
CEste Fable nous apprend que le trauail, et l'occupation a quelque chose d'
honneste, et d'vtile, est preferable a l'oisiuete, et qu' vne fortune mediocre
et plus a souhaitter qu' vne plus grande, et plus esleuee, parce que si les
hommes viennent vne fois a la perdre ils tombent dans un Abysme de malheurs, et
de tristeste.

The Wanton Calf.
A wanton Calfe whose neck no yoke as yett
Did with its rude uneasy pressure frett.
Boasts his slick skin and his smooth neck does vant
And does with. uncontrolled freedom rant
With saucy frisks insulting ore an Ox
And his aged neck gald with. long tillage mocks
Who with disdain sleights his rude Obloquy
Soon after as an equal victime he
Adorned with Chaplets was to the allter led
Which when ye indirstrious Ox beheld he sed
Those fading garlands and the priests keen knife
Are the just guerdon of thy looser life.
Labor with. industry dull Life Supports
Which Loose debauchery as often distorts.


FAB. LII. De Vitula, and Bove.
MOllis and lasciva Vitula quum Bovem, agricolae aculeo agitatum, and arantem
cerneret, contempsit; Sed quum Immolationis Dies affuit, Bos a Jugo liberatus
per pascua vagabatur; Vitula vero ut immolaretur, retenta est; Quod quum Bos
conspicatur subridens ait, Heus Vitula, ideo non laborabas, ut immolareris!

MORALE.
QVI alteri irridet, sibi ipsi caveat; Qui labori suo sedulo incumbit securus
est; otioso, and nihil agenti pericula semper imminent.

FABLE LIII.
LA Charroy d'vn Laboureur se profondement fichoit en vne fangeuse terre; Alors
il prioit a Hercules de l'expedier de ce grand Mal, et pour le fair y sortir;
Or Hercules ne veut point accorder a son priere, et fut sourd a ses cris; Adonc
il plaignoit a Hercules derechef, et s'importunoit de ses solicitations; En
fin vne voix s' eslanca des cieux, Employe toute ta force pour te remedier, et
donc pry a Hercules qui to exaucera.

Le Sens MORAL.
ON fit voir un Jour au Roy Antigonus vne troop de Soldats qu' on luy debitoit
pour les plus vaillans et plus Industrieux hommes de la terre, et ceux la
estoient tous percez de Coups, estropiez de leurs Members, et deguisez de
larges et profondes cicatrices. Ce qu' ayant veu le Prince, il dit au Capitain
qui les luy monstroit; Il me semble voirement que ceux-cy sont braues gens,
mais J' estime plus braues ceux qui les ont ainsi marquez. Par ces mots de
raillerie il vouloit monstrer qu' en matiere de Courage, et d' Industry, il ne
faut jamais donner des louanges excessives a ceux qui se picquent par trop de
leur effort, estant veritable que l'on ne void d'vn homme si genereux, ou
Industrieux, qui ne puisse facilement rencontrer son esgal, si non son Maistre;
car l' Industry est ordinairement victorieuse de la force, pourueu toutesfois
qu' auecque les prieres a Hercules, elle soit accompagnee de bon Courage. Il
est aise a l' homme Industrieux de surmonter les grand Colosses, et les members
des Geans, et de render son Esprit victorieux sur tous les Forces Ennemies, Ce
qui nous ont fabuleusement prouue les prodigieuses defaites d' Hercules mesme,
qui ayt vaincu l' Hydre de Learn, Le Lion Nemeen, Le Sanglier de Meleagre,
lesquels Poets feignent, qu' il a defait par Industry plustost que par la
policy; Et ce qui se dit d' Hercules se doit penser des Generaux, ou si la
multitude d'vn party accable presque la petitesse de l'autre, il faut auoir
recours aux aguets de l' Industry, et de l' Invention. Sertorius et Spartacus,
a mon aduis suyrent Hercules de bien pres en cette Nature de Gloire; Car n'
ayant jamais eu de forces completes, ils firent test, fort long temps, a la
plus victorieuse Nation du Monde. Tells furent Ennemies parmy les Anciens, et
tell a este n' aguere dans les troubles d' Allemagne le redoute Mansfield, qui
joynant Address au peu de moyens qu' il auoit, a fait subsister, combattre, et
retirer plusieurs fois ses soldats, d'vn facon de tout extraordinaire.

The Clown and Cart.
A Clown whose Cart ensnared lay ith mire
Did with low prayer of Hercules require
That he would rescue ye. engaged wayne.
To whom ye. God replied thou resty swayne.
Indeaver first with. thine own strength and Art
To disintangle thy engaged Cart
From knotted Dirt, and then ye. powers above.
With thy concurrence will the attempt improve.
Our Lazy prayers heavens concare never scale
But when th'a^ winged with. heat they often prevail.


FAB. LIII. De Rustico and Aratro suo.
RVstici Aratrum haeret in profundo luto; Mox prostratus Herculem implorat,
quum statim vox a Coelo auditur; Inepte flugellato equos, et ipse totis
viribus, humerisque annitere rotis? and deinde Herculem invocato, Tunc enim
tibi propitius Hercules aderit.

MORALE.
FAbula innuit quod otiosa Vota nihil prosunt, vota enim sunt quae sane Deus
non audit, Vetus est adagium, Juva temet, et ipse te adjuvabat Deus.

FABLE LIVE.
LA Main, et le Pied se plaignoient quelquesfois du Ventre, alleguans que par
sa paresse, il engloutissoit tout le gain qu' ils pouuoient fair. Ils
vouloient donc, ou qu' il trauaillast, ou qu' il ne demandast point a estre
nourry. Le Ventre les supplia deux, ou troisfois, la main luy refusa
nourriture, le Ventre estant attenue de faim, tous les nerfs et arteres
commencerent a defaillir, lors la Main luy voulut finalement fair service,
mais c' estoit trop tard, pour ce que le Ventre affoibly, pour auoir este trop
long temps vuide, n' eust pas moyen de fair sa fonction, et rejetta la viande,
d'ou il aduint qu' il ne peut perir, que toutes les autres parties du Corpse ne
perissent, et tell fuit le effet de l'enuie qu' else luy portoient.

Le Sens MORAL.
A Insi aduient il en la Compagnie des hommes, comme en la Societe des Members.
Un Membre a besoin de l'autre Membre, L'amy a besoin de l'Amy; Parquoy il faut
que vsions de peines et services mutuels, Car les richesses, et hauts Degrez et
Honneurs ne rendent point l' homme assez asseure, Le seul et souerain secours,
et aid est d'auoir l'amitie de plusieurs; Menenius Agrippa, le plus sage et le
plus authorize de tous les Romans, conta mot a mot toute cette Fable d' Esope,
au peuple de Rome pour leur fair voir par l'Example du Ventre, et des parties
du Corpse humain la mutuelle Dependence qu' a le Senate auec le populace; Car,
disoit il, mes amiss, ne pensez pas que les Senateurs, quoy qu' ils soyent
oysifs aux operations manuelles, et qu' ils employent le peuple aux labeurs
mechaniques, soient pour cela moins necessaires a vostre conservation, Ces sont
eux qui vous departent la chaleur qui distribue le bon suc par toutes les
parties de la Cite, Eux dis je, pour qui vous trauailles, mais qui trauaillent
bien plus ponr vous mesmes; Ne vneillez donc pas (mes Amiss) affoiblir cette
party de tell sort par vos facheuses mutineries qu' elle soit incapable de
vous seruir. D' ou l'on peut juger facilement combien l'vnion mutuelle des tous
les Members est necessaire a Conservation du Corpse soit naturel, soit,
Politic.

The Belly and Members.
The hands and feet the Belly tax of Sloth
And new supplies to Contribute are Loath
And all accustomed maintenance Substract
Less with joint toil she le yt Support Exact
Yet she implores for to be still Supplied
But her addrese they with neglet Deride
Who propt with. no recruits Strayl Shrinks away
And with her ye whole structure does decay
And now ye hands and feet would work again
With food ye. withered Belly to sustain
But it was too late when ye Chief member dies
Death of ye whole Compleats its Obsequies
In States all interests must each other prop
Which if they Clash, will into ruin drop


FAB. LIVE. De Membris, and Ventre.
HVmani artus quum ventrem otiosum viderent, ab eo discordabant, and suum ei
ministerium negaverunt; Hoc facto, quum and ipsi quoque deficerent,
intellexerunt ventrem acceptos cibos per omnia Membra dividere, and cum eo in
gratiam and mutuum officium redierunt.

MORALE.
MAgnae res discordia pereunt, concordia crescunt, valentque; Non semper
inspiciendum est quod agamus, sed quo sumus animo, quum agimus.

FABLE LV.
LE Lion vint pour manger le Cheual, Mais pource qu' il estoit desaisi de
toutes ses forces a cause de veillesse, il s' aduisa d'vn plaisant moyen pour
executer son entreprise, C' est, qu'il contresit le Medecin, and commenca
d'entretenir le Cheual de diverse discourse; Mais luy, qui reconnut cette Fraud,
trouua moyen de luy en opposer d'vne autre, Il feignit donc, que passant n'
aguere a trauers des ronces, il s' estoit fourre bien auant, dans le pied vne
gross espine, et pria ce nouueau Medecin de la luy arracher, Le Lion en
demeura d'accord, et mesme il se mit en deuoir de le fair; Mais le Cheual luy
fit quitter bien vitte cette besongne, car il frappa droit au front de toute sa
force, et s' enfuit a mesme temps, Le Lion qui de ce coup estoit presque
demeure sur la place, estant a la fin reuenu a soy; Mal heureux qui je suis,
dit il, que je portea bon Droit la peine de ma sottise, et qu'a bon Droit aussi
le Cheual s' est eschappe, car il a vange la fraud par la fraud mesme.

Le Sens MORAL.
LA Ruse bient souuent est payee par la Ruse, Le Lion fut resolu d'esgorger le
Cheual, et de se repaistre de son sang, Mais comme la force vient a luy
manquer, a cause de son extraordinaire vieillesse, il veut s' ayder de la Ruse,
et oublier pour quelque temps qu' il est Lion, c' est a dire le plus genereux
de tous les Animaux, Ce qui nous apprend, que les persons plus vigoreuses
deuiennent mesapprehensives par l'Age, a cause du refroidissement de leiru
sang; De plus nous pouuons remarquer par la, que ceux qui en leur jeunesse ont
aim la cruaute sont plus que jamais trauaillez de la soif du sang, quand ils
viennent au decours de leur Age, a cause de l'estrange accroissement que
prennent en eux, peu et peu, les apprehensions et les mes-fiances, L' Ennemie
qui apertement se monstre estre Ennemy n' est a craindre, mais celuy, qui
combien il soit Ennemie, toutesfois il feint vne amity il est a craindre, et
digne de Haine.

The Horse and Lion.
A Lion with dull age decrepid lies.
With Cloaser arts in Ambush to surprise
A smewy horse, and more to improve his snares
He his choice skill in Surgery declares,
The Horse resents ye plot, and said great Sir
My hoof a present object does occur.
Of your famed Art, since it a thorn does vex
Which straight ye. Lion strove for to relaxe,
When his rude hoof, dispenct so dire a blow
The price of fraud he by yt. wound did know,
Thus fraud we often employ fraud to ^ntwine,
And mines with. stratagems we undermine


FAB. LV. De Equo, and Leone.
VEnit ad Equum comedendum Leo, Carens autem prae senecta viribus, Meditari
coepit artem, Medicumque se esse profitetur, verborumque ambagibus Equum
moratur; Equus dolo dolum, artem opponit arti, Fingit se dudum in loco spinoso
pupugisse pedem, oratque ut inspiciens, sentem Medicus educat, paret Leo, at
Equus multa vi calcem Leoni impingit, et se continuo conjicit in pedes, Leo vix
tandem ad se rediens (ictu enim prope examinatus fuerat) pretium inquit fero ob
stultitiam, and is jure effugit, dolum enim dolo ultus est.

MORALE.
NON est timendus Hostis qui Hostem prae se fert, sed qui quum Hostis sit
benevolentiam simulat, is demum timendus est, et fugiendus.

FABLE LVI.
LE Laboureur tendist au champs ses filets pour prendre des Grues, et des Oyes
sauuages qui luy mangeoient tous les jours le bled qu' il auoit seem; Il aduint
donc, qu'il prit auec else vne Cicoigne, qui se sentant attachee par le pied
pria le laboureur de la laisser aller, luy remonstrant qu' elle n' estoit ny
Grue, ny Oye, mais bien Cicoigne, et par consequent le plus debonnaire de tous
les autres oiseaux qui auoit accoustume de seruir ses parens pieusement, sans
les abandonner jamais en leur vieillesse; Mais tant s' en faut que le Laboureur
fut touch de ses paroles, qu' au contraire s' estant mis a sourire; Je scay
tout cela, luy dit il, et connois assez qui tu es, Mais puis que te voila prise
auec ces autres oyseaux, il faut que tu meures aussi auec eux.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEux qui consentent en un meffait doiuent estre punis de semblable peine que
les delinquans; Neantmoins il appartient aux Jurisconsultes de vuider cette
question a scauoir si ceux qui ont este en la Compagnie des meschans doiuent
porter la peine comme eux du Crime qu' ils ont commis; C' est vne chose
ordinairement pratiquee parmy les Juges de les tenir pour coulpables, et par
consequent de leur fair presque tousjours leur procez, comme aux Criminels;
Mais les Philosophes auant que de donner a un Homme le Nom de Meschant, ils
examinent s' il en a fait les actions, et s' il les a reduites en habitude, Et
ils trouuent, que bien souuent les bons accompagnent des mauuais, bien qu' a la
Verite ils n' ayent aucune teinture de leur Vice ny aucune Inclination a la
prendre, En quoy toutesfois, ils ne peuuent nullement s' excuser de leur
Imprudence, Car s' ils sont veritablement gens de probite, il faut de necessite
conclure qu' il n'y a rien qui leur soit plus insupportable que la pratique des
meschans, Mais ils peuuent respondre a cela, qu' ils y sont conviez par la
frequente Importunite des autres, qu' ils les viennent voir a leur lever, les
conuient a disner en leurs maisons, leur escrivent a tout propos, et qu' ils ne
leur laissent pas un seul moment du repos sans pretendre a les entretenir, si
bien qu' ils se trouuent obligez a leur permettre un libre accez dans
leurfrequentation, Mais O trop foible, et trop imprudent Response, car il ne
faut achepter si cher la Ciuilite, que de l'obseruer a la Ruin mesme de tous
autres Vertus; Fuyons les donc comme vne Peste contagieuse a nostre Ame, nous
representant tousjours, Qu'auec eux nous ne scaurious estre que malins, ny
vertueux en la conversation des persons, qui sont doves d'vne parfaite Virtue.

The Stork and Geese.
A Clown an ambush strewn for Cranes and Geese
Whose ravage wasted his sown feilds; with. these
A Storke surpised did for his life request
Since she before nere did his seed infest
Nor was nor Goose nor Crane but one who still
Did her aged parents with. refreshments sill
And therefore begged yt. she ^edeem'd might be
If not for pity yett for piety;
The Clowrte replied though you are no Goose (...)
Yet you shall dye cause you among such were (...)
Shun Impious men lost thee some fate imprap
And mix with them in ye same dire mishap.


FAB. LVI. De Agricola and Ciconia.
LAqueum praetendit Rusticus gruibus, anseribusque sata depascentibus, Capitur
and Ciconia; Supplicat Illa, and Innocentem sese clamitat, and nec Gruem, nec
Anserem esse, sed avium omnium optimam, quippe quae parentibus sedulo semper
inservire, eundemque senio confectum alere conseueverat; Agricola, horum,
inquit, nihil me fugit, verum cum nocentibus postquam te cepi, cum nocentibus
morieris.

MORALE.
EVitanda est malorum societas, trah^t enim ad Imitationem Criminis, and ad
Poenam, qui Impuris se adjungit socium, pari poena plectitur.

FABLE LVII.
LE Coq saisi du Chat luy demandoit parquoy il le voulut manger; Le Chat luy
reproacha qu' il estoit un Animal importun, d'autant qu' en chantant de nuit il
ne permettoit point les dormir, mais il les eueilloit, et les empeschoit de
reposer, Ce que Je fais, respondit le Coq, en s' excusant, est pour leur
profit, afin qu' ils se leuent pour s' en aller trauailler; Tu as beau dire,
reprit le Chat, cela n' empesche pas que tu ne sois meschant et vilain, jusques
a ce poinct que pour assouir ta lubricite, tu as a fair a ta Mere, et n'
espargne pas mesmes tes soeurs. Le Coq voulut encore chercher des Excuses a
cecy, Mais le Chat ne daigna les entendre, et s' irritant plus fort qu'
auparauant, C' est trop cajole, dit il, tu ne m' eschapperas point aujourd'-huy.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEluy qui est meschant de la Nature quand il a vne fois delibere en son Esprit
combien qu' il n 'ait nulle occasion, toutesfois il ne se departira point de sa
meschancete; Et il est bien aise de trouuer un pretexte quand on a conclud la
mort de l' Innocent; Il a beau s' excuser sur son Innocence, et alleguer tout
ce qu' il faut pour vne persuasion qui soit raisonable, car pour dire la
Verite, Comme il n' est point d' homme si vertueux dans le monde, en la vie
duquel il n' y ait tousjours quelque chose a dire, aussi n' en est il point de
si abandonne, qui ne trouue un pretexte a ses malices, et ne color ses Actions
par vne assez specieuse Appearance, Et tousjours il est veu, que s' il arrive,
que les Grands vueillent fair mourir quelque un, apres auoir parle
genereusement, pour le Bien de la Patrie, il ne se trouuera que trop des
complaisans, pres de leur person, qui pour en haster l'a punition luy
imposeront incontinent le Crime de Calomniateur, de Seditieux, et de Boutefeu;
Mais la Justice Divine doit fair trembler les persons de Grand Condition, et
les detourner pour jamais de leur Cruaute, principalement de celle qui se
figure sous un charitable Pretexte du Bien public, pour conclure la mort des
Innocens auec la Satisfaction des peuples.

The Cat and Cock.
A Cock Surpised by a bold Catt, ask why,
By her feirce claws he was designed to die
Cause man (said she) thy shriller notes affright;
The Cock replied but they devide ye night
And man inform how time does ebb away
And yt my feigned disservice will allay,
But thou thy Sisters (vrgd ye Catt again)
Do with thy wild Incestuous mixtures stayne
The Cock replied we are not like colder men
Confined to mingle with one lawful He^^
But this not charms ye Catt who being cloyed
With his addresses, the dull Cock destroyed.
So a Luxuriant power often makes its will
The only cause of Rough opression still.


FAB. LVII. De Cato, and Gallo.
CAtus quum Gallum cepisset, criminare coepit quod esset animal turbulentum,
qui noctu clamitando non permitteret homines quiescere, Gallus se excusabat,
quod id ageret ad eorum voluptatem, quum ad opera facienda illos excitaret;
Rursum Catus ait, Impius es qui nec a matre, nec a sororibus, te abstineas, sed
per Incontinentiam illis te commisceas, Gallus se defendebat dixitque quod ex
hujusmodi coitu, gallinae pariunt ova; Tunc inquit Catus, quamvis
excusationibus abundes, ego tamen te missum facere non intendo.

MORALE.
FAbula significat quod qui pravus existit a Natura, a pravitate aut raro, aut
nunquam desistet.

FABLE LVIII.
LE Renard, et le Leopard disputoient ensemble de leur Beauty, Le Leopard
louoit hautement sa peau, de diuerses couleurs, Le Renard pour ce, qu'il ne
pouuoit preferer la sienne luy dit, J'aduoue que tu as quelque raison de ce
coste-la, Mais en recompense, l'aduantage que j' ay sur toy qui n' est pas
petit, c' est d'auoir l'esprit des diuerses couleurs, et non pas le corpse.

Le Sens MORAL.
LA Beauty de l'Esprit doit estre prefer a la Beauty du corpse, car infinies
sont advantages que la Beauty de l'Ame emporte sur celle du Corpse, neantmoins
c' est trop vray, qu' il n' y ait que trop de persons dans le monde qui
souhaittent plus ardemment la possession d'vn beau corpse, que celle d'vn bell
Esprit, si est ce qu' il est impossible, ce me semble, qu' en leur Ame ils ne
trouuent ce dernier plus estimable que l'autre, comme tesmoignent ces verse du
Pierre Ronsart.

Tell que l'Astre du Jour esteint par sa presence
Tous ces Feux, qui du ciel sont les brillans tresors;
Tell, et plus grand encore, est la preeminence
Des beautez de l'Esprit sur les graces du corpse.
The Leopard and Fox.
The Leopard warpt with an ambitious pride,
Which did resmit from his Embellisht hide
Disdayns all beasts, Lions are not Exsempt
In this bis voee from cheapnes and contempt
Whom ye Fox meeting, counsels to lay by
That unbeseeming pride for outwardlly
Thoug fair he seemed to be, yet he should fimd
Others excel in virtues of the mind
Which is ye noblest treasure and will raise
To highest honor, when thy pomp decays.
(...) trour outward ^^^ce make proud your hearts.
The monest outside often has noblest parts,


FAB. LVIII. De Vulpe, and Pardo.
VVlpes and Pardus de pulchritudine concertabant, and Pardo suam pellem
versicolorem extollente, Vulpes quum suam praeponere non possit, dicebat Pardo;
At quanto ego sum speciosior, and quam long formosior, quae non corpus, sed
animum versicolorem and variis notis insignem sortita sum?

MORALE.
PVlchritudo animi antecell it pulchritudinem Corporis, and est omni corporis
ornatu potior.

FABLE LXIX.
LE Bergerot paissoit ses Brebis en un haut lieu du pre, et tres ou quatrefois
se mocquoit des Laboureurs d'alentour, qu'il appelloit a son aid, en criant Au
Loup, Au Loup, Les Laboureurs estant ainsi trompez par plusieurs fois, Lors qu'
a bon escient il demandoit leur secours, le laisserent crier tout a son aise,
tellement que les Brebis furent faites la proye des Loups.

Le Sens MORAL.
LE Philosophe Aristote fait enquis a ce propos, Que gaigne le Menteur? Il
gaigne cela, respondit il, Que quand mesme il ne meant point, on ne le croit
pas. Celuy qui est fait vnefois Banquerout a la Verite, non se soucie, non plus
de se parjurer, que de Mentir, A force de mentir ce petir Berger se rend
indigne de Foy, quand il cry tout de bou; Ordinaire Aduanture de ceux qui
mentent, au quels on n' adjouste point de creance encore qu' ils disent vray;
En quoy, il me semble que pour un plain plaisir de mentir l'on perd vne chose
bien pretieuse, a scauoir, la Foy; Action certes d'vn tres mauuais Mesnager, et
d'vn Imprudent, puis qu' il ny a rien de si commode en tout le Commerce de la
Vie, que de passer pour veritable, autant pour seruir des Amiss, que pour son
Interest propre; De la vient aussi, qu' Esope n' attribue pas cette sottise qu'
a un Enfant, jugeant indigne d'vn homme de s' exercer a des Mensonges
nuisibles, et horse de saison. Que si cela est, combien y a til des Enfans qui
vont jusqu' au cheueux gris, et qui toutesfois font gloire de s' exercer a des
niaseries inutiles, de berner l'vn, et de mocquer de l'autre, et d'employer
tout leur loifir a des comptes si peu profitables, que tout le fruit qu' ils en
recueillent n' est autre chose que la perte de leur Creance; Il faut donc s'
estudier de tout son possible a dire la Verite, puis qu' elle est le seul
Object de l 'Entondement, et que c' est oster beaucoup a vne si noble faculte
que de la repaistre de mensonge.

The Shepherds Boy.
A Sheepheards boy did often with feigned cries
Suggest to neighboring Swaynes a near surpriz^
By a feirce Wolf on his whole flock designed
Who straight their mingled succors all combined
T'assert the Flock and its concernment guard
But found they were by false alarums scared
Framed by ye boy, at last ye Wolf indeed,
Aproach'd on the defenceles flock to feed
Who beggs their aid, now with a real cry
Which they, so often deluded do deny,
So ye keen Wolf the unguarded sheep surpised
Who were to the boys imposture sacrificed.
Truth by tepeated lies such scandal gaynes
None, though it is told at last, it Entertaynes.


FAB. LXIX. De Pastoris puero, and Agricolis.
PVer editiore prato oves pascebat, atque per jocum, Lupum terque, quaterque
adesse clamitans, agricolas undique exciebat; Illi saepius illusi dum auxilium
imploranti non subveniunt, fiunt oves proeda Lupo.

MORALE.
FAbula admonet, linguaces ac garrulos domi non habendos, si mentiri
consueverit quisquam, huic, quando verum narrare incoeperit, haud facile
habebitur Fides.

FABLE LX.
LE Renard, et le Bouc ayans grand soif descendirent dedans un puits pour
boire, auquel quand ils eurent bien beu, le Bouc regardoit de tous costez le
chemin pour sortir horse, Le Renard luy dit, prends courage mon bon Amy! Je vien
de m' aduiser d'vne Invention par le moyen de laquelle nous pourrons tous deux
sortir d'icy. C' est qu'il te faut tenir debout, et te leuant droit de tes deux
premiers pieds, to appuyer contre le mur, puis joignant le menton a ta
poictrine, tu baisseras un peu tes corns, et moy je monteray par le long de
tes eschines sur tes corns, et ainsi m' estant sauue, Je te mettra dehors par
apres, Le Bouc creut ce conseil, et executa de poinct en poinct tout ce que luy
dit son compagnon, si bien, que par ce moyen, le Renard sortit; Mais comme il
fut dehors, d'aise qu' il en eust, il se mit a dancer sur le board du puits, ne
se souciant plus de son Compagnon, qui ne se peut vanger autrement, qu' en luy
reprochant sa perfidie, et sa lachete, Alors le Renard se mocquant de luy, O
pauure Bouc, luy dit il, si tu auois autant de sens dans la test, que tu as de
Barbe au menton, tu ne fusses jamais descendu dans le puits, que tu n' eusses
premierement bien pense aux moyens d'en sortir.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEtte Fable nous demonstre la vanite de ceux qui se jettent imprudement dans
vne affair, auant que d'auoir considere qu' elle en sera l' Issue; Il en
arrive de mesme a plusieurs, qui charmez d'vn petit plaisir, se lancent, test
baissee, dans des difficultes bien estrangees, et d'ou ils ne sortent quelque
fois, sans qu' en sortant du monde; Ainsi, les Auares, pour contestent le Bien
d'autruy, auecque peu de droit; et s' attachent indifferement aux grands
Procez, aux voyages, et aux quereles sous l'esperance qu' ils ont de quelque
succession; Et ainsi les Ambitieux s'obstinent a de pernicieuses entreprises
qui n'aboutissent en fin qu' a leur Confusion; Par les Euennemens de ces
trompeurs, il bien souuent aduint qu' ils se rendent en party ridicules, en
party odieux, et en party miserables; Ridicules, en ce qu'ils aspirent la
pluspart du temps a des chooses qui sont au dessus leur puissance, Odieux pource
qu' ordinairement ils bastissent leur Fortune sur la Ruin d'autruy; Et
miserables en suite, a cause que ce sont ceux, a qui la soif extraordinaire des
Grandeurs fait hazarder la Vie, et perdre l' honneur auec la liberte.
Contentons-nous donc du conseil d' Esope qui nous enseigne, que l' homme
prudent, auant qu' entrer en son affair, doit diligemment regarder qu' elle en
sera l' Issue.

The Goat in the Well.
The Fox and Goat their scorching thirst t'Aswage
Lodgd in one Buckett, in a well engage,
The Fox by prayers does with the Goat prevail.
That he ascending on his back might Scale.
The Margent of the Well; so he again
His Freedom by this engine did obtain;
The Goat (the Fox infranchis'd) then desired
His Freedom might be by his aid acquired
The Fox the Goat (who his imposture chydes
In Angry murt^^^s with contempt derides
Saying if's will and beard had but one size
He had declin^d this ruinous surprise.
Consult before you undertake, or look.
To be us perilous attempts forsook


FAB. LX. De Capro in Puteo.
VVlpes and Caper in quendam puteum descendebant in quo quum perbibissent,
Vulpes dixit circumspicienti reditum Capro, Bono animo esto Caper; Excogitavi
etenim quo pacto uterque reduces simus; Obtemperavit consilio Caper, and Vulpes
ex Puteo prosiliens, prae gaudio in margin gestiebat, Caeterum quum ab Hirco
ut faedifraga incusaretur, respondit, Enimvero Hirce, si tantum tibi sensus
esset in Mente, quantum est setarum in mento non prius in puteum descendisses,
quam de reditu exploratum habuisses.

MORALE.
VIR prudens debet finem explorare, antequam ad Rem peragendam veniat, Finis
enim coronat opus.

FABLE LXI.
LA Mort et Cupidon s' estans fortuitement rencontres, La Mort luy demanda s'
il vouloit entrer dans un Cabaret pour boire auec elle. Cupidon condescendit a
sa request, et estans entres dans le lieu, l'vn et l'autre mirent bas leurs
darts. Ayans demeure la quelque temps, et se faisant obs^ur l'aueugle Cupidon
se leua, et pressed a sortir, se trompa, et prit les darts de la Mort, au lieu
des siens, et au Contraire se mirent a operer, Et la Mort darde les fleches de
Cupidon, et consequemment bless tous les viellards, et les fait aimer toutes
celles qu'ils rencontrent. Et Cupidon darde les fleches de la Mort, et bless
mortellement tous est la seule cause qu' on peut s' imaginer, pourquoy les
jeunes les jeunes hommes. Et son erreur a tousiours continue depuis, et ceci
hommes meurent en la fleur de leur aage, et pourquoy les vicillards, sont
amoureux, et courtisent les filles en leur viellesse, lors qu' ils ont un pied
dans la fosse.

Le Sens MORAL.
LE Sens Moral monstre qu' vne fault, ou erreur fondamentalle, ou capitalle vne
fois commise est irrevocable, et que ce qu' vne fois les celestes destinees ont
decrete ne peut estre resist par aucune puissance, ni change par aucun conseil
d'hommes Mortels, si sages, et vaillants qu' ils puissent estre.

Cupid and Death.
Cupid and Death their Arrows did exchange
By sad Mistake, straight Death's keen Arrows rang
And fix an aged breast, whose touch inspires
Their witherd veins with new and agile fires
Whilst Cupids Darts tipped with Disease and ice
Congealed those hearts they should by warmth entice
At last a youth designed unto a Dart
To Cupid did the black design impart
On which they both once more their shafts divide
Yet still their quivers in blind mixtures hide
Some darts which Cupid some which Death does clame
With which Love shoots a frost and Death a flame
So suffers youth in age's could embrace.
As embers we with Isicles do place.


FAB. LXI. De Cupidine and Morte.
MVtabant Pharetras Mors and Cupido; Mortis sagittae senile pectus penetrant,
and caeco Amoris Igni carpuntur venae, Cupidinis (...) Morbis solummodo and
frigore armata gloriabantur illa corda quae juvenili Igni calefacere debebant.
Quum hoc Cupidini innotescebat, Mortis telis, Morti remissis, Cupido suam
reposcebat Pharetram, quam illi Mors remisit; Sed quamvis ambae suis jam
potiuntur spiculis, delirus tamen Error remanet, saepius etenim fit, ut quaedam
Cupidinis sagitta, nivibus, and glacie, and aliae sagittae Mortis ignibus and
flammis sunt armatae.

MORALE.
Juvenilis in Venerem Ardor pessime in cineribus Senectutis cernitur namque
contra perversos hos affectus Natura ipsa exclamat; sic Juvenes pereunt, sic
Moribundus amat.

FABLE LXII.
UN Laboureur auoit plusieurs enfans qui ne pouuoient aucunement s' accorder
ensemble, et ne tenoient conte des les Instructions et Admonitions de leur
Pere; Ce qui fut Cause qu' un Jour quand ils estoient de repos en la Maison, ce
bon Homme commanda tout haut, qu' on luy apportast un faiscenu de Verges; Alors
s' addressant a eux il se mit a leur dire, qu' ils rompissent la faisseau tout
entire. Ce qu' ils essayerent de toute leur force, Mais ils ne se peurent
fair, Adone le Pere leur command de delier le faisseau et que chacun
empoignast sa part a fin de la rompre, de quoy ils vinrent about aissement,
Lors il leur dit Mes chers Enfans, Quand en ceste sort vous serez vnis d'vn
mesme Courage et Volonte, vous ne pourrez jamais estre vaincus de vos Ennemis;
Mais si vous fomentez enter vous des Inimities, et des Divisions, quelle enter
prendra de vous perdre, le fera facilement.

Le Sens MORAL.
EN tell maniere Silurus Roy de Scythie appella ses Enfans a l'Article de la
Mort, et leur fit fair la mesme Experience, Ce qui nous apprend, que plus nos
forces sont vnies, moins else sont faciles a vaincre; Tesmoin ce fameux Axiom
de Philosophes Naturels; Que toute Virtue est plus forte quand elle est uniee.
Le Sens et Affabulation de cette Fable est aisement preuue par l'Exemples, La
Ruin de ce grand Empire des Perses a pris sa Naissance des Discords de Cyrus
auec son Friar, Les Grecs perdirent leur Liberte ar le moyen de leur Divisions
Intestines; Les Romans virent l'estat de leur Republique change par les
sanglantes Inimities de Caesar, et de Pompee. L' Empire s' estant depuis estably
s' exposerent a vne Infinite des maux qui procederent de leurs Discordes
particuliers, Je puis parcourre plusieurs autres grands Fstats pour fair voir
combien la Discord leur a este dommageable.

The Old Man and his Sons.
A Care full father who his sons often viewed
T'infest each other with intestine feud
A bunch of rods to be produced Commands
Combined into one heap with. Ozier bands
That bundle then to break did each attempt
Which yelt from their efforts was still exempt
Then he injoind the heap to be unbound
Which by retaile they with. much ease confound
He says Lo. how by concord thing's obtain
New vigor which discord dissolves again.
By union soderd things themselves preserve
Which do by discord to Confusion swer^^


FAB. LXII. De Agricola and Filiis.
AGricola filios suos videns quotidie litigantes, jussit fasciculum virgarum
sibi afferri, quae cum allatae essent, colligavit omnes in unum fasciculum,
jussitque singulos filiorum fasciculum, capere and confringere; Illis vero
confringere non valentibus, solvens postea fasciculum tradidit singulas
singulis eis frangendas, atque illis statim facileque frangentibus, dixit, Ita
and vos filii mei fi unanimes perstiteritis, invictos vos hostibus praebebitis;
Sin minus; ipsa vestra aemulatio opportunam vos praedam inimicis praestabit.

MORALE.
Res humanae optimum incrementum Concordia faciunt, vel pessimam Discordia
Jacturam.

FABLE LXIII.
DES Chiens de chasse poursuiuoyent un grand Cerf auec beaucoup de violence,
jusques a la Mort, mais s' en estant sauue auec beaucoup de peine le Faon luy
parla ainsi. Mon pere je suis estonne de ce questant si grand, et si fort, et
de ton corpse, et de tes corns, tu crains si fort ces chiens, qui to aboyent.
Auquel le Cerf respondit, encore que j' aye un corpse si gros, j' ay pourtant le
coeur fort petit.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEtte Fable nous apprend que ceux auquels le Nature a done des corpse les plus
grands, et les plus gros ne sont pas les plus vaillants, et les plus hardis,
mais au contraire sont les plus laches, et les plus poltrons, et les moins
propres a l'Execution des grandes, et des belles chooses. Et de mesme que nous
voyons qu' un petit feu n' est pas suffisant pour un grand foyer, aussi un
petit coeur dans un grand homme n' est pas capable de l'enflamer suffisamment,
et de luy donner un courage proportione a la grandeur du corpse qu' il anime.
Aussy il est certain que dans chaque chose, ou les operations sont parfaitement
bien reglees, il se doit rencontrer vne just proportion et rapport enter la
form, et la matiere qui la composent. D' ou vient que les Philosophes disent
qu' vne Mouche n' est pas capable de receuoir dans son petit corpse l'ame d'vn
Lion, et qu' il seroit du tout impossible qu' elle y put exercer aucunes de ses
fonctions.

The Old Deer and Fawn.
A Dear (then Hounds more swift) and large of size
And better a^^'d with horns against surprise,
By a young Faune was alkt ye. reason why
With such resentment he did dread their cry
The reason's ^^iviall, straight ye. Dear replied
For though so amply I am qualified
My heart ^s so cowed with an ignoble fear,
It prompts me still to run when them I hear.
Cowards by nature with no magic can
Be heightened to the valor of a man.


FAB. LXIII. Cervus vetus, and Hinnulus.
CErvus praegrandi Corpore, and Qui Cornua habuit ingentia, per Sylvas
grassabatur; Cui Hinnulus accedens, inquit mi Pater, pro miraculo mihi est,
quod quum sis tam praegrandi Corpore, and Cornua habeas tam praeclara, latratus
Canum exhorrescere. Cui Cervus, mi fili, Magnum habeo fateor Corpus, and Cornua
Comparia, sed sane Cor pusillum.

MORALE.
NON magnae Caminae parvulum suffecturum Ignem. Et quod in exiguo corpore,
saepissime Magna Men's immoratur.

FABLE LXIV.
UN Chasseur encourageoit son Chien a la chasse; Mais c'estoit inutilement,
parce que la pesanteur de ses pieds tardifs ne luy permetoit pas d'aller viste.
Or bien qu' il eut prins la best, il n' eut pas la force de la retenir, parce
qu' il manquoit de dents. Alors son Maistre s' estant mis a le tancer aigrement
en adjoustant les coups, aux menaces, le pour Chien luy dit; qu' il estoit
bien digne de pardon, puis qu' il estoit devenu vieil, et que pandant sa
jeunesse il auoit aussi bien chasse qu' un autre; mais je vois bien ce que c'
est, continua il, il n' y a que le profit qui te done du plaisir: je ne suis
donc pas estonne a cette heure, si m' ayant tant cheri, tant que j' ay bien
chasse, tu me hais maintenant que je suis tout edente, et incapable de courir.
Mais si tu n' ufois d'ingratitude enuers moy comme tu m' as aim, lors que j'
estoit jeune, a cause du profit, cette mesme consideration deuroit aussi to
obliger a m' aimer en ma vieillesse.

Le Sens MORAL.
TOUT le Monde peut apprendre par cette Fable l'enormite de l' Ingratitude. Ce
malheureux Chien que nous represente icy Esope nous fait voir cette verite;
Vous voyes quel cruel traitement son Maistre exerce contre luy dans un estat,
ou la vieillesse l'auoit renda incapable de le seruir, au lieu qu' il deuoit le
traiter auec bien plus de douceur, s' il se fut resouvenu des bons services,
qu' il luy auoit rendu pandant sa jeuneste.

The Old Hound.
A Hound bowd down with age, yet quick obey
His Masters will, persues the Started Prey,
But though he fastens, yet his hold aquitts,
And ye Swift Game to abler Hounds transmitts.
Which when ye Hunts man saw he sought again
By blows to improve his pace, but all in vain,
For pantin he retires, which when the man
Beheld, with Death to menace he began,
To Rouse his Speed, to whom ye fainting Cur,
This answer made, pray be more Gratfull Sir,
And all the Servise of my you^^ Revew,
And not my age with blows and death pursue.
Often faithful servants when oprest with Age
Their Master by Deserting Disingage.


FAB. LXIV. Canis vetulus and Magister.
CAnis venaticus qui quondam velocitate caeteris praecelluit, and magno erat
olim usui and emolumento hero; jam longaevus, and imbellis fortuito Cervum
persequebatur, and apprehensum (dentibus privatus) mox demisit; Quem, iratus
Herus verbis and verberibus increpabat; cui Canis, O dure and severe mihi
Magister, Qui multifaria mea merita, tam male pensitaveris.

MORALE.
DOcet omnium vitiorum ingratitudinem damnosissimum, and etiam veritatem
veteris adagii confirmat Servum juvenilem, canescentem (nisi sit providus) fore
mendicum.

FABLE LXV.
LE Chameau estant m' escontent de sa condition, faisoit des plaintes de ce que
la Nature auoit done au Taureau des corns pour se d'effendre de ses ennemis,
au lieu qu' elle ne luy en auoit done aucunes pour cet effect. Il supplia donc
Jupiter de luy en vouloir donner; Mais il se mocqua de sa folly, et luy
accourcit les oreilles, apres auoir bien rit de sa demand extrauagante.

Le Sens MORAL.
I'Ay parle de l'Allegorie de cette fable en tant d'autres endroits, que jen
parleray fort peu icy, et diray seulement pour satisfaire le Lecteur, que
l'Ambition immoderee ne vient pas seulement a bout de ee qu' elle souhaite,
mais mesme. Est le plus souuent la cause de la perte de ce que l'on possede. Je
me souviens sort bien que j' ay fait voir cette verite par l'exemple de tous
les conquerans, qui ont perdu ou leurs Royaumes, ou leur vies, parce qu' ils n'
ont peut borner leur ambition, et qui pour vouloir tout auoir ont tout perdu.
Pour cet effect j' allegueray seulement pour tous exemples celle de Caesar
Borgia, qui perdit la vie miserablement parmi ses plus hauts projects, pour n'
auoir pas este content de la Duche de Valentinois, et pour auoir voulu attenter
a la possession de toute l' Italy, ayant pour sa devise, ou Caesar, ou rien.

Jupiter and the Camels.
A Camel with regrett to love Complained,
Cause him with. low contempt the Beasts disdained
Because no horned arms seur'd his head,
When spacious antlers on ye Hearts were spread
And Bulls and Goats were with. tall Horns supplied
To whom the angry Deity replied
Since thy vain folly does our gifts despise
T'invest thy self with. others dignities.
We Will curb your pride, henceforth yor. head shall wear
No horns alone, but what is worse, noe ear.
With Loud regrett repine not at thy fate
Which Heaven designed at first on the ^' instate
For ye all ruling providence above.
Knows where to fix and to dispense its Love.


FAB. LXV. De Jove and Camelos.
QVum primum visus est Camelus, homines perterriti, and magnitudinem admirati
fugiebant; Camelus vero sui paenitens, querebatur tauros insignes ire geminis
cornibus, se inermem objectam esse caeteris animalibus; Orat igitur Jovem ut
Cornua sibi donet; Ridet Jupiter stultitiam cameli, nec solum votum negat, sed
etiam and auriculas Bestiae decurtat.

MORALE.
SAEpe nobis, and nostra non placet; Sit quisque Fortuna contentus sua, Etenim
multi secuti fortunam (ut putabant) meliorem incurrere pejorem, and sero suam
stultitiam damnaverunt.

FABLE LXVI.
COmme un jour un Renard s' en alloit a la chasse aux Poules, pour tacher d'en
attraper quelques vnes pour appaiser sa faim qui etoit fort grande; il fut pris
par la queue dans un trebuchet, qu' on auoit tendu par hazard par ou il passoit
alors. Mais ayant fait inutilement tous les efforts pour se mettre en liberte,
comme il vit que cela luy etoit impossible, il tira tant et si fort qu' il s'
arracha toute la queue. Et comme il rencontra en son chemin beaucoup d'autres
Renards qui le consideroient, et s'embloient etre fort etonnes de le voir sans
Queue. Ils leur dit ne vous etonnes pas de cela, parceque je viens de la Court
de voir le Roy qui est malade, et qui a ordonne soubs peine de la vie que l'on
comparoisse deuant luy en l'etat ou vous me voyes. Les autres Renards entendans
cela le prierent d'abord, de leur vouloir aussy couper leur queues
semblablement, ce qu' ayant fair tres volontiers le Renard, et leur ayant
raconte l'aduenture qui luy etoit arriuee, prit un plaisir extreme de se
mocquer de leur credulite.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEtte fable nous sait voir que chacun tache de render semblables a soy meme
tous les autres; et que si nous sommes tombs dans vne calamite, nous faizons
tout notre possible, pour y fair tomber notre prochain, et il semble que la
consolation des miserables est d'auoir des semblables.

The Tailess Fox.
A Fox ensnared in a rude Gin, does bail
His Life from ruen, by his Loss of Tail
When to avoid this Signal obloquy,
In a convention of Foxes, he
Declared what prejudice to them acrew'd
By being with such bushy tails indu'd
And therefore movd, that his example, might
Them that destructive load to prune invite;
But one replied, his project was not fair,
That would a stayne, with public loss repair.
Winnow all Council, for you will find most tend
To private ends, when they your good pretend.


FAB. LXVI. Vulpes sine Cauda.
IN Foveam incidit vulpecula and inde Cauda detruncata occurrit multis
vulpeculis, quas quum indignabunde conspexerat, inquit mi Fraterculi quo
vaditis? Ad Leonis Basilicam eundem est nobis respondebant. Ad Leonis
Basilicam? inquit Vulpes, profecto ego ab ea nuperrime redii, and Mos jamjam
Novellus est, ut omnes Ferae detruncent caudas; Quibus auditis, illico
detruncabant Illae suas caudas; quas quum vidit vulpes, irrisit, and se
consolabat, se socios si non periculi, saltem pudoris, ereavisse.

MORALE monet
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.

FABLE. LXVII.
LE Corbeau ayant prins par hasard vne bonne proye, en estoit fort joyeux, et
faisoit un fort grand bruit sur un arbre; quand le Renard y estant accouru, et
le considerant; luy dit; bien te soit, Monsieur le Corbeau: j' ay entendu
souuent dire d' horrible chooses de toy; Mais je cognois bien a cette heure,
quelles ne sont pas veritables. C'est pourquoy passant icy par hasard, et te
voyant perch sur cet arbre, je m' en suis approach, pour desaduouer ceste
calomnie. Car oseroit on dire que ton plumage est plus noir que de la poix?
puisque je te voy plus blanc que la neige; sans mentir, si ma raison est saine,
je trouue que tu as un g^and advantage par dessus les Cignes, et que tu es plus
beau que du lierre blanc, que si tu chantois aussi bien, que ton plumage est
beau, je ne mentirois pas si je te nommois le Prince des Oiseaux. Cette douce
cageolerie attira si fort le Corbeau, quelle luy donna envy de chanter; mais
comme il se vouloit preparer pour cet effect, il laissa tomber un fromage qu'il
auoit au bec, que le Renard ramassa incontinent, et se mit a esclater de rire
cepandant que le pauure Corbeau estoit dans la confusion, et qu' il enrageoit
de sa perte, et de sa disgrace.

Le Sens MORALE.
LA sotte presomption du Corbeau doit seruir d'exemple a vne infinite de gens,
qui se laissent piper sans raison, par les vains eloges que les flateurs leur
donnent.

The Fox and Crow.
A prattling Crow a booty had aquir'd.
And with it to a taller tree retired
From whom the Fox designed it to repize
And to her thus his soft adresse aplyes,
Hayle fairest Mistres Fame has Scattered night
And Soo^ upon your wings when your so (...)
Should Lillyes but to vy with you begin
They would want white to do you penance in,
Clapping her wings ye Crow designed to Speak
And render thanks, when from her empty beak
It dropped, the loss of which atcheived prey
Did ye mean price of his false praises pay.
Court not ye praise of Sycophants for they.
Their ends obtain, that prays with scorn allay.


FAB. LXVII. Corvus and Vulpes.
NActo casci frusto, Corvus, in Arborem volavit, Quem quum Vulpes conspexerat,
abunde collaudat pennarum pulchritudinem, and corporis formam, nil Illi deesse
(inquiens) nisi voicis harmoniam, unde Jovis Ales evaderet. Quod quum Corvus
Audierat, cantare conatus ore soluto, caseus elapsus, quem quum devorasset
vulpes, cachinnos movit, dicens nil Corvo praeterquam Cor and mentem,
defuturum.

MORALE indicat
Quod just and condign miserias patiuntur Qui Sycophanticis assentationibus
deluduntur.

FABLE LXVIII.
LES Colombes eurent jades guerre contre le Milan, les quelles les pour le
vainers eleurent le Faucon pour leur Souerain iceluy estant cree Roy se
gouernoit non point comme Roy mais comme Ennemy. Il ne faisoit pas moins que le
Milan il rauisoit, il les mettoit en pieces, il les mangroit les Colombes se
repentirent done de leur sottise et dirent qui il leur eut este beaucoup
Meilleur d'endurer la guerre du Milan que la Tyranny Faucon.

Le Sens MORALE.
LEcy nous admoneste que nulne soit trop marry de sa condition Il ny a Rien
herureux de toutes parts, et vrayement je ne vondry point changer mon estat,
pourveu qu' il fect tolerable CXX plusieurs cherchans nouueraux estate vne
souhatte de retourner a leur premier, nous sommes presque tous de cenaturel que
nous ne sommes jamais content de nous mesmes; or ces delices qu' on trouue a
changer viennent sans doubt, de ce que nous ne jam ais rassassions d'vne mesme
Action, ou d'vn mesme object enque les Animaux ont advantage par dessus nous,
Car ils viuent des le commencement du monde dans les mesmes pricipes, Ils n'
ont pas la Raison pour entirer des consequences et fair des arguments, Ils ne
l'ont pas aussi pour s' ennuyer pour pretender aux nouueautez pour infer des
fausseter sur de vrais principes pour trouer le disorder en cherchant le
perfection, et pour prostiture la de leur entendement, al tuaute, et a
l'Ambition.

The Doves and Sparhawk.
An eager Ha^ke with. winged speed, persues --
A trembling Dove, but an ill fate acrues
As suddenly on him, for by a Clown,
A Nett was spread near to a neighboring town
Which both surprix'd ye. Hawk did much implore
The man for mercy, since yt. he his store
In new sown feilds near wasted vrgd ye. Dove.
Did ravin much, therefore did pity move,
Since he good service did such to destroy,
Which did so much ye. neighboring swavnes anoy,
The Man replied, thy pleadings false it is blood
Thou huntest after, and not for our good
Thy Cruel Nature often Blood has shed
Which now is lustly fallen on thy head
Many pretend their King and Countries good,
When it is self Interest ye makes them shed Blood.


FAB. LXVIII. De Accipitre Columbam insequente.
QVum Accipiter Columbam praecipiti insequeretur volatu, villam quandam
ingressus, a Rustico captus est, quem blande ut se dimitteret obsecrabat, Non
etenim te laesi dixit; cui Rusticus, Nec haec te laeserat.

MORALE.
FAbula innuit, merito puniri qui Innocents laedere conantur, Debemus enim
esse Protectores Innocentiae, quum Fortuna administrat and Authoritatem and
Potentiam, Qui alterum violenter persequitur, in seipsum saepe crudelis
patitur.

FABLE LXIX.
VNe Nourrice voyant pleurer son enfant le menaca de le donner au Loup s' il ne
s' appasoit, Le Loup ouyt ces menaces, et esperant trouuer du boutin, il s'
approach a la Port, l'enfant a la fin commenca a dormir et se teut, Pourquoy
le Loup retourna en son bois a jeun, et vuide; La louue le voyant donc de
retour, luy demanda ou estoit la proye? Il ny en a point, respondit le Loup
extremement triste, car la Nourrice qui me promettoit de me Liuurer son Enfant,
ne m' a done que des paroles, et m' a trompe meschamment.

Le Sens MORAL.
Enter les Instructions qu' Esope donnoit a Ennus, comme nous lisons en la vie
d' Esope, cet fut un, ne trop confier a Femme; Et maintenant par cette Fable
Esope ait voulu dire qu' il ne faut point se fire aux paroles d'vne Femme, et
que les plus fins s' y trouuent souuent trompez; Et pour cette cause, s' il en
faut croire diuerses Autheurs, les vns de ceux comparent la Femme a la Mer, a
cause de son humeur variable, les autres aux vents et aux orages; Pour cela
mesme, ils luy donnent la lune pour la Modele, et veulent qu' elle contienne
plus de Lune que d'aucune Astre, Ils ne la croyent capable, ny de verite, ny de
Resolution, tant y a qu' ils en parlent ainsi ou par caprice, ou pour en auoir
estre mal traittez, Mais parmy ceux qui font mestier de se plaindre de leur
humeur, il ny en a point en la bouche de qui ces injures soient plus
ordinaires, qu' en celle des Amans, Ces sont eux qui les premiers ont ose
murmurer contre ce qu' ils adorent, et qui ont lasche la Bride a je ne scay
quelle cholere meslee de tristesse, et d' Amor ensemble; Et de la vient
premierement le blasme vniuersel qu' on leur done d'estre Infideles, et
coulpables d' Inconstance, Je ne veux pas conclure cela si generalement, que je
n' except plusieurs de leur Sex, qui surpassent de bien loin les hommes
mediocres, et egalent ceux qu' on estime les plus Illustres, non pas seulement
en Esprit, et en Scauoir, mais encore en ce qui regard la force du Coeur, et
le genereux mespris de la mort, qui ont pass veritablement pour des Heroines.

The Nurse and her Child.
An eager Wolf yt forag'd for a prey,
T'a testy Child ore-heard a Nurse to say.
Be still or thee i will to the Wolf devote.
Which made him wait to rince his ravenous threat
With. infant blood but straight the cla^^rous Child
Appeasd with L^dlabys, was chartu'd with mild
And easy sleep, which when ye. Wolf perceived
And yt. his hopes were of his prey bereaved.
He with regrett retreates into the Wood.
There to carrouse a draught of other blood.
The parious passions of a Woman's mind,
Are guilty of more changes then ye. wind.


FAB. LXIX. De Nutrice and Lupo.
NVtrix minatur Puerum plorantem, ni taceat se Lupo illum traditurum, Lupus
praeteriens id forte audit, and spe praedae manet ad fores; Puer tandem
obrepente somno silescit; Regreditur Lupus in Sylvas jejunus and inanis, Lupa
obviam illi habens sciscitatur, ubi sit praeda; Cui gemebundus Lupus, Verba
inquit mihi data sunt, puerum plorantem se abjicere Nutrix minabatur; sed
fefellit.

MORALE.
AVari omnes Lucro and praedae inhiant sed honestis saepe deluduntur dolis;
Multa promittentibus omnes libenter auscultamus, Foeminae autem nulla adhibenda
fides.

FABLE LXX.
UN jour le Leiure voyant la Tortue qui se trasnoit a pas lents, se mit a
sou-rire, et luy dit plusieurs mots de raillerie pour blamer son extreme
tardiuete; Alors la Tortue a qui ce mepris du Lieure seruit d'vn just Subjet
de s' en offencer, ne luy fist point d'autre Response, sinon qu' elle le defia
Courageusement a la Course. Ce defy accept, et tous deux estans demeure
d'accord du lieu, jusques ou ils deuoient courrez, ils print le Renard pour
leur Juge. La Tortue partit en mesme temps, et le Lieure luy laissa prendre tell
advantage qu' elle voulut, s' imaginant qu' il y seroit assez tossed pour la
vaincre. Voila cependant qu' a force d'aller, elle se rendit insensiblement aux
bornes prescriptes, et gagna par ce moyen le prix de la Course; De quoy le
Leiure bien estonne maudist tout haut sa non-chalance, et la trop bonne opinion
qu' il auoit eve de soy mesme; Mais le Renard s' en mocquant luy dit, Mal
advise que tu es, Apprends un autre-fois a ne croire point ta folle test, et a
te seruir de tes jambes au besoin.

Le Sens MORAL.
PAr la Tortue en cette Fable nous pouuons entendre un Esprit tardif, mais bien
vigilant, par le Leiure un courage prompt mais mal advise, et par le Renard un
homme accort, et Ingenieux qui ne juge que de ce qu' il void, sans s' arrester
a la vain monstre des presomptueux, n' y a la trop bonne opinion qu' ils ont
ordinairement de leur Virtue pretendue; La Force est vne Qualite fort
souhaittable, quand elle se trouue joincte a l'Addresse, puis que par elle nous
venons glorieusement a bout des plus hautes entreprises ou la Valeur et la
Courage nous portent; Toutesfois comme l'Eau corrumpit insensiblement, et
deuient puante si elle n' est remue, Ainsi la force du Corpse et la Beauty d'
Esprit ne sont que des Qualitez inutiles a l' Homme, s' il ne s' en sert au
besoin, s' il ne reduit la puissance en Act, car tous ceux qui ont excelle, so
it aux lettres, soit aux Arms, n' auroient jamais rien advance dans cette lice
d' Honneur, s' ils ne se fussent hastez doucement, Et c' est en cela sans
doubt qu' ils ont imite la Tortue, plustost que le Leiure, et en matiere d'
Esprit, et de force, toutesfois qu' il leur a fallu agir, ils ont fait sans
differer, et ont tousjours joinct la Prudence, et la Force ensemble.

The Tortise and Hare.
A youth by Cupid was engaged, to Love
A well propo^^^ou^d Ca^^ did. Venus move.
Wish thick addresses, she the Cat would, grace
Wi^^ h^^^^ane features and a Virgius face.
To which at last the Gods does asso^^.
Whe^^ ^edlock both their (...) did straight Cement
But when the night theyn turptiall Loves improved
A straggling Mourse midst their Caresses moved,
About their Nuptial bed, which when she vierr'd
With eager speed she ye wild game persu'd,
Which Vet^us did resent with sttch disdain
She clothed her straight with. her own shape agaim^
The^^^ ills (...) is jo^ wicked men.
So to lop of they will nere sprou^ ou^ again.


FAB. LXX. De Lepore and Testudine.
TEstudo quum pedes ejus Lepus deridebat, subridens dixit, si periculum in
cursu feceris, quis sit velocior liquido cognosces; Eligerunt igitur Vulpem
quae ambobus and locum and terminum cursus constitueret; Testudo omni segnitie
remota iter accipiens haud quievit donec ad terminum pervenerat, Lepus vero
pedibus fidens postquam paululum quievit, somno excitatus, quantum Pedes
valuerunt, ad terminum cucurrit, ubi quum Testudinem quiescentem reperit, se
fatetur a Testudine superatum.

MORALE.
STulte facit qui nimiam confidentiam in se ipso ponit, nam studio and
diligentia, non corporis viribus res maxim conficiuntur.

FABLE LXXI.
UN beau jeun Compagnon aymoit si grandement vne Chatte qu' il pria Venus, qu'
il luy pleut de changer sa Chatte en Femme; La Deesse, ayant Compassion du
Desir du jeune Homme, conuertit la Best en vne belle jeune Femme; Ce pauure
fol fut a mesme temps si passionement epris de son Amor que sans vser de plus
long Delay il la menit droit a son logis pour en auoir la j' ouyssance; Mais
comme ils furent tous deux a lict, Venus voulant eprouuer si le changement de
form ne luy auroit point aussi fait changer de Naturel, lascha un Rat au
milien de la Chamber; Alors cette froide Aymante, ayant mis en oubli et le
lict, et celuy qui estoit auec elle, se jetta du lict en bas, et se mit a
poursuire le Rat pour le manger, ce qui fut Cause que la Deesse irrite voulut
qu' elle reprit sa premier formee.

Le Sens MORAL.
C'Est vne chose estrange de voir que l'Amour frappe quelques fois des
persons si fort inesgales en toutes leurs parties, que si on leur vouloit
choisir des Ennemis l'on n' en iroit jamais chercher d'autres; Cet Aueugle ne
reconnoist bien souuent ny qualite, ny merit; Nous pouuons juger par la, si
l'Estat des Amans n' est pas ridicule, puis qu' ils passent vne bonne party de
leur Age priuez de toute connoissance, et de l'Espoir mesme de la recouurer,
Car il est presque impossible qu' un Homme achoppe a cette passion s' en rende
jamais le maistre absolu de soy mesme; Cette transformation de Chatte en Femme
est marque de la Foiblesse des Aimans, qui ne sont pas si tossed abandonnez a
leurs passions que toutes chooses leur semblent changer de Nature; Les mal
aduises combient qu' ils changent d' Estat ou Condition, toutesfois ils ne
changent jamais de facon de fair.

The Nurse and her Child.
A Lazy Tor^oyze slighted by a Hare
Does to a race his active rival dare
And both before they ye sol^^ne course engage
Submit to the sage Foxes vinpinage
Who the adjusted lists was. so divide
And who atcheiv'd ye conquest to decide,
The Tortoyze gravely glides along ye lil^^s.
Non from his speed till he had gain^^ desists
The Hare who much on his quick pare ^ely'd
First slept and then himself to run aply'd
But seeing ye dull Torboyze victor said,
This loss ye price of his contempt has paid.
Mean parts by industry those things dor Act
Which greater wau'd, forld by their dull ^^olect


FAB. LXXI. De Cata in Foeminam mutata.
CAta quaedam, delicium erat formosi cujusdam Adolescentis, Veneremque or avit
ut in Foeminam mutaret; Dea miserta cupiditatis adolescentuli convertit Catam
in puellam quam quum long speciosa esset, Amator domum abduxit; Venus experiri
cupiens si mutata facie mutasset and mores, in medium, constituit Murem, quem
quum illa aspexit, oblita formae, murem ut caperet persecuta est; Qua super re
indignata Venus denuo eam in priorem Catae formam mutavit.

MORALE.
FAbula innuit quod homo nequam licet personam mutet, mores tamen retinet
eosdem.

FABLE LXXII.
L' Asne paissant en la Forest y rencontre fortuitement la peau d'vn Lion, et
il s' en reuestit a l' heure mesme, puis s' en retourna a sa pasture ordinaire,
donnant l'alarme a toutes les autres Bestes qui s' ensuioient loin de luy;
Cependant, le Maistre qui l'auoit perdu le cherchoit de tous costez, et fut
bien estonne de voir ainsi deguise qu' il estoit; Il accourut droit a luy, et
mesme qu' il se mit a braire, voulant si possible, imiter le Rugissement du
Lion; Alors le prennant par les Oreilles qu' il n' auoit point cachees, Asne,
mon Amy, luy dit il, trompe si tu peux qui bon te semblera, pour moy, Je te
connois trop bien pour estre conterefait.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEtte Fable nous represente la grand presomption de ceux qui par vne espece de
vanite, (qu' on peut appeller aussi grossiere qu' elle est insupportable)
entreprennent de se desguiser, et de passer long temps pour plus eminent en
Fortune et en Virtue, qu' ils ne sont effectiuement, Cest ainsi que parmy les
nouueaux Docteurs ils s' entrouue plusieurs, qui sont vestus d'vn Bonnet, et
d'vne Robe dans vne chair pour paroistre plus eloquens deuant ceux qui les
ecoutent, mais il est aise de connoistre qu' il y a du vuide dans leur test,
ou les oreilles d' Asne paroissent visiblement; Les Fanfarons tout de mesme ont
beau porter leurs longues Espees, fair les Rhodomonts dans les Rues, morguer
les vns, et les autres, alonger leur pas, et affermir leur Countenance, On les
discouure aussi tossed, et n' est point d' homme de Courage qui n' ait pity de
leur valeur pretendue, Leur Artifice peut quelquefois surprendre l'Esprit, mais
il est impossible qu' on ne le reuele bien tossed apres; Pour ce, Ne feins point
que tu sois autre que tu n' es, Ne te vante point estre scauant quand tu ne
scais rien, d'estre rich, ou valiant, quand tu es pauure, et Couard, car quand
la verite sera sceue tu seras mocque.

The Ass in a Lions Skin.
The fordidid Ass did with a Lions skin.
Himself invest, whose aspect did, begin
T'amaze ye. herd, but when ye Master came
Into ye. field, the Ass retired with shame.
For ye contracted veil could not disguise.
His sptions ears from his more curious eyes;
His Master to re torn ye. Ass desired.
For though yt. shape ye. trembling Beasts inspired
With fear, he still but seemd an Ass, and so
Corrects his pride and folly with a blow.
Seem what thou art and not with borrowed shape
Make thy self type of ye. fantastic. Ape


FAB. LXXII. De Asino pelle Leonis induto.
ASinus in Sylvam veniens, exuvias Leonis offendit, quibus indutus in pascua
redit, greges and armenta territans fugansque; Herus autem qui vagum,
fallacemque Asinum perdiderat, occurrit, Asinus viso Hero cum rugitu obviam
fecit; At herus, prehensis quae extabant auriculis; Alios licet, inquit,
fallas; Ego te probe novi.

MORALE.
QVod non es, nec te esse simules, Multi qui Hectores se esse, and jactant, and
videri volunt, ex sua loquacitate redarguuntur, and, Vero comperto, irridentur.

FABLE LXXIII.
AUtresfois le Bruit fut que les Montagnes deuoient enfanter. Tout le peuple de
toutes costs y accourut et enuironna la Montagne, attendant auec frayeur, et
grand crainte, quelque monstre horrible; Mais en fin la Montagne enfanta, et un
Rat sortit, ce qui les fit tous pasmer de rire.

Le Sens MORAL.
C'Est bien la commune Interpretation de cette Fable de l'appliquer aux grands
prometteurs qui ne respondent pas aux esperances qu' ils font naistre, ou aux
Fanfarons qui ne mettent point en l'affect la centiesme party de leurs
menaces, mais qui tremblent a la veue du peril, aprez l'auoir mesprize dans
leurs maisons, mais si nous venons a fair vne plus haute application de ce
suiet, a scauoir, a la vanite des plus grandes entreprises du monde, Elle est
tell, sans mentir, qu'elle ne pouuoit pas estre mieux comparee, qu'a la
grossesse des Montagnes et a la production d'vn Rat, Car si nous contemplons
ces Conquerans qui beent apres la possession de la terre entiere, qu'
engendrent ils en fin que des vermisseaux? Que deuiennent ils, qu' un peu de
poussiere, et de cendre? Mais supposons qu' ils arriuent au bout de tous leurs
entreprises, qu' on y desire pour les accomplir, l'issue toutesfois n' en est
pas ridicule, et vain, comme en l'accouchement des Montagnes? si l'on aspire a
gloire, quel est ce bien, pour qui l'on se peine tant, si ce n' est un Bien
fragile, et indigne de nostre Desir? Si l'on ne trauaille que pour vne belle
oeuure, quel moyen a to on de la perpetuer? C' est ne plus que la grossesse
d'vne Montagne qui n' accouche que d'vne soury; Car ces glorieux outrecuidez
combien qu' ils promettent deuant tous, et se vantent de fair grande chose, a
grand peine toutesfois en font ils vne bien petite, parquoy ces glorieux
Trasons seruent de risee et brocard. Ceste Fable aussi defend les veins
craintes, car bien souuent la crainte du peril est plus fascheuse que le peril
mesme, et qui plus est c' est, vne chose digne de mocquerie, ce que nous
craignons.

The Birth of the Mountains.
Fame did suggest a teeming hill to be
Discharged of some stupendous prodigy
When the amazed rout convene next morn
Thinking a second Alps, inight then be borne;
When from ye. Mountayues yawning womb a mou^
By its sinall birth becomes ridiculous
To the deluded through who straight retired
And that contemned which. they before admired
Thus our too swelling hopes abortwe are,
And fall like Towens whose basis is the ayve


FAB. LXXIII. De Partu Montium.
RVmor erat parturire Montes, Homines undique accurrunt, et circumstant,
monstri quippiam non sine pavore expectantes; Montes tandem parturiunt, exit
ridiculus Mus, Tum omnes risu emori.

MORALE.
REprehendit haec Fabula Jactantiam illorum qui quum magna profitentur vix
parva faciunt; Vetat etiam inanes timores, Plerunque etenim periculi metus est
ipso periculo gravior, and ridiculum est quod tantum formidamus.

FABLE LXXIV.
LE Satyr qui jadis fut repute pour le Dieu des bois, et Forests ayant pity
d'vn pauure Pelerin passant tout accable de Neige, and transi de froid, le mena
dans sa Caverne, et le fit asseoir aupres du feu; Mais ayant pris guard que le
pauure Morfondu souffloit dans ses mains, il luy en demanda la Cause, A quoy le
voyageur respondit, qu' il le faisoit pour les eschauffer; En suite de cela,
ils se meirent tous deux a table, ou la premiere chose que fist l'Estranger fut
de Souffler sa bouillie; Ce que voyant le Satyr, il en voulut derechef scauoir
de sujet; Et comme il eust appris que c' estoit pour la refroidir, ne pouuant
plus souffrir un tell Host dans sa cauerne, Sort de ceans, luy dit il, car je
ne suis pas d' humeur a m' accommoder auec un homme qui se contredit ainsi en
ses paroles?

Le Sens MORAL.
L' Action de ce Satyr nous admoneste de ne receuoir a nostre table des
persons doubles en paroles, Car ce n' est un glaiue plus trenchant de deux
costez, que celle de langue de ces hommes la, qui peuuent nuire aussi bien a
leurs amiss qu' aux autres, s' accommodant tantost a nos sentimens par la
flattery, et tantost a nos Ennemy's par meschancete. Mais il arrive
ordinairement que la Cajollerie et la Complaisance sont de vrays pieges a
surprendre les fols, le nombre du quels est infiny; De la vient aussi que ceux
qu' icy tendent sont tomber aisement les mal-aduisez. Il est donc certain que
tells perfides, qui disent autrement qu' ils ne pensent, sont plus a craindre
que les persons declarees a nostre Ruin, a cause que sous l'appas de douces
paroles ils sont capables de nous infecter d'vn poison mortel, et d' rempler
d'amertums les douceurs de l' hospitalite. En effect comment nous pouuons nous
fire a vne person qui est, mill fois le jour, double a soy mesme, et comment
adjouter foy a la parole d'vn homme qui n' en a point? Si le plus agreeable
fruict de l'amitie consiste en sa duree, qu' elle perseverance doit on attendre
d'vn faux Amy qui change a tout coup d'opinions? Et comment nous sera fidele
celuy qui ne le fut jammais a person?

The Satyr and Clown.
A Satyr who did in rude deserts dwell
Admi^^s a Traveller into his Cell
Who there with. warmer breath did thaw yt. frost;
Which his congealed, muscles had ingrost^.
(...) Salvre all^^ the cause ye. man replied
(...) supplied
The Satyr next him sealding postage brought
Which with ye. same breath he to coolues wrought
What this new action meant he ask^ ye. man
Who straight replied it was ye. host broth so san
Antongst my g^e^^s (said he) you are not mrolld
Who with. one brouth can blow both hot and cold.
^
(...) in one (...) bear.


FAB. LXXIV. De Satyro and Viatore.
SAtyrus Viatorem nive obrutum, atque algore enectum misertus ducit in antrum
suum; Refocillantem manus anhelitu Oris, percontatur causam, ut calefiant
inquit, postea quum accumberent sufflat Viator in Polentam, quod cur ita
faceret interrogatus, ut frigescat inquit; Tunc continuo Satyrus Viatorem
ejiciens, Nolo, inquit, in meo ut sis antro cui tam diversum est os.

MORALE.
FAbula innuit, devitandum esse ejus Amicitiam cujus anceps Vita est, and non
simplex sermo, cujus Cor and Lingua dissimiles parts agunt.

FABLE LXXV.
LE Milan gisoit en son lict Malade, et estant prochain de sa Mort prioit la
Mere qu' elle allast supplier les Dieux pour ta luy. Sa mere luy did. Il ne
faut point que tu esperes aid, ou aucune sort d'assistance des Dieux qui as
tant de fois pollue leurs Sacrifices, et leurs Autels.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEste Fable nous remonstre la verite de ce que dit un grand Docteur. A scauoir
qu' il arrive difficilement que celuy qui n' a fait autre chose que viure mal,
ait l'aduantage de bien mourir; Il ne faut pas jusques la trop
presumpturusement confier en ceste haute bonte, Mais plustost d'estre soigneux
de nous render dignes de cela, Car c' est un grand et profane abuse de fair
des fautes pour la requerir, Mais ce Conseil du Milan semble contraire en
quelque facon a la Rellegion Christienne, en ce que la Mere de cet Oyseau
rauissant, ne luy persuade pas d'attendre, a l' heure de la Mort aucun bon
office des Dieux, apres les auoir offenses mille-fois durant sa vie, Car nostre
Relligion nous apprend; que Dieu est encore plus miserecordieux, que nous ne
sommes meschans, et que le plus desespere de tous les hommes le trouue
tousiours pressed a son secours, si tant qu' il implore sa bonte. Si nous le
mesprisons en nostre prosperity, il sans grand repentance n' exaucera nous en
nostre aduersite, parquoy ayons souuenance de luy en nos bon jours, a sin que
quand en nos miseres nous l'appellerons, il soit pressed pour nous ayder.

The Young Kite and his Mother.
The younger Kyte being sick his Mother prays
That with. her Oraisons ye. Gods she would raise
TO appease his malady, but she replied.
Thou in thy health did yeir high power deride
And with. repeated acts of wild excess
And rude disorder nobler thoughts suppress
And can thou think then they will yeir. succor lend
To thee, who well, did heaven so often offend.
When thou art well of heaven often mindful be
Lest when you are ill heaven do abaudon thee.


FAB. LXXV. De Milvo aegroto.
AEGrotus lecto decumbebat Milvus jam ferme moriens; Matrem or at precatum ire
Deos, Multa promittens si redire ad salutem liceret. Matter autem respondebat
nil opis sperandum a Diis, quorum sacra, and Aras suis Rapinis toties
violasset.

MORALE.
DEbemus venerari superos, Illi etenim Pios juvant, Impiis adversantur; In
faelicitate neglecti in miseria non exaudiunt; Quare in secundis Rebus simus
little Memores, ut in adversis Rebus praesentes sint vocati.

FABLE. LXXVI.
L'Esperuier ayant vole sur un arbre pour y prendre le frais, et y ayant trouue
par hasard un nid de Rossignols, comme il commencoit a prendre les petits la
mere suruint, elle pry de pardonner a ses petits, elle en conjure par toutes
les Diuinites auec des pleurs dignes de pity. Qu' est il besoing de tes
l'armes, dit l'Esperuier, ou de tes prieres? Tu me toucherois plustost par le
prix de la recompense. Elle luy demand, ce qu' elle pourroit luy donner, il
luy command de chanter pour luy donner du plaisir. Cette triste mere chanta,
Mais d'vn coeur fort triste; Mais comme elle eut filii, ton chant ne m' a pas
pleu, dit l'Esperuier, parce qu' il n' a pas este guerrier, et ayant prins ses
petits en sa presence les deuora. Mais il fut prins par un Oyseleur, don't il ne
se prenoit pas guard, ce qui ne donna pas vne mediocre joye, au miserable
Rossignol, qui voyoit que le Ciel vengaoit justement l'injure qu' il auoit
receue.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous apprend que les grands se mocquent ordinairement de nos
plaintes, et ne sont point touches des douleurs, et des maux, qu' ils nous font
injustement souffrir. Mais ils deuroyent prendre guard, que souvent la Justice
Divine prend le parti des Innocents, et des foibles, qui sont opprimes sans
raison, par la force, et par la Tirannie des Grands.

The Nightingale and Hawk.
The warhling Nightingale who vse'd t'endeare
With her harmonious lays ye. Charmed Ear,
Was by an eager Hauk surpised, whom she
With melting airs Implores to set her free.
Saying his gorge could not be well supplied
With her thin ru^ins, the keen Hauk replied.
Urge not thy smaller bulk, a bird possessed
Ont poyses two yt in the bush do rest.
(...) though never so small thy interest,
When thou have it with care and art possessed.


FAB. LXXVI. De Accipitre and Luscinia.
COmprehenderat Lusciniam Accipiter, Quae misere clamabat, ut se captivam
demitteret. Cui Accipiter, frustra clamosas cies querimonias, nam licet omnes
Sylvarum commoveris Aviculas non ab unguibus meis liberabunt.

MORALE.
COntra magnates nil moliendum esse ab impotentibus and homuncionibus pusillis.

FABLE LXXVII.
LE Paon addressa ses plaintes a Junon; Soeur, et Femme de Jupiter, parce que
le Rossignol chantoit incomparablement mieux que luy? Mon ami, luy respondit
Junon les Dieux on partage differemment les Dons aux hommes; si le Rossignol
chante mieux que foy, ton plumag le surpass en beauty; il est done just que
chacun soit content de sa condition.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous enseigne, que la Justice de Dieu dispense les biens qu' elle
done aux hommes auec beaucamp d'esgalite, et que la Nature recompense un
defaut par un advantage plus considerable; ce qui d'oit obliger tout's les
persons raisonnables, a ne conceuoir point de mespris pour ceux qui n' ont
pas tant de perfections qu' eux, Mais aussi a se contenter de leur condition,
et a render graces a Dieu des biens; qu' ils ont receus de sa liberalite. Au
lieu de se plaindre de ceux qu' ils ne possedent pas. En effect quel est l'
homme si peu qu' il aye receu de Dieu, qui ne soit encore oblige de luy en
render tous les jours des graces immortelles, et de confesser hautement aux
yeux de tout le monde, qu' il a encore receu plus de faueurs de sa pure grace,
qu' il n' en meritoit.

The Peacock and Nightingale.
The gaudy Peacok with complaynts repayres
To loves great Sister yt. those turnefull airs
The Nightingall thrild forth, did so indeare
They almost did transform each sense to ear.
When every one her harsh and screaming straiues
With Coy resentment and known hate disdaines.
Great loves kind Bounty (luno then replied)
Has yt. mean want in thy gay plumes supplied
The envy of all birds, know bee'le transmitt.
Such gifts as may with. each condition fit.
As her Harmonious notes thy strains excel
You her in Ornament out parallel.
Envy not others virtues: providence.
Gifts fitted to each gertius does dispense.


FAB. LXXVII. Pavo and Luscinia.
QVerebatur and Jovem supplicabunde, rogabat ut quum sit Junonis Avis, and
omnibus Avibus pennarum pulchritudine praecellebat, ut eandem etiam vocis
suavitatem Jupiter Illi quam perpusillae Lusciniae concedaerat. Cui Jupiter
nequaquam hoc fieri opportere, respondit, nec omnibus Dotes omnes aequaliter
Impertiri.

MORALE.
DOcet nos Sortem nostram quiet terre, nec aliena petere quae minime nobis
competant.

FABLE. LXXVIII.
UN petit Poisson ayant, este prins par un Pascheur, le supplioit instamment de
luy donner la Liberte, luy disant, qu' il ne faisoit encore que de naistre; et
qu' ^l estoit si petit, qu' il ne luy seruiroit de guere, et que loc^ (...)
seroit plus gros, il retourneroit volontairement a l' hamecon. Mais le Pescheur
inexorable a toutes ces paroles; Mon ami, lay respondit il, je n' ay pas
dessein de quitter vne proye asseuree, bien qu' elle soit fort peu
considerable. Je n' ignore pas ce que j' ay prins, mais bien ce que je dois
prendre, et se n' achepte jamais l'esperance a prix d'argent.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous enseigne clairement, qu' il ne faut jamais quitter le gain
d'vne chose asseuree, pour l'Esperance d'vne incertaine, quelque grande, et
aduantageuse, qu' elle puisse estre. Ainsi nous voyons que le Marchand se
tiendra fort volontiers au bien present, plustost que de suinre, vne fortune
incertaine, et s' attacher a la conqueste d'vn bien imognu, et qui n' est
fond, pue sur l'esperance. En fin si nous parcourons toutes les conditions des
hommes, nous verrons, sans doubt, qu' on a plus de satisfaction d'estre asseure
de la possession d'vne fortune mediocre, qu' a s' amuser vainement apres vne
entreprise incertaine.

The Angler and Little Fish.
An Augler did for his own food and dish
With a false bayt surprise a sinaller fish.
The Fish did him implore that he would transmi^
Her to her watuy dwelling as vnfilt
for any table yett, but if he would please
To let her range in the desert of the Seas,
And but one year improve her self, she then
Being thus mature, would court his hook again.
No said he never i will my self divest
Of that firm right of which I am possessed
We from this fable this result may draw,
Possession is eleven points of Law.


FAB. LXXVIII. Piscator and Pisciculus.
SMaridem Pisciculum captabat Piscator, Quem, ut se tunc demitteret donec
grandesceret (unde luculentius, et lautius hospitum fauces expleret) importunis
precibus fatigavit. Cui Piscator, me sane insulsum crederes, si tam futilibus
and lubricis promissis fidem adhiberem, and certum Commodum pro spe incerta
Commutare.

MORALE.
QVAM stolidi sunt Qui spe oblactati Magnae fortunae, nugantur omnino, and
Tempus in trivialibus consumunt.

FABLE LXXIX.
IL aduint un jour par hasard que des Oyes, et des Grues paissoient ensemble
dans un pre. Et apres qu' else y curent demeure fort long temps, et qu' else
y curent mange a leur aise tout leur Saoul, comme else deuisoient ensemble;
Else virent l'Oiseleur proche d'elles qui etoit en etat de les prendre, Mais
les Grues ayant d'abord pris guard a luy aidans aides de la legerete de leur
corpse, s' enuolerent facilement, et ainsi eschaperent le grand d'anges qu'
else couroient d'etre prises par l'Oiseleur. Mais les Oyes qui etoient
empeschees par la pefanteur de leur corpse, comme else faisoient tous leur
efforts pour tacher de prendre la fuitte. Else furent en fin attrapees par
l'Oiseleur, qui les emporta ches soy auecque beaucoup de joye.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous apprend que souuent les pauures, que les riches nomment par
derision la Lie du Peuple, qui se trouuent dans vne ville que les ennemis s'
accagent et pillent, euitent souuent le danger ou ils sont, et sortent de la
main de leur Ennemis, plutot que les Puissans et les Riches, qui a cause de la
quantite de leur biens, et de leur richesses, sont reteneus en servitude par
ceux qui les ont pris, qui voulans s' ennrichir de leur depouilles, sont
contrains de leur oster la liberte, de crainte qu' ils ne leur puissent nuire,
n' y recouurer leur biens qu' ils ont perdus.

The Geese in the Corn.
A Flock of Geese mixed with. some Cranes do waste
A Clownes Corn Field, when he with. eager haste,
And his observant Hindes to ataque them run.
The cautious Cranes by Hight their onsetts thum
But ye. dull Geese clogged with. their bulk and weight.
Do with. their death his danage expiate.
In Civil buoyles ye. Indigent are freed
While still ye. rich do in their purses bleed,


FAB. LXXIX. De Gruibus and Anseribus.
ANseres and Grues in eodem pascebantur Prato; Venatoribus autem visis, Grues
propter alarm longitudinem, and Corporum levitatem statim evolaverunt, Anseres
vero quum ob inutile onus humi manebant, capti fuerunt.

MORALE.
FAbula significat quod quum, Provinciae subjugatae sunt, aut urbes expugnatae,
inopes facile fugiunt, Divites autem capti in servitium ruunt.

FABLE. LXXX.
UN Chien passant un jour deuant vne bourcherie et estant press de faim; il
derobat vne piece de chair, et comme le boucher le poursuiuoit a grand' force;
il se jetta dans un fleuue prochain; Et comme il le passoit a nage, et qu' il
faisoit un fort beau jour, et que le Soleil y ictoit ses rayons a plom; Le
chien, voyant dans l'eau l'Ombre de la piece de chair qu' il tenoit dans sa
bouche, a fin d'allouuir sa gourmandise. Quitta celle quil tenoit pour
engloutir la fausse qui luy apparoissoit dans l'eau; Mais comme la veritable
chair, luy fut eschapee, et qu' il se vit aiusy trompe, et qu' il auoit perdu,
ce quil auoit derobe; Il s' escria o moy miserable qui soubs l'esperance d'vne
false appearance, ay perdu vne chose reelle, et qui m' estrit asseuree.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous enseigne que l'orsque nous sommes en possession de quelque
chose; il ne faut pas la quitter soubs l'esperance d'vne meilleure, (Mais qui
peut estre incertaine) de crainte que ne l'obtenant pas, nous ne soyons oufin
prive du tout. Il vaut done mieux estre content d'vne mediocre fortune, que de
l'abandonner pour courrir auecque incertitude et resque a vne plus grande, qui
n' est point asseuree. Cette fable nous apprend aussy a ques point de folly
sont montes ceux la qui abandonnent les chooses utiles, belles, et necessaires
pour suiure les friuoles, et fragiles qui n' ont rien de beau l'apparence.

The Dog and Piece of Flesh.
An Hungry Dog did with swift paws divide.
The fleeting Current of a watery tide.
Whilst his rude fangs did like some hostage keep
A shoulder; torn from a dismembered Sheep,
passing a Bridge his busy eye did trace.
Its portrayed shadow on ye. waters face.
At which he catching, his vame hopes were croll
Since for the shad dow, he ye substance lost.
Be not too eager to enhance thy store.
Least thou loose yt. thou did obtain before.
Least thy designs a crooked fortune cross.
Bu^ing i^s^ing hopes with present loss.


FAB. LXXX. De Cane and Vmbra.
CAnis quidam tranans fluvium, vorabunda fauce vehebat carnem, splendente Sole;
et ut plerunque fit, umbra Carnis lucebat in aquis, quam avide captans, quod in
rictu oris erat perdiderat, quo infortunio perculsus, huc, illuc, vagos
circumtulit ocellos, and tandem animum reeipiens sic elatravit; Miserae deerat
Cupiditati modus; Satis superque esset ni desipuissem, Jam tota spes and Res in
fundo perierunt.

MORALE.
MOnemur hac Fabella modestiae, monemur prudentiae, ut cupiditati modus
ponatur, ne certa pro incertis amittamus, Omnium Malorum Radi^ est Avaritia.

FABLE LXXXI.
LE Chien flattoit son Maistre, et tous ceux de la maison, le Maistre et les
antres l'amadouoient, et le carressoient de mesme; L' Asne voyant ceci
souspiroit profondement, et commencoit a se fascher de son estat miserable,
pensant estre chose desraisonable, qu' un petit Chien inutile fust neantmoins
agreeable a tous, et nourry de la table de son seigneur, bien que cependant, il
ne receut ce bien, que par le plaisir qu' il donnoit, sans auoir aucune peine,
Et luy tout au contraire estoit charge d'vn pesant fardeau, jamais oisif, et
estoit tous jours battu, et en la disreguard de tous, pour tant il disoit a soy
mesme, si par adulations, et blandices cecy se faict, Je veux vser de ce
mestier tant profitable, Cette Resolution prise, il arriua quelque temps apres,
que voyant son maistre de retour en sa maison, le galant Asne se mit essayer
son entreprinse, et venant au deuant de luy il sauta sur ses espaules, et le
frappa des pieds, luy pensant fair de grandes caresses; Cependant le Maistre
commenca a crier, et les seruiteurs accourent qui traitterent le pauure Asne a
coups de bastons, et il qui pensoit plaisanter fut tres bien frotte et traitte
a basionnades.

Le Sens MORAL.
CE que l'ingenieux Esope nous a voulu figurer en cette Fable est pour monstrer
l'impertinence de ceux qui se meslent d'vn mestier qu' ils ne scauent pas, et
pour prouuer vne verite si receue, l'Experience nous fait voir euidemment en la
Bonffonerie, car null n' a jamais veu qu' un se soit rendu plaisant, sans y
auoir vne grand Disposition naturelle, soit que la gentilesse du Bouffon
consiste aux postures, ou au maniment du corpse, comme aux Histrions et aux
pantomimes, soit qu' elle depend entierement de la Grace de l'Esprit, comme
aux discourse du bons mots, soit qu' elle participe de tous les deux comme aux
Comediens. Cette bonne mere Nature veut que ses enfans ne s' egarent point des
traces quelle leur a marquees, les gentillesses du Chien sont entierement
contraires, a la Nature stupide d'vn Asne. Null ne peut toutes chooses, et toutes
chooses ne semblent bien a tous; Que chacun desire, que chacun entreprenne ce
qn' il pourra, Si te Nature repugne, ton labeur sera inutile; Le vray est ce
viel Proverb, Asinus ad Lyram, et le verse en le Poet Horace, Tu nihil invita
dices, faciesve Minerva.
Tu ne feras, ou diras rien, Malgre ton Naturel.


The Ass and little Dog.
A Flattering Dog often Chartud his Masters Heart
With soster bland ishments and faituing Art
When a dull Ass having behold this Dog
Useful for naught but au uneasy Clog.
Thus to Oblige with. braying retorick
He seeks his Master to Carress and lick
Hoping this rough Address will him lugage
But this in him called up so wild a page
As strayt Commands his servants to dispeuse
lust stripes as guerdon of his ^^solence.
How much propostervns it is for one
TO intrude upon another function.
For after all their ^oyle none can partake
Of eucry Art; Skill does ye Artist make.


FAB. LXXXI. De Cane and Asino.
DVm blandiretur Canis hero, and Familiae; Herus and Familia Canem demulcent,
quod Asellus videns, coepit eum pigere sortis suae, inique etenim putabat
comparatum, Canem gratum esse omnibus, et de mensa Herili pasci; idque otio,
ludoque consequi; sese contra nunquam otiosum esse, portare Clitellas,
quotidiano caedi flagello, and odiosum praeterea omnibus haberi, Artem igitur
statuebat insectari quae tam multis utilis esset, Hero igitur domum redeunti
obviam occurrit, subsilit, pulsatque ungulis, Exclamante hero, accurrebant
servi, et Ineptus Asellus qui se urbanum credidit, fuste vapulat.

MORALE.
NOn omnes omnia possumus, quam quisque Artem noverat in ea se exerceat, Id
quisque velit, id tentet quod possit.

FABLE LXXXII.
LE Loup deuora vne Brebis don't quelques os luy estoient demeurez dans la
guele, ce qui l'incommodoit fort; Il cherche ca, et la, Il demanda le secours
des vns, et des autres, mais pas un ne vouloit donner, et tous disoient, qu' il
l'auoit bien merit, et que son mal estoit vne just recompense de sa
gourmandise, Finalement par plusieurs flatteries et promesses il induisit la
Grue de mettre son col en sa gueule, et arracher l'os qu' il auoit dedans la
guele, L' ayant fait ainsi il luy demanda quelque recompense; Mais le Loup se
Mocquant d'elle, Va to en d'icy? Ne te suffit il pas, que tu as la vie sauue?
tu es grandement oblige a moy de ce que tu es en vie, s' il m' eust pleu, je to
eusse arrache le Col.

Le Sens MORAL.
LE viel Proverb est vulgaire, Le Bien fait a un Ingrat est perdu; Ces hommes
maligns sont comme le lierre qui ruin la mouraille qui le soustient; En ceste
Fable, l'ingratitude human est viuement representee, tesmoignee par le Loup
infidele qui frauda les esperances de la Grue; De la est venue la coustome
d'appeller ceux Grues qui se laissent affiner par les meschans, apres auoir
done leur peine, et leur temps pour les obliger; Et ils n' en passent a si bon
march que la Grue d' Esope, Car ils se trouuent d'ordinaire embrouillez dans
les propres menees de ceux qu'ils ont seruis, et sont a la pluspart le triste
suiet de leurs infidelitez, plusieurs-fois ils tournent leur malice enuenimee
contre l'Autheur de leur Bien, et de leur conservation, Ils me font souuenir de
Themistocles, qui se voyant mal traitte de ses faux amiss, Je suis (disoit il)
comme un puissant Arbre, ou chacun se met a couuert en temps de pluye, et que
chacun abandonne quand elle est passee; Je croy que plusieurs ingrats sont plus
cruels, que le Loup se content de ne fair perdre a la Grue l'esperance de son
salaire, luy representant qu' elle auoit quelque suiet de le remercier de ce,
qu' ayant vne Nature si Sanguinaire il luy auoit permis d'eschapper saine et
sauue enter ses dents, pendant qu' elle auoit le bec dans son gosier. A l'
homme ingrat toutes les faueurs sont perdues.

The Wolf and Crane.
The Wolse ye Crane did a Large guerdon grant
Provided he would a traverse bone supplant
That burr'd his throat, yt. I Will (says she) effect
And having with. her bill performd yt. act
And the trucle obstacle dislodg' d did ask
The stipind due for her acomplisht task.
Thy lise (says he) I could have sna^cht away,
And I by givein yt thy guerdon pay.
He ye ^^qr^^efull men does think to insure.
But tills Ye Rock, or does the Sand manure.


FAB. LXXXIV. De Lupo and Grue.
LVpus, osse in Gutture retento, quum multum cruciaretur, Grui pretium obtulit,
si illud e Gutture extraheret; Grus autem, quum os e Gutture Lupi extraxerat,
pretium sibi promissum postulat; Cui Lupus subridens, simulque dentes acuens
dixit; Satis pretii tibi esse debet, quod ex meo Ore caput sine capitis Jactura
eduxeris.

MORALE.
ALiorum pericula homines cautiores efficere debent, Apud Improbos non parva
habetur Gratitudo si pro obsequio quis detrimentum non recepit.

FABLE LXXXIII.
DEux hommes, l'vn Auaritieux, et l'autre Envieux auec l' Importune de leurs
prieres fatigent Jupiter, mais Jupiter envoya verse eux Apollon pour satisfaire
a leurs Requests; Il leur permit donc de souhaiter a leur aise tout ce qu' ils
voudroient, a condition que ce que l'vn demanderoit, l'autre le receuroit
doublement; L' auaritieux fut long temps irresolu, pource qu' il ne croyoit pas
qu' on luy en put jamais assez donner; Mais en fin il demanda plusieurs chooses
que son Compagnon receut a double; En suite de quoy l'Envieux requist que l'vn
des yeux luy fut arrache, esperant par ce moyen que l'Auare perdroit tous les
deux.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEtte Fable nous represente viuement le Portraict de deux Vices estranges, et
tous deux Insupportables, a scauoir l'Enuie, et l'Auarice, qui sont icy compris
sous vne mesme Fable pour donner a entendre, qu' ils vont le plus souuent l'vn
auecque l'autre, et qu' il est mal-aise d'aymer obstinement les Richesses sans
enuier ceux qui les possedent en abondance, Les Vertus de l'Ame sont des Biens
trop charmans et trop nobles pour estre les Sujets de l'Envie, car l'Envie n' a
pour But, que les Biens exterieurs, et souhaite non seulement les posseder
comme tells, mais encore d'en priuer autruy qui est chose execrable, et maudite.
Et quel est Design d' l'infame Avarice? Quelle chose bonne et seante peut
naistre de ce monstre? Estant difforme comme il est, ne faut il pas que ses
productions le soient aussi? Quel a este l'Auare qui s' est jamais rendu grand
Personnage, ou aux Arms, ou aux Lettres, ou plustost en la vraye et parfaite
Virtue? Les plus grands Capitaines n' ont ils pas este liberaux; Tesmoins
Alexandre, et Caesar? Les plus scauant hommes, n' ont ils point blame l'Auarice,
Tesmoins Aristote, et Socrate? Les plus Gens de Bien, et de l'Antiquite, n' ont
ils pas estime cette passion indigne d'eux, Tesmoins Phocion, Crates et
plusieurs autres; Il n'y en a pas eu un seul qui ne fait profession de ce
glorieux Dedain; Aussi ne peut on gagner le Ciel sans estre depouille des
affections et Inclinations de la Terre parmy lesquelles, certes il n' y en a
point de plus vile que celle-cy, ny de plus messeante a la Nature.

The Covetous and Envious man.
Apollo was by love designed to scan
Both what the covet^^^ and envious man.
By just demands could challenge when ye. first
With ye. hydwropick sat of welath accuest.
Suspend's the vnbosoming' of his request
Hoping his wide desiros would be increast
When the envyious man's addrelses were discharg' d
Then thus ye. other his desires (...).
Will^ing one eye of his might loose his fight
So the others eyes might both be ^obd of light
What nice to En^y'^ equnal which. would still.
Destroy it self to improve another ill


FAB. LXXXIII. De Avaro and Invido.
AVarus and Invidus orabant Jovem Apollo mittitur ut eorum votis satisfiat, qui
utrique dat liberam optandi facultatem, hac condition ut quodcunque alter
petiisset, alter idipsum acciperet duplicatum; Haeret diu Avarus, petitque non
pauca; Et duplum accepit Socius; Invidus tandem hoc petivit ut ipse uno
privetur oculo, laetus socium mulctandum esse utroque.

MORALE.
AVaritiam nihil satiare potest, at Invidia nihil est dementius, quae dummodo
alteri noceat sibimet-ipsi imprecatur Malum.

FABLE LXXXIV.
DEux Pots furent fortuitement laissez sur le board d'vne Riuiere, et emportez
deca, et de la par la violence de l'eau, Le pot de terre apprehendant en grand
peur d'estre casse, son Compagnon luy dit, Ne crains point? car Je donneray bon
order que nous ne serons point cassez? Adonc le Pot de terre luy respondit,
soit qu'il en aduienne que tu me brises, soit, que je sois casse par l'
Impetuosite de l'eau, ce m' est tout un, car la perte tombera tousjours sur moy.

Le Sens MORAL.
PAr cette Fable nous sommes enseignez de ne nous accoster guere de Persons
plus puissantes que nous, veu le dommage, qui nous en peut arriuer en ca^ que
l'Amitie vienne a se rompre, Or quand mesme elle se dissoudroit pas, c' est vne
chose dangereuse de se vouloir esgaler a ceux qui sont eleuez par dessus nous
en pouuoir, et en condition, Il vaut beaucoup mieux viure, et s' entretenir
auec son pareil, que de frequenter la Compagnie d'vn plus puissant que soy; Car
le plus puissant te pourra porter dommage, et tu ne luy pourras nuyre. Et quand
nous sommes tousjours en la Compagnie de plus grands, de cette espece de Vanite
il ensuit que nous en deuenons plus orgueilleux qu' il ne faut, et plus
despensiers que nos moyens nous permettent; De sort que la Fin de cette
presomption retombe tousjours a nostre prejudice, et bien souuent a nostre
confusion, C' est pour quoy le Fameux Orateur enter les Romans dit, Que les
Egaux s' assemblent familierement, et heurensement auec leurs pareils; Et le
grand Philosophe enter les Grecs, Qu' il n' est point de plus solid Amity
parmy les Hommes que celle qui s' establist enter les semblables; Mais quelques
vns ont desire, que ce soit vne Amity de Dependence, ou l'vn des partis tienne
quelque maniere de Prerogative, ou de Superiorite sur l'autre, comme celle du
Souerain enuers son Fauory, et du pere enuers son Fills, et du Seigneur enuers
son Subjet; Il faudra neantmoins, qu' elle les semble egaler, par le poinct ou
ils s' entr'-ayment, Par l'Exemple, Le Prince abaisse et diminue sa haute
Condition, et augmente en quelque sens celle du Fauory, quand il est question
de luy communiquer un se cret, encore tell espece de bien-veillance est
presque tousjours Subjette a vne Fin dangereuse, si le Fauoury ne se gouuerne
auec beaucoup de prudence, ce quine proceed, que d' l'extreme Inegalite des
deux Amiss, et par consequent, il faut necessairement, qu' il y ait de la
proportion enter l'vn, et l'autre.

The two Pots.
In a swift Strame two potts together meet
Of ^^^th and Brass, b^^^ that of earth too fleet
For the slow Brass, is swistly bonne away.
The Brass implores ye. Farthen pott to stay.
That they may sail together; no replies.
The Earthen pott. my ruin in it lies,
For should I float near thee thy harden side
Iustled against mine, by the inconstant tide,
Would crush ^^y britle frame, and therefore I
Secture by distance my Indemnit^.
Mix not with them whose power is in the excess.
For they may thee, thou can not them oppress.


FAB. LXXXIV. De duabus Ollis.
DVae ollae stetere in ripa; una erat lutea, altera aenea, utramque tulit Vis
fluvii, Lutea collisionem metuenti, Respondet aenea, hortaturque ne quid
timeat, Sese enim ne collidantur satis curaturam; Tum altera, Seu me inquit,
tecum, seu te mecum flumen colliserit, cum meo utrunque fiet periculo, Nam
certum est a te superari.

MORALE.
QVi nescit miseris esse succurrendum, aut certe non nocendum, vecors est,
Satius est vivere cum Socio pari, quam cum potentiori, ille etenim pericula and
Injurias infer tibi potest, quum ille secure admodum, and de te nihil
sollicitus vivet.

FABLE LXXXV.
LE Renard invita la Cicoigne a souper, et versa sur la table tout ce qu' il
auoit de Viande, mais d'autant qd'elle estoit liquide, la Cicoigne n' en
pouuoit prendre auec son long Bec, pourquoy le Renard la mangea toute; La
pauure Cicoigne ainsi trompee se retira bien marry et honteuse a l'injurie qui
luy auoit este faite. Un peu de temps apres, elle retourna, et pour en auoir sa
Reuenche convia son host a disner; Elle luy seruit donc quantite de bonnes
viandes dans un grand Bocal de Verre, Mais pource que l'entree estoit fort
estroite, le Renard eust seulement la veue, et n' en peut jamais gouter, comme
au contraire il fut bien aise a la Cigongne de tout manger.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEtte Fable sert bien d' Exemple a ces Artificieux qui conuersent parmy les
hommes, pour leur apprendre que toutes les ruses ont leur contreruse, et qu' il
est mal aise de fair profession de dupper tout le monde sans estre duppe de
quelqu' un, ce qui est certes vne chose honteuse aux maistres de ce mestier,
Ils ont beau recourir au mensonge pour ne point render suspecte leur mauuaise
volonte; Mais, si faut il, en sin qu' elle se descouure, car elle ne peut long
temps estre cache non plus que la fausse monnoye qui est vne des plus grandes
tromperies du monde; Le Temps, qui ne peut rien tenir cache, fait vne monstre
public de cette engeance de mocqueurs, lors qu' ils y pensent le moins, et
les expose comme ils meritent a la rise du tout le monde, car la Fraud tomb
d'ordinaire sur son Autheur; Les sentiers destourneez par ou les trompeurs se
croyent sauuer, les conduisent insensiblement en des precipices, Ce qui monstre
assez, que c' est vne chose tout a fait indigne d'vne bonne Ame, d'vser de
deguisement en ces matieres, si ce n' est d'auanture que l'on y soit convie par
les Fourberies, et les artifices d'autruy.

The Fox and Stork.
The Fox the Crane did Solemnly invite
Only to Tantalite her Appetite.
For nothing he but liquid Fare provides,
That spreading ore the table thinly glyds.
Of which has spear like beak could nothing sup
Whilst the sly Fox licks all unkindly up.
The Crane this false Imposture to requite
The Fox to new Carresses did invite
But a glass vial did her Cates conteyne.
Which only she with. length of bill could drayne.
The Fox thus foyld, with. her more powerful Arts.
To his own Cell with. scorn and shame departs.
Thus Frand t^ Entangle fraud is often designed.
And falsehood is by falsehood Countermind.


FAB. LXXXV. De Vulpecula and Ciconia.
VVlpecula ad coenam invitavit Ciconiam, Opsoniumque in Mensam effundit, and
quum liquidum esset facile lingua lingebat, quod Ciconia frustra Rostro
tentavit; Abit elusa avis, pudet, pigetque Injuriae, Paucis diebus
praeterlapsis, invitat ad coenam vulpeculam; Vitreum Vas situm erat opsonii
plenum, quod quum esset arcti gutturis, Vulpeculae licuit opsonium videre,
gustare non licuit, Ciconia enim Rostro facile exhausit.

MORALE.
FRaudem fraud refellere licet, Risus enim Risum, Jocus Jocum, Dolus meretur
Dolum.

FABLE LXXXVI.
LA faim ayant chasse l'Ours du Bois, comme il s' en alloit chercher de quoy
repaistre, il trouua des Ruches en son chemin, et se meit a lecher le miel
d'alentour, Vne abeille s' en apperceut de bonne Fortune, et picqua l'Ours a
l'oreille; Cela fait, l'abeille laisse son Ennemy en vne rage mortelle, et se
sauua dans la Ruche que l'Ours s'aduisa de rompre, s'imaginant par ce moyen
d'auoir tire raison de l'iniure qu' il venoit a receuoir; Mais voila, qu' a
l'instant routes les autres Abeilles sortirent, et le picquerent jusques au
sang, pour se reuanger else mesmes de ce qu' il auoit rompu leur maison; Tout
ce que l'Ours put fair a cela, dans l'extreme violence de ses douleurs, ce fut
de songer a sa Retraitte; Il se retira donc bien viste, et en s' allant,
Miserable qui je suis, dit il, a part soy, qu' il eust beaucoup mieux valu pour
moy de souffrir vne petite picqueure, et lecher le miel en patience, qu' estre
cause du grand Mal, que toutes les abeilles m' ont fait, lors que je creu me
vanger d'elles.

Le Sens MORAL.
CEtte Fable nous apprend, qu' un seul ne peut rien contre plusieurs; Que les
Grands doiuent apprehender la colere des Petits, Qu'il n' y a point de jeu a se
vouloir vanger de ceux, a qui nous auons done sujet de nous nuire; Et qu' en
tout cas, il vaut mieux endurer un Mal qu' ils nous font, que se mettre en
danger d'en souffrir vne infinite. Quelque sort qu' en soit la liaison, elle
s' affoiblit souuent par les moindres Ennemis, quand ils vnissent en nombre, La
Vengeance est vne espece de Justice sauuage et brutalle, et ne s' en trouue que
trop parmy eux qui sont bien contens de fair comme l'Ours de cette Fable, c'
est a dire a manger la plus pure substance des Innocens, et de ne vouloir pas
toutesfois, que ces pauures gens s' en ressentent; Car alors, s' ils en
recoiuent le moindre deplaisir, il n' est pas a croire combien est grande la
Violence, ou leur passion les port; Alors s' imaginant que toutes chooses leur
sont permises a cause de leur puissance, ils font gloire d'opprimer les petits
et de les aller chercher jusques dans Ieur maisons, qu' ils y ruynent de fonds
en comble pour se vanger; Ceux cependant jouent, et comme ils se voyent ainsi
persecutez, faisant courage de desespoir, ils en attirent a leur defense
quantite d'autres, qui tells que des Mouches a miel sortent a la foul de leurs
loges, et se jettant pesle mesle sur ces oppresseurs les picquent jusques au
sang, et les contraignent en fin de fair vne honteuse retraitte.

The Bear and Bee-hives.
A sullen Bear with a slight wound ^^ag'd
Inflicted by a testie Be straight waged
A public war with her whole tribe, which he
Persu'd with such a rude Barbaritie
That he attempts each obvious hive to raise
Whilst they with. raised swarms so lance his face
That now his rage he would with. regrett recall
Greivd yt his prival send proved national
Often pellier-Brinces bing too much persu'd
Hane Mightyer Monarchs with. joint strength subdued


FAB. LXXXVI. Vrsus and Alveara.
ABapiculis irritatus and leviter ictus Vrsus, indignabundus in totum Alveare
totis viribus irruebat. Ad quam violentam Concussionem Apes omnes, velut agmine
facto, In faciem Vrsi involabant: Quarum acriter cruciatus aculeis Vrsus,
quanto (inquit) satius mihi fuisset unius Apiculae tulisse patienter aculeum,
quam tam temere totum examen irritasse?

MORALE.
DOcet Moderationem and Patientiam actionibus humanis Praesidem fore
prudentissimum, and quam futilis sit impotens iracundia and illic excandescere
ubi non penes nos sit injuriam illatam vindicare.

FABLE LXXXVII.
DEUX Amiss faisant voyage ensemble rencontrerent un Ours en leur chemin. D'
abord l'vn deux monta promptement sur un arbre (a vin deuiter ce peril) et
l'autre se mit par terre, luy estant comme impossible de s' en pouuoir fuir. L'
Ours aussi tossed s' approach de luy, et le taste par tout, le flairant
particulierement autour des oreilles, et de la bouche. Mais comme il fit tout
son possible pour s' empescher de respirer, et de remuer, cette Best, qui ne
s' approach jamais des charongnes, pensant que c' en estoit vne, le laissa la,
sans luy nuire en aucune facon. Mais apres qu' il fut parti, et que celuy qui
monta sur l'arbre en fut descendu, il voulut se mocquer de son Ami, et luy
demand ce que l'Ours luy auoit dit a l'Oreille: Mais ce pauure malheureux. Le
pouuant justement reprendre; Il luy respondit qu' il luy auoit done conseil de
ne voyager jamais auec un semblable Ami.

Le Sens MORALE.
LE Danger et la Disgrace sont les deux pierres de touch, par lesquelles ont
cognoist les veritables Amiss. Nous en trouuons asses tous les jours qui nous
caressent dans nostre prosperity; Mais qui nous abandonnent dans nostre
disgrace. Mais la veritable amity estant fondees sur la virtue, et estant
eslenee au dessus des afflictions, il faut necessairement qu' un veritable ami
en face peu de cas, lors qu' il s' agit de l'interest de celuy, pour qui il a
vne veritable amity.

The Bear and two Travelers.
A Savage Bear, two travelers assayles.
The one a tree straight for his safety scales
His friend by seeming dead deludes ye Bear.
Who with a myld Accost, but finest his ear
And so retin'd, the the first did then descend
And what was (asked him) the result and end
Of that soft whisper, which ye Bear distild
Into his Fare, the other being filled
With keen regret replied he bid me fly
A friend, who was composed of treachery
Black Swans in Rivers are not found more ^^re,
Then friends on earth, thin and vnfrequent are.


FAB. LXXXVII. Vrsus and duo Vivtores.
AMici duo facto faedere iter inceptantes Vrsus obviam dabant. Alter ex amicis
trepidus Arborem conscendit; Alter autem consternatus humi se Mortuum
simulabat, and spiritum totum compressit. Accedens Vrsus and ad faciem Os
admovens and Mortuum credens, alibat, intactum relinquens. Tandem descendebat
ex Arbore amicus, and Socium accedens percontatus, quid Illi susurraverat
Vrsus, cui Ille respondit, Monebat me Vrsus, ut de falsis and perfidis amicis
in posterum Caverem.

MORALE.
Indicat quam rarum sit Fidelem invenire Socium, qui in ipso mortis atticulo se
constantem exhibebit.

FABLE. LXXXVIII.
UN Trompette, pandant des guerres ciuiles flate de la gloire, et du butin s'
en alloit a la guerre. Mais comme elle estoit fort s' anglante, et que tous
ceux de son parti estoyent, ou defaits, ou prisonniers, et rendus a la mercy
des victorieux je ne scay par quel malheur le Trompette estoit mean captif
parmi les autres, a la Tente du General. Et comme en deliberoit la de la vie,
et des despouilles des prisonniers, le Trompette respondit ainsi a ses
Accusateurs, je vous conjure tres humblement de vouloir me pardonner, parce que
je suis tout a fait sans arms, et n' ay autre chose que ma Trompette, qui est
un Instrument, qui ne peut fair mal a person. Au quel le General respondit
ainsi; Je scay fort que la Trompette est un Instrument, qui n' est pas
sanglant, Mais parce que tu as souffle par la sedition, et as anime les autres
par son a la Guerre, tu es autheur de la Rebellion et et par consequent digne
de Mort.

Le Sens MORALE.
LA Moralite de cette Fable signify que dans vne guerre civil tous ceux, qui
sont criminels de leze Majeste doiuent estre punis, et sur tout ceux qui sont
les Autheurs de la sedition, et qui sont, comme les soufflets de l'incendie
public, tells que sont les soldats, qui sont les promoteurs de la Guerre.

The Captive-Trumpeter.
A Captive Trumpter implored the foe.
That life and freedom he would on him bestow
Since by his Guiltless sword no life he said
Had been to war as a pale victime paid,
but thou design'st said he far greater ill,
Who men each other do excite to kill.
They yt bad, lets command they might suspend
Are Guilty of those ills those lets attend


FAB. LXXXVIII. Tubicen Captivus.
TVbicin quidam in Bello Captivus delinebatur, Qui hosts supplicabundus or
abat ut non Illum interficerent, quandoquidem totus inermis, esset and nullum
eorum vulnerasset. Cui sic hosts, quia Tu sis inermis, and pugnandi excors
ideo moriere, qui Tubae cautu inimicos nostros pugnam Concitaveris.

MORALE docet
Quod magis laesae Majestatis sunt rei habenti Primores qui Consilium, and
rations Bellum movendi praecipiunt, Quam gregarii Milites Qui Eorum Morem
gerunt Praeceptis.

FABLE LXXXIX.
UN Oyseleur ayant tendu ses filets dans les champs auoit prins un Perdrix
enter les autres Oiseaux, qu' il auoit attrapes, la garda dans sa cour en la
compagnie de deux Cocqs. Il arriua que les deux Cocqs attaquerent la Perdrix
auec leurs aisles ouuertes, et leurs Ergots, et tuerent presque la Perdrix.
Mais l'ayant en fin laissee la, ils commencerent a se battre entr' eux fort
cruellement, et s' estans faits des plays mortelles l'vn a l'autre tomberent
tous deux morts sur la place. Mais comme la Perdrix les eut consideres elle se
consola, disant je ne me plaindray doresenavant de ma fortune, d'auoir este
l'object de la colere de ces Cocqs, qui se sont donnes la mort l'vn a l'autre
par les plays, qu' ils se sont faites reciproguement pas leurs ergots
ensanglantes.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Moralite nous apprend que le mal, que les meschans veulent fair a leurs
voisins leur arriuent le plus souuent a eux mesmes, et que les hommes furieux,
et coleres tournent souuent les coups de leur fureur sur leur propre person,
qu' ils auoient dessein de decocher sur les autres; et cela nous apprend qu' il
faut auoir de la patience, et que nous verrons en peu de temps nos Ennemis se
desfaire par leur propres arms.

The Fighting Cocks and Partridge.
One a tame Partrige with much care designed
To seed with two feirce cocks who straight combined
To assault the Partrige with insulting have
Whilst he with sighs resents his angry sat.
Soon after they with ^^^all strise contest
And with intestine wounds themselves infest
When this destructive s^^'d the Partridge viewed
And saw their plumes with. mutual blood bedewd
No wonder says she that they me annoy
When they themselves with. their own bate destroy
Calm (...) those without reqe^^ should sight
Whom their rough natures still to strise invite


FAB. LXXXIX. Galli and Perdix.
IN eadem area Rusticus Perdicem, and duos Gallos incluserat; Vbi Galli diu in
Perdicem passis alis and calcaribus cruentis involabant. Sed tandem mutata
rabie in seipsos crudelia calcaria exercebant, and alternis vulneribus in
conspectu Perdicis ceciderunt. Quod quum vidit Perdix sibi plaudebat, inquiens
non miror si in me civil odium exerceant, quod seipsis tam male discreverint.

MORALE.
Monet Nos publica dissidia aequiori far animo, cum domestica inter fratres
fraterrimos exerceantur.

FABLE. XC.
L' Oyseleur ayant tendu ses filets dans des Pasturages auoit prins par hasard
vne Perdrix. Cette captive se plaignoit fort, et supplioit humblement
l'Oyseleur de luy donner la liberte, disant qu' elle estoit fort maigne, et
chetiue, et qu' elle ne suffiroit pas, pour appaiser la faim d'vne seule
person, et en fin luy promit, qu' elle emmeneroit doresenauant beaucoup d'
Oiseaux dans ses filets, s' il la mettoit en liberte. Ce qu'ayant entendu
l'Oyseleur; est ce ainsi que tu me parles meschante que tu es, que tu trahiras
doresenauant tes Compagnes? Sans mentir tu es un mauuais Orateur, de to accuser
de perfidie, a cause de quoy je te tiendra prisonniere; car comment pourrois je
me fire a toy, qui me promets de trahir tes amies, et tes confederees.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous apprend, que nous deuons estre constants dans les malheurs,
et disgraces, qui nous arriuent, et que nous ne deuons jamais nous esloigner du
chemin de la virtue. Elle nous aduertit en outre que les plus dangereux de tous
les hommes sont les perfides, et les traitres, et qu' il ne faut jamais
adjouter foy a ce qu' ils disent, sur tout lors qu' ils ont trompe leur ami,
pour seruir a leur propre interest.

The Fowler and Partridge.
A Partridge snared in the Ambush of a nett,
A ^ard^kner did implore with sad regrett
That both her life and liberty he would spare
And her whole tribe she would tempt into his suare
Nay now says he receive thy fatal doom
That for thy friends desi^n'st an early toome.
That snare which some for others do design
Themselves with its Contexture often Entwine.


FAB. XC. Auceps and Perdix.
AVceps Retibus extensis captabat Perdicem, volucris illa captata,
supplicabunde Illum rogabat ut se demitteret, promittens se in Relia plurimus
aves alecturam! Cui Auceps, nequaquam hoc faciam nam proculdubio me decipies,
quae sodales Tuos proditura^es.

MORALE docet
Nunquam fidem illis adhibituros, Qui alios semel fefellerunt.

FABLE XCI.
L' Aigle ayant vole du plus haut d'vn Rocher dessus le dos d'vn Agneau; ce que
le Corbeau ayant veu de loin, il luy print envy d'en fair autant, et s' alla
jetter sur la lain d'vn mouton, ou il s' embarrassa si fort, qu' il ne peut s'
en depestrer, de sort qu' il fut prins, et fut liver pour seruir de jouet aux
enfans.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous enseigne que la Temerite, est presque tousjours la cause de
la ruin des hommes; Ce que l'experience nous apprend tous les jours, et nous
fait voir que le presomptueux, qui veut s' esleuer par dessus ses forces attire
toufiours asseurement sur luy la risee de tout le monde, ou bien sa ruin
entiere. L' aduanture de ces Temeraires ne se peut mieux accomparer qu' a c'
elle du Corbeau, qui pour auoir en la Temerite de vouloir fair autant, que
l'Aigle seruit de jouet aux enfans, et mourut de Desespoir.

The Eagle and Crow.
The plumed Freebooter the Eagle ^^ing's
His savage talous and his spreading wing's
Upon a Guiltles Lambe^ and bears away
Unto his bloody nest the bleating prey.
A Crow discerning this did straig^ design.
With eager Claws a Ram for to pur^oyne.
Whilst his dull pownces so entangled were
In knarled wool as in some viscuous suare
A Shepherd takes him captive prunes his w^ngs
And him in scorn to in^^^^ing Children Things.
So these y^ painly here themse^^es aspire
(...) by their fall y^ (...) of their desi^^


FAB. XCI. Aquila and Cornix.
AQua prehenderat Testudinem; Quem frustra Multoties Conata est Contundere.
Accedens autem Cornix sic Aquilam alloquitur, si velis (mi Hera) Testudinem
frangere, opus est ut altissimum avoles, and longinquo Testudinem in hanc rupem
impingere. Consilium probabat Aquila, and Testudinem confractam illico Cornix
antequam Aquila devolaverat, rapuit, et devoravit.

MORALE docet
Quod Magna facile fiunt per asutias Quae nusquam per vires efficiantur.

FABLE. XCII.
LE Lion, l'Ane, et le Renard firent un jour amity ensemble, et sortirent pour
chasser. Et ayant prins beaucoup de proye, le Lion commanda a l'Ane de fair le
partage, Lequel les ayant distribues en trois parties esgales s'imaginoit que
chacun deuoit prendre la part que le sort luy donneroit: Mais le Lion rugissant
de colere de ce proceed, se jetta sur l'Ane, et mit en pieces ce pauure
malheureux. Apres il commanda au Renard de fair les parts. Mais luy ayant mis
presque le tout en un Monceau, il ne s' en reserua qu' vne petite portion, et
dit que ce partage estoit fort just, et que le rest luy estoit bien deu, puis
qu' il auoit en toute la peine. Au quel le Lion respondit O liabile Renard, qui
ta apprins a si bien fair les parts; O Lion tres genereux, respondit le
Renard, l'euenement de l'Ane mon compagnon me la apprins.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous apprend que les hommes prudents se doiuent fair sages au
depans d'autruy. Et c' est a mon aduis vne grande marque de sagesse; lors que
nous profitons pour nostre advantage du malheur Lors que nous auons veu arriuer
a autruy, et que nous seruons de leur exemple pour en profiter.

The Lion, Ass, and Fox.
An Ass Fox Lion, rivalls were in spoil
Of a slain Heart acheiv'd by mutual toil
The Ass ye prey did in just parts disseet
But fell himself a vietime for yt fact,
Cause he to equal porrions did divide
Which when Sagacious Renard had espied
He by surrender did his share transmitt
Which made ye. Lion alke him, whence yt. wit
And prudence he had gavn'd, the Fox replies.
The Asses fate had taught him to be wise.
That prudent man is Circumspect alone
Who by another loss declines his own.


FAB. XCII. De Leone, Asino, and Vulpe.
LEO Asinus and Vulpes conflata inter se Societate, venatum excunt: Cumque
multam praedam cepissent, Leo Asino mandat, ut praedam dividit. Asinus, cum eam
in tres parts equales esset partitus, optionem capiendi socios dedit quam
partitionem Leo indigne ferens ac dentibus frondens a divisione deposuit eum
mandavit que Vulpi ut praedam ipsa partiretur; ut Vulpes, illas tres parts in
unum coligens ac pede nihil sibi seorsim relinquens, Leoni onmia tradidit; tunc
Leo vulpi ait; quis te partiri docuit? inquit extempore Vulpes, Asini periculum
id me facere instruxit.

MORALE
Fabula significat quod aliorum pericula homines faciunt cautiores.

FABLE. XCIII.
LE Renard ayant veu quelques Raisins, qui commencoyent a meurir; prit envy
d'en taster, et fit tous ses efforts pour en auoir. Mais comme ce fut en vain,
et qu' il ne put venir a bout de son dessein, changeant sa tristesse en Joye;
Je ne me soucie pas, dit il, de ces Raisins, car ils ne sont pas encore meurs.

Le Sens MORALE.
LA Dissimulation est quelquesfois mauvaise, et quelquesfois indifferente. Elle
est vitieuse, lors que nous cachons nos intentions, ou au persons a qui nous
sommes obliges a les dire, comme a nos amiss; Ou quand nous les cachons mal a
propos, ou auec un mauuais dessein. Ces gens, qui en agissent de la sort sont
des persons a deux visages, et des Prothees, qui prennent toute sort de
forms; et en un mot des Hipocrites, qui desguisans la verite se rendent odieux
a tout le monde. Mais quand la dissimulation n' est pas vitieuse, il ne c' y
trouue aucune de ces circonstances susdites; Cette sort de Dissimulation ne
nuit a person, Mais est vtile en quelque chose au Dissimulateur, comme lors
que nous nions d'auoir au vne entreprise, lors que nous la cognoissons inutile.
C'est la feinte qu' Esope attribue a son Renard, qui ne pouvant manger des
Raisins, qu' il vouloit auoir, disoit qu' ils n' estoyent pas encore meurs. Ce
qui nous apprend qu' il faut adroitement rejetter son impuissance, sur
l'imperfection de la chose, que l'on souhaite, quand on est fasche de n' auoir
pas reussi.

The Fox and Grapes.
A Fox a Vinyard traces, where he spies
Full Clusiers of large Grapes when is greedy (...)
Fast'nd on them Egg on his keen desire.
To pillage sorn, but when too low't aspire
Thereto ye Fox descride his reach to be
And no Arts of his could them gain, then he
To give his hopes thus bafled some Alay
Said ye^. were green and tart not worth his ^a^
Rather Contenute then with a vain desire.
Things seek to grasp vupossible'^ acquire.


FAB. XCIII. Vulpes and Vva.
RAceinum dependentem frustra conata est Vulpecula iteralis saltibus attingere;
sed tandem conatibus cassibus omnino defatigata, indignabunda Vecessit,
inquiens appage acerbas and immaturas istas unas, quae sane tam sordidae sunt,
ut ne quidem humi jacentes attollerem si mihi gratis offerrentur.

MORALE docet
Simulatum fastidium comeniens esse Earum Gararum quas nulla pessimus art
comparare.

FABLE. XCIV.
LE cheual magnifiquement harnache, s' en alloit courant par les rues, et
faisoit retentir l'air de ses hennissements; lors que rencontrant vne Ane
charge, qui s' opposoit a sa course, il s' embrasa de colere, et rengeant son
frain tout escumeux. Poltron, et tardif Animal, luy dit il, es tu bien si
hardi, que d'estre en obstacle au Cheual? Retire tey promptement de ce lieu,
autrement je te briseraey soubs mes pieds. Ce discourse surprit l'Ane, d'vn tell
effroy, que n' osant ouvrir la gueule pour braire, il se retira a quartier, et
luy fit place tout doucement. Cepandant le Cheual recommenca de courir, et fit
un si grand effort que son ayne en fut entrouverte. Alors ne valant plus rien,
ni pour la course, ni pour la parade, on luy osta le superbe harnois, qu'il
portoit, et on le vendit a un Charretier. Le lendemain l'Ane l'ayant rencontre
comme il tiroit la charrete; et bien compagnon, dit il, en quel equipage te
vois je? Ou est ta selle toute brillante d'or? Ou sont tes superbes hardes? Ou
est ton mors si brillant? Sans mentir mon Ami ce malheur te deuoit bien
arriuer, parce que tu estois trop orgueilleux.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous apprend qu' il ne faut pas que nostre bon fortune nous face
mespriser ceux, qui sont au dessoubs de nous; parce que nous deuons
apprehender, qu'vn facheux reuers ne nous face descendre, d'ou nous estions
montes, et qu' ainsi nous ne soyons exposes a la risee de ceux, que nous auons
mesprise.

The Horse and Heart.
A Stagg and Horse a Single Combat waged.
By whom the Horse to a retreat's engaged.
Who strayt for aid to man himself aply'd.
Who by consent did his proud back bestryde
And armed with vigorous Lane and massy shield.
They that dee Mighty sums attempt ^^ing^ss
And with rec^^^^s peace up some former l^ss
Forced the defeated Heart to quit ye Field.
So he before whom a black Foil persu'd
Buoyd up by this supply his foe subdued
But from this pelly gavne his loss began
For he ere snice has Servant bin to man.
Are still perplexed when they'ne their Aims atcheiv'd
How to pivserve what they before retvir'd.


FAB. XCIV. Equus and Cervus.
PRatum interdum Equus sibi solum possedebat, sed tandem accessit Cervus and
ibi pascua detondebat. Quod quum vidisset Invidus and Avarus Equus, Consilium
inibat, and modum ab eo postulabat quo cerni injuriam ulcisceretur. Respondit
Homo si vindictam velis opus est ut fraenum admittas, ut Ego armatus Dorsa
conscendam Cervum persequturus. Parebat monitis Equs, and sic Captivus
abducebatur.

MORALE docet
Condign Eos pati infortunium gravius qui de tranquillitate sua se volentes
detraherint.

FABLE. XCV.
UN jeune Prodigue, qui auoit despanse tout son patrimoine estoit reduit a
tell necessite, qu' il exposa tous ses habits en vente a grand march.
Pourtant s'estant rauise a cause de l'hiuer, qui estoit rude, il voulut
conserver ses habits, mais pourtant il changea de dessein ayant veu voler vne
Arondelle, qui luy presageoit l'este, et cet augure malheureux fit qu' il
vendit ses habits. Mais a peine les auoit il despouilles que le froid commenca
de reuenir plus fort, qu'auparauant, et estant presque mort de froid il trouua
la malheureuse Arondelle morte dans un rocher, et luy estant proche d'expirer
s'escria, ah! Malheureux Oiseau, qui as fait un maunais prognostique de l'este
prochain; Et O! moy plus malheureux d'auoir creu a un oracle si trompeur.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtre fable nous apprend qu' il nous faut bien donner de guard des insidieux
allechements des Putains, et il nous faut si bien gouuerneur dans le temps de
nostre infortune, que nous ne soyons point aueugles dans celuy de nostre
prosperity.

The Young Man and Swallow.
A lavish vn^^^urst whose excess did doowe
His ^orne Demeasnes to a voluptuous Tomb
And now had naught but his thin wardrohe; spied
A Swallow with. Swift wings the Air divide
When straight he Indg'd when yet Midw^^^er had
Scanse ye glazed Earth with his ^cie vesture clad
That ye mild Summers cal^er Aspec^ dawned
So that for Drink his reserved Clothes he pawnd
Soon after He condensed almost with Cold
The Swallow ^oo, does even congeald behold
Whom he thus breaks; unhappy Bird vng'd he
Thou with thy self have like wise ^^ind me.
Indigentie wild profuseness ^^ds.
And lavish Kiot ^^ill lean want ^llends.


FAB. XCV. Juvenis and Hirundo.
TEmulentus, and dissolatus quidem Juvenis Qui Patrimonium integrum decoxerat,
ipsa etiam vestimenta solebat pro pecuniis venum dare. Ad hoc, ex Augurio
circumvolantis Hirundinis conjiciens jam aestatem appropinquasse, illico
vestitus exuit and Seminudus in popinus dilituit sed quum Brumae reliquiae
redeuntes majori Frigore saeviebant, and Hirundinem enecassent, Juvenis tandem
circumvagabatur nocibundelus and Aviculam mortuam offendens, inquit O
infaelicem Augurem, and Tui and Mei infortunii.

MORALE docet
Non certam Avium aut ventorum auguriis fidem abhibendam.

FABLE XCVI.
UN certain homme auoit vne poule qui luy pondoit tous les jours un ocuf d'or;
Mais il fut si sot que ne contentant pas de ce profit ordinaire, et voulant s'
enrichir tout a la fois, il la tua cruellement, dans la croyance qu' il auoit,
qu' il trouueroit sans doubt en son ventre vne grande quantite d'or: Mais comme
ce malheureux homme l'eut euentree, et qu' il ne trouua rien dans son ventre,
il fut si fort etouue, et touch d'vn si sensible regret qu' il s' abandonnat
d'abort aux soupirs, et aux pleurs; se plaignant d'auoir perdu son bien et son
Esperance. Mais toutes les plaintes furent veins, et ne firent pas reuiure sa
poule qu' il auoit esgorgee si imprudemment, et auecque tant de cruaute.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte fable nous apprend clairement que la precipitation des moyens empesche
la fin d'vne affair, par les obstacles que l'imprudence, et le peu de
conduitte y apporte, C' est done un grand defaut a un homme de fair ce qu' il
entreprend auecque trop d'empreslement, et de promptitude. Mais il faut suiure
le proverb latin, festina lent, advance lentement, Et d'effect nous voyons
que la trop grande precipitation est presque toujours nuifible. Ainfi vne
person qui march trop vitte, est sujet a broucher, ou a tomber. Il faut done
meurement songer a ce que nous deuons fair, auant que de l'executer, et nous
deuons prendre un tems suffisant pour deliberer, a fin que si par notre trop
grande precipitation il nous en aduient du mal, nous ne fassions pas la reponce
accoutumee des fols, qui disent je n' y pensois pas.

The Man and his Goose.
One that beheld each day his goose to vent
By ^ich retaile a golden excrement
Warpt with. foude avarice, his goose destroy' d.
(Such Engines are by yt. black vice employed)
hoping in her the mine it selse l'vnfold.
Which dispense this ample stock of gold.
But his imagined mine and vain desire.
Did with his Goose together both expire.
Would: thou grow rich retrench then thy desire.
And seek not immaturely to acquire
The sum of all thy hopes leash grasping all
Thou all do lose, and into ruin full


FAB. XCVI. Anus and Anser.
ANus quaedam Anserem alebat Quae Illi quotidie Ovum aureum excludebat. Anus
avarissima existimans Anserem habwsse in visceribus fodinam auream, cupiditate
commota; anserem confestim interfecit, and quum viscera perscrutebatur, and
unicum tantum ovum deprehenderat, spe sublactata inani, exclamabat, O me
infaelicem tantae crudelitatis consciam, quae non modico contenta lucro, jam
omnia perdiderim.

MORALE monet
Nos contentas fore praesenti sort, quam quum despicimus, and altiori
inhiamus, saepissime cumiliorem incidimus.

FABLE XCVII.
UN Loup affame et maigre errant un jour parmy les bois, rencontra par hazard
un Chien fort gras et potele, bien poli et bien peigne. Auquel il parla de la
sort; he beau chien d'ou viens tu? auquel le Chien repondit, je viens de la
maison de mon maistre. Le Loup luy demanda, comment il se pouuoit fair, que
luy qui estoit un animal domestique, et ordinairement enferme a la maison, fut
si gras, et au contraire que luy estoit si maigre, et si affame, veu qu' il
auoit tant de bois et de compagne pour se promener, et pour chercher de quoy se
nourir. Le Chien respondit qu' il auoit un maistre fort bon, et fort indulgent,
qui auoit soin tous les jours de luy donner la viande de sa table de sa propre
main. Le Loup ayant oui ces propos demeura tout estonne, mais l'ayant approach
de plus pres, il prit guard que son col estoit tout pele, et esche; et le Loup
s' informant curieusement d'ou cela pouuoit venir, le Chien luy respondit, que
c' estoit seulement des cicatrices, que luy auoit fait le colier don't il estoit
attache, de crainte qu' il ne mordit les estrangers qui l'approchoient. Auquel
le Loup dit, je n' envy pas ta Fortune et ne me plains pas de la mienne; et j'
aim mieux jouir de la liberte, et estre comme je suis, que d'estre en ta
condition, enchaine et souuent batu.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte fable nous apprend qu' vne mediocre fortune est meilleure auec la
liberte, que non pas vne plus puissante sans elle. Et qu' on a plus de plaisir
dans la vie, selon ce dire du sage Solomon, de viure en paix et en repos dans
etat mediocre, que de viure auec splendeur et magnificence parmy la discord et
le trouble.

The Wolf and Dog.
A Wolf and Dog within a Wood do meet,
In the days nonage, when the first did greet
By questions, alking how his polisht hide
Became so plump and slick, the dog replied,
From his own dish his patron stockt him often,
Straight the keen Wolf wished: for a life soft;
The Dog promotion did suggest so he,
Would but rebate his native feritie:
This was agreed when by full light he saw
His neck was ^all'd; from whence yt signal flaw
Arose, he asked, my master said the Dog
To Appease my ferce^ss there annexed a clog,
If your soft life such chains do grate, urged he
Give me my rougher sale with Liberty
That gaudy pomp which. does in Courts appear
Exchanged for Liberty is bought to dear,


FAB. XCVII. De Cane and Lupo.
SAginato Cani occurrit Lupus macilentus, miratus quomodo Ille qui infra
parietes privatos clausas, tam pinguis evaderet, and Ipse tam macilentus foret
Qui tot Nemora, colles, and pascua de Jure suo possideret ex quibus victum sibi
compararet. Respondit Canis se indulgentissimum habuisse Herum Qui cibos Illi
quotidie de mensa sua porrigebat. Attonitus stetit paulisper Lupus, sed propius
cicatrices, and collum saucium perspiciens, percontatus unde haec cruditas
acciderit. Respondit Canis haec tantummodo esse catena indicia, qua interdum
perstringebatur. Cui Lupus, ne Tuae non invideo fortunae nec meae paeniteo,
malim enim jejunus and impastus praesenti frui lentate, quam satur catenis
perstringi, and festibus contundi.

MORALE docet
Iniquam and pauperculam libertatem servituti ditissimae praeferendam.

FABLE. XCVIII.
AU temps que les Arbres parloyent, un Paysan s' en alla dans vne Forest, et la
pria de luy accorder de couper autant de bois, qu' il auoit besoing pour fair
un manche a fa coignee; ce qu' il obtint facilement de la Forest. Mais comme
elle vit qu'estant emmanchee, il s' en seruoit a couper les Arbres, elle se
repentit alors, quoy que cela fut en vain de sa trop grande facilite, et fut en
colere contre soy mesme d'auoir este cause de sa ruin.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous apprend que les hommes ont tort de se plaindre des disgraces,
qui leur arriuent, et d'en accuser la Fortune, qui n' en est aucunement la
cause, mais eux mesmes; Et de fait les malheurs, qui nous ariuent le plus
souvent viennent par nostre imprudence, et par nostre propre fault: Cette
verite paroist clairement dans la temeraire entreprinse de Phaeton, don't la
presomption fut la cause de sa ruin, sans qu' il eut aucun subject de s' en
prendre qu' a luy mesme.

The Wood and Clown.
Whou trees had speech (as yt. they had of old
Witness dodona Oracles that told.)
A woodman Cornets their thickets, and desires
A Stripling shrub. vseles unto their (...):
To make his Axe a healve which they soon yield,
But he soon spoyld their Coat and left ye. field
Without a charge, who being thirs one thrown
By his keen axe: they since are speechless grown
The Devil can the Moral to you tell.
Who if you give an inch he will take an ell


FAB. XCVIII. Rusticus and Sylva.
ACcedebat Sylvam Rusticus and rogabat Arbores ut sibi Lignum concederent, ex
quo Ansam securis fabricaret. Concedebant Lignum Illi, Arbores, quod ad Domum
deportabat, Quorum Mox ad securim adaptato, ad Sylvam redibat, and omnes
Arbores ad unum detruncabat.

MORALE
Quod levissima, and quae minutuli videntur Momenti, ingravissimum nonnunquam
tendiunt dispendium.

FABLE XCIX.
LE Lion, qui pendant sa jeunesse s' estoit acquis plusieurs Ennemis par
l'exces de sa cruaute, en porta la pain dans sa vieillesse. Car pandant cet
aage debile les autres Animaux luy rendirent fort bien la pareille. Le Sanglier
l'ataqua auec ses dents, et le Taureau auec ses corns. On vid. mesme jusqu' a
l'Ane qui montra sa brauoure contre luy; et pour se fair paroistre vaillant,
et perdre le tiltre de Poltron, il l'assailit a coups de pieds, et de langue.
Cepandant le miserable Lion fort angoisse: O moy malheureux, s' escrioit il, en
souspirant, ceux que j' ay cy deuant mal traites me rendent a cette heure la
pareille; et je trouue qu' ils n' ont pas tort. Mais ce qui m' est le plus
insupportable, c' est que ceux que j' ay autrefois oblige, me payant maintenant
d' Ingratitude. J' advoue donc que j' ay este bien sot de m' estre attire tant
d' Ennemis, et que je l'ay este encore d'aduantage de m' estre fie a de faux
amiss.

Le Sens MORALE.
CE Lion qui paroist icy couche a l'entree de sa cauerne, est un emblem de la
fin des meschans hommes. Car comme cet Animal ayant deuore pandant la vigueur
de son aage un grand nombre de Bestes se trouue a cette heure brise de
vieillesse, et de pauurete, et manquant de force, pour chercher de quoy se
nourrir; Ainsi voyons nous fort souvent, que les Partisans qui ont este les
Sangfues du pour peuple se trouue a la fin les victimes de leurs Ennemis, et
se voyent reduits a la necessite.

The Old Lion.
The Beasts Convend the Lion to de^pize
Now sick and weak, for former injuries
And first his Tyra^ie to pay the Bore
With his k^^ne tuskes his aged sides does gore
The Bull insests him with his Horns, the base
Dull Ass kicks at him to with chepe disgrace
Whose last nupression discomposed him more
Then all ye. affronts they show^^d on him before
Since those his wild oppressions had incenst
But to ye. Ass he favors had dispens'^
Haples yt. he his Dole of kindness shed
On such a fordid and unthankful head.
Let no^ thy happier s^ale engage to pride
Lost when thou (...) each will thy sall deride.


FAB. XCIX. Leo Senex.
LEO longaevae senectutis laborans vitio, and viribus deprivatus odio and
contemptui fuit omnium Ferarum. In quarum numero Asinus (omnium Animantium
vilissimus) apparebat and Leoni imbelli, calce, minitatus est. Quod quum
vidisset Leo, suspirans, inquit, justum fuisse ut tandem injurias suas ferae
ulciscerentur, and ut jam odio haberetur qui olim omnibus metum intulisset.

MORALE monet
Omnes in Magistratu suo tam modeste sese continere ut non quum de dignitate
detrusi, omnium chachinnis and risu exciperentur.

FABLE C.
UN Homme chassoit deuant luy un Cheual et un Asne charges de diuerses chooses,
Mais comme l'Asne etoit accable du fardeau qu' il portoit, et qu' il estoit sur
le point de defaillir, il pria le cheual de le vouloir un peu soulager, et de
porter vne party de sa charge, mais le cheual se mocqua de ses prieres. Un peu
apres l'Asne etant tout brise et de la fatigue du chemin, et du poix de sa
charge, se laissa tomber dans le chemain, et mourut. Alors le voyageur ayant
pris la peau de l'Asne, qu' il auoit escorche, et aussy tout ce qu' il portoit,
il le mit sur le dos du cheval, lequel commenceat a deplorer sa fortune, mais
trop tard, et a se repentir de sa fault; O! moy malheureux dit il, qui ay
refuse de porter un petit fardeau, et maintenant je suis contraint d'en porter
un si gros, et mesme la peau, de l'Asne mon compagnon, duquel j' ay mesprise
les prieres auecque tant d'arrogance.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte fable nous apprend, que si les plus grands le joignent auecque les plus
petits, cela reullira a l'aduantage de tous deux: et en fin cela fait voir qu'
il se faut accommoder les vns les autres, et que par ainsy les affairs vont
mieux, que si au contraire ou refuse de s' aider reciproquement, cela ne peut
estre que des auantageux.

The Horse and Loaded Ass.
A Loaded Affe desir^^d a Horse his Pack,
Might be impar^ placed on his Senew'd Back,
Which motion he resents with Scorn; when (...)
The Ass fime dead under ye Incumbent weight,
They yt do men contemn with g^eife pe^pl^xt,
From whom ye Master ye still weight withdrew,
And on ye Horse she pressing Burden threw
On which he look^d as a lust Geurdon sent.
That would ye Asses presure not resent.
Max be thems^ews with the same anguish next.


FAB. C. De Equo, and Asello onusto.
AGitabat Corarius quidem una, Equum and Asinum onustum. Sed in via faliscente
Asino, rogabat Equum ut sibi succurreret, and velit portiunculum oneris tanti
tolerare. Recusabat Equus, and mox Asinus oneri totus succubuit, and calitum
clausit supreinum. Herus accedens, mortuo Asino, sarcinam detraxit, and pelle
superaddita excoriata, omnia Equo imposuit. Quod quum sensissit Equus,
ingenuit, inquiens, quam misellus ego qui quum portiunculum oner is socii far
recusaverim, jam totam Sacrinam logar tolerare.

MORALE docet
Infortunium and imprudentiam eorum qui quum possint pro pecuniola, vel
minutulo pretio mal incumbentia exuere, opportunitate illa posthabita, in damna
graviora inciderint.

FABLE CI.
UN vieillard ayant coupe du bois dans vne Forest, en fit un faggot, lequel il
chargea sur ses espaules, et commenca de s' en retourner en sa maison. Mais
ayant desia fait beaucoup de chemin, se trouuant las, et fatigue, et du
fardeau, et du chemin, ayant pose sa charge, et faisant reflection en soy mesme
fur les miseres de son aage, il appella a haute voix la Mort a son secours, par
l'assistance de la quelle il disoit qu' il pouvoit estre deliure de tous ses
maux. Alors la Mort ayant entendu ses prieres, se presentant deuant luy, luy
demanda ce qu' il vouloit d'elle. Mais le vieillard espouuante, et qui se
repentoit de mourir; je ne veux rien, respondit il; mais j appelle quelqu' un,
qui me soulage pour un temps de mon fardeau, en attendant que je le puisse
reprendre.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte fable nous enseigne que tous les hommes craignent naturellement la Mort,
et qu' ils aiment mieux souffrir des extremes douleurs, pandant qu' ils ont la
vie, plustot que de la perdre en les quittant.

The Old Man and Death.
An aged man whose shouddexs were oppressed
Threw down his pressing load t'achews some rest
And death implored yt he would to him repair
And at once ease him both of life and care,
Death with his pravers complyes and straight inquires
Though wrackt with parjous torture life does please
What ye result was of his swift desires,
But he resenting now his pain no wore
And wearier of his wish, then life Before
Told him his summons only did demand
He Would heave his wood up with his abler hand.
Still more then death, though death all pressures ease


FAB. CI. Senex and Mors.
FAsce praegravatus Senex, and misellae suae pertaesus sortis, Mortem
invocabat, ut sinem erumnosae vitae, tandem defigeret. Invocata, advenit Mors
percontata Senex quid secum velit; ad cujus adventum territus, nil respondit,
sed ut auxilio mihi sis, and fascem collapsum rursus humeros imponas.

MORALE indicat
In adversis nos vota execrabilia emittere, Quibus post seriam considerationem,
abhorremus.

FABLE. CII.
L'Asne pesant et paresseux se rioit un jour du Sanglier, qui grincant les
dents de colere; Poltron animal, luy dit il, si tu meritois la pain d'estre
frote, tu le seruis tout a l' heure tout ton soul, mais cela me seroit honteux.
Tu peux done a ton aise te mocquer tant que tu voudras; tu le peur fair sans
crainte, mais souuien toy que ta laschete, et ta paresse te sauuent les coups
que tu merits.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous apprend, qu' il n' y point d' honneur a un homme de grand
courage de se vanger des injures, et du mespris, qu' il recoit d'vn Ennemi
indigne de sa colere, et de son ressentiment, et que le mespris qu' il fait des
offenses qu' il a receu de sa foiblesse, luy est plus glorieux, que la
vengeance qu' il en prendroit. Et d'effet quel honneur auroit en hercule s' il
se fut battu contre un Pigmee, et quels trophies luy eut en erige; Il faut pour
meriter de la gloire dans un combat, que les parties soient esgales, fortes, et
vaillantes.

The Boar and Ass.
An Ass Designed for ^ovle whose task was slak^
And with ^ich pagen^rev and rappings Dec^
Desy'd a Boar the Glory of the wood
Who numerous thoks of Dog and spears had stood
And did with over weening pride invi^e
The ha^^ ye Beast vule a ^^^all fight
But ye sto^^t Boar his solly did deride.
And with a kick cha^^ ys'd his ^riviall pride
Reneque on mean base peposus sules not those
Whese valliant Arms has for^t the stou^est soes
Their prosserd Injuries contemine and ^lyte.
It Is say mere No^^er then such to requite.


FAB. CII. De Asino and Apro.
ASinus occurrens Apro cachinnis illum jocose excepit, percontatus de Moribus
ejus and parentibus, and liberali educatione, inquiens praeterea se servulum
sibi futurum, and si quid foret Quod Illi in Mandatis praeciperet. Cui torvus
and iracundus Aper ait, abi insulsum Animal nolo os contaminare colloquio tam
vaecordis Belluae.

MORALE docet
Quod Magnanimi and Bellicosi Heroes nunquam petulantibus inferiorum convitiis
moveantur.

FABLE. CIII.
Le Thon fuyant le Dauphin, qui le poursuiuoit, comme il estoit port auec vne
merveilleuse impetuosite, estant pousse a vne Isle, par la force des vagues, il
y fut jette tout ensemble auec le Dauphin. Mais comme ils auoyent este beaucoup
tourmentes tous deux, par l'agitation des flots de la mer, et par la violence
de leur faite, et de leur combat ils arriuerent a cette Isle tous demi Morts;
et le Thon se retournant, et considerant le Dauphin, qui estoit pressed
d'expirer, dit, que sa mort ne luy seroit pas triste a present puis qu' il
voyoit que son ennemi perdroit la vie aussi bien que luy.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous apprend que tous les hommes ont accostume de supporter les
disgraces qui leur arriuent, auec plus de force, et de patience, lors que ceux,
qui en sont les autheurs, en souffrent de pareilles; et sans mentir la plus
part des hommes, qui sont attaques par un puissant ennemi; lors qu' ils voyent,
qu' ils ne pauuent eschaper le Danger qu' ils courent, perissent doucement.
Pourveu que leur ennemi soit accable auec eux soubs les mesmes ruins.

The Dolphin and Tunis.
A dolphin a swift tunny did pursue
Who his Impetuous onsets to eschew.
Darted himself upon a Hollow clist
Shiming his foe by that destructive shift
But not his death. for its tall crest b^ing high.
Could not with water her again supply
For want of which she ready to expi^e
Beholds the dolphin fett^ed in the mire.
Through his too eager chase, whereat she cries
O welcome object to my setting eyes,
Without regrett I now embrace my doom
Since a Just ruin does my foe intoube.
Often Injured Innoce^^ is cased to See
Ill men as Scourges to Ill men to be


FAB. CIII. De Delphino, and Smaride.
PErsequebatur Pisciculum Delphinus. Hunc ut vitaret Pisciculus, ad Rupem
confugit, Quem ut captacet Delphinus tam violento sequebatur impetu, ut arenis
illisit, and haerens, Morti succubuit. Quod quum vidisset Pisciculus, sibi
paululum Consolata est, moribundula, inquiens, dulcior mihi profecto mea Mors
futura est quod prins authorem meae mortis defunctum prae oculis viderim.

MORALE indicat
Quod mali and scelerum Artifices in casses saepissime inciderint, quas aliis
tetenderunt.

FABLE CIV.
LES Colombes ayant dessein de fair guerre au Milan; a fin de la surmonter
auec plus de facilite, choisirent le Faucon pour leur Souuerain; Mais luy ayant
este choisi pour leur Roy, les gouuernoit comme les ennemi, et leur estant
aussi inhumain, que le Milan mesme, leur mettoit en pieces, et les deuoroit.
Else se repentant done de leur sottise, dirent, qu' il leur eust este plus
aduantageux de supporter la guerre du Milan, que la Ti^annie du Faucon.

Le Sens MORALE.
Cette Fable nous apprend que c' est auoir beaucoup d'imprudence d'appeller un
Prince a sa deffense, plus cruel, que son Ennemi mesme. Il faut done tousiours
choisir quelqu' un pour sa deffense, don't la probite soit cognue, et qui ne
done de lieu de se repentir, de s' y estre soubsmis. Et en effect le propre du
sage est de ne se laisser conduire, qu' a la virtue. Aussi le premier but de
l'etablissement des Princes doit estre pour contenir les peuples en
l'obseruation de ce qui est honneste, et vertueux.

The Doves, Kite, and Sparhawk.
Betwixt the Doves and Kyte contest does grow
But they to weak to check the insulting foe
A Ravenous Sparrowhaarke for king elect
Hoping he will their innoceuce protect
But he with ample Sov' raignty possessed
One chauge often sp^^es a ^orsen (...) one
The Girldes Doves with greater rage Oppressed
Whilst thus they under his wild scepter grcane
By their too hasty choice they made it konwne
It Was safer to contest with kytes then be
Torn with ye Sparrow-hauks homebred tyum^^
Should therefore acquiesce and covel none


FAB. CIV. Milvus and Columbae.
COlumbae ut Milvi evaderent crudelitatem, Accipitrem sibi Regem delegere.
Accipiter ex Rege evasit Tyrannus, and plures Columbas uno die perdidit, quam
toto anno Milvi devorare valuerunt.

MORALE docet
Eos just Tyrannidem pati, qui non Moderatae Gubernationi morigeros sese
praestabunt.

FABLE. CV.
UN jour le Lion et le Bucheron le promenans familierement par un bois virent
un tombeau, sur lequel eroit grave un homme triomfant d'vn Lion auecque l'espee
a la main. Alors le Lion qui se promenoit auec le Bucheron demeura tout estonne
fort long tems, e^ en finil demanda au Bucheron, que vouloit signifier c' et
Emblem, et cette representation. L' homme luy respondit d'abord, je te diray
en deux mots l'expliquation de ce que tu me demende. Par ce que tu vois on a
voulu demonstrer la grandeur de courage des grands Hommes et des Heroes qui
auoient asses de cocur pour attaquer les Lions, et de far pour les veincre.
Le Lion alors se mettaut a rive luy respondit, le croy bien ce que tu me dis,
Et si les Lions eussent ete Sculpteurs ils eussent bien fait le contraire.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte fable nous apprend que ceux qui se vantent si fort, et s' esleuent si
hauts, sont pour l'ordinaire les plus incapables, et les plus ignorans: et que
si on examinoit leur merit, il se trouueroit si peu considerable, qu' on
setouueroit extremement de leur orgeuil et de leur vanite.

The Forrester and Lion.
A Man and Lion trave^ling their way,
Discry'd a Stony basis, to display,
Insculpt thereon, the lanage of a man,
Which had a Lion vanquished, then began
The first t^ vntwist^th emblem, and declare.
How vigorous men, and strongly active were.
When one a Lion ta^'d, to whom again,
The Lion Answered, could Beasts paar^^ like men
You Would find yt. Lions on more Men hane sed;
Then those ye have by your thin Conquests bled
Wild, Heeters this discribes, who boast ^haur don
Acts, which they never durst adventure on.


FAB. CV. De Sylvano, and Leone.
SYlvanus and Leo una iter conficiebant, and in transitu cernebant Monumentum
eximium supra quod Armatas stetit homo, and sub Pedibus Leonem debellatum
conterebat. Significationem and sensum inquirenti Leoni, respondit Sylvanus
Illud Monumentum virtutem and vim hominis super belluam triumphantis,
indicasse; Cui lepide Leo, nae si Leones etiam Sculptores evasisset, contrarium
hoc fore compertum credidisses.

MORALE indicat
Quod uniusquisque sibi plerumque adblanditur, and quantum sibi arrogaverit,
tantum aliorum laudibus detraxisse.

FABLE CVI.
UN jour que l'air etoit fort serain et clair, et que le soleil d'ardoit ses
rayons brillans l'eau d'vn fleuue, le cerf y aborda pour estancher la soif qui
le pressoit fort, et se mirant dans le cristat de l'onde, y contemploit
agreablement la beauty de tout son corpse, il admire sur tout celle de ses
haultes corns; Mais comme il apperceut ses jambes greles et tenues, il s'
escria en les mesprisant. Mais sur cette entrefaitte il fut attaque tout d'vn
coup pas des chiens de chasse auecque beaucoup de violence. Mais pour euiter
leur fury il fut contraint de gagner au pie, et de fuir plus vitte que le vent
dans la prochaine forest et en courant il embarassa ses corns de tell sort
parmy des branches, qu' il y demeura pris, et fut deuore incontinent par les
chiens; Et comme il estoit sur le point d'expirer il se mit a crier, O moy
malheureux, qui ay mesprise mes jambes, et ay si fort love mes Corns, la
longueur desquelles m' apporte un mort precipitee.

Le Sens MORALE.
LA Moralite de cette fable nous enseigne que la pluspart des hommes preferent
les chooses, de neant, et de peu de consequence, a celles qu' ils deuroient
estimer infiniment d'auantage. Ainsy ils preferent les richesses a la virtue,
qui pourtant doit estre le Souuerain but auxquel les hommes se deuroient
attacher, s' ils veulent viure heureux.

The Stag looking into the Water.
A panting Heart within a limpid Brook
On the reflection of his horns did look,
Then viewd his slender legs which he with. scorn
Resents, but gloryes in his spacious horns,
Whilst thus he prides himself an eager cry
Of Hounds, what danger told him now was nigh,
Him far from which his slighted, legs had brought
But that a bow his ragged antlers caught,
Who with. regrett this black surprise deplored
Cause to was improved by those he most adored
Things often not sayr (but useful) we reject,
Greedy our pompous ruins to effect.


FAB. CVI. Cervus in aquas inspiciens.
CErvus sedandi sitim gratia ad Fontem descendit and ibi totum Corpus
despectans, Cornua magnopere praestantia laudavit, sed Tibialium tenuitatem
maxim deprecatus est. Sed mox Canum circumlatrantium ingruebat horror, and
ille per Tibialium velocitatem confugit ad Sylvas, and ibi miserrime a Cornibus
detinebatur; Qui tum Moribundulus sic ultimum efflavit halitum, me miserum Qui
Tibialium damnavi tenuitatem qui mihi salutem, and Cornuorum laudavi
praestantiam quae mihi ruinam peperunt.

MORALE monet
Quod iis maxim stolidi delectantur, Quae miserias sibi maximas minitantur.

FABLE. CVII.
LE Cerf estant chasse par les chiens verse des Boeufs, les pria de le vouloir
cacher. Les Boeufs ne refuserent point ses prieres; mais l'aduertirent qu' il
se tint tousiours sur ses gardes, bien qu' il fut dans des retraites les plus
asseurees, et luy dirent qu' ils craignoyent qu' il ne fut surprins dans
l'estable. Il leur dit, qu'en ce cas la il receuroit tout le danger sur luy,
ils le recoiuent done, et le couurent de foin, et de paille. Le Mestayer arriua
pen apres, et ayant regard ses Boeufs, sans beaucoup de soing s' en alla. Le
Cerf bien joyeux creut d'auoir esuite tout le danger, mais il apprit des Boeufs
que le Maistre de ce Domaine arriueroit bien tossed, et que s' il ne prenoit pas
guard a luy il seroit en seurte. Le Maistre vint done, et voyant que ses Boeufs
n' estoyent pas bien traites, regard luy mesme la litiere, et y mit la main.
Et comme il faisoit cela il apperceut les Corns du Cerf, qui estoit cache dans
la paille, et estant prins il fut mis a mort.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous apprend que ceux qui se refugient ches des Estrangers, s' ils
sont conserues doiuent attribuer cela seulement a leur bonne fortune. Elle nous
apprend aussi que chacun doit auoir soing particulierement luy mesme de soy, et
de ses affairs, sans se fire a la vigilance d'autruy.

The Stag in the Oxstall.
A Heart whom eager Huntens did infest,
A shelter from kind Oxen did request
Amidst their cribb, which. being granted, he,
Secures himself from ye, cheap scrutiny,
Of a dull Hind, but when ye. Master scand
With ye. attacques of a more curious hand
That skreene of blended straw, he straight deserys
The hunted beast, and renders him his prize.
Our ruin ost does from those Arts comence
Our fears at first contrived for our defense.


FAB. CVII. De Cervo in Bovium stabulo.
PErsequutus a Canibus Cervus, ad stabulum Bovium Confugiebat, and ibi totum
Corpus praeterquam Cornua abscondebat. Adibat stabulum Servus, and ille
oscitanter and negligenter huc and illuc oculos Circumferens, mox decessit.
Fortunae suae nimis applausit laetabundus Cervus, and sese tulissimum
autumabat. Sed statim ipso Hero ingrediente locum, and rebus curiosius
perlustratis, Cornua Cervi detexit, and fustibus cum vicinis adoriebatur.

MORALE notat
Quod abundans Cautela non noceat, and quod plures per nimiam sui perduntur,
quam per tela, and Hostium arma Circumsonantium.

FABLE CVIII.
LA Fourmi se sentant pressee d'vne extreme soif descen dit dans vne fontaine a
fin de l'appaiser mais comme elle voulut boire, elle s' y laissa cheoir par
malheur. Dans le mesme temps vne Colombe perchee par hasard sur un arbre, qui
panchoit sur l'eau, voyant la malheureuse. Fourmi en peril de mort rompit
d'abord auec son bec un rameau de l'arbre, qu' elle fit tomber dans la fontain;
et ainsi la Fourmi se mettant dessus se sauua du danger d'estre noyee, et se
mit en seurte. Dans ce mesme temps il survint en ce mesme endroit un adroit
Oyseleur, qui tendit ses glueaux pour attraper la simple Colombe; ce que voyant
la Fourmi, elle le mordit au pied; de facon que l'Oyseleur fut oblige de
quitter ses gluaux a cause de la douleur, que luy fit cette piqueure; cepandant
la Colombe espouuentee du bruit, s' enuola aussi tossed, et ainsi elle se sauua
de present peril.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous fournit un bell Exemple contre l'ingratitude, don't les hommes
vsent ordinairement les vns enuers les autres; puisque nous voyons mesme que la
recognoissance d'vn bien fait receu regne parmi les bestes qui sont priuees de
raison, ce qui doit mettre tous les ingrats dans vne confusion extreme.

The Dove and Pismire.
The A^^ to a strea^^ l'appease her thirst does com^
Where a rude wave had like (...) have been her tomb
But that a twig from a near willow dropped
By a kind Dove, this An^ from sinking propt
His Netts a Fowler not long after strewn
T'in^ware this Dove which when ye Bs^^^ viewed
To poyse her merit, with a grateful bite
In^licted on his beel, did so affright
And discompose him, he withdrew his hand.
Which made the Dove his Ambr^sh understand
Who straight with winged speed ye (...) declined
Which was for her with. nieer Ar^ designed.
Where shall outhankfull men for place intrude
Nor Earth nor Water shrow^s virgra^titude.


FAB. CVIII. Formica and Columbae.
FOrmica ut sitim sedaret, fonticulum accessit, sed in fonticulum elapsa, and
paene lymphis absorta, Columba arborem insidens fonticulo contiguam, ramusculum
ore direptam fonticulum emi sit, cujus adminiculo servata formica, evasit. Sed
interea adfuit auceps and columhae insidias tensurus, formica Tibiale
gravissime mordebat, cui quum fricandi gratiarum admonebat, percepit id
Columba, and impune avolavit.

MORALE monet
Gratiarum reciprocam Retributionem and vel pusillis Animalibus Fortiores
interdum obligatos.

FABLE. CIX.
LE Lion ayant par hasard veu vne fille en deuint extremement amoureux, il vint
done a son Penes, et luy demanda sa fille en marriage. Mais il luy dit, quoy
done donnerois je ma fille, qui est vne jeune, et tender vierge a tes dents, et
a tes griffes? Si tu n' auois pas tells chooses je tiendrois fort heureux, si
je pouuois auoir un tell gendre que toy. Mais maintenant je n'oserois pas te la
donner. Mais le Lion extremement amoureux souffrit qu' on luy arrachast les
griffes, et qu' on luy cassat les dents. Et l' homme le tenant ainsi desarme le
vainquit facilement, et le tua.

Le Sens MORALE.
LA Fable nous apprend que ceux, qui se laissent corrompre par les voluptes
perdent en fin leur force, et seruent de jouet, et de risee a tout le monde. Et
de fait il n' y a rien de plus veritable, que les sales voluptes enervent les
forces des hommes, et les met dans un estat si malheureux, et si desplorable,
qu' il ne leur rest, que des horribles malady, qui les accompagnent jusques
au Tombeau. Au lieu que ceux, qui ont le pouuoir de moderer leur passion, et
qui en scauent bien vser jouissent pour l'ordinaire d'vne parfaite sante, et
d'vne vigueur esgale, autant que leur peut permettre.

The Lion in Love.
A Lion did a Country Lass affect
But her cold Sire did his address re^ect
When b^ing a^^o^isht with. his aufull brow,
He veilds their mutual ^^iptialls to allow,
So he both ^eeth and claws would lay aside
Which he assents to, to enjoy his bride,
When being thus disrobed of all defense
The man a signal combat does comence
And him for former insolence indites
Performing with a Club his marriage rights.
Love so ^aptives us with. ^ts powerful charms
It both our prudence and our strength disar^^s


FAB. CIX. Leo amatorius.
LEO Sylvani cujusdam filiam perdite amavit, and patrem virginis sollicitabat
ut Illi virgo in Matrimonium daretur. Respondebat Rusticus Filiam ejus esse
tenellam and delicatulam virginem and nunquam hamatos Ejus ungues, Detesque
passuram passus igitur Leo dentes, and ungues evelli, ut virgin frueretur.
Quod quum vidisset pater Fustibus Illi involabat, and longius imbellem
abigebat.

MORALE indicat
Vesaniam inutili amoris, propter Quem pretiocissima perdimus and Captivitatem
patimur.

FABLE CX.
LA Tortue ennuyee de ramper sur la terre promit des merveilles a celuy qui la
voudroit porter jusqu' au Ciel. L' Aigle l' y ayant portee, luy demanda
recompanse; Mais comme il vid, qu' elle n' auoit rien dequoy recognoistre sa
pain, elle luy en fonca ses griffes si auant dans le corpse, que la malheureuse
en perdit la vie; et elle la laissa proche des Astres, qu' elle auoit souhaite
de voir, auec tant de passion.

Le Sens MORALE.
CEtte Fable nous apprend, que le changement de la condition est extremement
perilleux, et que ceux qui veulent s' esleuer au dela de leur naissance,
voulans monter trop haut font vne rude cheute, par laquelle ils sont eux mesmes
escrases, comme la Tortue; Adjoutes a cela, qu' il arrive souvent, que les
grands qui nous ont aduances, sont aussi les mesmes, qui nous destruisent.

FIN.
The Tortoise and Eagle.
The Tortoyze to obtain a fond desire
Of Soaring high does with all speed require.
An Eagle to Asist her, to discry
(As she pretended) Jewels yt did lie
On a high Mountains top, the Eagle then.
With this dull Lump out mowits ye Clouds but when
He found the Tortoyze Falsehood, soon did tear
Her shell in twain, devouring in the Air
Her guardles body, to apease his rage,
For causing him so vainly to Engage,
Promise not Princes what you cannot make good
Only to raise your selves their Royal Blood
Do not inflame it is dangerous them to mock
It often procures a Halter or the Block.


FAB. CX. Aquila and Testudo.
CErtamen inire voluit Testudo reptilis cum Aquila velocissima. Locus
designatus, and qui spacio trium dierum ad propositum locum prius venerat,
victor salutaretur. Aquila Tardigredum contempsit Testudinem, autumans se
alarm impetu posse brevissime ad locum avolasse. Negligens igitur secessit,
aliis intenta, sed Testudo indefatigabili labor and solertia infra tempus, and
ante Aquilam, arrepsit ad locum, and omnium calculis, victor evasit.

MORALE docet
Quod nil tam arduum quod non solertia and sudore attingatur.

FINIS.
La TABLE.
DV Coq, et de la pierre brillante. Page 2 Du Loup, et l'Agneau. Page 3 Du
quatre Taureaux, et du Lion. Page 6 De la Grenouille, et du Renard. Page 8 De
l'Asne mangeant des chardons. Page 10 De l'Alouette, et ses poussins. Page 12
Du Renard, le Chien, et le Coq. Page 14 Du Renard, et du Loup. Page 16 Des
Loups et des Brebis. Page 18 De l'Argle, et du Renard. Page 20 Du Loup vestu de
la peau d'vn Brebis. Page 22 De l'Oyseleur et de la Colombe. Page 24 De Loup,
et de la Truye. Page 26 Due l'Asne, et du Cheual. Page 28 Du Loup, et du Bouc.
Page 30 Des Colombes et du Faucon leur Roy. Page 32 Du Rat de Ville, et du Rat
Villageois. Page 34 De l'Arondelle et des autres Oyseaux. Page 36 Le Bieure.
Page 38 Du Renard, et du Chat. Page 40 Les Rats en Conseil. Page 42 Du Lion et
autres Bestes. Page 44 Du Lion et du Rat. Page 46 Du Lyonne, et du Rat. Page 48
De deux Chiens. Page 50 De la Grenouille et de Boeuf. Page 52 Du Lion et de
Renard. Page 54 Du Singe et du Renard. Page 56 Du Chien enuieux et du Boeuf.
Page 58 Des Oyseaux et des Bestes a quatre pieds Page 60 Du Tigre, et du
Renard. Page 62 De Lionne, et la Renard. Page 64 De l'Arbre, et du Roseau. Page
66 De Soleil, et du Vent. Page 68 Du Rat et de la Grenouille. Page 70 Des
Grenouilles et de leur Roy, Page 72 De vne Viclle, et ses Servants. Page 74 Du
Lion et Ours. Page 76 De la Corneille et de la Cruche. Page 78 De les
Coleuures, et des Herissons. Page 80 Des Lieures craignans sans cause. Page 82
Du Loup, et du Renard. Page 84 Du Chien, et de la Brebis. Page 86 Du Paon, et
de la Grue. Page 88 Du Serpent, et de la Lime. Page 90 Du Coq, du Lion, et
l'Asne. Page 92 Du Geay. Page 94 De la Fourmis, et de la Mouche. Page 96 De la
Fourmy, et de la Cygale. Page 98 Du Laboureur, et du Serpent. Page 100 Du Lion
Malade. Page 102 Du Jeune Taureau, et du Boeus. Page 104 D' un Laboreur, et
Hercules. Page 106 Du Ventre et des autres Members. Page 108 Du Cheual, et du
Lion. Page 110 Du Laboreur, et de la Cicogne. Page 112 Du Chat, et du Coq. Page
114 Du Renard, et du Leopard. Page 116 Du Berger, et des Laboureurs. Page 118
Du Renard, et du Bouc. Page 120 De Cupidon et Mort. Page 122 D' un Laboureur et
des Enfans. Page 124 Du Cerf, et du Faon. Page 126 Du vieux Chien, et de son
Maistre. Page 128 Du Chameau, et de Jupiter. Page 130 Du Renard sans Queue.
Page 132 Du Corbeau, et du Renard. Page 134 Des Colombes et de leur Roy de
Faucon Page 136 De la Nourrice et de Loup. Page 138 Du Lieure, et la Tortue.
Page 140 De Venus et d'vne Chatte. Page 142 De l'Asne de la peau du Lion. Page
144 De l'enfantement des Montagnes. Page 146 Du Satyr, et du Pelerin. Page 148
Du Milan Milade. Page 150 De l'Espereuier, et du Rossignol. Page 152 Du Paon et
du Rossignol. Page 154 Du Pescheur, et d'vn petit Poisson. Page 156 Des Oyes et
des Grues. Page 158 Du Chien et d'vne piece de chair. Page 160 De l'Asne, et du
Chien. Page 162 Du Loup, et de la Grue. Page 164 De l'Avaritieux, et de la
Envieux. Page 166 De deux Potts-slotans. Page 168 Du Renard et de la Cicoigne.
Page 170 De l'Ours, et des mousches a miel. Page 172 De deux Amiss et de l'Ours.
Page 174 Du Trompette Prisonnier. Page 176 Du Cocqs et Perdrix. Page 178 De
l'Oyseleur, et de la Perdrix. Page 180 De l'Aigle et du Corbeau. Page 182 Du
Lion, l'Ane, et le Renard. Page 184 Du Renard et des Raisins. Page 186 De
l'Ane, et du Cheual. Page 188 Du Jeune homme et de l'Arondelle. Page 190 D' vne
Oye, et de son Maistre. Page 192 Du Loup et du Chien. Page 194 De la Forest, et
du Paysan. Page 196 Du Lion affoibli de vieillesse. Page 198 Du Cheual, et de
l'Ane. Page 200 Du Vieillard et la Mort. Page 202 Du Sanglier et de l'Asne.
Page 204 Du Thon, et du Dauphin. Page 206 Des Colombes et du Faucon leur Roy.
Page 208 Du Bucheron, et du Lion. Page 210 Du Cers qui se contempt dans l'eau.
Page 212 Le Cerf, et les ^oeufs. Page 214 De la Four mi, et de la Colombe. Page
216 Du Lion amoreux. Page 218 De la Tortue, et l'Aigle. Page 220
The TABLE.
Fable I. THE Cock and precious Stone Page 3 Fable II. Wolf and the Lamb Page 5
Fable III. Lion and four Bulls Page 7 Fable IV. Fox and Frog Page 9 Fable V.
Ass eating Thistles Page 11 Fable VI. Lark's Nest in the Corn Page 13 Fable
VII. Fox and Cock in a Tree Page 15 Fable VIII. Fox in the Well Page 17 Fable
IX. Wolves and Sheep Page 19 Fable X. Eagle's Nest Page 21 Fable XI. Wolf in
Sheeps Clothing Page 23 Fable XII. Ringdove and Fowler Page 25 Fable XIII. Sow
and her Pigs Page 27 Fable XIV. Pampered Horse and Ass Page 29 Fable XV. Wolf
and Goat Page 31 Fable XVI. Parliament of Birds Page 33 Fable XVII. City Mouse,
and Country Mouse Page 35 Fable XVIII. Swallow and other Birds Page 37 Fable
XIX. Hunted Beaver Page 39 Fable XX. Fox and Cat Page 41 Fable XXI. Cat and
Mice Page 43 Fable XXII. Lion and other Beasts Page 45 Fable XXIII. Lion in a
Net, and Mouse Page 47 Fable XXIV. Lion and Mouse Page 49 Fable XXV. Dog with a
Clog Page 51 Fable XXVI. Ox and the Toad Page 53 Fable XXVII. Lion and Fox
Page 55 Fable XXVIII. Ape and Fox Page 57 Fable XXIX. Dog and the Ox Page 59
Fable XXX. Birds and Beasts Page 61 Fable XXXI. Tiger and Fox Page 63 Fable
XXXII. Lioness and Fox Page 65 Fable XXXIII. Oak and Reed Page 67 Fable XXXIV.
Wind and Sun Page 69 Fable XXXV. Kite, Frog, and Mouse Page 71 Fable XXXVI.
Jupiter and the Frogs Page 73 Fable XXXVII. Old Woman and her Maids Page 75
Fable XXXVIII. Lion and Bear Page 77 Fable XXXIX. Crow and the Pot Page 79
Fable XL. Porcupine and Adders Page 81 Fable XLI. Hares and Storm Page 83 Fable
XLII. Wolf and Fox Page 85 Fable XLIII. Dog and Sheep Page 87 Fable XLIV. Crane
and Peacock Page 89 Fable XLV. Viper and File Page 91 Fable XLVI. Lion, Ass,
and Cock Page 93 Fable XLVII. Jay and Peacock Page 95 Fable XLVIII. Ant and Fly
Page 97 Fable XLIX. Ant and Grasshopper Page 99 Fable L. Countryman and Snake
Page 101 Fable LI. Sick Lion Page 103 Fable LII. Wanton Calf Page 105 Fable
LIII. Clown and Cart Page 107 Fable LIVE. Belly and Members Page 109 Fable LV.
Horse and Lion Page 111 Fable LVI. Stork and Geese Page 113 Fable LVII. Cat and
Cock Page 115 Fable LVIII. Leopard and Fox Page 117 Fable LIX. Shepherd's Boy
Page 119 Fable LX. Goat in the Well Page 121 Fable LXI. Cupid and Death Page
123 Fable LXII. Old man and his Sons Page 125 Fable LXIII. Old Deer and Fawn
Page 127 Fable LXIV. Old Hound Page 129 Fable LXV. Jupiter and the Camels Page
131 Fable LXVI. Tailess Fox Page 133 Fable LXVII. Fox and Crow Page 135 Fable
LXVIII. Doves and Sparhawk Page 137 Fable LXIX. Nurse and her Child Page 139
Fable LXX. Tortoise and Hare Page 141 Fable LXXI. Young Man and his Cat Page
143 Fable LXXII. Ass in a Lions Skin Page 145 Fable LXXIII. Birth of the
Mountains Page 147 Fable LXXIV. Satyr and Clown Page 149 Fable LXXV. Young
Kite and his Mother Page 151 Fable LXXVI. Nightingale and Hawk Page 153 Fable
LXXVII. Peacock and Nightingal Page 155 Fable LXXVIII. Angler and little Fish
Page 157 Fable LXXIX. Geese in the Corn Page 159 Fable LXXX. Dog and Piece of
Flesh Page 161 Fable LXXXI. Ass and little Dog Page 163 Fable LXXXII. Wolf and
Crane Page 165 Fable LXXXIII. Covetous and Envious man Page 167 Fable LXXXIV.
Two Pots Page 169 Fable LXXXV. Fox and Stork Page 171 Fable LXXXVI. Bear and
Bee-hives Page 173 Fable LXXXVII. Bear and 2 Travelers Page 175 Fable
LXXXVIII. Captive Trumpeter Page 177 Fable LXXXIX. Fighting Cocks Page 179
Fable XC. Fowler and Partridge Page 181 Fable XCI. Eagle and Crow Page 183
Fable XCII. Lion, Ass, and Fox Page 185 Fable XCIII. Fox and Grapes Page 187
Fable XCIV. Horse and Heart Page 189 Fable XCV. Young Man and Swallow Page 191
Fable XCVI. Man and his Goose Page 193 Fable XCVII. Wolf and Dog Page 195 Fable
XCVIII. Wood and Clown Page 197 Fable XCIX. Old Lion Page 199 Fable C. Horse
and Loaded Ass Page 201 Fable CI Old Man and Death Page 203 Fable CII. Boar
and Ass Page 205 Fable CIII. Dolphin and Tunis Page 207 Fable CIV. Doves, Kite,
and Sparhawk Page 209 Fable CV. Forrester and Lion Page 211 Fable CVI. Stag
looking in the Water Page 213 Fable CVII. Stag in the Ox-stall Page 215 Fable
CVIII. Dove and Pismire Page 217 Fable CIX. Lion in Love Page 219 Fable CX.
Tortoise and Eagle Page 221

