A Fannaticks Address Humbly Presented to the King and his Peers, And also to
his PEOPLE in their REPRESENTATIVE, The COMMONS HOUSE of PARLIAMENT, ASSEMBLED
and SITTING at Westminster:

Discovering to Them, the Innocence of his Actings in the midst of the late
Revolutions of Governments in this Nation; With the Resolves of them that walk
with him, and the Qualifications of those they intend to have COMMUNION withal.

By HENRY ADIS, a Baptized Believer, undergoing the Name of a Free-Willer; and
also most ignomineously by the tongue of Infamy, called a Fannatick, or a mad
man.

Phil. 4. 5. Let your Moderation be known to all men, the Lord is at hand.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, an Upholdster, living in Princes-Street, near
Covent Garden, 1661.

A Fannaticks Address HUMBLY PRESENTED To the KING and his PEERS, And also to
his People in their Representative, The COMMONS House of PARLIAMENT, Assembled
and Sitting at WESTMINSTER, etc.
FOr as much, as several that lately took upon them the places of Trust,
Government and Authority in these Nations, under a pretense of making such a
Reformation in Church and State, as was agreeable both to the Law of God, and
the best Reformed Churches; And yet their Ends in all this, the Event did
clearly evidence, was nothing either more or less, but to advance and set up
Self, and Self-Interests; the which that they might the better, and with the
more Self-security effect, they Proclaimed Liberty of Conscience, that so they
might gain a Party to stand for and by them, if necessity required; In which
time of Freedom, a small Party. (the Searcher of all hear^s right well
knows) enjoyed our Liberties under them, with an utter Detestation both to
their Acts of Violence, Oppression, and Self-servings, with our continual
bearing our Testimony against them, in those Actions, as it fell in our way,
both in Discourses and Teachings; but more publicly in my Books, printed and
published in the year, 1648. called, The Symptoms of Ruin, or, The Sword and
Famine, the Attendants of Oppr^ssion; as also in that Book, entitled, A Cup
for the City and her Adherents; and in that Poem, called, A Spy for Justice,
sent out of the Tower Chamber of the Fleet; In all which it will evidently
appear, that for mine own part I could not own, nor in the least allow of their
Violence nor Oppression: And the better to clear to the whole Nation, our
Innocence and the cleanness of our hands, as to all manner of acts of Violence,
and Oppression, I caused 1500. Declarations to be Printed and Published, the
12th. day of the 11th. Month, Vulgarly called January, in the year 1659. which
is also joined to the Latter end of my Fannaticks Mite, cast into the Kings
Treasury; in which I declared my Judgment, and the Judgment of that small
Company that were in Society with me, both concerning Fighting, Swearing, and
Government, and our obedience to Magistracy, and Magistrates, and our present
disrelish to them then in being, as in the 23, and 24. lines of the said
Declaration, (if recourse thereunto had) is evident: And yet notwithstanding,
my self with two more of the said Declarers, in this late Imprisonment, about
the late Insurrection, and also upon refusing to Engage to the King by an Oath,
we have been Cruelly Imprisoned, in the Gate House Dungeon, and two of us also
most abusively (with others) were Printed as Traitors, although the thought of
those, and such like Acts of Violence, and Bloodshed, are even an Abhorring to
our Souls.

And seeing we have the Word of the King passed to us, for our Protection under
him, in our Liberties in our Meetings, to discharge our Duty to our God, and
each to other, in that way that God has Manifested himself unto us in his
revealed Will, the Holy Scriptures of Truth, so long as we on our Parts without
Acts of Violence, Hostility, Plottings, Contrivings, or Underminings, shall
behave our selves peaceably and quietly under him.

And seeing we on our parts, have never in the least forfeited our Privileges,
by any thing that we have either Acted, or in the least Intended, and yet our
peaceable and quiet Meetings, have been beset with rude and debauched
Soldiers, Rending and Swearing, attended with the Rude Rabble; and that since
our late Enlargement by the Kings Coronation Favor; And all this for speaking
in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God, Acts 2. 22. He that is
pretendedly owned of you all, and contended for by you all; and yet such is the
Inveteracy of the spirits of some, that they are Eagerly fighting against those
that in the singleness of their Souls serve this Jesus in the footsteps of the
Flock of God gone before; of whom, because the King, the Nobility, and the
generality of the Commonnalty of this Land of our Nativity, are misinformed of
some of us, and that we with some, are of the Judgment, that killing is no
Murder; Intend to lay a punishment upon us; for the guilt and opinions of
some, whom we as little own, as they that are ready to Inflict the punishment;
I have therefore thought good once more to set Pen to Paper, and in plainness
of Speech, to give the King and his People, and you their Representative, a
fresh discovery of the Intents of our hearts, and the bent of our spirits, in
the singleness of our Souls, in the sight and presence of him, who is the
searcher of all hearts, that sin* revenging God who is of a more purer Eye,
then to approve off, or to behold Iniquity with approbation thereunto.

I shall therefore declare our Judgments as to the present Governor, and
Government, and our Opinion touching Government simply so considered; And then
I hope Daniel like, neither the King, his People, nor you their Representative,
shall find any just cause against us, save in the matters of our God; in which
(the Lord assisting us) we shall resolve in Gods way to go on in, and if
therein we perish, we perish.

And therefore first of all, I shall let you know, that we do own Government,
and that we both do and shall Resolve to be obedient to Governors, because
they be Ordained of God, according to Romans 13. 1, 2. And therefore on our parts
we dare not resist them, but shall according to verse. 7. Render unto them
Tribute, Custom, Fear and Honor: and for as much as we have seen the hand of
him who changes the Times and Seasons, who removes Kings and sets up
Kings, Dan. 2. 21, 37. Dan. 5, 18, 19. 1 Samuel 15. 1, 23. 1 Samuel 16. 12. to be
great in this change in setting up Charles the Second; we do therefore own him
to be the Lawful King of these three Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland;
And to whom we shall willingly submit in all Civil things, that we do find to
be agreeable to the Mind of God, revealed in that Directory, his Holy
Scriptures of Truth; and if at anytime he shall require from us any thing that
we cannot in Conscience Actually obey him in, we shall not in the least resist
him violently, nor by force of Arms oppose him, but shall patiently suffer
under him the penalties for our not obeying him; And as we own him, so we shall
receive, own and obey Actively or Passively, all others his Civil Magistrates,
set up and sent by him, for the punishment of Evil Doers, and the praise of
them that do well, according to 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. And this we shall do in the
singleness of our Souls, without Evasions, Equivocations, or mental
Reservations.

Secondly, As we do own Magistracy to be of God; so we cannot look upon our
selves to be concerned in the affairs of this, or any other Nation, so as to
have to do with Government, as to our own particulars, although we were endowed
with such Qualications and Estates, as might render us Capable thereof; because
we look upon our selves to be a People chosen out of the World, and such as
shall be hated of the World, Joh. 15. 19. and for the sake and Name of Christ
shall be Haled before Kings, Rulers, Governonrs, Magistrates, and Councils of
this World, as he himself has foretold us, Mat. 10. 17, 18. Mark 13. 9. For
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall Suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.
12. And therefore we look upon it to be our Duties, to behave our selves as
Pilgrims and strangers on Earth, as the Flock of God gone before us did, and
were, Heb. 11. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 11. And to sit loose to the things of this World,
and to use the World as if we used it not, and as not abusing it, 1 Cor. 7. 30,
31. but that our Moderation therein and in all things, may be known to all men;
because the Lord is at hand, Phil. 4. 15. And not Martha-like to be too much
Cumbred with the things of this World, but with Mary, to look after that one
thing necessary, and to choose that good Part which shall not be taken from us,
Luke 10. 41, 42. And as we are Risen with Christ, so to seek those things which
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of the Father, Col. 3. 1. And
so to lay up for our selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Rust nor Moth do
corrupt, and where Thieves cannot break through, nor steal, Mat. 6. 20.

Thirdly, We shall and do own the Parliament of England, convened and gathered
together by the Kings Writs, to be the Lawful and only Lawful Assembly of the
Nation, for the Confirming, Establishing, Making and Repealing of Laws and
Statutes, for the better well-being of the Nation in Civil things; but we
cannot find from the Word of God, any Warrant for the greatest of Men or
Councils, either Civil or Ecclesiastical, to Alter or Abrogate any of the Laws
of God made by that great Council of Heaven; or to prescribe any other kind or
manner of Worship, then what the great Jehovah in his Magna Charta, the Holy
Scriptures of Truth, has Established, Rratified and Confirmed, by Miracles,
Signs, and Wonders, and diverse Gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own
Will, Heb. 2. 4. And in which the Flock of God gone before us Acted, who
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in Breaking
of Bread and Prayer, Acts 2. 42. to which Directory only, we both do must and
shall conform to and none other. And if by the hands of the Rude Multitude, by
your continued Tolleration, or otherwise by your Appointments, we shall therein
or therefore perish, we perish. Yet I cannot but by the way let you know, That
for some time past I have observed and taken special notice, that when
Parliaments have gone about that work, of Settling and Ordering of Matters
concerning the Worship and Service of God, their Designs have Suddenly been
Blasted, their Councils confounded, and their Enemies Foreign or Domestic,
Increased; by which means they have been forced to leave that work, or else by
the hands of those that called them, or by the Armies Force they have been
violently dispersed.

And now I shall Really Inform you of our Resolutions herein, and shall
declare, That if this great Assembly shall go on to Intermedle with the
Regulating of our Consciences, as to the Worship and Service of our God, or
give it into the hands of the Churchmen of England so to do, we shall not by
force of Arms, nor the least Violence Oppose them, nor Comply with any that
shall Oppose them; neither shall we Resolve to Conform to them in the least, in
what is Inconsistent with the Laws of our God, left us in Scripture Record: But
under our penalties, for our refusals, we shall with Israel of old, groan under
such Egyptian Bondage; And we question not, but that the Captain of our
Salvation, in his own due time, by a mighty hand, and a stretched out Arm, will
release and relieve us, to the comfort of his poor Oppressed Suffering ones,
and to the confusion of His, and His Peoples Enemies; And with Israel of old,
we shall resolve to stand still and behold the Salvation of our God, which he
will work for us, let our Sufferings be under (you, or them) what they will,
for our not Actually obeying man's Traditions.

Fourthly, We look upon it to be our bounden Duty notwithstanding, though we
Suffer for it by the hands of Men, yet to follow the Direction of King Jesus
the Captain of our Salvation, who himself was made perfect through Sufferings,
Heb. 2. 10. Who, that his own Flock might the better avoid that great Danger of
Forswearing, either by Ignorance, Forgetfulness, Mistakings, or by reason of
Fear, Favor or Affection, he persuades them not to Swear at all, Mat. 5. 34.
who also tells us, Mat. 5. 20. T^^ Except our Righteousness, shall Exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; And therefore, in Verse. 37. he requires, that our Yea
should be Yea, and our Nay Nay; and he adds this as a Reason, for says he,
Whatsoever is more then this comes of Evil, or of that Evil one: as much as if
he should have said, when you either assert or deny a thing, you shall do it
with such singleness of heart, and such sincerity of Soul, being in me, or in
my Way Order or Worship, as that you shall not cause the Name of God, nor his
Gospel to be Blasphemed or Evil spoken off, by reason of your deceitful denyals
or affirmings, but that you speak the Truth in me, who a^ made of my Father
unto you, both Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; And so am
become to you the Lord your Righteousness, Iere. 23. 6. who as I judge, does
not tie us distinctly to the Circumstance of the terms, Yea and Nay, but to
the substance of the Verity or Truth of the thing asserted, although the terms
may differ, as do his own, who says, Verily verily, I say unto you, John 3. 3.
who also uses the same Expression above twenty times in that Gospel by Saint
John, the which Verily, Verily, had it been an Evil, or if it had come of that
Evil one, and he himself speaking it had been his Evil, to have tied us from
it, as an Evil, and yet Acted it himself; and so he would have laid himself
under a guilt, the which to say, I really believe is no less then Blasphemy: So
that he tieth us, as I judge, not to the circumstance of the words, but to the
substance of the Matter, and that without Swearing, in saying, Swear not at
all: So that though we cannot Swear to King Charles, yet we can and shall be
freely willing to promise to King Charles, what we can safely and upon a
Scripture Account promise. And as we are not our selves free to plot, contrive,
nor by force of Arms to undermine Him, nor His Government; so to prevent the
shedding of Blood, and the breach of the Peace of the three Nations, we shall
and will be ready and willing to discover all Plots, Conspiracies, or any thing
that by force of Arms we shall know of against Him, to some Justices of the
Peace, or other His Ministers, within 24. Hours after the knowledge of such
Plot or force Intended; and shall resolve (the Lord assisting us) to be as true
and faithful in our Yeas and Nays, whether Promisary or Testimonial, to King
Charles and his Subjects, of what Rank or Quality soever they be, as our
Brethren of Holland are to their States, and to their fellow Citizens and
Townsmen; And we hope our performances therein will be found far more Real,
then the Multitudes either are or have been, who have been ready to Swear for
his to Day, and against it to Morrow, whose own Interests generally cause their
mouths to open, in such Swearings and Forswearings, more then Conscience; The
which we dare not do, lest we be found Transgressing the Law of our Savior,
and his faithful servant, who say, Swear not, and Swear not at all, Mat. 5. 34.
Jam. 5. 12.

Fifthly, We look upon it to be our Duties, to be a peaceable, a quiet, a
harmless, and an Innocent People, and to keep our selves from all Manner of
Acts of War, Uiolence, and Hostility; Because to kill, Inslave, bring under,
ruin, or destroy our Friends, were most Inhumane; And to do so to our Enemies,
we dare not, because our Lawgiver by his faithful servant, Romans 12. 17. etc.
requires us to Recompense to no man Evil for Evil; But that we Provide things
honest in the fight of all men; And that if possible, as much as in us lies,
we should live peaceably with all men; who requires us not to avenge our
selves but rather to give place unto wrath; because it is written, Vengeance is
mine, and I will repay it, says the Lord: Therefore says he, if thine Enemy
hunger, feed him, if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shall heap
coals of fire on his head; And be not overcome with Evil, but overcome Evil
with good: yea, and so says our Savior himself, Mat. 5. 44. But I say unto
you, Love your Enemies, Bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them that despitefully use you; that you may be (or that you
may Evidence your selves to be) the Children of your Father, which is in
Heaven; for he makes his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the Good, and his
Rain to fall on the Just, and on the Unjust: for if you love them which love
you, what reward have ye? Do not even the Publicans the same? And if ye salute
your Brethren only, what do ye more then others? do not even the Publicans the
same? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is
perfect. And we look upon it to be our Duties to follow our Lord and Master,
who left himself a Pattern for us to follow, who says, Mat. 11. 29. Learn of
me, for I am lowly and Meek, and ye shall find rest for your Souls; who, says
the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 21. 23. When he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
Suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him who judges
Righteously. Much more might be said to their particular, the which for brevity
sake I shall omit; And shall thus affirm, That for this cause, and such
Requirements as these are, we dare not have to do with Weapons of War, nor that
the Acts of Violence in any case be found in our hands, no not for the best
things, and to advance or promote either the Gospel or Kingdom of Christ by any
such way or means, we dare not in the least have so much as a thought, but look
upon it to be our Duties Patiently to wait and earnestly, according to that
other Requirement of Christ, to Pray, That his Kingdom may come, that so his
Will may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, Mat. 6. 10. And as we have
declared in the said Declaration, in 1659. That we could not hold Society with,
nor own those that were in the same Faith and Order with us, and from whom we
then stood at a distance, that Acted with the Carnal Weapon, Weapons of War,
and Acts of Hostility then; so still, we look upon it to be our Bounden Duty so
to do, because it is so frequently forbidden in Scripture, and also because it
brings such an Odium upon the Truth, and also upon the peaceable People of
God that are in Gospel Order, and walk close to the Appointments of Christ in
all his Ordinances, and in Church Fellowship, as it is at this day: And
therefore we cannot have to do with any such as do so Act, or that look upon it
to be their Liberties, or Privileges so to Act; And shall have as little to do
with them now as then, or with any one that has so acted, unless they shall
freely relinquish the same, and shall acknowledge their failing and Evil in
their so acting, whether it be either against, or for King Charles the first,
or King Charles the second; It being so clearly made out to us, and also to
several of them that formerly so acted from the Holy Scriptures, to be contrary
to the qualifications of a Gospel Disciple, to have to do with the Weapons of
War, or the Sword of slaughter, whose Weapon only ought to be the Sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God, to cut down, kill and slay, wound and bring
under every Imagination, and every high thought, that Exalts it Self against
the Knowledge of Jesus Christ; and to bring every Soul to the Obedience of
Christ, in all his Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and Appointments: In order
whereunto,

Sixthly, We look upon it to be agreeble to the pure Will and Mind of God, that
there be a free Toleration for Men and Women to Worship God, without either
Constraint or Restraint; And that no Acts of Violence be used against them
therein, to force the Conscience of any, no not of the meanest of the Sons and
Daughters of Men, of what persuasion or Judgment soever they be of; because
Jesus Christ out of that exceeding Love of the Father, was sent to lay down his
Life for the Sins of the World, John 1. 29. and to be a Redemption for that
first Transgression, Heb. 9. 15. under the guilt of which all the whole Bulk of
Mankind that ever were, are, or ever shall be, by Imputation, do lie under;
and from the punishment of which by Jesus Christ they shall all be released,
and restored, Romans 5. 18. And not only so, but they are also by Jesus Christ,
that second Adam, brought into a Capacity to have that Salvation that is in
Christ Jesus, with Eternal Glory, 2 Timothy 2. 10. whose work was to come to seek
and to save that which was Lost, as he himself says, Luke 19, 10. And
therefore he gave out his Universal Commission, the Benefit whereof extends
to all; and therefore to be Preached to all, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15.

And we having this Universal Gospel to Preach, to wit, That God was in Christ
Reconciling the World unto himself by Jesus Christ, not Imputing their
Trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the Ministry of
Reconciliation; now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us; we pray you (yea) (you great Tall Cedars of England) [we
pray] you in Christ stead be ye reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. And have
a care I beseech you in the Fear of the great Jehovah, that ye neither slight
our Message, as you tender the good of your own Souls to Eternity; neither be
ye, I pray you, as those Pharisees, and Hypocrites, against whom a Woe was
pronounced by our Master King Jesus, Mat. 23. 13. who shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven against Men, who neither desired to go in themselves, nor suffered those
that were entering to go in: O I beseech you have a care of this, for Men are
backward enough of themselves, and should you but seem to hinder them, happily
their disobedience may be put upon your score; And he that is found forwards
now to hinder, will be found most guilty at that Day, when Christ shall
dispense to every Man according as his work shall be, 2 Cor. 5. 10. O I beseech
you once again, yea and again I entreat you, have a care every one of you, as
you tender your own good to Eternity, that you hinder none, though never so
Rich, nor never so poor; for God is no respecter of Persons, but in every
Nation, he that fears him and works Righteousness, is accepted of him, Acts
10. 34. Hinder none, be they never so young, nor never so old; for our
Householder the Master of our Family, Jesus Christ who is a Son over his own
House, comes to some Early in the Morning, Mat. 20. 1, etc. even whilst they
are tender and young, even so soon as they come to Reason and understanding,
God by the Incomings of his Holy Spirits, comes to hire them into his Vineyard;
to some he comes at the third hour, in their Youth, to others at the sixth Hour
in their Manhood, to others at the ninth Hour in their declining Age; and to
some again at the 11th. Hour, even in their old Age: O then I say again, I
beseech you have a care, that none be hindered of their entrance into the
Vineyard of Christ, of no Age or Sex whatsoever; for he may be loytring in the
market place of the World this day, that may be hired into the Vineyard of
Jesus Christ to Morrow; for Christ of a Persecuting Saul, may Suddenly make a
Preaching Paul, one voice from Heaven can do it; through mercy I know it by
good Experience, and therefore I am the boulder to assert it; And that
provokes me the more earnestly, to Beg again and again, that no Violence be
used, because the Householder, Mat. 20. 1. is said to Hire, not to Frighten, nor
Beat, Force, or Constrain, but to Hire Laborers, to go into his Vineyard,
telling them what they shall have for their pains, if they will Labor when
they are there; And as I told the King in my Fannaticks Mite, in Page the ninth
of the last Impression, That a Gospel Minister was not as a General in an Army,
to Frighten, Beat, or Fight men into Faith; but as an Ambassador, to persuade
and Invite, and gently Treat with, and to Entreat into the Way of God; the one
being Gospel or Evangelical, but the way of Force being Diabolical and of the
Devil, and proceeds from the Fruits of the Flesh; a part whereof I told the
Mayor of London, in Christian Love to his Soul, the danger thereof, in my Alarm
given to him in his Quarters, in Page 34. in which some of them are clearly
laid down, and how they will exclude a Soul from Heavens Glory.

Again, it is required, that all things be tried, and that which is good be
held fast; But how shall there be a trying of all things, if there be a
constraint only to one? for how can there be a choice, where the tryi^g any
but one is restrained? the which restraint confounds the choice. Again, if
those of the Episcopal Government, do look upon Toleration or Liberty of
Conscience, simply so considered, to be a Sin, Then I query if it be not an
Evil to Tolerate any? and whether that Evil is not then more Aggravated, if
they shall Tolerate that Opinion or Religion that they would have us Swear
against, because they say it is Idolatrous and sinful? And whether there is not
a farther Aggravation, if the worser be allowed, and the better be suppressed?
And whether they will not Evidence themselves to be such, as judge not as God
judges, if they shall Tolerate the Great, the Rich and Mighty, and suppress
the Mean, the Poor and the Low? when God Respects not Persons, but in every
Nation, he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him.

And therefore I would earnestly Beg every one, (the bent of whose spirit
carries him that way) according to the Requirement of the Apostle, to try
their spirits whether they are of God or not, 1 John 4. 1. and to Examine their
Wisdom in this case of Persecution, whether it be that Wisdom that is from
above, which is first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, and Easy to be Entreated,
full of Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality, without Hypocrisy, Jam, 3.
17.

Whether it be without Partiality? whether they would be willing to be served
so themselves? whether if they have at any time undergone Persecution for
Conscience sake, and have not cried out against it as abominable, as the Roman
Catholics and Episcopals have done, in that Grand Usurper Oliver Cromwels
days, and the General Baptists, confident I am, should have done, had he
longer continued; Even as they with others now do, and as that People of the
Presbyterian persuasion suddenly (unless my judgment greatly fail me) will do,
if this Horrid Rome-bred Persecu^ing Spirit, still be Predominant in England;
which is contrary to the true Spirit of God, whose Fruit is Love, Joy, Peace,
long Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekhess, and Temperance; against which
there is no Law: no Law of God, although there be now some Laws of man
intended to be made against them: O that this were taking upon your spirits,
that now sit at the Stern!

Was not your Loyalty to King Charles the first, and King Charles the second, a
great cause of your Hardships, most of you? How fared it with you, you that
were continually in England? Was not those that bo^e sway in England your
continual Tormentors, your fear and daily dread? And those that were away, Did
not they feel the smart of it? Did you not all both abroad and at home, cry out
of Oppression, Cruelty and Tyranny? Did you cry out of them, and think you that
others, will not cry out of you, if you be found such Actors to others? Was it
evil in them to use you so, for your Loyalty to King Charles? And can you be so
cruel to those that are Loyal to King Jesus, and never acted any thing against
King Charles the first, nor King Charles the second, or against the meanest of
you, nor ever took part with them that did? Did the hand of God follow them for
their cruel and unjust Actings to you and the King, as most of you do say it
did? And can you be the same to others for their Loyalty to Him who has
righted you of them, and brought you: your own again; and that against some of
them too, that never got the worth of one ^ar^^ing by all their Pillagings,
Plunderings, or Sales, neither of Goods nor Lands? Can you be contented to
enjoy your own? And are you not willing that those that never harmed you,
should enjoy theirs? Are you glad that you are brought into the Land of your
Nativity again? And would you now most cruelly justle others out? Are you now
setting up that Worship, that you judge to be agreeable to the mind of God? And
will you now force others to forsake what they are persuaded to?

Oh! that you would but consider, what your own Oppressions were, and who you
are now about to Oppress; Let not your fury, nor revenge fall heavy upon the
Innocent; Why should Iniquity and Injustice be found in your hands?

Oh! Consider with your selves apart, and discourse it each with other
seriously* what such a Judgment, as I in the singleness of my soul have laid
before you, can, or ever did do you harm; who never did any Acts of Violence
for, nor against you or the King; nor ever shall resolve to do; who have not
gone with a defensive Weapon so much as to defend my self with, above this
fifteen years; and am of the same Judgment with our Brethren of Holland, whose
innocent and harmless behavior, confident I am, many of you in that time of
your absence from this Land of your Nativity, are well acquainted with; the
which I am confident the strictest of you have no just exception against,
either for endeavoring to undermine Government, or to pull down Governors, or
by fraud or force, to have to do with any man's Possession, Goods, or Estate;
who am willing to do by another, as I would have another do by me, and am as
willing another should Live as my Self; whose Endeavor in all my Teachings,
have been to persuade Persons to forsake and avoid all acts of Violence and
Oppression, and to cleave to God with purpose of heart, and to persuade those
that have Owned God in his Own way, to continue steadfast in the same, and to
prove Faithful to him, whose Laws teach the best Loyalty to our Earthly
Princes, and purest Love to all, yea to our very Enemies; who with
single-heartedness to all, and without either Fawning or Flattery, have and
shall still resolve to tell every one, with whom I have to do, the worst of
their Condition, and show them the danger they are in, by reason of their
misactings; with an earnest desire that in order to their Eternal well-being,
they would refuse the Evil and choose the Good.

And so I have at this time done with you, the great Council of the Nation, and
if for my plainness of speech either as to the matter or manner of it, you
shall become mine Enemy, because I deal so plainly with you, I shall let you
know, that notwithstanding, I shall in the singleness of my Soul pray for you,
and for your Convertion, not in the least Endeavoring, or Plotting your
Confusion.

And now I shall earnestly desire both the King, his People, and you their
Representative, to judge with Equity our Innocent Cause, that so when you shall
your selves be Summoned at that great Session, before that great Tribunal and
Righteous Judge, who shall give to every man according as his work shall be,
that then you be found Innocent and without Blame, as to your actings against
the peaceable Ones of Christ's Flock, whose Sentence, of either, Come, ye
Blessed, Inherit the Kingdom; or, Go ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire, will be
of an Eternal Extent, and that upon the account of Men's actings to his People,
either for doing them good, or for refusing to do them that good they might
have done them; who looks upon what is either neglected or done to them, to
be done unto himself: And hence it is, that he uttered that from Heaven,
saying, Saul, Saul, why Persecutest thou me? I am Jesus whom thou Persecutest,
Acts 9. 3, 4. And after the same manner will be his Sentence at that great Day
of account, even, Go ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels; for when I was Hungry ye fed me not, and naked, ye clothed me
not, Sick and in Prison, and ye visited me not; For inasmuch as ye did it not
to one of these little Ones, ye did it not unto me.

O then I beseech thee, whoever thou be, that art of a Persecuting spirit; I
say again I would Beg thee seriously to consider, O Persecuting spirit, that if
the Lord Christ, will thus severely punish the neglecting the doing good to his
People, when Hungry, Naked, Sick, and Imprisoned; What then will be the Portion
of those that cause them to come into such difficulties and straits, as
Imprisonments, Hungrings, Nakedness, and Sickness; And cause them to be thrown
as it were on heaps, one upon another, as some of the Baptists lately have
been in one Room some 9. Foot broad, and 14. Foot long in New Gate? And much
after the same way in several other Gaols and Prisons in the Nation; Enough to
breed Infections and Diseases, had not the God whom we serve appeared mightily
in our Behalfes.

And seeing the Eternal Sentence, will be so severe against such Violent
Actors, In love to their Souls I cannot choose but give them a timely Caution,
and in their behalfes with that servant of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Cry out and
say, O that they were wise, that they would understand this, that they would
consider their latter End.

And now let not the King, his Peers, nor his People, be angry, and I will
speak but this once more in the behalf of my self, and all that are of the
Separation, of what Judgment soever, that so if possible I may be
Instrumental, that the Peace of the Nation be preserved, and kept; And this I
shall humbly Beg, that if you are not willing that we should serve our God, in
that way which we have received, But that we shall be taken into custody for
our so doing; that then you would Commissionate some Peace Officers for that
work to have to do with us; And that we be not left to the mercy of the Rude
Multitude, nor the Violent Laws of the Mercenary Soldiers, whose actings
toward the peaceable, have been very Rude and Inhumane, in London and
Westminster; where at one Meeting, they wounded one man so dangerously on his
-- Arm, that it is greatly feared, he will lose the use of one of his hands.

At another Meeting Place* they Rudely came and drank up the Wine that was
provided by that Congregation, to Celebrate that Holy Ordinance of
Communicating at the Table of the Lord.

At another Meeting Place, the Congregation being generally dispersed before
they came, in revenge whereof the Soldiery set on the Rude Multitude, to break
in Pieces the Table that they used to make use of to Celebrate the Lords Supper
upon.

At another Meeting Place, they Rudely behaved themselves, Violen^^y casting
some of them headlong down the Stairs, but the Stairs being winding, and some
People upon them, the force of the falls (through mercy) being thereby broken,
there was not much harm done as to the People, the greatest harm that was done,
was by one of the Soldiers to himself; for he set that up then upon his own
score, the which (unrepented off) will exclude him Heavens Glory, if the saying
of our Apostle be true, in 1 Cor. 6. 9. who would not have men to be deceived,
for says he, Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor
Covetous, etc. shall Inherit the Kingdom of God: And such was one of them, as I
am Informed, by one who says, that at the very Interim of time charged him
with it, in the face of the Congregation; and if such Acts of Deceit should be
winked at and allowed, we should be in as bad a Condition, as when our Houses
were searched, upon the late Insurrection, when, who would, came and forced
into Houses, and took and bore away what they pleased, to the great hinderance
of some, as can be clearly Evidenced: And when our Pockets were searched in the
main Guard, and our Knives and other things taken from us, and never restored
to us again: and if such Acts of Violence be not restrained, our peaceable and
well governed Land, in a short time may (it is to be feared) become Acheldama.

And therefore in the behalf of my self, and all others, whose Light it is to
walk in a Separated way, if by your Appointments, we shall be taken into
custody for our peaceable Meeting together, in the Service of our God; I shall
humbly Beg, that we may have the Privileges of freeborn Englishmen, and that
which the worst of Offenders enjoy; who though the Laws both of God and man,
will condemn to the shamefullest death, yet they are apprehended by
Peace-Officers, and Peaceably preserved from the hands of Violence and Cruelty,
till they be Legally Charged, Adjudged and Condemned; The which Security, if
this great Assembly shall vouchsafe us, and that the Nation be forbidden to
make any tumultuous Insurrections, contrary to the Peace of the Nation, And
that they forbear to commit any Acts of Violence upon us, either in our
Peaceable Assemblings together, or apart at our Habitations, or elsewhere, till
further Order from the Assembly; The which if this National Assembly shall
vouchsafe us the Privilede of, we shall in all humility and thankfulness
acknowledge it: But if not, Yet it shall be our great care in our Meetings, to
perform our Duties in obedience to our God, and to follow that Christian Advice
of his Servant, in 1 Timothy 2. 1. To make Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions,
and giving of Thanks for all men, for Kings, and all that are in Authority;
that under them we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and
honesty; because it is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior: And
this shall be the Resolution of Him, whose only End and Aim is the Glory of
God, the good of the King, the Well-being of his People, and the Eternal
Benefit of all your Souls; Who in the Singleness of heart, in the sight of the
all-seeing God, shall Subscribe himself, a Friend to your Souls, in order to
your Eternal well-being, in the behalf of himself, and those he has Communion
withal.

HENRY ADIS.
THE END.

