An Alarm FROM HEAVEN: OR A Warning to Sinners, By the Just Hand of God;
Pursuing Adultery and Drunkenness in the Person of William, Dennis late of Lamb
yard near the Hermitage in Wapping, for wickedly and considerately Murdering
the Person of Thomas Gately.

For which he was Apprehended; and after his Examination before the Justice,
was Committed to Newgate; there to remain till the next Sessions.

With Allowance.

London: Printed for Benjamin Harris near the Royal Exchange. 1677.

AN ALARVM FROM HEAVEN; OR, A Warning to Sinners, etc.
WHat Reason poor Mankind has to take care of himself, let any Judge, since he
has Three such Potent Enemies to Encounter, the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, they being so considerable, that our Divines have thought it in all Ages
their principal Care and Endeavors to prompt all people to a serious and
strict consideration of them, and departing from Evil, the conquest of them
being of more esteem and value then that of Kingdoms.

But since we find by sad and woeful Experience, by the unhappy mistake of our
first Parents and Original, that without the assistance and Protection of
Almighty God, and Merits of his Blessed Son, we are liable to all the
inconveniences of their unhappy miscarriage, (let us beg his Assistance to
prevent) to take warning by the sad Examples of others (not only their
Punishment but Actions) of which by a most sad and dreadful Relation I shall
give you an Account from the Spectators of this Bloody Tragedy begot by
Drunkenness and Adultery.

The wife of this William Dennis the Murderer, (who was a Literman) from what
Reason I cannot certainly Learn, but supposed from the true cause of Jealousy,
found him in Bed with a lewd woman on May day, she was one that used to cry
Strong-water about the Streets, (the common first occasion) of the succeeding
Sin.

From whence (as justly it might) begot great discontent and strife between
them, which procured the poor woman several severe Bastinadoes, which grew to
such a degree, that the Neighborhood took notice of it.

But more particularly on this Fatal day, the fifteenth Instant, when he going
abroad, and returning home drunk, and abusing his wife as formerly, occasined
not only the whole Neighborhood, but Passengers, who came to hinder the
mischief designed his wife, but he being as full of mischief as drink, without
any consideration or occasion, wickedly Swore he would Kill the next Man, which
he villanously performed upon the body of one Thomas Gately a Tubman, an
Innocent Spectator, by wounding him in the Groin with a half pike, of which he
immediately died.

Which being done as if he had been Infatuated or stupid, returns to his own
House, and throws in the aforesaid half pike, after which he endeavored a
seeming escape, but Vengeance pursuing him, he was soon stopped to give an
account of his prodigious Murder, to which purpose he was carried before
Justice Wood, who being not at home, was transmitted to Justice Rycrofts, but
no body being there at present, who were Spectators of the Murder, and the
great disorder he was in by drinking, he was respited for some time.

But afterward upon a stict examination the Horridness of the fact which was
highly aggravated by his wilfulness and stubbornness being proved by the
strength of the Evidence, He was by the Common Guard of the Constable and his
assistance easily conveyed to Newgate, from whence he must expect the Just
reward of his Error.

But it is feared this sad Tragedy will not end in this one person, for besides
his Wife who is cruelly maimed by him, and whose Life is much suspected, the
Daughter of the Murdered Party, who having been lately brought to Bed, hearing
of the untimely and unexpected loss of her dear Father, being Transported into
a passion begot by affection and Nature, forgetting all care of her self, and
contrary to the use of Women in that condition, runs out of her Chamber,
Embraces the Corpse of her Dead Father from which she could not be disingaged by
any entreaties or persuasions till such time as it is feared the danger she ran
has destroyed her, I hope this sad warning will be a Just occasion to deter
all People from committing such evils, and make them stand upon their Guards,
and make them oppose that great Enemy of Man the Devil who goes about seeking
whom he can devour.

He Is a subtle Vigilant Enemy, he doe^ not only take advantage from our
inclinations, but humors and minds. To prevent which. Let us beg the
assistance and Guardianship of Almighty God, who is able to subdue all things
under his feet, to whom as his just due, be Honor and Glory for Evermore.

FINIS.

