The Age of Riddles: OR A True LIST of certain extraordinary Positions,
formerly called Contradictions, but now distinguished by no Names at all.
Faithfully Extracted from several Modern Doctrines and Practices.

Qui Color est Albus nunc est Contrarius albo.
I. ALL Government is overturned by Obedience, and Established by being
Relisted. Therefore,

II. The most eminent Instance of Loyalty, is to condemn Subjection; and he is
the greatest Rebel that preaches against Rebellion.

III. Those are a Prince's best Subjects, and most faithful Ministers, who deny
his Title to the Crown before his Face, and argue against their Right which
they are bound by their Office and their Oaths to defend.

IV. The worst Cause in the World, ought to have the worst Managers; and those
are fittest to censure other Peoples Speeches, that cannot read their own.

V. A C -- h must necessarly be in a safe and flowrishing Condition, when B --
ps explode its Doctrine, and Lawyers are forced to Defend 'em.

VI. When they that know nothing of the Laws of the Land, or Act and Plead in
direct opposition to 'em, either are already At -- is and Sol -- rs Gen -- l,
or ought to be made Lord Ch -- f J -- ces.

VII. Those are the most proper Persons to accuse others of High Crimes and
Misdemeanoers, who for their Speeches in that very Accusation, ought themselves
to be hanged for High Treason.

VIII. Ignorance, Rudeness, Impudence, Dullness and Nonsense, are undoubted
proofs of Wit, Learning and good Manners; and the most virulent Slander,
Railing, Rage, Malice, Lying, and Injustice, are the truest Signs of Christian
Charity, Temper and Moderation.

IX. When a Man is condemned and punished as a Criminal, his Friends ought to
testify their Concerns by Bonfires and Illuminations.

X. Those are the greatest Enemies to Arbitrary Power, who of all Mankind best
love to Exercise it; and they are the most zealous Defenders of Liberty and
Property of their Fellow Subjects, who are for Destroying both, either without
Law, or contrary to Law.

XI. It Is the Duty of the Sons of Archbishops, to Impeach the Church; of
Bishops to Vote a Clergyman guilty of High Crimes and Misdemeanors, for
preaching those Doctrines which Christ and his Appstles, and even they
themselves have preached; of Scotch Peers, to save a Church of England Divine
from Ruin; of Presbyterians, to pull down Meeting houses; of Governors, to
encourage the Principles of Disobedience, and of the Mob, to Rebel in defense
of Loyalty.


