AN ALARM TO CORPORATIONS: OR, THE Giddy sort of HERETICS Designs, unmaskt.

BEING A NARRATIVE OF The unjust, Barbarous, Inhumane, Traiterous practices of
some of the ANABAPTISTS, and others, (to the shame of the Professors of
Religion) at the Town of Brecknock, in opposing the Legal Election of William
Thomas Esquire; and by force of Arms, endeavored the placing of one of their
favorites, to the disturbance of the Peace.

WHEREIN The Nation is forewarned of their being made perpetual slaves to the
Pride, Lust, and Ambition of a few Inconsiderable Persons, who aim at nothing
less than the making themselves Masters of the Consciences, Power, Government,
Estates, Lives, Liberties, and Laws of the Nations.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Page. 1659.

THat, by a Charter Granted unto the Burrough-Town of Br^cknock in South Wales,
in the second and third years of the Reign of King Phil p and Queen Mary, and
the ancient Customs, Liberties, and Privileges of the said Town; It is
provided, That the Common Council of the same Town consist of 15 Persons; And
that they, or the Major-part of them remaining al^ve, shall on every Monday
next before the Feast of St. Michael Th'archangel, choose one of themselves to
be Bailiff, and two to be Aldermen, and other Officers for ^he Well-Government
of that Corporation* for that year.

In pursuance whereof, on the 26th day of September last, (being the day
appointed for that purpose) the Bailiff, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
said Town, did meet in the Guild Hall of the said Town, with an intention to
proceed in the Election of a Bailiff, two Aldermen, and other Officers for this
year.

That Captain Jenkin Jones, a Pastor of a Congregated Church; Captain John
Morgan, and others of his Congregation being of the Militia there, minding to
choose one John Lewis (heretofore a Trooper for the late King, and a deboyst
Man, of a scandalous Life and Conversation) to be Bailiff for this year, being
a Person by them conceived fit for their purpose: And finding the Major-part of
the Common Council had an intention to Elect William Thomas Esquire a Person
well-affected, to be Bailiff, and other qualified Officers of known Integrity,
befitting those Places wherewith they we e to be Entrusted; The said Soldiers,
being led by the said Captain John Morgan, and others with him hired for that
End, in an armed posture did enter the said Town, on the said day of Election,
and having placed their several Guards of Horse and Foot there, with an
intention to terrify the Free Electors (who nevertheless pursued their former
Resolution of choosing Mr. Thomas); the said Officers and Soldiers (having one
Lewis Jones the Sheriff to join with them in this confederacy,) they by color
of a mean process (for not mending a High W^y) issued out of the Sessions
there, frandulently sued out, and prepared for that purpose, with a premeditate
design to be then Executed, to obstruct their free Election*) did Imprison
five of the Common Council, who Voted for Mr. Thomas, and kept them Prisoners
without Bail, or main-prise though Bail was offered, until five (being the
lesser number) had Elected the said John Lewis, according to the Will and
Pleasure of the said Captains and their armed Soldiers, who were first raised
by the Parliament, for the Defense of the People's Rights and Liberties, and
Preservation of the public Peace (which they herein highly violated), and then
stood disbanded by Order of Parliament, and had no Commission at all, or other
pretense, to muster or assemble themselves there, at that time.

As soon as the Common Council men were enlarged, they did immediately, on the
same day, assemble themselves in the Guild Hall; and consisting of 9 (being the
major number), did, according to their Charter (which limits no hour of the day
for that Service) duly choose the said Mr. William Thomas their Bailiff; Richard
Creed and Thomas Roberts their Aldermen; and other Officers, according to the
usual manner, for this year; and intended, on Monday following (being the usual
time), to swear the said Bailiff and Officers accordingly.

That the said Capt. John Morgan, and other the Officers and Soldiers
aforesaid, intending to prevent the Common Council from swearing Mr. Thomas,
and other the Officers duly chosen, and being abetted, and hired with money,
did on the Lord's day following, in like armed Posture, enter the said Town
with Horse and Foot, and placed several Guards and Centries about the House of
the said Mr. Thomas, the Bailiff elected, and imprisoned Him, and several
Others of the Common-Councill and Burgesses, and placed another Guard in the
Guild Hall, and in other places in the Town, not permitting Mr. Thomas, and the
Common-Councill that chose him, to come to the Guild Hall to swear their
Bailiff and Officers. And in the mean time, five of the Council, who joined
with the Soldiers, did swear John Jews, chosen by them (being the lesser
number), and such Other Officers as they pleased, and continued in this armed
posture for two nights and one day, to the great Terror of the Bailiff,
Common Council, and Burgesses of that Town; on whom they committed many
Insolences, and would not suffer either Meat or Drink to be carried to the
said Bailiff Thomas, whom they kept close Prisoner in his own House, during all
that time.

That the said Mr. William Thomas being of ^rwards duly sworn, according to the
Charter in the presence of the Old Bailiff, and ten of the Common-Councill, and
a Writ of Mandamus out of the Upper-Bench granted for that purpose, (no day
being prefixed by the Charter, for the administering the Oath): And being with
his Aldermen and Officers in the peaceable Execution of their Offices; the said
Mil tia Soldiers, being the third time h red by John Jews and abetted by
their Officers, did march into the said Town with Horse and Foot, and, having
placed their several Guards, did enter the Town-Goal, and released such
Prisoners as they pleased, assaulting and imprisoning several of the Burgesses;
the Charter and ancient Records being also taken away and imbezilled, and to
this day kept in unknown places; and many other Insolences committed to the
high Infringement of their ancient Rights, Liberties, and Privileges of the
said Town, and Violation of the public Peace. Whereupon, the whole Town
assembled themselves together in Arms (according the usual manner, on rolling
the Bell,) for Defense of the Bailiff and Burgesses, who were in danger of
their Life's by these inhumane Soldiers, who threatened to suppress and ruin
the whole Corporation; and finding the Town too powerful for them, their
Officers promised they would depart home without doing any further harm, if Mr.
Thomas, the Bailiff, would dismiss the Burgesses.

The Bailiff being unwilling to engage the Town in blood, and ready to prevent
further mischief, and to proceed against the Malefactors by due course of Law,
did require the Burgesses to go in peace to their houses, who observed his
commands accordingly; and the Militia-Souldiers promised to depart the Town;
But having no such intentions, but a deceitful and wicked purpose, when the
Townsmen were dispersed to their houses, with force of Arms to assault them,
did unawares dangerously wound diverse of the quiet Burgesses, without any cause
or provocation; some of them having lost their limbs, having no weapons to
defend themselves against this premeditated mischief designed against them, who
threatened their ruin, and the suppressing of the whole Corporation: and
Captain John Morgan (one of their rude leaders) has since told one of the
Burgesses at the door of the Committee of Safety, that he would overthrow the
Corporation, and hoped ere long to see all the Corporations in England and
Wales suppressed, which afterward necessitated the. Town to keep stricter
Guards for defense of their l^ves and Liberties, in so eminent danger to be at
once destroyed. Which these Janissaries perceiving, and fearing their
unpracticable unchristian proceedings (destructive to all Corporations and
civil Societies) should be made known, and they proceeded against accordingly:
The Countenancers Comforters, and Abettors of these several Riotts, did, by
many false Letters, Messengers, and applications to diverse members of the
Committee of Safety, and eminent Officers of the Army mis-represent matter of
Fact, and excuse themselves, and lay the blame on the poor oppressed innocent
Townsmen, who were also Obliged, as much as in them lay, to make known the
truth of their grievous complaint, which produced a Reference to the Governor
of Hereford, and the said Captain Jenkin Jones (whose friends, relations, and
Church Members, were the main Instruments and Actors of all these outrages).
And the Bailiff, Aldermen, and Burgesses, having attended the Governor with
honest credible VVitnesses, to prove the truth of the premises; He having no
power to examine on Oath, forbore to certify the same; But did report, as his
Opinion, with the assistance and concurrence of Captain Jenkin Jones, that
neither John Jews, nor William Thomas the Bailiff were legally elected; And
that he conceived it fit that Henry Powell, heretofore Bailiff, should be
appointed Bailiff for this year. Which Report, the Committee of Safety
confirmed, and accordingly nominated, and appointed the said Henry Powell to be
the Bailiff for this year. And although the Town have sent up one of the Common
Council, with their Humble Petition and address to the Committee of Safety,
to pray a re-hearing before indifferent unconcerned persons, offering by
VVitnesses on Oath, to prove every particular of their Complaint; Or else that
they would leave the fame to be determined by Law; Giving them to understand,
That they are advised by Learned Counsel, that this Order will tend to the
extinguishment and forfeiture of their Charter, and total overthrow of their
Corporation, their Charter limiting a precise day for Electing a Bailiff by the
major part of the Common Council; and if a Bailiff be elected on any other
day, or by any other persons, in any other Manor, such Election they conceived
to be void by Law, and the tenure of their Charter; and the exercising of that
Office by Henry Powell, who was never chosen by the Council, nor can be now
legally sworn; and the desisting of the Execution of that Office by William
Thomas duly chosen and sworn, in Obedience to their Order, will cause an
absolute Forfeiture of their Charter, to the undoing of that Town and the
Inhabitants thereof, having therein 4 Parishes very populous, and hitherto
lived very happily and plentifully, their well-being depending on the
Continuance of their ancient Rights and Liberties; and prayed to be heard by
their Counsel learned, to give their Honors satisfaction in matter of Law: Yet
the Committee did not think fit to alter or revoke their Order, grounded on the
Single Certificate aforesaid, without Examination of Winesses on Oath; and the
Prooffs, tendered by the Townsmen, were omitted out of the Report.

And whereas this oppressed Borough well-hoped to have the insosent,
unpresidented, and unsufferable practices of the Soldiers punished, their
Ringleaders and Abetters discountenanced and Cashiered, and the wounded
Inhabitants repaired; After all their great Expenses, and their several
Journeys to London, 120 miles distant from their now Comfortless Dwellings
(being Tenants at Will), and their many Humble Addresses and Applications
herein, by Themselves, Friends, and Agents: They are now like to lose their
Blood spilt by merciless Soldiers, with their Charter, undoubted Rights,
Libertyes, and Privileges, purchased by their Ancestors, and for so many
scores of years enjoyed by that ancient, and heretofore well governed Town of
Brecon, being the Shire-Town for that County, and one of the most Eminent and
Considerable Corporations in South Wales.

Observe.
I. They begin with their evil Practices in the remotest parts of the Nation,
as Wales; and if their designs take effect there, then they will bring it
nearer the Center of the Nation, and at last into the City of London it self.

II. Witness the Act for Propagation of the Gospel in Wales, procured by some
Persons of the Hypocritical Godly Party, that then were instrumental to carry
on these Designs in Wales; A good style, and well penned, but ill executed, and
the Intentions of the Parliament perverted.

They had Power to eject scandalous and ignorant Ministers, and to supply their
rooms with Godly learned Ministers. In stead thereof, they ejected all, good
and bad promiscuously; their design tending to root out the Ministry as well as
the Ministers: And in their steads did put in a few ignorant, scandalous
mechanic, Itinerants, that would be contented with small Wages, who have
spread that Country with Schism and Heresy; and for want of those many
learned, pious, Ministers, causelessly ejected, Wales is become a Land of
Darkness, overspread with Heathenism, Ignorance, Heresy, Schism, and
Profaneness. And the Procurators of this Act, and Executioners thereof, in the
mean time enriching themselves with the Treasure of the Tithes, which for 10
years last past, in 7 Counties of South Wales, amounts to above two hundred
thousand pounds; And not one penny thereof paid in, or accounted for, to the
State, to this day, notwithstanding the many Addresses and Complaints made to
all the several Parliaments, Councils, and Conventions, for 10 years last past,
some whereof were broken, viz. The last Parliament in April 1653. by Oliver
Cromavell, to prevent a due Examination of those Accempts, (if credit may be
given to his own Speech to the little Parliament following, and the
Acknowledgments of the Propagators themselves); These guilty Persons not
suffering any Parliament or Convention to perfect any good Work begun by them,
or to give way for any good Settlement, well-knowing the same to be destructive
to their Designs of continuing an Arbitrary Military Power in the hands of
Themselves.

And if the Inhabitants of Wales had not been very zealous and diligent in
making known the Grand Cheats and Abuses committed by color of the said Act,
in Wales; The like Act had been procured for England, as was openly affirmed by
Vavasor Powel, and others, their evil Instruments in Wales; And an Act ready
contrived by them for that purpose. Which if it had passed, all the Ministers
of England, as well as Wales, had been long since ejected and exposed to
Poverty and extreme Want. And the Anabaptists and Sectaries (destructive
Persons to all Governments and Commonwealths, except those of their own
Faction) had been in the actual Possession of all the Tithes, and Church
Revenues, in England; and the two famous Universities suppressed, and their
Revenue by these ignorant Miscreants possessed: Which is the Design of madd Dr.
Chamberlain, and such idle, unsettled, distracted, covetous, Brains, that
propose a maintenance for a Godly Ministry, by taking away Tithes.

An Advertisement.
THe foregoing Discourse, gives an ample Demonstration of what the Nations are
to expect from the hands of those People, that now endeavor to arrive at the
top of Supremacy: And to place Themselves above all Laws, Order, Right, and
Property; That they may have their full swing in putting in Execution their
Lusts, Pride, and Ambition: Their Ringleaders have given the example in razing
down the Supreme Power of the Nation; Corporations were Invented as Impa^ments,
and senses against Absoluteness and Tyranny, in their being Governed by a
Member of the same Liberty for an year, that as the years end, the same Person
that Governed, may become subject to Government. The Corporations of England
are all Commonwealth's. They have continued some hundreds of years under
Monarchy, They have preserved their Liberty, and defended Society in an eminent
manner: Together with their Forms and Customs, which, with very little
alteration, will consist and fit with the Form of the best Constituted
Commonwealth that can be thought of: these People are not against the Form, but
their aim is at the Power, and when they cannot attain that, then they destroy
the Form to come at the Substance: They cry down the Laws and Customs as
Corrupt, that they may Govern by no other Laws then their Lusts Ambition, and
Ignorance: By this example, the People of England may be forewarned of the
ensuing dangers that will inevitably befall London, and other Corporations in
the Nation; the preventing of which, together with the many other Invasions of
Rights and Liberties, threatened by these Levellers, who, under a pre^^nce to
get Arms into their Hands, to secure the Interest of the good People, will
Ruin, Destroy, and throw down all that we have to defend our Lives, Liberty,
and Estates; and instead thereof Erect a Righteous Government, after the mode
of John of Leyden, and Knipperdolling. Who had Commission and Call, as they
pretended, from God, to kill all the wicked Kings, Magistrates, and People,
that the Saints might possess the Earth; that is to say, all those that are
not of their persuasion. This Design of the Anabaptists here, has bin carried
on underhand this ten years and more by their Confederates; they have obtained
a great part of the Places of Trust and Profit in the three Nations; by which
means there has bin a Seminary of Hypocrites created, Men fit to aid in any
Change of Government, and the Effecting of any Villainy whatsoever. These
People's design does exend yet further, that is to say, not only to destroy
the Ministry, but also the Magistracy, that none may be left to preserve
public Interest. And as they judge none fit to bear Arms, and exercise Power
but this Party: So even by the same Rule, they will judge it not fit for any to
enjoy Estates, either Real or Personal but Themselves; So that the whole
Nation shall hold nothing that they Possess, by any other Title, but the
Courtesies of these Monsters of Mankind; It therefore behooves London, and all
the rest of the Nation, not to trust any longer to Religious Pretenses and
Cheats, but effectually as becomes Men, to endeavor the securing their Lives,
Liberties, and Estates; which are all like now to be swallowed up by a few
inconsiderable Persons, who have bin constant Faith-breakers and Kickers
against Magistracy, Ministry, Law, Order, Right, and Common Honesty; who are
led by no principle but their own Lusts; Consider the Dangers now drawing nigh.

FINIS.

