THE MOST Natural and Easy Way OF INSTITUTION: CONTAINING, PROPOSALS For
making a Domestic Education Less Chargeable to PARENTS, AND More Easy and
Beneficial to Children.

By which Method, Youth may not only make a very considerable Progress in
Languages, but also in Arts and Sciences, in Two Years.

(...). Plutarch.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Hussy, at the Flower-de-Luce in
Little-Britain. School.

TO Sir WILLIAM HUSTLER, A MEMBER of the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
YOUR Honor, some considerable time ago, being much Concerned about the best
Method in the Education of your Children, was pleased to ask my Opinion
therein: But my Thoughts concerning it, at that time, being but in the Embryo,
conceived upon the Reading a Treatise of EDUCATION, writ by the Learned and
Ingenious Mr. Lock, to whose Opinion fearing I might be too partial by the
Satisfaction his other Writings gave me, and knowing how unsafe and invidious
it is to oppose Inveterate Customs, I, as handsomely as I could, declined the
Matter. Only I ventured upon your pressing me further, to tell you I should
prefer a Domestic to a public Institution. Your Honor was pleased to inform
me, you were of the same Mind, and desired me to enquire out a Tutor, proposing
such a Sallary as I believe few Gentlemen in England give, and which might have
invited into your Family a Man of Sobriety, Parts and Learning. But though I
durst not then venture my callow Thoughts abroad, after they were fledged and
confirmed by Time and mature Advice, at the Instance of your Worthy Brother,
Mr. JAMES HUSTLER.
(a GENTLEMAN of that Piety and Virtue, that I dare not write his Character;
and if I durst, of such Modesty, I should be afraid to lose a Friendship, which
has been so many ways to my Credit and Advantage) I sent them to you in a few
Proposals, tending to make a Domestic Institution less chargeable to the
Parent, and more Useful and Easy to the Child. Upon the Reading of which, some
Objections arising, I was desired to answer them, and subjoyn the Reasons of
the said proposed Method, which I purposed to do with all the brevity I could,
and send them to you the same day. But beginning to think what Method to use
therein, it seemed necessary to show there was a General Male-Treatment of
Children; and this I conceive to be not only the most proper, but most useful
way of proceeding in Cases of this Nature. For if I can prove a Reformation is
necessary, I have gained a considerable Point; and having no Ambition my
Diminutive Name should stand in the Catalogue of Reformers, shall be satisfied
in the hopes of seeing some other more happy and successful Proposals, in order
to the effecting thereof. An honest and ingenuous Man ought not to be
concerned, that his Methods for Reformation, of any grievance in Church or
State, are rejected, if he has been so happy to Convince that some or other
were Necessary.

SIR,

I humbly desire your Pardon for prefixing your honored Name to these Papers,
assuring you I don't pretend to make a Present, but beg a Patronage. And if you
will please to do me these two Favors, first, To think I meant honestly, and
nextly, To pardon the failures of the management to the Candor and Ingenuity
of the Design, I will (in Return) do you the only one that lies in my Power, in
Superseding wretched Panegyrics and fulsome Flatteries, the usual Furniture of
Modern Dedications, being sensible that Persons of known HONOR and WORTH, are
abused by having their Names taken in vain by every trifling Scribbler; And
only add that I am,

Honored Sir, Your Obliged humble Servant, R. Ainsworth.

PROPOSALS Of a Method of Institution, etc.
THE Advantages of giving Children an Ingenuous and Liberal Education, are so
well known in England to all ranks and degrees of Men, we need no Lacedaemonian
Edict, by which those Parents were deprived of the Freedom of their City, who
were negligent in this Particular, being looked upon fit for nothing but to
cleanse Shoars, and carry Burdens, who condemned their Sons never to be fit for
any better Employment. But though we are sufficiently Convinced of the Usefulness
and Excellency thereof, we are very negligent and careless of the Methods
whereby to effect it, and so more blameworthy than some of the ignorant
Lacedaemonians, who possibly saw no such real benefit thereby. To be solicitous
about the End, and neglect the Meaens, betrays I know not whether more Levity
or Imprudence.

We generally think to give our Children education is but in other words, to
send 'em to School; to whom, or for what, is not much material. It may be,
about six or seven years after, it is expected a Lad should understand Latin; if
he does, all is well, if not, cries the Parent he is a Blockhead, I Will never
trouble my head further about him. If he is a Gentleman, may be he adds, He had
as good play at Home as at School; and so the Youth being fit Company for none
but Servants, familiarly converses and saunters away his Time with 'em. And now
having told you his Company, you may guess at his Manners, Uva conspecta
livorem ducit ab uva,
But if a Tradesman, Away with the Dunce, I Will put him to 'prentice forthwith;
so this often occasions that too, to be done precipitately, and so he is little
better for serving a tedious Apprentiship, in a whipping Bridewell, under a
flogging Orbilius. The better did I say? nay, generally worse, being habituated
there to several Vices, which often keep him Company as long as he lives.

But, if after all, the Parent is resolved, in spite of the Muses and Apollo,
his Son shall be a Scholar, after a sound Chastisement, he is sent to another
School, 6 or 7 years longer, to make his Verse end -- Berecynthius Atys, and
read a little -- (...), without knowing any thing of Arts and Sciences, and
perhaps Common Sense.

To reform these, and such like Abuses, in Childrens common treatment, several
worthy Persons have taken great pains, (as Mr. Walker, Monsieur Fleury; but
above all, the Learned and Ingenious Mr. Lock, (whom I have not the Honor to
know but by his excellent Pen) and treated this subject so well, that they will
always be reckoned as our best and chiefest Reformers. Not have they missed of
success amonst discerning and impartial Readers; but most being otherwise, and
the Heresies overgrown, and slubborn, a through Reformation cannot be expected
on a sudden.

Having often highly extolled the Method of learning Latin, as a Native of
Rome, being convinced both by great Reasons, and great Authorities it must be
the best; and being accused by some of Singularity, though following so great
Authors, because I had made Proposals to some Gentlemen by which I supposed the
Design might be best answered, I thought my self concerned to give a Public
Account of my so doing; in the performance whereof, I shall insist in this
Order:

1. Enquire into the manner of our Childrens general Treatment, both by Parent
and Master, and make some Animadversions on both. 2. Lay down a Method, in 10
Proposals, whereby I conceive it easy to teach them to understand a Roman
Author very well, write Latin elegantly, speak it properly and easily, gain a
considerable knowledge in Logic, Rhetoric, Geography, History, etc. in the
space of two years. 3. Assign the Reasons of the said Proposals, and answer
Objections.
And lastly, Leave the whole to the Judgment of the Candid and Judicious Reader.

The Reasons of the slow Proficiency, and careless Institution of our Children,
are such as either the Parents, or Master, is chargeable with.

First, The Parents, Reason 1.


Who don't ordinarily take care to have their Children taught to read, till
they are so habituated to Vice and Idleness, that their Teacher must have as
much Labor to bring 'em into love with their Book, as otherwise wou^d have
taught 'em to read; from whence also various Inconveniences arise both to the
Parents and Children; the Enumeration whereof not being my Province, I leave to
those who write the whole series of Education.

No doubt, as soon as they can speak, they may be taught to read either by
Father or Mother, with case and pleasure, without ever imposing it as a Task
upon 'em. The Ingenious Mr. Lock tells us of a Person of great Quality and
Worth, who by pasting the six Vowels on the six sides of a Die, and the
remaining 18 Consenants on the sides of three other Dies, has played his Son
into Spelling and Reading with the greatest eagerness imaginable; and I doubt
not but the said worthy Patriot may teach him Arithmetic, History, Music, with
but a little deviation from that his so excellently contrived Method. Facile
est inventis addere. This very Method, for fear of bad Consequences afterward,
may not be so well, but from it we have an hint for an hundred very harmless
Inventions to teach Children to Read.

2. If they do take care to send 'em to School, perhaps it is to some Woman who
never knew any thing of Orthography, though she may make a shift to read her
Prayers, or Murder a Gazette, confounding one Period with another, which she
must needs do, having never been acquainted with the Rules of Pointing. Hence
it comes to pass, that Vulgar People, who only have learned to Read and Write
at this rate, commit such horrible blunders in Spelling, and making no Points,
are at the hazard of having no one, that writes true, to understand what they
mean.

I admire that Parents, that design their Children a Liberal Education, should
commit them to such; they had better let all alone, for they contract such ill
habits, as will cost their Master afterward double the trouble to unlearn 'em,
as were requisite to learn 'em to read, and I should scarce undertake to teach
'em for a double Reward: For to teach has a great deal of pleasure, to unteach
has none at all to recommend it. To which I may add, That it not only
discourageth the Pupil, but is apt to create in him an aversion to his Tutor:
And thus both the Master and Scholar labor in vain. -- Ista felix nullo
mansuescit aratro.
Pers. And this I am sure of, by many Experiments, that an Adult Person, who
has had the misfortune to be taught English at this rate, cannot be so great a
Proficient, in 6 Months time, in learning Latin, as another, happy in his first
English Rudiments, may be in two; and besides, must take a great deal more
pains.

Parents, when their Children are fit in their Accounts to be put Reason 2. 2.
to a Master, think it sufficient to put them to a good Scholar, (as they
phrase it) whether a good Man or no, is not much material. And what is this
good Scholar? He understands Latin and Greek. As though this were Accomplishment
enough! This is so far from it, that it is undoubtedly but one Qualification,
and that one of the least too, of a good Schoolmaster to little Children,
whose tender years are to be imbued with Piety, and Principles of right Reason:
He ought to be a Virtuous, Modest, and humble Man, and very patient; his chief
business ought to be to dissipate by soft and gentle means, those passions that
would over-cast the early dawnings of infant Reason, that it may shine out
bright and glorious; and with a gentle hand, to weed out the Tares which
perhaps were sown when the Parents slept, before they are grown so high, as to
choke the Culture of an Ingenuous and Liberal Education, to cherish the
Principles of Kindness, and good Nature, till they are grown into HABITS; to
settle a Reverence to their Parents and Masters, and a Love and Respect for
all, and they will soon enough afterward learn to exert them in a fashionable
Mein, and decent Comportment, which, when they have learned with a
Dancing Master, will more admirably become them, when their Bows and Honors,
not forced by Modes and Fashions, not Ap'd and Mimick'd, but found to be real
by the Divine sweetness of their Looks, which no Art can teach, will not only
challenge from all Persons an high Commendation of their Parts and Breeding,
but also gain 'em every where an Admiration and Love for their Virtue.

He ought not only to have these Qualifications, but a reasonable knowledge of
Arts and Sciences, as Logic, Rhetoric, History, Geography, etc. to speak Latin
well and promptly, and understand the Greek Tongue; neither too young, nor too
old, a proper wellmade Person, and of a good Presence. What shall I say? He
must be

-- Qualem nequeo monstrare and sentio tantum.
But you will say, All these Qualifications seldom meet in one Obj.
Man, especially who will vouchsafe to be a Tutor.

I confess it. And therefore get in one, as many as you can, and A.
be content to abate him some of these last, (I mean as to Accuracy) but never
any of the first; for in those that are to study as Gentlemen, this Age looks
upon it a greater Accomplishment to have a taste of all Arts and Sciences, so
as to be able to discourse, and give some tolerable Account of each, as
occasion shall offer, than to stick close to any particular Study, neglecting
the rest, provided that when they are called to any Office or Employment in the
Commonwealth, they then apply themselves close to that Study, which may best
qualify them for it, and make all their other Knowledge as much as they can
subservient thereto: But if designed for Scholars, in whatsoever their Master
is deficient, they may perfect themselves by their Industry, and a Tutors
assistance, in the University.

Many Parents think it is well enough to send their Children to a public
School: Those that are not able to give them a Domestic, or more private
Education, I censure not; but such persons as have good Estates, and some of
Quality and Worth, who perhaps have taken great pains to form their Childrens
Mind, and Manners, with Piety and Virtue, till they are come to 7 or 8 years of
Age, and then for the sake of a little Latin run so great an hazard to have the
beautiful Image spoild, and the whole Work effaced, some will be apt to Arraign
of either Levity, Incogitancy, or both. Here Children of good, and bad
Education, and good, and bad Tempers, being huddled promiscuously together, it
may be rather feared the bad may infect the good, than hoped the good may
reform the bad. -- quoniam dociles imitandis
Turpibus ac pravis omnes sumus.


But further, Would public Schoolmasters (as it is next to an Impossibility
they should) take care of their Morals, and be never so sollicitous of
Cultivating their early Years with Piety and Virtue, yet at Noon or Night, when
dismissed from School, they would be apt to saunter about, and loyter in the
Streets, where they would see various Objects to divert their thoughts, hear
several Common, if not impious Sayings, of Porters, Car men, and
Kitchen-Wenches, which much abhor from that Phrase and Diction they ought
always to be Accustom^d to; whereby Barbatos licet admoveas mill inde
Magistros,
Hinc totidem,
their Virtue and Innocence would be difficulty secured. I profess I should
hardly run the risque were there no better, no other way, whereby my Son could
come at the Understanding of a Language.

I am sorry I should have Occasion to subjoin my next Reason:

Many of good Estates, and I fear some of Quality, do give their Reason 3.
Children a very mean and ordinary Education, because they are loath to be at
any extraordinary Charge about it: Of this, Plutarch vehemently complains, in
his Time, in these words; (...)

Many People are grown so Covetous, and ( I will not translate my Authors word)
so slighting of their Children, that for fear of paying a greater price for
their Tuition, they choose Men of no Account for their Childrens Tutors,
purchasing for them a cheap Ignorance.

And tells us a biting reply of Aristippus, who being asked by one of these
Fathers what he would ask for his Sons Education, (...), said he. O Hercules!
cried the other in a great Astonishment, Why, I can buy a good Slave for that
Money: Why, and so you may, replied the Philosopher, then you will have two
Slaves, the Slave you have bought, and the Slave you have begot.

But to set aside all Arguments drawn from the Usefulness, Excellency, and
Ornament of Learning, since these are no Topics to insist on with such a
Reader, we will endeavor to convince him that the laying out his Money in his
Sons Education, is not incompatible with his own Maxims. If he had a piece of
Land that were very barren and stony, but with a little Agriculture would be as
good as any of his Neighbors, would he spare his Money here, where there was a
prospect of a considerable Advantage? Would he not rather order his Bailiff
forthwith to Manure and Cultivate it? And is the Cultivating of his Son, a
matter of lesser moment, from whence probably, in the very Letter, more profit
may come into his Pocket than from his Field?

Or when he has a considerable stock of Money by him, is he not apt to be
uneasy, till he has put it out to Interest, hearkened out a Mortgage, or
wisely transmuted it into good Terra firma; because, says he, let Fires, losses
at Sea, change of Government, any, or all of these happen, this will stay upon
the spot, I shall still have this to leave my Son, Yet though the Land, as he
says, will still abide on the spot, he knows how moveable a skin or two of
Parchment is. One would think now, if he could light of a Purchase more secure,
and more advantageous too, for his Son, he should not grudge to lay out his
Money upon it. If he ask me what that is, I answer: A Virtuous and Learned
Education; and that too, (if he be as careful as he generally is) he may have a
very good Pennyworth. Only let him remember, The best is the best Cheap.

The Fondness and Indulgence of some Parents, who can scarce Reason 4.
endure their Children out of their sight; For (say they) we are not sure they
will be so indulged, and treated with that care and tenderness, they are at
home. And what then? Suppose they should not, where would be the harm of it?
Perhaps, nay probably, the inuring them to a little more hardship, may in a
great measure contribute to their health, by confirming, and fortifying their
Constitution. This the Lacedaemonians, Romans, and other Wise, and Warlike
Nations, knew; and therefore were far enough from bringing up their Children
with that softness, and niceness, as our Cocker'd Citizens are. And certainly,
whether we respect their Bodies or Minds, this nice and over-tender treatment
of Children, must be very pernicious to them; it makes their Constitutions weak
and infirm, subject to catch cold with every little breath of Air, and their
health often various, and uncertain all their life long. Then as to their
Minds, they must not be crossed, nor contradicted, they must have their humor
in every thing. What a piece of barbarous Cruelty is it in Parents to suffer
those Passions to get strength in the pretty Creatures, the breaking of which
will cost them so dear, and dearer if never broken!

And certainly, a wife and sober Tutor may manage a Child to his Advantage both
ways much better, who it is probable will never suffer those Irregularities in
his Meat, Play, or Sleep, which the ill-timed and pernicious Indulgence of many
Parents often winks at, and oftener sees not; And too great, or too little a
weight, too quick, or too slow a Motion, often put this delicate Movement out
of order. He will sooner see the first rising of any Disorder or Tempest in the
Passions, even (like the Prophets Servant) when no bigger than a Man's hand,
and so may dissipate, and scatter them with more case, that so they may not
over-cloud the Sky of their dawning Reason, before the bright Sun of their
Virtue can well be perceived to be risen in their Horizon.

The next Charge I have against Parents, is their frequent removing Reason 5.
their Sons from one School to another, upon the slightest Reasons, and
sometimes none at all; then which, nothing is more apt to rebate the Masters
diligence, who cannot tell but another may reap the fruit, and have the credit
of his care and pains, and the Child, by this means, is most certainly balk'd,
for being put into one Method by his first Master, into another by the second,
and perhaps into the first again by the third, or it may be into a new one, he
loses some years, and is not at last so good a proficient as if he had been
entrusted, or continued with any of the three. They ought to be very great and
cogent Reasons, which oblige a Parent to remove his Child, if he has been a
considerable time under a Master, especially when the Pupil respects him, and
makes, though but a flow, Proficiency under him. Parents ought to say so to their
Sons as Tully does to his:

Quamobrem disces tu quidem a Principe hujus aetatis Philosophorum, Cic. de
Offic. lib. 1.
and disces quam diu voles, 'tamdiu autem velle debebis, quoad to quantum
Proficias, now paenitebit.

Some persons neglect to enquire into their Childrens Proficiency, Reason 6.
even sometimes, though very learned themselves, perhaps, thinking it too mean a
thing, or not their Province, to concern themselves in examining Schoolboys
Exercise; but Marcus Cato thought not so, who, though he kept a Tutor at home for
his Sons, would notwithstanding himself, even in the Tutors presence, give them
not only precepts of Virtue, but Grammar too, exciting at once both the
diligence of Tutor and Pupil. But the Great Augustus, though laboring under the
weight of Years and Empire, thought not so, who constantly taught his two
Grandsons, Lucius and Caius. But Tully thought not so, who, though of Consular
Dignity, and a great Statesman, supporting, as it were, with his own
Shoulders, a tottering Commonwealth, made Account he had not yet discharged
his duty to his Son, by sending him to Athens, the most learned City and
University of the World, to be instructed by Cratippus, one of the greatest
Philosophers of the Age, unless himself also wrote him a Treatise of Ethics, by
which to form and regulate his Manners. These Examples I do not produce,
because I would persuade learned Parents to toil and labor at the Oar, like
these great Personages, (though perhaps, if they should, their Fere would often
make them amends) but that they would think it not so mean an Employ, now and
then at leisure hours, to inquire into their Sons proficiency, that if either
Tutor or Pupil be remiss, they may admonish him, or diligent, encourage him.

These are the Reasons of the great Obstacles and Remoras in Childrens
Education, occasioned by the Parents, some being tardy in one particular, and
some in another. Now come we to those, which on the Masters part lie against
their improvement in learning Languages.

Some Masters have a standing Method, not only in teaching Reason 1.
their Pupils a Language, but also in the Motives, by which they propose to
raise and fix their Attention. This may proceed from a want of Reflection, that
Chiidrens Passions, as well as of elder People, are excited by different
Methods and Motives. Now whilst a Master continues ignorant of the particular
Motives by which he must raise Attention in every particular Scholar, he must
needs be often at a loss, let his general Method be never so good, and let him
take never so much pains. He had as good talk to the Wind, and Plough the
Shore; the one would as soon learn, and the other be cultivated, as several of
his Pupils. Certainly therefore, the knowledge of his Scholars temper must be
the Theory, and the proceeding by that knowledge, the Practick of the most
useful and excellent Science any Schoolmaster can study, whether respecting
his own Ease, or his Pupils Advantage.

Some again (I would hope not many) preferred ( magis, ambitu Reason 2.
quam merito) having annual Stipends in Free-Schools, in the Erection and
Endowment whereof our Ancestors have been very liberal, make no Conscience of
suffering their Pupils to lose their time, their Duty and Credit being small
Motives to their Diligence, where the main Stake, their Sallery, is secured.
But I have not time to declaim against one of these, and if I had 'twere lost
labor. -- Caret culpa, nescit quid perdat and alto
Demersus, summa rursus non bullit in unda. Pers.


Others, though otherwise learned and conscientious, whether indeed Reason 3.
approving their own Method, or taking it from Custom, without ever calling it
to the Touchstone of their better Judgment, enjoin the Herculean Labor of
getting Lilly's Grammar without book, perhaps two or three times over, and
after that a long Word-book of two or three thousand Words jumbled together at
a strange rate; and it may be, should Children, with prodigious labor and
courage, conquer these, the Hydra bubbles up again with more Heads, their
Lessons out of their Authors are to be learned Memoriter too, which baffles our
valiant Champions to that degree, they dare Encounter no longer, but slink
away, and are not a pin better for all their former Victories.

I would ask one of these Gentlemen, should he set about the learning of the
Arabian Tongue, carrying along with him an earnest desire, a firm resolution,
and the Terms of Art, (which are common to all Languages) and desiring his
Tutor to show him the most expeditious way of attaining it, should only receive
this answer, Sir, You must get Erpenius's Grammar perfectly without book, and
afterward fix in your Memory two or three thousand words out of an Ardbian
Lexicon, would he not be discouraged at this? Would he not be apt to think
there might be some more expeditious way of learning it found out? Undoubtedly
he would, especially if the Rules of Erpenius's Grammar were Arabic as Lilly's
are Latin. And does he think that which discourageth him, a Man, with all these
Advantages, should not have the same effect upon a Child, without them?

Not that I go about to depreciate Lilly's Grammar, especially with the Oxford
Notes; no, perhaps it is the best that ever was writ, but several Rules, and
many more Exceptions, seem rather to be calculated for the Meridian of riper
Judgments, than to the Latitude of Childrens Capacities. Nor did the Learned
Compilers ever design a fourth part of them to be learned without book by
Children; they only propose a Boy should learn his Declensions and Conjugations
very well, which when he understands, not by rote, but reason (as they phrase
it), and is more cunning in understanding See the Preface to Lilly's Grammar.
the thing, than rehearsing the words, which is not above a quarter of a years
diligence, or very little more, to a painful and diligent Man, if the Scholar
have a mean Capacity: then they Advise to let him pass to the Concords, to know
the agreement of Parts among themselves, thence to the Syntax, but not to learn
the Rules as they follow in Order, but as occasion shall offer it self Reading
and Persing some Author, wherein not only the Eloquence of the Tongue, but some
plain Lesson of Honesty and Godliness is contained. And after some time of
turning English into Latin, and Vice versa a little below, they add, If to this
were adjoined some use of speaking, (which must also necessarily be had) he
shall be brought past the wearisome bitterness of his Learning. This method
seems to me so rational, that I am almost tempted to believe some
Schoolmasters have never read the Preface to the Grammar they daily teach, or
if all have, I wonder (though some Learned and Ingenious Men may) others should
have reason to think they have found out a better way of teaching their
Grammar, than the Compilers themselves had. In my Judgment, those Masters who
take a different method to their Prescriptions, (except as before Excepted)
walk a tedious round; but especially such as teach all the Rules and Exceptions
as they follow one another, before their Pupil reads an Author. For if Children
should by the Masters diligence, and continual beating their brains about the
sense of this, or that particular Rule, or Exception, be brought to some little
Notions about them, it is ten to one, but being forced to summon all their
thoughts to understand the next, the Ideas they had conceived about the former
are quite obliterated; by this means it often comes to pass that one poor
Exception, which perhaps might not occur above once in an Author, at last is
understood at the loss of two or three General Rules, and some Leather in at
the bargain. Sure I am, that the learning this line, Tartara Taygetus sic
Taenara Massica, etc.
stood me in the latter, if not in the former, which had I never learned, had
not been a pin of matter, since no Word is of one Gender in the Singular, and
another in the Plural Number.

Nor would I, by what I have said of Lilly's Grammar, be understood as if I
thought that a perfect model. It Is greatest Admirers have confessed, there are
many Deficiencies to be supplied, but more Redundancies to be retrenched; and
the modest Compilers themselves thus preface it.

Wherefore it is not amiss, if one seeing by Tryat, an Easier and Readier way
than the common sort of Teachers do, would say what he has proved, and for the
Commodity allowed, that others not knowing the same might by Experience prove
the like, and then by proof reasonably Judge the like, not hereby excluding the
better way when it is sound out, but in the mean while forbidding the worse.

This I believe I may venture to say, It may be easy for any Master, on half a
Sheet of Paper, to extract out of this Grammar what is sufficient for any Lad
to know before he reads an Author. But I proceed:

The harshness and severity of others, is a great obstacle to Reason 4.
Childrens Improvement. Were they to perform their hard task, and carry burdens
like Slaves, and not for every little Omission, or Peccadillo, to be thump'd
like them, I should think their condition something different. Nay, I fear they
are beat sometimes for not performing Impossibilities, for not making Brick
without Straw; I mean, for not finding Matter as well as Words. And is not this
an Egyptian Slavery?

If these Gentlemen, whom a body would scarce take for Romans, unless by their
Fasoes, pretend a liberty to scourge them, in order to their Manumission, I
should be rather content my Son should be no Denizen of Rome, than pay so dear
for his freedom.

Indeed, when ill Principles, long indulged, are grown to ill Habits, and a
Master has in vain, a long time, attempted to Weed them out gently with his
hand, there may be occasion for a Spade or a Mattock, to dig them up at once,
but that being once done, I can see no occasion afterward, in any case
whatsoever. When Boys, as Quintilian has observed, Facile sanabilibus labor ant
malis, why should we always have recourse to the extremest remedy? Correction,
like Physic, where it has no operation, commonly does harm, and the often
repetition of it either spoils the Part, or at best fortifies it against it.
Few, I believe, have been whipped into Virtue and Learning, but many, to my
knowledge, have been whipped from them; and then it is the worse for them that
ever they were sent to School, for either the severity of their Treatment makes
them have an utter aversion for their Book as long as they live, or if they
retain a love for it still, they commonly lard their discourses in common
Conversation with such scraps, and serve it in with such bombast, that I must
needs think he has a strong stomach that does not nauseate it. I declare it,
when I hear this horrid Iargon, I know not which is greater, my pity or
indignation. Certainly, nothing is more unbecoming a Gentleman, nothing more
silly and ridiculous, than this Pedantick humor. If the Company be learned,
nothing can grate their Ears more harshly; if unlearned, it is an unmannerly
Abuse. This I take to be a worse plague than the former, and both of them are
generally the effects of a Rod.

It Is strange to me that Persons of Qvality, nice enough of their Honor in
other points, should suffer their Children to be whipped and abused by every
little fellow, whose understanding a little Latin and Greek is the only Title
he has to the Birchen Scepter, wherewith he Tyrannizes like the Abdicated
Dionysius.

Curtius tells us, That the Power of scourging the Children of Curtius, lib. 8.
the Macedonian Nobility resided only in their Kings, and a beating even by
their Command was looked upon to be so disgraceful, that Alexander the Great,
for executing it, had almost paid his Life for satisfaction to the disgraced
Youth.

But though our Noblemen sometimes may indulge them this Power, I wonder our
Strabo's should so willingly forfeit the favor and respect of their Pupils in
time to come.

The reason of our Obligation to our Physicians, and Schoolmasters, is not (as
Seneca reasons very well) because we have received Health of the one, and
Erudition of the other, though both Lib. 6. de beneficiis, cap. 5.
things unvaluable, because both of them set a value upon them, and that value
we paid. Quid ergo? Quare Medico and praeceptori plus quiddam debeo, nec
adversus eos mercede defungor? Quod ex Medico and praeceptore in amicos
transeunt, and nos non art quam vendunt obligant, sed benigna and familiari
tractatione. What then? What is the reason I am still obliged, and not out of
my Physicians and Schoolmasters debt? Because of a Physician and Schoolmaster
they become friends, and do not oblige us by the Art, which they sell, but by
their kind and obliging devoirs.

Lastly, Some both public and private Schoolmasters, being Reason 5.
more devoted to their own Interest, than to the good of their Pupils,
undertake more than they have time to manage; so by taking in more Pupils they
send out fewer Scholars. But this, indeed, is equally the fault of the Parent,
who sending his Son to a Master, whose Time and Labor being to be divided
amongst so many, can hope for little of either to fall to his Sons share.

Having thus gone through my Reasons of, and Animadversions upon the Obstructions
in Childrens Institution, let me beg of Parents to beware of those failings for
the future, wherewith I have charged 'em, by taking an especial care of the
first 6 or 7 years the little Ones are under their Wing, and I hope I shall
propose the best Method to manage them afterward; for I don't doubt, if
Virtuous and Ingenious Men be encouraged, they can ever want fit Tutors, either
in the following manner of teaching 10 or 12 together, or, (which is next best)
in their own Families. Let them but take care of the main matters in their
Infancy, and they need not fear but Languages will be had afterward easy and
cheap enough.

Childrens Minds are soft and moist Clay, such as may be easily thrown on the
Wheel even how you please, but Age hardens it, and Custom confirms it, and then
your Vessel, whether honorable or dishonorable, cannot be altered; therefore
be sure to fashion it right, and season it well. I admire to see several
Parents treat their Children like Bruits, till 6 or 7 years of Age, which is
the ready way to keep them so much longer. Next to the Care of forming their
Minds, succeeds that of teaching them to read; and, methinks, this might be
done without sending them out of doors, as is usual to a Mistress, where,
besides the inconveniences I have before recounted, among Children of worse
Education, they often learn ill Words, and ill Things. Since Childrens Minds
are pure Virgin Parchment, is it not a thousand pities to suffer it to be
scrall'd over with foolish and senceless Characters, much more to be blotted
and blurred with Anger, Envy, Pride, and Sullenness, when it may so easily be
prevented?

When they read English very well, it is time to dispose of them to a Master,
not only to teach them Latin or French, as is usual, but enjoin him to perfect
and polish that Work which you have begun with so much success, to take care
they be instructed in Piety and Morals, in Arts, Sciences, and Languages.

But some will be apt to think, the perfecting of all this will be Obj.
a Matter of great difficulty, and many Years; and that the learning of Latin
alone taking up so much time, when will the rest be perfected, which are
usually the Studies of Men, not Children?

I answer: I do not mean they should be separate, and successive Answ.
Acts, but all carried on at once; and that I believe the Latin Tongue may be
learned so far forth as to understand very well a Roman Author, to write Latin
correctly, and speak it fluently, and a considerable knowledge attained in Arts
and Sciences, by little Children, by the Proposals following, in two years time
at most, and that with ease and pleasure, both to Master and Scholar.

THAT a convenient House be taken, a small distance from Prop. 1.
London, with a large Garden, and other conveniences.

THAT there be two Masters, whereof one to be capable of Prop. 2.
teaching Latin, Greek and Hebrew: The other, at least, to understand Latin,
and speak it fluently; to be well skilled in Logic, Rhetoric, Geography, and
History; and that he write a good Hand.

THAT Latin be made a Living Language in the Family; 3.
i.e. That no other Language be used in presence of the Boys.

THAT one or both the Masters continually be present 4.
with the Pupils, whether Reading, Writing, Translating, or Playing, from 7 in
the Morning till 8 at Night.

THAT there be no Rods, or any kind of Punishment, but 5.
that a generous Emulation be carried on by Rewards; to which Use the Parents
shall allow per Annum, of which they to have an Account Monthly in a Latin
Epistle, by which they may be informed both of their Proficiency and Diligence
from time to time.

THAT the number of Pupils exceed not Twelve. 6.


THAT they read English well; and that their Master take 7.
care to Improve it.

THAT they be not younger than Six, nor older than Eleven 8.
Years of Age.

THAT their Authors, and Masters, be their Grammar, 9.
Dictionary, and Phrase-Book.

THAT nothing be imposed on them as a Task. 10.


Here follow the REASONS of each particular Proposal, with OBJECTIONS Answered.
TO this I see not what can be Objected: I think it ought not Proposal 1.
to be proposed in London, because the Air is not so good. And how much a good
Air contributes to the health of the Body, and that to the health of the Mind,
no Person can be ignorant; Nor far from London, because it not being convenient
the Pupils should ever be suffered to go home; and, as I said before, requisite
Parents should frequently enquire into their Sons Proficiency, they may do it
in Summer, when they have a mind to divert themselves with a Walk, and in
Winter by Coach, at a small expense.

Their Garden ought to be pretty large, and to have some choice Plants and
Flowers, not only for the Pleasure and Use, but such a Collection ought to be
made, from which the Argument of some useful Discourse, as it were
Occasionally, may be treated of.

Hence they may not only be told the Names which not often occur in their
Authors, or if they did, the Name only being known, and not the Idea, would
easily ship out of their Memory, and whilst it was there, was of no use.

Their Use and Natures also will be of great Advantage to them hereafter. To
which I may add. That from their very Names they may learn a good part of the
Heathen Mythology, as of Daphne, Narcissus, Hyacinthus, etc.

I cannot suppose any Person can think the undertaking can be Prop. 2.
(so commodiously) performed by one.

Because it might grow tedious to any Man never to have an Reason 1.
hours liberty, either to mind his private Studies, or enjoy a Friend.

Because those Qualifications which are requisite in these Proposals, Reason 2.
are more easy to be found in two than one.

Because there seem to be two distinct Parts; the one ought, though never strange
nor angry, very to be so cheap as the other should necessarily be, his Province
is to take especial care of their Morals, to give them the sense of their
Authors, which ought to be such, from whence with ease, and pleasure, he might
draw Instructions of more useful knowledge, to distribute Rewards, to carry it
with a certain coldness to such as are guilty of a fault, and with much
kindness and affection to those that do well: The other's with all sweetness
and affability, to infinuate himself into their favor, to invent for them
Plays and Exercises, tending to the Institution of their Minds, and Health of
their Bodies; and that I may express it in Tacitus's elegant words, Non studia
modo Tacit. Dial. de Orat.
curaque sed remissiones etiam lususque puerorum, sanctitate quadam ac
verecundia-temper are.

Nor ought he only to invent such Plays, but often to make one in the sport,
and show himself very much pleas d and delighted in it; also to teach them to
write a good hand.

Not that I would have these two Parts so separate, but that either of them
might perform the others part, if one should happen not to be well, or have
some earnest Vocation for a whole Day.

The learning of Languages being in it self, as consisting of hard, and uncouth
words, unpleasant, or at best insipid, ought to be well cooked, and made
pleasant, before it is served up to Children. The Recipe may easily be had, a
little Utile dulci, the one to season it, the other to make it palatable, for
Children we know love sweet things; History and Geography, especially with fine
Maps, and Pictures, as falling under the sense of Seeing, afford both these;
and their natural Inquisitiveness and Curiosity will give their Master a large,
and apt occasion to Instruct them, for their whole Instruction ought to be as
it were occasional, and not designed. The Master ought to study their Accessus
and Idone a tempora fandi. These, and several other Arts and Sciences, might
easily be made so palatable, that the Children would hang at their Masters
Lips, and, as it were, devour his Words, to have the better Account of things;
so they might be brought to love the Language for the Art, and afterward, yet
more dearly, love the Art for the Language. Their Play hours, I mean, their
Absence from their Books, (for their whole Institution ought to have no other
Name) ought to be made as beneficial as any other. Hear what the Pious and
Learned Author of the Whole Duty of Man says on this head: Methinks it might
very well be contrived, that their Recreations might sometimes consist of such
ingenious Exercises, that they might at once both play and learn.

If any one ask how Latin is to be made a living Language, I Prop. 3.
answer: Their Master, who is always to be present as before, shall (after
three Months spent in learning so much Grammar as may be necessary for them)
never speak any other Language to them, nor suffer any other to be spoke before
them. The Mistress of the House, in some measure, should understand and speak
Latin, at least such forms as will suit her Occasions, which are about Dressing
and Undressing, and serving them with Meat; and no Servant, at any time, be
suffered to speak to any of them but before the Master, and that in a
prescribed form.

But though I were assured my Son may learn Latin the same way Obj.
he learned English, by Conversation, in two Years time or less, yet you mean,
he shall only then speak Latin as he now speaks English, i.e. improperly.

If he now speaks English improperly, there is a proper Reason to Answ.
be assigned for it; because he has conversed most with those that spoke
improperly, his Nurse or Servants, than which Conversation nothing can be more
pernicious either to a Child's Language, or Manners; but now his Conversation is
to be with such as speak proper. But,

It is not proposed that he should learn the Latin Tongue purely by
Conversation, he ought, I think, to have thus much Grammar:

1. To distinguish the Parts of Speech one from another. 2. To learn to decline
a Noun, and Conjugate a perfect Verb very well. 3. He ought to be acquainted
with the Terms of Art, as Number, Case, Gender, Declension; Active, Passive,
Mood, Tense, Conjugation, Person. 4. To learn his Praepositions. 5. His
Concords. 6. And since there are 6 Cases, to have about 6 General Rules of
Regimen.
And a body would think all this might as well be done in three Months as three
Years.

He ought also to be Instructed in the Analogy of the Tongue, that he may
better understand, and fix his Rules in Memory.

But how can the Masters playing with them be so beneficial? Obj.


Because he may teach them more there, than the other at their Answ.
Books, since (as the Ingenious Mr. Lock has observed) `Learning any thing as
they should, may be made as much a Recreation to their play, as their play to
their Learning. How many curious Fabrics may be built on their natural
curiosity, and busy humor? And when sufficiently wearied with those diverting
plays, he may invent for them; I question not but their Natural activeness,
(for they hate to be idle) will carry them to the equally diverting, though less
useful play, their BOOK.

But many Men will think it too great a Condescension to play Obj.
away above half their time with little Children.

I see no Reason any one should; especially since his Employment Answ.
being to invent Sports, and Plays for the Children, to introduce them into the
Per(...) of more Useful Knowledge, he may lightly hit upon some thing that will
abundantly recompense his pains. But if sometimes they should out-vote him,
(for I would not have him insist upon any thing too much) and have a mind to
play at Nine-pins, Cherry-stones, or Cok-nut, he needs not be ashamed of that,
which the greatest Personages have delighted in Witness Augustus Caesar.

Modo talis aut ocellatis nucibusque ludebat cum pueris minutis Suet. in vit.
Aug. cap. 83.
Quos facie et g(...) conquerebat.

The Noble Pair of Friends, Scipio and Ielius, even in their Old Age, wou^d, in
the Company of little Children, gather Shells, and pretty smooth round
Umbilicos Val. Max.
Stones at Cajeta and Laurentum, and play with them, and sometimes at Ball.
Socrates himself, with Children in his Retinue, would publicly ride up and
down on an Hobbyhorse. For my part, I should take this to be the most pl(...)
Life in the W^^^d to spend my Life in a Garden with such Company.

If any one thinks that Children cannot be governed unless by Prop. 1.
the Discipline of the Rod, and the severity of Reprimands, I am sure he only
thinks so, and has never tried the Experiment, and I doubt not but thousands
can inform him better.

That Pedants so often join together the Idaea of a Red and Book, I have always
conceived to be the cause of their ill success in Teaching. Can such imagine,
Children should conceive any other of the latter than of the former? Can they
think Children should not do things much worse under dread? I am apt to
believe, few of these could have been persuaded to declain ad aram Lugdunensem,
though great Orators themselves, and great Rewards promised to such as came off
with Applause. And why? Because the Punishment inflicted in case of failure,
being so great, might have possibly so busied, and taken up their thoughts, as
to have spoiled the eloquent Harangue. But a Boy has rarely any Reward in a
School; nay, scarce extorts an Euge from his Task-master if he does well, and
is certainly whipped if he does not: Can he blame him then if he withdraws his
hand from the Ferula, when himself, in such a case, would do the same? Himself
knows how fear so often praecludes the thoughts, as to leave room for nothing
else; and will he expect from a Child, whose Passions are stronger, and Reason
much weaker, that Fear should not have the same influence over him, which it
has upon Adult Persons?

But the giving them frequent Rewards tends to make them Obj.
vain, proud, or covetous.

Some, perhaps, it may, but that the Masters prudence ought Answ.
to prevent, and he may do it several ways; I will instance in one.

It may be proposed, when their Praemiums amount to such a Sum to buy this or
that pleasant Book, near and delicately bound; this or that fine Map or
Picture; and when one has made up the Money, and bought the Book, an emulation
will be excited in all the rest till another has got it. After which, every one
will strive the more to ingratiate himself into the Masters affection, the more
have been served before him, when he perceives his Praemiums are purely the
Reward of Merit. Only the Master ought to take care, that two or three of the
last have their Moneys made up at the same time, least any should be
discouraged.

I hope none will Object this Number is too many, where Prop. 6.
there are two diligent and careful Masters. Certainly, so many may as well
(some of my Friends have thought better) be instructed in this Method than two.
And as the Ingenious Mr. Walker has observed, is neither so tedious to Master
nor Scholar. Besides, a generous Emulation will be more easily promoted than
amongst two or three only. And lastly, The Matter may be managed at lesser
Charge to the Parents.

Nor ought the Tutors, through Covetousness, to think it too few. For having so
small a Complement, they need take none in but Children very well descended,
and such as have had a virtuous and sober Education. And these Proposals being
performed, they will deserve the respect of Persons of Quality, whose Interest
may stand them in good stead. But not being performed, I think it too many, and
their Reward, if any thing, too much. I could wish that such as are negligent
in this important Matter, as they are accountable in foro Conscientiae, might
be severely Animadverted upon by humane Laws. Certainly the Cynic was in the
right on it, who trounc'd the Master because the Scholar was a naughty Boy.

This Proposal seems very necessary. Because all their Discourses Frop. 7.
and Authors being Latin, it might be feared through a total Disusc they might
be at a loss to express themselves handsomely and properly in their Mother
Tongue. The Master ought to be very careful in this particular, and, as the
aforesaid Method of Conversing with Latin People, Latin Authors, and earefully
observing Latin Analogy, will certainly prevent Anglicisms in their writing
Latin, he ought to take heed that no Latinisms creep into their Translations,
or English Phrase, and Diction. And this I take to be the most proper time for
it, viz. When he begins to find they had rather speak Latin than English;
(which by the use of the one, and disuse of the other, I suppose may be a
little more than a Year) then the Scholar ought to be put upon comparing them
both together, by heedfully minding their particular Phrases, Idioms and
Proverbs, and by almost an equal use of both the Styles, to render them both
equally easy and familiar, and yet so as neither of them may smell of the
other, the Analogy of both the Tongues being carefully observed.

For this Reason a Foreigner cannot be fit to undertake this Charge, unless
exactly acquainted with our Phrase and Indiom, which few are.

The Reason of this Proposal is, Lest a Disparity in their Prop. 8.
Age should cause the same disparity in their Improvement. Not that I fear the
Elder should get the start of the Younger, but on the contrary; for without
doubt, the younger we put Children into this Method the better. The Masters
will have most trouble with the oldest; yet when he is once managed, though he
should exceed the Age in this Proposal, if he be a Youth of a sweet and loving
temper, and studious withal, (but in this great care should be taken) he may
lead the younger whither he pleases, and do his Master a great deal of Service.

But Children are generally thought incapable of learning Obj.
Latin at this Age.

If People would consider how soon they learn English, I Answ.
dare say they would be of another mind.

These pretty little Mimics, with a sweet and natural delight, listen to all
our sounds, and very well understand them in a few Months, so far (at least) as
they any way concern themselves, as may be observed by many of their Actions,
and desire to be understood themselves. Nay, they are so concerned their little
Mimicisms cannot be conceived, that they make a thousand signs to show their
meaning, which is as pleasant, and delightful a Rhetoric, to such as have but
the Leisure, and Curiosity to observe them, as the quaintest Diction, and most
celebrated Haranguel Children have, by Nature, no greater Aptness to imitate
one Tongue than another; the Children of Jews, Arabians, French, and English,
come to speak much at the same time, and need not any particular Rules and
Directions about the Matter, nor indeed ever understand they are Learning, and
yet they all arrive at a tolerable Proficiency in two Years. The consequence is
therefore, they would equally understand Latin in that time, for none will
think the Roman Children did not understand their, Mother Tongue till 6 or 7
Years of Age.

But some will say, Though this be demonstrably true, yet Obj.
they may not, perhaps, at 6 or 7 Years of Age, be so capable of Foreign
Languages.

Yea, much more capable; for if before that Age they learned, Obj..
their Mother Tongue, notwithstanding their weakness, frowardness, contraction
of their Faculties, and their want of assistance from Art, and that purely by
hearing their Mother, or Nurse, Lisp a little broken English, What shall we
expect from them, when their Bodies are more firm, their poevishness abated,
their Faculties more dilated, when they may be assisted by Art, and Converse
with Men that speak fine and properly?

But what need these Collections, when daily Experience tellsus, That Children,
after having learned English, are in a Yearstime ordinarily taught French, or
Italian, and that with Ease and Pleasure, both to themselves and Master? Nay, I
am credibly informed of a Child, of ten Years of Age, who speaks five Languages
very fluently by Conversation only, of which Latin is one: And undoubtedly, the
learning of Latin the same way as they learn other Languages, must be most
easy and natural.

If Authorities were wanting, where Reason and Experience speak so loud, 'twere
easy to accumulate them. 'Twas partly by this Method, but since better
improved, that Roger Ascham taught his Royal Scholars, Elizabeth, Edward, and
the Lady Jane Gray, Latin, Greek, French and Italian, in three or four Years
time, to the Accomplishment of those great Personages, and to his own eternal
Honor.

'Twas this way, though not so happily proposed, that our admirable Cowley,
almost by his own indefatigable Industry, learned the Latin and Greek Tongues,
as is observed by the Gentleman that writes his Life in these words:

His Teachers never could bring him to learn the ordinary Rules of Grammar, but
[he] chose rather to converse with the Books themselves, from whence the others
were taken. This, no doubt, was the better way, though more difficult; and he
found afterward the benefit, that having got the Greek and Latin Tongues, as
he had done his own, not by Precept but Use, he practiced them not as a Scholar
but a Native. And this very Consideration was the occasion of my

For by making his Authors and Masters his Grammar, Dictionary, 9th Prop.
and Phrase-Book, he will better come to know the Genuine significations from
the Translated, fee how the latter come from the former, with pleasure, and
learn as a Native of Ancient Rome to write, and speak, without encumbring
himself with Rules, or conceiving his sense in English, before he speaks, or
writes.

And here I cannot but observe the Cause our Learned Gentlemen of England, whom
all Foreigners own to write Latin very politely, attempting to speak it, do it
so awkwardly, and (as it were) unnaturally; because they have not learned it in
this natural way: They must needs speak it slowly, who having been taught by
multiplicity of Rules, their Mind is employed in three different things at the
same time: 1. Thinking of the Rules by which they learned it. 2. Thinking of
the English sense which they carry along with them. And 3. Of the Latin Diction
and Idiom, (which how troublesome it is, themselves knowing, can seldom be
prevail^d with to speak it, and all others, who consider it, may easily
conjecture) whereas a Man in speaking Latin ought not to be concerned about the
two former, (for what signifies the Scaffold when the Building is finished)
and, forgetting what Countryman he is, imagine himself a Citizen of Old Rome.

The reason of this is, because Children finding no restraint Prop. 10.
upon them but acting freely, act much more vigorously and to the purpose. When
imposed, they often have an utter Aversion to that, which otherwise they freely
choosing, would take a great delight in. Bring but Children into love with a
Language, Art or Science, and when that point is gained, and some of them
desire to be taught it, you may tell them, A great many Men do not understand
it, and that it would be the way to make them wiser than most Men, and you will
find they will yet have the greater Inclination.

When their Desire is sufficiently heightened, you may pretend notwithstanding
it is so great a Privilege, yet you love such an one (your favorite) so dearly
for his diligence, and attention, that you could almost find in your heart to
give him a little insight into it; then proceed as though you were unwilling the
rest should be admitted to this favor, and such a proceeding, I question not,
will oblige some of the rest quickly, by their Attention and Diligence, in
their own Studies, (when they find those are the only ways to recommend 'em)
labor to ingratiate themselves into your favor, to enjoy the Privilege of
your favorite. So by degrees you may wind up their inclinations to what
heighths you please, and bring them all by degrees, with submission and
thankfulness, to accept the favor.

Thus I have, as short as I could, given the Reasons of the Proposals, and
Answered such Objections as I could think of, or have been made to me by
Parents, when I have desird them to tell me their Opinion of Mr. Lock's Method
in learning Latin, which (because upon the Reasonableness thereof Page 196. Pr.
Ed.
these Proposals are grounded) I shall transcribe from the Learned and
Ingenious Author.

If therefore a Man could be got, who himself speaks good Latin, who would be
always about your Son, and talk constantly to him, and make him read Latin,
that would be the true, genuine, and easy way, of teaching him Latin; and that
I could wish, since besides teaching him a Language without Pains or Chiding,
which Children are wont to be whipped for at School six or seven years
together, he might, at the same time, not only form his Mind and Manners, but
instruct him also in several Sciences, such as are a good part of Geography,
Astronomy, Chronology, Anatomy, besides some parts of History, and all other
parts of knowledge of things that fall under the Senses, and require little
more than Memory.

But hold -- I had like to have forgot the Grand Objection, Obj.
not levelled at any particular part, but at the whole Design. The Method is
singular, I dare not venture upon it for my Son.

I hope it is a singular good one, and then no Matter. Is it Answ.
reasonable? If so, it ought to be tried. If this were any Argument, there
never would have been, nor never would be, any Improvements in the World.
Christian Religion wou^d never have gained ground in the World at first, nor
its Reformation since. Philosophy, Medicine, Law, and all Arts and Sciences,
had been thousands of years ago put out of a possibility of being improved;
nay, to speak more properly, not so much as the Names themselves had been heard
of.

But if, for all that, any will think Singularity an Argument, I will beg of
them to accept of it against our General Method of Education in England, as
being different from that of all Learned Nations, and Ages, that have been
before us. I never heard that the Jews, Egyptians, Phaenicians, Persians,
Graecians, Romans, ever Studied Languages, or if they did, that they were ever
denominated learned from thence, much less ordered their Children to spend ten
or twelve of their best Years in learning Words and Sounds, as though they were
not only the Vehicles of Knowledge, but Knowledge it self. No, no, their
Masters gave them a quite different Institution, they Admonished them to study
themselves, and the Universe, to Converse with Nature, to observe the heavenly
Influences; were continually preaching to them Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance, in their tender Years, and afterward, Oeconomics, and Politics, to
know how to steer and guide themselves first, and then the Ship of the
Commonwealth, if they were to be Public Men: They made them acquainted with
the Constitutions of other Governments, not by reading Books, but sending them
Abroad, where their having learned Languages, was reckoned as one of the least
benefits of their Travels. Nay, by many 'twas looked upon a disadvantage, and
such as had them were always cautious of intermixing them with their own. And
were not these better Institutions of Youth, than purely Language and Words,
which our Schoolmasters hunt after with such earnestness, neglecting the
sense? In which Matter I could heartily wish a Reformation; when a Boys Lesson
is that of Persius. Discite and o miseri, causas cognoscite rerum,
Quid sumus and quidnam victuri gignimur, ordo
Quis datus, and metae quam mollis flexus, and unde,
Quis modus Argento, quid fas optare, quid asper
Utile Nummus habet, patriae charisque propinquis
Quantum elargiri deceat, quem te DEUS esse
Iussit, and humana, qua part locatus es in re;


Would not any Parent think it far better his Son knew the meaning of this
Divine Poem than the Syntax? Were not a fair Occasion given the Master to read
his Pupil Lectures of Physics, Ethics, Oeconomics, Politics? etc. and by
insisting a good while upon it, the Child, perhaps, would remember it as long
as he lives.

Nay, we are not only singular in our Manner of Education to former Ages, but
this too, in those Countries which are more concerned to admire Latin than we,
because the Service of their Church is in that Tongue: For they take greater
care about their Childrens Morals, and Institutions of Piety, than Latin, but
we postpone these Matters of infinitely more Concernment, or if we have taken
any care in them, are willing to run the risque; Latin they must have, though at
the expense of their Virtue and Innocence, and six or seven Years of their best
time, to be Instructed in useful knowledge to boot. And does not this look like
the Proverbial purchase, Pro thesauro Carbones?

Nor do they learn it as we do, confounding themselves with unncessary Rules,
and Exceptions of Grammar; but chiefly by Conversation, and the Authors from
whence they were taken, and by this Method can often speak and write it
tolerably well in a Year, and, perhaps, have at the same time profited in some
useful Knowledge. And admit they do not understand it so well, as who have
spent seven or eight Years about it, yet well enough for their Occasions, to
read an Author, and converse with Strangers, (which last we seldom, after all,
can do); and how Gentlemen, Tradesmen, and all Persons, who do not design their
Children for Scholars, should think so many Years in learning a Language (tho
they were sure they would be Critics in it) which, after all, would be but of
very little use, well spent, I cannot easily imagine, when to understand it, as
abovesaid, may do as well to all intents and purposes; nay, better for
Conversation, and may be attained so easily. Here it is proposd, because
unexperienced in this way to take two years to do that, which the Scots, French
and Germans, often do in one; and yet to save a Child four or five years, which
would have been spent at School in learning Latin, which may be Employed to a
far greater Advantage, in writing a good Hand, reading the best English
Writers, polishing and perfecting his English Style, learning Merchants
Accounts, studying the Mathematics, improving those Rudiments of Arts and
Sciences, which he had so good a taste of in reading Latin, learning the Art of
a decent Carriage and Comportment with a Dancing Master, Conversing with
Gentlemen of Sense and Experience in the World, whose Conversation will be much
more Advantageous to him, than of any Scholar: And are not all these
Accomplishments preferrable to the being a Critic in a Tongue, which existing
only in Books, can never perfectly be understood? Witness several things in
Cato of Husbandry, Ennius and Plautus, which are not understood; upon which,
notwithstanding, People will Comment and Criticize in Infinitum.

But such as their Parents design for Scholars, in this Method, after one year,
their Master may put upon reading Sanctius's Minerva, with Scioppius's Notes,
and other Pieces of Criticism upon Grammar; or which, I take to be much better,
to teach them from their Observations upon Authors, to make a Critical Grammar
themselves, and when they have done it, they will not need so many Rules of
Grammar before they read a Greek Author, as they had occasion for, before they
learned a Latin one; and so the Tutor may proceed much after the same way as
before, reading Lectures upon Authors, and still improving the Rudiments of
Useful Knowledge.

This is the Method I think best, in the Treatment and Institution of Children,
which I hope, by the blessing of God, and careful Endeavors of Able and
Virtuous Men, may be of use to the Commonwealth.

I shall leave the whole to the Readers Judgment, desiring his Candor and
favorable Opinion of this Proposed Method of Institution; and if he will
vindicate the Common Method, or propose another he thinks better than that, or
this, I will repay him, with Thanks.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
SUch as desire to discourse the Author upon these Proposals, may hear of him
at the Booksellers, or at the Marine Coffee-House in Birchin-Lane, after
Change, who can inform them of Undertakers.

AN Idea of Geography and Navigation. Containing Easy Rules for finding the
Latitude and difference of Longitude of Places by Observation of the Sun, Moon
and Stars. The demonstration and use of the Logline. The variation of the
Compass. The Doctrine of Plain Triangles. The Construction and Use of all
manner of Maps and Charts. To keep a Iournal, and to work a Traverse both by
Plain and Mercators Sailing. The Solution of all Nautical questions,
Geometrically, Arithmetically, and Instrumentally. Also Tables of the Sun's
Declination and Right Ascension for ever. A Table of the most Eminent (...)
Stars in both Hemispheres, rectified for the Year 1700, with their Use, and
other Tables necessary for Navigation^ By Samuel Newton, Master of the Math.
School in Christ^^ Hospital^ London. Printed ^^ Christopher Hussy, at the
Flower-de-Luce in LittleBritain.


