A DISCOURSE OF WIT.

BY David Abercromby, M. D.

Qui velit ingenio cedere rarus erit. LONDON, Printed for John Weld at the
Crown between the two Temple Gates in Fleetstreet, 1686.

TO ALEXANDER MVRRAY OF Blackbarronie, Esquire
SIR,
I Here offer you not a Transcript, nor Translation, but my own free, and
perhaps, not quite ungrounded Thoughts on several Subjects; though I pretend
not to impose on any Man's Understanding, my own irregular Fancies, as inclining
more* to Scepticisim in disputable matters, than to that Bold, and Magisterial
air of Dogmatical Philosophers. My chief Design then in writing and publishing
this present Treatise, was to furnish the Virtuosi with matters fit for
ingenious Conversations: Which perhaps I have performed in some measure,
because of the great, and not unpleasant Variety of things it contains. I speak
every where my mind with a Philosophical freedom, neither blaming other men's
Fancies, nor presuming too much upon my own Conceits. And if I seem to be
somewhat Paradoxical on several occasions, it is more in appearance perhaps,
than in realty: for these seeming Paradoxes, if not overlook't, may appear to
an unprejudiced* Reader undeniable Truths, or at least (which is my utmost aim)
not to be altogether improbable. Of such things it is free to every one to
dispute Pro and Con, as it serves his turn, or present Fancy. Wherein I could
never conceive any thing of a pedantick Humor, but a very Lawful, and Laudable
Exercise of Wit and Ability: which I designedly add, because some, I know, are
of Opinion, that all kind of Learning and Ingenuity should be banished from a
free and familiar Converse: But I conceive such Men to be either of the dullest
sort, or Epicureo de grege Porcos, mere Epicureans, as taking delight in
nothing, but what may please their Senses, or revive the Images of their past
Pleasures. Thus some homebred Gentlemen make a long Story to every one they
meet, of what they daily either eat or drink. Others talk perpetually of their
Amors, Mistresses, and new Intrigues, and not a few abuse your Patience with
severe Reflections on their Neighbors.

But since you are not guilty of such Irregularities, I had, no doubt, some
other reason, than your Instruction, to prefix your Name before these Papers. I
shall then perhaps, offend your Modesty, but not the Truth, if I say it was
chiefly the great share you have in the Subject they treat of. It Is true, the
Ancient and present State of your Noble Family, and other advantages of that
kind might have engaged me to make you this Present, had I been of an Humor to
value Men only by their out side, I mean, by what is without them, and not
rather by their real Parts, and if I may so say, intrinsecal Nobility. I ow
indeed an outward Respect to a Person of Quality, yet I shall pay him no inward
Homage, if nothing else recommend him, but the Greatness of his Family; whence
you may easily judge, that, how considerable soever you may be in the Eyes of
the World on other accounts, I do value you most for what is really your own, I
mean your Ingenuity, Discretion, Wisdom; yea, and Virtue too, so seldom to be
met with in this corrupted Age we live in. As these Endowments of the Mind are
far more taking with me than any other advantages of Fortune whatsoever, so
they were my chief Inducements to let you know by this inconsiderable Present,
that I am in Realty, and without Flattery, which I hate,

SIR, Your very affectionate Friend and Servant David Abercromby.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. l. 24. Read, and the Grecians. p. 7. l. 3. in a higher degree, add,
than others. l. ib. as salt, R. a salt. p. 9. l. 7. R. ingenuously. p. 25. l.
8. not without. p. 28. l. 12. infused R. misused. p. 30. l 15. R. Springs. p
ib. l. 17. R. or change p. 35. l. 7. and the former, etc. add is free. p. 36.
l. 13. R. of most knowable things. p. 16. l. 19. R. less. p. 39. l. 23.
heightness R. lightness, p 45. l. 6. R. the harshest. p. ib. l. 15. R.
affectations. p. ib. last l. R. if dissemblingly you admire them. p. 57. l. 15.
R. but not any innate indisposition to, etc. p. 61. l. 12. R. had for have p.
69. l. 23. R. may discover Jovis, etc. p. 71. l. 15. R. respect. p. 88. l. 28.
influences R. inferences p. 97. l. 18. R. Gordian knott. p. 231. l. 10. R.
Rugens quaerens quem devoret. p. 133. l. 5. R. certainty. p. 135. l. 24. R.
ingenuously. p 139. l. 12. R. true Gold without a. p. 176. l. 10. R. quicken
into Life without them. p. 180. l. 5. leave out may before Authors, and put it
in immediately before have.

SECTION I. What is meant by that which Men usually call Wit?
1. That the things we are most acquainted with, we least understand.

2. How few are the true Notions we have of the most obvious things.

3. Several specious definitions of Wit.

4. Its best and most accurate description.

5. That Beasts are not to he denied all sort of Wit and Reason.

It Is seemingly improbable, yet very true, that the things we are most
acquainted with, we least know. Thus Light, than which, nothing in the whole
Creation is more conspicuous, is as impenetrable to the dim Eyes of our
Understanding, as it is visible and obvious to those of our Bodies. Thus Time so
generally known and discoursed of, is as obscure unto me, if not more, than
Eternity it self. What more visible than Colors? Since we see nothing else;
yet if I consult for resolutions sake, Philosophers, I shall make no more of
their most satisfactory Answers, than that they are, (at least to my weak
understanding) mere occult qualities, un je ne scay quoy, or I know not what.
So far these Great Men, though deservedly reputed not ordinary Wits, fall
nevertheless short, of the true Orgine, and Mechanism of the most known and
visible Objects. The Wind I feel, and am extremely sensible of, especially when
boisterous, and blows hard; what it is, whence it comes, why it is so
changeable; and yet in some parts of the World so constant, why it moves
sidewise and Horizontally (as they speak) and not Perpendicularly, or from the
Circumference to the Center on a strait Line, I never yet could reach, and
thought always the Laudable Endeavors of such as have undertaken to give us an
account of those hidden, though most visible Phinomena's, altogether
unsuccessful.

2. What I have said of Light, Time, Colors, etc. and whatever we are most
conversant with in the Works of the Creation, I shall with a no less appearance
of Reason, apply to our present Subject: For what the Latins call, Ingenium
the French, L'esprit, the English, Wit, is a thing so generally known, that
there are few but pretend to be acquainted with it, and not to want it, or not
to have received as great a measure of it, as the very wittiest sort can
pretend to; for nothing more true than this common Word, Qui velit ingenio
cedere rarus erit. Yet even those, on whom Nature has bestowed it most
Liberally, are put to a stand, and know not what to answer, if you press them
to determine what in realty it is. But pretending sometimes to know more than
really they do, and being resolved to say any thing rather than nothing, they
will endeavor to put you off with great and empty Words, Splendid
Descriptions, Tedious Tautologies, affected Metaphors, and whatever may seem a
sufficient Veil to their Ignorance. What is it then we commonly call Wit? I
confess, I never either read or heard any thing on this Subject, that looks
like a satisfactory Resolution of this Question: And perhaps what I shall set
down here, will prove far short of the thing I aim at. For I am of Opinion, we
do so little understand the Nature of things, that we cannot confidently boast
yet of any true Notion, or Definition. Yea, I hold that this very Definition of
Man, Homo est Animal rationale, so familiar in the Schools, is near as
imperfect as this, Homo est Anima rationalis, Man is a rational Soul. My Reason
for this assertion, is because the latter Proposition presents to my
Understanding nothing but what is in some Sense true, though not all the Truth:
For a man indeed is a rational Soul, though something else. The former, besides
its obscurity, gives me just grounds to suspect its containing more than the
Truth; I mean, that this rational Soul, which in the Second Proposition, I
conceieve, in a manner free from matter, is really material, as depending on an
Organical Body, as to its first being, conservation, and functions. For if you
take asunder this Notion, and consider it in every respect, you shall find that
this reasoning faculty, supposed to be in man, is never exerted without the
concurrence of the matter, or of some material Phantasm. The contrary whereof
is a prerogative granted only to those perfect Spirits, the ancient
Philosophers called Demons, and by the Grecians Angels, who by the privilege
of their most refined Nature, are happily freed from that gross and massy
substance, which our Souls, how Spiritual soever they be, are clogged with, in
this Mortal Life.

3. I cannot then pretend to give you a true and genuine Notion of Wit, but an
imperfect, and rude inchoate description thereof, yet so general and
comprehensive, that it contains all such Creatures, as without any violence
done to the Word, we may truly call Witty. Yet shall I not say with a great
Man of this Age, that Wit is, un je ne scay quoy, I know not what: For this
would be to say nothing at all, and an easy answer to all difficulties, and no
solution to any. Neither shall I call it a certain Liveliness, or Vivacity of
the Mind inbred, or radicated in its Nature, which the Latins seem to
insinuate by the word Ingenium; nor the subtlest operation of the Soul above
the reach of mere matter, which perhaps is meant by the French, who concieve
Wit to be a Spiritual thing, or a Spirit L' esprit. Nor with others, that it is
a certain acuteness of Undestanding, some men possess in a higher degree, the
Life of discourse, as Salt, without which nothing is relished, a Celestial
Fire, a Spiritual Light, and what not. Such and the like Expressions contain
more of Pomp than of Truth, and are fitter to make us talkative on this
Subject, than to enlighten our Understandings. But what then is Wit? To hold
you no longer in suspense, Wit is either a senceful discourse, word, or
Sentence, or a skilful Action. This Notion, though short, being as you see,
disjunctive, is upon this account the more comprehensive: Where ever then you
shall meet with Sense in discourse, etc. Dexterity and Skill in Actions, there,
and no where else you shall meet with Wit. As this is so clear, that it needs
no more proof than the Sun needs Light, so I leave it untouched, and to your
own Meditation, as a self-evident Principle, I shall only say, that Sense is so
necessary for meriting the Honorable Name of a Virtuoso, and a true Wit; that
Men without this advantage are deservedly not only reputed not Witty, but mere
Fools, and senseless: Yet do I not mean that every kind of Sense in our
discourse, allows our Discourse to be styled Witty else the number of Wits
would be fargreater than we are commonly aware of: Yet certain it is, there are
but few true Wits, in comparison of those that have Sense enough, not to be
mere Fools. We speak then here not of Sense only, but of Sencefulness, neither
of a dead, and down right flat Sense, for nothing more common, but rather of a
Lively one, as being animated by a certain Tour not usual to the duller sort.
This sort of Sense is not unlike to a bright and polished Diamond, the other
may be represented to us by a Brute, and unpolished one: They are both of the
same Substance, not of the same Value, both of the same matter, not of the same
form, I mean of the same Light, Splendor and Brightness.

4. As to the other part of this Description, wherein I mention a dexterous or
skilful Action as a piece of Wit, I confess ingeniously, I designed by this
Addition to declare, that I am not so great an Admirer of mankind, as to think
that no other material Substance, but that which is congenial to my self, may
be, and deservedly too, called Witty. Philosophers may pretend what they
please, unless they prove themselves Semideos, to be more than Men, they shall
never convince me that they are otherwise differenced than in Speech and
Figure, from those living Creatures, we call commonly Beasts; and which I have
always conceived to be in reality, Animalia rationalia, rational Catures, but
of a lower Rank, and less perfect than Men. Neither shall any Man laugh me out
of this Philosophy with their innate instinct, which in the judgment of common
understanding, is their first inward Mover, and the sole principal of all their
Actions. For unless you understand by this Instinct, God himself, which would
be no less surprising, than Deus e Machina, and besides no satisfactory answer,
you will I hope confess it is nothing else but an obscure and insignificant
Word, invented only to heighten that too vain conceit we have of our own
nature, by depressing that of other inferior Creatures. For Men considering
the wonderful, and most skilful, and inimitable Actions of Apes, Elephants,
Swallows, Bees, Dogs, etc. were loath to allow them to be endowed with some
kind of Reason, as if they should thereby range themselves among the Beasts.
Yet being forced to give some account of these undoubted pieces of Wit we daily
observe in that lower sort of living Creatures, they called subtily their most
ingenious Actions, the Products not of Reason, but of Instinct; whereby, if
they understood nothing else, but an inferior sort of Reason, and in some
particulars far below that of the more perfect and rational Creatures, they
were only guilty of a wilful and affected obscurity: But if they intended by
this harsh Word an entire exclusion of all true reasoning, they pretend more,
than ever they did or could well prove, as I could easily demonstrate, if it
had not been done by others. They were in vain afraid already that if they
granted once the use of Reason to other Inferior Creatures, they should not be
sufficiently distinguished themselves, and far enough removed from their
Condition, as if besides Shape and Speech, the different degrees of Reason
could not make a separation wide enough between Men and Beasts: For though it is
most true, that, Simia quicquid agat, simia erit, a Beast at the best will
always be but a Beast: Yet I never understood why we should deny some share
both of Reason and Wit to several of those inferior Creatures, that do things
we can neither imitate, nor account for, without granting them, in some
measure, this reasoning faculty, we would feign Monopolize to our selves. I
would not then style him an Extravagant, who should conceive as much Reason and
Wit in an Ape, a Dog, Fox and Elephant, as in some Men, though not mere Fools.
However no man can deny, what chiefly I here aim at, that Wit is not the
Prerogative of Mankind alone. A Spiders Web in my conceit, is no less, if not
more ingeniously contrived, than the Weaver's. I conceive in a Honey Comb, with
Pleasure and Admiration, a very acurate, and regular piece of Fortification;
the wonderful Texture and groundless Foundation of a Swallows Nest, do
represent to me more art, than ever I could be yet sensible of in the structure
of the greatest Louvers.

SECTION II. The Causes of Wit.
1. Two different Opinions concerning the diversity of Wit in Men.

2. That it is not occasioned by the respectively greater perfection of the
Organs.

3. That one Soul is really perfecter than another.

4. Some curious enquirys relating to this proposition answered.

5. What things may contribute toward the promoting of Wit.

6. That we cannot improve our Wit beyond the innate perfection of our Souls.

1. WE are taught in the Schools, that all diversity of Wit in Men, does
originally spring from that of their Organs. I sucked in this Doctrine in my
greener years, and believed it a while, as many others of greater moment, which
I have bid a farewell to since, in a riper Age: For being naturally curious, and
not very credulous, I began to shake off by degrees, a certain implicate Faith,
I had been for several years too much enslaved to; having more than once in my
ordinary solitude, and retired thoughts, Neque enim cum me aut porticus
accepit, aut lectulus desum mihi, called my self to an account upon what
grounds I had so long stood up for such a vulgar Error, I found them all to be
moveable, unstable, and groundless; and first I thought I was neither
conformable to reason, nor common Sense, to think that a Soul free from matter
and Mortality, as I conceived mine to be, should entirely depend upon a Body,
both material and Mortal, especially as to its Chief, and most perfect
Operarions, as undoubtedly those of the Wit are. I had another more powerful
Inducement not to shake hands with this Opinion, and bid it adieu, which was
that I remembered to have been familiarly acquainted with several, both at home
and abroad, who had no visible defect in the Organs of their Bodies, and yet
were most deficient, as to the endowments of the Mind. And on the contrary, I
have known not a few, who, if you regard only their outside, may look upon
Nature as a cruel Stepmother, as having received from her no sensible marks of
a Motherly Benevolence; yet if taing them by another Bias, you consider their
Abilities, you shall, I am persuaded, instantly confess, that they are more
obliged to Nature, or God rather, than most of those who have received in a
larger measure, those exterior Ornaments and Gifts of Beauty. For why may we
not reckon the sharpness of their Wit, and other advantages of their Souls to
be more a sufficient Compensation for some outward Imperfections of their
Bodies. Thus it happens sometimes, that Blind Men are clearer sighted than many
of those who make use of both their Eyes. I had the luck to to be acquainted
with one of this Number in Germany, whom I judged the most extemporary Wit I
ever met with. I remember I was once curious to know what he thought of Black,
Red, White, and other Colors, his answer was, he framed to himself the same
idea of such things that we frame to our selves of occult qualities.

2. Thus all things impartially weighed on each side, I could not ascribe those
differences and manifold degrees of Wit we observe among the generality of Men,
to any other Cause with a greater appearance of Truth, than to the different
perfections of their Souls: For meditating sometimes upon the grounds of this
common Word, quantum homo homini praestat, how much one man surpasses another
in Vivacity, sharpness, penitrancy, and other intellectual Endowments. I was
inclined to believe some things among those Imperfect Spirits, for such are the
Souls of Men, as being each of them but a part of the whole Man, answerable to
what Divinity will needs have us to admit, among those perfect Spirits, we call
Angels. I was inclined I say, to think that there are different Species or
Hierarchies of Souls, as well as of other created Spirits. For I conceive an
Angel, and I believe the School Divines will not give me the lie, to be farther
distant from the perfection of a Cherubim, or Seraphim, than a Lion, or any
other inferior Creature is from that of a Man. Now the reason of this great
variety in that superior Spiritual Nature, establishes the same, or not an
unlike one in the Souls of Men. The Divines then say, that if God had created
but one sort of things, or one single Species, he had not given us so very
Illustrious Marks of his Power, and Wisdom; and consequently had bin less
glorified by us. Undoubtedly then a Specifical variety of Spirits, as they
speak in the Schools, must needs be a greater manifestation of his Glory, than,
to borrow this other Scholastic Expression, a mere numerical one. We may
discourse after the same manner of our Souls. For as the great diversity of
Bodies furnishes us with a nobler Idea of Gods Power, than if he had created
but one kind, or all of one Texture; so if I suppose different Species, and
Hierarchies of Souls as of Angels, I frame, no doubt, a higher conceit of his
perfections. Yet notwithstanding all this, you shall not be allowed hence to
infer, that there are different Species of Men: For this Denomination we take
from what is most obvious to our Senses, that is from the Bodies. In which we
can observe no such difference, as we may easily take notice of between a Horse
and a Lion, a Lion, an Ape, and a Bird, etc. this Doctrine will raise in our
minds a great Respect and Veneration for Men of greater Abilities than we know
our selves to be of; for we shall conceive their Souls are in a higher order,
as indeed they are, and consequently pay to them a due and proportionable
Homage, as Angels do Honor and Esteem Archangels, and Archangels likewise
Powers, Thrones, etc. But I must needs here, for your further satisfaction,
answer some curious inquiries about this matter.

1. How comes it to pass that a most perfect Soul is sometimes lodged in a most
defectuous Body? I answer, this happens against the intention of Nature: for
Nature delights in proportion, and reason teaches us, there should be some
proportion between the Beauty of the Soul, and that of the Body it lodges in,
as the Stateliest Palaces are ordinarily the dwelling places of the greatest
Princes. 2. Are not the noblest Souls more ordinarily lodged in beautiful
Bodies? I answer they are; for the reason above mentioned, and it is by
accident, if perhaps the contrary happens. But these are the solutions of a
mere Naturalist, or of one that favors too much Nature. I answer then in
Second Instance, we must search after the true cause of such surprising
contingencies in the first cause of all things, I mean in God himself, who may
do, and does sometimes, what, to our weak Judgments, Nature neither seems to
desire nor require. 3. Does it never happen that a Soul of the first or second
Order, that is a most perfect one, is so disabled, during its stay in a
corruptible Body, as never to discover its natural abilities? I answer it is not
likely that such a case should ever happen, or if it does, this is as I was
saying before, against the intention of Nature, though not of the Author of
Nature, and a mere chance occasioned by some considerable defect of our Organs,
which the Soul, how perfect soever, is not able to supply, because it wants a
fit and convenient matter to work upon. But hence some that take notice but of
few things, and consequently are easily mistaken, may conclude the contrary of
what I intend to assert, that the various degrees of Wit depend on the
diversity of our Organs; which cannot be Lawfully inferred from what I have
said, for as if we place the most imperfect Soul, that is one of the Lowest
Order, in the most complete Body can be imagined, it shall never for all this,
transcend its own dull nature, and by consequence shall operate but very
imperfectly, so if we conceive the Noblest Soul that ever God created in a Body
most imperfect, that is, destitute of necessary Organs, or having but the
Rudiments of true Organs, it shall never do what otherwise it had been able to
perform, because it cannot discover to us its abilities in this Life, but by
these material instruments, nor operate to any perfection they be wanting, or
notably defective Which argued only Imperfection i^ the Instruments, not in the
principa^ Agent. Thus the defects we observ^ in a mere fool, are not really in
hi^ Soul, but occasioned by the overthrow of those parts of his Body without
which he cannot utter himself rationally. Whenever then perceive by all the
most visible sign of Health, and good Texture, tw^ Bodies equally Sound,
Perfect, an^ Acomplisht, and yet a notable difference between the two Persons
t^ whom those Bodies belong; a notabl^ difference I say as to their
Intellectuals, I mean Judgment, Sense, Sharpness and Wit, I conclude instantly
without further deliberation, an^ perhaps without Error too, that the one has
a Soul of a Lower Rank, and the other of a Higher.

3. Yet I acknowledge willingly there may be other Inferior Causes, that
contribute not a little to the increase of Wit: For how perfect soever we
conceive the Soul to be, she requires still the help both of Vital and Animal
Spirits. And if these be but too few, or not lively enough, you shall find her
slow, dull and heavy. It Is not then an unwholesome Advice to all such as are
sensible they have received from above, Animam bonam, a not very imperfect
Soul; to conserve with all possible care the necessary Instruments of her most
Spiritual Operations; I mean not to consume by excessive Venery, excessive
Drink, or any other kind of Surfeit those Spirits, without which their Souls,
though never so perfect, will act but very imperfectly, and far below that
degree of perfection God has allowed them. Upon this account, a sober Diet, or
temperate Life is the best Preserver both of Wit and Health; for nothing more
true than this common Word Vinum moderate sumptum acuit ingenium, Wine does not
only strengthen the Stomach but likewise quickens the Spirits, if moderately
made use of; as on the contrary it weakens the Stomach, and darkens the
Understanding, if taken excessively, or beyond a proportionable measure.

4. There is as yet another greater Promoter of Wit, we must not forget, which
is to converse often, and keep Company with those that are really Ingenious and
Witty: For though your Soul, perhaps, be of the highest Hierarchy, yet it moves
not it self easily, unless it be first moved; it must then be roused up, and
awakened by the Company of those who can insensibly improve those real Talents
God has vouchsafed to bestow upon it: For as we may boldly judge of a Man's
Temper, or good Humor, of his good or bad Morals, if once we are informed what
Company he most frequents; so likewise we may guess at his intellectuals by the
Capacity, and Abilities of such as he is most conversant with. For experience
has taught us more than once, that ingenious Men become at length dull and
heavy, by frequenting too much the duller sort; whereof I think this account
may be given without some show of probability. Ingenious Men have need of some
considerable encouragement to display those Talents they have received from
above. Now neither esteeming nor valuing much the Esteem of mean Capacities,
they fall in a manner, in a certain Lethargy, and are not able to rouse up
their Spirits for want of sufficient inducements. And this often happening,
begets in them a habit, they cannot easily be afterward rid of.

5. On the contrary, nothing improves us more than a frequent converse with the
wittiest sort, as daily Experience shows; and the custom of the Ancient
Philosophers, who traveled all the World over, to see and hear the Learned
Men of their times; which example is followed in this very age we live in by
most Nations of Europe, the Scots especially, and the Germans, and by the
English of late, who, for the most part, become not only smoother, and more
polite by their traveling into Foreign Countries, but sharper too, and
Wittier; as every one may easily observe, who will be at the pains to compare a
merely home-bread Gentleman, with one that has either lived abroad, or
conversed much with Strangers, especially the ingenious sort at home: I look
upon the former as a mere Clown, destitute of that Delicacy of Wit, and
discerning Faculty, you shall find upon occasion in the latter. But all this is
to be understood cum grano salis, in this supposition that you have not a Soul
of the lowest Rank, but one that may hold in the Hierarchy or imperfect
Spirits, a place at least of an Archangel, I mean, that is not in the very
lowest Order of Souls: for let a Man travel never so far, and converse never so
much, he shall attempt in vain the attainment of that Wit, which by reason of
the innate Imperfection of his Understanding, he is not capable of. If then a
Father minds to send his Son abroad, in Order to improve his Understanding, let
him consult first with himself, and others, if he be capable of any
considerable improvement; for the first and chief Source in us of Wit is the
Soul it self, which, all our endeavors shall not be able to quicken, if it be
heavy and dull by Nature. For as some rough Stones may be smoothed into a
bright Diamond, because they contain already what ever is most valuable in a
Diamond; so some others, for a contrary Reason, can never be changed into so
Noble Substance. Even so, if our Souls be really capable of a further
improvement they may be so far improved, as to attain to no ordinary
Perfection; but we lose our Time, if we pretend to equalize them at length to
those of a higher Order, and Superior to them in Nature. For I take the
supernatural Order, and the Natural to be proportionably answerable to one
another. As then there is a certain finite number of Blessings, wherewith we
may, if we please, work our Salvation, which being once granted, and infused,
we can obtain no more; so likewise there is a certain pitch and measure of
Natural Ability, beyond which, with all our possible endeavors, we can never
reach. If then your Soul be of the Lowest Hierarchy, you can no more pretend to
the Excellency of a Higher one, than an Angel to be an Archangel, or an
Archangel to be a Power, etc.

SECT. III. Different sorts of Wits.
1. The great variety of Physiognomy, and Humane Bodies not so wonderful as
that of Humane Souls.

2. Of Habitual, and Accidental Wit.

3. Of Universal and Singular Wits.

4. That some Characters of Wit are inconsistent together.

5. Other unusual distinctions of Wit.

1. I Never wondered much at the great variety of Physiognomies and Humane
Bodies, because I am fully persuaded that a perfect resemblance in every
particular, is either impossible, or can be at the most, but a work of mere
chance, by a fortuitous Cohalition of the compounding corpuscles into the same
Texture. But believing no such Composition or Texture in our Spiritual Souls, I
ever looked upon them as more deserving pieces of Wonder. I was always then
extremely surprised, and I am yet, that among so many Millions of Rational
Souls, God has created since the first Birth of the World; there are so few,
if any at all, resembling exactly one another: For though they fall not under the
reach of our Eyes, yet we cannot but know infallibly their real discrepancies,
by the diversity we observe in their respective productions, which, as I was
lately saying, spring originally from the Soul, though sometimes it may suffer
an occasional stop, or chance, by the Temper of the Body. But to be more plain,
what I say deserved ever my highest admiration, was this, that let men's Bodies
resemble never so much one another, their Souls shall never be near of the same
temper; by which I mean not only the same humor, but likewise the same degree
of Perfection or Wit. Whereof for Methods sake we may consider two sorts: The
First I call Habitual, the Second Accidental. An habitual Wit is proper only to
all such and only to such as are habitually inclined, and disposed to think and
speak sensefully, and to the Purpose on all occasions. And this is the true
Character of those that are deservedly called Witty. Such observe naturally St.
Bernard's Judicious Precept, Verbum bis Veniat ad Limam quam semel ad Linguam,
they think twice before they speak once, least their words should forerun their
thoughts. They are wise, discreet, humble, peaceable, and the fittest of all
Men for the Managment of great Affairs. The accidental Wit is the Product in a
manner of a mere chance, and hazard, such as that of most, at least of many
Women, the most talkative, but neither the most judicious, nor the most
thinking part of Mankind. They say sometimes, things that look like Wit, but
impetu naturae non judicii, merely by a sudden vehemence of their Nature, or
rather a certain volubility of their Tongues, not by Judgment, or a serious
reflection, what proportion their discourse may have with the Subject in
question, because, they seldom take notice of the Dictates of their discerning
Faculty, but follow the sudden motions of a mutable and confused Imagination or
Fancy. ^his is only to be understood of that sort of Women, who are to be
accounted Witless rather, than Witty: For this accidental Wit we are now
speaking of, holds so much of Chance, that mere Fools may now and then stumble
upon it. And I am really of opinion, as, Nemo omnibus horis sapit, No Man has
always his Wits about him, so likewise, Nemo omnibus horis desipit, no man's
Brains are so darkn'd, but that he may have on certain occasions some Lucid
Intervals. We must not then judge a Man Witty, as some short sighted People do,
because of his uttering a Witty word, or two, by chance rather than by
judgment. It Is not one or two Conversations, nor broken pieces of Discourse,
that we are to take our measures by for decisions of this nature; but after, at
least some days familiar converse with those, whose Reach and Capacity we are
curious to know, we may become capable of making such discoveries.

2. There is a second distinction of Wits worthy our Consideration. Some we may
call Universal Wits, other Singular ones; which Word I take not in the most
obvious Sense, as it imports some peculiar pre-eminency, but as it may be
determined to imply a limitation of Capacity to some particular Subject. For
it is most certain that, Non omnia possumus omnes, as there are many things we
cannot overcome with the strength of our Bodies, so there are far more beyond
the greatest Abilities, and longest reach of our Souls. Thus a Man may prove an
able Mathematician, who shall be but an ordinary Divine, and on the contrary
you shall meet with most subtle School Divines, that are simple and dull in all
other respects. Thus likewise you may meet with some Physicians that can
discourse pertinently enough of all Tempers and Distempers, yea, and prescribe
in general twenty different Remedies for the same Disease, yet want a certain
practical Judgment, so necessary for a due application, that they kill
unhappily more than they cure. I have been familiarly acquainted with some
excellent Gamesters at the Chess, which is thought to require a great deal of
Wit, whom certainly I knew to be of little or no Understanding in all other
things. Whereof we can give no rational account, unless we suppose, what I hold
to be most true, that there are some Characters of Wit inconsistent one with
another, because they depend upon different principles; some springing from the
Intellect, and some from the Imagination, faculties so opposite one to another,
that we can hardly ever excel in them both, because the latter relies much upon
mere proportion, combination, shape, and situtation, and the former from all
such Materialities. Hence if a man is a most skilful Gamester at the Chess* but
cannot penetrate the subtle School Difficulties, it is an eviden^ mark that his
Imaginative faculty has the advantage above the Intellective. And again, if an
able Divine find himself unfit for the Mathematics, Chess, or any other
Mechanical exercise depending much upon the shape of things proportion, figure,
and situation, he may certainly thence conclude, that Nature has bestowed upon
him a penetrancy of understanding, but no considerable quickness of
Imagination. As to those Wits I have called Universal, I know not, if in the
rigor of the Word it may be allowable, that there are any such in the World.
But taking the thing in a less rigorous sense, we may say, That such as have a
general Wit fit for all Sciences, Arts, Employs, or at least can discourse
ingeniously, and to the purpose, with a certain air of probability of any
Subject whatsoever, are to be accounted Universal Wits. For this Character
implies at least, besides a not ordinary quickness of Imagination, some general
Notions and Ideas of most honorable things.

3. But here is a third distinction, or rather a third sort of Wits: For some
are slow, and others extemporary. The latter are Men of a sudden and
extemporary sharpness, and much esteemed by the lesser discerning sort, because
having always an answer at hand to any Question whatsoever you may propose to
them, they are never surprised. Such sort of Men discover all their abilities
in the first converse you have with 'em, because they are not capable to speak
to the purpose after premeditation; a witty Word must needs issue out of their
Mouths on a sudden, as a Lightning out of a dark Cloud. The Slower Wits, as
not being quick in their replies, are often laugh't at by the less
understanding sort. They conceive easily enough, but mistrusting prudently
their own Abilities, venture not to utter their Thoughts, till they understand
the matter entirely, and to the bottom. You may compare them unfitly to the
Water, that admits easily of any sort of Figure, or Character you please to
frame upon it with your Finger, but shall in a moment lose it again. They
resemble Gold rather, or any other Metal hard to be wrought upon; but withal
being tenacious, and a faithful Preserver of whatever you Carve upon it. So
they hardly ever let go the Images of things once conceived. They were
undoubtedly meant by Aristotle, when he said that the Melancholy are ingenious
and Witty, Ingeniosi Melancholici, which is not to be understood of a certain
black and terrestrial Melancholy, for this is dullness it self, but of that sort
which is animated by brisk, lively and vigorous Spirits, and purified by a
clear Flame.

4. I doubt it may not be allowed here to make a fourth distinction of
Profound, and Superficial Wits: For some have received from above a kind of
comprehensive Knowledge of most things. They see in a manner as Angels do the
remotest conclusions in their first principles, without any formal consequence.
Such Men are not only fit for Humane Society, but to sit at the Helm, and
manage the weightiest Affairs of Great Kingdoms and Empires. They are not
sometimes much admired by the undiscerning sort, especially in a free and
familiar Converse, because they speak little, being naturally more thinking and
contriving, than talkative, but what they say carries along with it such a
Character of good Sense, that you shall instantly discern them to be none of
the common sort. Yet as there is nothing in the World Omni ex part beatum,
without a mixture of some imperfection; these Great Men are so taken up
sometimes with their own Thoughts, and Designs, that in a familiar converse
they seem not to talk to the purpose; which gives occasion to the Vulgar, to
think that they are really simple. Now these Wits we call Superficial, are not
indeed wholly dull, but in the next degree to the dullest sort. You shall not
be sensible of their Weakness at their first Complement, their first utterance
being commonly senseful enough, Which I have likewise observed in some Fools.
But you shall easily discern the heightness of their Brains in a continued
discourse; let them but go on, for speak they must, and will show in a trice
their foppish and simple Temper, because they pretend commonly to know every
thing, though they have but few clear Notions of any thing. They value
themselves highly upon the account of a not ordinary Volubility of their
Tongues, as being talkative beyond measure, like most Women, which the less
knowing part of Mankind, take to be a piece of Wit.

SECT. IV. The Character of a Pretender to Wit.
1. What is here meant by a Pretender to Wit.

2. Some reflections on the Chimists.

3. What is understood by L'esprit deli'cats, or a delicate Wit.

4. That this Character of Wit is not proper to the French alone.

1. I Mean not by a Pretender to Wit a mere Fool, but rather one that has some
share in this Noble Endowment of the Mind. Far less do I understand any of
those Learned Societies, that make a peculiar profession of promoting real
Knowledge: For we must needs confess several of their Members not to be mere
Pretenders to Learning, but eminent Virtuoso's, and great Wits. I mean then by
this somewhat ambiguous Word, all such as foolishly pretend to more Wit than
God and Nature have really allowed them. I conceive them to be near a kin to
those superficial Wits, we were lately discoursing of, and not very unlike the
Nominal Philosophers; because their deepest Knowledge reaches no farther than
to the Etimologies, Derivation, and Nature of Names; upon which account they
prefer themselves before Men of more supposed Abilities. They are not clear
enough sighted to discern what is true Sense, or down right Nonsense in a
Discourse: They are only capable to judge of a polite Expression, of a Word
A-la-mode, and other such like Childish niceties. They have, I confess, some
confused Notions of every thing, which emboldens them to debate things that are
beyond the reaeh of their Capacity. They are the professed Censurers of
Mankind, and can speak good of none, themselves only excepted: I conceive them
to be ever without Rest and Repose, yea, and the most miserable of all Men,
because most obnoxious, not to be envyed, but to envy others. They are highly
offended if you happen to commend any other in their Presence but themselves,
or any other Man's Works but their own; if perhaps they have appeared in
Public, wrapped up in a Pamphlet or two. For they make it their whole business
to cut deep in the Reputation of those who should, methinks, be above the
aspiring, and reach of their Envy. This Man, say they, in a familiar Converse,
has printed such a Book, as you know but containing little Truth in it, they
could easily refute the Arguments, and Doctrine it offers, if they judged the
matter worthy their while; he has mistaken himself in several material points,
and speaks here with little coherency, and there flat untruth, though perhaps
they have not so much as seen the Title Page of the Book they talk thus at
random of; you shall name no Philosophy, no Poem, no ingenious Piece, that such
men have not perused more than once, but you will do them a piece of service not
to question them too much upon any particulars, least you discover their Vanity
and Weakness. They are more guilty than the rest of Mankind of that general
hatred, that those of one Profession conceive easily one against another: For
the common Word is but too true, Figulus figulum odit. They leave no Stone
unmoved to ruin the Repute of such as concur, or share with them in any
profitable Employ. I know no People in the World that have less Respect for,
and less Knowledge of Antiquity. I have heard some of those Irregular Heads
call Aristotle, whom probably they had never read, a mere Fool, only because
they had declared themselves Carthesians. I have always observed this sort of
Men to affect extremely novelties, but above all new terms and new coined
Words. Italian Proverbs, Epigrams, Devises, premeditated and short Sentences,
and sometimes the sharpest both Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Words. It Is pleasant
to hear some Physicians, especially the greener ones, talking perpetually of
Acids and Alcaliis. I dispute not here the Truth of the thing in itself,
whether it may be allowed that an acid, as some do think, is the general cause
of all Distempers. But the affections only in speaking of the matter, I justly
blame, and look upon it as a mark of little Judgment, and Wit. Who would not
laugh to hear a Physician resolve all his Patients doubts with an Acid and an
Alcaly.

2. But nothing shall divert you more, than the familiar use of some conceited
Chemists, especially if dissemblingly admiring them. They will display in a
quarter of an hour several great and rare Arcana's, or Secrets, yet without
discovering any of them, but only that being taken with the Bait, you may, buy
at a high rate, what once known you shall undervalue or value but very little.
There is no Distemper, but such Physicians will undertake to cure. They speak
great things, and promise Wonders, as pretending to do more with a dozen of
drops of some Essence, Oil, Tincture or Spirit, than the Galenists with a
Troop of Simples, and an infinite variety of loathsome Decoctions. They pretend
to the great Art of making Gold, and of converting imperfect Metals into
perfect. If you understand not their Mysteries, you must submit your Judgment,
because you are not perhaps a Master of the Art, who only is able to comprehend
the Frame, and Texture of the Philosophers Stone, of the Alkahest,
extraversion, of Mercury, etc. I have a great respect for Helmont, that
celebrated Chemist, but more upon the Authority of an Eminent Virtuoso of this
Nation who esteems him, then by a free determination of my own Judgment. For I
must beg his pardon, if I say, I conceive, him to speak sometimes like a mad
Man, or as if he understood, not what he meant: Because as all Men desire
naturally to know, Omnis homo naturaliter scire desiderat: so all Men have a
desire no less natural and vehement to be known, Omnis homo naturaliter sciri
desiderat; If then we have any important Secret to communicate to the World,
the discovery whereof may redound to our Honor, and the good of Mankind, I am
fully persuaded that no man is so indifferent for the increase of his own
Repute, as to publish it immediately, and obscurely, or in such terms, as few
or none can comprehend. Thus when Helmont, and other self-conceited Chemists
speak so boastingly and boisterously of the great Wonders they can do, without
discovering their Methods, so that they may be understood, I am apt to believe
that they have but very confused Idea's, and obscure Notions of those great
Arcana's they talk so much of.

3. You shall meet with some other Virtuoso's that pretend not to those high
Strains of Wit, but to a certain politeness in their discourse, and Writings;
if they meddle sometimes with the Pen. Their chief care is not how to speak
sencefully, but how to speak politely, wherein they discover the weakness of
their Judgment, and the shallowness of their Wit: For men of great Parts are
wont to express themselves significantly, but without any apparent affection of
too much Polity. This is the common defect of some young Gentlemen that live
upon their Rents in, and about London. They think themselves sufficiently
improved by frequenting the Playhouse, and turning over Play-Books, which
contribute more to the tickling of their Imagination, than to the framing their
Judgment. I confess, nevertheless, they may get some advantage by such
Lectures, provided they take not so much notice of the Words, and manner of
expression, as of the design and management of the intrigue, wherein the
greatest Wit of the piece consists.

Others again make it a part of their business to study the fashionable Art of
Complementing: as being fully persuaded, they can give no better proof of their
Sufficiency, than by studied Complements, which is nothing else but a piece of
French Wit: For it is almost become Proverbial among the Vulgar French, c'esi un
homme d'esprit il fait bien un Complement. Such a one is a Witty Gentleman,
because he complementeth well. If the French had no other thing to be proud of
but this Complemental mode, the greatest Favor I could do them, would be to
reckon them among the Superficial Wits, I have spoken of elsewhere; and I fear
all things impartially weighed, they can be hardly allowed any higher Rank. I
know they pretend to a certain delicacy of Wit, which they monopolize to
themselves, as if other Nations could not reach it, and which they say is no
otherwise accountable for, then that it is, as one of their beaux esprits
speaks, un je ne scay quoy, I know not what. But having lived near Twenty
Years among the Learned sort of them, I think I may venture to give a clear
and distinct notion of What they call delicacy of Wit, that thereby it may
appear to be no prerogative of the French, but common enough to all civilized
Nations.

4. I have observed then that what they call un esprit delicat, is chiefly
known by a smooth, easy and Natural expression, an acurate and judicious
comparison, or a senseful Word that may be easily mistaken by a common
understanding, or taken in a sense it was not intended for. That this is a near
description of a Delicate Wit: I could easily if it were necessary, prove by
those very Authors, they allow most of this Character too. I can imagine no
other reason why the French mistake themselves so far, as to think that other
Nations have little or nothing of this forementioned Delicacy, then because
they write Romances, and Love Intrigues, which admit and require this smooth
way of writing, more than any of their Neighbors, who generally chosing more
solid Subjects, have not so often occasion to give Proofs of their being
capable to write delicately. For it would be easy to show this Character in
the Authors of all Nations, who have chanced to handle Subjects that required
it.

I shall add in the last Instance, that those whom we call here Pretenders to
Wit, are commonly better Spokes-men, than Writers or Penmen. They surprise
those that have never before convers't with them, with an extempory Eloquence,
and an easy Utterance of their Thoughts upon any obvious Subject, by an
extraordinary Volubility of their Tongues, besides a vehement inclination to be
hearkened to in a Public Conversation, as if they were Oracles; hence it is
that they think their repute lessened, if any other in the Company talk more,
with greater Authority, or longer than themselves. But it often happens that
those same Men, who seem to the the Vulgar sort, so eloquent in an extemporary
debate, are at a loss in cold Blood, and when on occasion, they must recollect
themselves to write their own Thoughts. Whereof take this short and rational
account: Such men being endowed with a quick Imagination, which being stirred
up in a Debate, furnishes them with Words enough, and with certain extemporary
Arguments, fitter to dazzle the Vulgar sort, than to persuade a Solid Wit. On
the other side, their Intellective Faculty being but weak, and now left to it
self, without the help of an unwakened Fancy, gives no more Light.

SECT. V. The Signs of Wit.
1. That no Nation can Monoplioze Wit to its self.

2. That cold Climats are fitter for the producing of great Wits, than hot
Countries.

3. That the English lose much of their Esteem abroad, by writing so little in
Latin.

4. The Chief Writers of Great Britain.

1. I Take this for no certain sign of Wit to be born under Mercury, rather
than under Jupiter, Venus or Mars. A Child may prove a witty Man, though in the
Critical Minute of his conception or birth, he be not countenanced by the
favorable Aspect, of any Planet, or Constellation; for I am of opinion, that
the Influences of Heaven, the vulgar Heads talk so much of, do not so much
affect our Bodies, as the inconspicuous Effluviums of the Earth, we scarce ever
take notice of. Neither do I take it to be a certain mark of Wit, our being
born in this Climate rather than in that, in a hot Country rather than in a
cold, in the Subpolar Regions, rather than under the Equinoctial Line. I cannot
but pity and laugh at the simplicity of the Italians, French and Spaniards, who
think themselves wittier than the Northern Nations, only because they live in
hotter Climats, for at this rate they must acknowledge the Moors, Negroes and
Indians far beyond themselves in Wit, which they will not, I doubt, readily
grant. It was in my Judgment no piece of Wit in the famous Du Peron to say of
the Jesuit Iretster, that he was ingenious for a German. The occasion of this
vulgar Error among Foreigners may be thus rationally accounted for. In the
hotter Climats, because the Bodies are weaker, the InhabItants especially, if
civilized, are more given to the exercising of the Mind, than of the Body. But
the Northern Nations take generally more delight in the exercise of their Body,
than in that of the Mind, as being more allured thereunto by their Natural
Courage, good Temper, and not ordinary Strength. I see not then what other
Influence the coldness of the Air can have upon us, than to incline us more to
the Improvement of the Natural Endowments of our Bodies, than to the promoting
those of our Souls. But in the main here lies the mistake of those
self-conceited Foreigners, that seeing perhaps a greater number of Virtuoso's
among them, than among us, they conclude very illegally to our disparagement,
and to their own advantage, that they have more Wit than we, whereas they can
be allowed to raise from hence, no other rational Inference, but perhaps this,
that they have more Wits, or rather more Writers; for among twenty French,
Spanish and Italian, that busy the Press, you shall hardly meet with two, or
three that deserve to be styled Witty. The Inhabitants then of the Northern
parts of the World, delighting generally more in Wars, or in Warlike Exploits,
than in Writing. No wonder if they trouble not the Press with such a number of
useless Books as the hotter Climats do: which argues a mere want of Inclination
to busy themselves that way, but not in any innate disposition to write well.
For we cannot but know by daily Experience that no People in the World write
more wittily than the the Natives of cold Climats, if once they betake
themselves to the Muses, which minds me of a Saying of the famous Barklay, a
most ingenuous Writer, who speaks with a generous freedom, the known Ill and
Good of all Nations, not sparing the Scots, his own Country Men, wherein he
thought them defective, or worthy of Reprehension. He has then, discoursing of
their Aptitude for all kind of Literature, these observable Words, Litterae
nunquam felicius se habuerunt, quam cum in Scotos inciderunt. I know not how to
English this bold Expression. But his meaning, if I mistake it not, was, that
the Muses were never happier, than when after all their Travels, they had
repaired unto the Scots; whereby he seems to insinuate that it was not always
the Fate of this Nation, no more than of most of the Northern Countries, for
the reason above mentioned, to have lodged those Honorable, Gentle, profitable
Guests, but that when they happened to stay any considerable time among the
Scots, they did them as much Honor, if not more than any other People in
Europe. Whereof we may instance as sufficient prooffs both Barkleys, Father and
Son, the Famous Buchanan the best of Poets since the Primitive Times, their
undoubted Countryman, whatever others may pretend to the contrary. Scotus
called deservedly in the Schools, Doctor Subtilis, the Subtle Doctor, together
with the incomparable Nepier, first Inventor of the Logarithmes, and several
others. I conceive those with the Generality of the Understanding sort, to be
far beyond any Foreign Writers in the Subject, they handle, whether, French,
Spanish, or Italian, but what Barkley says of the Scots, may likewise be said
of the Danes, Germans and Hollanders. Tycobrache is a Star of the first
Magnitude, Kepler, Greiier, Clavius, Nostradamus, are matchless. But I think
without the offense of any other Nation, we may apply more particularly this
Sentence to the English, Literae, nunquam se felicius habuerunt, quam cum in
Anglos inciderunt* For the World is obliged to them for the best and newest
discoveries i^ Natural Philosophy, Physic and Anatomy. But the pity is they
write so much in their own Tongue, that the less knowing sort of Forraigners
abroad, ask sometimes if there be any Learned Men in England, because, some
Eminent Physicians excepted, few or none of them write in Latin, the Universal
Language. There are several Excellent English Books that would prove a great
increase of the public good, and the Honor of this Nation, if they were
translated into Latin by an accurate Polite Pen. Of this number I reckon the
Works of most Divines, and whatever the deservedly renowned Boil has hitherto
published, the Whole Duty of Man, and the Discourses of the Reverend Dr.
Tillotson, etc.

2. I shall say nothing of another incomparable advantage, that England has
above most Nations of Europe. I mean that Learned and Royal Society, instituted
for the promoting of Real Knowledge, and the general Good of Mankind. This is
one of those Infinite Blessings this Nation received by his late Majesty's
happy Restoration, who was the Head and first of this Assembly, not only
because of his Royal Prerogative and independency, but likewise upon the
account of his Princely Wit and Wisdom, being not only in the opinion of all
Europe, a most wise Prince, but in the Esteem of all such as have the Honor to
approach his Sacred Person, a most complete Gentleman. Likewise His Royal
Brother, our present King, besides his Princely Virtues, which, as all the
World knows, he possesses in a most High Degree, is likewise deservedly
esteemed in other particular respects. 'Twas observed at Edinburgh, that none
gave a more rational account, than his Majesty of that wonderful Shower of
Herrings, that happened at the South of Scotland. For whereas the most part had
recourse to a certain Panspermia or universal seed of every thing, spread every
where, which other necessary conditions concurring together, might be improved
into a living Creature; his Majesty solved more rationally this Phenomenon by
certain Spouts of Water that happen sometimes at Sea, wherein the small Herring
being easily, with the Help of a Whirlwind, tossed up into the Air, and carried
off in a thick Cloud, fell down again not far from the Shore. As to the other
Members of this Royal Society, I think I do them no wrong, if I say that the
famous Boil is the Chief Pillar thereof: For his Name carries with it such a
weight of Authority in Foreign Countries, that I have heard some Eminent Men
say, that whatever he positively affirms in his Books is sure and evident. Out
of all this discourse, we may raise to our purpose this self-evident Inference,
that Coelum atticum is no more an infallible Cause or Sign of Wit than Caelum
Articum, I mean that Wit is of all Nations, though not perhaps of all Ages,
since some have bin extremely dull, as the Tenth for Instance, and some
likewise both fore and after Ages.

3. Yea I think it no Paradox to say that the cold Climats are the fittest
Soils for the producing of great Wits. I conceive but two things necessary for
the existency of what generally we understand by a great Wit, first, a Soul of
the first, or at least none of the lowest Hierarchy, I mean one of a not
ordinary perfection, whereof I have discoursed at large in the Second Section.
Secondly. A well tempered Body furnished, besides the necessary Organs, with a
great quantity of brisk and lively Spirits. As to the former point, I hope you
will grant that it is in the Power of the Almighty to create most perfect Souls
in cold Climats as well as in hot. Hence then you can pretend no advantage. And
for the latter it is evident, that that the Bodies in cold Climats are better
tempered, of a firmer Texture, and fuller of brisk and lively Spirits, than
those of hotter Countries, where men are commonly languishing, faint and
exhausted by a sensible dissipation of those few Spirits they live and move by.
They are then little acquainted with the World, who affirm the purest Air to be
the only Element for the subtilest Wits; since we know by experience, and it is
generally confessed by all Forraigners, that the Scotch and the Irish, who
breath in no very thin Air, are far subtiler disputants in Divinity, Logic,
and such like Scholastic, and Airy matters, than either the Italians or the
French. I would then have Men to cease from gazing upon the Stars, and not look
upon the Celestial Influences, as the only causes of those various Characters
of Wit, we observe in the World; for there may be some more hidden Sources of
acuteness, and less reflected on: Such I take to be the invisible Effluviums of
the Earth: For as the Famous Boil acutely proves, it is most probable that they
are the unheaded Causes of many Epidemical Distempers, so I think it no less
conformable to reason, to say that they occasion likewise the good temper of
the mind, by contributing not a little toward the Health of the Body; for
since it is most certain by daily experience, that the Inhabitants of this
Northern part of the World, to whatever they apply themselves entirely, become
at length most eminent therein, and do far exceed the rest of Mankind,
espceially in Learning, Courage, and all other Warlike Exploits, we must needs
confess there may be Corpuscles issuing out from the coldest Soil, that mixing
themselves through the Pores of the Body with the blood, give it such a Texture,
as is requisite to make it a fit Instrument for the most Spiritual Functions of
the Souls. I am so far from beleiving the vulgar Error, or rather the vain
conceit of some ancient Romans, that those who are born in, or near the cold
Zones, have few or none of those natural Gifts that make a true Virtuoso; I am
so far, I say, from beleiving such a gross and vulgar Error, that I hold such
to be the fittest men in the World for penetrating Airy, and Subtle things,
and for doing great ones, if they will be but at the pains, when occasion
serves to improve their Natural Talents. For besides what I have said, are not
we beholden to the Northern Nations for the Noblest and best pieces of Art and
Wit, I mean those various and ingenious Engines, relating to shipping, lifting,
weighing, etc. invented for the Use and Convenience of Mankind. The Gunpowder,
the Guns, and most of the Mathematical Instruments, especially Microscops,
Telescops, and Megalescops are the Fruits of their Industry. And either the
Germans invented the Art and Mystery of Printing, or the Chinese, who live not
in a very hot Country. The Japans live almost as far from the Equinoctial Line
as we do, and yet are accounted inferior to no Nation in the World as to Wit,
sharpness, and Penetrancy of Judgment.

SECT. VI. The Signs of Wit in the Features of the Body, or the Witty
Physiognomy.
1. That Physiognomy is neither a groundless or vain Science.

2. The whole Object of Physiognomy.

3. A rational account of Physiognomical conjectures, relating to the Head and
its several parts, as Forehead, Face, Hinder Part, Hair, and its Colors, the
Stature and its Accident.

4. In what sense the Tongue belongs to Physiognomy.

1. I Know not well what was his Opinion of Physiognomy, who said that Frons,
oculi, vultus, persaepe mentiuntur, Oration vero saepissime. The Forehead, the
Eyes, the Face do do often impose upon us, but oftener yet the Tongue.
Nevertheless I conceive clearly by this Expression that he thought it not a
vain and quite groundless Science, else he had not made use of this double
Restriction, persaepe saepissime. If then we fail sometimes, when we judge of
Men's inward Temper by their Physiognomy, or conspicuous Features of their
Bodies, we must acknowledge ingenuously our want of Skill, and insight in the
matter. For since the Visible things do manifest the Invisible, there are no
doubt some visible Characters of our Inside, written by the Hand of God in our
outward shape. But as every one cannot read Books, and falress yet Men, those
Characters, how conspicuous soever to some, and easy to deeypher, ly hidden,
and are untelligible mysteries to others. Yet as we man discover Foris, his
Satellites, or Jupiters Waiters through a good Prospect or Teloscop, though not
with our naked Eye, so by the help of this curious Art, a vulgar understanding
may, to his great satisfaction, see things, he could never before either
observe or understand. Though I pretend not to any extraordinary Skill in this
present Subject, yet I may be allowed to set down here some of my own
observations, grounded upon Reason and Experience. Because Physiognomy can no
more pretend to any demonstration, than Judiciary Astrology; what I shall say
must be looked upon at the most, as probable conjectures, and not as certain
and positive decisions, which you may follow as infallible Rules, to judge of
those you converse, or consider. To proceed then with some order and Method, I
conceive the whole Object of this curious Science to be comprehended in these
four Words, Frons, Oculi, Vultus, Oration. By the first as a Physiognomist, I
understand not only the Forehead, but all the neighboring parts backwards, as
the Hair, the Ears, the Hinder part of the Head, or the Nape of the Neck. By
the second, Oculi, I mean what it literally sounds, though we may allow a
larger Signification to the Word Vultus, and understand thereby not only the
whole Frame and Conformation of the Face, but also that of the whole Body.
Oration is not to be taken so much by the Physiognomist, for the discourse it
self; as for the adjuncts thereof, as sound stammering Precipitation, etc. I
shall then, without loosing the due respects I owe to the Author of the
forementioned Sentence, invert it thus to my present design, in lieu of saying
Frons, Oculi, vultus, per saepe mentiuuiur Oration vero saepissime, I do affirm
and maintain that, Frons Oculi vultus verum persaepe loquuntur, Oration vero
saepissime. The Front, the Eyes, the Face, speak often the Truth, and discover
really what we are, but the Tongue as yet more frequently.

2. To begin with the Forepart and Highest of the Face or Forehead We may
consider its Breadth, it Length, its Prominency or Height* I take the length
thereof, from the distance between the two Temples the Breadth from the Root of
the Nose upwards to the Coronal Suture I say then a Forehead both broad long,
and somewhat prominent, o^ not quite flat, is a more than ordinary mark of a
solid Judgment, and a sharp Wit. Because those Dimensions cannot be thus
enlarged, but by a most perfect Soul, and able to extend thus the Matter it
informs, o^ which is all alike for my intent, by ^ great number of Animal
Spirits, who being brisk, active and lively, make room for themselves. I said
Prominent, or not flat: For though flatness of the Forehead, provided other
necessary conditions be not wanting may be often consistent with understanding
and Capacity, yet it shows some natural deficiency either i^ the Soul or in
the Spirits, that could not thrust forward their Work. But I know no greater
disadvantage, or more ominous of this part we are speaking of, than its
narrowness, or straitness, whether we take the narrowness thereof from the Root
of the Nose upwards, or from the Right Temple to the Left; for this is but a
too visible mark of a very imperfect Soul, and of an extraordinary want of
Spirits: And those few that such puny Heads do lodge, are withal Dormant in a
manner, and cannot for want of Room either dilate themselves, or give any
Light. This you shall believe the more probable, if you take particular notice
of those that are naturally Fools, and silly. For you shall scarce meet with
one of them that wants this mark of his Infirmity. What I have said of the
Forehead, may be likewise understood of the whole Head: The Bulk whereof,
generally speaking, if proportionable to the Body is no ill mark, and I take
the contrary to be a vulgar Error, confuted by daily Experience, and the
aforesaid reasons. And if one contrary may discover another, I remember to have
seen at Amsterdam, in the House near the Temple, wherein the natural Fools are
kept, to the number of three or four, whose Heads did not surpass in Bulk an
ordinary man's Fist. Now if Nature has so proportionably enlarged a Man's Head,
as if it had intended to make two of of one, by giving him a Forehead qualified
in the aforesaid manner, and likewise a high and bulky hinder part, you shall
hardly fail, if you say, that such a one is not of an ordinary Wit and
Capacity. But that you mistake nothing here, I take the hinder part of the Head
to be high or bulky, when it it is not cut in a manner even down, but
over-reacheth the hollow of the Neck. For the Perpendicular descent of the
Head, so that the hinder part and the Neck be upon the same Perpendicular Line,
is called 'pleasantly' by the French, Le coup de hach, the Axe-strock, and is
generally thought a scarce ever failing sign of a mean Wit: Because I fancy the
hinder part of the Head is the Magazine of the Soul, where the Species and
Images of things are conserved. This may be the reason why being desirous to
recover the memory of a forgotten thing, we turn naturally our hand back
thither, as if we intended to awaken our Memorative Spirits. For I doubt not
but the Memory is a great help, and Promoter too of Sharpness, Judgment and
Knowledge, because it represents faithfully to us all such Circumstances as are
necessary for the right framing of our Reflections. It then Nature has
deprived us of this back Room, we may nevertheless have, perhaps, some no
inconsiderable Talents, but none in a very high degree.

3. As for the Hair, four things may be considered concerning them. 1. Their
lying flat on the Head. 2 ly. Their curling. 3 ly. Their quantity. 4 ly. their
Color. The First signifies Dullness, if they be not somewhat curled at the
ends, because this shows a want of Heat. The Second some greater sharpness,
because it supposes some more heat. The Third, if very considerable, and
accompanied with thickness, is a sign of too many Excrementitious Parts, and of
a too material Substance of the Brains. Of the Fourth for Methods sake, I shall
distinguish but three sorts, the black and the fair Color, as two extremes,
the Chestnut Color, as a middle between them both. The Fair is a surer mark of
Wit, Judgment, and good Sense, than the Black, because it is originally
occasioned by the movement of brisker, clearer, and more lively Spirits.
Whereas the Black, I mean the deepest sort, may sometimes import a Melancholy,
heavy and dull Temper, as being of an exceeding Compact and close Texture, yet
it is often produced by the motion of more active Spirits, but which are
tempered with Terrestial ones. And when this happens it is no ill Omen: But the
Cheasenut Color is to be preferred before the other two, as proceeding not
from the Action of mere Terrestrial, or of mere airy Corpuscles but from a just
mixture of both.

4. I had almost forgot the Ears, whereof the Bulk only is considerable in
relation to Physiognomy, because if they be respectively too great, or not
proportionable to the Head, they are reckoned commonly to be a sign of dullness.
The reason of the Vulgar is, because such People resemble long Eared Asses. But
it is more rational to say, that this is occasioned by the weakness of an
Imperfect Soul, who made one part proportionably larger than the other. Because
though it aimed indeed, as all things do by the impulse of Nature, at the most
perfect, yet it could not reach it, as being none of the Highest, or of the
first Hierarchy of Souls. But to turn about now from the Ears to the Eyes; they
are not only windows through which the Soul looks out to us, but through
which likewise we look into it, and by their Light discover easily its real
perfections, and abilities. I know but three things in them worthy a
Physiognomist's Observation, their Bigness, their Situation, their Color. The
black eye represents to us a judicious Soul, but none of the sharpest, because
of the too compact Nature of the Instruments it makes use of, I mean of the
Spirits. The blew grayish is more common, and if some other Conditions be not
wanting, may be a good proof of acuteness and solidity, because of a
proportionable mixture of massy and airy Corpuscles, subservient to the
Functions of the Mind. The largeness is an equivocal Sign, either of Dullness,
or Wit, because the great eyes are not commonly sparkling like the Stars in the
Firmament, but of a sixth Light, like that of most Planets. The little Eyes
then, or of no excessive size, but quick, and constantly sparkling, are reputed
to be infallible marks of Sharpness and Wit, because of the brightness,
agility, and liveliness of the Spirits they move and shine by. The Situation of
the Eye makes but little to our purpose. Yet may not we be allowed to say that
the deep eye shows as much weakness in the Soul, as vigor in the Sight, or
Vision it self; and on the other side, that the prominent Eye, which the French
call a fleur de peau, may discover its good Temper and Strength. I explain my
self thus. Because of the weakness of our visive Faculty, we apply a Tellescop
or Prospect close to our Eye, whereas if it were stronger and more vigorous, we
could see the Objects through the Prospect removed, and at some distance from
our Eye. Consider then the deep or hollow. Eye, as a Prospect joining more
closely in a manner to the Soul, and the Prominent somewhat more distant; and
you shall instantly understand why I take the Prominency of the Eye for a mark
of greater vigor in the Soul, as likewise wherefore I affirm the contrary of a
deep Eye; which supplyeth, in some manner, this imperfection of the Soul;
because gathering closely together the visual Beams, it represents to us the
Objects at a greater distance, but not so well those, or not at all, that ly at
our sides, unless we turn about to them. I know this comparison is lame in some
respects, but Omnis comparatio claudicat, you know else it would change its
Nature.

5. As for the other part of the object of Physiognomy, which the Latins call
Vultus, Visage or Face, and whereby here I understand not only the conformation
of the Face, but of the whole Body; I shall only say if we take it by the first
Bias, we shall find nothing observable in it but the Color and the Shape. The
Face somewhat inclining to a natural and habitual pale, doo^ in our Clymate
promise most; because the Spirits seem to be always refining within by serious
thoughts, attentive speculations, or ingenious contrivances. The fair
Complexion likewise, because of the clearness of their Spirits, shows a well
disposed Soul, but not always very much acuteness. As to the shape, more length
than breadth is to be most commended; for such commonly have the hinder part of
the Head very large, which, as we said lately, is a good mark.

Now if we take the word vultus precisely for man's outside, or outward
appearance, we may consider two things, his Stature, and the accidents thereof.
As to the first, the tallest men generally speaking, are not always the
Wittiest: because in such, as in High Houses, the uppermost Room is commonly
the worst furnished, their Spirits being too much dispersed to produce any
considerable Effect. The middle size, for the functions of the Mind, as well as
for those of the Body, is the most advantageous. I shall say nothing of the
adjuncts of the Body, save that it is observable that the crooked, lame and
blind, are ordinarily possessed of not ordinary endowments of the mind, whereof
I can give no other rational account, than by saying that this happens through
a peculiar disposition of an universal providence supplying thus abundantly the
defects of the Body, by imparting to the Nobler part, the Soul, a peculiar
perfection, and Beauty. Out of all this we may conclude not without a a show of
probability, that, Frons, oculi, vultus, verum persaepe loquuntur, Oration vero
saepissime: The Front, the Eyes, the Face speak often Truth, and discover what
really we are, but our Tongue yet more frequently lays us open to the
understanding sort, and perchance more certainly too, especially if we take it
for the very substance of the things we say, for then by the coherency, or
incoherency of our discourse, we betray our selves either to be Fools or wise,
dull or Witty. But as a Physiognomist precisely, I mean here the outside only,
if I may so speak, and the accidents of our Speech, as the Sound,
Precipitation, Stammering, Duration, etc. As to the Sound: To speak High and
boisterously without any rational occasion, is a surer mark of a sharp voice
than of a sharp Wit. Precipitation proceeds sometimes, I confess from a too
quick apprehension, that conceives more things than the Tongue can well utter
in a short time; but more often it is occasioned by the confused Idea's of the
Soul. By the duration of our discourse, I mean that excessive one, whereby we
become insufferable to those we converse, as being talkative beyond measure,
whick I take to be no sign either of Wit or judgment, unless we admit that the
talkative sort are the wittiest, and most judicious, which no man of Sense will
ever grant, as being sufficiently confuted by obvious reason, and daily
experience: For as, Loquaciores avium quae minores, the smallest Birds, for
Instance, the Sparrows, Nightingales, etc. make more noise than the greater
ones do; as the Eagle, the Swan, etc. So those petits esprits, shallow Wits,
and superficial Understandings are commonly more talkative than the Judicious,
and most thinking sort of Mankind.

SECT. VII. The Imperfection of humane Wit and Knowledge.
1. That Science does rather make us humble than proud.

2. That our clearest Knowledge of Natural things is but mere Sceptisisme, and
the Learned Men, but mere Scepticks.

3. That we have a self-evidence of some truths, but no true demonstration of
most things we undoubtedly believe.

4. That mere matter may do by God's Omnipotency what our soul supposed
Spiritual, performs.

5. That not only the Mysteries of our Religion, but the most Obvious and known
Objects are above the reach of our limited Capacities.

1 It Is a common saying, Scientia Inflat; but I doubt if it be not likewise a
vulgar Error: For I am so far from believing that true Knowledge does puff up a
Man, and swell him with Pride, that I can conceive nothing fitter to make us
truly humble without either Hypocrisy or Dissimulation. It Is easy to
conjecture upon what grounds I run thus contrary to the Stream, and the general
Opinion of most men, because methinks it is evident that the chief Source of
true Humility, and Humiliation too, is a perfect knowledge of our own Weakness
and Imperfections, of our Incapacity, and little Insight in most things, which
I take to be proper to those only, who are the most knowing sort of Mankind. I
look upon such as true Scepticks in this Sense, That whatever is not laid open
to their Eyes, either by the Light of an undeniable demonstration, or by some
sort of self-evidence, they justly doubt of. Because they understand perfectly
the difficulties on both sides, which holding their Judgment in aequilibrio,
equally in the middle, and in suspense, hinder them from joining closely with
either of the extremes. Hence it appears that as the greatest Wits have most
Doubts, so the Dullish are commonly those that doubt almost of nothing. I speak
not here in matters of Faith, for as Christians, we are mere Believers, not
Philosophers, but of Nature and Natural things, of the World, and what it
contains, or whatever is within us, or without us: whereof we have so little
Knowledge, that the self-evident principles excepted, we know nothing
evidently, or at least by demonstration. We know indeed certainly that we are,
as having some sensible Foundation both in Essence and Existency, That there is
in us a certain internal principle, whereby we move, subsist, and understand,
which we call the Soul. But how it performs all these things, what it is,
whether Spiritual or Corporal we know not: I believe my Soul to be both
Immortal and Spiritual. And I have read several Treatises pretending to a clear
demonstration of its Spiritual Nature, which I could never yet see, nor any
Impartial judge, I am afraid, shall ever be sensible of, because we can have no
certitude from the light of Reason that she has either being, or operation,
not depending upon matter, or some Material Phantasma; and what in the other
Life shall be her way of acting, we shall not know so long as we remain in
this. I am not altogether unacquainted with the chief Prerogatives of our
Souls, which are to conceeive, and frame general Notions, to prescind, or
rather divide by her sharp Edge the matter, into various parts severally
intellegible, to raise Influences from the general to the particular, and from
the particular, though more Illegally to the general, to remember things past,
envisage the present, and frame not unlikely conjectures of what is to come.
But all this amounting to no more than to some degrees of probability, offers
nothing like a demonstration of the Spirituality of our Souls. For I conceive
no reason why God, who made all things of nothing, may not likewise make what
he pleases of something. Where is there then any contradiction, if we say that
God, who created the Matter of nothing, may change the same into a being
capable to do, and in a more perfect manner to whatever our Soul performs. For
I conceive it to be but a mere prejudice, and not reason that leads us to say,
that whatever thinks, or reasons, is of a Spiritual Nature. It Is observable
then, whenever we pretend to reveal by demonstration such hidden Mysteries,
we always suppose what in first Instance we should prove, I mean that God is
neither so powerful to elevate the matter to what he pleases, nor so skilful
as to change it into a form capable of most perfect operations, or at least of
those that we allow to our Souls supposed to be Spiritual. But if we understand
not the nature of ou^ Souls, we can conceive almost a^ little of the Fabric of
our Bodies Here we are Admirers, and not Philosophers, since we can give but a
very imperfect, and a scarce rationa^ account of what we behold in our selves,
and know not neither how we live, how we grow, how we move, nor from what part
of the Body the Blood begins to circulate, or in what part of the eye the
vision is made, or whether the Child breath's in the Womb or not, etc. In one
word, the whol^ Texture of our Body is such a piece of wonde^ to the
understanding sort, that i^ seems to some to be no less beyond the reach of our
capacity, than the very Nature of a mere Spirit.

2. I do firmly believe what all true Christians believe; but this fundamental
article of all Religon, that there is a God, though I were no Christian, I
could prove to my self, and perhaps to others too, by a convincing
demonstration: Yet such is the weakness, or rather the darkness of Humane
Understanding, that the clearest demonstrations of this important Truth are
refuted by some one or other, whose obstinacy they cannot conquer. And Vasques,
if I misremember not, a subtle Romish Divine, after a large confutation of
whatever had been said before his time, in order to prove the Existency of a
Sovereign being, admits at length but a mere moral demonstration of this
Fundamental point, though so evident indeed, that it cuts away all pretense,
and excuses to infidelity. As to the other mysteries, for Instance the Trinity,
and Gods contingent degrees, which our reason reaches not; it is a piece of
madness and folly for us to endeavor their discovery by the light of reason.
Yet they may be inculcated to the People, though infinitely above their
comprehensive faculty, as being Articles of mere Belief, and not at all within
the reach of humane Understanding. I could not but smile to hear a certain
Minister once preach on this Subject, because he very confidently assured his
Auditory, that he would prove the existence of the Trinity with no less
evidence than the subtilest Philosopher could demonstrate the being o^ God in
Nature, and his Unity. How far he performed this, it is neither worth your while
to hear, nor mine to relate. I shall only say, that he showed himself all along
a very ill Philosopher, and a worse Divine.

3. But what wonder if men are so short sighted in things so far above the
reach of their Capacity, since they know not the Nature and Natural properties
of the most familiar and obvious Objects. I do in vain make my Application
either to the Old or New Philosophy for the intelligence of the most common
things. I am for Instance as little satisfied, when I am told, that whatever I
see under so many different figures, shapes and sizes, is only occasioned by a
various Texture and coalition of Corpuscles, I am, I say, as little satisfied
with this, as with Aristotle's matter and form united together, I know not how:
For to say a thing belongs to this or that Species or kind, because it has a
certain texture that we can give no further account of, is a Notion almost as
obscure unto my dim Understanding, as if you had instanced for Answer, A matter
informed by a certain specifical form. On each side you see by the very word
certain we insinuate enough our doubtfulness and uncertainty of the thing. What
more known than the History of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea: The dullest
Mariner can give you a satisfactory relation thereof; but you may expect in
vain a rational account of the same from the ablest Philosopher. To attribute
with the greatest number of Philosophers this wonderful Phenomenon to the
Stars, or more particularly to the Moon, is but an ingenuous confession of
their ignorance, and despair of a better answer. For it being certain that when
the Moon is in the upper Quadrant of our Meridian, the Waters are not only
swelled here, but likewise in the opposite part of the Earth toward our
Antipodes; I cannot conceive how the Moon pierces through such a thick and
massy Body as the Earth, so as to heighten the Waters beneath. I Am sure she
acts not at such a distance, either by heat or by light, for her heat is not
strong, and her light is but very weak, and neither of them can penetrate above
ten foot within the superficies of the Earth. Her occult and secret Influences,
I neither understand, nor look upon as an answer capable to satisfy a curious
enquirer. The movement of the Earth, by which some endeavor to give an account
of this regular movement, we observe in the Seas, besides the uncertainty of
this principle contributes but little or nothing toward the solution of this
insuperable difficulty; and Maurus, his Angel moving thus orderly this great
and vast Body, is but a guess, and at most but an ill grounded Opinion.

4. If we come now ashore, and travel over the habitable Tracts of the
Continent, what an infinite number of obvious, but most hidden Mysteries shall
we discover every where. I shall offer but two at present to your
consideration, the Loadstone, and Quicksilver, or Mercury. The former is an
unpolished piece of Work, and looks like an excrementitious part of Nature: But
Who can give us a tolerable account of its attractive faculty, why it draws,
and holds closely Iron, rather than any other Metal; why it thrusts from it the
Needle with one Pole, and attracts it again with the other; and why it declines
more or less, or no at all in several parts of the World etc. Philosophers are
commendable for doing their utmost endeavors and squeezing their brains to
answe^ such difficulties; but I fear after al^ their Sweats, and laborious
Speculations, they shall never satisfy either themselves on this subject, or
others Mercury is clearer indeed to the Ey^ than the Loadstone, but as obscur^
if not more, to our darkened Understanding. It Is the very riddle of Nature,
Aenigma naturae, it is a Monster compounded of mere contrarieties, as being
round and sharp, cold, and in the opinion of some hot too light and heavy,
moist and dry, corruptible and incorruptible, alway^ the same, and yet most
changeable, invisible, and by an easy recovery of it self visible again: I
ever admired above all this, its compactness and close texture; for it admits
not the Subtilest Air, and giving no access to the points of Fire, it flies
from before it.

5. But I need not have recourse to the confessed Prodigies of Nature, to show
how far we are from understanding any thing to the bottom. The very Sciences
themselves are not such to us, if narrowly looked into. I have reason to
examine the Truth of Euclides demonstrations, since I see the Impossibility of
a common Segment, as they speak, demonstrated to my Weak Judgment by Proclus,
and again contradicted with no less evidence by other able Mathematicians. To
say nothing of the duplication of the Cub, the Squaring of the Circle, and
other Gordian lenots of this Nature; I doubted always of the very Foundation of
Geometry, I mean of the true Notion of a point. For when I hear this stranger
description, Punctum est cujus pars nullae est, I begin to wonder what that can
be, that though not a Spirit, has no Imaginable parts: and then concluding
there is no such thing in being. I take the true Object of Geometry as a Line
that is made of Points, and a Superficies compounded of Lines, to have no other
Foundation in Essence or Existency, but my own Conceit and Fancy. I am moreover
so little satisfied with the groundless grounds, and Principles of judiciary
Astrology, that I fancy it the most vain, and most uncertain of all Sciences,
and those that admire it to be none of the judicious sort. I confess, the
Heavens are great Volumes, wherein we may read the wonderful effects of Gods
infinite Power and Wisdom; but you shall see no Characters there that express
the Contingency of things to come, and the occasional determinations of our
free Wills. For what connection can any rational man imagine between the Aspects
of the Stars, and a Child's being one day either a King or an Emperor, or to
dye such a death. We know neither the Nature, Properties, nor Influences of the
Celestial Bodies; how can then a man, not a mere Fool, presume to determine
their contingent Effects. Astronomy indeed is somewhat better grounded. But how
many things are we yet here ignorant of, the quantity of the natural year shall
never be exactly determined, because we can never know the critical Minute of
the Suns first step backward from one Tropic toward the other. The new
Calendar is not as yet perfect, and may one day stand in need to be corrected a
second time: We can give but a very uncertain account of the Nature of Comets,
and debate often about their hight, periods, movement and bulk; whether the
light of the fixed Stars be innate, or only borrowed from the Sun, we are not
as yet certain. We do but guess at their real distance from us and among
themselves. We speak rashly, and perhaps, upon not very good grounds, of their
wonderful Rapidity and Swiftness. I shall say nothing of an infinite number of
other things, that we can give no rational account of, as for Instance, of
Antipathy, Sympathy, Poisons, and of that sort of Remedies, we call Specificks.
If I chance to meet with two men I never saw before, I find my self more
inclined to serve the one than the other, but why, I am to seek. As soon as the
Lamb comes into the World, it flies from before the Woolf, as from a known
Enemy: Now by what kind of Impulse or Impression, it behaves it self so
rationally, I shall willingly learn from any of the Modern, or Ancient
Philosophers. The strange effects of Poisons are but too well known, whereof
some are quick, some are slow, some cold, and others hot. But they all agree in
this, that they destroy at length the structure of our Bodies. I remember to
have been present at the overture of a Lady, that had certainly been poisoned,
which nevertheless we could not affirm by any visible Impressions made upon her
inward Parts, the alteration made by this subtle Poison being quite
insensible. I am of opinion that in this Life we shall never reach to a perfect
knowledge of such odd pieces of Wonder. Let us then acknowledge that there is
no true Philosophy in the World but Sceptisism; not that I take Scepticks here
for men that doubt of every thing, yea, and of their own Existency too, for
it is, perhaps, a vulgar Error to believe that there were ever any such in the
World, and withal not mere Fools: I mean then by Scepticks those that are come
to such a pitch of Knowledge, as to doubt rationally of every disputable
matter, because seeing nothing under one light only, and looking narrowly into
the reasons of both sides, they discover but some few, or more degrees of
probability without the very Twilight of Evidence.

SECT. VIII. The Character of a great Wit.
1. That there are few great Wits.

2. Who are not to be reckoned among the great Wits.

3. The truest notion of a great Wit.

4. That great Wits are Wary in their decisions, and not at all Dogmatical.

5. The difference between Aristotle and Descartes.

6. Thomas Aquinas upon what account to be most esteemed.

1. I Doubt, if I may not say of great Wits, what Cicero says somewhere of
great Orators, that scarce one was seen in an Age: For as Aristotle calls
little men comely, but not beautiful, so likewise I take the most part of those
that the World admires most, to be but jolly Wits, des esprits jolly, as not
thoroughly deserving, because of some considerable deficiency, a more honorable
Title, or rather not filling in all sense what is in rigor meant by a great
Wit: For I conceive none to be such, who has received but one Talent, though in
a just measure: Thus a man may be an excellent Poet, a skilful Astronomer, a
good Geomatrician, a subtle Logician, and yet unfit for all other Sciences;
such an one then can be reckoned but among the jolly Wits, and that is Honor
enough for him. I do far less judge those to be great Wits, who understand
nothing, but what is beyond common Sense and Understanding, as these
Metaphysical Whymsies, abstracted Idea's, and Airy Notions, that fill the empty
heads of some speculative Virtuoso's. Neither could I ever have a great Opinion
of such, as preferring themseves before the rest of the World, condemn whatever
flows not from their own Pen, or whatever is beyond the reach of their short
Capacity. For this is no more than what the duller sort are equally capable of.
I am likewise somewhat out of conceit with most of our Modern Philosophers, who
will have none to be really Witty and Ingenious, but such as understand
perfectly Mechanism, or the Texture and Structure of things, or how to knit,
weave and knead one Corpuscle with another. For at this rate Apothecaries,
Smiths and Bakers, and the rest of the Mechanical Tribe, are to be accounted
true Philosophers. Yet I ever conceived Philosophy to be something beyond the
reach of this common sort, and would be very loath to become either a Smith or
a Baker, in order to gain the Honorable Name of a true Philosopher. I have a
great respect, and I am forced to it by the very name, for what we call in
England Divines, yet I look not upon them as great Wits, because if they be
good Christians, they must renounce the use of their Wit, and believe the most
inconceivable Mysteries of Religion upon no better ground, than the Simplest
sort, that is upon the surest of all, the Authority of a Divine, though obscure
Revelation. I conceive then to be short, no other Notion of a great Wit, than
what Sceptisism affords me: Not that I mean a man that doubts of every thing,
but rather one that can show demonstratively the incertitude of all disputable
matters, those of Faith, with which we meddle not, laid aside. The doubts of
such men are not mere Negative ones, for those are groundless, but rational,
positive, and grounded upon such reasons as may demonstrate our little
Capacity, and Insight into most disputable things. So as the greatest Wit of
Angels, consists in knowing; the greatest Wit in Men consists in doubting:
whoever than after a due consideration of any difficulty in what Subject soever
sees the Pro and the Con, or whatever may be find for maintaining either part
of the contradiction so clearly, that he is forced to balance his
understanding in the middle by an almost equal Weight of counterpoizing
Reasons: This Man I say, and no other may assume to himself without Usurpation,
the Name of a great Wit: You shall easily know him either by his discourse, or
by his Writings. He is not of the Humor of certain Dogmatical Heads, who
because they see things but under one light, undertake boldly to determine the
greatest difficulties at the very first hearing of them. But the Man we are
speaking of being wary and cautious, requires time to consult with himself
about the matter, before he ventures to give a positive answer, which sometimes
occasions the less understanding sort to take him to be none of the sharpest;
and when he is come to a resolution upon the case proposed, his Decisions are
so moderate, so prudent, and so far from being too daring and bold, that they
scarce ever amount to more than to the determination of some degrees of
probability, if the thing be really doubtful. I have always admired this
Character in the Honorable Robert Boil: It Is to be met with every where in
his Writings, and is observable likewise in his discourse, if he be required an
answer to any considerable difficulty. Yet if it chance that some Eminent
Virtuosi express themselves sometimes in doubtful matters, as if they judged
them evident, this is not to be wondered at, because as some Men cannot express
well their Thoughts, others have such an easy utterance, that through the Heat
of dispute, or quickness of ^magination, they do often make use of Words
signifying more, than really they intend. But generally speaking when you hear
a man say, he can give an evident account for instance of the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea, of the fits of the Ague, of the attractive faculty in the
Lodestone, of the nature of Poisons, and Specificks whether exterior or
interior, of the Origin of the Winds, of the solution of Gold by Aqua Regia,
and not by Aqua fortis, of the solution of Silver by Aqua fortis, and not by
Aqua Regia, and a thousand other abstruse difficulties of that nature; you may
be sure that his insufficiency is nothing inferior to his vanity and
presumption. I fall much short upon this account of the great Esteem some have
for Discartes, because he pretends too much to evident Truths, and will have us
before we are fit for his Philosophy, to make our Understanding Tabulamrasam,
as a smooth board, capable of any Character by scraping out of it the Pictures
of all things it was fraught with from our greener years, as if none had ever
spoken Truth but himself, or as if our intellective faculty being thus naked,
was not equally disposed to be wrought upon by error, as well as by Truth. Some
of his Followers betray themselves to be but half witted, when they deny a
thing, because Aristotle, whom they are not acquainted with, affirmed it, and
pretended it to be an evident Truth, because forsooth Discartes held it.

2. To do both these Philosophers right, though with the learned part of the
World, I apprehend Aristotle to be far beyond Discartes, as to sharpness,
depth, and penetrancy of Wit: They have spoken both many things to the purpose,
and probable enough, and many others likewise with a greater appearance of
falsehood than Truth. The main difference I find between them both only
consists in this, that Aristotle undertook to debate and discuss matters beyond
the reach of Humane Capacity. Such I reckon to be the Infinite, whether in
number, or matter, the Divisibility and Composition both of the fluent and
permanent continuum. Discartes speaks of Matter and Motion, and things indeed
less subtle, but more intelligible; yet I conceive his conclusions drawn from
thence to be no demonstrations; and if any of his Disciples look upon them as
such, I fear he is either prejudiced, or sees things but under one light: I
have so good opinion of Discartes his Judgment, that I believe he intended not
to give us a true demonstration of God in his Metaphisical Meditations, though
grounded, if I misremember not, upon these two principles, first, that whatever
we have, a clear and distinct Idea of, exists, or may exist. Secondly, that we
have a clear and distinct Idea that God is in Nature. For I know not why I may
not have a clear and distinct Idea of any impossible thing, since our Knowledge
receives not so much its qualifications from its Object, as from the manner of
its tendency toward the Object, which may be clear, though the Object be
confused. Again, no man of good sense will take this proposition, Deus est, God
exists, for one of those we call Notas per se, known immediately by their own
self-evidence, without a Medium or reason to prove them. Nevertheless this must
happen in our case, if we have a clear and distinct Idea of Gods being really
existent in nature, or of his being possible: For if I conceive an infinite
good possible, it is consequential that he really exists, since in this very
notion the actual existency is included, as being a most material perfection.

3. Let us not then impose upon our selves, and take for demonstration by a
certain Precipitation of judgment, what at the utmost bears but a fair show
of probability. I may methinks be allowable to mistrust a Man's Capacity, when
he pretends to know all things to the bottom, or to say nothing, what is not
either in it self, or by consequence clear and evident. I have always been a
great admirer of Thomas Aquinas, the Angelical Doctor, and do look upon him as
a transcending Wit, but merely upon this account, that he seems to be certain
of nothing, though in Corpore articuli, he stands at length stiffly to one part
of the contradiction, and answers the Arguments for the other. But you may
easily gather both from the difficulties he proposes to himself, and his
answers that he pretended no more than to doubt rationally of disputable
matters; and more than this cannot be expected from the capacity of Man, who
has no comprehensive knowledge of natural things, as Angels have. I take then
an ingenuous Ignorant to be of the most ingenious or knowing sort: I mean one
that professes sincerely he knows nothing certainly, but who withal, because
of his penetrancy, and great Wit, can give a rational, though not a
demonstrative account of every thing. Such an one I conceive capable to defend
probably, and no further, whatever you may propose to him. For few things are
to a man of this Character self-evident. He doubts not only of the possibility
of ever doubling the Cub, or squaring the Circle, of fixing of Mercury, of
making malleable Glass, etc. But he discovers without Telescops, Stains, and
Spots in the very Stars themselves, I mean Obscurity, Falsehood, uncertainty in
the clearest and most approved Notions, Errors, Mistakes, and sometimes flat
Deviations from the Truth in the most accurate Authors. He neither admires the
old Philosophy, nor dotes upon the New, but takes up the Cudgels indifferently
for either, as it serves his turn, or his fancy. He is not always satisfied
with what we call Mathematical Demonstrations, and discovers them often to be
but false apparitions, imposing easily upon a weak understanding. He scrupleth
at the vulgar Opinions, and values them no more than vulgar Errors. This is the
Sentiment of an honorable Gentleman, whom I respect as a great Wit; I have
heard him say more than once, that he found by experience the most vulgar
Opinions to be flat untruths, which he has ingeniously proved to conviction in
several of his most learned Books. Nevertheless, though such Men seem to be
satisfied with nothing, not through Pride, for they are of the Humblest sort,
but through Knowledge, yet they are desirous to learn from the meanest
Capacities, as well knowing that their Understanding, how vast soever, is but
of a limited extent, and not Omniscient. Though they be sparing of their
Elogiums, as admiring nothing, yet they are seldom guilty of detraction, of too
much blaming, or rashly condemning other men's labors; and if Books receive
their Fates from the Capacity of the Readers, it is a good Fortune for a well
penned Piece to fall into such men's hands: for being great Artists themselves,
they are the best Judges of Arts, and do praise moderately what they judge to
deserve it, or say nothing at all of what they either cannot, or will not
commend.

SECT. IX. The Origin and Progress of Wit.
1. The extent of Adam's Wit.

2. The natural endowments of his mind, not destroyed by his Sins.

3. That we owe to the Egyptians, Arabians, Grecians, Romans, the greatest
part of Humane Sciences.

4. Of the Gymonosophists and Druids, and their Doctrine.

5. That this present Age surpasses all the foregoing Centuries, as to Wit,
Knowledge and Learning.

1. ADam was not only the first man in the World, but the first Wit: for as
being the King of all other inferior Creatures, I do rationally fancy he was
fitted to such an eminent Dignity, with proportionable Gifts, and Talents. This
being Gods usual way of providing for his Creatures whenever he minds to
exalt them. I conceive then, first Adam's Understanding fraught with clear and
distinct Idea's of all natural things. He was, I doubt not, a good Alchimist,
and an ingenious Astronomer, an accurate Geometer, a subtle Logician, and a
very acute Philosopher. But yet I cannot say that he was a very witty Husband,
because of his too simple and blind complacency to his Wife, which occasioned
his ruin, and that of his Posterity. We must not think nevertheless that his
Fall darkened his Understanding, though it corrupted his will: For I suppose he
was not unlike to the Angels, as to this point: of whom the Divines affirm, non
sunt vulnerati in Naturalibus, after their Sin committed, they retained yet all
their natural endowments, as not being wounded in their Intellectuals. He could
then I fancy, and did really propagate to Posterity a part of his Wit and
Knowledge: Not that I think Wit to be hereditary, since we know certainly by
daily experience, that the most ingenious men beget sometimes the dullest
Children. My meaning only is, that he taught his Sons and Daughters, what he
himself never learned but from God immediately, so they became in a short time
by his Instructions well versed in most Sciences, and skilful in all Arts,
which they invented first for necessity's sake, and then for convenience. Thus
Wit flourished in the World as by a lineal descent, till the days of Noah: When
all Flesh had corrupted their way, that is their Wit; Omnis caro corruperat
viam suam. It was confined then in the Ark to a little number, and if the Ark
had split, it had entirely perished. The Egyptians after the retreat of the
Waters from above the Face of the Earth, claimed more right to it for several
hundred years, than any other Nation of the World. Every Creature was to them a
piece of Divinity, and what signified nothing to other Nations, represented to
them profound Mysteries. Their Hierogliphicks are evident proofs of their
ingenious meditations. To them, as much as to the Arabians, we owe the
knowledge of Astronomy, and of most other Sciences: Yet as men are obnoxious to
various changes, this most ingenious Nation became at length so dull, as to
acknowledge, and worship Cats, Dogs and Rats for its Gods. But the Grecians
succeeding in their Room, took upon them to be the great Instructers of the
World, and were never equaled but by the Romans. I know not what to make of
Plato, whether we should call him a God or a Man: I shall only say, he justly
deserves to be styled Divine, Divinus Plato, because of his high Sentiments of
God, and those Notable pieces of Divinity he has left to Posterity. Anacharsis,
Anaxagoras, Pythagoras, Euclides, are really Stars of the first magnitude, and
were the greatest Wits of their times: But the Romans at length subduing the
Grecians, became their Masters, not only by the happy success of their Arms,
but also by their Wit, Learning and Eloquence: For if we reflect but a moment
upon the present condition of the Grecians, we shall instantly conclude, that
whenever the body is enslaved, the mind is commonly subdued, or at least
loses much of its natural vigor and sharpness, because of its dependency upon
the body. The Athenians under the Roman Yoke were no more called then, as
before, Scientiarum Omnium Inrentrices Athenae, the Inventors of all Arts and
Sciences. The Muses had now deserted Athens to follow the Roman Conquerours, to
the Imperial Seat of the World then, Rome. The Romans now on the other side
began to propagate, together with their own Authority, Wit, and Knowledge,
through the rest of the World; yet the Gymnosophists flourished before them, as
some fancy in the East Ines. I know not what sort of Men they were, but if we
believe the relations of some not unlearned Travellours, they taught not very
impertinent Doctrines concerning another life, a Rewarder, and Punisher of
Crimes, of the Existency, Omnisciency, Goodness and Immensity of God. It Is
reported that they delighted much in that pleasant fancy of Transmigration of
their Souls; which Doctrine I take to be most true in this Sense, that Men in
all ages do arise so like unto those that have gone before them, as to Wit,
Sharpness and Learning; that we must not quarrel much with such as admit a
certain representative Metempsycosis, or Transmigration of Souls from one Body
into another: Which I fancy was the Opinion of the First Transmigrators, and is
conceived to have been the meaning of the Indian Gymnosophists. The Druides
likewise, before ever the Roman Eagles appeared on this side of the Alps, were
looked upon as great Wits among the Gauls. Yet I could learn almost nothing of
this Tribe abroad, though I have been very inquisitive after their Doctrine,
Discipline, and Manners, but that they lived in remote places, as upon
Mountains, where I have seen some of their Monuments, and in Woods much
resorted to, by the generality of the People that consulted them upon all
occasions, and doubtful Cases, as Oracles. Yet I was informed that they held
the World eternal, and thought it a self-evident Contradiction that any thing
should be made of nothing. They could not admit in God any foresight of
contingent effects, as altogether inconsistent in their Fancy with their
Contingency. Nevertheless the Gauls were but a blunt and dull sort of People,
under these self-conceited and speculative Masters. Yet no sooner the Romans
had possessed themselves of the greatest part of the World, but the Gauls and
most other Nations began to improve more particularly their Natural Talents.

2. Nevertheless I believe, I shall not be contradicted, if I say that since
the Roman Empire was torn asunder by its own divisions, and intestine Broyls,
Wit and Learning made a greater Progress in the World than ever they had done
during the prosperous Days of the Roman greatness. For not to speak of Gunnery,
Printing, Sailing, whereof either the Romans knew nothing at all, or never came
near the skill of after Ages, they can pretend to no insight in Chemistry, and
had made but few discoveries in Natural Philosophy, in compare to what the Wits
of our Age have made in both, to the great benefit of Mankind. Yea I am of
Opinion, that if Cicero came now into the World again, he would be forced to
study afresh his own Tongue, and learn from us the new significations of many
Latin Words, which we either borrow, or invent to express new things, and that
were perhaps quite unknown to him: Such I reckon to be most Chemical terms, as
Precipitation, Solution, Stratification, Volatisation, etc. Some of the
Ancients I confess, were Eminent Mathematicians, as Ptolemy, Euclides, etc. But
Methinks we have no reason to yield to them in this point; since besides many
new things we have discovered that they never dreamt of; we may justly boast of
the renowned Napers Divine Invention, I mean his admirable Logarithmes, whose
Properties and Nature the more you study, the greater Wonders you shall meet
with. I take this Divine Art, for I know no Elogium below it, to be the very
Key of Mathematics. Since what formerly could not be done without long and
tedious Multiplications and Divisions, may now be performed by a simple
Addition and Substraction, Operations so easy, that a Man but of a mean
Capacity may become capable in less than a days time, to teach them.

3. I shall not forget here another no less curious, and more necessary piece
of Wit, or regarding more nearly the common good. I have seen in France,
Holland, Germany, many sad effects of what we call Herniam or Rupture: And
being curious to know the best Methods of curing it, I converst the renowneds^
Artists, upon this account, in mos^ parts of Europe: But could never be
satisfied with what I either could invent my self, or learn from others*
concerning the main Instruments made use of in this important cure, I mean the
Trusses, whether Vmbilical, o^ others. But all my doubts were full^ cleared,
and my curiosity entirely satisfied, since I met with Mr. Smith ^ Scotch
Gentleman, living in the Blackfriars, in London. To do him justice, without
the least design of e^ther interest or concern, I never met with any either at
home or abroad comparable to him in the Art and Skill of curing this sad
Distemper. I conceive his chief Secret to consist in two things. First, in
making Trusses so light and easy to carry, that whereas others sometimes weigh
several Pounds, whereof I have seen one in his own House, his exceed not nine
or ten Ounces. Secondly, so fitted to the Body, that they follow exexactly its
movement whether violent or natural, as if they were incorporated in a manner
to the Person that wears them. He designs to publish at conveneniency his
Method, which undoubtedly will prove a great common Good. But I should weary
out your patience, would I be at the pains to set down here all the great
advantages of this Age we live in, above the foregoing Centuries. Though the
Ancient Romans may justly pretend to have been greater Masters of the Latin
Tongue than we are now: Yet I can instance three Linguists near our times, that
may justly be reckoned among the purests of the Polite Age of Augustus, I mean
Buchanan, Petavius, Maffeius. The first is well known, and is most natural and
smooth, whether he writes Verse or Prose: upon his account it was said, that
Romani Imperii fuit olim Scotia limes
Romani eloquii Scotia limes erit.


His Translation of the Psalms is as far beyond that of Father Magnet's, the
Jesuit, as a Masterpiece is before the mere Rudiment of a Prentice. Petavius
and Maffeius, so well known all the Learned World over, may be ranged with
those of the Primitive times for the Purity of their Style: But however, though
we may yield to the Romans in this point, and grant that they knew their own
Tongue better then Foreigners, yet we shall ever pretend the Advantage in
several other things, of great Wit. Our Warlike Engines, our Artificial
Fireworks, as Bombs, Carcasses, Grenads; Our Telescops, Microscops, etc. and a
thousand other obvious pieces of Art to be met with in every corner of Europe,
do manifestly show that our times are improved, if not perhaps in Virtue, at
least in real Knowledge, far beyond all the foregoing Ages.

SECT. X. The abuse of Wit.
1. That we make sometimes a good use of bad things.

2. The common and general Cheats put upon Men by Tradesmen, Lawyers, and
others.

3. Interest, the Primum mobile of Mankind.

4. The vain and unsuccessful attempts of Learned Men.

5. The fruitless labors of such as search after the Philosophers Stone.

6. The Vanity of Judiciary Astrology.

7. That the Angels know not the Secrets of our Hearts, and why.

8. That private Men ought not to meddle with Public affairs.

1. WE do often make an ill use of the best things, as also sometime a good use
of the worst. Thus that great Overthrower of the Texture of Humane Bodies,
Poison, we turn into wholesome Remedies, and Powerful Antidotes. I know nothing
worse than Sin, which nevertheless has proved an occasion of Salvation to many
through Humility and Humiliation, its ordinary Effects. St. Peter was never
truly humble, till by a flat denial of his Savior, he became experimentally
sensible of his own Weakness. St. Thomas's Incredulity, or misbelief, wrought
not only in him an increase of Faith, but likewise in the rest of the Christian
World. For I look upon it as a most powerful inductive to believe the Mystery
of the Resurrection, because it occasioned the Conviction of those that then
doubted of this Important truth, or might perhaps in after times doubt of it.
For who can hereafter mistrust this point, if he reflects but a moment with
what evidence Christ proved to St. Thomas the Realty of his Body: But now it is
as true on the other side, as I was saying a little before, that we misuse
sometimes the best things, as a sickly and disorderly constitution turns the
best Food not into a good Substance, but into pernicious Venom. Thus Wit, the
Noblest of Natural Gifts, is made often an Instrument of all kind of
Wickedness. I conceive it was not said of the Devil only, Circuit tanquam Leo
rugens querens quam devores, That he runs to and fro like a roaring Lion, to
prey upon, and devour the first he meets with. This is likewise the chief and
ordinary business of most Men in this corrupted age we live in. Some indeed
like Roaring Lions hold the World in a perpetual Stir, and Fear, by claiming
right to whatever they can reach by their Arms. Others again make not an open
War like Lions, but more crafty like Foxes, lay secret Ambushes to their
unthinking Neighbors. I would wish there were no Tradesmen in the World, if
Men could live as well without them. I know indeed they are thought necessary
for the Good and Benefit of Mankind; but the unjust measures they use sometimes
for their own private ends, under pretense of promoting the Common Good, makes
me speak thus, and wish we could want them. For I am of Opinion, that to trade
with many, and to Cheat, are much about one. I shall not except that Noble, and
necessary Art I do profess my self, wherein I wish the number of able, and
Conscientious Men, did equal that of mere Pretenders, and bold Adventurers. I
doubt not but there are Good Men of all Trades as of all Religions; yet I have
known some Godly Tradesmen, as to their outside, prove at length the greatest
Cheats under Heaven. They had no doubt read in Scripture this passage, Vtilis
ad omnia pietas, that Piety is useful for everything: Whence they concluded,
that it might be useful for the gaining of Money too, the best of things in
their Conceit: and accordingly thought it a piece of Folly and not of Wit, to
adventure the cutting of a Purse in the Highway, since they could do it with
greater security, and certainly by long Prayers, reformed Looks, or by whatever
they might gain the esteem of those they deal't withal, and could expect any
thing from.

2. I shall say nothing of the Diverse and manifold tricks of Lawyers, who
become often on a sudden very rich, though by the Law, yet very unlawfully. If
men were not mad, they would undoubtedly agree among themselves, and give them
less to do: It was not the only sad effect of Original Sin, that our Bodies
should be obnoxious to the cruel handling of some Physicians, and our Souls to
the interess'd decisions of fanciful Casuists, but likewise that our Goods,
Substance and Riches, should be plundered and pillaged, by those very Men who
pretend to secure them to us by: certain Methods of equity and Justice: But
this disorder, I mean this perpetual reflex upon our own private concerns, is
not only to be met with in Atrio, in the outer Court, but it is got into the
very Sanctuary it self, into the Church, and Pulpit, where no such thing should
be expected. I doubt not but if we could see into the Breasts of several
Preachers, we should there discover that their greatest Zeal aims either at
some Preferment, if they have none, or a fatter one then that they are
possessed of. Neither do I fear the guilt of a rash Judgment, by speaking thus
freely my mind, since it is commonly said, though perhaps it be but a mere
calumny, that Churchmen discourse more together of their Livings, than of the
means how to amend their own, perhaps, or other Men's irregular lives. Yet I
will charitably suppose that this is but the defect of some few particular Men,
and not of the Generality: For I do less wonder to see a debauched Clergyman,
than a Judas amongst Christ's Apostles. Nevertheless I pretend not that
Clergymen, as well as others, may not make use of their Wit for their peculiar
ends: I allow them then to preach either for a Benefice, or for a better
Benefice, provided this be but their Secondary Motive, and not the first mover
of all their Actions, or provided perhaps, by being enabled to do more good,
they pretend to glorify God more in a Higher Condition, than in a lower: In
all this I conceive nothing Irregular: Neither do I deny but that an ingenious
Tradesman may, and ought to gain by his Ingenuity, cheating only, and the Art
of Circumventing one another, I condemn; which I observe to be but too usual
among 'em: For if they have to do with a man that either understands not their
Tricks, or ingeniously relies upon their Word, and Honesty, it is odds but
consulting their dearly beloved Interest, more than what Justice requires of
them, they will pretend to have used him kindly, as they speak, when they have
really put a Cheat upon him. But as the eclipses of some Stars argue not a
general darkness in all the rest, what I lately said of Churchmen, may
likewise be understood of Mechanics, and all Tradesmen, whereof several are
Conscientious, and well meaning Men, so well grounded in the Maxims of true
Honor and Honesty, that they would not for all the World have done a base
thing.

3. I am satisfied that men misuse not only these ingenious faculties they have
received from God to the Corruption of their Morals, but likewise to the
intangling and depraving of their Intellectuals. I laugh more at, than I do
pity the unsuccessful attemps of such as pretend to give us a true Notion of
the Infinite, that is of a thing infinitely above the reach of our conceiving
Faculty, or to inform the World with Aristotle, what or how many parts either
time or matter is compounded of. Descartes, if not so subtle as Aristotle, is
in my Judgment more prudent, for having left untouched such insolvable, and
useless Difficulties. The Pompous Notions of Eternity, as a perpetuum nunc, a
perpetual Instant, instans infinitum, an infinite Instant, Instans immobile, an
immovable moment, Vitae interminabilis tota simul ac perfecta possessio, a
perfect and whole possession all at once of an interminable life, are but vain
and airy Conceits, fitter to embroyl our Understandings, than to give them any
New, or real Light toward the discovery of the Object they propose. We may
truly say of Eternity what an ancient Philosopher said of God, the more we
think on it, the less we know what it is; which may be likewise applied to many
other things, commonly thought less inconceivable, as to time, place, motion
and matter, whereof as I have never read any satisfactory Notions, so I think
it not worth my while to make any new attempts about a Subject which I humbly
conceive to be some degrees beyond the reach of my weak Abilities. What a
strange conceit is it in some to consume whole years, and the greatest part of
their days in searching a perpetual movement, and at the same time wholly
artificial: A French Jesuit spent unsuccessfully a part of his Life, and a
considerable Sum of Money in this vain attempt, and coming at length without
having found out the eternal movement, to his last end, and eternal rest,
reaped no other thing by the continual, and long Labors of his Life, but this
pleasant Epitaph after his Death, Patri quaerenti motum perpetuum requies
aeterna.

4. I take it likewise to be a loss of time, which I would not value, if it
proved not also sometimes the loss of Men's Fortunes, to search after, though
perhaps it may be found out what they call commonly the Philosophers Stone. A
Man of a great Estate, who dyed at length in an Hospital, said, a little before
his Death, he could wish his most implacable Enemy no greater misforfortune
than to become an Alchimist, or a Chrysopeian, I mean one that endeavors to
find out the Texture necessary for the constitution of a true Gold: This
Texture I fancy is known to the Angels, whether good or bad, because they have
an intutive and comprehensive Knowledge too, in some degrees, of the whole
Creation: But I have just reason to doubt if any Man has as yet stumbled upon
it: And which makes equally for my purpose, though we were certain to find out
at length this wonderful Art, all would be in vain and lost labor, yea, and of
a dangerous consequence too. Because Princes being justly jealous of such
industrious Artists, would either use them hardly, or keep them in perpetual
Prison, least they should furnish their Enemies, or their subject^ with an
easy Method of Heaping up Treasures; which would render them less
considerable, by dividing thus into many hands, and in great quantities, the
things they are most courted, and respected for by the vulgar sort, Gold and
Silver. But I conceive no worse use of Wit, than to be busy about acquiring
too much insight in Judiciary Astrology, which a man cannot be entirely
addicted to, without being already come to the Years of Dotage in the Opinion
of the Wiser sort. I often do wonder how rational Men are not deterred from the
Study of this vain Science, by the very weakness of its imaginary Principles,
and suffer not themselves to be laughed out of it, by the notoriously false
predictions of such as have pretended to the greatest insight in this matter.
The Great Duke's Mule is a known Story; whose Horoscop being enquired for under
the Notion of a Bastard from those that were then esteemed most eminent in
Judiciary Astrology; the import of their answer was not only what really was
not to come to pass, but what could never happen: For some promised to this
pretended Bastard the Empire, others the Triple Crown, some would needs have
him to become one day a great Lawyer, others a great Captain, and others again
a Saint. So extreme was the folly of those Irregular Heads, who deserved not
only to be pointed at for their insufferable Vanity, but likewise to be
severely punished for daring to thrust upon the World at this rate these flat
untruths, and presuming to play the Prophets, without the least proof of their
being inspired, or so much as of a sufficient Capacity for the Framing of
probable conjectures.

4. It Is not only in my Judgment a Sin which we should chiefly fear, to
consult with Magicians and Witches, if there be any, concerning contingen^
effects and contingencies; especially such as depend upon the free
determination of our wills, which the Angels, of whatsoever color, if I may so
say, know no more than I do. Though because of their natural acuteness, they
guess a great deal nearer what we are to determine our selves to, by the
present Temper and Disposition of our Bodies. I know indeed that the innate
perfection o^ the Angelical Nature, as all Divines generally teach, requires a
perfect Knowledge of our free Determinations, as well as of our necessary ones.
But I am told likewise by the greatest Masters of Divinity, that God never
concurs with them to such a Knowledge, because he is resolved to maintain the
privilege o^ Mankind, whose Prerogative it is, as of other Commonwealths, to
have all Freedom, either of concealing from, or communicating to Foreigners
their Secrets. Thus if I address my Thoughts to the Devil, or to an Angel, I do
not improbably think, that God being now free by my consent, and yielding up my
right from that Obligation he has put upon himself, the Angel really knows, and
understands what I think; but if I do not direct after this manner my Thoughts,
or will not discover them to any other Creature: God has put a tie upon
himself, grounded upon the Privilege of a Free Commonwealth, as that of
Mankind is, not to lend a helping hand to the Discovery of my secret Thoughts.
Since then the Devil cannot at the utmost frame but very weak conjectures of
things to come, especially if they be contingent: It is not only useless, but a
not ordinary piece of madness, to take advice from, and consult with them, who
in all appearance have first consulted him.

5. There are other things of great Moment, wherein we may misapply our Wit,
and spend our time not only to no purpose, but likewise to our great damage
too. I am for instance but a private Man, and a very inconsiderable Member of
the Commonwealth too, so as it never was my Lot, nor in all appearance ever
will be, to share with others that deserve it better in the Government of State
Affairs; yet if I am as the Traitor Holloway said of himself, a too public
Spirited Man, pretending to meddle with things that I am not answerable for, as
not being entrusted to my Charge, I neither do in this case behave my self, as
if I were either Witty, or wise. What a piece of folly is it then to censure
the Actions of our Lord and Sovereign, because perhaps they square not to the
fanciful conceits of our irregular Heads. For since we can never in reason
suppose but that he aims at nothing more than the Peace, Happiness, and common
good of the Nation, as being inseparable from his own concerns, and welfare:
if you perhaps through a criminal mistake chance to be of another Opinion; you
may certainly conclude from thence that you understand not the Public concerns
so well as he does, who sits at the Helm, and is by Gods special command to
watch over us all, as a Flock committed to his vigilance and trust.

As the Stones cut by the prescript of an Archytect into Triangles, Squares,
Cubes, Pyramids, know not why they are thus shaped: For this being the business
of the Architect, or Master Mason, who has conceived a clear and distinct Idea
of the whole Building, he orders accordingly whatever he thinks fitting for the
completing thereof. Should then those Stones to follow out this comparison,
complain of their being cut after this, or that manner, or of their not being
set in the Frontespiece, rather than in some inconsiderable corner of the
Building: Would this in your opinion, be either rational or sufferable, since
they know nothing of the Undertakers design. We run yet much more counter to
reason, and the Subordination that God has established in this World, when we
presume to set up for Judges of our Sovereign, or dare to question upon what
account he does this or that, issue out this or that Order, as if we understood
better than he, the Public Interest, which God has entrusted to him, not to
us. We shall never then be useful Members to the Commonwealth we make a part
of, unless we keep within the bounds of our Respective Stations. It Is then safe
and a greater piece of Wit in a Tradesman for instance, to mind his business,
and Domestic con^erns, rather than to asperse the Government by his malicious
reflections, or which is yet worse, to writ seditious Pamphlets, and
calumniatory Libels in opposition to his Superiors. Such Men have a great
account to render one day to God for this disorderly use of their Wit. I
conceive the Devil himself with his Hellish Tribe, to be but in one point worse
than those troublesome Spirits; that he is not capable of Repentance. But I need
not enlarge on this Subject, since to the great advantage of the established
Government, it is daily handled with so much accuracy by that very ingenious,
and truly Loyal Gentleman, Sir Roger L' Estrange.

SECT. XI. The use of Wit.
1. That Wit is sometimes the occasion of great disorders.

2. That a witty man may live happily in a solitude.

3. That the common word, Man is a sociable Animal, is only to be understood of
the duller sort.

4. The Duty of a Christian.

5. That the clear light of Reason may contribute somewhat toward the increase
of the dark Light of Faith.

6. Divine revelation to be proposed by, and received from the Universal Church.

7. The vulgar Error, that of three Physicians, two are Atheists confuted.

8. The foresaid Reproach pressed home to some Divines, especially to those of
the Romish Church, with a greater appearance of Truth.

9. The usefulness of natural Philosophy, and the best method of Learning.

10. That we must conform our Discourse to those we converse with; and not make
an affected show of Wit before the duller Sort.

1. IT may be a Paradox, though no untruth, that Wit is the worst of Gods Gifts
bestowed upon Mankind, if we Judge a thing bad, that either is the occasion or
cause of evil, and mischief: For it is not only the Headwel of Rebellion,
Sedition, and Heresy, which we may easily discover, whether we reflect upon
our times, or by a start backwards take a view of the foregoing Ages; but it is
also the Inventer of those innumerable Engines made use of by men for the Ruin
of Mankind, under pretense either of a necessary defense, or just attack: Yet
as by Malice, or misapplication, it may be a fit Instrument for evil; so if we
turn it once the right way, it may prove the most useful, as undoubtedly it is
the most shining participation of the Divine Nature. And I know not why
Aristotle said, that a Man who can live in a retired solitude, must be either a
God, or a Beast: Since for this I conceive nothing else requisite but a not too
narrow Wit: For Spiritualis homo omnia judicat, the Spiritual Man, that is the
Witty, discerns, and makes use of every thing. Of such an one it is truly said,
Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus, that he is never in better company, than
when he is with no body; for then in his retired Thoughts he calls himself to
an account, and examines severely all his own actions, thoughts and Words. I
know not then whereupon it is grounded, that a Man is a sociable Animal, and
loves to live together with his like in Nature and Shape. For I have always
observed the wittyest sort of men to delight more in their retired Solitudes,
than in the greatest Crowds. If this common Maxim be not a vulgar Error, as I
believe it is none, it cannot be understood but of the duller Sort, who being
once alone, are in all sense alone, and with no body, because they are no
Company to themselves; I mean they know not how to play the time away, with
what either is within or without themselves: But such as can act the
Philosophers part with whatever they see, feel, or touch, do neither need, or
incline much to converse except perhaps those that are of a no less, or rather
of greater Abilities than themselves. Nay Books to such men are not necessary
Companions in their Retirements: For they can want their Company too, though
not so well as that of Men. One of these three they are always conversant with,
themselves, God, or the Obvious Works of his Power, that are without us. I
conceive not, it is true, what God is; for how should he be what he is, if I
could comprehend him, yet I may apprehend him to be a being infinitely perfect:
that is to say, whose perfections are numberless. I need not then, if I please,
want a Subject to think on when alone, if considering apart those perfections
one after another; I measure, as far as I can reach, their dimensions, their
length, their breadth, and their depth. So I shall now meditate upon his Power,
and then contemplate the strange effects thereof in the works of the Creation,
which I shall always conceive infinitely below what he could have done, or may
yet do. I shall again represent to my self, though very imperfectly, the
brightness of his Glory in the Sun, Moon and Stars, his constancy in the Earth*
his activity in the Fire, the depth of his Essence in the bottomless Seas, and
the least of his Creatures shall be unto me a fair Copy of his Wisdom,
Goodness, and other Perfections.

2. But if I make no other use of my Wit than this, I am but a mere Moralist,
and not a Christian; for as such I must lay aside my Philosophy, and believe
what I conceive not upon the infallible Authority of an obscure Revelation.
Nevertheless, though my Religion forbids me to play the Philosopher, yet if I
pretend to a rational belief, I presume nothing against its true Maxims. As I
look then upon the mere light of Faith to be somewhat dark, so I know the light
of reason to be somewhat clearer: May not I then join those two Lights
together, and make perhaps a greater one of them both? I believe the mystery of
the Trinity, though I comprehend it not; I think it not unlawful to slatter my
own Weakness with the discovery of some Rudiments thereof in my Soul, as being
one in Nature, and threefold in Operation, I mean, as having three distinct
Faculties, the Memory, Understanding and Will. The Incarnation is above the
reach of an Angelical Understanding: The Angels themselves by the mere light of
Nature could not but judge it impossible. It Is a strange Metamorphosis, that
faith only teaches me to be real. Style me not nevertheless quite impertinent,
if for my own satisfaction I endeavor to persuade to my self the possibility
thereof, by what I see daily in Nature, in the grafting of one Tree upon
another, so that two Natures become now but one by union, and one almost
individual Principle of their Common Productions. The resurrection of our
Bodies, or that after so many Changes, and different Shapes of Worms, Serpents,
Birds, Fishes, or whatever may feed upon us, we shall be at length our
numerical selves again, is a thing that I incline to believe upon experience,
when I observe some Liquors or Waters, perfectly corrupted, to recover
themselves, though neither this, nor the foregoing Motives, could ever make me
a Christian without the Authority of Divine Revelation, which I neither take
from the Romish, English, nor Greek, but from the Catholic and Universal
Church, conceived by the Unbiased and Understanding sort to be compounded of
all such, and the like particular true Christian Assemblies. Thus what all true
Christians grant, and never debated, this and no other I take to be an article
of Divine Faith, necessary to Salvation, if sufficiently proposed. I look upon
the rest as Supernumerary, or at the utmost as probable opinions, that may be
disputed to and fro amongst Schoolmen, but ought not to be imposed upon
Christians, as Articles of Divine Faith, without the belief of which, their
Names are rased out of the Book of Life. I believe then not only that there is
a Catholic Church, Credo Ecclesiam Catholicam, but likewise, Credo Ecclesiae
Catholicae, I believe whatever it unamiously decides: for, Audi Ecclesiam,
hearken to the Church, is a true obligation, but the Romanist is extremely
prejudiced, when he means always the Romish Church, as if it were, as it now
stands, truly universal; whereas it is but a Member, and a very unsound one too
of that great Body, we must all submit to. I have observed another common
mistake of the less discerning Sort of Romanists, which is this, They pretend
to a considerable advantage over Protestants from Antiquity, but reflect not
that their Church is no otherwise distinguished from the reformed part of the
World, than by mere Novelties, and Mysteries unheard of in the first three
Centuries: For I know no other material difference between a Protestant and a
Romanist, but that the former adheres closely to the Doctrine of the Primitive
times, whereas the latter takes for an articie of Divine Faith, not only what
the universal Church held from all times, but whatever the particular Church of
Rome has declared since to be revealed. Yet because I was ever of opinion that
every man must stand, or fall by the verdict of his own Conscience; I think it
neither fit, nor a good use of Wit to quarrel with any man upon the account of
his Religion.

3. I shall therefore do better perhaps, to clear in this point those of my own
Profession, I mean the Physicians, from a foul and too general aspersion of the
vulgar sort, alleging that they are not much concerned with what we call
Religion. For it is commonly, to our great scandal said, Ex tribus medicis duo
Athei, that of three Physicians there are but two Atheists. I am without
Prejudice, of a quite contrary opinion, and think it no Paradox to say, that
none are so Religious as Physicians, or at least, that none have greater
opportunities to raise their Souls to the highest Degree of Perfection: Which
if I prove to conviction, nothing more can rationally be required for the
taking away this general scandal of our Profession. What I shall say of
Physicians must needs be understood of their near Relations, the natural
Philosophers, who likewise, if we credit the bigoted part of Mankind, are no
great Patrons of either Virtue or Religion.

Would one think that two contrary Causes could have the same Influence, or the
same effect, yet nothing more conformable to Truth. Thus I hold that as
ignorance is commonly the Mother of Devotion in most men, I mean in the duller
sort of Mankind; so Knowledge, the opposite extreme, begets undoubtedly Piety
and Religion, in such as have eyes to discover God in the Works of his Power.
But who has a greater convenience for making of such useful Discoveries than
Physicians, whether we consider the Object of their Art, or the Subject
thereof. The former I take to be, whatever is contained in the three Kingdoms,
as they speak, in the Animal, Vegetative and Mineral: where they cannot but
admire that Sovereign being, Fatherly Providence over Mankind, in the
production of whatever may prove instrumental to the conservation of our Health
and Life. The latter I apprehend to be no other than that wonderful Engine of
our Body, whose wonderful Structure may furnish them with higher Sentiments of
God, than that of the Universe it self. Thus a Physician considering this most
ingenious Fabric, cannot but raise his thoughts toward the Maker thereof. For
no man in his Wits will take the Coition, or rather Cohalition of all the parts
of our Body into such a comely and proportionable texture, to be mere
fortuitous, and not the real effect of Art and Wisdom. I know not then whereon
is grounded the general prejudice against this noble and necessary Science,
which the Divines themselves, especially those of the Romish persuasion seem to
be more concerned in than Physicians. For he was not perhaps guilty of a very
flat untruth, who inverting thus the common word said, Ex tribus Theologici duo
Athei, That of three Divines its odds but two are Atheists, or in my less
severe judgment perhaps, mere Deists; because pretending sometimes to
circumscribe our Mysteries within the Circumference of their narrow
Understandings; they often fall from believing, what by their Weak Reason they
cannot reach, and so turning Christianism into Deism, they cease to be in their
Hearts what for interest sake they make an outward Profession of. The Romish
Divines, to the great Scandal of the World, busy themselves in their Schools,
in laying open the Arguments that humane acuteness may frame against the
possibility of Christ's Incarnation; as if their answers grounded upon these
obscure principles of Faith, could prove evident confutations of such
Objections, as seem to us to rely upon Evidence. I know no shorter way than
this to Deism, and thence by degrees to Atheism; when they teach that the most
illuminate Angel could not by the mere light of Nature fall into the least
suspicion of the possibility of an Hypostatical Union; do they not give
occasion to the weaker sort to think that this Mystery is not only above, but
against reason? Yet I was scandalized at nothing more than neither to hear, nor
propose any demonstration of the existency of God, which they pretend not to
confute with a show of probability, as if Atheism were a probable opinion,
which seems to be the consequence of their Doctrine; for though each one claims
to a demonstration of Gods being actually in nature, yet no two do ever agree
upon the same: what the one affirms, the other denies with equal grounds, as he
pretends, from Reason: So that by their principles they must hold it probable
that there is no demonstration of a Sovereign Being, which I look upon as a
dangerous, and a too bold Assertion.

4. The only then profitable use of Wit in such matters of Religion as
overreach our weak Capacity, consists in captivating our Understanding by an
humble submission to the belief of the Universal Church.

As to other inferior Subjects, I know nothing fitter to improve our
Intellectuals, than the Study of natural Philosophy: For it fills not our
Heads with vain and airy Notions, with insignificant School Terms, and
Pedantick Niceties, but aims at the promoting in us of real Knowledge: Yet I am
not so much out of conceit with the School Doctrine, as to put no value upon it
at all. That part of it they call artificial Logic, I apprehend not only to be
useful, but necessary for the quickening of our discoursing Faculty: for I have
always observed such as understand not the Art of a Syllogism, or the
Aristotalian Method of drawing Coherent Conclusions, to raise often very
illegal Inferences, which you can scarce make them sensible of, because being
not acquainted with the general, and particular Laws of a formal discourse;
they seldom distinguish between what is concluded vi formae, as they speak, and
what is only concluded vi materiae. I mean when a proposition is essentially
true, and because of its dependancy upon another, and only accidentally, or
because of the Subject it expresses. Yet I am of opinion that the Analytick
Method is to be preferred before the Syllogistick, because, besides that the
former, mean of analysie and resolution contains, if well managed, the
Substance of the latter; it brings along with it more Ornaments than is
consistent with naked Enthimema's, and harsh Syllogysms. I know not
nevertheless if any of these Methods be fit for young Beginners; for I incline
much to think, that our Imagination, though generally stronger in our greener
years, than our Judgment, yet being more various and changeable than in our
Riper Days, must needs first of all be brought to some degree of consistency:
which may easily be done by following the custom of some Ancient Masters, who
would have their Scholars to learn first the Mathematics, as the easiest
Principles and Demonstrations both of practical and speculative Geometry; Not
so much upon the account of the great Evidence of such Sciences, as chiefly
because they depend upon Figure and Proportion, two things necessary and
sufficient for the fixing of our inconstant Imaginations.

5. I have no more to say of the use of Wit at present, except what may regard
our familiar and daily Conversations: We are then to reflect with whom we have
to do: For if they be really our Masters in all sense, or judged generally
beyond the common reach; whatever abilities we find our selves gifted with, we
must rather keep them close than display them vainly in their presence, least
we seem either to think too much of our selves, or not enough of them: To whom,
as occasion serves, we ought to pay without flattery, the Homage due to their
grand Genius's. If perchance we converse with those that we judge not superior
to our selves, we may take more Freedom, but if we are in Company of the duller
sort, we must conform our Discourses to their Capacity, and not to our own. For
to behave our selves otherwise, I mean to endeavor in our Converse with such
men, to say nothing but what carries along with it a certain Character of Wit,
and Sharpness, would be a no less piece of Folly then, as they commonly say,
Projicere Margaritas ante porcos, to cast Pearls before Swine because they
could neither digest, nor be sensible of such a Spiritual Food. I remember upon
this occasion a passage of two Gentlemen, who hearing a third say, that an
Ambassador was an Honorable Spy, opposed warmly this expression, as carrying
in its Front an apparent Contradiction, and that an honorable Spy could amount
to nothing more than an Honorable Rogue. Though they seemed to be ingenious
enough, yet they could not be made sensible of their mistake, nor conceive
somewhat of Wit in this reflecting way of speaking, and more Sense too than
every mean Capacity is aware of.

SECT. XII. That great Wits are not at all times equally Witty.
1. Several imperfections of great Wits, and why they make not always use of
their Wit.

2. That our Passions are great obstacles to the exercise of our Wit.

3. Some particular causes of our accidental dullness.

4. A wholesome advice to Patients.

5. The cause why sometimes they recover not, or not so soon.

6. Several notable defects observable in some famous Writers.

7. An advice to such as write Books.

1. AS I conceive nothing to be of a long continuance that may have an end, so
I think nothing in rigor perfect, that contains not all Imaginable
perfections; I know not then why we should call any man perfect, and not rather
in compare to others less Imperfect; since the imperfection of Mankind consists
not only in the real want of several perfections, but likewise in this, that
men are not always capable of making use of these great Abilities, that God
perhaps has bestowed liberally upon them, which may, and does frequently happen
upon several accounts.

First, because the perfectest Soul in the World is but of a limited Capacity,
and consequently cannot at all moments apply it self to every Object with an
equal attention: For Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula Sensus, the more
objects we consider of at once, the less notice we take of each one in
particular. And if it be true that some of the Ancients, as Caesar, if I
misremember not, could write, speak, and dictate at the same time; sure I am,
he could perform neither of the three, with that acuracy, had he done either of
them severally. It Is then the prerogative of a Sovereign being only to
understand all things equally; the perpetual contemplation of his own essence
not hindering him from looking into the Secrets of our Hearts, and weighing the
least of our Thoughts: Men then even the Wittyest sort, by reason of their
limited abilities, when too much applied to one object, seem to forget all
others: And thus discovering their own Weakness, become sometimes a Subject of
laughter and sport to those they chance to converse with. St. Thomas,
deservedly called the Angel of the School, was looked upon as very dull and
simple, when at the Emperors Table he broke out on a sudden into these words,
Conclusum est contra Manacheos, the Conviction of the Manichees! Or its
concluded against the Minachees, which though reported by some as a sign of his
profound Wit, and great Capacity; I take in the quite contrary, to be an
infallible mark of a very limited Genius, as not being capable of performing
two things at the same time: But the most observable deficiency of those Men,
we esteem great Wits, lies here, that they are not only not equally capable of
many things at once, but what sometimes they can do to admiration, they are
again within a short time entirely unfit for. Thus a man's converse will be
often charmingly pleasant, and witty, whom you shall find at other times dull
and heavy. Which I may in Second Instance suppose to proceed from a certain
necessary, or voluntary Wearyness of the Soul: For I see no cause why it may
not fall weary, as well as the Body. The difference only is that the latter
becomes weary because of the loss of its most lively parts, the Spirits; the
former because of its limited nature, and weak faculties, or rather through a
natural desire of change and variety. Thirdly, we are not our selves upon all
occasions, because of our too green and domineering passions: whether they be
of sorrow, envy, hatred or anger, which turn all our natural sharpness and
Vivacity into malicious contrivances, and fits of Fury. When we have conceived
an extreme aversion from any person, by inveighing against him upon all
occasions, we show no more Wit than can be expected from a scolding Woman: No
wonder then if we cease sometimes to be ingenious, since we are often
overruled by our undaunted passions, which overthrow yet more the inward
temper of our Souls, than the outward Texture of our Bodies. Nevertheless we
must confess that it is not always in our Power, either to speak or write
wittily at all times, or with that accuracy we are really capable of. The Great
Homer is not always himself, but sometimes of a dull and sleepy Humor,
Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus; but I understand Mankind better than to
wonder at such accidental deficiencies in the greatest Men, because I am
sensible of this common, but most true Word, Nemo omnibus horis sapit, No man
has always his Wits about him. For as the very change of Weather changes
sometimes the Temper of our Bodies, so it does alter that of our Souls: We
shall then at some Hours of the day both write, and speak easily, and wittily
too, good sense: At some others, we may scratch our heads long enough before we
awaken, and revive again our almost dead Spirits. Which gives me occasion
sometimes to think, though no just grounds, that our Soul is really material,
and of a very changeable Texture too, since it passes so easily, and in such a
short time from one extreme to another: For I would conceive in its supposed
Spiritual Nature, a more constant and durable Temper. Yet I apprehend that
several things may occasion in us this accidental dullness: And first, the very
Company we converse with, either we esteem not enough, or too much. In the
former case we want encouragement to endeavor to show our Wit, because we
think not those we speak to worth our while, or deserving our peculiar
application: In the latter we are kept in awe by a prudent fear of the Censure,
and inward slight of such as we have a high Esteem, and Veneration for. But as
I know nothing more prejudicial to Wit, than Want and Poverty; so I conceive
those common Sentences, Ingenii largitor venture, vexatio dat intellectum, etc.
that Hunger, Vexation and Trouble do make men witty, to be but mere illusions,
and vulgar Errors grounded only upon this, that the very dullest of Men in
great Straits will make odd shifts to rid themselves of the present Necessity.
We must needs then confess, Virtutibus Obstat res augusta domi, That a light
Purse, as the Scots say, makes a heavy Heart, and very unfit to exert those not
ordinary Abilities we are perhaps gifted with. Besides, such is the Nature of
Mankind, that without some encouragement, or prospect of reward, it is not in
our Power to do our utmost endeavors in any enterprise whatsoever.

2. I pretend to no extraordinary Skill in Physic, yet I know no curable
distemper; but methinks I could cure, provided I want not the necessary
encouragements from my Patient, which if you look upon as a piece of
Covetousness, you discover more of a censuring, than of a sharp and considering
Genius: For as it is highly my concern, that you recover your Health by my
care. So I cannot but desire your recovery most earnestly, though I expected no
just salary for my laudable endeavors: Whereby I intend only to give this
wholesome advice to the Patient, as much for his concern, as for the Physicians
interest, that if he fail to do his duty, it is odds if the other, how
conscientious and skilful soever perform successfully his part, not designedly,
nor through Malice, but because such is the natural constitution of Men, that
they cannot serve God himself but upon the account of some proportionable
reward. So if you would have your Physician take notice of every particular
circumstance of your distemper, to apply usefully his Skill for your recovery,
it will be a piece of Wit in you not to let him want too long his due. For else
it will not be in his Power to make use, to your advantage, of that Wit God has
given him, because you encourage him not, by doing what he justly expects, and
may lawfully require. I doubt not but more Patients have perished through their
own narrowness, than by either the Ignorance, or wilful neglect of their
Physicians.

3. I know not why some Nations now, as the Grecians, and others, produce
scarce a Wit in an Age, which formerly were in so great repute throughout the
whole World, but because they are not awakened out of their Lethargy by that
powerful inductive to do great things, a proportionable reward, which may
quicken them into life again those, whose Wits seem to be buried in their
Bodies. So those Princes that are great promoters of Learning, and Learned Men
deserve from them an Apotheosis, a sort of Divine Honor, because they hold of
them the very Life of their Souls, their Wit, by the daily encouragements of
their Princely Liberalities.

I must in this place remember you, that the greatest Wits cease sometimes to
give light before the years of Dotage, either because the Organs without which
the perfectest Soul cannot make us sensible of its Abilities, are corrupted by
our irregularities, or perhaps because of the Natural limitation of Humane
Capacity, which could reach no further.

4. As to the wittyest Authors, there is not only a difference among them, such
as is between different Stars: But the fame Author is sometimes so unlike unto
himself, that one would take him to be another. I admire the First Six Books of
the Aenead, and the Sixth above all. I meet with nothing in all the rest that
deserves my admiration. Ovid's Love Letters are incomparably well done, they
are penned most smoothly and wittily; but he neglected himself too much in
those he wrote in the place of his banishment. There are some excellent pieces
in his Metamorphosis; such I always fancied his description of the Old Chaos,
and the Rudiments of the World, P^a^ton's journey to his Father the Sun, the
debate between Ajax and Ulysses, etc. I admire nothing more in Lucan than the
unevenness of his Style, he flies high, and on a sudden low again in the same
Page, and sometimes in the same Verse; you shall read none so elevated, upon
some occasions, and none so flat on other rencounters: Claudian and he are near
of a Temper. Livy by his long and Minute narratives wears out his own Wit, and
the Readers patience. His best pieces in my Judgment are his Harangues, or
those senseful Speeches he puts in the Mouths of Statesmen, and great Captains.
I have had also a great Veneration for Cicero, yet I am very sensible that he
is not himself upon all occasions. I find few of his Plea's so well penned, as
that he made in defense of Milo. He knows not what he would be at in his Book
de Natura Deorum, and his best Interpreters, I fancy, as Es^al^pier, etc. and
others, do but guess at his meaning. As to the Accuracy, and Politeness of
Expression, he is every where the same, and the best Master of the Latin Tongue
Aristotle is beyond envy it self, tho not every where beyond reach: the new
Philosophers speak more distinctly, and give more sensible Notions of most
things. His best Pieces I take to be his artificial Logic, or Art of arguing
conformably to certain infallible Rules, his Politics, his Poetry, his
Rethorick and his Morals. He is a very Obscure Metaphysitian, because he
handled such matters as are beyond the reach of Humane Understanding, and
thought it not enough to say that every thing was this or that by a various
Texture, but would needs further enquire into the Properties of the compounding
parts, whether they were Finite, or Infinite, obnoxious to an endless division,
or not, etc. Thus he proposes to us palpable, and intelligible difficulties,
but very obstruse, mysterious, and unsatisfactory solutions.

What I have said of the Ancients, I may likewise say of our Modern Wits. For
there are but few of 'em eminent in every thing, and most of them eminent in
nothing. But I must not end this Section without giving you some rational
account of this unevenness observable in most may Authors. First then we have
recourse to that common answer to all such difficulties, the limitation of
humane Capacity; but because this is too general, I shall say something no less
to the purpose, and more particular. I may be allowed then to say in Second
Instance, that our own indiscretion is commonly the cause of this disorder: For
as we never write wittily, but when our Imagination is exalted to a certain
degree of heat, destructive to our cold dullness; so when our Spirits are spent
by a long and serious application, it would then prove a piece of prudence in
us to lay aside our Pen, and meditate no more on the Subject till we recover
our lost Spirits, and first vigor. I believe Vigil kept this Precept, since he
spent near Thirty years in the composure of his Poem; but our Folly is such,
that black paper we must, though our Soul be not able to act its part, because
of the supposed want of Necessary Instruments, furnishing us with as lively
Idea's as before. Which fancyful Humor I apprehend to be the true Cause, why
we write not always so well as really we could have done, if we had broken off
our work till the return of our better temper and disposition. Whereof I find a
not unfit Analogy in a Subject somewhat like to that we now treat of. I see no
other cause of the great difference as to Wit among Children of the same
Parents, but because the latter observe not the fittest times for the act of
generation, coming together, when their Seeds are either yet raw, or not so
elaborated and spirituous, as is requisite. So if married People understood the
critical, and fittest Minute for this duty of Marriage, or would contain
themselves so long as they were not fit for it, they would undoubtedly be more
satisfied with their Children, than some of them have reason to be; because I
fancy the former would not be so unlike one another, as to the endowments of
the Mind. We may proportionably discourse at the same rate of our Spiritual
Children, our Writings: They may all resemble one another in not unlike stains
of Wit, if we manage our selves aright in conceiving of them.

SECT. XIII. The art of writing wittily.
1. Why some do speak ill, and write well, and some do write ill, and speak
well.

2. That we ought first to consider, before we undertake to write, if the
Subject be not beyond our natural Abilities.

3. What use we are to make of Authors. That we wrong our selves by not
perusing our own Wit.

4. That some are professed Robbers of other Men's Works, as several Germans, and
other subtle Thieves, as not a few French undoubtedly are.

5. That we must not be too positive in our assertions.

6. Aristotle's obscurity instanced in some few examples.

1. IT may be thought not out of purpose to enquire in this place why some do
speak ill and write well, and on the contrary, why others speak well, and write
ill. The difficulty I confess is considerable, and I am not fully resolved in
the case. Yet it may be said that this proceeds from some of the different
Characters of Wit we have spoken of elsewhere. For some are slow in conceiving,
because, perhaps they have a too weak Understanding, and fear too much to be
mistaken; so their utterance upon this account is very uneasy: and such speak
their Thoughts so imperfectly, that one would think they had but a very
superficial Understanding. Nevertheless they are sometimes excellent Penmen,
and the fittest Men in the World to appear in Print; because the uneasiness of
their utterance comes rather from a certain wariness, and Weakness perhaps too
of the Imagination, than from any real defect of Judgment. But as for those
that speak well, and write ill; if by this expression we mean that some do
speak great Sense, who cannot write sensefully; I think I may be allowed to
say, that there is no such thing possible. For whosoever can speak Sense, I
know not why he may not likewise couch it upon Paper, if he please. But if
perchance we understand by speaking well and wittily, a certain facility,
easiness of expression, the Volubility of the Tongue, or a certain show of
Eloquence without either great Sense, or acuteness, there are I confess, many
half-witted Men, and more yet of the Weaker Sex that speak well, though they
write not wittily, because of the shallowness of their Judgment, which is
rather a help than a hindrance to their talkative humor; especially if they
have, as commonly they want it not, any quickness of Fancy. For such People,
it is no less useless to prescribe Rules of writing wittily, than to teach Fools
how to speak to the purpose.

2. The first Precept then of this art, I conceive to be no other but the
consideration of the Subject we are to treat of. We must in the first instance
consider if it be not perhaps, beyond the reach of our Abilities: For, Non
omnia possumus omnes, Nec omnis fertomnia tellus, there are but very few
equally capable of every thing; Was not Cicero the Prince of Orators, but had
no inclination toward Poetry, wherein Ovid was eminent; who again had no other
considerable Talent we know of. The latter had proved, I fancy, a very
ordinary, and less perhaps than an ordinary Writer of Plea's, and the former
but a dull, uneasy and constrained Poet. Our first Study then must be of our
selves, and of our Genius, to know, Quid valiant Humeri, quid far recusant,
what we are really capable of. If then perhaps we are sensible of our fitness
for any Science whatsoever, we may be the more daring to write our thoughts
indifferently upon any Subject: But this we cannot certainly know without a
frequent Trial of our Capacity. However, it is most certain there is still one
thing we are fitter for, than for any other, and to this we must apply our
selves more particularly: but it may be here enquired, how shall we know what
Nature has made us chiefly for? I answer, First, almost after the same manner
that we know our Vocation, or Call to any State of life, as to a married, or
single life; by the very inclination we find in us to this, or that kind of
Study, which not being given to us in vain, must needs be a sign of our fitness
to succeed therein. I answer Secondly, whatever we do with greatest facility,
that undoubtedly we are born to. Thus if I conceive more easily whatever
depends upon Figure, shape and Proportion; or if I can make a Mathematical
Demonstration with less difficulty than a Verse, or a Poem; I shall rather
apply my self to Mathematics than to Poetry.

3. Now having found out by the foregoing Method what I may with best success
undertake, I must then follow these particular Rules, and Precepts that regard
the Subject I write of. But my chief care shall be to peruse often those that I
know certainly to be eminent in that Art, or Science I apply my self to: Thus
if I mind to write natural Philosophy, I shall consult the English Philosopher,
Boil, or the Famous Verulam. Yet without any design to plunder or pillage
them, for I know nothing more destructive to the improvement of Wit, than the
stealing humor of some Writers, who sometimes make great Volumes of other Men's
Labors; which is not so much always a sign of their incapacity, as of their
Lazyness, and mistrust of their own Abilities; if we can be at the pains but to
think by our selves, and to write nothing but our own thoughts, we may perhaps
become at length sensible by experience, that we are nothing inferior to
those, whose borrowed Wit we had made our own. It Is a great Commendation of an
Author, when it may be truly said, that what he writes is not borrowed, which
is not so to be understood, as if he should write always things never any
dreamt of before him; for this is impossible, since the Beaux Esprits must
needs sometimes jump together by chance, as to the Substance, though not as to
the Tour, and manner of Writing. My meaning is, that an ingenious Man ought not
to copy out any man's Works, but write his own Thoughts and Meditations, as if
he were alone in the World without the help of Books. I know no Author in this
Age so much searched into as the Famous Robert Boil, and by such as enrich
their works with his ingenious contrivances though they are neither so civil,
nor so grateful, as to make an Honorable mention of him. Takenius has been
more guilty of this fault than any other that I know of. But to return to what
I was saying, how can we ever improve that Wit God perhaps has bestowed upon us
in a larger measure than we are aware of, if we never make use of it, or
exercise it, which we do not, though we write every year a Volume, so long as
we are mere Transcribers, and not true Authors. As the French do frequently
reproach this to the Germans, so they say commonly, Qu'un livre d' Allman, cest
un livre on il n'y a rien de l' autheur, That there is nothing in a Germans
Book, of the Author, but his Name. Which I confess ingenuously not a few of
that Nation to be guilty of. But yet whilst they put other Men's productions in
room of their own, which perhaps would prove as good, if not better then
theirs, they are so just as to name the Authors with proportionable Elogiums;
upon which account I look upon them as public and professed Robbers, rather than
subtle Thieves, which I take to be the Character of the French Writers, who
steal wherever they meet with any thing that may serve their turn, and
returning no acknowledgement to the Author from whom they take they will
cunningly, and wittily too, pretend they have some reason not to acknowledge
the theft, as being molded now into another frame and shape; which some of
them do to the very deceiving of the Author himself at the first view: and this
I reckon to be the height of the French Wit, as scarce reaching to the
invention of any thing, but perhaps of new modes: For this Nation is now so
used to plunder, and pillage their Neighbors, that if they lay aside what they
have stolen out of Spanish, Italian, German and English Books, what is properly
their own, would not make a very large Volume.

4. Being then fully resolved to be Authors, rather than either Robbers with
the Germans, or Thieves with the French; we shall conceive first a general
design, whereunto all the particulars of the piece must be either directly, or
indirectly related: But though I esteem a mean Author more than either a German
Robber, or a French Thief; yet I do allow those following uses of other Men's
Labors: First I may, and ought to peruse them for the quickening of my fancy,
and for the acquiring of what we call, a Style, or an accurate and polite
elocution; not that we ought to borrow their witty Words, Leurs bons mots: For
it is better to utter our selves in our own language, than to speak in other
Men's terms: But my meaning is, that the perusal of what they have written,
whether it regard our Subject or not, may by heightning our Imagination, hinder
us from a too flat way of writing. Thus if I mind to write an Elegy, I shall
first run over some choice piece ^f Ovid, or one of his more polite ^etters. It
will be useful to read some Passages of Cicero, Virgil, Livy, etc. before I
undertake to write a Latin Oration, an History, or Poem. The same advice is to
be followed, what Language soever we write in, whether it be French or English.
If the Authors we peruse have written upon the same Subject, we must endeavor
to improve what they have said, or confute their Errors that deserve to be
taken notice of: wherein we are to take heed above all things not to be too
positive, as if we pretended to demonstrate every thing we say; for this would
betray us to be none of the most knowing sort: For I think it no Paradox to
say, that the very things we are sure of, and hold for undoubted Truths, we can
no more prove by the Light of an undeniable Demonstration, than what we look
upon as mere Opinions, and uncertain Conjectures. For since I know nothing but
by the help of my fallible, and often failing Senses; how do I know but I am
imposed upon by the very things I think, I touch, I feel, I hear. This
affirmative way of debating may be allowed in the Schools, where the conceived
infallibility of the Masters is necessary, both for gaining and conserving
their Credit among their Scholars; but it must be avoided, cane pejus and
angue, above all things by a sober, witty and judicious Writer. This necessary
moderation is observable every where in the Works of the renowned Boil: I do
certainly believe he thinks more before he says, such a thing perhaps is, than
others do before they positively affirm, it is undoubtedly so.

5. Obscurity is another defect we must be careful to shun, since, prima virtus
orationis perspicuitas est, the chief and most necessary Ornament of any
discourse, is it perspicuity and clearness. I have a very ill opinion of a man's
Capacity, when whatever he writes is a mystery to the Understanding sort: Yet I
shall be so far favorable to the Chemists, as to think there may be some real
secrets, and Mysteries known only to themselves, which they will not reveal to
others. But I must beg their Pardon, if I incline more to believe their
affected Obscurity to be nothing else but a Childish vanity, or rather a
specious Nonsense, proposed to the World in obscure Terms, in order to gain
Credit among the ignorant sort of Men, who commonly admire nothing more than
what they least understand. This defect is justly reproacht by the New
Philosophers to the Peripateticians, and to Aristotle himself, especially in
his definitions where perspicuity is most expected, and is most necessary.

I shall instance some few examples for proof of what I say. If then you ask
Aristotle the nature of what we call a quality, he shall give you instantly
this misterious definition, Qualitas est aqua quales quidam dicuntur. I know
not how either to English, or make sense of this obscure Notion; but it is all
one as if you had defined white to be that whereby we are made white. I am sure
every rational Man understands better what movement is, than its definition
given by Aristotle, Actus entis in potentia quatenus in p^tentia, which besides
its obscurity, far beyond that of the thing it intends to clear, is, First,
such a piece of Nonsense, that I defy any man in the World to make
intelligible English of it, without a large Comment; and Secondly, it contains
an evident contradiction in adjecto, as they speak, in the very terms: Since
the former words, astus entis in potentia, are altogether inconsistent with the
latter, Quatenus in potentia. Locus, or place, we undoubtedly conceive better,
than what Aristotle says, in order to furnish us with a clear Notion thereof:
For I thought always I understood in some measure what it was, till I heard
Aristotle call it, Superficies prima acris ambientis immobilis, the immovable
surface of the ambient Air. Now my weak head is full of endless doubts, and I
understand no more what I understood some thing of before, by its own
self-evidence; for first I understand not how the surface of the Air is
immovable: Secondly, I know not why a Body a Stone, for instance, in vacuo,
should be no where, because it is not surrounded with Air. I apprehend Thirdly,
the Natural place of every thing to be nothing else but the Imaginary and
immovable space that it fills with its three Dimensions, depth, breadth and
length, which Aristotle's definition makes no mention of.

I shall say nothing of that other Notion of his relating to Time, which he
calls, Motus secundum prius and posterius, that is literally, and verbatim, a
movement according to what is before, and according to what is behind, what
more clear? Auditum admissi risum teneatis amici. But to speak ingenuously; all
this argues no defect of Capacity in Aristotle, but only betrays him to be
guilty of attempting I shall not say pretending to give us exact definitions of
things that are above the reach of Humane Capacity; such as Time, Place,
Movement, etc. because they are primary Principles, whereof we may give
perhaps, some imperfect Descriptions, but no true Notions.

We are not only to shun obscurity in our definitions, which ought to be always
self-evident to any man, understanding the terms they are conceived in, but
likewise in every particular Word, and Sentence, if it can be avoided. For I
take it to be a vulgar, and a silly error, that great Wits are commonly
obscure, misterious and cloudy; because, as I am fully persuaded that
perspicuity is the chief, and most necessary Ornament of our Discourse, so I
conceive it to be the best Character of a true Wit. We must then give to
whatever we write, all the Evidence, and plainess the Subject can bear, which
we shall perform the more easily, if we shun with all possible care a too great
multitude of superfluous Repetitions, as likewise Subjects, that are not only
hard to be understood, but which no Humane Capacity can compass. A too great
affectation of harsh and hard Words, of far fetched Expressions is justly
condemned by the Polite and wittiest sort of Writers: For since Words are the
Images of our thoughts, we must make choice of those that are their best
representatives. Whatever then is made use of in common discourse by such as
speak well, and naturally, that is fittest for us to make choice of. Thus our
Style shall be smooth, natural and easy, without either obscurity, or that
misterious Nonsense that some weak Heads naturally incline to; and is termed by
the French, du Galimathias. But I know nothing that may contribute more toward
the clearness, and smoothing of our discourse, then a fit and ingenious
comparison, not more insisted on than is necessary, nor too frequent. The
English Philosopher, I mean the Famous Boil, understands better than any I
ever yet read, the art of illustrating, and proving too, what he affirms by
witty and natural comparisons. As his Style is every where smooth and clear; I
know no better Master of natural Philosophy, not only upon the account of his
Doctrine and ingenious Solutions of the greatest difficulties, but likewise for
his extraordinary perspicuity and clearness.

SECT. XIV. If Women can be really witty.
1. Why some allege that Women cannot be really witty.

2. Some weak Objections answered.

3. That their Wit appears most in managing of intrigues, whether good or bad.

4. A true Story of a Ladies dexterity to be rid of two Husbands.

5. That as little men may be comely, not beautiful, so few Women can be
reckoned among the beaux E'spirits, though we may allow several of them place
among those whom the French call Esprits jolly, or jolly Wits.

1. SOme, who make it their whole business to inveigh against Women, though
perhaps they be not quite out of conceit with them, may be apt to think that
they are rather naturally wilful, than Witty; because, perhaps, they were made
of one of Adams Bones, and not of his Brains; yet it is certain they may claim a
just right to it as well as Men, and sometimes to wisdom too; The coldness of
their Temper is no argument to me of their stupidity or dullness; for besides,
that the melancholy, though cold, are commonly ingenious, This supposed
coldness of their temper is often corrected by such a degree of heat, as may
improve them into real Wits. Their Bodies, I confess, are not of so close a
texture as those of Men, as being both softer, and more moist: But in all this
I see nothing inconsistent with their being really witty. And if we are not
convinced as yet of this self-evident truth by reason, daily experience may
easily clear all our doubts. Speak they not to the purpose in a familiar
converse, and as good Sense as most Men; yea, some of them can act the
Philosophers part, compose Books, and write Verses too, not very impertinently.
And if we will speak our mind impartially, they have somewhat more of a
sudden, and extemporary* Wit than Men themselves, who can speak Sense, but
after Meditation; whereas they talk sometimes to the purpose, without being at
the pains of much thinking. Shall we doubt of their acuteness, if we reflect
but a moment upon their quick Reparties, in certain Rencounters, where in Men
are like Equus, and Asinus quibus non est intellectus, as dumb as Beasts: And
if the beauty of the Soul be proportionable to that of the Body; we have reason
to think that as they exceed our Sex in the former, so they have some
considerable advantage over us in the latter too, whereof they give sometimes
but too certain proofs by circumventing, and imposing upon the Greatest Head
pieces amongst Men; which is nothing else but an ill use of a very good thing,
their Wit. Sampson could neither be overcome, nor outwitted by the Philistines,
but subtiler Dalila put a cheat upon him, that cost him at last his life.
Solomon was the wisest Man of the Age he lived in, yet he was prevailed upon by
the forcible persuasions of his Concubines to adore false Gods. Abigail with a
short Harrangue triumphed over David's warlike resolutions. And Adam himself
could not resist the Rethorick of his Wife Eve, but submitted to her as to his
Master. So true it is that Women have outwitted the greatest men in all ages,
and for ought I know, the World turns yet round at their discretion. But
nothing shows more their Wit, than their subtle management of intrigues,
whether of Love or Revenge; for they can dissemble better than Hypocrisy it
self, and put what Face they please upon their Secret, and real Designs. I
shall set down here on this occasion what happened in France not many years
ago, as being a true Fact, and no Romance; though because of the oddness of the
thing, it looks somewhat like one.

2. When the French King invaded Holland in the year 72. if I misremember not,
the Nobility, as it is usual on such occasions, followed him by his express
Command from all parts of the Kingdom: A Gentleman of a mean Fortune, but of
Good Parentage, in obedience to his Sovereign, and besides encouraged by a
promise of some considerable Preferment, resolved to leave his Lady, being
married but Three Months before, and to hazard his life for the increase of his
small Fortune. But whether he was not very Vxorious, or which I am more apt to
believe, had bin wholly taken up with Military Affairs, he never in the space
of Five years absence informed her once what condition he was in. She began
then to suspect him killed in some rencounter. But all her doubts were at
length cleared by a Letter she received from one of his intimate Friends, who
was very well informed of his continual Silence all the while of this long
absence. He assured her then by his Letter of her Husbands death, because he
judged his recovery out of a Distemper he was then in, impossible. He added,
that he was coming to present her with her Husbands Diamond Ring, as a part of
his last Will, and a mark of his most sincere Love and Affection toward her:
And accordingly not thinking that his Friend could recover* sets forward for
France. He failed not at his arrival to present the Lady with the Ring, and at
the same time with his Sevice, if perchance she dislik't him not, as he professed
he did not dislike her. She seemed, as Women commonly do upon such occasions,
to be somewhat shy at first, and surprised at his unexpected offer. But weary
now of a solitary Life, and fearing she should not meet with so good an
opportunity again, she thought it a piece of Prudence to lay hold on it; and so
being at her Liberty, as she thought, she engaged within a few days to this
Second Husband; who not using her near so kindly, as the first, though, as it
shall appear hereafter, she never really loved him neither; she began to wish
for a change, and that it would please God to rid her of this Husband as he had
already delivered her of the First when he recovering unexpectedly out of that
Distemper, his Friend, but now his Rival, had left him in without any hopes of
recovery, comes on a sudden home, not knowing any thing of his wifes second
Marriage. Being soon informed of the whole matter, and how innocently it had
happened on her side, he appeared to be somewhat satisfied, and told her that
he wa^ ready to live with her again, if she was willing to part with her
present Husband, and however that the Law would right him in this case. It was
accordingly ordered that she should leave her second Husband, and return to the
first again, wherewith she appeared to be well satisfied, because of her hard
usage from her second Husband: They lived then awhile together very
contentedly, and he doted on her more than ever he did when he was first
married: She failed not to use him likewise with all imaginable kindness, which
so gained his heart, that he could not cross her in any thing; yea, not in such
things as were neither lawful nor allowable. As he was still highly concerned
if any thing should displease her, or put her in a melancholy temper, he
inquired of her one day why she appeared to be somewhat dejected; how can I be
other, replied she, since I know certainly that you are in a greater danger
then ever you was in the Holland Wars, because my second pretended Husband, as
I am credibly informed, is resolved to murder you, that he may enjoy me again.
I hear indeed he is going for Burgundy, but I know he will make but a short
stay there. So you may easily judge, that loving you as tenderly as I do, I
shall never have a moment of Rest either by Night or Day, till I be rid of my
too well grounded fear, by preventing someway this designed blow, which at once
would kill two, and be the occasion of a deserved, though shameful death to a
third, the Executioner himself, your Rival: Her Husband being extremely
surprised at this discourse, knew not what to resolve upon; but being near
concerned in the case, and loving her more than his life, he took a sudden
resolution to do whatever she would put him upon. This subtle Lady taking
notice of this yielding humor he was in, spoke to him thus again, or to this
effect; you seem to be in doubt what you have to do: You must then resolve, for
I know your Rivals Humor, and there is no middle, either to kill or be killed,
and all wise men, methinks, will prefer the former before the latter: Now
because I cannot suffer you to expose your self to the least hazard, I shall
furnish you this Night with the fittest Opportunity that can be devised of
doing your self, and me too, a most important piece of Service. Your Rival then
will come about Six of the Clock, as he has given me notice by a Letter, to
take his leave of me before his departure for Burgundy; which civility I shall
not only admit, but invite him likewise in your presence to Supper, under
pretense of a pretended Reconciliation to be made up between him and you. The
Gentleman comes as he had promised, and yielded with all his heart to their
Civil offers, being now almost fully persuaded, that as in Holland, and
Flanders he had had all things in Common with his Friend, this juncture would
furnish him with an overture to the like privacy at home, which was all that he
either aimed at, or cared for. Before the Gentleman came to take his leave of
the Lady, they had contrived, and agreed upon the manner of his Death, which
was to press upon him several Healths, and when he should be almost insensible
of what was doing about him, to dissolve some Strong and Heady Soporifick in
his Wine, that so they might the more easily strangle him, the Servants being
first dispatched out of doors upon pretended Errants. The murder thus executed
without resistance or noise; the Lady took after this manner her measures for
concealing this horrid fact, and hiding the Body from the eyes of the World.
She desired her Husband to take it upon his shoulders, while she would bear up
the Legs upon hers for his greater ease in carrying it. Thus they went quietly
along together about Midnight by a back door through the Garden, straight to
the River that washed the very walls thereof: But as they were thus in their
March, the Lady tied dexterously in more than one part, the dead Man's Clothes
with those of her living Husbands, which he, as being intent upon the
completing of the business, could neither mistrust, nor be sensible of. They
were come near to the River, when she told him to go as near as he could, and
being now upon the very brink of the precipice, she most unmercifully thrust
him over, and so both headlong down together into the River. Thus she got her
self rid of both her Husbands at once, whom it seems she had equally dislik't.
It may be yet somewhat to my purpose to tell you, that being returned home, she
made a great stir among her Servants, as if she had known nothing of the
matter, and ask't them often if they had not met with her Husband and the other
Gentleman, for that she feared they had challenged one another, and had gone to
some remote place agreed upon, to put an end by the Sword to their old
Quarrels: But though this was for a while the general opinion of the Town, the
two Bodies being found two Months after by some Fishermen bound together, and
the Lady being upon suspicion apprehended, and according to the Laws of that
Country, in such doubtful cases, threatened with extraordinary Tortures, if she
would not confess her crime: She made at length a full discovery of the whole
matter: And suffered by the order of the Justice what she had well deserved an,
infamous Death.

3. Let us make here but this one reflection: Could there be a greater
wickedness than this, and at the same time a greater abuse of Wit; whereby we
see clearly that this weaker Sex has nothing of real Weakness when they resolve
upon a design, whether bad, as this was, or good, as that of Judith, who in my
judgment cheated not Holofernes so subtilely out of his life, as this Woman
did her two Husbands out of theirs.

I pretend not by this discourse to puff Women up with Pride, for they are but
too proud already; my design only is to show that they ought not to be
undervalued by Men, as if they were little better than Fools, and had no kind
of real Wit; since their very Malice and Tricks do demonstrate the contrary.
But nevertheless, though it may be allowable to call some Women fine Wits,
because of some peculiar vivacity they are gifted with; yet few of them can
pretend to be great Wits, such a Character requiring a constant temper of the
Soul, which they, because of their changeable humor, are not capable of. I
shall not perhaps be justly styled impertinent, if I say, that since Wit
depends most upon the perfection of our Souls, they have not received from God
so perfect Souls as Men, because by Gods special appointment they are to obey,
and Men to command; they are to be Servants, and Men their Masters: Now it is
conformable to the Wisdom of that all wise being, that as they are inferior to
us by the condition of their State, so they should be likewise far short of
Men, as to the innate endowments of the Mind. Yet I deny not but that God may,
and does sometimes lodge a Soul of the First Hierarchy, I mean a most perfect
one in a Woman's body; but this is not usual, and seldom happens, but when he
pleases to make choice of Women to rule over great Empires, and whole Nations,
which hinders not the generality of them, from falling far short of those
eminent abilities that men are deservedly esteemed for. I conceive the French
to be more sensible of the truth of this Doctrine than most other Nations,
because by their Salick Law, Women can claim no right among them to the
Sovereign command. I shall not say, it would perhaps, prove to our great
advantage, to put the same affront upon them by giving place to this Law
amongst us; but sure I am that England would be no more a Purgatory for Men, as
it is commonly said to be, and would not cease neither to be a Paradise for
Women, if the Salick Law were once established in every private House and
Family of this Kingdom.

SECT. XV. The witty Physician, or the chief Secret of Physic.
1. How difficult a thing it is to become a good Physician.

2. What is chiefly required in a good Physician.

3. Why a man may know the whole Materia medica, and not be a good Physician.

4. That the unsuccessfulness of, or harm done by a remedy, is rather to be
ascribed to the Physician, than to any defect in the Remedy it self.

I Conceive no Art so hard to compass, as that which makes ^ true Physician;
Divinity it self ^ompared to it is but a Play: For one may be a not
insufficient Divine, if ^e can but discourse probably of that may be understood
in our mymysteries, and confess by an humble belief his ignorance of whatever
is beyond the reach of his Capacity, whereby I mean that the most intricate
difficulties and mysteries of the Cristian Religion may be easily surmounted by
a blind submission of our Understandings unto Gods obscure Revelation. But
whether I consider the Speculative, or practical part of Physic, I meet
everywhere with insupe^^ble difficulties. I represent first to my self whatever
is contained in the Three Kingdoms, not of England, Scotland and Ireland only,
but of Three of a far larger extent, the Mineral, the Vegetative, and the
Animal: And on a sudden I fall into despair of ever understanding to the
botttom the least thing they contain: I can scarce fiv in my dull head the very
names of Metals, Minerals, Plants and Animals; and far less their infinite
Poperties, and Medicinal uses. Reflecting again upon our corruptibel Bodies, my
Thoughts are put to a stand, when I am pressed to give a rational account either
of their tempers, or distempers. Yet if I pretend to be but an ordinary
Physician, I must have a sort of comprehensive Knowledge of this Engine, our
Soul moves, and of all its particular Motions; which being upon several
accounts an insuperable difficulty, what wonder if the ablest Physicians
mistake not only sometimes a man's distemper, but which is of a worse
consequence, take sometimes one for another: Because two different Diseases may
have such an affinity in their Symptoms, that they can pretend to no
infallibility in distinguishing them. On the other side, when I consider the
obscure Origin of most Distempers, I am quite out of humor with the Practice
of Physic. I may but too easily mistake that, without the Knowledge of which I
cannot cure my Patient, the true cause of his disease; yea, I wonder how any
Man dare venture to study Physic, if he peruse but a moment Hypocrates his
first Aphorism, Vita longa, ars brevis, occasio celeris, experimentum
difficile, judicium periculosum, Our life is too short, and the Art is of an
infinite extent, the occasion gives us easily the slip; the Experience is hard,
doubtful and dangerous, and it is not easy to discern well, either the
Remedies, or the Distempers: We can have then but little certainty of the Cure,
especially if we take notice of what follows in the same Aphorism, Oportet
autem non modo seipsum exhibere quae oportet facientem, sed etiam aegrum ac
praesentes, and externa, that the Patients Recovery depends not only upon the
Physicians care and skill, but no less upon the Patient himself, who must
contribute toward his own cure by an exact submission, and scrupulous
performance of what he is ordered to do, take, or observe. And besides, all our
endeavors are useless, if those that wait upon him do not their Duty, or if
perchance those things that the Old Man calls external, and are without us, as
wholesome food, good air, etc. be wanting. Out of all this discourse I raise the
same inference that made my first proposition in the beginning of this Section,
That there is no small difficulty to become a good Physician; yet on the other
part, one would think that there is nothing more easy, because of the great
number of Physicians to be met with every where, whom we know in all other
respects to be but mere Blockheads. If the Knowledge of Physic were a thing so
hard to attain to, and beyond the common reach, could either a Tailor, or a
Shoemaker, and the rest of the unlearned Tribe practice Physic, as able and
Famous Doctors. I confess if there were no more required to be a Physician than
what the less understanding sort, or the Mobile conceives to be necessary, the
whole World might soon be turned into a College of Physicians: It is not then
the Knowledge of a Receipt, or two not unsuccessful on some, or several
occasions that give us right to this honorable Tittle, nor the art of making
up this or that Physical Composition, unless we will foolishly reckon up old
doting Wives, and Apothecaries Prentices, with the ablest Doctors. Yea, I
maintain it to be no Paradox to say, that a man may comprehend perfectly the
whole Materia medica, and an hundred good Remedies against every particular
Distemper, and yet prove a very insignificant, and ignorant Physician too.
Because the chief Secret of Physic consists not in the goodness of the Remedy,
but in the due application thereof, with regard to time, place, the Temper of
the Patient, and other Circumstances. Who understands this, and no other, is a
true Physician, as being capable to cure the worst distempers, by not very odd,
nor far fetched Remedies. Whether there be any Panicea's, or universal Remedies
against all sort of distempers, I shall not here examine; but sure I am that
Opium perhaps for diminishing of pain excepted; there are no such found as yet:
and though there were any of this Latitude, I would still look upon them as
mere Instruments that may miscarry by the unskilfulness of those that handle
them. I am then sensible that several are quite mistaken, when they complain
that such a Remedy did wrong their Bodies, or increase their Distempers,
whereas the Physician only is to be blamed; who, though he prescribed a thing in
it self very good, neither understood the critical Minute it was to be given
in, nor his Patients constitution, nor other Circumstances which we must needs
take notice of, else we may prescribe the best remedies to no purpose. A
Physicians Wit then lies not in framing modish Receipts, and prescribing a
numberless number of Remedies, whether Chimical, or Galenical, but in a certain
practical judgment, which is not got in the Universities, of applying what is
fittest for the cure of the Distemper, with regard to time, place, the strength
of the Patient, and other Circumstances. I look therefore upon such as sell
Secrets against all sorts of distempers, to be mere Cheats; because if their
Remedies be indeed Panacea's, or Universal, this Character I allow not to be
intrinsecal to them, but merely extrinsecal, as derived from the practical
Judgment of such as prescribe them successfully, which as they cannot sell,
nor communicate, neither can they either sell, or communicate their Secret:
Hence we may conclude what a piece of imprudence, or rather madness it is, to
take Remedies from the hands of mere Empricks, without the advice of some
Judicious Physician; because, as I was saying lately, our recovery depends not
so much upon the goodness of the Remedy, as upon a due application thereof. For
we are taught both by reason, and experience, that we may either kill or cure
with the same Remedy differently applied, and to different Subjects, or not in
the same Circumstances.

SECT. XVI. The ingenious Art of Translating.
1. The difficulty of a good Translation.

2. The Art of Translating compared to the Art of Portraying.

3. In which of the two Languages the Translator ought to excel, whether in
that he translates from, or in that he translates in to.

4. The Faults and Mistakes of some Translators.

5. That good Latin Translations do always outdo the Originals.

1. ONe would think that there is no great Wit, nor no very much art neither,
in making of a good Translation; but how far they are deceived, we may easily
conjecture by the infinite number of bad Translations done in this City: For as
an Ingenious Gentleman did lately observe, some of the Translators understand
not the Language they Translate from, others understand not the Language they
Translate into, and others again understand not the Subject they translate:
What wonder then if they fall not only often very short of the Original, but
besides furnish the World with such imperfect Copies, as may ruin the repute
of the Authors, in the judgment of those that know them not. I conceive then,
and require in a ingenious Translator such parts, as I fear we shall meet with
but in a very small Number. We must not then think that a man is qualified to
make, for Instance, a good English Version out of French, because he has stayed
a year or two, or if you please, some years in France, unless he understand the
very Criticisim, and Tour of the Language, which can scarce be attained to but
by those who have been bred up from their greener years among the Politest sort
of that Nation; and besides, have made good use of their time by writing,
speaking, conversing, reading, and all such exercises as are the fittest for
acquiring the perfect Knowledge of any Language. It Is then a piece of
Simplicity in some Booksellers to make their application for the Translating of
French Books, to such as have been but a year or two in France, or which is yet
worse, have never stirr^d from home; though I grant they may by their private
Study understand in some measure the French Tongue, yet I am sure that they
never conceive aright the whole Energy, Pith and Delicacy of the Phrase; the
knowledge whereof is so necessary, that without it, the version cannot but be
very imperfect, and to the disadvantage of the Author. Most of those that
translate Novels being sensible of their insufficiency as to this part, pass
by, and supply what they understand not by some irregular Fancy of their own,
and sometimes not very much fitted for the purpose. I conceive then the Art of
Translating to be like unto that of Portraying. He is a very mean Painter, who
can but represent the mere Lineaments, and external Shape of a Man's Face. The
chief Secret of this Art consists in drawing to life the very Soul it self; I
mean, in representing the very Air, Temper, Humor and Complexion. For a Man
is not drawn to Life, unless the most habitual indisposition of his Soul shine
in the Piece. So I may proportionably say, to turn French into flat English
precisely, is not beyond the reach of the meanest Capacity; but it is a piece
of harder work than the unexperienced are aware of, to represent the Original
to life: This requires, besides a ripe Judgment, an extraordinary quickness of
the Imagination, with an easy and ingenious utterance. And here I think it is
not amiss to enquire in which of the two languages the Translator ought to
excel, whether in that he translates from, or in that he translates into. I
think it then no paradox to assert a perfect Knowledge of the former to be more
necessary than that of the latter: my reason is, because if I understand never
so well the Tour, for instance, of the English; this will avail me but little,
if I comprehend not that of the French likewise together with its whole Energy
and Pith, for without this foresaid Knowledge I shall never be able to make a
true and Natural Copy of the Original, how Politely soever I do write in
English. For a good English Version consists not in the goodness of the
Language, absolutely considered in it self, but respectively to the Original,
which it must represent and equal, if possible, in all Sense. On the other
side, though I understand not so eminently the Language the Version is done
into, yet if I be Master of the Language the Orignal is written in, I shall be
capable of translating it exactly and well. For in this case I shall be
sensible of the least expression that shall fall short of my Author, and so
with a little more application I may reach him at length by changing the Phrase
or Expression, which is not very uneasy to do, till comparing the Original
with the Copy, I find them nothing inferior to each other, or rather as near
as possibly they can be. A good Translator then may in so me respect be as much
esteemed, as the Author himself: For sure I am that sometimes the ingenious
sort find it a harder Task to translate, than to write, or to invent
themselves; because it is easier, no doubt, to express our own thoughts, then
those of other Men's, which are often none of the clearest. Their obscurity
sometimes prove a lawful excuse for our mistakes, but we can, under no
pretense, shun a just and deserved confusion, if through our own ignorance we
quite abuse and misrepresent our Authors. I fear he was of this number who
translated, Le pont Euxine, the Euxine Bridge, in lieu of the Euxine or Black
Sea, between Moeotis and Tenedos, as also that other, who translates thus the
receipt of an eminent Physician, Repulveris panonici Rubri, etc. take of the
Powder of Red Cloth Two Ounces, as if Panonicus was derived from the Latin
Word Pannus, Cloth, and not from Pannonia, the name of a Country.

3. I shall in this place take notice of what but few perhaps reflect upon,
that as the living Languages of Europe are but Jargons compared to the Latin,
so all Books done out of French, Spanish, Italian, etc. into Latin by an
accurate, and Polite Pen, and in a true and Natural Style, are always far
beyond the Original: because this Language carries along with it a certain
Energy that no other reaches. I shall give you a proof of what I say by
translating these ensuing Verses to demonstrate to you the wide difference
between those two Languages. The Four first were penned by a Man more esteemed
by some than he deserves. The Answer was made by an Emiminent Virtuoso, and a
Famous Philosopher, of whom I have spoken several times in this Treatise.

The Deists Plea.
NAtural, Religion easy first, and plain,
Tales made it mystery, Offerings made it gain
Sacrifices, and Feasts were at length prepared,
The Priests eat Roast-meat, and the People star'd.;
The Christians Plea.
NAtural Religion does indeed display
The duty of serving God, but not the way;
Man of himself, fickle, perverse and blind,
A Precipice sooner than a way could find:
What Worship God will have, himself must teach,
And so he did by those he sent to preach.
Who Doctrines worthy to be thought Divine,
Confirmed by Miracles where his Power did shine,
(And by those wonders, instances did give
Of things as strange, as they bid us believe)
Who profer'd endless joys; but lives required,
Worthy of Men that to such joys aspired;
Who what they taught, so much believed and prized,
That for its sake they all things else dispis'd,
And both by its strict Rules, their lives did guide,
And to attest its Truths, most gladly died,
And without Arms subdued the World; save those
Whom to clear Truths (not parts, but) Vice made Foes.
Deismi Defensio.
INsita naturae, facilis primum, obvia cunctis
Relligio; simul ac pia fraus misteria sinxit,
Protinus illa pium, fit per pia munera, lucrum,
Victima caesa cadit, convivia opima parantur,
Optima quaeque vorat, populo spectante, Sacerdos.
Christianismi Defensio.
INsita naturae pietas servire Tonanti
Relligioque jubent: methodum, sed neutra, modumque
Edocet: hanc methodum, nullo monstrante, modumve
Nemo sciat: malus, and fragilis quoqve, caecus, ubique
Mill modos mortis, pereundi mill Figuras
Invenies citius, quam qua ratione colendus
Sit Deus: ipse modum hunc doceat Deus, ipse docebit
Et docuit, quoties veteres docuere Prophetae,
Praeconesque novi, qua sit ratione colendus,
Divino quoties Oracula digna sigillo
Exposuere Gregi: tot, quae, miracula firmant
Divinae virtutis opus: praegrandibus ipsi
Vt dicta aequarent factis, tam mira patrarunt
Quam, quae, mira, fides docuit: sed et ampla merenti
Praemia promisere, and gaudia nescia finis
Gaudia, quae puram poscant sine crimine vitam,
Et quae perpetuis ad gaudia talia votis
Hinc aspirantes deceat, doceat^ue nepotes:
Quod docuere, fide pariter tenuere, fidesque
Doctrine par usque fuit: sed and illius ergo
Sub pede calcarunt studia in contraria vulgus
Quicquid agit, caecisque animos ardoribus urget.
Vivendi quoque Norma fides his extitit: ipsam
Sanguine signarunt laeti, dum morte probarent,
A^matumque orbem Gens haec superaret inermis
Hos tantum excipias Clarissima dogmata contra
Quos non ingenium, sed men's male conscia movit.
Now compare the Original with the Version, and if you understand the one as
well as the other, you shall, I doubt not, confess, that the latter as being
more expressive than the former, offers to your thoughts a fuller Idea of the
Authors meaning than they themselves could express in this inferior Dialect.

I apprehend then Horace, Virgil, Ovid, and other Primitive Masters of the
Latin Tongue to be wronged and weakened by the very best Translators, because
they appear now in a Disguise, and under a borrowed Apparel, and not so
Majestical neither as they first appeared in. Yet if we undertake for the
Common Good, such sort of Translations, we are to observe exactly this one
Precept above all others, to express the full Sense of the Author, wit^out a
too scrupulous regard to every particular Word and particle, unless it be
judged material to the expressing of his intent, and meaning.

FINIS.

