Licensed,

Feb. 23. 1687. R. Midgley.

Academia Scientiarum: OR THE Academy of Sciences. Being a Short and Easy
Introduction TO THE KNOWLEDGE Of the Liberal ARTS AND SCIENCES. WITH The Names
of those Famous Authors that have written on every particular Science. In
English and Latin.

By D. ABERCROMBY, M. D.

LONDON, Printed by H. C. for J. Tailor, L. Meredith, T. Bennet, R. Wild,
Booksellers in St. Paul's Churchyard, Amen-corner, and Ludgate Hill, 1687.

TO ALEX. CAMPBELL, OF CALDER The Younger, Eldest Son to Sir HUGH CAMPBELL,
Knight Baronet, and Baron of CALDER.
SIR,
BEing of a temper quite contrary to the flatering Genius of this Age, I shall
not follow the Example of most Writers of Dedicatory Epistles, and try your
Patience with long Encomiums either of Yourself, or of your Family, since the
Histories, and public Records of the Kingdom of Scotland, have given the
Public so clear, and so full an account of its Antiquity; as likewise of the
Virtue, Generosity, great Achievements, and unshaken Loyalty of your
Illustrious Ancestors Yet I hope I shall not offend your Modesty, if I say,
it is the general opinion of all your Acquaintances, both at home and abroad,
that as you follow in your greener years so closely their footsteps through the
Temple of Virtue, to that of Honor and Glory, so you may perhaps, impove (if
possible) to a Higher pitch, those very Great and Heroic Qualities they first
excelled in. May not I then b^ allowed to say, without the least suspicio^ of
flattery, that you are not only the la^ful Successor of the most Ancient, mo^
Noble, and Loyal Family of the Thai^ of Calder, and of their Estate and
For*tune, but also, that you are already possessed of these good and great
Endowments both of Body and Mind, which made them capable of the great
Employments they were entrusted with, and enabled them on all occasions to
render the Kings of Scotland and Great Britain such signal Services, as can
never be forgotten.

But not intending a Panegyric, which I know would be uneasy to you, who
hates the least appearance of flattery, I shall not insist on this Subject; I
must only tell you, that this small Treatise, since it is the Academy of
Sciences, could not but claim a peculiar Right to your Patronage, since you
have given so singular and convincing proofs of your being thoroughly
acquainted with the Subject it treats of; for having seen by a lucky chance,
before I had any acquaintance with yourself, your very learned and accurate
Book, I found it to contain in short, almost all kind of useful Learning, the
Systems both of the New and Old Philosophy, the choicest Flowers of Rhetoric;
as likewise evident marks of a not ordinary Piety and Loyalty, especially when
you conclude the whole with your Father's, as well as your own dutiful
Asserting and declaring for his Sacred Majesty, who now Reigns, (then Duke,)
his undoubted Right of Succession, in expressions full of affection and zeal to
his Person and Service, and that at a time when Loyalty and Duty of Subjects to
the Royal Family, were not only seasonable, but seemed to be necessary; and you
being hardly past the Sixteenth year of your age, I could not but be surprised,
instead of promising Buds, to find so early Fruits both of Virtue and Loyalty.

While this directed me whither I should send this small Present, it raised my
Thoughts in revising of it with a Paulo majora canamus, to reform it so as to
make it suitable to your Character, and give it the better pretense to your
Acceptance.

Only I hope, that as Travelers find some pleasure when settled at home, to
review in a small Map, those vast and pleasant Countries they have visited
abroad, so it may perhaps, prove some diversion in your spare hours, to
consider now and then those very many Arts and Sciences, which both at home and
abroad you have practiced, and so successful studied in larger Volumes.

Though I treat nothing a fond, as the French speak, or thoroughly and to the
bottom, yet besides some not despicable hints of the Material Principles of
most Arts and Sciences, I do point every where at the Famed Authors, and
greatest Masters of every Art and Science, that they may supply you with what
my designed brevity, and the scope of this Treatise, would not allow me to
enlarge upon; and so this not unpleasant method, whatever you think of the
performance, may perhaps reconcile you to my design, of adding, though but
little, to your greater improvements, while at the same time I show to the
World with what zeal I am,

SIR, Your truly Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant, D. Abercromby.

Nobilissimo, Clarissimoque Domino. D. ALEX. CAMPBELL, A CALDER Juniori, D.
HUGONIS CAMPBELL, Equitis Baronetti, and Baronis Calderae, filio natu maximo.
Nobilissime Domine,
CUM proclivem adeo in adulationem hujus saeculi genium omnino oderim praeter
orum fere omnium morem qui mecaeati suo opusculum quodpiam inscri^nt, neque in
tuas ipsius, neque in Familiae tuae lauds multis excurram, cum praesertim
Historia ipsa publicaque Regni Scotiae instrumenta, non antiquissima solum
ejusdem stemmata, sed and virtutem, fortitudinem, ingentia sacta,
inconcussamque semper in reges nostros illustrium majorum tuorum fidem nec
semel, nec paucis divulgarint. Nihil tamen, spero, proferam quod prae modestia
aegrius far debeas, si dixero cum omnibus sive Britannis, sive exteris quibus
non de facie tantum notus es, eorum te vestigia quamvis adhuc tantum aerate
florentem per Templum Virtutis ad Templum Honoris and Gloriae, tam presso pede
insequi, ut quibus illi aliquando dotibus claruere, has rerum a te gerendarum
splendore illustriores forte aliquando fore, nec immerito, nec solus conjiciam.
Quidni igitur hoc loco absque ulla adulationis suspicione liceat mihi profiteri
te non modo conspicuum antiquissimae, nobilissimae, fidissimaeque regibus
nostris Familiae, ac Thannorum Calderae, opumque, quibus potiuuntur, legitimum
haeredem, sed videri etiam donatum a natura iis sive corporis sive animi
ornamentis, quae ipsis ad sublimia quaeque regni munera additum aperuerunt,
quibus ii recte administrandis insignia Regibus tum Scotiae, tum magniae
Britanniae obsequia nulla proinde oblivione delenda pro re nata praestitere.

Sed cum nullam hic Panegyrim mihi proposuerim, utpote quae tibi vel levissimam
adulationis speciem refugienti ingrata foret, huic argumento pluribus non
immorabor; hic tantum dicam tractulum hunc, cum Academia Scientiarum sit, vel
eo nomine tuo deberi patrocinio quod illius argumentum intime te, penitusque
nosse indiciis haud obscuris non ita pridem demonstraveris, cum enim propitio
mihi casu in librum a te sane perquam docte eleganterque conscriptum prius quam
mihi notus fores, incidissem statim eo paucis, compendioque animadverti
contineri non veteris modo novaeque Philosophiae Systemata, sed and omnem fere
utilorem and alicujus momenti doctrinam, flosculosque etiam Eloquentiae
selectiores, nec non conspicua Pietatis in Deum, Fideique in Regem ubique
indicia, ibi praesertim ubi sub finem operis, tuo ipsius Patrisque tui nomine,
Regis nunc regantis (tum Ducis Eboracensis) certissimum avitum ad diadema jus,
spirantibus ubique tuum in ipsum amorem verbis pro officio declaras, eoque
tempore quo debitae regiae Familiae fidei, obedientiaeque declaratio non
opportuna tantum, sed and necessaria omnino videbatur; cumque annum jam sextum
supra decimum vix implevisses non potui non mirari maturos adeo tuo in hortulo
solidae virtutis fructus, e quo teneriores tantum adhuc flosculi habita aetatis
ratione expectari poterant.

Dam haec me impellerent ut tuo tractatulum hunc nomini inscriberem novam mihi
provinciam imposuerunt ut eum scilicet ad limam denuo revocarem, quo jam tuo
dignior aspectu quantumvis tibi semper impar, faciliorem ad te aditum inveniret.

Illud tantum sperare mihi liceat, ut qui longinquas regiones peragrarunt,
domum reduces non absque voluptate aliqua exigua eas in Mappa revisunt, ita
futurum tibi negotiis magis seriis libero non injucundum contemplari varias
illas Scientias Artesque quas tanto successu grandioribuse voluminibus
conquisitas, domi ^orisque foeliciter exercuisti.

Caeterum licet nihil hic penitius attingam, praeter non contemnenda Artium
plerarumque, ac Scientiarum principia, celebriores ubique Authors indico, ut
ea tibi pluribus subministrent, quae paucis tantum proposita mihi brevitas
ipseque tractatuli hujusce scopus a me exigebant; hac itaque non injucunda
scribendi methodo, quicquid de opere ipso censeas, forte fiet ut and concilium
meum probes, and propositam mihi metam; eo enim hoc opusculo collimavi, ut
quidpiam quamvis modicum praeclaris animi tui ornamentis adderem, dum interim
palam profiteor quam non ficte haberi velim tibi, tuoque ubi res feret,
obsequio addictissimus.

David Abercromby.

THE PREFACE.
BEcause of the shortness of Humane Life, and the little leisure of most Men to
read large Volumes, an accurate and easy method for attaining to a general,
and yet in some measure, sufficient Knowledge of most Arts and Sciences, has
been long wished for, but never, for ought I know, undertaken, or at least, so
compendiously, and so usefully performed, by any perhaps, either at home or
abroad. For,

1. I have set down in these Papers, a part of what I judged most material in
every Science; as likewise fittest for every common capacity, that so this
Treatise may prove of a more general use.

2. I have called it the Academy of Sciences, because here, as in an Academy,
you may learn most of the noblest Arts and Sciences, especially if you peruse
often what is offered to you in these few sheets: But if you desire to know
more, though perhaps most Gentlemen will think this enough, I have supplied you
with good Authors, who will give you a further, Instruction, if you are at
leisuure to consult them.

3. The Virtuosi are concerned in this Treatise, because it contains an
Abridgment of what they have already learned, together with the Names of the
Famed Authors that have treated of the Subject; which is no inconsiderable
advantage, the Learned as well others, being sometimes at a loss when they
write Books, what Authors treat of this or that Subject; wherein by having this
Treatise at hand, they may be soon satisfied.

I have written it both in English and Latin, to gratify such as understand
but one of the said Tongues.

4. For methods sake, in the order of the Sciences set down here, I have
followed the Alphabet as far as conveniently I could, beginning with those
whose first letter of their Names is A, and then with those whose first letter
is B, etc. which engaged me to keep the Greek and Latin Names, as the most
known, and the fittest for this purpose.

I need not now tell you, that this Treatise is of singular use to all sorts of
Persons, of what condition soever, and not to Scholars only, but likewise to
Masters, who have here in a few lines, what they may teach such as are
committed to their trust; yea, the very Ladies themselves, by the perusal of
this Treatise, and a little help, may be furnished with such a variety of
Knowledge, as may supply their not being bred in Universities.

PRAEFATIO.
CUM per humanae vitae brevitatem, otiumque ingentia evolvere volumina
plerisque hominum non liceat, accuratam, facilemque methodum qua generalem
quis, and tamen quae aliquatenus sufficiat, Artium praecipuarum Scientiarumque
notitiam assequeretur, diu multumque plurimi exoptarunt, quam tamen indigenarum
nemo, quod sciam, aut etiam alienigenarum scribendam adhuc suscepit, aut eo
saltem, quo hic tradita est, compendio, fructuque forte hactenus conscripsit:
primo enim quicquid praecipui quavis in Scientia momenti, and quicquid communem
ad captum magis appositum judicavi, idcirco adduxi in medium ut eo pluribus
tractatulus hic usui foret.

2. Academiam Scientiarum inscripsi; hic enim velut in Academia Arts
plerasque, Scientiasque nobiliores discere poteris si praesertim saepius
relegas quae breve hoc scriptum tibi proponit: At si penitius omnia, pluraque
scire volueris, quamquam nobilium plerique sat multa haec forte existimaturi
sint, probatos tibi suggessi Authors, qui te plura docebunt si quidem per
otium eos consulere tibi liceat.

3. Jam eos quoque qui ingenuis artibus ingenium excoluere opusculum hoc
spectat, utpote eorum compendium quae jam didicere, complexum, celebriorumque
propofito super argumento nomina Authorum: Quod non exiguae quid utilitatis est
cum etiam docti aliquando, perinde atque alii nesciant, dum libros scribunt,
quis de hac, illave re egerit; quod seposito hujuscemodi ad usum hoc libello
cito descent.

Caeterum tum Anglico eum, tum Latino idiomate eo consilio scripsi, ut ^is
inservirem qui alteram linguarum ^llarum non intelligerent.

4. Methodi gratia in serie Scientiarum hic exhibita, Alphabeti ordinem,
quantum commode potui secutus sum, initio ab iis ducto quarum homina littera A,
tum ab iis quarum homina littera B inchoat, etc. unde factum est ut voces
Graecas and Latinas, utpote maxim notas, huncque in scopum magis idoneas
retinuerim.

Frustra jam hic subjungerem tractatulum hunc sum utilem fore omni hominum
generi, aetati, conditioni, neque discipulis tantum, sed and Magistris quae hic
perpaucis habent quae suae commissos curae docere queant: Quin etiam ipsae
faeminae hujus tractatuli lectione exiguaque docentis opera eam cognitionis
varietatem compare sibi poterunt, quae educationis, qua carent, Academicae,
supplementum quoddam videri possit.

Some Books Printed for, and Sold by John Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Free Enquiry into the Vulgarly Received Notion of Nature, made in an Essay,
addressed to a Friend. In English and Latin, for the Benefit of Forreiners. By
R. B. Fellow of the Royal Society.

The Declimations of Quintilian, being and Exercitation or Praxis upon his
Twelve Books, concerning the Institution of an Orator. Translated (from the
Oxford Theater Edition) into English, by a Learned and Ingenious Hand, with the
Approbation of several Eminent Schoolmasters in the City of London.

The Happy Ascetick, or the best Exercise; with a Letter to a Person of
Quality, concerning the Lives of the Primitive Christians. By Anthony Horneck,
D. D. Preacher at the Savoy.

THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES.
ACADEMIA SCIENTIARUM.
Section I. Algebra.
ALgebra, or the Analytical Doctrine, is the Art of finding an unknown
Magnitude, taking it as if it were known, and finding the equality between it
and the given Magnitudes: It implies then a dissolving of what is supposed to
be compounded, which is meant by the Greek word (...), or Resolution: This Name
may upon this account be given to the common operations of Arithmetic; as for
instance, to what we call Substraction, Division, Extraction of Roots, etc. for
Substraction is nothing else but a Dissolution or Resolution of what is
supposed to be compounded, or made up by Addition; and Division a resolution of
what is supposed to be made up by Multiplication; as likewise Extraction of the
square Root, is a resolution of what is supposed to be made up by squaring: But
such resolutions being easy, are not called Algebra, for the resolution of
things, whereof the composition is more intricate, is more properly understood
by this harsh word.

The Arabs call it Algibr Walmokabala, from the first of these two words we
call it Algebra, which taken together, imply the Art of Restitution and
Resolution. Lucas de Burgo, the most ancient European Algebrist, calls it the
Rule of Restoration and Opposition.

And indeed, this is its chief work; a quantity unknown, which they commonly
call Root, is supposed by Additions, Substractions, Multiplications, Divisions,
and other like Operations, to be so changed, as to be made equal to a known
quantity compared with it, or set over against it; which comparing is commonly
called Equation, and by resolving such an Equation, the Root so changed,
transformed or luxated, is in a manner put into joint again, and its true value
made known, for the word Giabara, from which the word Algebra is derived, does
signify, to restore or set a broken Bone or Joint.

Theo says, that Algebra was invented by Plato; however the chief Writers of
Algebra are those whose names I have set down here, to gratify such as would
learn this noble Art.

Lucas Pacciolus, or Lucas of Burgo, a Minorita Friar, wrote an Italian
Treatise of Algebra, in Venice, 1494. a little after the Invention of the Art
of Printing; there he mentions Pisanus, and several others that had written on
the same Subject before him, but their Works are not Extant. Harriot, Oughtred,
Descartes, Huddenius, Gelleus, Billius, and lately the famed Dr. Wallis has
written a large Volume on this Subject.

Sectio Prima. Algebra.
ALgebra sive Doctrina Analytica est ars inveniendi magnitudinem incognitam eam
accipiendo quasi cognita foret, inveniendoque aequalitatem eam inter, datasque
magnitudines. Sonat itaque Resolutionem ejus quod compositum supponitur, hicque
Graecae vocis (...), sensus est: Hoc proinde nomen tribui poterit communibus
Arithmeticae operationibus, puta Substractioni, Divisioni, Extractioni radicum
quadratarum, etc. Substractio enim nihil aliud est quam resolutio ejus quod ex
Additione supponitur emersisse, compositi, Divisio quid? nisi resolutio ejus
quod ex Multiplicatione supponitur emersisse, compositi, Extractioque radicis
quadratae nil aliud est quam resolutio ejus quod ex quadratione supponitur
emersisse, compositi: Sed hujuscemodi resolutiones utpote faciliores Algebrae
nomine intelligendae non veniunt, difficilium enim compositionum resolutio
barbara hac voce, and magis proprie intelligitur.

Arabibus dicitur Algiabr Walmokabala, a priore voce nos Algebram dici mus,
geminae eae voces simul sumptae artem restitutionis, ac resolutionis sonant.
Lucas Burgensis antiquissimus inter Europaeos Algebrista Algebram
Restaurationis and Oppositionis regulam vocat.

Et reipsa praecipuum hoc ejus opus est, quantitas adhuc incognita quam vulgo
Radicem dicunt, quibusdam Additionibus, Subductionibus, Multiplicationibus,
Divisionibus, aliisque ^d genus operationibus ita supponitur mutata, ut tandem
aequalis fiat quantitati notae eidem comparatae, aut e regione ejusdem
collocatae, quae comparatio aequatio dici solet: Hujus autem aequationis
resolutione radix hunc in modum mutata, aut quasi luxata, priori rursus, ut ita
dicam, situi restituitur, verusque ejus valor innotescit, vox enim Giabara unde
Algiabr desumitur, fracti ossis restaurationem sonat. inventam asserit a
Platone Algebram Theo; ut ut sit praecipui Algebrae Scriptores hi sunt quorum
nomina hic appono in eorum gratiam qui nobilem hanc artem discere voluerint.

Lucas Pacciolus, aut Burgensis, Italicum de Algebra Tractatum scripsit
Venetiis Anno nonagesimo quarto supra millesimum quadringentesimum ^aulo post
inventam Typographiam; ^bi commemorat Pisanum, aliosque ^on paucos qui de eodem
argumento ^rius scripserant, at eorum opera jam ^on extant. Harriotus,
Oughtredus, Cartesius, Huddenius, Gelleus, Billius, ^c nuperrime celeberrimus
Vallisius ^oc super argumento amplum volu^en edidit.

Sect. II. Arithmetic.
Arithmetic is the Art of Numbering; it is either Practical or Speculative; the
Speculative Arithmetic contains some general truths relating to Numbers: As
for instance, Unity is the beginning of every Number; a Number is a Multitude
compounded of Unites. An even part of a Number is that which by Multiplication
produces that number. As 2 is an even part of 10, because 2 multiplied by 5,
give 10.

An uneven part of a number is that which by Multiplication produces not that
number. Thus 3 is an uneven part of 10, because however multiplied, it shall
never produce this number 10.

The proportion of Numbers is either according to their excess, defect, or
equality, for that thing has some proportion to another that is either less,
greater, or equal. A perfect number is that which is equal to all its even
parts: The first perfect number is 6, for all its even parts are 1, 2, 3, which
together give 6. The next perfect Number is 28, for all its even parts are 1,
2, 4, 7, 14, which by Addition give 28.

These ensuing notions likewise may be referred to the Speculative part of
Arithmetic,

To Multiply one number by another, as 4 by 2, is to take the Multiplicand 4 as
many times as the Unity may be taken in the Multiplicator 2, and so 4 being
multiplied by 2, the Product must be 8.

To divide one number by another; as for instance, 8 by 2, is to find out how
many times 2 are contained in 8.

A plain number is the product of two numbers multiplied the one by the other;
12 then is a plain number, because it is the product of 6 multiplied by 2.

A Solid number is the product of three numbers multiplied, such is 24, because
it is the product of those three numbers multiplied 2, 3, 4, for multiplying 2
by 3 I have 6, and 6 by 4 I have 24.

A Square number is the product of two equal numbers muitiplied by one another,
or of the same number multiplied by itself. 4 Is a Square number, as being the
product of 2 multiplied by 2, and 2 is called the Square Root.

A Cube is the product of three equal numbers, or of the same number thrice
taken; for if you multiply 2 by 2, you have 4; and if you multiply 4 by ^
again, you have 8, and 8 is called the Cube Root.

That part of Arithmetic that relate^ to the Practice, contains, First
Addition, which is the gathering of man^ numbers into one Sum; as if I add ^ to
6, the whole is 8. Secondly Substraction, as if I take 4 from 6, ther^ remains
2* Thirdly, Multiplication as if I enquire how many are four time^ six, and I
find 24. Fourthly, Division, as if I enquire how many times ^ are contained in
24, and I find the^ to be contained four times in 24. Fifthly, the Fractions.
Sixthly, the Decimal Fractions, invented to supply broken numbers, very
troublesome to Practitioners. Seventhly, the Extraction of Roots, Cubic and
Square* Eighthly, the four Rules of Proportion, of Society, Alligation,
Falsehood, the Doctrine of Progressions.

We may reckon the ensuing Authors among the best Arithmeticians. Simon
Stevinius invented the Decimal Fractions; Neper supplies troublesome and
intricate Divisions by his Rabdologick Plates, and his Logarithms; and Tacquet
has given us both the Theory, and the Practice of Arithmetic; Euclid in the 7,
8, 9, and 10 of his Elements of Geometry; Jordanus, Nemorantius, Francis
Maurolycus, Barlaamon, etc.

Sectio Secunda. Arithmetica.
ARithmetica est ars numerandi; est autem practica aut speculativa; haec
manifest vera quaedam, and generalia de numeris pronunciata complectitur:
Cujuscemodi ea sunt quae sequuntur. Omnis numeri principium est unitas; numerus
est multitudo ex unitatibus composita. Pars aliquota numeriea est quae numerum
metitur. Ita numerus hic 2 est pars ^iquota numeri hujus 10, quinquies ^im 2
sunt 10.

Pars aliquanta numeri est ea quae ^umerum non metitur. Ita numerus ^ic 3 est
pars aliquanta numeri hujus ^o; ter enim sumptus dat 9, and qua^er dat 12.

Proportio numerorum est nume^orum consideratio juxta excessum, defectum aut
aequalitatem: Illud ^nim ad aliud proportionem habet, quod aut minus, aut
majus, aut aequale est.

Perfectus numerus dicitur qui omnibus suis partibus paribus aequalis est.
Primus perfectus est 6, illius enim omnes parts pares seu aliquotae sunt 1, 2,
3, quae simul additae dant 6. Secundus est 28; nam illius omnes parts
aliquotae seu pares sunt 1, 2, 4, 7, 14, quae simul additae 28 producunt.

Subsequentes pariter notiones ad Arithmeticam speculativam referri poterunt.
Unum numerum per alium ^ultiplicare seu in alium ducere ut 4 ^n 2 est toties
sumere multiplicandum ^ quoties sumi potest in multiplicatore ^ unitas: Quare
si 4 ducas in 2, summa ^utura est 8. Unum numerum divi^ere per alium ut 8 per 2
nihil aliud est quam invenire quoties 2 conti^eantur in 8. Numerus planus a
duo^us numeris in se invicem ductis producitur, 12 igitur est numerus planus
quia producitur a numero 6 in 2 ducto.

Solidus numerus a tribus numeris multiplicatis oritur: Ejusmodi est 24, ex
tribus enim hisce numeris multiplicatis emergit 2, 3, 4; si enim 2 duco in 3
habeo 6, and si duxero 6 in 4, ha^eo 24. Numerus quadratus producitur a duobus
aequalibus numeris inse invicem ductis, cujusmodi est 4: Oritur enim a numero 2
in 2 ducto, qui radix quadrata dicitur.

Cubus oritur ex multiplicatione trium numerorum aequalium, aut ejusdem numeri
ter assumpti ita 8 cubus primus ex multiplicatione numeri 2 ter assumpti,
producitur, si enim 2 ducas in 2 habes 4, and si 4 rursus ducas in 2 habes 8,
and 2 radix cubica dicitur.

Pars illa Arithmeticae quae spectat praxim complectitur primo Additionem quae
est plurium numerorum in unam summam collectio, ut si addam 2 huic numero 6
summa integra futura est 8. Secundo, Substractionem ut si 4. subduco e numero
6, supersunt 2. Tertio, Multiplicationem, ut si inquiram quot constituant
quater 6, comperiam 24. Quarto, Divisionem ut si inquiram quoties 6
contineantur in 24 comperioque in 24 quater contineri. Quinto, Fractiones.
Sexto, Fractiones Decimales ad supplementum Fractionum practicis permolestarum
excogitatas. Septimo, Extractionem radicum cubicarum, ac quadratarum. Octavo,
Regulas proportionum, societatis: alligationis, falsi, and doctrinam
progressionum.

Annumerare possumus sequentes Authors primis Arithmeticis. Simo^em Stevinium
fractionum decemalium ^nventorem; Neperum Scotum qui divisionis molestiam
laminis suis rabdologicis, and logarithmis omnem sustu^it; Tacquetum qui
Arithmeticae, and Theoriam, and praxim tradidit; Eucli^em 7, 8, 9, 10,
Elementorum, Jor^anum, Nemorantium, Franciscum Maurolicum, and Barlaamontium,
etc.

Sect. III. Judiciary Astrology.
JUdiciary Astrology is that Science, by the help of which Men pretend to judge
of things to come, and more especially of Men's Good and Bad Fortunes. The
Judiciary Astrologers do ascribe considerable virtues to the different
Conjunctions amd Aspects of the Stars.

They distinguish five kinds of mutual Aspects among the Planets: The first is
called a Sextile, when one Planet is distant from another the sixth part of the
Circuit of the Heavens, that is to say, 60 degrees. The second is called a
Quartile, when the distance is but the fourth part of the circle or 90 degrees.
The third is called a Trine, when the distance is but the third part of the
circle, or 120 degrees. The fourth is called an Opposition, when the two
Planets are in the two opposite points of the circle, and distant from one
another 180 degrees. The fifth is called a Conjunction, when the two Planets
are in the same Sign of the Zodiac.

Astrologers divide the Heavens into twelve equal parts, which they call
Houses; they say that every Planet has eight dignities, viz. House, Exaltation,
Triplicity, Term, Chariot or Throne, Person, Joy, Face.

They say the Stars were not only made to give light: Hence it is they take the
station, direction and retrogradation (as they speak) of a Planet to be a
certain reeling, or spinning of Fates and Fortunes: They distinguish all the
Constellations into so many Triangles or Trigones: The first is the fiery
Trigone, comprehending Aries, Leo, Sagittarius; the second is the Earthly,
comprehending those ensuing Constellations, Taurus, Virgo, Capricornus; the
third is the Aerial, comprehending Gemini, Libra, Aquarius; the fourth Trigone
is the Watery, comprehending Cancer, Scorpius, Pisces.

If you desire to know more particularly the Principles of this Science, you
may consult these following Authors. Vannius, Butler, Cardan, Gadbury,
Albottazen, Haly, Julius Firmicus, Johannes Jovianus Pontanus, Pezelius, etc.

Secttio Tertia. Astrologia Judiciaria.
AStrologia Judiciaria ea est Scientia cujus open de rebus futuris homines
pronunciant, ac praesertim de faelici aut infaelici cujusque fato. Astrologi
Judiciarii insignes ascribunt virtutes diversis conjunctionibus, aspectibusque
planetarum.

Quinos distinguunt aspectus planetarum. Primus dicitur Sextilis cum distat
planeta unus ab alio sexta part circuli, hoc est 60 gradibus. Secundus vocatur
Quadratus cum distant invicem quarta part ejusdem circuli, hoc est 90
gradibus. Tertius dicitur Trigonus quando tertia tantum part, seu 120
gradibus. Quar^us Oppositionis cum uterque planeta sibi oppositi sunt,
disjunctique 180 gradibus. Quintus est Conjunctionis cum duo planetae sunt in
eodem signo Zodiaci.

Universum Coeli ambitum secant Astrologi in duodenas parts aequales, quas
vocant domos seu domicilia.

Octonas planetarum dignitates numerant, quae sunt domus, exaltatio, trigonus,
terminus, carpentum, persona, gaudium, facies.

Stellas dicunt non creatas tantum ad orbem illuminandum: Unde aiunt stationem,
directionem and retrocessum planetae esse nescio quam fatorum revolutionem, ac
quasi netionem: Constellationes omnes distinguunt tot in triangula seu trigona:
Primum trigonum igneum dicitur, complectiturque Arietem, Leonem, Sagittarium;
secundum terrestre appellatur, continetque Taurum, Virginem, Capricornum;
tertium aerium est complexum Geminos, Libram, Aquarium; quartum appellatione
aqueum, continet Cancrum, Scorpium, Pisces.

Si propius hujus Scientiae principia intueri volueris, consulere poteris hos
sequentes Authors, Vannium, Butlerium, Cardanum, Gadburium, Justinum,
Philippum Melanctonum, Origanum, Ptolomaeum, Albohazen, Haly, Julium Firmicum,
Johannem Jovianum Pontanum, Pezelium, etc.

Sect* IV. Astronomy.
AStronomy gives us an account of the Motions of Celestial Bodies, of of their
distance, order, bulk, etc. The Babylonians will have Belus to have been the
Inventor of it, the Egyptians Mercury, the Moors Atlas and Hercules, the
Grecians Jupiter, Orpheus and Atreus, the Scythes Prometheus. We may divide it
into two Parts, the one Spherical, and the other we may call Systematical The
Spherical is that part of Astronomy which treats of the Sphere, whether
Artificial or Natural; the Artificial Sphere is made up of ten circles, whereof
six are great ones, because they divide the whole Sphere into two equal parts,
such we reckon the Horizon, the Meridian, the Equator, the two Colures, and the
Zodiac. The little Circles are those that divide the Sphere into two unequal
parts, as the two Tropicks, and the two Polar Circles: Every circle is divided
into sixty parts, which they call first minutes; and each Minute likewise into
sixty parts, which we call second Minutes.

The Natural Sphere, or the Celestial Globe, besides the foregoing Circles,
offers to our view diverse Constellations: The Ancients reckoned eight and
forty, comprehending in this number all the Stars to be seen in Greece, and all
the known Parts of the World; 12 of those Constellations are contained in the
Zodiac, 21 are to be seen toward the North, and 15 toward the South; but of
late there are twelve other Constellations discovered toward the South.

The Systematical Astronomy, which others call the Theorical, is that part
which by the help of some Engines and Orbs, offers to our view those Celestial
Motions which are not so obvious to every common understanding.

This part of. Astronomy comprehends several Hypotheses, as that of Anaxagoras
and Democritus, who allowed a free motion to the Stars, but of no first Mover,
or Primum mobile: Neither did they admit any second motion toward ihe East,
but a simple motion only toward the West; so in their Opinion, those Stars
only could be said to move toward the East, that moved more slowly toward the
West. There is another Hypothesis that considers the Stars as tied to solid
Spheres; and who hold this Hypothesis, hold likewise the Earth to rest in the
Center of the World.

Copernicus allows motion to the Earth; he fixes the Sun in the Center of the
World, though it turns round about its own Axis within seven and twenty days,
as it is manifest by the motion of its spots. 1. In this System, the Orb of the
sixed Stars is immovable. 2. Mercury turns round the Sun in almost three
months. 3. Venus in four months and a half, and the Earth itself in twelve
months, and round the Earth the Moon tarneth every month. 4. Mars's revolution
round the Sun is ended in almost two years, as Jupiter's in twelve years, and
Saturn's in thirty.

Tycobrahe orders his System thus: First the Firmament, or the Sphere of the
fixed Stars, the Earth being the Center of the World; then the Orbs of Saturn,
Jupiter and Mars; Venus and Mercury turn round the Sun, and the Moon round the
Earth.

The Old System was ordered thus: The Earth was the Center of the World, above
it were placed the Planets and Heavens in this order; the Moon, Mercury, Venus,
the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, the two Chrystalline Heavens, and the Primum
mobile.

Authors.
Ptolomy, Aratus, Eudoxus, Calippe, Tycobrahe, Gassendy, de Billy, Courcier, de
Sacrobosco, Fracastorius, Galilaeus.

Sectio Quarta. Astronomia.
AStronomia describit corporum Coelestium motum, distantiam, ordinem,
magnitudinem, etc. Illius inventorem Babylonii volunt esse Belum, Aegyptii
Mercurium, Mauri Atlantem and Herculem, Graeci Jovem, Orpheum and Atreum,
Scythae Prometheum. Eam dividere possumus geminas in parts, alteram
Sphaericam, alteram appellare possumus Systematicam. Sphaerica est ea pars
Astronomiae quae agit de Sphaera, sive art facta, sive naturali: Sphaera art
facta constat 10 circulis quorum 6 sunt majores quia dividunt Sphaeram in duas
parts aequales; cujusmodi numeramus horizontem and meridianum aequatorem,
colurosque duos aequinoctii, and solstitii, and zodiacum. Minores circuli sunt
ii qui Sphaeram in duas parts inaequales dividunt: Cujusmodi sunt duo tropici,
totidemque polares: Quivis circulus dividitur in gradus 360, and quivis gradus
in 60 particulas, quas prima minuta vocant; and minutum primum in sexaginta
parts quas secunda minuta dicimus.

Sphaera naturalis, seu Globus coelestis praeter commemoratos circulos
aspicientibus exhibet varias constellationes: Antiqui octo supra quadraginta
constellationes numerabant: Quo numero comprehendebant omnes stellas in Graecia
conspicuas, atque in omnibus cognitis tum mundi partibus: 12 constellationes
continebat zodiacus, 21 apparent ad boream, 15 ad austrum, versus hanc partem
duodecim nuper aliae detectae sunt.

Astronomia Systematica quam alii Theoricam vocant est ea Astronomiae pars quae
aspectui nostro exhibet open quarundam Machinarum Orbiumque eos coelestes motus
qui omnibus non aeque obvii sunt.

Haec Astronomiae pars varias complectitur hypotheses cujusmodi est hypothesis
Anaxagorae ac Democriti, qui motum astris liberum assignabant sed nullum
admittebant Primum mobile; neque ulla proinde solidis Sphaeris alligabant
sydera: Nec ullum secundum in ortum concedebant motum, sed simplicem tantum in
occasum: Ita juxta eorum sententiam ea tantum sydera moveri dicuntur in ortum,
quae lentius moventur in occasum: Alia quaedam est hypothesis quae sydera, ut
solidis alligata Sphaeris intuetur; quique hanc hypothesim tenent terram in
centro mundi quietam volunt.

Copernicus motum terrae attribuit; solemn constituit in centro mundi immotum,
licet proprium circa axem moveatur spatio viginti septem dierum ut patet e motu
ejusdem macularum in hoc systemate. 1. Orbis fixarum immotus est. 2. Mercurius
spatio fere trium mensium circa solemn vertitur. 3. Venus intra quatuor menses,
and semissem, terraque ipsa duodecim mensibus, circaque terram quolibet mense
gyrat Luna. 4. Martis periodus circa solemn absolvitur duobus fere annis, ut
Jovis duodecim, Saturnique spatio triginta annorum.

Suum Tycobrahe systema ita constituit. Firmamentum, seu coelum fixarum primo
loco statuit: Mundi centrum terra est; fixarum coelo succedit coelum Saturni,
tum Jovis, and Martis, Venus and Mercurius circa solemn gyrant luna circa terram
movetur.

Antiquum systema ita se habebat: Terra mundi centrum occupabat; supra illam
erant aqua, aer, and ignis, succedebant planetae coelique hoc ordine, Luna,
Mercurius, Venus, Sol, Mars, Jupiter, Saturnus, Firmamentum, duo coeli
chrystallini Primum mobile.

Authors.
Ptolomaeus, Aratus, Eudoxus, Calippus, Tycobrahe, Gassendus, Billius,
Courcierius, de Sacrobosco, Fracastorius, Galilaeus.

Sect. V. Military Architecture.
ARchitectonica Militaris, or Military Architecture, is the Art of Fortifying.
This Art teaches us how to incline toward the Angles of a Poligone, that is,
a Figure of many Angles, certaines lines upon which the Fortress is to be built
in such a manner, that the Enemy by whatever side he makes his approach, may be
beat back by the lesser number.

Every point of the circumference of the Fortress must be defended by some
other part of the same.

According to the Holland method of Fortifying, the Angle of the Bastion, or
the Flanqued, and Defended Angle exceeds always by 15 degrees the half of the
angle of the Polygone; upon this account it is that the angle of the Bastion is
never straight, or of 90 degrees, unless in a place defended by 12 Bastions;
but in places defended by more than 12, it is always straight.

According to tht French method, if the Polygone be a triangle, the angle of
the Bastion contains 45 degrees; if it be a Pentagone, or of five angles, it
contains 78 degrees; if the Polygone have more than five sides, the angle of
the Bastion is straight, or is open 90 degrees.

Authors.
Errard of Barleduc, Samuel Marolois, Adam Fritach, Stevin in Italian, de
Lorini, del Cavallero Francisco Tensimi, del Cavallero Alessandro Barone, de
Groote, Herigone.

Sectio Quinta. Architectonica Militaris.
ARchitectonica Militaris est ars muniendi, ars autem muniendi docet qui
inclinare debeamus ad angulos polygoni hoc est figurae variis terminatae
angulis lineas quasdam super quibus propugnaculum aedificandum est, ita ut
hostis quacumque part invadat, minoribus viribus repelli possit.

Omne punctum in procinctu munimenti debet defendi ab alia part.

Juxta methodum muniendi Hollandicam angulus propugnaculi, aut defensus excedit
semper quindecim gradibus semissem polygoni, quamobrem angulus propugnaculi
nunquam est rectus nisi locus duodecim propugnaculis defenditur, quoties autem
locus pluribus, quam duodecim propugnaculis munitur, rectus semper est.

Juxta Gallicam muniendi methodum si munitum polygonum triangulum fuerit,
angulus polygoni est graduum 46, si pentagonum fuerit, angulus propugnaculi est
gradibus 78; si polygonum constet pluribus quam quinque lateribus, angulus
propugnaculi est rectus, aut 90 graduum.

Authors.
Errardus Barneto-duceus, Samuel Marolois, Adamus Fritachius, Stevinius
Italice, de Lorini, Franciscus Tensimi, Herigonius, etc.

Sect. VI. The Military Art.
THe Military Art of the Greeks and the Romans was on several accounts
different from that of this Age.

Of old an ordinary Grecian Army did contain 28672, among whom we reckon not
those that were upon the Elephants, who were sometimes in greater numbers,
sometimes in lesser. This Army was divided into Horse and Foot: The Foot was
divided again into Oplites and Psiles, the Oplites were those that wore a heavy
Armor, the Psiles were slightly Armed.

The number of the Oplites was always double of the number of the Psiles, and
the Psiles double of the number of the Cavalry. All the Oplites of the Phalange
were put in one Battalion, whereof the Front contained 256 men, and the Wing 16.

Of all the Psiles of the Phalange, the Grecians made two Battalions, each
having 128 men on a breast, and 8 in the slanks; all the Cavalry of the
Phalange was divided into 16 squared Turmes or Troops, whereof each did contain
64 men.

In a Grecian Army made up of four Phalanges, there were four Battalions of
Oplites, 8 of Psiles, and 64 Troops of Horse.

In a Roman Legion there were four different sorts of men, not only as to Age,
Riches, Warlick Science, but likewise on the account of their Arms, and way of
Fighting; for of the younger and poorer sort (as Polybius assures us) they made
their Velites; those that were somewhat above them upon the account of their
age and riches, were Halbardeers, or Hasteries; such as were richer, and in the
full vigor of their age, were Princes; and the oldest and most experimented,
were the Triaries.

The number of the Soldiers of every one of those different sorts, was
different in different times, according as the Legion was less or more
numerous. When the Legion did amount to 4200, as it did in Polybius his time,
there were 600 Triaries in the Legion, and 1200 of every one of the three other
sorts, to wit, of Princes, Hastaries, and Velites. When the Legion was more
numerous, those three different sorts were likewise increased, the Triaries
only excepted, who were always the same number.

In the Militia of this Age, there is no such repartition observed, the Armies
being not always divided into parts made up of the samo numbers; for some
Regiments have 10 Companies, others 15, others 20, etc. Likewise the
Compapanies have not always the same number, some being a hundred men strong,
others one hundred and twenty, others one hundred and fifty, etc.

In this Age an Army is drawn up in Battle, or three Lines, and the French
divide sometimes every Line into several little Bodies; the Turks give
sometimes to their Army the figure of a Cer^sont.

The Camp, especially if the Enemy be near, ought to be in some place where
there is a great abundance of Water, and Provisions: And if the Army is to make
a long stay, it is to be observed if the Air be good.

Ye are not to Encamp near a Hill, which being taken by the Enemy, might
incommode your Camp.

Authors.
Polybius, Stevin, Herigone.

Sectio Secta. Ars Bellica.
ARS Bellica, seu Militaris tum Graecorum, tum Romanorum vary discrepabat ab
hodierna recentiorum.

Communis Graecorum exercitus numerabat 28672, quibus non annumeramus qui
Elephantis insidebant qui non eundem semper numerum conflabant, sed interdum
majorem, minorem interdum. Hic exercitus dividebatur in equites, peditesque,
pedites rursus in Oplitas and Psilos, Oplitae erant gravis armaturae milites,
Psili levis armaturae.

Numerus Oplitarum duplus erat numeri Psilorum, and Psili equitum numerum
geminabant. Omnes Oplitae unius Phalangis uno colligebantur in agmine cujus
frons constabat 256, and ala 16.

Ex omnibus Psilis Phalangis constituebant Graeci duo agmina, a front stabant
viginti octo supra centum, a latere octo. Omnes equites Phalangis
distribuebantur in turmas quadratas sedecim, quarum quaelibet quatuor supra
sexaginta milites continebat.

In exercitu Graeco ex quadruplici Phalange conflato quatuor erant agmina
Oplitarum, octo Psilorum, and sexaginta quatuor turmae equitum.

Romana legio quatuor complectebatur hominum Genera diversa non aetate tantum,
divitiis, scientiaque Bellica, sed and armis, modoque pugnandi: Ex junioribus
enim, pauperioribusque, ut testatur Polybius seligebantur Velites, ex proximis
hastarii, ex aetate florentibus Principes, senioresque, and magis experti
seligebantur in Triarios.

Numerus militum ex quibus diversi illi ordines constabant diversis temporibus
diversus erat; prout legio magis, minusque numerosa erat. Cum legio constabat
ducentis supra quatuor millia, ut temporibus Polybii constabat; sexcenti erant
Triarii in legione, ducenti supra mill in quovis ordinum reliquorum, scilicet
Principum, Hastariorum, and Velitum: At numerosiore jam legione tres varii
ordines numerosiores omnes reddebantur, exceptis tantum modo Triariis quorum
numerus idem semper erat.

In Militia hujus saeculi nulla hujusmodi distributio observatur, cum exercitus
non dividatur in parts eodem semper numero constantes: Quaedam enim legiones
constant 10 cohortibus quaedam 15, quaedam 20, paucioribus aut pluribus;
cohortes pariter non semper eodem constant numero: Quaedam enim constant 100
militibus, aliae 120, aliae 150 etc.

Hoc saeculo exercitus pugnaturus in tres ordines distribuitur; Galli
unumquemque ordinem in varia agmina quandoque distribuunt, Turcae exercitum
interdum ordinant in formam lunae crescentis.

Castra, maxim si in propinquo fuerit hostis debent figi in loco tuto ubi
magna adsit aquarum copia, commeatusque, and si diuturnior esse debeat
exercitus mora, videndum an aura illic salubris sit.

Cavendum autem imprimis ne castra prope montem statuantur, qui ab host
occupatus exercitui noxius esse posset.

Authors.
Polybius, Stevinius, Heregonius.

Sect. VII. Cosmography.
COsmography is a Description of the World, and its chief Parts..

The World is the Highest Heaven, and whatever it contains, it is divided into
the Sublunary Region, and the Celestial: The Sublunary Region is obnoxious to
diverse Changes, and is contained in the concave surface of the Orb of the Moon:
It contains the four Elements, the Earth, the Water, the Air, the Fire.

The Semi-diametre of the Earth contains about 3436 Italian miles.

The ordinary depth of the Sea is 500 Geometrical paces.

The Surface of the Earth is almost equal to the Surface of the Sea, and
somewhat higher, because we see that Rivers from their first rise to the Sea go
always downwards.

The Divines think that the Earth was entirely round, and surrounded with
Waters on all sides, but after God had commanded the Waters to retreat, so many
Hills were made as there are Concavities to receive the Seas.

The Celestial Region is that part of the World which is extended from the
concave surface of the Heaven of the Moon, to the unequal surface of the Highest
Heaven; which space comprehends the Heavens of all the Stars.

Astronomers distinguish three sorts of Spheres; the first is straight, when
the Equator makes straight angles with the Horizon; the second is oblique,
when the Intersection of the Horizon and Equator makes oblique angles; the
third is the Parallel Sphere, when the Equator and the Horizon are joined
together.

Astronomers conceive ten Points, and ten chief Circles in the concave
superficies of the first Mobile: The Points are the two Poles of the World, the
two Poles of the Zodiac, the two Equinoctial, and two Solsticial Points,
Zenith and Nadir.

The Circles are the Horizon, Meridian, Equator, Zodiac, the Colures of the
Equinox, and the Colures of the Solstice. The Cancer and Capricorn, the
Arctick and Antarctick circles; by Zenith and Nadir we understand two points,
the first directly answering to our Heads, and the second to our Feet.

Astronomers fancy diverse Motions in the Heavens: the Primum Mobile turns round
with it all the other Orbs in 24 hours. They allow to the other Heavens under
the first Mobile a motion of Libration from the North to the South, and from
the South to the North.

The Eclipse of the Moon is a real privation of its light, by the interposition
of the Earth between it and the Sun. The Eclipse of the Sun is not a real
privation of light, because the Sun Eclipsed, is only hid from our eyes by the
interposition of the Moon.

All the Eclipses of the Moon are universal, or seen by all such as see the
Moon; all the Eclipses of the Sun are Particular ones, or not seen by every one
that sees the Sun.

There are five Zones, one Torrid, two Temperate, and two Cold ones. The torrid
Zone is comprehended between the two Tropicks; its breadth is 47 degrees, if we
reckon according to the common Calcul 23 on each side of the Equator; the two
temperate Zones are contained between the Tropicks and the Polar Circles,
whereof one is South, and the other North; the breadth of both is 43 degrees.
The cold Zones are contained within the Polar Circles, distant from the Poles
of the World 23 degrees.

Authors.
Peter Aerte his World, in five Vol. Herigone, Garcy, Adrianus Metius.

Sectio Septima. Cosmographia.
COsmographia est descriptio mundi, praecipuarumque ejusdem partium.

Mundus est caelum altissimum, and quicquid eo comprehenditur, dividitur in
regionem sublunarem, and coelestem, regio sublunaris variis est obnoxia
mutationibus, contineturque concava caeli lunaris superficie, quatuor
complectitur elementa, terram, aquam, aerem, ignem.

Semi-diameter terrae quadringenta fere and triginta sex supra tria millia,
milliaria Ilalica complectitur.

Communis marium altitudo est passuum Geometricorum quingentorum. - Superficies
terrae est fere aequalis superficiei maris, atque aliquanto altior, quia
animadvertimus flumina ab ipsa origin ad mare descendere, seu deorsum tendere.

Putant Theologi terram initio rotundam fuisse, atque aquis undique
circumcinctam: Sed postquam Deus aquas recedere jussisset, tot erupere montes,
quot sunt concavitates aquis marinis recipiendis idoneae.

Regio coelestis est ea pars mundi quae porrigitur a superficie concava coeli
lunaris ad superficiem convexam altissimi coeli, quod spatium coelos omnium
stellarum comprehendit.

Astronomi triplicem sphaeram distinguunt prima est sphaera recta quando
equator rectos cum horizonte angulos constituit; secunda est obliqua cum
intersectio aequatoris, and horizontis constituit obliquos, tertia est
parallela cum equator, and horizon sibi congruunt, aut conjunguntur.

Astronomi in concava primi mobilis superficie concipiunt 10 puncta, totidemque
primarios circulos: Puncta sunt duo mundi poli, duo poli zodiaci, duo puncta
aequinoctialia, duo puncta solsticialia, Zenith and Nadir.

Circuli sunt horizon, meridianus, equator, zodiacus, colurus aequinoctiorum,
colurus solstitiorum, Tropicus Cancri, and capricorni, duoque polares: His
vocibus Zenith and Nadir intelligimus duo puncta ex diametro opposita, alterum,
scilicet zenith vertici nostro imminens, alterum nempe nadir, pedibus oppositum.

Astronomi varios concipiunt in coelis motus. Primum mobile reliquos secum
coelos 24 horarum spatio circumducit: Reliquis sub primo mobili coelis addunt
motum librationis a septentrione in austrum and ab austro in septentrionem.

Eclipsis lunae est vera luminis privatio interjectu terrae lunam inter and
solemn: Eclipsis solis non est realis privatio luminis. Sol enim deficiens
tegitur tantum ab oculis nostris interpositu lunae. Omnes Eclipses lunae sunt
universales aut conspicuae omnibus corpus lunare eo tempore intuentibus; omnes
Eclipses solis sunt particulares, aut non conspicuae omnibus qui solemn ipsum
intueri possunt.

Quinque sunt Zonae, una torrida, duae temperatae, duaeque frigidae, torrida
Zona comprehenditur duobus Tropicis: Ipsius latitudo est vulgari calculo 47
graduum; nempe 23 cis, ^ltraque aequatorem; duae temperatae comprehenduntur
tropicis, and polari^us circulis quorum alter meridiona^is alter borealis est,
utriusque latitudo est graduum 43; frigidae Zonae comprehenduntur polaribus
circulis dissi^is a mundi polis grad. 23.

Authors.
Petrus de Aerte, seu mundus ipsius ^ voluminibus, Herigonius, Garcaeus,
Adrianus Metius.

Sect. VIII. Catoptrick.
CAtoptrick is derived from (...), a Looking-glass, because it treats of the
Rays, as being reflected by polished Bodies. This Science demonstrates these
following Propositions.

1. If a Ray falling upon a glass, make equal angles, it is reflected into
itself. 2. Rays reflected from plain and unequal glasses, do neither come
together, nor are equi-distant. 3. Heights and Depths seem to be overturned in
Unequal glasses. 4. In Unequal glasses, what is on the left hand, appears to be
on the right; and what is on the right hand, appears to be on the left. 5. If
the eye were in the center of ^ Concave-glass, it would see nothing but itself.
Authors.
Euclid and Peter Herigone have written on this Subject.

Sectio Octava. Catoptrica.
CAtoptrica derivatur a Graeca voce (...), quod speculum sonat, quia agit de
radio ut reflexo a laevigatis corporibus, sequentes propositiones demonstrat.

1. Si radius in qualecumque speculum cadens aequales facit angulos ipse in
seipsum reflectitur. 2. Radii a planis, convexisque speculis reflexi neque
mutuo concurrent, neque erunt paralleli. 3. Altitudines and profunditates in
convexis speculis inversae apparent. 4. In speculis convexis sinistra videntur
dextra, and dextra sinistra. 5. Si oculus ponatur in centro speculi concavi
seipsum tantum cernet.
Authors.
Euclides, and Petrus Herigonius hoc super argumento scripserunt.

Sect. IX. Chemistry.
Chemistry is the Art of Analyzing, or Resolving Bodies by the operation of the
fire into their compounding principles.

The Chemists do generally affirm Mercury, Salt, and Sulphur to be the
compounding principles of all compounded things; which Doctrine is learnedly
and solidly confuted by the English Philosopher, I mean the Famous Robert Boil
in his Skeptical Chemist. Yet it cannot be denied but that it is useful and
necessary likewise to mankind, upon the account of those many excellent
Medicines it prepares to the great advantage of Physicians, and ease of their
Patients, whereof these ensuing are some of the most considerable.

1. Aurum fulminans, or thundering Gold; a very good Sudorifick; it may be
taken in the Measles from 2 grains to 6 in any convenient Electuary; it stops
Vomiting, and is a hindrance to the activity of Mercury, or Quicksilver. 2.
Vitriolus Lunae taken inwardly, is prevalent against the Dropsy, and the
Headache, of what sort soever; you may take it from 2 grains to 6 in any
Specific water; it is likewise a moderate purger. 3. Sal Jovis, is a great
drier. 4. Magisterium Bismuth, softeneth the skin, and is good against Scabs
and Itch, if you mix a dram of it with 4 ounces of water, because it is a
great destroyer of Salts and Acids, two general causes of most Distempers. 5.
Sal Saturni taken inwardly, prevails against the Squinancy, the overflowing
of the Flowers, Piles, Dysentery; you may take it from 2 grains to 4 in
Plantain-water. 6. Oleum Saturni cleanses and dries up Ulcers. 7. Spiritus
ardens Saturni resists powerfully putrefaction; it is beneficial to such as
are troubled with too much Melancholy. You may take it from 8 to 16 drops, in
any convenient liquor, a fortnight together. 8. Crocus aperitivus martis has a
a peculiar virtue against all distempers occasioned by obstructions* You may
take it from 2 grains to 2 scruples in Lozenges or Pills. 9. Crocus martis
astringens is of a peculiar virtue against the glitting of the Yard, the
overflowing of the monthly Flowers and Piles; you may take it from 15 grains to
a dram in Lozenges or Pills. 10. Mars Diaphoreticus cures effectually the
most melancholy distempers, as likewise Quartan-Agues; you may take it from 10
to 20 grains in Pills, or any convenient Liquor. 11. Sublimatum corrosivum eats
up superfluous flesh, and dries up Ulcers. 12. Sublimatum dulce, or Aquila
alba, is very good against all Venereal Distempers; it is a great Deobstruent,
and killer of worms; it may be taken in Pills from 6 grains to 30: It Is a mild
purger. 13. Praecipitatum rubrum dries up wounds, and consumes superfluous or
proud flesh. 14. Turbith minerale, or The Yellow Praecipitate, is a strong
purger, and works both upwards and downwards; it is good against Venereal
Distempers; you may take it in Pills from 2 gr. to 6. 15. Crudum Antimonium is
a Sudorifick, but if you boil it in any acid liquor, it will provoke you to
vomit. 16. Regulus Antimonii purges upwards and downwards, if mixed with any
Cathartick or Purger. 17. Vitrum Antimonii is the strongest Vomitory that is
made of Antimony. 18. Antimonium Diaphoreticum resists powerfully Poison, and
is likewise good against contagious Distempers, and against the Measlles. 19.
Flores Antimonii provoke to Vomit; and Rubri flores Antimonii as yet more; you
may take them both from 2 gr. to 14, taking every quarter of an hour a spoonful
of Broth wherein you have boiled a competent quantity of the Cream of Tartar.
20. Sulphur Antimonii is prevalent against the Distempers of the Breast; you
may take 6 grains of it in any appropriated liquor.
Authors.
Paracelsus, Beguinus, Helmontius, and the deservedly Renowned Robert Boil,
etc.

Sectio Nona. Chymica.
CHymica est ars reducendi corpora vi ignis in ea ex quibus constant principia.
Fatentur Chymicorum plerique, asseruntque Mercurium, Sal, Sulphur, esse tria ut
loquuntur, prima, seu constituentia omnium rerum compositarum principia: Quam
doctrinam erudite more suo, ingenioseque ac solidis argumentis confutat
Philosophus Britannicus celeberrimus merito Boylius in Chymico suo Sceptico.

Nemo tamen inficias ierit Chymiam and utilem esse generi humano, and
necessariam ob tot generosa quae parat medicamenta non mediocri medicorum
emolumento, magnoque commissorum ipsis aegrorum levamine: Quae hic
subjunguntur, quaedam sunt ^e praecipuis.

1. Aurum fulminans sudores provocat; adhiberi potest adversus morbillos,
minima dosis sit gr. 2 maxima gr. 6 sistit vomitum, obstatque activitati
Mercurii. 2. Vitriolus lunae interius sumptus praevalet contra Hydropem, and
quemcumque capitis dolorem: dosis minima gr. 2 maxima 6 in quacumque aqua
specifica; leniter quoque purgat. 3. Sal Jovis valde desiccat. 4. Magisterium
Bismuth, emollit carnem, valetque contra scabiem and pruriginem si illius
drachmam quatuor unciis aquae commisceas, quia salia, and acida, geminas
plerumque morborum causas destruit. 5. Sal Saturni, si sumatur interius
praevalet contra anginam, immoderatum menstruorum fluxum, Haemorrhoides,
Dysenteriam; dosis minima gr. 2, summa 4, in aqua plantaginis. 6. Oleum Saturni
purgat, exsiccatque Ulcera. 7. Spiritus ardens Saturni potenter resistit
putrefactioni; nimia melancholia dejectis prodest: dosis 6, 8 aut 16 guttae in
quovis conveniente liquore per quatuordecim dies. 8. Crocus aperitivus martis
peculiari virtute pollet adversus morbos ab obstructionibus ortos: dosis minima
gr. 2 summa scrupuli duo in trapeziis, aut pilulis. 9. Crocus martis astringens
peculiariter valet contra stillicidium penis, nimium menstruorum fluxum, and
hoemorrhoides; dosis ima gr. 15, summa, dram in trapeziis, aut pilulis. 10.
Mars Diaphoreticus reipsa curat plerosque morbos a melancholia ortos, atque
febres etiam quartanas; dosis 10 aut 20 gr. in pilulis, aut conveniente quopiam
liquore. 11. Sublimatum corrosivum exedit superfluam carnem, exsiccatque
Ulcera. 12. Sublimatum dulce, aut Aquila alba pollet adversus omnem veneream
intemperiem: insigniter Deobstruit, vermiumque excidium est; si in pilulis
sumitur; minima dosis gr. 6 summa gr. 30; leniter purgat. 13. Praecipitatum
rubrum exsiccat vulnera, consumitque superfluam carnem. Turbith menerale, aut
Praecipitatum flavum valide purgat superne and inferne, valet adversus morbos
venereos; dosis ima in pilulis gr. 2. summa gr. 6. 15. Crudum Antimonium est
sudorificum, sed si illud in acido quopiam liquore concoquas, vomitum
provocabit. Regulus Antimonii Cathartico cuipiam immixtus superne, inferneque
purgat. 17. Nihil ex Antimonio fit, quod po^entius Vitro Antimonii vomitum
ex^itet. 18. Antimonium Diaphoreticum re^istit potenter veneno, valetque contra
morbos contagiosos, and morbillos. 19. Flores Antimonii vomitum pro^ocant
fortiusque, adhuc, Rubri flores Antimonii; amborum dosis ima gr. 2 ^umma 15,
sum interim quovis qua^rante horae Cochleare jusculi in quo ^remoris tartari
sufficiens mensura ^octa fuerit. 20. Sulphur Antimonii pollet adversus omnes
pectoris morbos; dosis ^r. 6 in quovis idoneo liquore.
Authors.
Paracelsus, Helmontius, Beguinus, meritoque celeberrimus ubique Boy^ius.

Sect. X. Dioptrick.
DIoptrick is that part of Astrology that searches out by Instruments the
distance of the Sun, Moon, and other Planets. If you take it more generally,
its chief end is to show the apparent changes of our sight, and of visible
objects looked into through Prospective glasses.

It treats of the broken or refracted Rays of light, and this is its chief
principle: When a Ray passes through a thin middle into a thicker, it breaks
in the Superficies of the thicker toward the perpendicular line; and when it
passes through a thick middle, or medium, to a thinner it deviates from the
perpendicular line, which this obvious experiment demonstrates. Lay an Image,
or any other visible object, in the bottom of a Vessel, and then go back till
it vanish out of your sight; now if you fill this Vessel with water, it shall
presently be visible again, because the Ray coming from your eye, breaks
downwards in the superficies of the water, as the same going straight up to the
superficies of the water deviates from the perpendicular, because of the
thinner air toward the eye, which renders the object visible again.

This Science treats likewise of Unequal and Concave glasses, as they may work
some change in the sight, and may help it. It gives* an account of those whom
Aristotle calls (...), who see remote things distinctly, and nearer objects
confusedly; and why those whom we call (...), see both the remote and nearer
objects confusedly.

It teaches likewise amongst other things, 1. That those whom we call (...)
see distinctly some things that are represented by Unequal glasses in a straight
situation. 2. That they see not distinctly through a Unequal glass any of those
objects that are overturned.

3. It shows the influence of Glasses applied one to another upon our sight.

Authors.
Kepler, Maurolycus, Euclide, etc. have written of this curious Science.

Sectio Decima. Dioptrica.
DIoptrica ea Astrologiae pars est quae instrumentis quibusdam distantiam Solis
and Lunae, aliorumque planetarum indagat. Eam in genere si spectes, praecipuus
ejusdem scopus est indicare apparentes visus mutationes, objectorumque per
vitra optica ut microscopia, megaloscopia inspectorum, agit de radio fracto;
hocque primarium hujus scientiae principium est: Cum radius lucis progreditur a
tenuiore medio ad dentius, frangitur versus perpendicularem in superficie
spissioris; cumque progreditur a medio spissiore ad tenuius, deviat a
perpendiculari. Quod obvio hoc experimento manifestum fit: Imaginem aut quodvis
aliud conspicuum objectum infundo vasis cujuspiam colloca: tum recede donec
objectum non amplius appareat: Jam si vas hoc aqua impleas, oculis se mox imago
oggeret: Quia radius lucis ab oculo ad fundum vasis porrectus frangitur deorsum
in superficie aquae versus Perpendicularem, ut idem ad superficiem ascendens ob
tenuiorem aerem deviat a perpendiculari versus oculum, unde fit ut objectum
rursus conspiciendum se praebeat.

Insuper haec Scientia agit de convexis concavisque vitris, quatenus visum aut
variare, aut juvare possunt. Redditque pariter rationem cur ii quos Aristoteles
(...) vocat, remota distinct videant, propinqua confuse; and cur ii quos (...)
dicimus tum remota, tum propinqua objecta confuse videant.

Inter alia pariter docet, 1. Eos quos (...) dicimus, quaedam videre distinct
quae a vitris convexis recto in situ exhibentur. 2. Minime eos videre distinct
per vitra convexa ullum eorum objectorum quae eversa sunt. 3. Ostendit vitrorum
sibi invicem junctorum in visum nostrum operationem.

Authors.
Keplerus, Maurolycus, Euclides, etc. de curiosa hac Scientia scripsere.

Sect. XI. Moral Philosophy.
EThica is that Art which directs us how to act always conformably to right
reason: Its chief principle is this, Do as you would be done by.

It teaches us that God is our last end, because he only is Bonum Sufficiens,
the Sufficient Good, nothing else being able to content us. It teaches
likewise that we can never love any thing but under the show and appearance of
Good, whereof it offers three sorts, Honor Profit and Pleasure.

God alone is our Objective Beatitude or Happiness, (as they speak in the
Schools,) our Formal Beatitude is that operation of the Mind by which we
possess God, which is the Intuitive Vision or Contemplation of God.

This Art shows that the Internal Principles of Humane Actions are either
Natural, as Powers; or Acquired, as Habits: That the Understanding moves the
Will to act, and the Will our Understanding; that a Habit being generated by
the repetition of Acts, gives the Soul not the real power of acting, but only
enables it to act more easily.

Authors.
Aristotle, Seneca, Plato, Cicero, etc.

Sectio Undecima. Ethica seu Moralis Philosophia.
HAEC ea est ars quae nos ad agendum in omnibus conformiter rectae rationi
dirigit: Primarium ipsius principium hoc est, Quod tibi vis fieri, and alteri
feceris.

Docet Deum esse ultimum nostrum finem quia ille solus est Bonum Sufficiens,
cum nihil aliud beatos nos efficere queat: Docet pariter nihil nos amare posse
nisi sub specie boni, cujus triplex genus proponit Jucundum, Utile Honestum.

Beatitudo nostra Objectiva, ut loquuntur Scholae, solus Deus est, Formalis
nostra Beatitudo est ea mentis operatio qua Deum possidemus, Intuitiva scilicet
Dei Visio.

Hic Habitus docet principia interna actionum humanarum, aut esse nobis
congenita, cujusmodi sunt Potentiae; aut acquisita, cujusmodi sunt Habitus;
docet intellectum movere voluntatem ad agendum, and vice versa; habitum actuum
repititione productum, animae tribuere non ipsam quidem agendi facultatem, seu
potentiam, sed majorem quamdam facilitatem.

Authors.
Aristoteles, Seneca, Plato, Cicero, etc.

Sect. XII. Geography.
GEography is the Description of the Earth, and its chief Parts..

Because Geographers talk much of the Longitude and Latitude of a place, it is
of some use to know what is meant by these two words.

The Longitude then of a place, or its distance from the East, is an Arch of
the Equator intercepted between the Semicircle of the first Meridian, and the
Meridian of the place, according to the order of the Signs. The Latitude of a
place, or its distance from the Equinoctial line, is the arch of the Meridian,
intercepted between the Equator and the place proposed, being always equal to
the elevation of the Pole, which is the arch of the Meridian intercepted
between the conspicuous Pole and the Horizon, because the latitude of a place,
as likewise the height of the Pole, together with the arch of the Meridian
intercepted between the Pole and the Zenith, are equal to the fourth part of
the Meridian or the Quadrant.

The whole World is now divided into four Parts, Europe, Asia, Africa, and
America: Europe is bounded toward the North by the Hyperborean Sea, toward
the West by the Atlantic Sea, and the Herculean by the Streights of Gibraltar
and by the Ocean; toward the East by the Egean Sea, the Hellespont, Propontis,
Bosphorus Thracius, the Streights of Caffa, the Meotide Lake, the River Tanais,
etc. till you come to a little Town called ^uria, from whence it is bounded by a
white line till you come to the White Sea.

The chief Parts of Europe are Germany, Spain, France, Great Britain,
Switzerland, the Low Countries, Ireland, Denmarck, Norway, Swedeland, Poland,
Italy, Croatia, Sclavonia, Dalmatia, Albania, Grecia, Thracia, Bulgaria,
Servia, Bosnia, Russia, Hungaria, Transylvania.

Asia is bounded toward the North by the Scythian Sea, toward the East by the
Sea called Eoum, toward the South by the Indian Sea or the Red Sea, toward
the West by the Arabic Sreights and the Interne Sea.

Africa is joined to Asia by an Isthme, or a narrow piece of Ground dividing
two Seas: It Is bounded by several Seas, toward the East by the Red Sea,
toward the South by the Ethiopian Sea, toward the West by the Atlantic Sea,
toward the North by the Interne Sea.

The chief Parts of Africa we reckon to be those following, Barbary
Biledulgeride, Sarra, the Country of the Negroes, Egypt, Ethiopia both
superior and inferior, the Kingdom of the Abyssins.

America was wholly unknown to the Ancients till about the year 1492, it was
discovered by Christopher Columbus, a Genoese, in the name of Ferdinand King of
Castile. It Is called America from Americus Vespucius, a Florentine, who the
first after Columbus, in the Year 1497, under the auspices of the King of
Portugal, discovered that Part of it that lies beyond the Equinoctial line.

America is divided into two Parts, the one Norrhern, and the other Southern,
or the Peruane America; they are both divided by an Isthme. The Northern
America is called the Mexican, from its chief City Mexico. We know only those
Countries that lie near the shore, as Canada, the Land of Labrador, the
adjacent Islands, New France or Norimbegra, Virginia or Apalchen, Florida, New
Spain, New Grenade, California, Quivira, Ananian, Jucatan, Guatimala, Hondura,
Nicaragna.

In the Southern America you have Castile, the Golden Peru, Chili, Chica, the
Country of the Pantagons, Brasilia, Caribana, Guiiana, Biquiri or the Country
of the Amazons, Paguan, Picoram, Moxos, Uram, Charchas.

Authors.
Ptolomy, the Great Atlas, the English Atlas, Ortelius, Strabo, Solinus,
Pomponius Mela, Philipp Cluvier, etc.

Sectio Duodecima. Geographia.
GEographia est descriptio terrae praecipuarumque ejus partium.

Quia Geographi multum loquuntur de Longitudine ac Latitudine loci, utile
fuerit scire quid reipsa sint.

Longitudo itaque loci, aut ipsius distantia ab ortu, est arcus aequatoris
inter semicirculum primi meridiani, and meridianum loci secundum ordinem
signorum interceptus. Latitudo loci aut ejusdem distantia a linea aequinoctiali
est arcus meridiani interceptus aequatorem inter, and locum propositum, estque
semper aequalis elevationi poli, quae est arcus meridiani horizontem inter, and
conspicuum polum interceptus, quod tam latitudo loci, quam elevatio poli cum
arcu meridiani inter polum and zenith intercepto, aequent quadrantem meridiani.

Totus terrarum orbis nunc dividitur in quatuor parts, Europam, Asiam,
Africam, Americam: Europa terminos habet a septentrione Mare Hyperboreum, aut
septentrionale, ab occidente Mare Atlanticum, fretum Herculeum, and Oceanum, ob
ortu Mare Aegaeum, Hellespontum, Propontidem Bosphorum Thracium, Bosphorum
Cimmerium, Lacum Maeotim, Tanais fluenta usque ad oppidum Tuia, inde lineam
rectam ad sinum usque Granduicum, seu Mare Album.

Praecipuae Europae parts sunt, Germania, Hispania, Gallia, Magna Britannia,
Helvetia, Belgium, Dania, Suedia, Polonia, Italia, Croatia, Sclavonia,
Dalmatia, Albania, Graecia, Thracia, Bulgaria, Servia, Bosnia, Russia,
Hungaria, Transylvania.

Asia terminatur versus septentrionem Mari Scythico, versus ortum Mari Eoo,
versus meridiem Mari Indico, aut Rubro, versus occidentem sinu Arabico and Mari
Interno.

Africa Isthmo jungitur Asiae, terminos habet varias circum maria, ab ortu mare
Rubrum, a Meridie Aethiopicum, ab occasu Atlanticum, a septentrione internum.

Praecipuas Africae parts sequentes numeramus, Barbariam, Biledulgeridem,
Sarram, Regionem Nigritarum, Aegyptum Aethiopiam utramque superiorem and
inferiorem, Regnum Abyssinorum.

America antiquis prorsus incognita fuit, donec sub annum quadringentesimum
nonagesimum secundum supra millesinum detecta fuit a Christophoro Columbo
Genuensi nomine Ferdinandi Regis Castiliae. America dicitur ab Americo Vespucio
Florentino qui primus post Columbum anno 1497. sub auspiciis Regis Lusitaniae
eam partem continentis detexit quae ultra lineam aequinoctialem jacet.

America dividitur duas in parts alteram septentrionalem, meridionalem alteram
aut Peruanam; utraque Isthmo dividitur, septentrionalis America vocatur
Mexicana a praecipua ejusdem civitate Mexico* Regiones tantum littoribus
adjacentes novimus, nempe Canadam, terram Laboratoris, atque insulas
adjacentes, Novam Franciam sive Norimbregram, Virginiam sive Apalchen,
Floridam, Novam Hispaniam, Novam Granatam, Californiam, Quiviram, Ananian,
Jucatan, Guatimalam, Honduram, Nicaragnem.

In meridionali America sunt Castilio Aurea, Peruvia, Chili, Regio Pentagonum,
Brasilia, Caribana, Guiiana, Biquiri, Paguam, Picoram, Moxos, Uram, Charchas.

Authors.
Ptolomaeus, Magnus Atlas, Ortelius, Strabo, Solinus, Pomponius Mela, Philippus
Cluverius.

Sect. XIII. Geometry.
THis Science teaches us how to Measure the Earth, and to set limits to every
Man's Lands; it is entirely contained in the Fifteen Books of Euclid's Elements:
The first thirteen are acknowledged by all to be undoubtedly of this Author;
the two last are ascribed by some to Hipsicles of Alexandria.

Euclid's Elements may be divided into four Parts; the first Part, contained in
the first six Books, treats of Plains; the second, consisting of the three
other following Books searches into the properties of Numbers; the third Part
of Euclid's Elements, consisting of the tenth Book only, treats of
commensurable and incommensurable Lines; and lastly, the fourth Part
comprehending the remaining Books, treats of Solids, or Bodies.

The first part of Euclid's Elements is again threefold; the first four Books
treat of Plains absolutely considered, of their equality and inequality; the
fifth treats of the proportion of Magnitudes in general; the sixth shows the
proportion of plain Figures.

Geometry may be divided into these three subordinate parts, Altimetry,
Planimetry, and Stereometry; Altimetry is the Art of measuring straight Lines,
Planimetry is the Art of measuring Surfaces, Stereometry is the Art of
measuring Solids or Bodies.

A line is measured by a line of a known magnitude, and a superficies or
surface by a square of a known magnitude, and Solids are measured by a Cube of
a known bulk.

Authors.
Euclid, Hero Mechanicus* Fournierius, Malapertius, Maginus, Clavius, Nicolaus
Tartalea in Italian, Adrianus Metius, Samuel Marolois, Simon Stevin, and Daniel
Sant Bech.

Sectio Decima tertia. Geometria.
HAEC Scientia docet nos qui terram metiamur, atque unius cujusque praediis
limits praescribamus: Integra continetur quindecim Libris Elementorum
Euclidis: Priores tredecim sine ulla controversia Euclidi ascribuntur ab
omnibus, posteriores vero duo, a quibusdam Hypsicli Alexandrino tribuuntur.

Elementa Euclidis dividi possunt in quatuor parts; quorum prima pars sex
prioribus libris contenta, agit de planis; secunda, quae ex tribus sequentibus
conflatur, affectiones numerorum examinat; tertia pars Elementorum Euclidis,
quae solo libro decimo constat, de lineis commensurabilibus, ac
incommensurabilibus agit; quarta denique pars, quam residui libri constituunt
de solidis, aut corporibus disserit.

Prima pars Elementorum Euclidis rursus triplex est; priores enim qua^uor libri
agunt de planis absolute spectatis, de eorum aequalitate, aut inaequalitate;
quintus disserit de proportionibus magnitudinum in genere; sextus planarum
figurarum proportiones exponit.

Geometria dividi potest in has tres parts subordinatas, in Altimetriam,
Planimetriam, and Stereometriam; Altimetria est ars dimetiendi lineas rectas,
Planimetria est ars dimetiendi superficies, Stereometria est ars dimetiendi
solida, sive corpora.

Lineas metiuntur lineae notae magnitudinis, superficiem metitur quadratum
mensurae notae, solidaque metitur cubus notae molis.

Authors.
Euclides, Hero Mechanicus, Fournierius, Malapertius, Maginus, Clavius,
Nicolaus Tartalea Italice, Adrianus Metius, Samuel Marolois, Simon Stevinius,
Daniel Sant Bechius.

Sect. XIV. The Art of Dialling.
GNomonica is the Art of Dialling, or of making Sun-dials.

Of Sun-dials there are two sorts, some are Pendulums, and others are Fixed
ones. The Pendulums are those that being hung up, or held up, show the hours by
the height of the Sun, as the Astrolabe, the Cylinder, the Quadrants, the
Astronomical Rings, and others of the same kind.

The Fixed-dials require a certain situation, to show the hours by the motion
of the Sun from East to West, and upon this account they are more exact than
the Pendulums.

The Center of the Dial, is that point of the plane of the Dial in which the
axis of the World is cut by the plane.

The perpendicular Style is a straight line drawn from the center of the Earth
to the plane of the Dial: The center then of the World, or of the Earth in a
Dial, is the top of the style, which is perpendicular to the plain of the Dial.

The Pole of the plane of the Dial, is the Pole of a great circle equi-distant
from the plane of the Dial.

In all Astronomical Dials, that part of the style which by its shadow shows
the hour, must be in the axis or axle-tree of the World.

The Italians reckon 24 hours, beginning from the setting of the Sun; the
Babylonians reckon as many from the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the
same; but in the old Dials, the hours of the day, and of the night, are
reckoned separately, viz. 12 from the rising of the Sun, till the going down of
the same; and as many from the setting of the Sun, till the rising of the same.

Authors.
Maurolycus, Ptolomaeus, Kircherus, etc.

Sectio Decima quarta. Gnomonica.
GNomonica est ars construendi horologia solaria.

Horologia solaria dividuntur in pendula, and fixa: Pendula sunt ea quae
appensa, aut manu suspensa, horas indicant open altitudinis solaris: Cujusmodi
sunt Astrolabium, Cylindrus, Quadrans, Annuli Astronomici, aliaque ejusdem
generis.

Horologia stabilia, seu fixa, requirunt situm quemdam ut ostendant horas open
motus solis ab ortu in occasum, ideoque accuratiora sunt pendulis.

Centrum horologii est punctum plani horologii, in quo axis mundi secatura
plano.

Stylus perpendicularis est recta a centro terrae ad planum horologii ducta,
unde centrum mundi, sive terrae in horologio est vertex styli plano horologii
normalis.

Polus plani horologii, est polus magni circuli paralleli plano horologii.

In omni horologio Astronomico ea pars styli quae umbra horam ostendit, debet
esse in axe mundi.

Itali numerant horas 24 initio ducto ab occasu solis; Babylonii numerant
totidem initio ducto ab ortu solis; sed in antiquis horologiis horae diei,
noctisque separatim enumerantur, duodecim scilicet enumerantur ab ortu solis ad
occasum, totidemque ab occasu ad ortum.

Authors.
Maurolycus, Ptolomaeus, Kircherus, etc.

Sect. XV. Grammar.
GRammar is the Art of Writing and Speaking well; it treats of Words and the
Construction of Words.

This Art considers two things in Words, the Letters, and the Syllables; as
likewise two sorts of Letters for some sound alone, and are called Vowels, as
a, e, i, o, u,; others sound not alone, but together with some other letter,
and they are called upon this account Consonants, as these following, b, c, d g
k, p, q, t, which letters are called Mutes, as f, l, m, n, r, s, x, z are
called half Vowels.

A Syllable that has a full sound is made up either of a Vowel and a Consonant,
or of Vowels and Consonants.

In Words, Grammar considers their accent or tone, whether acute, or grave,
or mean; their Derivation and Etymology, their Composition and Simplicity;
their numbers; if the word be a Noun, Plural, singular; their Cases,
Nominative, Genitive, Dative, Accusative, Vocative, Ablative: If the word be a
Verb, it considers the Tenses, as Present, Imperfect, Perfect, Future or to
come.

It teaches the Art of Construing words one with another, as the Adjective
with the Substantive, in order to make a congruous Speech; either continued or
interrupted: It distinguishes the sentences by three notes, which we commonly
call Comma, Semicolon, Colon, or as the Latins speak, Punctum.

The first is a short pause of respiration, which we express thus (,) the
second is a longer pause, which we express thus (;) the third is a full pause,
and finisheth the sense, which we mark thus (.)

Chief Authors.
Alvares and Despauter.

Sectio Decima quinta. Grammatica.
GRammatica est Ars recte loquendi, scribendique; agit de vocibus, vocumque
constructione.

Duo contemplatur in vocibus literas and syllabas, ut pariter duo genera
literarum quaedam enim solitary sonant, and vocales dicuntur, ut a e, i, o,
u,; quaedam solitary non sonant, sed simul cum alia quapiam litera, and
propterea consonantes dicuntur, cujusmodi sunt hae literae oppositae b, c, d,
g, p, q, t, quae literae dicuntur mutae, ut f, l, m, n, r, s, x, z dicuntur
semivocales.

Syllaba quae integrum habet sonum, constat vel unica vocali, vel vocali addita
consonante, vel vocalibus simul and consonantibus.

In vocibus Grammatica considerat accentum, seu tonum, sive acutum, sive
gravem, sive medium, earum derivationem, originem, atque etymologiam,
compositionem, simplicitatem, Numeros, si quaestio de Nomine sit, Singularem,
Pluralem; Casus, Nominativum, Genitivum, Dativum, Accusativum, Vocativum,
Ablativum; si quaestio de Verbo sit, considerat Tempora, ut Praesens,
Imper^ectum, Praeteritum, Futurum.

Docet qui voces simul construere debeamus, ut Adjectivum cum Substantivo, ut
fiat oration congrua, continua, aut interrupta; distinguit sententias tribus
hisce notis, quas designamus appellationibus hisce Comma, Semicolon, Colon, aut
ut Latini loquuntur, punctum.

Prima nota indicat brevem a respirando cessationem, quam exprimimus hunc in
modum (,) secunda est diuturnior cessatio quam exprimimus hunc in modum (;)
postrema est plena cessatio, sensumque absolvit, quam ita notamus (.)

Authors primae notae.
Alvares, Despauterius, etc.

Section XVI. Hydrography.
HYdrography is a Description of the Waters, especially the Seas.

The Sea is the general Collection of Waters, it is divided into the Ocean and
Mediterranean Sea: The Ocean is that Sea which surrounds the whole Earth, it is
divided into the great Ocean, Gulfs and Streights.

The Ocean has four different names, from the four opposite points of the
World, from the East, it is called the Eastern Sea; from the South, the
Southern; from the North, the Northern; it is divided into three vast Seas,
Indian, or Red Sea; the Atlantic Sea, so called from Atlas, a Hill in
Mauritania; and the Pacifick Sea.

The Indian Sea reaches from the Islands of Sumatra and Java to the Promontory
of Good Hope, its chief Gulfs are the Ganget^ck Gulf, or the Gulf of Bengala,
whose longitude is 120 degrees. latitude 16 degrees. the Persick Gulf, or Elcatif Sea,
whose longitude is 76 degrees. latitude 26; the Arabic Gulf, or the Red Sea,
commonly called Mar di Meca, whose longitude is 70 degrees. latitude 20; the
Barbarick Gulf, whose longitude is 70 degrees. latitude 4.

These are the chief Islands of the Ocean, Learn, or Madagascar, or the Island
of St. Laurence, longit. 75 degrees. lat 20. Discuriada, or Zocotara, longit. 48
degrees. lat. 11. the Maldives, longit. 105. lat. 5. Nanigeris, commonly called
Zeilan, longit. 113. lat. 6. Taprobana, Sumatra, longit. 130. lat 0. Java the
Great, longit. 140. lat. 10.

We reckon among the chief Islands of the Atlantic Sea, Albion, or Great
Britain, longit. 22. lat. 52. Ireland, longit. 13. lat. 54. Hesperides, or the
Islands of the Cap vert, longit. 353. lat. 17. Cuba, longit. 295. lat. 22.
Jamaica, 298. lat. 18.

The Pacifick, or Southern Sea, lies between Asia, America, and the Magellanick
Gulf; its chief Islands are Japan, longit. 170. lat. 36. The Molucs, longit.
157. lat. 1. Salomon's Islands, longit. 195. lat. 10.

Authors.
Herigone, Ortelius, Pomponius Mela, Joachim, Vadiam, Fournier.

Sectio Decima sexta. Hydrographia.
HYdrographia est descriptio Aquarum, maxim Marium.

Mare est generalis aquarum collectio, dividitur in Oceanum, and Mare
Mediterraneum: Oceanus est mare quod universam terram ambit, dividitur in
vastum, sinuosum, and fretum.

Oceanus quatuor sortitur appellationes a quatuor cardinalibus mundi partibus,
ab orient Eous dicitur, ab occidente Occiduus, a meridie Australis, a
septentrione Septentrionalis; dividitur in tria vasta maria Indicum, sive
Rubrum, Atlanticum a^ Atlante Mauritaniae monte sic dictum, and in Pacificum.

Oceanus Indicus porrigitur ab Insulis Sumatra, and Java usque ad Caput Bonae
Spei: Ejus praecipui Sinus sunt Gangeticus, sive Bengalensis, cujus longitudo
120 graduum, latitudo 16 graduum. Sinus Persicus, cujus longit. 76 graduum,
latitudo 20 graduum. Sinus Arabicus, aut Mare Rubrum, vulgo Mar di Meca, cujus
longit. 70. lat. 20. Sinus Barbaricus, sive Mare Asperum, cujus longit. 70.
lat. 4.

Primariae Oceani Insulae sunt Learn, aut Madagascar, seu Insula Sancti
Laurentii, cujus long. 75. lat. 20. Discuriada aut Zocotara, cujus long. 48.
lat. 11. Maldiviae, longit. 105. lat. 5. Nanigeris, vulgo Zeilan, cujus longit.
113. lat. 6. Taprobana, Sumatra, longit. 130. lat. 0. Java Major, longit. 140.
lat. 10.

Praecipuae Insulae Maris Atlantici sunt Albion, sive Magna Britannia, ^ujus
longit. 22. lat 52. Hibernia, ^ujus longit. 13. lat. 54. Hesperides, ^ut
Insulae Promontorii viridis, longit. ^arum Insularum 353. lat. 17. Cuba, ^ujus
longit. 295. lat. 22. Jamaica, ^ujus longit. 298. lat. 18.

Mare Pacificum, sive Meridionale ^cet inter Asiam, Americamque, and ^retum
Magellanicum; Praecipuae ejus ^nsulae sunt Japonia, cujus longit. 170. ^t. 36.
Molucae, longit. 157. lat. 1. ^nsulae Salomonis longit. 195. lat. 10.

Authors.
Herigonius, Ortelius, Pomponius Me^, Joachimus, Vadiamus, Fournierius.

Sect. XVII. Logic.
Logic is the Art of Disputing wel^ The three operations of the Min^ make up
its whole object, which are Apprehension, Judgment or Affirmation and
Illation. It teaches, that the truth of any of those three operations consist^
in their confirmity to their objects: S^ this compounded Apprehension, Go^
Almighty, is true, because I apprehen^ God to be, what he really is, that i^
Almighty; you may easily apply this t^ the other two Operations.

Its two chief Principles are these Dictum de omni, and Dictum de nullo: The
first signifies, that whatever (...) generally affirmed of any thing, m^
likewise be affirmed of whatever is contained under that thing, as if I s^
Every Animal is a living Creature, the it follows, that a Bird is a living
Cre^tur^* The second signifies, that what ever is generally denied of any
thing is denied likewise of whatever is contained under that thing; as if I say
No Animal is a Stone, then I may, an cught likewise to say, No Bird is Stone,
No Man is a Stone, etc.

Logic teaches the Art of making Syllogism, which consists of three
Propositions, whereof the first two being granted, the Conclusion must
necessarily b^ granted, because it was already implicitly admitted by him, who
admitted of the Premises: As it is evident in this Syllogism, Every Man is a
living Creature, Peter is a Man, ergo, Peter is a living Creature.

Logic is natural to all Mankind, because it is nothing else but the use of our
Reasoning Faculty. Artificial Logic is made up of some Rules and Precepts that
help our Reasoning Faculty.

Authors.
Aristotle, Arriaga, Ruvius, Guilminot, etc.

Sectio Decima septima. Logica.
LOgica est ars recte disserendi: Ipsius objectum sunt tres mentis ^perationes;
Apprehensio, Judicium ^ut Affirmatio, and Illatio. Docet ^eritatem illarum
operationum in ea^um cum ipsis objectis conformitate esse positam; ut composita
haec apprehensio, Deus Omnipotens, est vera, ^uia apprehendo Deum, ut reipsa
est omnipotentem: Quod reliquis operationibus applicari facile potest.

Duo praecipua Logicae principia sunt ista, Dictum de omni, and Dictum ^e
nullo: Prius significat quicquid generaliter affirmatur de re quapiam,
affirmari idem posse de omnibus sub eadem contentis, ut si dicam, omne animal
est vivens, licebit dicere omnis volucris est vivens. Posterius ^nnuit,
quicquid generaliter negatur de quapiam re, negari posse idem de omnibus eadem
comprehensis; ut si dicam, Nullum animal est lapis; licebit etiam dicere, Nulla
volucris est lapis; Nullus homo est lapis, etc.

Logica docet artem conficiendi Syllogismi, qui constat tribus propositionibus:
Quarum duae primae si semel admittantur, tertia necessario admitti debet, quia
jam tacit admissa est ab eo qui duas primas admisit, ut patet in hoc
Syllogismo, Omnis homo est animal, Petrus est homo, ergo, Petrus est animal.

Logica congenita est humano generi, cum nihil aliud sit quam facultatis
nostrae rationalis exercitium. Artificialis Logica sunt praecepta quaedam hanc
facultatem juvantia.

Authors.
Aristoteles, Arriaga, Ruvius, Guilminotius, etc.

Sect. XVIII. Metaphysick.
THis Science considers Beings, as abstracted from all matter; and is so
called, because it treats of things somewhat besides, above, or beyond Nature.
It considers two things in a Being, 1. Its Essence, which seems to have a
real Being, though it does not exist, as a Rose in the midst of Winter. 2. Its
Existence, which is actually in being, or by which a thing is actually in
being, as the existence of a Rose is that by which it now is.

It considers three properties of every Being, its Unity, Goodness, and
Truth; Unity is that by which a thing is one, and not many. Truth or Verity, is
the conformity of any thing to its real or consistent Principles, as true Gold
consists in its conformity to the principles of this Metal. The Metaphysical
Goodness of things, is that essential perfection which is agreeable to them.

This Science treats likewise of Powers, Acts, Principles, and Causes, and
proves, in opposition to Aristotle, and other ancient Philosophers, that the
World was not eternal.

Authors.
Aristotle, Vasques, Suares, Valentia, etc.

Sectio Decima octava. Metaphysica.
HAEC Scientia considerat Entia, ut abstracta ab omni materia, nomenque hoc
trahit inde quod agat de rebus aliquatenus praeter, vel supra, aut ultra
naturam.

Duo in Ente contemplatur, 1. Essentiam, quae videtur esse verum Ens licet non
existat, ut Rosa media Hyeme. 2. Existentiam quae actu in rerum natura est, aut
vi cujus aliquid actu existit, ut existentia Rosae est id vi cujus Rosa nunc
existit.

Contemplatur tres in quovis Ente proprietates, Unitatem, Bonitatem, Veritatem:
Unitas est id vi cujus quidpiam est unum, and non multa. Veritas est
conformitas unius cujusque rei cum principiis veris, and constituentibus, ut
veritas Auri, aut Aurum verum est ejusdem conformitas cum constituentibus
hujusce Metalli principiis. Metaphysica Bonitas rerum est essentialis illa
perfectio quae rebus congruit.

Haec Scientia agit pariter de potentiis, actibus, principiis, causis,
contraque Aristotelem, aliosque antiquos Philosophos, probat mundum non fuisse
aeternum.

Authors.
Aristoteles, Vasques, Suares, Valentia, etc.

Sect. XIX. Music.
Music is a Science which teaches us what belongs to the Theory and Practice
of Harmony.

Melody is that which has a certain order compounded of Sounds and Intervals.

This Science treats of these seven ensuing things, of Sounds, of Intervals, of
Genders, of Constitutions or Systems, of Tunes, of Changes, of the making of
Melody.

The Sound is a gentle falling of the voice upon the Note.

The Interval is comprehended under two Sounds, the one sharper than the other.

Authors.
Guido Aretine, in the Year 1028, Invented these six Syllables, ut, re, mi,
fall, sol, la, of which mi, fa, or fa, mi, imply a half Tune, and the others
following one another signify a greater or lesser Tune; Euclid, Ptolomy,
Aristoxenus, Faber Stapulensis, Boethius, John Kepler, Salinas, Zarlins, and
Vincentius Galilaeus in Italian.

Sectio Decima nona. Musica.
MUsica est Scientia quae Theoriam Praximque Harmoniae docet.

Concentus est id quod certum habet ordinem ex Sonis and Intervallis compositum.

Haec Scientia de septem hisce sequentibus agit, de Sonis, de Intervallis, de
Generibus, de Constitutionibus, de Tonis, de Mutatione, de Melopaeia.

Sonus est concinnus vocis casus ad unam extensionem:

Intervallum est id quod continetur duobus sonis acumine, and gravitate
differentibus.

Authors.
Guido Aretinus, anno salutis 1028, invenit has sex Syllabas, ut, re, mi, fa,
sol, la, quarum mi, fa, vel fa, mi, dimidium Tonum significant, ac sequentes
sese invicem aliae Tonum absque discrimine majorem aut minorem; Euclides,
Ptolomaeus, Aristoxenus, Faber Stapulensis, Boethius, Joannes Keplerus, Salinas,
Zarlinus, Vincentius Galilaeus Italice.

Sect. XX. The Mechanics.
THis Science considers the quantity of Moving forces, and of Duration of the
time in which the Motion is performed.

The gravity of a Body, is a certain capacity of falling downwards; the center
of gravity, is that place or point from which if we conceive the Body to be
suspended, whatever situation you may give it, it shall retain the same.

The Center of Magnitude, and of gravity, are not always the same, as it is
evident in a Bowl half Lead, half Wood.

The Pendula diameter of gravity, or the handle, is a straight line drawn
through the center of gravity perpendicularly to the Horizon.

No weight can rest, unless the pendula diameter of gravity, or handle, pass
through the place upon which it leans, or from which the weight is suspended.

In all Planes, the center of the figure, is likewise the center of gravity.

This Art teaches in general, how to find out the ponderousness of every
thing, and how to move things with little strength.

We must not forget in this place a sort of Mecbanism, the knowledge whereof is
of great concern for the good of Mankind; I mean that of Trusses, and
Instruments fit for restoring by degrees, any part of the Body to its natural
place and situation.

The burst Peritonaeum sometimes gives way to the Intestines, at other times to
the Caul. and not seldom, to both, to get out of their natural place, into the
Groins, or the Scrotum, there causing a Rupture, called Enterocele, or Hernia
intestinalis; if the Bowels come out, an Epiplocele, or Hernia omentalis; if
the Omentum or Caul be out. The Peritonaeum is made up of two strong, but soft
Membranes, which do so contain whatsoever is included in the Belly, that, when
sound, nothing can fall out. In Women, the Os pubis is its utmost limit. In
Men, its outermost Membrane reaches further, and constitutes the first proper
coat of the Testicles. In the Groin, it comprehends the seminal Vessels, as in
a Sheath, called Processus, which being stretched or enlarged, or coming to
burst, is the immediate cause of the lately mentioned Ruptures. We must not
nevertheless imagine, that the Peritonaeum cannot be distended, and burst in
other places, and therein to cause a Rupture.

The causes which make the Peritonaeum to Burst or Dilate, are falling,
leaping, beating, bearing of heavy burdens, strong Vomitings or Coughing,
Obstipation of the Belly, Winds pent in, and vehement motions of the Body.

But I can do no greater service to the Public, than to inform the World of
two of the best Artists I know of in this kind, both living together in Black
Friars, in London, I mean the Famed Robert Smith, a Scotch Gentleman, and his
Son-in-Law, Thomas Jewel, who give daily succesful proofs of their Skill in
this kind of Mechanism, their Trusses of what kind soever being so light, so
easy, and so fitted to all the motions of the Body, that they are not at all
troublesome.

They likewise cure effectually any Deformity in humane Bodies, occasioned by
the preternatural bending outward, inwards, or downwards, of any part thereof,
and by such ingenuously contrived Engines, as force Nature gently into its
first place and situation.

Authors.
Aristotle, Henry Monenthole, Joseph Blancan, Guide Ubald, Stevin, Hero, Robert
Vulturius, Cedren, John Baptista Porta, Joseph Boillot, Ranelli, Barbette,
Brown, etc.

Sectio Vigesima. Mechanica.
MEchanica est Scientia quae quantitates virium moventium, and temporum in
quibus fit motus considerat.

Gravitas corporis est quaedam potentia ad descensum.

Centrum gravitatis est punctum ex quo vel sola cogitatione suspensum corpus,
quemcumque situm dederis retinet.

Centrum gravitatis, and centrum magnitudinis non sunt semper idem, ut patet in
Sphaera plumbo* lignea.

Pendula gravitatis diameter, aut ansa est linea recta ducta per centrum
gravitatis acta Horizonti perpendicularis.

Nullum pondus quiescere potest nisi pendula gravitatis diameter, aut ansa
transeat per locum cui innititur, aut e quo suspenditur corpus.

In omni Plano figurae centrum, centrum quoque gravitatis est.

Haec ars docet in genere modum reperiendae ponderationis, rerumque exiguis
viribus movendarum methodum.

Non est praetermittendum hoc loco aliud genus mechanismi cujus notitia non
parum humano generi profuerit; de mechanismo loquor, fasciarum,
instrumentorumque, aut machinarum quibus paulatim quaevis corporis pars ad
debitum a natura situm reducatur.

Rupto Peritonaeo interdum intestina, omentum interdum, saepe and intestina,
and omentum loco naturali excidunt in inguina, aut Scrotum, ibique Hernia
producitur, dicta Enterocele, aut Intestinalis, si prolabantur Intestina, vel
Epiplocele, aut Hernia Omentalis si Omentum excidat.

Peritonaeum gemina valida quidem sed molli constat membrana, quae ita
concludit quicquid imo ventre comprehenditur, ut cum sanum corpus est nihil
procidere possit. Peritonaeum in mulieribus Osse pubis terminatur: In viris
Tunica exterior ulterius procedit, ac Testiculorum involucrum primum proprium
constituit. In Inguine vasa seminalia comprehendit, instar vaginae, Processus
dictae: Processus hic laxatus, Dilatatus aut Ruptus est immediata herniarum mox
commemoratarum causa: Non est tamen existimandum Peritonaeum non posse
distendi, rumpique etiam aliis in locis ibique Herniam producere.

Causae Peritonaei Rupti, aut Dilatati hae fere sunt, lapsus, saltatio,
percussio, gravium onerum gestatio, vomitus violentior, aut tussis, constipatio
ventris, flatus reclusi, vehementiorque omnis corporis motus.

Sed nihil forte utilius rei Publicae praestitero, quam si hic nominatim indica
vero duos peritissimos quos quidem norim hujusmodi mechanismi artifices simul
conviventes Londini in ea regione urbis quae Black Friars, dicitur; sunt autem
ii celebris Robertus Smith Scotus, ejusque gener Thomas Jewel, qui quotidiana
magnoque successu suae hoc in genere mechanismi peritiae experimenta exhibent:
Ipsorum enim fasciae cujuscumque generis, sive contra hernias Intestinales,
sive Omentales, sive Umbilicales, sive Ventosas, aut contra aquosas, adeo leves
sunt, gestatuque faciles, omnique corporis motui ita obsecundant, ut nihil
omnino molestiae gestantibus secum afferant.

Reipsa quoque praenominati tollunt quamcumque humanorum corporum deformitatem
a praeternaturali partis cujuspiam extrorsum, introrsum, aut deorsum
distentione ortam, instrumentisque ac machinis ingenii ejusmodi quibus natura
suaviter ad pristinum situm reducatur.

Authors.
Aristoteles, Henricus Monentholus, Josephus Blancanus, Guidus Ubaldus'
Stevinus, Hero, Robertus Vulturius, Cedrenus, Joannes Baptista Porta, Josephus
Boillotus, Augustus Ranelli, Paulus Barbettus, Johannes Brownius, etc.

Sect. XXI. Medica: Or the Art of Conserving and Curing Humane Bodies.
HErmes Trismegistus, a Famed Physician in Egypt, invented this necessary Art:
It Is either Empirical, that is, grounded upon mere Experience; or Dogmatical,
that is, grounded both upon Reason and Experience: Hippocrates and Galenus were
the chief Masters of the Dogmatical part.

This Art is either Speculative or Practical; the former considers, 1. The
nature, and the outward causes of Distempers, as the six things that are called
not natural, because they are not the constituent parts of our Bodies, such we
reckon the Air, Meat, Drink, Sleep, Watching, Motion and Rest, what we throw
off, and what we retain, Excreta and Retenta; our Passions, Plethora, or
fullness, Cacochymy, or an ill habit of our blood. 2. It searches into the
internal causes of our Distempers, as Wind, Worms, Acids.

The practical part of this noble and useful Art relates to the method of
Curing, which is either performed by Alteration or Evacuation. Whether this
Evacuation be wrought by Bleeding, Vomiting, Stool, Urine, Sweat, or insenble
Transpiration; and upon this account, its true object is the whole Materia
Medica, or whatever may be subservient to the Physician's intention in either
of the three Kingdoms, I mean, Animal, Vegitative, and Mineral.

The whole Materia Medica may be reduced to the ensuing Heads.

1. the Attenuating Remedies, as Elicampe Roots, Wormwood Leaves, Camomile
Flowers, the hot Seeds, Juniper, and Laurel Berries, old Tallow, and Grease,
especially that of a Wolf, and of a Bear, most Oils, as of bitter Almonds,
Walnuts, etc. the Plasters of Betony, Diachylon, Oxycroceum, etc. 2. The
Softening, as Marsh mallow Roots, Briony Roots, etc. 3. Such as dissolve Clots,
as the Roots of round Birthwort. 4. The Deterging, as the Roots of Gentian, and
Birthwort. 5 The Epicerasticks, that by a moderate moisture take off the
sharpness of the humor, as Mallow, and Marsh-mallow Roots. 6. Alexipharmaca,
that resist Venom, as Angelica Root. 7. The Thickening, as the Roots of
Bugloss and Plantain. 8. The Cathartick, which either purge the Bile, as
Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, etc. or the Phlegm, as Carthamy, wild Saffron,
Agarick, Turbith, Jalep, or the Melancholy, as Sena Oake-Fern, or the Watery
Humors, as Dwarf Elder, Elder-seed, Bark, Juice, Mechoaca. 9. The Vomitory,
whether milder ones, as Sarabacca Leaves bruised in Dill Water, or stronger
ones, as the Spirit of Tobacco, the Infusion of Tobacco, Crocus Metallorum,
etc. 10. Diuretics, as Radish Roots, Parseley Roots, etc. 11. The Sudorificks,
as Hearts horn, Diascordium, Angelica Roots, etc. 12. The Repelling Remedies, as
the Sloe-tree Roots, Tormentil Roots, etc. 13. The Emplasticks that stop the
passages of the Body, as Lilly Roots, wild Comphry Roots, etc. 14. The
Absorbing Remedies, which by a great faculty of drying, consume the moisture,
as all Cenders, Vinegar, Brine, etc. 15. The Blistering, which raise Blisters,
as the Cantharides, Mustard, Garlic, Watercresses. 16. The Suppurating, that
generate matter, as Marsh-mallow Roots, white Lilly Roots. 17. The Vulnerary,
as Tormentil Roots, the Roots of both Comphreys. 18. The Sarcoticks, that
remove whatever may hinder the breeding of Flesh, as the Roots of Birthwort,
Tragacanth, Dragons Blood, Sarcocolla, etc. 19. The Epuloticks, that generate a
Callus, or Scarr, as Dragons Blood, Myrtle Leaves. 20. The Anodines, as
Marshmallows, and Lilly Roots. 21. The Narcoticks, which take away all
feeling, as Oil of Palm, Laurel, Turpentine, Opium, etc. 22. The Hypnoticks,
that cause Sleep, as Requies Nicolai, Diascordium, Laudanum opiatum, etc. 23.
Such as stop Bleeding, as Corals, the Bolus, Sealed Earth. 24. The Cephalicks,
as the Roots of Birthwort, Betony Leaves, Galanga. 25. The Errhina, that purge
the Brains and the Breast, by bringing down the superfluous pituite lying about
the Meninges, as the Juice of Betony, the Powder of white and black Hellebore.
26. The Ophthalmicks for the Eyes, as Eyebright, and Celadine water, and also
their Juices. 27. Otica, that ease the pains of the Ears, as Laurel Leaves,
Leeks, Radishes. 28. The Cardiacks, as the Roots of Zodoaria, Great Leopards
Bane, Thistle, and Balm water. 29. The Bechick, that render the humors
contained in the Lungs and the Breast, fit to be thrown up, as the Syrup of
ground*Ivy. 30. The Aromaticks, as Roots of Cyperus. 31. Splenica, such as cure
the Spleen, as the Powder of Style, Valerian Roots. 32, The Nephritcks, that
help the Reins, as Marsh-mallow Roots, Sal Prunella, etc. 33. The
Lithontripticks, that break the Stone, as Elecampane Roots, Galanga, etc. 34.
The Hystericks, that cure Hysterical Fits, as Purslain Seed, the Seed of Agnus
Castus, the Trochisques of Myrrh, etc. 35. The Arthriticks, that prevail
against the Gout, as Elecampane Roots, Nightshade, Plaintain, Marsh-mallow
Leaves.
Authors.
Hippocrates, Galen, Trallian, Actuarius, Cornelius Celsus, Avicenna,
Sennertus, Riverius, Macasius, Regius, Willis, Barbette, Harvey the Inventor of
the Circulation of the Blood.

Sectio Vigesima prima. Medica: Sive Ars Conservandi and restaurandi Humani
Corporis.
HErmes Trismegistus celebris apud Aegyptios medicus necessariae hujusce artis
inventor dicitur: Est autem aut Empirica, hoc est quae mera experientia, aut
Dogmatica, quae ratione and experientia nititur: Medicinae Dogmaticae praecipui
magistri extitere Hippocrates and Galenus.

Est aut speculativa aut practica; prior considerat, 1. Naturam, causasque
externas morborum, ut sex res dictas non naturales quia non sunt parts
corporis humani constituentes, cujusmodi censemus aerem, cibum, potum, somnum,
vigilias, motum, and quietem, excreta, and retenta, animi pathemata, plethoram,
sive Plenitudinem, Cacochymiam, sive pravum sanguinis habitum. 2. Scrutatur
internas morborum causas, puta flatus, vermes, acidum.

Practica pars nobilis hujus, utilisque artis methodum medendi spectat, quae
posita est in Evacuatione, and Alteratione, quocumque demum modo evacuatio
contingat, sive venae sectione, sive vomitu, dejectione, sudore, urina, aut
insensibili transpiratione; quocirca verum ipsius objectum est tota materia
medica, aut quicquid in regno Animali, Vegetabili, and Minerali, Medici scopo
inservire poterit.

Porro totam materiam medicam ad sequentia capita reducere fere possumus.

1. Attenuantia, ut Radices Aenulae Campanae, Folia Absinthii, Flores
Camomillae, Semina Calida, Baccae Juniperi, Lauri, Axungiae vetustiores maxim
Vulpina, and Ursina, Olea pleraque, ut amygdalarum Amararum, Nucum, etc.
Emplastra de Betonica, Diachylon, Oxycroceum, etc. 2. Emollientia, ut Radices
Altheae, Bryoniae. 3. Grumos dissolventia, ut Radices Aristolochiae rotundae.
4. Detergentia, ut Radices Gentianae, Aristolochiae. 5. Epicerastica quae
moderata humidate Acrimoniam humorum obtundunt, ut Radices Malvae, and Altheae.
6. Alexipharmaca quae resistunt Veneno, ut Radix Angelicae. 7. Condensantia, ut
Radices Buglossae, and Plantaginis. 8. Cathartica que vel purgant Bilem, ut
Cassia, Manna, Tamarindi, etc. vel Phlegma, ut Carthamus, Crocus Sylvestris,
Turbith, Jalap, vel Melancholiam, ut Sena, Polypodium quercinum, vel Humores
aquosos, ut Sambuci, and Ebuli Semen, Cortex, Succus, Mechoaca. 9. Vomitoria,
sive mitiora, ut asari folia, aut validiora, ut Spiritus Nicotianae, Infusio
Nicotianae, Crocus Metallorum., etc. 10. Diuretica. ut Radices Raphani, Apii.
11. Sudorifica, ut Cornu cervi, Diascordium, Radices Angelicae. 12.
Repellentia, ut Radices Pruni Sylvestris, Tormentillae, etc. 13. Emplastica
quae corporis meatus obstruunt, ut Radices Symphiti, and Liliorum. 14.
Absorbentia, quae valida exsiccandi vi absumunt humorem, ut omnes Cineres,
Acetum, Muria. 15. Vesicatoria, quae vesicas excitant, ut Cantharides, Sinapi,
Allium, Nasturtium. 16. Suppurantia, a quibus pus generatur, ut Radices
Althaeae, Liliorum Alborum, etc. 17. Vulneraria, ut Radices Tormentillae,
Consolidae utriusque. 18. Sarcotica, quae removent quicquid Carnis generationem
prohibet, ut Radices Aristolochiae, Tragacantha, Sanguis Draconis, Sarcocolla.
19. Epulotica, quae callum generant, aut cicatricem, ut Sanguis Draconis, Folia
Myrthi. 20. Anodina, ut Radices Althaeae, Radices Liliorum. 21. Narcotica, quae
omnem sensum tollunt, ut Oleum Palmae, Lauri, Terebinthinae, etc. 22.
Hypnotica, quae somnos conciliant, ut Requies Nicolai, Diascordium, Laudanum
opiatum, etc. 23. Sanguinem Sistentia, ut Coralliae, Bolus, Terra Sigillata,
etc. 24. Cephalica, ut Radices Aristolochiae, Galangae, Folia Betonicae. 25.
Errhina, quae cerebum purgant and Thoracem, educta superflua circa meninges
pituita, ut Succus Betonicae Pulvis albi and nigri Hellebori. 26. Ophthalmica,
ut aquae and succi Euphrasiae, and Chelidoniae. 27. Otica, quae levant aurium
dolorem, ut Folia Lauri, Radices Porri, Raphani. 28. Cardiaca, ut Radices
Zedoariae, Doronici, aquae Cardui Benedicti, and Melissae. 29. Bechica, quae
humores in Thorace, and pulmone conclusos ad faciliorem Tussiendo ejectionem
disponunt, ut Sirupus and succus hederae terrestris. 30. Aromatica, ut Sirupi
Absinthii, and Betonicae. 31. Splenica, ut Pulvis ex Chalybe, Radices
Valerianae. 32. Nephritica, ut Radices Althaeae, Sal Prunellae. 33.
Lithontriptica, quae calculum frangunt, ut Radices Aenulae Campanae, Galangae.
34. Hysterica, ut semen agni casti, Portulacae, Trochisci de Myrrha. 35.
Arthritica, quae valent adversus Podagram, and Chiragram, ut Radices Aenulae
Campanae, Folia Solani, Plantaginis, Althaeae.
Authors.
Hippocrates, Galenus, Trallianus, Actuarius, Cornelius Celsus, Avicenna,
Sennertus, Riverius, Macasius, Regius, Willisius, Barbetius, Harveius
circulationis Sanguinis Inventor, etc.

Sect. XXII. The Art of Sailing.
ARS Nautica, or Histiodromica, is that Art which teaches how to direct a Ship
through the Seas, to the proposed Harbor.

This Art requires the knowledge of the Mariners Compass, and the Lead, of the
Seacoasts, Capes, Rocks, Promontories, Harbors, of the distances of one place
from another, of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, of the latitude and
longitude of every place. It requires likewise the knowledge of several
Instruments fit to take the latitude of a place, as of the Cross-staff, of the
Quadrant, of the Nocturnal, of the Plane Scale, of Gunter's Scale, etc.

The Mariners Compass is a round Plane, whose circumference is divided into 32
equal parts, by straight lines, called Rhombs, passing through the center.

The height of the Pole, of so great benefit to Sailers, is found out thus:
Observe first the height of the Sun at Noonday, with an Astrolabe, or some
other Instrument of that kind; then take the declination of the Sun, from the
height, if the Sun declines from the Equator toward the Northern Pole; or add
the declination of the Sun, to the observed height, if the Sun declines toward
the Southern Pole; the remaining number, or the sum made up by Addition, gives
you the height of the Equator, whose Complement to 90 degrees (as they speak)
is always the height of the Pole. Thus if the height of the Equator above our
Horizon be 60 degrees. the height of the Pole is 30 degrees. because 30 added to 60,
make up 90; and if the Pole be elevated but 10 degrees. the height of the Equator
is 80, because this number is the Complement of that.

If their could be an Hour Glass, or ^ Clock, so contrived, as to fall but very
little short of the Measure of Time* with the help of this Clock, to the great
advantage of Sailers, the differences of the longitudes might be found after
this manner: When the Ship sets off, let the Clock show the hour in the place
from whence you sailed, without discontinuing: If then we would know the
longitude of the place in which we now are, let us, by observation of the Sun,
find the hour in that place we chance to be in; which if it be the same pointed
at by the Clock, or shown by the Glass, it is certain we are in the same
Meridian we were in at our first setting out; but if we find by observation,
more hours than the Clock points at, we have made a progress toward the
East; if we find fewer hours, we are gone toward the West; and the differences
of the longitudes may easily be known, if the differences of the hours be
converted into degrees, and minutes of degrees.

Authors.
Seller, Everard, Wright, etc.

Sectio Vigesima secunda. Ars Nautica.
ARS Nautica, sive Histiodromica ea est quae docet qui dirigi debeat navis per
maria ad propositum portum.

Haec ars requirit notitiam pyxidis Nauticae, and Bolidis, orae Maritimae,
Promontoriorum, Rupium, Portuum distantiarum inter loca, aestuum Maritimorum,
latitudinis and longitudinis cujusque loci, instrumentorum pariter variorum ad
investigandam syderum altitudinem, ut Baculi decussati, Quadrantis,
Nocturnalis, Scalarum planarum, Scalarum Gunteri, etc.

Pyxis Nautica est planum rotundum, cujus circumferentia in 32 parts aequales
dividitur rectis lineis per centrum transeuntibus quae Rhombi dicuntur.

Altitudo poli Navigantibus adeo utilis sic invenitur: Observa primo Meridianam
solis altitudinem open astrolabii, aut alterius cujuspiam instrumenti, tum
substrahe declinationem solis ex altitudine jam inventa solis, open instrumenti,
si declinatio solis versus polum conspicuum sit, aut add declinationem solis
observatae altitudini si sol declinaverit versus polum meridionalem, residuum
aut summa futura est altitudo aequatoris, cujus complementum est semper
altitudo poli: Itaque si altitudo aequatoris supra horizontem nostrum sit
graduum sexaginta, altitudi poli futura est graduum triginta: Quia si addas 30
ipsis 60, summa futura est 90; and si polus 10 tantum supra horizontem gradibus
extet, equator supra eundem extabit 80, quia hic numerus est complementum
illius.

Si posset construi Clepsydra, aut horologium quod ab accurata mensura temporis
parum aberraret: Illius open inveniri possent hoc modo longitudinum
differentiae: Aptetur horologium ita ut dum solvit navis ostendat horas loci
unde discedimus, deinde inter navigandum nunquam cesset: Cumque libuerit scire
longitudinem loci in quo sumus, ex observatione coelesti inquiratur illius loci
hora, quae si omnino convenerit cum hora quam horologium indicat, certum erit
nos esse sub eo unde discessimus meridiano, si vero plures horas observatione
invenimus, quam horologium indicet, progressi sumus versus ortum, si pauciores
defleximus versus occidentem, dignosceturque differentia longitudinum, si
reducantur differentiae horarum in gradus, and minuta graduum.

Authors.
Sellerius, Everardus, Wrightius, etc.

Sect. XXIII. Optics.
THE Optics, or Optica, gives us an account of various appearances of Objects.
This Science treats of the straight Ray, as the Catoptrick of the reflected,
and the Dioptrick of the refracted or broken Ray. These following Definitions
belong to the Optics. The proper Objects of Sense, are those that can be known
but by one sense; and the common Objects, such as may be known by more than one
sense. Light and Color, are the proper Objects of our sight; the Light, upon
its own account; and the Color, by the help of Light. These following things,
are the common Objects of our Senses, Bulk, Figure, Place, Situation, Distance,
Continuity, Discontinuity, Motion, and Rest. The visuel Rays, are the straight
lines, by which the frame of the visible Object is in a manner carried to the
eye.

We may reckon among the chief principles of this Science, these following.

The visible object radiates from all its least parts, to all the least parts
of the Medium, to which one may draw a straight line.

That is seen, and that only, from which to the eye the visuel Ray may be
eztended.

The more bodies there appear between the eye and the object, the more remote
the objects appear to be.

The Convergent Rays, are those that departing from the object, come together:
Such are, the Rays of diverse parts of the object, which cut one another in the
Chrystalline humor. The Divergent Rays, departing from the object toward the
eye, recede from one another: The Rays of every point of the object, are
divergent, till they come to the Chrystalline humor, beyond which they come
together again toward the Retina.

We may reckon these following Propositoins amongst the most considerable of
the Optics.

No visible object is seen at first altogether, and perfectly.

Magnitudes being in the same straight line, the remoter seem to be the lesser.

Parallel intervals seem to be nearer one another, the farther they are from
the eye.

Rectangle Magnitudes being seen at a distance, seem to be round.

Equal Magnitudes being under the eye, those that are farthest from the eye,
seem to be highest.

Authors.
You may reckon amongst the best Masters of the Optics, Euclid, Aquilonius,
Scheiner, Vitellio, Alhazane, Herigone, etc.

Sectio Vigesima tertia. Optica.
OPtica variae objectorum apparentiae causas demonstrat. Agit de radio recto,
ut Catoptrica de reflexo, and Dioptrica de refracto. Ad Opticam spectant
sequentes definitiones. Propria objecta sunt ea quae ab uno tantum sensu
percipi possunt. Communia sunt ea quae a pluribus sensibus percipiuntur. Lumen
and color sunt propria visus nostri objecta, lumen quidem ratione sui, color
open lucis. Communia visus objecta sunt ea quae sequuntur, quantitas, figura,
locus, situs, distantia, continuitas, discontinuitas, motus, and quies. Radii
visorii rectae lineae sunt, quibus forma aspectabilis objecti ad visum
porrigitur.

Inter praecipua hujus Scientiae principia sequentia numerare licet.

Visibile radiat e quolibet sui puncto ad quodlibet punctum medii ad quod recta
duci potest.

Id omne and solum videtur a quo ad oculum radius Opticus extendi potest.

Quo plura corpora oculum inter, and objectum apparent, eo remotius existimatur
objectum.

Convergentes radii sunt ii qui recedendo ab objecto simul coeunt. Ejusmodi
sunt radii variorum punctorum objecti qui se mutuo in humore Chrystallino
secant.

Divergentes radii progrediendo ab objecto versus oculum recedunt a se invicem
donec ad humorem Chrystallinum pervenerint ultra quem versus retinam coeunt.

Annumerare possumus praecipuis Opticae; propositiones sequentes.

Nullum visibile objectum simul totum, and perfect videtur.

Magnitudinum in eadem recta quae remotiores videntur, minores apparent.

Parallela intervalla eo magis ad se invicem accedere videntur quo sunt
remotoria ab oculo.

Rectangulae magnitudines procul visae apparent rotundae.

Aequalium magnitudinum sub oculo quae remotiores, videntur altiores.

Authors.
Inter praecipuos Opticae doctores censere possumus Euclidem, Aquilonium,
Alhazenum, Scheinerum, Vitellionem Herigonium, etc.

Sect. XXIV. Perspective.
PErspective represents every object seen in some Diaphane, or transparent
Medium, through which the visual Rays are terminated or bounded on the object;
and generally what* is seen through something, as through the Air, Water,
Clouds, Glass, and the like, may be said to be seen in Perspective.

The chief Contents of this Science, may be referred to these following Heads.

The Ray is a straight line drawn from the Eye to the Glass perpendicularly.

That point is called Primary, on which falls a perpendicular line drawn from
the Eye to the Glass.

The projection of a line, is not a crooked line.

The object being a Point, there is but one visual Ray drawn from the Object to
the center of the Eye, and this Ray is called the Axis, or Centrical, as being
the most vivid, and the strongest of all.

If the Object be a straight line, the visual Rays make a triangle. If the
Object be a Surface, plane or spherical, the visual Rays represent a Pyramide.

Ichonography is the Pourtraiture of the Platform or Plane upon which we would
raise any thing.

Orthography is the Pourtraiture of the fore part of the Object.

Scenography represents the Object wholly elevated and perfect, with all its
Dimensions and Umbrages on all sides.

The Horizontal line in Perspective, is taken from the height of our eye: This
is the chief piece of the Picture, and which ought to be the rule of the
dimensions and height of the Figure.

The point of Perspective, or sight, is made by the centrical Ray above the
Horizon.

Authors.
Amongst the chief Writers of Perspective, you have Roger Bacon, John Baptist
Porta, Stevin, Marole, John Cousin, Daniel Barbaro, Vignola, Serlio, du Cereau,
Solomon de Cause, Guidus Ubaldus, Niceronius, etc.

Sectio Vigesima quarta. Perspectiva.
PErspectiva quodlibet objectum exhibet conspectum permedium quodpiam
diaphanum, per quod radii visorii transeuntes terminantur ad objectum, and
generaliter loquendo quicquid per aliud quidpiam videtur, ut per aerem, per
aquam, per nubes, per vitrum, and quaecumque alia sunt ejusmodi, dici possunt
videri in Perspectiva.

Quae praecipui momenti haec Scientia continet ad sequentia Capita reduci
queunt. Radius primarius est recta ab oculo in vitrum ad angulos rectos ducta.

Primarium punctum dicitur id in quod cadit perpendicularis ab oculo in vitrum
ducta.

Projectio lineae non est linea curva.

Cum objectum est punctum unicus tantum est radius visorius ab objecto ad
centrum oculi ductus, hicque radius dicitur Axis, aut radius Centricus, estque
omnium vivacissimus, ac fortissimus.

Si objectum recta sit linea, radii visiorii conflant triangulum.

Si objectum sit superficies plana, aut sphaerica, radii visiorii conficiunt
pyramidem.

Ichonographia est delineatio plani super quod erigere quidpiam volumus.

Orthographia est delineatio anterio^is objecti partis.

Scenographia exhibet objectum omnino elevatum, perfectumque una cum omnibus
ejusdem dimensionibus, um^risque undique.

Linea horizontalis in Perspectiva ^ucitur ab altitudine oculi: Haec prae^pui
in pictura momenti est, regu^que esse debet dimensionum, altitu^numque figurae.

Punctum Perspectivae, aut visus fit ^entrico supra horizontem radio.

Authors.
Inter praecipuos Perspectivae scriptores hi censentur Rogerius Bacco, Johannes
Baptista Porta, Stevinius, Marolus, Johannes Cousinus, Daniel Barbaro, Vignola,
Serlio, du Cereau, Solomon de Cause, Guidus Ubaldus, Niceronius, etc.

Sect. XXV. Poetry.
POetry is the Art of making Verse and Poems: In order to this, (...) teaches
the quantity of Syllables, whether they be short or long, doubtful (...)
common, I mean, either short or long (...) pleasure.

It teaches what feet every Verse compounded of, that feet are made Syllables
of different quantities, as Spondee consists of two long syllables; for
instance, Doctos, and Pyrrichius; of two short, as Rota; a Dactyle consists of
one long, and two short, as Pectora.

A Poem implies a Fiction: Upon this account, Verses that contain no Fiction,
are not strictly considered* a Poem; and he that gives a mere Matter of Fact,
without any ingenious Fiction adapted to the Subject, is rather styled a
Versificator, than a Poet.

Verses are either denominated from their Inventors, as Sapphick Verses, from
the Greek Poetress Sappho, the first Inventress; as Pindarick, from Pindarus,
or from the feet whereof they consist; as Iambick, from the Iambick^ of which
they are composed, or from the matter they express; as Heroic, from the
Praises of Great Men; as Elegiack from sad Narratives, or from the number of
feet, as Hexameter, and Pent^ meter, the first having six, and the other five.

The Scansion of a Verse, is the measuring of a Verse by its feet. The Cesure
is the making of a short syllable long at the end of a foot.

Authors.
Aristotle, Horace, Alvares, Despauter, Waller, Cowley, Dryden, and.

Sectio Vigesima quinta. Poetica.
POetica est ars pangendorum carminum quem in scopum docet quantitatem
syllabarum an scilicet sint longae, breves, dubiae, aut communes, hoc est pro
arbitrio, breves aut longae.

Docet ex quibus pedibus quilibet versus constet, pedesque constare ex syllabis
variae quantitatis, Spondaeum puta, duabus longis, ut Doctos, Pyrrichium; ex
duabus brevibus, ut Rota; Dactylum ex una longa and duabus brevibus, ut Pectora.

Poema fictionem necessario requirit: Quare versus nullam fictionem complexi
stricte loquendo Poema dici nequeunt: Qui rem absque ingenioso ullo commento,
ut reipsa contigit, carmine describit, Versificator potius quam Poeta dicendus
est.

Versus denominantur aut ab inventoribus, ut Sapphici versus a puella Graeca
quae Sappho dicebatur, prima inventrice, ut Pindarici a Pindaro; aut a pedibus
ex quibus constant, ut Iambici ab Iambis, ex quibus fiunt; aut a materia quam
exprimunt, ut Heroici a laudibus Heroum, Elegiaci a maestis narrationibus; aut
a numero pedum, ut Hexameter, and Pentameter a numero pedum sex, and quinque.

Scansio versus est ejusdem open pedum dimensio. Caesuta est productio syllabae
brevis sub finem pedis.

Authors.
Aristoteles, Horatius, Alvares, Despauterius, etc.

Sect. XXVI. Philosophy.
PHilosophy, if we take it generally, is the love of Wisdom; if more
particularly, the knowledge of Natural Bodies, or of the Natural Causes of
Things: The Aristotelian Philosophy acknowledges three Principles of every
thing, Matter, Form, and Privation; for we can conceive nothing to be generated
without these three; for if I conceive the generation of fire in wood, I must
of necessity apprehend the Wood as the Matter, as likewise the Privation of the
Fire in the Wood, and also the Form of Fire taking place of that of Wood.

This Philosophy resolves all difficulties relating to Bodies, by Matter,
Privation, and Form, Occult Qualities, and such like pretenses to humane
Ignorance: So every Mixed, according to Aristotle's Principle, is compounded of
Matter and Form: This Matter, the Peripateticks call the Subject of all Forms;
and this Form, the Act of Matter; and both together, the two compounding
Principles of all compounded Things

Aristotle's Followers teach, that Nature is such an Enemy to a Vacuum, that to
shun it, she forces heavy things upwards, and light things downwards.

The New Philosophy holds but two simple Principles of all things, Matter, and
Motion; that, as the Material Cause; this, as the Efficient. The Formal Cause
of things, which Schoolmen call a Substantial or Accidental Form, being
nothing else, according to the Modern Philosophers, but a certain Texture of
the compounding Particles; and by the variety of Textures every where obvious,
or by the various Modifications of Matter, they give us a rational account of
all the differences we observe among Corporeal Beings.

Authors of the School Philosophy.
Aristotle, and all his Commentators, as Averroes, Alexander Aphrodisaeus, etc.

Authors of the New Philosophy.
Descartes, Verulam, the Honorable Robert Boil, who in not a few things, has
outdone them both, and is deservedly styled abroad, The English Philosopher;
he being indeed, the Honor of his Nation, as well as of his Family.

Sectio Vigesima sexta. Philosophia.
PHilosophia si latius sumatur, amorem sapientiae sonat, si propius and
specialius, est corporum naturalium, aut naturalium causarum cognitio.
Philosophia Aristotelica agnoscit tria rerum dum generantur principia,
Materiam, Formam, and Privationem. Nihil enim generari concipimus nisi haec
tria concipiamus: Si enim concipio generationem ignis in ligno, necessario
concipio lignum, ut materiam, and privationem pariter ipsius in ligno,
formamque ignis formae ligni succedentem.

Haec Philosophia omnes fere difficultates ad corpora spectantes open materiae,
privationis, and formae resolvit, atque occultarum qualitatum beneficio,
aliisque humanae ignorantiae velamentis; unumquodque igitur mixtum juxta
Aristotelica principia componitur ex materia, and forma: Hanc materiam vocant
Peripatetici Subjectum omnium formarum, and hanc formam Actum materiae,
componentiaque duo principia si simul sumantur, omnium rerum compositarum.

Aristotelis Sectatores docent Naturam Vacuo adeo esse inimicam, ut illius
vitandi gratia gravia sursum cogat, and levia deorsum.

Nova Philosophia duo admittit simplicia omnium rerum principia Materiam, and
Motum, illam ceu causam Materialem hanc ut Efficientem. Formalis enim rerum
causa, quam Scholastici formam Substantialem vocant, aut Accidentalem, nihil
aliud est juxta Philosophos recentiores, quam textura quaedam partium
componentium. Hacque contextus varietate ubique obvia, aut variis materiae
Modificationibus, rationalem, facilem, obviamque nobis reddunt rationem omnium
quae observamus, corporea inter entia discriminum.

Authors Philosophiae Scholasticae.
Aristoteles ejusque Commentatores, ut Averroes, Alexander Aphrodisaeus, etc.

Authors novae Philosophiae.
Gassendus, Cartesius, Verulamius, illustrissimus Robertus Boylius, qui in
multis his omnibus palmam praeripuit, meritoque Philosophus Britannicus
cognominatur; est que reipsa Nationis suae, and nobilissimae Familiae
ornamentum and decus.

Sect. XXVII. Rhetoric.
Rhetoric is the Art of Speaking well; the duty of a Rhetorician, is to speak
pertinently to the Subject, in order to persuade, and his chief scope must be
to persuade by his discourse.

Rhetoric consists of four parts, Invention, Disposition, Elocution, and
Pronounciation: Invention is the contriving of an Argument fit to persuade, and
those Arguments are always taken from some of these ensuing Heads.

1. From the Definition, when we declare what the thing is. 2. From the
Division, when we distribute a thing into all its parts. 3. From the Etymology,
when we show its Origin and signification. 4. From the Species, when we frame
an Argument from that particular kind of thing the Subject we treat of, belongs
to. 5. From the Genus, when we bring some proof from that general thing the
Subject we treat of, is contained under. 6. From the Similitude. 7. From the
Dissimilitude. 8. From Contraries. 9. From Opposites, that can never concur
together. 10. From Comparison. 11. From the four Causes, Efficient, Material,
Formal, and Final. 12. From the Antecedents and Consequents of a thing.
Disposition is the orderly placing of the things invented: This orderly
placing consists of five things; Exordium, by which the Speaker prepares the
minds of his Auditors, to what he is to say. Proposition, when the Orator
declares what he intends to make out. Narration, when he relates the Matter of
Fact, with all its circumstances. Confirmation, when he proves his Proposition.
Peroration, when the Orator endeavors to move the affections of the Hearers,
by a fit Elocution.

Elocution, made up of Tropes, as they speak in the Schools, by which Words
change their signification; and of figures, which are an Elegant, and not
Vulgar manner of speaking, is the ornament of Speech.

Pronunciation relates to the Voice, and the Gesture; by the first, we please
the Ear; by the second, the Sight. These forementioned things (necessary to the
completing of an Orator) being seldom found together in any Eminency, gave
occasion to Cicero to say, that We scarce find a good Orator in a whole Age.

Authors.
Aristole, Cicero, Suarez.

Sectio Vigesima septima. Rhetorica.
RHetorica est ars been dicendi; officium Rhetoris est loqui apposite ad scopum
hoc est ad persuadendum; praecipuus enim ipsius scopus est persuadere dictione.

Rhetorica quatuor constat partibus, Inventione, Dispositione, Elocutione,
Pronunciatione: Inventio est excogitatio argumenti ad persuadendum idonei; haec
autem argumenta ducuntur semper ab aliquo sequentium capitum.

1. A Definitione, cum declaramus quid res sint. 2. A Divisione, cum rem
distribuimus in omnes parts. 3, Ab Etymologia, cum indicamus ejusdem originem
and significationem. 4. A Specie, cum argumentum quodpiam ducimus a particulari
illa rerum specie, ad quam res, de qua agimus spectat. 5. A Genere, cum
probationem de sumimus a generali illa re, sub qua id quod sub litem cadit,
continetur. 6. A Similitudine. 7. A Dissimilitudine. 8. A Contrario. 9. Ab
Oppositis, quae nunquam concurrere queunt. 10. A Comparatione. 11. A Quatuor
causis, Efficiente, Materiali, Formali, and Finali. 12. Ab Antecedentibus and
Consequentibus.
Dispositio est ordinata rerum inventarum collocatio: Haec ordinata collocatio
his quinque constat, Exordio, quo parat Orator auditorum animos ad ea quae
dicturus est. Propositione, cum Orator quid probaturus sit exponit. Narratione,
cum materiam facti omnibus vestitam appendicibus enarrat. Confirmatione, cum
propositionem suam probat. Peroratione, qua conatur Orator auditorum animos
apta Elocutione movere.

Elocutio, composita ex Tropis, quibus voces ad alienam significationem
traducuntur, and figuris quae sunt elegantes, and non vulgares loquendi
formulae, est totius Orationis ornamentum.

Pronunciatio spectat vocem, and gestum, ista recreamus aurem, hac oculum:
Praememorata haec quae in perfecto Oratore requirimus cum vix uspiam simul
summo in gradu concurrant, impulerunt Ciceronem ut dicere^ vix singulis
aetatibus singulos tolerabiles Oratores extisse.

Authors.
Aristoteles, Cicero, Suares.

Sect. XXVIII. The Doctrine of the Sphere.
SPhaerica is a Science which treats of the Sphere, whether Artificial or
Natural.

The Sphere is a solid figure comprehended under one surface, to which all the
straight lines drawn from one of those points that are within the figure, are
equal one to another.

The Center of the Sphere, is the forementioned point.

The Axis of the Sphere, is a straight line drawn through the Center, and
terminated on each side in the surface of the Sphere; about which the Sphere
turns round.

The Poles of the Sphere, are the two extreme points of the Axis.

This Science demonstrates these following Propositions.

1. The Sphere touches but in one point the Plane by which it is not cut. 2.
In the Sphere, great Circles cut one another into equal parts; and if they
divide one another into equal parts, they are great Circles. 3. In the Sphere,
the Pole of a great Circle is distant from the circumference of the same
Circle, a full Quadrant, or a fourth part of the great Circle. 4. In the
Sphere, Parallel Circles are about the same Poles; and Circles that are about
the same Poles, are Parallel. 5. In the Sphere, there are no more than two
Circles, both equal-distant and equal.
This Science teaches how to find the Center, and the Pole of any Sphere, and
shows likewise all the properties of the Circles of the Sphere.

Authors.
Theodosius, Maurolycus, Sacrobosco, Clavius, Mestlinus, Blancanus.

Sectio Vigesima octava. Sphaerica.
SPhaerica est Scientia quae agit de Sphaera, sive art facta, sive naturali.

Sphaerica est figura solida comprehensa una superficie, ad quam ab uno eorum
punctorum quae intra figuram sunt, omnes rectae lineae ductae sunt aequales
inter se.

Centrum Sphaerae est punctum praememoratum.

Axis Sphaerae est recta per centrum ducta and utrimque terminata in superficie
Sphaerae circa quam volvitur Sphaera.

Poli Sphaerae, sunt duo extrema puncta axis.

Haec Scientia sequentes propositiones demonstrat.

1. Sphaera Planum a quo non secatur, non tangit in pluribus punctis uno. 2. In
Sphaera, maximi circuli sese mutuo bifariam secant, and qui sese mutuo bifariam
secant, sunt maximi. 3. In Sphaera, polus maximi circuli abest a circumferentia
ejusdem circuli quadrante maximi circuli. 4. In Sphaera, paralleli circuli
circa eosdem polos sunt, and qui circa eosdem polos in Sphaera sunt, sunt
paralleli. 5. In Sphaera non sunt plures circuli aequales, and paralleli quam
duo.
Haec Scientia praeterea docet qui centrum, polumque cujuscumque Sphaerae
invenire possimus, indicatque pariter proprietates circulorum Sphaerae.

Authors.
Theodosius, Maurolycus, Sacrobosco, Clavius, Mestlinus, Blancanus.

Sect. XXIX. Divinity.
THeology, or Divity, is wholly directed to the Glory of God, and Salvation of
Mankind. The Speculative part of it, proposes to us things that we are to
believe, as whatever concerns Gods Attributes and Perfections, the Immortality
of our Souls, and whatever is contained in the Apostolic Creed. The Practical
part, proposes to us things that we are to do, viz. whatever is contained in
the Decalogue.

The immediate object of Divinity, as it relates to Christians, we reckon
whatever concerns Christ, directly, or indirectly; as in general, the Old and
New Testament. And in particular, the Prophecies relating to his Coming, his
Miracles, his Doctrine, and the Conversion of the World by his Apostles: If
then, a Man knew no other Divinity, but that which gives an account of Gods
Attributes, he is not upon this account a Christian Divine, but a Philosopher,
or Deist.

Christian Divinity, besides the aforesaid things, teaches all kind of
Virtues, as Charity, Humility, Patience, Chastity, Adoration, Prayer to, and
Praise of God, Faith, Obedience, Repentance, etc. It will have us moreover to
pardon and love our very Enemies; which no other Religion Commands: It offers
to us the fundamental points of Christian Religion, Christ's Godhead, Passion,
Death, Resurrection, etc. and ( as I was saying) whatever is contained in the
Creed.

Authors.
The Master of Sentences, Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, Hammond, Lightfoot, and
several other Doctors of the Church of England.

Sectio Vigesima nona. Theologia.
THologia ad Dei gloriam, salutemque animarum tota dirigitur. Speculativa pars
proponit nobis credenda, ut quae spectant ad attributa divina, immortalitatem
animae, quaeque in symbolo Apostolorum continentur. Pars practica facienda
nobis proponit, quaecumque scilicet Decalogus nobis exhibet.

Theologia prout spectat Christianos, immediatum habet objectum quicquid
refertur ad Christum direct, aut indirecte ut in genere tum Antiquum, tum
novum Testamentum; and magis speciatim Prophetias ad ipsius adventum
spectantes, miracula, doctrinam, hominumque ab Apostolis conversionem: Quocirca
si nullum quis aliam noverit Theologiam quam quae divinorum attributorum reddit
rationem non hoc nomine Christianus Theologus, sed Philosophus potius, aut
Deista merus dici debet.

Theologia Christiana praeter superius commemorata docet omnia virtutum genera,
humilitatem, patientiam, castitatem, adorationem, orationem, laudem Dei, fidem,
obedientiam, paenitentiam, etc. Vult insuper nos non tantum remittere injuriam,
sed and diligere inimicos: Quod nulla nisi Christiana religio injungit.
Proponit nobis religionis Christianae fundamenta, Christi Deitatem, passionem,
mortem, resurrectionem, etc. atque ut superius dicebam quicquid in symbolo
continetur.

Authors.
Majister Sententiarum, Thomas Aquinas, Johannes Duns Scotus a patria,
Hamm^ndius, Lightfootius, aliique quam plurimi Ecclesiae Anglicanae Doctores.

Sect. XXX. Spherical Trigonometry.
SPherical Trigonometry teaches us to measure Spherical Triangles, that is
Triangles in the surface of the Sphere, made by the Arches of great Circles.

Those sides of a Spherical Triangle are of the same kind that both exceed, or
both fall short of 90 degrees; but they are of a different sort, if the one
exceed, and the other fall short of 90 degrees.

This Science demonstrates these following Propositions.

1. In all Spherical Triangles, any side whatsoever, is less than a
Semicircle. 2. In all Spherical Triangles, any two sides, howsoever they be
considered, are greater than the third. 3. Of a Spherical triangle equilateral,
if each side be a quadrant, or of 90 degrees. all the angles are straight; and if
each side be less than the quadrant, all the angles are obtuse. 4. In all
Spherical triangles, when the angles are all acute, all the arches are less
than the quadrant. 5. In all Spherical triangles, the three angles are greater
than two straight angles, and lesser than six.
Authors.
Kepler, Afraganius, Julius Higinus, Garcaeus, Robert Hues, Adrianus Metius.

Sectio Trigesima. Trigonometria Sphaerica.
TRigonometria Sphaerica docet nos modum dimetiendi triangula Sphaerica, hoc
est triangula ex tribus arcubus maximorum circulorum, in superficie Sphaerae
composita.

Latera ea trianguli Sphaerici ejusdem sunt affectionis quae simul excedunt,
aut deficiunt a quadrante, aut nonaginta gradibus, sed non sunt ejusdem generis
si unum latus excedat, and alterum sit infra nonaginta gradus.

Haec Scientia sequentes hasce propositiones demonstrat.

1. In omni triangulo Sphaerico quodvis latus quomodocumque sumptum est minus
semi-circulo. 2. In omni triangulo Sphaerico duo latera reliquo sunt majora
quomodocumque sumpta. 3. Omne triangulum Sphaericum aequilaterum, si singula
latera sunt quadrantes, habet singulos angulos rectos, si vero quadrante
minora, ob, tusos. 4. In omni triangulo Sphaerico cujus omnes anguli sunt acuti
arcus singuli quadrante minores sunt 5. Omnis trianguli Sphaerici tres anguli
duobus quidem rectis sunt majores, sex vero rectis minores.
Authors.
Keplerus, Afraganius, Julius Higinus, Garcaeus, Robertus Hues, Adrianus Metius.

Sect. XXXI. The Rectiline Trigonometry.
THe Rectiline Trigonometry teaches us how to measure Triangles made of
straight lines.

A straight line, is the shortest way between two extremes.

Between two extremes, there can be but one straight line.

Two straight lines can not cut one another, but in one point.

An angle is measured by degrees, so a straight angle is an angle of 90
degrees, an acute angle is an angle of fewer than 90, as an obtuse angle
contains more than 90 degrees.

A line falling even down upon another line, without inclining either to the
one side, or to the other, is called a Perpendicular line, and makes two
straight angles.

Parallel lines, are those that are equidistant one from another.

This Science demonstrates this Proposition, of great use in Mathematics, that
the three angles of all Rectiline triangles, are equal to two straight ones.

All the angles of a triangle, may be acute, but there can be but one straight,
or obtuse.

If one of the three angles of a triangle be straight, the two others are equal
to a straight angle.

Who knows the degrees of two angles, knows the degrees of the third, because
all three make up 180 degrees.

All the angles of a triangle being equal, all the sides are likewise equal.

Authors.
Euclid, Clavius, Arnauld; Malapertius, Fournier, etc.

Sectio Trigesima prima. Trigonometria Rectilinea.
TRigonometria Rectilinea docet qui triangula ex rectis lineis composita metiri
oporteat.

Linea recta est brevissima duo inter extrema via.

Duo inter extrema unica tantum duci potest recta.

Duae rectae nequeunt se invicem nisi in puncto secare.

Angulum metiuntur gradus, angulus rectus est angulus 90 graduum, acutus
angulus graduum pauciorum, angulus obtusus plures nonaginta gradibus gradus
continet.

Linea in aliam utrimque incidens ex aequo Perpendicularis dicitur, duosque
utrimque rectos angulos constituit.

Lineae parallelae, sunt lineae aequo a se invicem intervallo dissitae.

Haec Scientia non exiguae Mathematicis in disciplinis utilitatis hanc
propositionem demonstrat, omnis trianguli Rectilinei tres anguli duobus rectis
sunt aequales.

Omnes anguli trianguli rectilinei possunt esse acuti, sed unus tantum rectus
esse potest, aut obtusus.

Si unus trium angulorum trianguli sit rectus, duo reliqui recto aequales sunt.

Qui novit duorum angulorum gradus tertii anguli gradus novit, simul enim tres
anguli conficiunt numerum 180.

Quoties omnes anguli trianguli sunt aequales, omnia latera quoque aequalia
sunt.

Authors.
Euclides, Cicero, Clavius, Arnauld, Malapertius, Fournierius, etc.

AN APPENDIX,
Pointing at some of the chief Authors of this, and the foregoing Ages. By
Authors, here are meant, those that are really such, and the first Inventors of
any useful piece of Knowledge.

READER,
THou may rest satisfied with this very short and imperfect account of some
of the chief new Inventions, either of this, or of the past Ages, since I
design, at more leisure, to write a larger Treatise of this Subject, as
likewise to set down the particular times every thing was Printed in, that so
the unjust dealing both of Domestic and Foreign Transcribers, who have so
often stolen the greatest, or (at least) the best part of their Writings from
the Honorable Robert Boil, Hook, Descartes, Gassendi, and Others, may to
their confusion, be discovered; and to the great encouragement of all ingenious
Men, who shall the more willingly venture abroad their Notions, and new
Contrivances, in what kind soever, if they* are once secured from usurping
Authors.

I shall begin with the deservedly Famous Robert Boil, though I may dispatch
in one word, what relates to this Noble Author, if I say, as truly I may, that
whatever he has published, is in every respect new, both as to the subject it
self, the Arguments he proposes, and the particular Method: But because the
curious Reader will not be satisfied with this general account, I come to
particulars, but shall speak but of a very few things, as designing, at greater
convenience, a more accurate History of this Great Author's new Contrivances,
whether Notions, Engines, or Experiments. As likewise whatever the Natives of
this Island have invented toward the promoting of useful Learning.

The famous Air-Pump was invented by the Honorable Robert Boil: He gives a
full account of it, in his Discourse of Physico Mechanical Experiments; by the
help whereof, he proves the Elastick Power and Spring of the Air, and several
other wonderful Phaenomena's relating to the nature, spring, expansion,
pressure, weight of the Air, etc.

He contrived the Experiment concerning the different parts and redintegration
of Saltpeter; whence he concludes, that motion, figure, and disposition of
Parts, may suffice to produce all secondary affections of Bodies, and so
banisheth the substantial forms and qualities of the Schools.

But because I design a larger account in another Treatise of this Noble
Author's new Inventions, I shall only tell you here, that his Physiological and
Experimental Essays, his Skeptical Chemist, his Usefulness of Experimental
Philosophy, his History of Cold, his Experimental History of Colors, his
Hydrostatical Paradoxes, his Origin of Forms and Qualities, his Free Enquiry
into the Received Notion of Nature, his Reconciliableness of Specific Remedies
to the New Philosophy, his History of Humane Blood, his Discourse of Final
Causes, not yet published; as likewise all his other Treatises contain as many
new Notions and Exepriments almost as lines.

I shall not forget in this place, what that very Learned and Ingenious
Gentleman, Sir Robert Gordon, of Gordistoun, has lately invented; I mean, his
famous Water-Pump, a piece of Mechanism, far beyond the Contrivances of all
foregoing Ages, in this kind, as I shall easily make out by the following
account of this useful Engine.

This new Pump draws twice as much water as any other; it is wrought with
half the force, and costs half the price, and takes up but half the room. The
Experiment, performed at Deptford the Twenty Second of March, in presence of my
Lord Dartmouth, and the Commissioners of the Navy; appointed to give account of
it to the King, was as follows.

In a Sixth-Rate Frigate, this new Pump did fill the Gaged Cistern of two Tuns,
in one minute and forty five seconds; and the Shippump did the same in six
minutes and some more, each Pump being wrought by four men.

In a Fourth-Rate Frigate, this Pump being wrought by twelve men, did fill the
Cistern in thirty one seconds; and the Ship-Pump, being wrought by six men,
filled it in four minutes and some more.

The chief Authors of new Discoveries in Anatomy, we reckon to be these
following: Fabricius ab aqua pendente discovered the Valve of the Veins, as the
Valve at the entrance of the great Gut Colon was found out by Bauhinus; the
Milky Veins of the Mesentery, by Asellius; the Receptacle of the Chyle, hy
Pequet; the Ductus Virsungianus, by George Virsung, of Padua; the Lymphatick
Vessels, by Dr. Joliffe, Bartholin, and Olaus Rudbeck; the internal Ductus
salivaris in the Maxillary Glandule, by Dr. Wharton, and Dr. Glisson; the
Glandules under the Tongue, Nose and Palate; the Vessels in the nameless
Glandules of the Eye; the Tear Glandule, by Nicolas Steno; a new Artery, called
Arteria Bronchialis, by Frederick Rusch; the Circulation of the Blood, by Dr.
Harvey, though some, upon no very good grounds, ascribe it to Paulus Venetus,
and others to Prosper Alpinus, and Andreas Caesalpinus.

The Act of making Salt water Fresh, was lately invented in England, whereof
the deservedly famous R. Boil gave a very rational account, in a Letter
written upon this Subject.

Arithmetic was either invented, or much promoted by Pythagoras, by Euclid,
not the Euclid that was Contemporary to Plato, and Hearer of Socrates, but the
Famed Mathematician of that Name, who was after Aristotle, and at Ninety years
distance from the former; by Diaphantus, Psellus, Apuleius, Cardan, Gemma
Frisius, Clavius, etc.

Neper invented the Logarithms, by the help whereof we perform all the
operations of Arithmetic by Addition and Substraction. He invented likewise an
easy, certain and compendious way of accounting by Sticks, called Rabdology,
as also Computation by Neper's Bones.

The Telescope was invented by James Metius, of Amsterdam, though commonly
ascribed to Galile, who indeed, improved it.

Torricellius found the Barometer, whereby we weigh the Air itself.

Printing, according to Polidore Vergile, was found by John Cuttemberg, of
Ments, in Germany, though Others give the Honor to one Fust, of the same City;
and Some, to Lawrence, a Burgher of Harlem. The Chinese knew this Art before
the Europeans.

Flavius Goia, of Amalphis, in the Kingdom of Naples, is thought to be the
Inventor of the Mariners-Compass, three hundred years since.

FINIS.
APPENDIX,
Quosdam e praecipuis hujus, superiorumque saeculorum Authoribus indicans. Hic
nomine Authorum intelliguntur ii, qui reipsa ejusmodi sunt, hoc est primi
utilis cujuscumque Scientiae, seu cognitionis Inventores.

AEQui bonique consulet Lector brevem hanc imperfectamque descriptionem eorum,
quae sive hoc, sive praeterita saecula invenerunt; cum enim per otium licebit,
statui ampliorem hoc super argumento conscribere tractatum, ipsumque denotare
tempus quo quidlibet e prelo in lucem prodiit, eo consilio ut Transcriptores
tum domestici, tum extranei qui toties ties illustrissimo Boylio, Hookio,
Cartesio, aliisque maximam aut praecipuam saltem lucubrationum suarum partem
surripuere meritas ipso detecti furti pudore luant paenas: Quo fiet ut
ingeniosi quique quaecumque de novo excogitant, facilius in lucem emissuri sint
si tutos se ab Authoribus aliena usurpantibus noverint.

Initium ducam a Roberto Boylio jure merito jam ubique celeberrimo, quamvis
quae hic nobilem hunc Authorem spectant verbo absolvere queam, si dixero ut
vere possum, quicquid ab ipso in lucem editum est esse omnino novum, sive
argumentum ipsum spectes, sive rations ab ipso propositas, sive denique
peculiarem ipsius methodum: Sed quia his in genere dictis Lectoris curiositati
factum satis non fuerit, propius quaedam attingam paucissima tantum
commemoraturus, ut qui per otium accuratiorem scribere decreverim Historiam tum
eorum quae magnus hic Author primus adinvenit puta Notionem Machinarum,
Experiment orum, etc. Tum eorum quae indigenae hujus insulae ad utilium
Scientiarum propagationem excogitarunt.

Celeberrima Antlia Aeria ab illustrissimo Roberto Boylio excogitata fuit:
Plenam ejusdem descriptionem tradit ibi ubi de Experimentis Physico-Mechanicis;
illius open elasticam aeris virtutem, atque elaterem probat, variaque alia, quae
merito miremur, Phenomenon ad naturam, elaterem, expansionem, pressionem,
gravitatemque aeris spectantia.

Primus ille Author experimenti est de diversis partibus, and redintegratione
Salispetrae, unde concludit motu, figura, partiumque dispositione secundarias
omnium corporum affectiones produci posse, proscribitque proinde substantiales
Scholarum formas, and qualitates.

Sed quia fusius alibi scribere statui de iis quae nobilis hic Author primus
invenit, hic tantum suggeram, Physiologicis ipsius tent aminibus, atque
Experimentalibus, Chymico Sceptico, Utilitate Experimentalis Philosophiae,
Historia Frigoris, Experimentali Historia Colorum, Hydrostaticis Paradoxis,
Origin Formarum and Qualitatum, Libera in Receptam Naturae Notionem
disquisitione, Concordia Remediorum Specificorum and novae Philosophiae,
Historia Humani Sanguinis, Dissertatione de Causis Finalibus, nondum edita;
variisque aliis ejusdem operibus, tot novas contineri Notiones, Experimentaque
fere quot versus.

Non praetermittam hoc loco quod doctissimus, ingeniosissim usque Rob.
Gordonius, a Gordistoun eques, nuper^ adinvenit; notissimam scilicet jam ubique
hauriendis Aquis Antliam, mechanismi quoddam genus, quod superiorum aetatum hoc
in genere art facta long exsuperet, ut sequente utilis hujusce machinae
descriptione facile demonstrabo.

Nova haec Antlia duplo plus quavis alia aquarum trahit; and dimidiis tantum
viribus dimidioque solum constat pretio, and dimidium tantum modo implet locum.
Experimentum hoc Deptfordii vigesimo secundo Martii coram Comite Darmouthensi
Commissariisque classis regiae, ad rem ut reipsa erat Regi referendam
constitutis ita se habebat.

Imposita nova haec Antlia navi bellicae sexti ordinis mensuratam duorum
doliorum Cisternam minuto uno, secundis quinque supra quadraginta implevit:
Notaque navis Antlia idem sex minutis and aliqua part septimi praestitit,
utramque autem quatuor tantum operarii agebant.

Navi bellicae quarti ordinis imposita coopera^tibus interim duodecim operario
Cist^ruam secundis triginta, and uno implevit, navisque Antlia open sex nautarum
cand^^^ quatuor minutis, and aliqua part quinti implevit.

Praecipuos rerum Anatomicarum detectores sequentes numeramus, vid. Fabricium
ab aqua pendente, qui detexit Valvulas venarum, ut Valvula, sub introitum magni
intestini quod Colon dicunt inventa fuit a Bauhino; venae Lacteae mesenterii ab
Asellio, receptaculum Chyli a Pequeto, ductus Virsungianus a Georgio Virsung
Paduensi; Lymphatica vasa a Doctore Joliffeo, Bartholino, and Olao Rudbeckio,
internus ductus Salivaris in Glandula maxillari a Doctore Whartono, and Doctore
Glissonio, Glandulae sub lingua, naso, palato, vasa sub innominata Glandula
oculi, Glandula lacrymalis a Nicolao Stenone; nova Arteria Bronchialis dicta a
Frederico Ruschio, Circulatio Sanguinis ab Harvaeo; quamvis alii quidam non sat
probabiliter eam ascribant Paulo Veneto, ut nonnulli Prospero Alpino, and etiam
Andreae Caesalpino.

Ars aquae Salsae Dulcorandae inventa nuper in Anglia est, de qua celeberrimus
merito Boylius conformia omnino rationi in Epistola quadam hoc super argumento
scripsit.

Arithmeticam aut invenerunt, aut multum promoverunt sequentes Authors,
Pythagoras, Euclides, non is qui coaevus fuit Pl^toni, auditorque Socratis, sed
celeberrimus Mathematicus hujus nominis qui post Aristotelem floruit, annis
post priorem nonaginta; Diaephantus, Psellius, Apuleius, Cardan^s, Gemma
Frisius, Clavius, etc.

Neperus invenit Logarithmos quorum open omnia Arithmeticae praescripta
exequimur sola Additione, and Substractione. Invenit pariter facilem, certam,
brevemque numerandi methodum open Baculorum, quam Rabdologiam dicunt, aut
Computationem per Ossa Neperi.

Telescopium inventum fuit a Jacobo Metio, Amstelodamensi licet vulgo Galilaeo
tribuatur, qui quidem perfectius illud multo reddidit.

Torricellius invenit Barometrum quo instrumento aerem ipsum metimur.

Ars Typographica test Polydoro Vergilio inventa fuit a Johanne Cuttembergio,
Moguntiano, licet quidam hunc honorem tribuant cuidam Fustio ex eadem civitate,
and nonnulli Laurentio civi Harlemensi. Sinenses hanc Artem prius Aeuropaeis
noverant.

Flavius Goia, ab Amalphi, in Regno Neapolitano creditur jam trecentis abhinc
annis pyxidem Nauticam invenisse.

FINIS.

