A MORAL DISCOURSE OF THE POWER OF INTEREST.

By DAVID ABERCROMBY, M. D. and Fellow of the College of Physicians in
Amsterdam.

Omnes quaerunt quae sua sunt, Phil. c. 2. v. 21. Licensed

May 1. 1690. J. Fraser.



LONDON, Printed by Tho. Hodgkin for the Author, and are to be sold by John
Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; and may be had at Mr. Trehern's,
Limner in the Strand, overagainst the New Exchange. 1690.

TO The Honorable, ROBERT BOIL, Esquire.
SIR,
SInce most Men act by Interest, as I do here endeavor to show, it may be in
all likelihood supposed, that in Dedicating this Book to you, I am my self
guilty of the very same thing I reproach in every Article to others: Which
indeed I cannot flatly deny, if Interest oblige us, as undoubtedly it does, to
be grateful to such as we are most, or rather, only indebted to. But besides
this particular Reason relating to my private duty to you, I was up. on another
account resolved at last to prefix your Name before these Papers, because the
World easily allowing you to act always by a generous Principle, and not by
Interest, it cannot be thought that I intend to give Sentence against you, when
I condemn the generality of Mankind; and tho I seem to say somewhere, That the
Public Good is the advantage you propose to your self in all your Learned and
Excellent Wtitings, yet this being a thing in it self highly commendable, you
have no reason to think your self wronged by such an unusual reproach, since
it is by pursuing eagerly this very kind of Interest that you are deservedly
styled every where, and particularly abroad, Philosophus Britannicus, the
English Philosopher; which Title, so glorious to your Self, to your Country,
and to your Noble Family, that you may in all Health and Prosperity long enjoy,
is the hearty wish,

SIR, Of your Affectionate Friend and Servant, DAVID ABERCROMBY.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IF an imperfect Knowledge of the probable Causes of Natural things was thought
of old sufficient to make a man happy, Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere
causas; I am of Opinion, that this Treatise may prove of some use to thee upon
the same account, because it discovers, in a not unpleasant Variety of very
observable Particulars, the undoubted Cause of all the Transactions of the
Politic World, Almighty Interest; to whose powerful influence over Mankind, as
I ascribe not only the odd and irregular Practices of some, but likewise the
unaccountable Speculations of others; so I endeavor to show, in almost every
Article, that men generally behaving themselves as if they were all downright
Hypocrites, both think, say, and do things for Reasons they will not own, and
which I undertake to lay open in the following Discourse, with this peculiar
Advantage, from the very Subject it self, That whatsoever may be said of the
Method I have made choice of, I can hardly be accused of a flat Untruth upon
the whole matter.

THE CONTENTS.
ARTICLE I. 1. That there is something in the Political World, answerable to
what we call Primum Mobile in the Heavens. 2. That every thing actually moved,
owes its Motion to some foreign impression. 3. Several obvious Demonstrations
of this Truth. Page 1 ARTICLE II. 1. Man never moved but by something without
himself. 2. The Design of this Treatise. 3. Who are not like to be very much
pleased with it. p. 4 ARTICLE III. 1. General Pretenses of most Men in their
Undertakings. 2. What particularly influences most Men's Actions. 3. Who act by
Temper, and not by Principle. p. 6 ARTICLE IV. 1. True Virtue hard to be known,
and why. 2. The dangerous condition of Tradesmen. 3. The true Notion of a
Gentleman. p. 8 ARTICLE V. 1. The Tradesman's Apology. 2. Usury generally
practiced without scruple. 3. Simony what, and how eluded. p. 11 ARTICLE VI. 1.
The Obligation of restoring other Men's Goods, and Good Name, not minded. 2. The
surest sign of Reprobation. 3. The Casuists immoral Advice to Rich Men. p. 15
ARTICLE VII. 1. Good and wholesome Advice to Princes. 2. The French King's
Success of late, what to be ascribed to. 3. Why the Spaniards are not now so
great Politicians as they were of old. p. 18 ARTICLE VIII. 1. What encourages
Men most to write, or to do great things. 2. Our chief Inducement to serve God.
3. Few Productions of this Age to be admired, and why. p. 21 ARTICLE IX. 1.
Plenty the occasion of most Men's Honesty. 2. The Opinion of the Vulgar of such
as are not able to pay their Debts. 3. Advice to Rich Men. p. 24 ARTICLE X. 1.
What Covetousness drives some men to. 2. The common practice of inviting other
Princes Subjects to betray their Masters, not allowable, though in an open War.
3. The vain Pretenses of Casuists favoring it. p. 25 ARTICLE XI. 1. False
Oaths not much scrupled in this Age. 2. The Turks not so guilty of such Crimes
as some Christians. 3. The Breach of a Treaty solemnly sworn to, severely
punished. p. 28 ARTICLE XII. 1. The Breach of Solemn Treaties upon the account
of Interest, too frequent among Christians. 2. Why, and upon what Penalty the
Papists are obliged to break their Oaths made to maintain Heresy. 3.
Equivocation and Mental Reservation taught and allowed of by the Casuists. p.
31 ARTICLE XIII. 1. Why the Begging Popish Orders Preach so often for
Almsgiving. 2. And why some others handle so seldom this Subject. 3. Why few
write after they are got into Preferment. p. 35 ARTICLE XIV. 1. The Popish
Principles coined in the Mint of Interest. 2. Purgatory how advantageous to
Rome. 3. A short account of the Virgin Mary of Loretto. p. 37 ARTICLE XV. 1.
The Abuse of Popish Indulgences, 2. The Advantage accrewing to Priests from
their pretended Power over Christ's Natural Body. 3. The Canonization of Saints
a mere Contrivance to enrich Rome. p. 41 ARTICLE XVI. 1. The Worship of the
Dead useful to the Living. 2. Popish* Processions. 3. Why Debates about the
true Relick of a Saint are never determined in the Popish Countries. p. 45
ARTICLE XVII. 1. What sort of Images most in Esteem in the Church of Rome. 2.
The Proofs of a Miricle done by a Popish Image, or Statue. 3. The History of
the Holy Vial, commonly called La Saint ampoulle. p. 47 ARTICLE XVIII. 1.
Rome's Politics. 2. The Fond of the Apostolic Chamber. 3. The late Pope's
Zeal. p. 50 ARTICLE XIX. 1. The Pope Christ's pretended Vicar General. 2. His
Design in assuming this Title, discovered. 3. Exceptions in Plenary Indulgences
and Jubilees. p. 53 ARTICLE XX. 1. A good Advice to Clients. 2. A Scotch
Lawyers Answer to one of his Clients. 4. The late Duke of Lauderdale's Answer
to the Right Honorable Earl of Rochester. p. 57 ARTICLE XXI. 1. Judges
sometimes easily gained. 2. The Dispensing Power why agreed to in the late
Reign. 3. A short account of a Popish Council held at Edenburg, during the stay
of the Duke of York there. p. 61 ARTICLE XXII. 1. The chief Reason why
Protestants turn Papists. 2. The strongest Popish Arguments from Interest. 3.
The Conversion of Learned Roman Catholics to Protestancy, undoubtedly sincere,
and why. p. 65 ARTICLE XXIII. 1. The mean and irregular Conduct of some Persons
of Quality. 2. The Design of their Intimacy with some Men. 3. The Ingratitude
of Tradesmen. p. 69 ARTICLE XXIV. 1. The Jealousy of Men of the same
Employment instanced in Courtiers. 2. The unhappy condition of Kings. 3.
Interest prevailing every where. p. 73 ARTICLE XXV. 1. The true Cause of the
Popish Fury against Protestants. 2. A short account of the Popish Hierarchy. 3.
Why the Council of Trent opposed a thorough Reformation. p. 77 ARTICLE XXVI. 1.
That few act upon the account of mere Honor. 2. The Fate of ingenious Men. 3.
The Rich seemingly admired. p. 84 ARTICLE XXVII. 1. Why Men change often their
Opinions. 2. Some of the Dragoon'd Papists real Converts, why, and how. 3. What
had been the Event of the late King's successful Attempts. p. 88 ARTICLE
XXVIII. 1. The Necessity and Conditions of a Married Life. 2. Its Complete
Happiness. 3. The French Marquess his Interested Marriage. p. 93 ARTICLE XXIX.
1. The Being of God known by its self, as a Self-evident Principle. 2. Several
Demonstrations of the Existence of God. 3. Why some Men endeavor to deny this
important Truth. p. 95 ARTICLE XXX. 1. The Justice of God asserted. 2. What the
Desire of Eternal Happiness implies. 3. Why some Men deny a future World's
Existence. p. 103 ARTICLE XXXI. 1. Pretenses of such as admit of no Free Will.
2. The Consistency of God's Foreknowledge of, and Sovereignty over Men's
Actions, with the Freedom of Humane Will. 3. Why so many follow the
Predestinarian Principle. p. 106 ARTICLE XXXII. 1. The Impression of the
foregoing Arguments upon Men's Understandings. 2. The Liberty of Adam, and of
his Posterity. 3. The Benefit of the pretended want of Free Will. p. 112
ARTICLE XXXIII. 1. The Return of New Converts to Rome again. 2. And why. 3. The
Power of Interest. p. 116 ARTICLE XXXIV. 1. That most Men act contrary to their
professed Principles. 2. The best Popish Argument. 3. If it be lawful to use
Violence, in order to force Men to consider of our Reasons in matters of
Religion. p. 119 ARTICLE XXXV. 1. The Jesuits zealous Defenders of the Sea of
Rome. 2. And of such Princes as can best protect them. 3. The Remissness of
their Morals whence. p. 124 ARTICLE XXXVI. 1. The Jesuits Politics. 2. Their
Specious Pretenses to Godliness. 3. The Qualifications required in such as they
admit into their Order. p. 130 ARTICLE XXXVII. 1. The Aim of the Romish
Zealots, 2. The pretended Zeal of Popish Princes. 3. The French King's real
Design in Dragooning his Subjects. p. 135 ARTICLE XXXVIII. 1. Why the Papists
keep the People in Ignorance. 2. The Silence of the Scripture about the
Fundamental Principles of Popery. 3. Why the Church of Rome allows not of the
Common Use of Scripture. p. 141 ARTICLE XXXIX. 1. Men generally more concerned
for their own Reputation than for the Honor of God. 2. A Young Lady severely
used by her own Mother, and upon what account. 3. The late Prince of Conde's
Reflection against the French Bishops. p. 146 ARTICLE XL. 1. Interest the
frequent Cause of Ingratitude. 2. King Charles the Second's Behavior toward
his best Friends. 3. Lewis the XIV. highly obliged by the French Hugenots. p.
150 ARTICLE XLI. 1. That Riches change Men's Tempers. 2. And why. 3. What the
Papists used to say of the New Converts in the late Reign. p. 155 ARTICLE XLII.
1. No true Image of God, and why. 2. God Visible in the Works of the Creation.
3. Why so seldom minded by Mankind. p. 160 ARTICLE XLIII. 1. The chief Remedy
against Burning. 2. The Vows of perpetual Chastity sinful. 3. Why imposed by
the Church of Rome. p. 165 ARTICLE XLIV. 1. Grains of Allowance for lewd Women
in Rome, and upon what account. 2. The Courtisans banished Rome, and called
home again. 3. A considerable Abuse suffered in Amsterdam, and why. p. 169
ARTICLE XLV. 1. The Abuse of Godliness. 2. Good Advice against the treacherous
Designs of the deceitful. 3. The Seven Woes of the Gospel pronounced against
Hypocrites. p. 174 ARTICLE XLVI. 1. Lewd Women. 2. Quack-Physicians. 3.
Judiciary Astrologers. p. 179 ARTICLE XLVII. 1. Crimes occasioned by
Covetousness. 2. Spanish Cruelty. 3. English Negligence. p. 182 ARTICLE XLVIII.
1. The Sabbath day profaned. 2. And by whom. 3. Women's Design in dressing
themselves upon the Sabbath day. p. 185 ARTICLE XLIX. 1. The Cheats of Vulgar
Chemists. 2. The Three best Catholic Remedies. 3. Method of little use against
Chronical Distempers. p. 188
A MORAL DISCOURSE OF THE POWER OF INTEREST.
ARTICLE I.
1. That there is something in the Political World answerable to what we call
Primum Mobile in the Heavens. 2. That every thing actually moved, owes its
motion to some foreign impression. 3. Several obvious demonstrations of this
Truth.

I Know not, if what Astronomers say, be a real Truth, or a mere groundless
supposition, That a Superior Heaven, they call Primum Mobile, turns round
the world with it self by its rapid motion all the other inferior Orbs; but
sure I am there is some such thing as a Primum Mobile here below, that
over-ruleth the very Microcosm it self, that untoward and unweildy Animal
called Man. This I fancy you will easily agree to, if you do but allow, with
the generality of Philosophers, nothing to be put in motion but by some other
thing of a distinct nature from it self: for though this received principle be
ingeniously contradicted by a late Author, I am still inclined to believe it no
untruth, by an infinite number of obvious and unanswerable instances, clearing
all our doubts about this old Maxim, quicquid movetur, ab alio movetur, that
every thing actually moved, owes its motion to some foreign impression. Thus
when a Stone falls downwards, I conceive it to be pressed toward the Earth by
the weight of the Atmosphere; or as others will tell you more obscurely, by the
magnetical attraction of the Center of the Universe: When the same heavy body
is tossed upwards, it is natural to us to think with the Aristotelians, of an
impressed Quality, or of a certain Impulse helped forward by the liquid
ambient, till the greater pressure of the incumbent air return it home again to
the Earth, from whence it came; and if this be apparently true in a rectiline
motion, we need not scruple to judge after the same manner of a circular one,
or of a body turning round some Center or other: for I am not as yet thoroughly
reconciled to the Opinion of those who will have the Sun, Moon, and other
Planets to turn round the world without the help of an Aristotelian
Intelligence. But we need not climb so high, to make new discoveries of so
probable a Truth: Does a Ship sail without a good gale? Does the Earth produce
its fruits unmanur'd and untilled? Can the powers of our Soul move themselves
without a previous impression from the Object? Fire indeed, and Water too
ascend sometimes up into the air, but by the strong pressure of heavier bodies
that thrust them upwards: and may not I be allowed to say, that if God himself
were mutable, he could not be wrought upon but by a Being distinct from
himself? So true, one would think this hitherto uncontroverted Maxim to be, My
Lord Stares his new principles.
though it appear doubtful to a great man of this Age.

ARTICLE II.
1. Man never moved but by something without himself. 2. The Design of this
Treatise. 3. Who are not like to be very much pleased with it.

But whether he be in the right or not, it is not very material to my purpose:
for whatever may be the true cause of motion in the great World; yea, though I
allowed, that some things without us are moved by themselves, and by no Being
distinct from themselves, I shall presume to be positive for once, contrary to
the natural disposition of my own temper, in asserting, that Man never moves
himself, unless first moved by something that is without him, and which he
endeavors to reach by all the different actions of his life: What this is,
what impressions it makes upon mankind, and by what means it attains the
designed end, are the very things I intend to clear in the following Discourse,
which upon this account may prove not altogether useless, though it may not
please very much that kind of men we call Pretenders to Virtue and Morality, or
more plainly, downright Hypocrites, who would not have us to pry into their
thoughts, nor discover the secret Spring of all their actions, that being
judged to act by higher motives than really they do, they may continue to
themselves that esteem they have acquired in the world, by a show of what they
were never really possessed of.

ARTICLE III.
1. General Pretenses of most men in their undertakings. 2. What particularly
influences most men's actions. 3. Who act by temper, and not by principle.

Such as intend to cheat thus the duller world for their own ends, are sure
never to do it barefaced, and without the common vizard of Virtue and
Religion, or of mere zeal and concernedness for the common good. But whatever
their pretenses may appear to be, we shall find by daily experience the
Scripture to be true, that all, or most men, omnes quaerunt quae sua sunt,
propose to themselves in all their proceedings still some temporal interest or
other, as their last end, without any further direction of their intentions
toward their only dread Sovereign, and Almighty Maker. Yet that it may not be
said, that I intend to libel mankind, and banish all real Virtue out of the
world, I do sincerely acknowledge, that some do act by principles, and not by
temper, nor temporal interest, as those do who give willingly alms for men's
sake, and seldom or never for God's sake, that is never in private, but always
in public, or on public accounts, for the increase of their Name and
Reputation among men; being contented with Cicero's wished for reward of a
present and popular applause while they are alive, ut vivi perfruantur gloriola
sua, not minding what they might have expected without this hereafter in
another Scene of affairs, in case they believe any thing beyond this life, as I
have reason to be afraid they really do not, because of their being resolved to
be great and happy here at any rate.

ARTICLE IV.
1. True Virtue hard to be known, and why. 2. The dangerous condition of
Tradesmen. 3. The true Notion of a Gentleman.

I doubt not but that there is such a thing in the World as Religion, yea, and
true religious men too of all Christian Religions; yet besides that, they are
so hard to be known, that the greatest Readers of mankind mistaking sometimes
their man, take such to be undoubted Saints, who are no better than Dunghills
covered with Snow, or finely painted Tombs, the number is so inconsiderable,
that true Virtue has always been the rarest thing in the world, as Vice the
commonest; which I can ascribe to nothing else but to the Almighty Power of
temporal interest so absolutely ruling over men's minds, that few or none are
either willing or able to resist it. To be somewhat more particular upon the
matter, it is a harder fate than one would think to be bred a Tradesman, because
it is a great temptation to him who must live by trading, if not a sort of
indispensible necessity to pursue his Interest, right or wrong, to the ruin of
his Soul and Conscience. The Casuists and Divines may set what Rates they
please upon his Goods, and declare what Gain is reasonable and lawful, and what
is by the Law of God and right Reason forbid, notwithstanding all their
prescriptions, the Dealer will still think all Fish that comes into the Net,
and that whatever he can get, he may lawfully take, were it six times the value
of what he disposes of. It Is upon this account, that, as Cicero, if I
misremember not, says somewhere, No Tradesmen are allowed to be Gentlemen, quia
nihil proficiunt, nisi mentiuntur, because they can hardly become rich without
cheating and lying, which true Gentlemen should not do, though too many among
us, pretending to this Quality, are as guilty of both as the meanest Tradesmen.
We are abhorred by the Turks upon this very Head, more than upon the account of
our Religion, which many of them have a respect for, as aiming at nothing more
than good manners and holiness of life. It Is a common word among them, That
they are neither Cheats in their dealings, nor perfidious, nor Liars, as the
Infidels, meaning the Christians; though they themselves are of late generally
as guilty of those Crimes as we are; and no wonder, since they have not the
same advantages that we have to rid our selves of the Tyranny and Slavery of
self-interest, which yet we endeavor to clear our selves of before men, by a
thousand protestations of our just and fair dealings, being ashamed to be
thought concerned for our selves in what we pretend to do merely for others.
This is the Vizard we put on in all our specious pretenses to Honesty and
Justice, lest we are at last discovered to be what we really are, and will by
no means own. By how many horrible and repeated Oaths will not sometimes a
greedy Tradesman endeavor to persuade a credulous Customer, that he uses him
kindly, when at the same time his design is Extortion, and an unreasonable Gain.

ARTICLE V.
1. The Tradesman's Apology. 2. Usury generally practiced without scruple. 3.
Simony what, and how eluded.

I know it is generally answered by the trading Tribe, That what they lose by
one, they must get by another; That what they lose by Trust, they must get by
the ready penny; That considering how many, and how different hazards they run,
they are not so injust as one would think in their dealings. So strong are the
Arguments drawn from Interest, that they can persuade a man into the belief of
his being innocent and guiltless, when he commits the horriblest of Crimes; as
that he may take, without scruple, from me what is really mine, to make up the
losses he has suffered through other men's either misbehaviour or misfortune; or
that Usury, so much condemned by the moral part of mankind, and by the Gospel
it self, is now no more a sin, because, forsooth, of what men call damnum
emergens, and lucrum cessans, of the damage we are thought to be exposed to, by
lending our money, or upon the account of missing in the mean time of a
seasonable opportunity of improving it; which two things, since they may always
be pretended to, there can be no such thing in the world as a sinful Usury,
though the Gospel tells us in plain terms, date mutuum, nihil inde sperantes;
lend your money without the very hopes of recovering any thing thereby more
than your principal: So far it is from allowing in any case of tyrannical
Extortions and injust Exactions: But by the deep reach of a preying Interest,
we understand now better things, since contrary to the written Word, Usurers
must be reckoned as honest men as any whosoever, lest we condemn the generality
of Traders and Dealers either in Goods or Money.

Simony, that is the selling of the Spiritual for the Temporal; as a good
Ecclesiastical Benefice for Gold or Silver, was always reputed a grievous sin;
but because this Doctrine became troublesome to the rich Bishops, Abbots and
Prebends of France, and other Popish Countries, who having at their disposal
several fat Benefices were strongly tempted to bestow them upon the most
deserving; that is, in their opinion, upon such as could give most money for
them, they are fallen luckily upon a trick to clear all their Scruples about
this Subject, and it is this, That they are not to contract in express terms
with the party, nor to give their Bond for such a sum of Money payable at their
being installed in the Spiritual Employment they are in pursuit of; They shall
only be at the trouble to let him they deal withal understand their present
disposition to a grateful return for the favor he promises to do them gratis,
though in the mean time he be very sure of his reward, or rather price, and do
expect it no less than if they were tied up to the payment by all the strictest
Forms of Law and Custom. Now all is well again, and we may by this easy method
shun all kind of Simony, sell and buy Ecclesiastical Benefices, as we do other
Goods, to the deceiving of men indeed, but not of an All-seeing God, who will
both judge and punish our wicked intentions with the same rigor he chastises
our real deeds.

ARTICLE VI.
1. The obligation of restoring other men's Goods, and good Name, not minded. 2.
The surest sign of Reprobation. 3. The Casuists immoral advice to rich men.

The Obligation incumbent upon all Mankind, to return other men's Goods, and
good Name if wrongfully taken from them, is so indispensibly necessary, that
the sin can never be remitted without an equal compensation made for the damage
done; non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum: But this Duty is so
seldom performed, that it is easy to see what God most men serve, and not very
often discoursed of neither from the Pulpit, as if the Preachers thought it
useless to insist upon a Subject which men will by no means hearken to; and
good reason, say they, why they should not, because they would be ruined and
undone, in case they were persuaded to restore whatever they had wrongfully
taken from the poor, or from those rich who are now through their oppression
become poor. I know no surer sign of Reprobation than riches thus injustly
acquired, because such sins being seldom repented of, harden men's hearts
against all revealed and natural light. I pity such sort of rich men more than
I envy 'em, because it is hard, if not impossible for them to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: The very Divines sometimes, if not good men, help them on to
their ruin, by flattering them through interest in their sinful ways, or by
telling them, with some able Casuists, but very indifferent Christians, that
making such a figure in the world as they do, they are not obliged in
conscience to lay aside their State and Greatness, to beggar themselves, their
Wives and Children, though they all live in the mean time upon the Substance of
such as starve for want of their own, that they may save their Souls at easier
rates, as giving some inconsiderable and superfluous part of their Riches to
the poor, or to those very persons whom they have wronged, if yet in being,
that all right flowing originally from power, what was injustly got at first,
is at last justly possessed, since no body is able to take it from them: Thus
the strongest shall never want the desired advice from trimming, covetous, and
conscienciousless Casuists, to maintain their injust acquisitions. It Is by
their favorable Decisions, that the Kings of Spain retain the Kingdom of
Navarr during their life safely, and in good conscience too, as they generally
affirm, provided at the hour of death they order their Successors to restore it
again to the right Owner, supposed to be the French King, who likewise
following the Example of their Predecessors, leave behind them their Orders for
the restitution of that Kingdom, in hopes to save their souls by this
Casuistical Trick. The Bishop of Rome pretends a right to the Kingdom of
Naples, and upon that account to a yearly Homage from the King of Spain, whom
he excommunicates every year for this injust usurpation of what is not allowed
to be really his due: But this Prince understanding, that Gold is a better
Fence against the Thunder of the Vatican, than Laurel was of old against that
of Jupiter, secures himself from it under the shelter of a heavy Purse,
presented from time to time to his Holiness by his Ambassador, as well knowing
the irresistible power of Gold, to which Crowned Heads stoop as well as others
do.

ARTICLE VII.
1. Good and wholesome advice to Princes. 2. The French Kings Success of late
what to be ascribed to. 3. Why the Spaniards are not now so great Politicians
as they were of old.

For let men pretend what they please, it is not in their power to resist the
Charms of this bewitching Metal: Upon this account it is a piece of Wit and
Wisdom too in a Prince to bestow large Salaries upon his chief Ministers of
State, lest they be tempted through want to comply with the secret Offers of a
rich Enemy. This Maxim is carefully observed by the French King, no Prince in
Europe allowing, or perhaps able to allow greater Salaries to such as he thinks
fit to be employed in State Affairs: Hence it is that he is seldom betrayed by
his Subjects, not that they are of a more generous temper than other people,
but because their covetousness being glutted at home, they are not so easily
overcome by what may be offered them from abroad. The French King owes not only
the Loyalty of his chief Subjects to his great Rewards, but likewise almost all
his Conquests, and the great Reputation he has got of a successful Politician.
The Spaniards of late are no more esteemed for their Politics, as they were of
old, though they be still the very same Men, of the same Temper and Reach, and
as wise as ever; but the secret of the matter is, that they have wanted for
several years the necessary Tool to show themselves great Politicians; that is,
Money enough to put in Execution their Projects either of Peace or War. It Is an
easy matter for a sensible man to imagine great things, and great designs;
yea, and to propose to himself the fittest Methods to compass 'em; but when all
this is done, if he is not able to bring his Speculations to practice, for want
of the great Instrument to put Politic Projects in execution, Gold and Silver,
his Enterprises may easily miscarry, not only to the loss of his Goods and
Estate, but also of his former Reputation of Wit, Conduct, Judgment and Insight
in Affairs: Whereas, if he were sufficiently provided with Riches and Treasure,
were he but a man of an ordinary reach, he might undoubtedly take such measures
as would soon gain him the Fame of an extraordinary Politician: So the
Spanivrds, I fancy, when they are once become as rich as formerly they were,
will on a sudden turn good Politicians again; and if the French King's
Treasures, by an easy turn of the Wheel, in case his Enemies can but agree a
while among themselves, are once exhausted, I am much mistaken if he proves not
a very insignificant Politician, and his State-Council too as weak as that of
Spain is of late thought to be.

ARTICLE VIII.
1. What encourages men most to write, or to do great things. 2. Our chief
inducement to serve God. 3. Few Productions of this Age to be admired, and why.

We owe to Interest the very Life of our Soul; that is, Wit and Ingenuity: For
whatever may be the perfections and natural endowments of the Soul, it is
certain, that she is never able to exert her natural Abilities without the help
of a proportionable reward either of profit, pleasure or honor, because, as I
have made it out in another Discourse A Discourse of Wit.
, it is not in our Nature to do our utmost in any business, unless we are
encouraged by something thought worth our while: yea, God himself is served by
Mankind chiefly upon the account of the happiness we expect from him, though
because of his infinite perfection alone, and the incomprehensible excellency
of his Nature, he deserves all our submissions and services whatsoever. We need
not then wonder to meet with so few Productions in this, though not unlearned
Age, that deserve to be admired, because of the little encouragement to be
hoped for from rich men, who if they cannot, or have not leisure enough to
improve their own natural abilities, should by their Purses contribute to the
improvement of others, and of themselves likewise by the perusal of such
productions as their liberality might give birth to. Though I doubt not but
that there are several in Europe, yea, and in this very Nation some, capable of
writing as well as ever Maro wrote, yet hitherto we have no piece extant
comparable to his excellent Poem, because of the want of a generous Moecenas to
encourage so great and noble undertaking: for nothing more true than this
common word, Sint Moecenates non derunt Flacce Marones.

True it is, that some, as the deservedly renowned Robert Boil, write merely
for the benefit and instruction of Mankind, without any prospect of Gain or
Preferment by their daily Studies: but besides, that this is the very Interest
they pursue, and the end they chiefly aim at, they owe the improvement of their
great Genius's to the good Estates God has blessed them with; whereby being
freed from those Cares and Troubles that other, no less Noble Minds, groan
under, they may more easily, and with better success than others, apply
themselves to the promoting of the good of Mankind by real knowledge.

ARTICLE IX.
1. Plenty the occasion of most men's Honesty. 2. The Opinion of the Vulgar of
such as are not able to pay their Debts. 3. Advice to rich men.

I shall add in this place a word no less true than what I have said hitherto,
That most men owe not only their Learning to their Plenty, but likewise their
Virtue and their Honesty: For how many thousands live now in the world in great
Esteem, and I confess deservedly too, for their Morality, for their honest and
just Dealings with all Mankind, who if they were put to their shifts, as others
as honestly inclined are, would soon lose their Reputation, yea, turn Rogues
and Knaves too, as the Vulgar think, and call generally such as are not able to
pay their Debts? I question not but Want and Self-preservation would put some
of them upon those very hard shifts they now blame so much in others. I would
then advise them, when they say that part of the Lord's Prayer, and ne nos
inducas in tentationem, and lead us not into temptation, to remember, that by
this Expression they desire that God would be pleased not to expose them to an
extreme want and poverty, as proving the too frequent occasion of the greatest
Immoralities.

ARTICLE X.
1. What Covetuousness drives some men to. 2. The common practice of inviting
other Princes Subjects to betray their Masters not allowable, tho in an open
War. 3. The vain pretenses of Casuists favoring it.

It Is true, if Poverty drive some men upon Projects they under better
Circumstances would heartily abhor, Covetousness pressing no less hard upon
others, makes them stick at nothing that can increase their Treasure. How
great a sin Treason is, and how heinous a Crime it is for a man to betray the
Trust he is sworn to, is so generally known, that I need not tell you it is
malum per se, a thing evil in its own nature, and intrinsecally; not only
extrinsecally, if I may so say, and upon the account of some Written Law or
other that forbids it: Nevertheless, what more common than to see Servants
betray their Masters, Subjects their Princes, and sometimes Wives and Children
their very Fathers, for a Sum of Money? So true it is, that the detestable
hunger after Gold and Silver, auri sacra fames, forces men sometimes upon the
horridest Crimes. But if Treason be such a heinous sin, it is never lawful for
any man to be instrumental to the committing of it, as those are, who in an
open War conquer Cities by corrupting and bribing their Governors to betray
their Masters; yet this Antichristian Practice is common all the Christian
World over, as much as any where else. The Casuists, I know, who take upon them
sometimes to excuse the greatest faults, especially of Princes and Great Men,
whom they have perhaps some reason to flatter, pretend, that a declared War
implies an implicit leave to do one another all the hurt they can by what
means soever: But surely, since this is to be understood of lawful means, it is
clear, that to decoy another Princes Subject into a Treasonable Practice
against his Sovereign, is sinful: If Princes were made sensible of their Guilt
in such kind of proceedings, they would act more Christianly and more
generously with their very Enemies, in case Interest hindered them not
sometimes to see what in conscience they ought to shun. May not I be allowed in
this place to advise the French King's Casuists to look narrowly into this
matter, and to consider seriously by what means they can clear their master's
Conscience, if he has made any Conquests, as some say he has, by drawing other
Princes Subjects into Treason and Rebellion, things sinful in their own nature,
as I said before, and not merely because they are forbidden.

ARTICLE XI.
1. False Oaths not much scrupled in this Age. 2. The Turks not so guilty of
such Crimes as some Christians. 3. The Breach of a Treaty solemnly sworn to,
severely punished.

But what greater sin than the willful breach of lawful Oaths? Though judged
always, and by all Nations, of a sacred nature, and inviolable, yet very often
an inconsiderable interest, like Alexander's Sword breaking through 'em, unties
soon all these Gordian Knots: How many swear daily before Judges to what they
know to be wholly false, that they may mortgage a House, or an Estate the
Second or Third time, or take away a man's Life, who perhaps they are sure is
not guilty of the Crime they perfidiously charge him with? Yea, I am credibly
informed, that in a Neighbour-Nation it is usual for the Country People and
Tenants, when they are told of their masters being engaged in a Suit at Law, to
tell them, that they are ready to swear to whatever they shall think fit and
necessary to be done for the Gain of the Cause. If this be true, as some say
it is, the Turks themselves are better Moralists than several reputed
Christians: for how covetous soever they are thought to be, they generally
scruple to gain money by flat Lies, Calumnies and false Oaths, and if of late
they have not appeared so steady to their word, by the breach of a Twenty Years
Truce with the Emperor of Germany; besides, that they were strongly tempted to
this sin by a most Christian Prince, they ingenuously confess the hand of God
to lie heavy upon them for committing such a great Crime; which shows in some
measure how sensible they are of foul and treacherous Dealings; which they
accuse us most commonly of ever since the perfidious practice of that King of
Hungary, who by the persuasion of an interested Cardinal, broke his Promise to
the Grand Seignior, then in Persia with his whole Forces, though not long
before he had sworn upon the Gospel to a solemn Truce with him: But the
all-Just God punished most severely the Impiety of the Christians in the day of
Battle; for the Turkish Emperor seeing the Victory incline at first toward
the Hungarians, took the Treatise sworn to by the Christians out of his bosom,
pronouncing these observable words, Jesus of Galilee, if thou be really God, as
the Christians say thou art, show this day thy Power against those perfidious
Villains who have thus taken thy Name in vain. His Prayer was immediately
heard, and the Christians on a sudden giving way to their Enemies, were
unmercifully hewed down by the victorious Turk, the King himself, and the
Treacherous Cardinal not escaping the dint of the Sword.

ARTICLE XII.
1. The Breach of solemn Treaties upon the account of Interest, too frequent
among Christians. 2. Why, and upon what Penalty the Papists are obliged to
break their Oaths made to maintain Heresy. 3. Equivocation and Mental
Reservation taught and allowed of by the Casuists.

Though nothing should be more binding than an Oath, yet if we look narrowly
into the general practice of mankind, it binds no longer than men think it
their advantage to keep it. This seems to be the secret Condition to be
understood in all Public Treaties confirmed by Oaths, since the Christians, to
their shame, make as little scruple to break them as the Mahometans upon the
first appearance of their Interest: For what other Apology can we make for the
breach of a perpetual Peace, or a Temporal Truce between Nation and Nation, so
soon as we find our selves in a posture to enslave our unthinking Neighbors?
But I doubt, if the great Rewarder of Virtues, and Punisher of Crimes, will
hold us guiltless when we break our Oaths and Promises, because, forsooth, we
find it our interest to act contrary to what we had sworn or promised. The
Papists are generally thought to be more obnoxious to the breach of Oaths than
any other people in the world, and deservedly too, if we consider, that others
break their Oaths through Humor, and the Papists by Principle: I speak of such
Oaths as relate to the maintaining of Heretics and Heresy, which they are
obliged not to stand to, under a no less pain than that of Eternal Damnation,
in case they are in a posture to break them safely, and without danger for
themselves, by destroying such as they call Heretics: It were useless to give
Instances of this common practice, since the learned part of the world is
sufficiently satisfied of the Truth of the matter. Besides what has been
already said, Two things the Papists have contrived, and I am afraid the
Protestants likewise make sometimes use of them both upon occasion, to swear
without any scruple, according to the Dictates of their own interest: and these
are Mental Reservation and Equivocation, both invented to untie all the Knots
of Humane Society, but with a design to promote private men's Temporal Concerns:
for when a man is obliged by his Oath to declare whatever he knows of any
particular matter of Fact, the ungodly and interested Casuist will soon resolve
him upon the matter, that he may swear to the Case proposed in some sense or
other that may secure the Interest he is either in pursuit or possession of,
which is all that he cares for: But the Casuists bait to draw him into this
wickedness is this, That he clears his Conscience likewise by telling him, that
what he does he may lawfully do, without any offense, though I doubt if either
the Casuist or his Pupil can be so invincibly ignorant as not to understand,
that in all proceedings of this kind there is still a cheat put upon Man, and
consequently a sin committed against God. But thus prevailing Interest puts a
Veil before their Eyes, though I fear, not to the quieting of a disturbed
Conscience, because that part of man's Soul, if I may so speak, commonly called
Conscience, is incorruptible, and not easily blinded either whatever may be our
endeavors to stifle its remorse.

ARTICLE XIII.
1. Why the Begging Popish Orders preach so often for Almsgiving. 2. And why
some others handle so seldom this Subject. 3. Why few write after they are got
into preferment.

But what is an inducement to sin, and sometimes to the greatest of Crimes, is
often the occasion and chief cause of good and laudable actions: This I say,
because I have observed in Popish Countries, that the Preachers generally,
especially of the Begging Orders, employ all the force of Art and Eloquence, to
show the great Merit, as they speak, of Almsgiving. My design is not to blame
them for serving thus the poor, but only by the way, to give an account of this
odd Phenomene, viz. Why they insist more frequently upon this Subject than the
Holland Preachers, and those of some other Countries, since it is confessed on
all hands, that what is given to the poor for God's sake, if it be not
meritorious, as I believe it is not in the rigor, is at least a very ready
means to procure from our heavenly Father a full remission of our sins. It is
easy to find out the Reason of this different behavior of the Begging Popish
Tribe from other Preachers, that either are richer, or depend not so much upon
the public Benevolence, because the first know they are to be the best sharers
themselves in the Alms they exhort the people so earnestly to; and if the
latter are not generally so zealous upon this Subject, it is for ought I know
upon this account, that their Example might reasonably be expected by the
people, which perhaps many of 'em are not willing to give, least they should
have less to spend in Superfluities. I must observe to you in this place a
thing somewhat related to the Premises, that though some teach, preach, and
write, with all imaginable zeal, in defense of the Religion they profess, yet
if we may judge of their designs by their delicious and idle life after they
have got into the long wished for preferment, we have reason to doubt if this
was not the chief thing they aimed at.

ARTICLE XIV.
1. The Popish Principles coined in the Mint of Interest. 2. Purgatory how
advantageous to Rome. 3. A short account of the Virgin Mary of Loretto.

But to pursue my design somewhat more particularly, I shall mind you of
another self-evident Truth, That the new Doctrines of the Church of Rome have
been all coined in the Mint of Interest. For 1. The Papists considering, that
the Belief of a Purgatory contributed more than any thing else to the increase
of the Revenue of their Church, agreed together in the Conventicle of Trent, to
make it an Article of Divine Faith, That the Roman Catholics might be obliged
for ever, to pay into the Church the Daily and Yearly Rent it produces; and
that the simple Bigots might be the more encouraged to redeem themselves out of
its flames with ready Money, their Doctors do generally teach, That they are
every whit as violent and scorching as the fire of Hell it self, with the
difference only in their duration, which they allow to be longer or shorter,
according to the greater or smaller Sum given to shorten the Soul's stay in
Purgatory. I should wonder then if Roman Catholics, being once persuaded, that
there is such a place as this is, and that they may suffer there the horriblest
torments imaginable several hundreds of years together, if they leave not to
the Church a part of what they have, to redeem their Souls out of such a Prison
as this is supposed to be: I should wonder, I say, if they paid not liberally
in this life, to ease themselves of the torments of the other, which they think
the very Venial, as they speak, and slightest sins expose them to. Upon this
account I was not at all amazed, during my long Residence in, and Travels
through Popish Countries, to see such vast Sums of Money paid daily and yearly
into the Church-Exchequer, and far less to hear the Priests preach to the
people, with so much true, or counterfeited zeal, the danger they were in to
suffer in Purgatory, a fire to which all our fiercest fires being compared, are
but painted ones, and flames in representation only, and that perhaps till the
day of Judgment, unless they prudently took care before their departure out of
this world, to lay down to them their Ransom. 2. The Romish Invocation of
Saints is such another piece of interested Contrivance: When a Saint is once
Canonized, if the Priests can but impose upon the credulous multitude a Miracle
done by or at his Image, they have done their business effectually, the Convent
is on a sudden enriched by the daily concourse of silly people with Presents,
for Masses to be said in the Honor of the Saint to their intentions: Pilgrims
flock thither in crowds, but never with empty hands, lest the Priests should
not make them welcome. It Is well known what infinite Riches the Chapel of the
Virgin Mary of Loretto, has already brought, and is as yet like to bring to the
Church of Rome, by the gross Contrivance of a strange Fable about its
Transportation to the place where it is now supposed to be. The Story in short,
according to the very Romish Authors, runs thus: It was first built in
Nazareth, carried from thence into Dalmatia by an Angel, where, because it
stood upon a piece of litigious ground, Two Brothers, if I misremember not,
disputing whose it should be, it was removed into a Wood in Italy, but the
peoples Devotion being disturbed there, by the Banditi, it was at last
transported to the place, where it is now to remain till some other
inconveniency happening occasion its Fourth removal.

ARTICLE XV.
1. The abuse of Popish Indulgences. 2. The Advantage accrewing to Priests from
their pretended Power over Christ's Natural Body. 3. The Canonization of Saints
a mere Contrivance to enrich Rome.

Indulgences in their first institution were nothing else but a remission of
Canonical Pains; that is, of Pains inflicted by the Canons of the Church,
which, no doubt, had power likewise to remit them: but Covetousness soon
stretched them farther, and to other ends, and chiefly to the gathering of
Moneys for the use of the Pope and his Cardinals, who made the ignorant Mobile
believe, that by fasting, praying in some set form, and particularly, by paying
certain Sums appointed, according to every man's ability, they should not only
ease the Souls of the departed of their torments, but likewise deliver them out
of Purgatory. This abuse ingenuously acknowledged by some Popish Authors, gave
occasion to a through Reformation, first in Germany, and afterward in most
parts of Europe. But nothing stirred up more the deluded Christian Princes, to
enrich the Popish Clergy, than their being wrought into the belief of the
Priests pretended Power over Christ's Natural Body; which, if true, would seem
to imply likewise an absolute Power over his Political Body; that is, over all
the Members of the Catholic Church. At least, it is certain the Romish Priests
look upon the first as an Article of Divine Faith, since they hold
Transubstantiation to be one: and I may safely say they pretend likewise to the
latter, exalting themselves above all that is called God. But not to alarm too
much the world with their ambitious Projects, they allow the Pope to be
Sovereign in spiritual things only, not in temporal concerns. This famous
distinction, narrowly looked into, is frivolous, and chiefly invented to
deceive the unwary, there being such a connection between the spiritual and the
temporal, that whosoever is supposed to be Master of the former, may dispose of
the latter at his pleasure, as whoever Lords over my Soul, may influence as he
pleases my body, because the motions of the one depend much upon the free or
necessary determinations of the other. However, to return to what I first
hinted at, the pretended Power of Priests over Christ's Body, has been one of
the Chief Causes, and the Original Prop of the now Popish Grandeur: For no
wonder, if the Laics are real Slaves to such as they look upon as the Makers,
and absolute Masters, in a manner, of Christ's Body, since they can multiply it,
they say, as often as they consecrate Bread and Wine. Their Churchmen owe to
this assumed Power the infinite Treasures of Gold and Silver they are possessed
of, there being few Churches in any considerable City, but which are richly
furnished with golden Melchisedecks, as they call them in Flanders, or Suns, as
they speak in France, to lodge the Consecrated Wafer in, besides Altars of
Massy Gold and Silver, Golden Cups of all sorts, and other precious Ornaments
belonging to the Workmanship of their own hands, Christ's Body, by an
imaginary, that is, an invisible Miracle, transubstantiated. The Canonization
of their Saints is likewise a gross Contrivance, to enrich that part of the
Romish Church which resides at Rome: Without Money, and a great deal too, there
is no hopes of ever being canonized there, the Expense amounting, at least, to
fifty or threescore thousand Crowns, paid commonly either by some Popish
Prince, or by the Religious Orders whom the Canonized Saint, when alive,
belonged to; which gave occasion to a Jesuit, of my acquaintance, in France, to
say, That he desired no more Canonized Saints in his Order, least it should be
ruined by the extravagant Expenses of their Canonization.

ARTICLE XVI.
1. The Worship of the Dead useful to the Living. 2. Popish Processions. 3. Why
Debates about the true Relick of a Saint are never determined in the Popish
Countries.

This minds me of some other pious Frauds of great benefit, to most Roman
Catholic Cities: Among these I need only mention the Religious Worship of the
Dead, though there be no Revelation of their being in Heaven. A City becomes
soon rich enough to be envied, if it can but be possessed of the Body of a
Reputed Saint or Martyr: For then the people repair from all parts to his
Shrine, to implore God's assistance by his Merits, as they speak, or Mediation,
to the great advantage of the Citizens, who are more enriched by the Money
Strangers spend with them, both upon Necessaries and Superfluities, than the
Saint is honored either by their Prayers directed to him, or by the frequent
Masses said at certain rates in his Honor. To allure the greater Crowds to
this Religious kind of Fair, they make, at appointed times of the Year, solemn
Processions, with all imaginable Pomp and Magnificence, omitting nothing of
Show and Pageantry that can contribute to the contenting of Peoples Curiosity,
and increasing the Solemnity of the Day, which begun with Superstitious and
Pagan-like Devotions, ends at last in Debauchery, Feastings, and all other
Recreations both lawful and unlawful. The Victualling and Publick-Houses are
sure to be provided abundantly with all Necessaries upon such occasions, as
gaining then more sometimes in a few days, than they do during the greatest
part of the Year, by their ordinary and daily trading. And this is the Reason
why, if there arise any Debate about the true Relick of a Saint, as there is
about St. John Baptist's Head to be found in Two different Cities in Europe: It
can never be composed, because one of the contending Parties must be at a loss
by a final decision of the business: So that every City stands up as stiffly in
the Vindication of the Relick the Citizens are in possession of, as if it were,
as really it is, in its yearly product, a good part of their Estates.

ARTICLE XVII.
1. What sort of Images most in Esteem in the Church of Rome. 2. The Proofs of
a Miracle done by a Popish Image, or Statue. 3. The History of the Holy Vial,
commonly called La Saint ampoulle.

It Is upon the same account that Images, not miraculous, are of little or no
value in the Romish Convents, because they are looked upon but as barren
Ornaments, that serve only to adorn their Walls, and not to feed their dainty
Palates: But their designed work is done, if they can but once persuade the
people, that some have been delivered from dangerous Distempers, by praying to
the Saint before his Image or Statue, which they never fail to take evidence of
by engaging the Man or the Woman upon whom the pretended Miracle is wrought, to
hang up in the Church or Chapel, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, in remembrance for
ever of the wonder, the figure of that part of the Body, which is said to be
cured, either in Gold or Silver, or in Wax at least, in case the concerned
party cannot be at greater Expenses: Now this Ceremony is always attended with
great Liberalities to the good Fathers, who do often laugh heartily in their
Long Sleeves, at the simplicity of the credulous multitude, so easily decoyed
into the belief of whatever they please to impose upon them. Such another kind
of pious Fraud is the Holy Oil, or rather Vial, La Saint ampoulle, which I
have seen in the Church of St. Remigius of Reims, in Champagne: It was brought
from Heaven by a Pigeon, to anoint the first Christian King of France, the Oil
being in a congeal'd-like form, and made use of in the Coronation of the French
Kings, without any real, if you believe the Common People, or at least, without
any sensible diminution of its Substance, because of the little quantity they
take of it, to mix with other Oils, in order to the anointing of a new King: Is
it not strange, that such a gross and groundless Fable as this is, should pass
so current and uncontroverted among sensible men, that the Citizens of Reims
have created des Chevaliers de la Saint ampoulle, Knights of the Holy Vial to
be its Angel-Guardians, lest any body should rob them of it: Yet I am of
Opinion, lest I should think them downright Fools, that their Zeal for its
preservation is not so much grounded upon their belief of the Truth of the
thing, because I can by no means believe 'em so silly and senseless, as upon
the great advantages they get weekly and yearly by keeping it within their own
Walls, first from all sorts of Strangers going thither very thick, to see what
sort of Oil is made in Heaven: secondly, from the King and the whole Court,
during their stay there, both before and after the Coronation is over.

ARTICLE XVIII.
1. Rome's Politics. 2. The Fond of the Apostolic Chamber. 3. The late Pope's
Zeal.

No City in the World has greater Politic Fetches for Interest sake than Rome
it self, as I have already intimated in another place: So that if she is not
Mistress of the World, as formerly she was, by the force of Arms, she still
maintains her Sovereign Dominion by her Spiritual Tricks, not easily suspected
by such as being in love with implicit Faith, submit blindly their Necks to
her Yoke.

Roma Caput mundi quicquid non possidet armis.
Religione tenet.
Though she has lost the Peter's Pence, and many other Casualties that enriched
her of Old, nevertheless it is incredible what vast sums of Money she draws out
of all parts of Europe, upon pretended Religious Accounts. The Annates, as the
French call them, and the First Fruits of every inferior Benefice, as well as
of the greater ones, bring Yearly vast Treasures into the Romish Exchequer. The
Possession taken of all Ecclesiastical Benefices, of any valuable Revenue, is
confirmed by the Pope's Patents: But this Confirmation is never granted gratis,
the Price thereof being sent to the Apostolic Chamber, or to be paid to the
Pope's immediate Officers upon the place. The Rate of what is called Pallium
Archiepiscopale, the Archbishop's Cloak, is always Four Thousand Crowns at
least; which must needs amount to a vast deal of Money, if we consider the
great number of Popish Archbishops in Europe alone: To say nothing neither of
frequent Dispensations of Age, of Nearness in Blood, of Irregularities to
qualify a Woman or a Man for Marriage, or Priesthood; nor of daily Appeals to
the Pope from all parts of Europe, always dearly paid for, though with some
regard to every man's private ability; The Popes very Zeal for the propagation
of the Popish Religion, is not so much disinterested, as those who see no
further than the outside of things, may perhaps fancy. Innocent the Eleventh
was deservedly commended for lending the Emperor, and the King of Poland Money
toward a vigorous prosecution of the War against the Turks: But this was
lending of Money to good use, since the New Conquests of Hungary, and other
Neighbor Countries, may prove in time as beneficial to Rome, as to the
Emperor himself, considering the great and usurped power of the Pope over such
people as have not maintained from time to time their Privileges, in
opposition to the injust encroachments of Priestly Covetousness.

ARTICLE XIX.
1. The Pope Christ's pretended Vicar General. 2. His design in assuming this
Title, discovered. 3. Exceptions in Plenary Indulgences and Jubilees.

Three things more, besides many others that would be too tedious to mention
here, contribute not a little to the maintaining and enriching of the City of
Rome: The Residence of Foreign Ambassadors, of the Heads of Religious Orders,
and now more frequent Jubilees than formerly were used to be. One of the chief
Usurpations of the Popes of Rome, was that of the Quality of Christ's
Vicar General upon Earth, not to mention the Title of Universal Bishop they
likewise laid claim to: But surely they could not be convinced in their
Judgment, that either of these Titles did really belong to the Bishop of Rome;
because the first is neither grounded upon Reason, Scripture, nor upon
Tradition it self; and the latter would imply the Bishop of that See to be the
only Bishop in the World, or that none are Bishops but by derivation of their
Power and Dignity from the Pope, which is manifestly false. Allowing then the
Popes to have been men of Sense, as undoubtedly they were, they had certainly
some other fetch than mere Ambition, in pretending to such high and groundless
Titles: and this was nothing else but the increase of their Treasures by the
great Concourse, upon this account, of Foreign Ambassadors from all Christian
Princes to Rome: To whom they have allowed such large Franchises, that they are
become almost Masters of that great City, to the impairing indeed of the Popes
Jurisdiction, but to the advantage and enriching of the Citizens, because of
the vast Expenses of those Foreigners among them, whereby they are the better
enabled to pay the Pope's Taxes. The residing likewise of the Generals of most
Religious Orders at Rome, does not a little increase his Holiness's Revenue:
For though some of them live in other Kingdoms, yet the most considerable make
their abode there; and the General Congregations, or Synods of the Regular
Clergy, sit commonly upon occasion in this City, whither every Province sends
Deputies, or Procurators, from other Kingdoms, to debate and decide Matters of
Concern; which must needs bring great Treasures to that City, each Religious
Envoy being allowed Fifty or Threescore Pound for the Expense of his Journey,
besides what he must spend during his stay in Rome. It is likewise observable,
that whatever Power is given to Priests in Full, Plenary, General Indulgences
and Jubilees, to dispense with reserved Cases, the Vows made by Votaries to
visit Saint Peter's Church in Rome, are always craftily excepted, and reserved
to the Pope alone, that the deluded Romanists may be still obliged to come, and
spend their Money there: But least the design of Interest should be discovered
by the suspicious multitude, the Pope never fails to except at the same time
the Vows or Promises made by the bigoted Papists to go Pilgrims to Saint James
Chapel in Compostella. But I have said nothing yet of the Famous Year of the
great Jubilee, a pretty Contrivance to bring in all the Waters of Europe to the
Roman Mills. It was celebrated at first but every Hundred Year, and afterward
every Fifty Year, but now every Five and Twenty; and perhaps the Popes will
some day shorten this time too, that they may the oftener drain the Pockets of
the Christians by this spiritual and plausible Trick, it being not only a bait
for the bigoted sort of Roman Catholics, but likewise for curious
Protestants, flocking upon such occasions in great Numbers to Rome, to see the
pompous Superstitions of the Romish Church at the very Springhead.

ARTICLE XX.
1. A good Advice to Clients. 2. A Scotch Lawyers Answer to one of his Clients.
3. The late Duke of Lauderdale's Answer to the Right Honorable Earl of
Rochester.

But let us leave the Court of Rome to consider a little how Interest plays its
part at the Bar, and in Courts of Justice. I shall begin with an Advice to
Clients, not unlike to that which I gave in the Discourse of Wit to Patients,
not to trust too much either to the undoubted Justice of their Case, or to the
great Skill of their Lawyers: For grant they are men both of an extraordinary
Reach and of a very good Conscience too; yet it is not in their power to move
briskly, and to the purpose about your business, unless first moved by large
Fees, either ready paid, or in prospect; which is not so much to be ascribed
to their Natural Covetousness, as to the very Nature of Mankind: for since we
generally serve God chiefly in hopes of the Reward, though infinitely beyond
our real merits, as I have said before, it is not to be expected that we should
behave our selves otherwise toward men, than upon the account of
proportionable Returns for the Services done 'em. This puts me in mind of what
a Scotch Lawyer is reported to have said to one of his Clients, who had
delivered up to him the Papers relating to his Affairs: The Client calling some
days after to know how his Case stood, and what hopes he had of gaining his
Cause, the Lawyer told him, he could not read his Papers, though written in a
very fair hand: The Client understanding his meaning, presented him immediately
with Five Broad Pieces of Gold, Two of which the Lawyer putting between his
Eyes, and the Scrowls told him at the same time he had recovered his Sight
again, and both could and would peruse his Papers to the best advantage, with
the help of such Spectacles. But, for ought I know of the matter, this solid
Metal blinded him, and darkn'd rather than cleared his Understanding: in case
he knew the Cause he was to undertake to be unjust, or not to be gained but by
some Trick or other, easily found out by experienced Lawyers, if sufficiently
encouraged by their Clients. I must give you in this place, since it makes for
my purpose, a not unpleasant passage between the late Duke of Lauderdale, and
the Right Honorable the Earl of Rochester, as I heard it related by the latter
to the Honorable Robert Boil. A Scotch Gentleman having entreated the Earl of
Rochester to speak to the Duke of Lauderdale upon the account of a business
that seemed to be supported by a clear and undoubted Right; his Lordship, very
obligingly, promised to do his utmost Endeavors to engage the Duke to stand
his Friend in a Concern so just and so reasonable as his was; and accordingly
having conferred with his Grace about the matter, the Duke made him this very
odd return, That though he questioned not the Right of the Gentleman he
recommended to him, yet he could not promise him an helping hand, and far less
success in his business, if he knew not first the man, whom perhaps his
Lordship had some Reason to conceal; because, said he to the Earl, If your
Lordship were as well acquainted with the Customs of Scotland as I am, you had
undoubtedly known this among others: Show me the Man, and I shall show you the
Law; giving him to understand, that the Law in Scotland could protect no man,
if either his Purse were empty, or his Adversaries great men, or supported by
great ones. But may not I be allowed to say, That this is not only the Custom
of Scotland, but of England likewise, and of all other Nations of the World,
men being, as to the pursuit of their own Interest, much of the same Temper
every where.

ARTICLE XXI.
1. Judges sometimes easily gained. 2. The dispensing Power why agreed to in
the late Reign. 3. A short account of a Popish Council held at Edenburg, during
the stay of the Duke of York there.

But you must not gather from the Premises, That Judges likewise being
generally corrupted, decide matters according to the Dictates of their own
Interest, because whoever is in the wrong, they are commonly in the right, as
being not obliged to judge according to the re^^, but only apparent merits of
the Cause, and according to the Evidences brought in before them; yet because
their Verdict is of great weight with the Jury, if they are either bribed, or
corrupted by enjoyed or promised preferments, they very often turn the Scales,
either by disguising the Truth, or by over-awing such as offer to stand up in
opposition to their injust Decisions. We have seen some Examples of this kind
in the late Reign, when the Dispensing Power, without consent of Parliament,
was cried up, the Judges having either really changed their former Opinions, or
acting in that juncture of Affairs, quite contrary to their real Sentiments,
but yet according to their then Interest, because one would think they could
not but know, that the Dispensing Power was either a Popish or a French
Contrivance, to introduce among us first Arbitrary Power, and then Popery, by
annulling, or which is all one, by dispensing for ever with the Fundamental
Laws of the Nation, or at least with those Laws that were chiefly intended to
put a stop to the growth of Popery and Arbitrary Power. I shall set down in
this place a famous Instance that I am peculiarly acquainted with, and cujus
pars magna fui, to show how far men's Consciences do sometimes comply with their
fancied or real advantages. When the Duke of York was High Commissioner for
King Charles the Second, in the Kingdom of Scotland, there was held, by his
Orders, in Holyrood-House at Edinburgh, a Council of Secular Priests and
Jesuits, to consult together, whether the Duke could lawfully, and in good
Conscience, sit as High Commissioner in Parliament: The Case was clear, and
could admit of no Dispute, according to the Principles of his Religion, because
he was to confirm as the King's Chief Minister there, such foregoing Acts of
Parliament as had established the Reformation, and condemned the Popish
Superstitions. Now this being a thing held evil of its self by Roman
Catholics, and intrinsecally, malum per se, and not merely upon the account of
its being forbidden, by any Superior or Written Law, it was in no case lawful
for him to cooperate to it, either directly or indirectly, either as a
principal Agent, or only instrumentally, and as a mere Substitute: Yet the
Godly Fathers acting in this Juncture, in contradiction to their own confessed
Principles, concluded, after some inconsiderable Debate about the matter, That
the Duke might lawfully, and in good Conscience sit in Parliament, touch with
the Scepter; that is, approve of, and ratify what both he and they called, and
thought down right Heresy. So powerful is the influence of Interest over some;
yea, most men's Consciences, That it either alters their Judgment, or forces
them irresistibly to act contrary to their settled Opinions.

ARTICLE XXII.
1. The Chief Reason why Protestants turn Papists. 2. The strongest Popish
Arguments from Interest. 3. The Conversion of Learned Roman Catholics to
Protestancy, undoubtedly sincere, and why.

For what other rational account can we give of such as turn from the
Protestant Religion to the Roman Catholic Superstitions, than that they can
hardly resist the great encouragements they meet with from the Papists: For if
a Protestant be not well versed in his own principle, and able to confute the
Popish Errors, a not extraordinary Preferment, a Sum of Money, the Favor of a
Prince either hoped for, or enjoyed, will prove convincing Arguments to him, of
the Truth of Popery, and of the falsehood of the Protestant Doctrine. The Popish
Priests in King James's Reign, observing how impossible 'twas to make the
people believe the being of an Infallible Visible Judge of Controversies in the
Church, since no such thing is countenanced either by the Scriptures, or by
General Councils; as likewise that they could not work them into the belief of
the strange Mystery of Transubstantiation, destroying the very Foundation of
all Humane Certitude, the Testimony of our Senses, and consequently the
Fundamental Proofs of Christ's Passion, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, yea,
and of his being real Flesh and Blood, if the constant Testimony of Seeing,
Feeling, Touching, Tasting, deceive us, as the Papists tell us they do in the
Consecrated Bread and Wine: The Priests, I say, having learned by Experience,
how blunt their Arguments were against understanding Protestants, betook
themselves to the only method they could hope success from; viz. to the
proposing of great Rewards from King James upon the first occasion, and from
both King and Pope, by the Mediation of his Nuncio then residing in London, in
case they had to do with Churchmen: And 'twas generally observed, that such as
went that way to work, were more successful than those who undertook to argue
the case with their Adversaries, because their Arguments being generally mere
Sophisms, laid always open the Weakness of the Arguer as well as of the
Argument. But many more yielded to the stronger Reasons from Interest, Worldly
Grandeur, and such other advantages as the Churchmen of Rome are used to
propose to hook men into the bosom of their Church. And indeed I often wonder
how it comes to pass, that they make so few voluntary Converts, since they
propose so great advantages to such as come over to them, upon what account
soever. But on the other hand, if I knew not by my own Experience, the almost
irresistible impression of Divine Grace, and the great force of the discovered
Truth, I should far more wonder, that a Roman Catholic could ever resolve to
turn Protestant, because new Converts are generally either coldly received by
Protestants, or seemingly mistrusted by such as having nothing but the outside
of the Christian Religion, are disposed to think others as great Hypocrites as
they know themselves to be: So that if an understanding and learned Roman
Catholic turn from Popery to Protestancy, his Conversion to be sure is
sincere, because he is not allured to our side by any Temporal Advantages to be
expected from us, who commonly take so little notice of new Converts, that we
let them often want Necessaries, if they cannot do for themselves: But if a
knowing Protestant surrenders himself to the weak Popish Arguments, I question
not in the least but that he has some considerable Interest in prospect: For
why should we think that a man would pull out his Eyes, lay aside the use of
his Reason, submit to an implicit Faith, and turn a Fool for just nothing.

ARTICLE XXIII.
1. The mean, and irregular Conduct of some Persons of Quality. 2. The Design
of their Intimacy with some Men. 3. The Ingratitude of Tradesmen.

To say no more of this matter, though a great deal more might be said of it,
let us consider in this place another kind of Irregularity occasioned in some
Nations, and particularly in this very Kingdom we live in, by the influence of
Riches, and Money, upon some men's minds, who by reason of the great Fortunes
they are born to, should have the less value for what they possess so much of,
or at least should not behave themselves so meanly as to make their Equals, and
familiar Companions, such as have no other thing to recommend themselves to the
World, but what they have got by very injust and shameful means, as Dicing,
Carding, Cheating, Swearing, to say nothing worse, if worse can be said: Do
they not give us just grounds to think they keep such Men Company, in hopes of
getting from them the ill gained Penny by the same methods it was at first got?
For what other end can they propose to themselves in courting them, in a
manner, at the rate they usually do? They cannot, sure, be in love with their
Ingenuity, unless we reckon Swearing, Cursing, Damning, Sinking, etc. pieces of
real Wit: They can pretend no kindness to them neither upon the account of
their civil and obliging behavior, since there is no rudeness but such men are
commonly guilty of, nor upon the account of their Noble Extraction, because
having generally sprung out of the lowest Tribe of Mankind, without either
Friend or Allie better than themselves, They buoy themselves up into the world
by an inexhausted stock of Impudence, which they should rather be undervalued
than esteemed for. They must then be fond of conversing with such Men so often,
and so familiarly upon some other accounts, as either because they are able to
pay largely their share in pulick Entertainments, to the lessening of the
charges of the Company, or in order to bring them back to their first low
condition again, by gaining from them what they before had sharp'd from others;
and when this is done his Lordship knows no more his Old Friend, and
inseparable Companion in Gaming, Feasting, Drinking, etc. whom a little before
he was wont to salute, kiss and hug in every corner, as his Bosome-Friend and
Equal: but now the case being altered, he becomes on a sudden, like most men
upon such occasions, not much fond of the Company they can get no more by. The
Lawyers, Physicians, and generally all Tradesmen behave themselves much after
the same manner, for their own ends, all attending, courting, and omitting no
kind of respect toward such as they hope to draw in to be their Customers:
Yea, the proudest Dealer knows how to bow, cringe and flatter, if by this
smooth way, so contrary to his unhewed Temper, he hopes to hook you into an
unreasonable price for his Goods, glorying at the same time, and boasting of
his Wit, or rather Wickedness, to make perhaps an Hundred Pound at the Years
end of every Fool's Penny: For some silly Tradesmen take sometimes the liberty
to lend this Character to such as thinking them honest men, trust to their
Words, or pay them small Sums, without taking their Receipts; wherein they are
not so much in the wrong as one would imagine at first: for considering their
daily knavish and deceitful proceedings with honest and well-meaning men, it is
the height of Folly to deal with them, but upon a supposition of their being
all, what some of 'em really are, down right Knaves, whatever may be their
pretenses to, and reiterated Protestations of Honesty, Sincerity and fair
Dealings with all Mankind.

ARTICLE XXIV.
1. The Jealousy of Men of the same Employment instanced in Courtiers. 2. The
unhappy Condition of Kings. 3. Interest prevailing every where.

To pursue the Scope of this Treatise in some other particulars, it is an old
Saying and a true one, Figulus figulum, etc. That generally men of the same
Profession hate one another: This has been observed from all times, and among
all sorts of men, but more especially among Statesmen, Tradesmen, Lawyers, etc.
How intimate soever men may be before they become Courtiers, they are no sooner
set up together at Court, but Jealousy seizing upon their hearts, kindles a
Flame that nothing can extinguish but the Ruin of their Fellow Courtier, whom
nevertheless they receive and complement after the most obliging manner in the
World, upon all occasions, while at the same time they endeavor to undermine
him, by the advice of such as they dare discover their ambitious Projects to;
and if succeeding in the secret Ambushes they have laid, they overthrow their
Enemy, by rendering him obnoxious to the Prince's Wrath, or the Commonwealth's
Indignation; their next step is to get into his Employment Civil or Military,
if perhaps he was in a better post than themselves. What troublesome and
factious Intrigues all Courts are embroiled in, it is too well known to be
particularly taken notice of in this place, as if it were hard to guess at the
true Cause, and secret Spring of the Plottings of great Men in Places of Trust
and Authority one against another. But there is one thing not so obvious to
every common Understanding, that gives occasion to the uneasiness of most
Courtiers; and it is this, That very often Men unfit for business, to say
nothing worse, are set over their Heads, because they have been able to present
largely some body or other, who upon this encouragement represented them to the
Sovereign as Men of great Worth and Integrity, and fit to serve him in any
Employment whatsoever: But the pity is, that Kings must of necessity see with
other Men's Eyes, else they would often discover, that their sincerest Friends
are commonly no partakers of their private Favors, either because they have
not wherewithal to buy Places of Profit and Honor, as others less deserving
do, or because they are misrepresented to their Sovereigns, as if they ought to
be afraid of them, as their Enemies. But it is in vain to complain of this, and
other Abuses of this kind to be met with in all Courts, and at all times: for
let Princes take what measures they please, to give every one his due,
prevailing Interest both in Church and State, will still get more than real
Merit. It is likewise more regarded than it should be in most Courts of
Justice, to the great oppression of the poorer sort, and of such as cannot go
on with their business by the ordinary methods of Law, for want of Money: for
grant the Judges to act never so justly, or at least, which is all that is
required of them, Secundum allegata, and probata, according to the Depositions
and Proofs proposed in the Case debated; yet the subtle Lawyers, unless very
conscientious, upon the prospect of a great Reward, know how to stretch the
clearest Decisions of the Law, in favor of their Rich Clients, to the very
deceiving of the ablest Judges. If Interest prevail with them, it has no less
power over all the other Tribes of Mankind: What Quarrels, Divisions and Heats
does it not daily occasion among all sorts of Tradesmen, their whole business
generally being not so much to outdo, as to un-do one another; as it is
likewise observed to be practiced by some Physicians, who finding always fault
directly or indirectly, with whatever they have not prescribed themselves,
offer modestly their Service to the Patient, especially if Rich, with a
Quack-like promise of a sure, easy, speedy and infallible Cure: Auditum
admissi risum teneatis amici.
Quid tanto dignum dabit hic promissor hiatu?


ARTICLE XXV.
1. The true Cause of the Popish Fury against Protestants. 2. A short account
of the Popish Hierarchy. 3. Why the Council of Trent opposed a thorough
Reformation.

I have been sometimes concerned to know the true Cause of the Fury of Roman
Catholics against such as are not of their own Religion, and more especially
against Protestants: I was at first of Opinion it was a mere Zeal, like that of
the Apostles, who would have consumed the Samaritans to ashes, for not
admitting our Savior into their City: I concluded then sometimes with my self,
that their foolish persuasion of our being Reprobates, if we die not in their
Communion, was the occasion of the pains they take to pervert us to their
principles, by all possible means, whether lawful or unlawful: And really the
ignorance of the Popish Mob, as likewise of the simple and blunt Friars, is so
gross, that not a few among them are acted by such a blind Zeal as this is. The
Prelates and Clergy of the Church of Rome are no less zealous than the
unlearnedest Priest, to root out what they think, and call Heresy, either by
fair means, if against Sense and Reason they can impose upon the unthinking
Multitude their new coined Articles, or by the French method of Converting, and
Dragooning Men into the Popish Religion: But, no doubt, in all such proceedings
they propose to themselves some other end than the mere saving of Souls; for I
can hardly think them so great Fools, as to believe really that there is no way
to Heaven but by and through the particular Church of Rome. Now what this is
you may discern more distinctly by the following and short account of the
Popish Hierarchy and Clergy: The Power over Christ's Natural Body, assumed by
the Romish Priests in the Consecration of Bread and Wine, has by degrees
swelled them so big with the Opinion of their own Authority, that in the
Council, if I misremember not, of Constance, they unanimously declared, that
notwithstanding the Institution of the Sacrament by Christ himself in both
kinds, notwithstanding the Practice of the Primitive Church continued during
the space of Fourteen Hundred Years, yet they, yea, they forsooth, thought fit
to Order, Command and Appoint, That the Lay-Christians should be partakers of
the same, but under one kind only, or that they should eat the Bread alone,
without receiving the Cup. If we consider more particularly the present
Condition of the Bishop of Rome, we shall find, that there is no Prince in the
World so absolute as he is over those of his Communion: He absolveth them when
he pleases from their sworn Allegiance to their Princes; he pretends, as he
often expressed himself in his Bulls, to the Power of Scattering and Gathering,
of Settling and Pulling down, of Planting and Pulling up again at pleasure, by
Deprivation, Excommunication, Deposition of Sovereign Princes, if they act
against his Authority, he being the only Prince in the World incapable of doing
any wrong, in the Opinion of such as believe him infallible. The Inferior
Bishops are of late, but chiefly in France, become as absolute, every one in
his own Diocese, as the Pope himself in that of Rome; and generally the Popish
Churchmen are become every where so vastly Rich, that their Treasures make at
least a Third part of what the Prince they live under enjoys. You shall find in
France, Spain and Italy, Convents and Nunneries possessed of Three or Four
Thousand Pounds English, of yearly Revenue, to maintain Fifteen or Sixteen lazy
Monks, to whom whatever is given, or left by Testament, can be of no further
use to the Public, as lying buried among them, without ever circulating any
more thence to the advantage of the Commonwealth. We may now begin to gather
from the Premises the true Cause of the Popish Zeal, either to destroy or
convert Protestants, which is no other, if narrowly looked into, but their own
Temporal Interest, grounded upon that Natural Inclination to maintain and keep
what one has once acquired, by what means soever: for the Romish Priests cannot
but know, that wherever the Protestants prevail, they must of course lose their
Ground and Authority, and must Lord it no more over their Brethren, as they now
do: So that if the people were once thoroughly reformed, they would put an end,
as they have effectually done in England, Germany, Danemark and Swedeland, to
the Tyranny of the Papists over Men's Bodies by their Antichristian Inquisitions
and Persecutions, as well as over their Souls, by an absolute Command to lay
aside the Use of their Reason, and submit blindly to their pretended infallible
Decisions. A thorough Reformation would likewise occasion a more equal
distribution of the Treasures the Churchmen of Rome heap up for themselves,
among the Members of the Commonwealth: So that the vast Riches that are now in
a few hands, would soon circulate to the Relief of the Poor, to the daily
increase of Trade, and encouragement of Industry. No wonder then if the Council
of Trent did so much oppose a thorough Reformation; for it being made up of
Rich Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Generals of the Regular Orders, and of
Clergymen of all sorts, they foresaw their Fate, if they discouraged the Abuses
slipped into the Church of Rome: Yet the Popes were so afraid, that some knowing,
and well-meaning Men among them, for they were not all of the same Temper,
should endeavor the new modelling of their Church into a better frame, that
they suffered nothing to be done in the Council but by and with the Consent of
their own Legates, proponentibus legatis; which gave occasion to some to say,
that the Holy Ghost was sent every week from the then Pope to the Council in a
Cloak-bag, because of the Pope's sending his weekly Instructions to the
Fathers, with express Orders to act according to the secret Resolutions of his
Privy Council. Let us not then hereafter accuse the Romanists of being blind
Zealots, since their Zeal is really according to Knowledge, at least, of their
own Temporal Interest, which they, and most men, as well as they, are only
concerned for.

ARTICLE XXVI.
1. That few act upon the account of mere Honor. 2. The Fate of ingenious Men.
3. The Rich seemingly admired.

Though undoubtedly there be some in the World that act merely upon the account
of Honor, Glory and Reputation, as some Authors do, who pretend to no other
advantage by their Writings than a great Fame, yet if we look narrowly into
Men's Designs, few or none are contented with a bare and empty Name, but still
aim at something else more solid and more real: Neither can I blame them for so
doing, because I think it no real happiness, though I know it to be the Fate of
many Ingenious Men, to be daily talked of, and much commended both at home and
abroad, for their Useful and Learned Productions, while at the same time they
starve in some corner or other unheeded: For though Poverty be not reckoned a
Crime, yet it being a thing that most men are more ashamed of than of the
greatest Sins, they are likewise ashamed to keep Company with such as are
Indigent or Poor, whatever may be their other Qualifications, and the Natural
Endowments of their minds: I speak of the Generality of Men: For some, I know,
there be who love rather to improve their Intellectuals, by conversing with
such as they may learn from, than to be intimate with some of the richer sort,
who can boast of nothing but what is without themselves: yet such men are often
esteemed by the Vulgar, and called by Designing Men both Sensible, Wise, and
Witty, because of some advantages they aim at for themselves, by their mean and
insipid flatteries; which contribute only to make these Rich Blockheads the
sillier, and prouder of their fancied Parts, while at the same time admiring,
and loving themselves without a Rival, they are deservedly undervalued by such
as take notice of their simplicity, in ascribing to their real Merit, the
outward respect we give them only upon the account of their Quantity, or
Quality, in case no other thing recommend them to our Esteem. There is another
thing to be considered in this place, as being akin to what I was saying
before, That as the Poor have no Friends at all, or very few, so the Rich never
want great Numbers, either of true or pretended ones, and that merely upon the
account of their Riches. When Fortune smiles upon a Man, his Relations, that
shunned his Company when it frowned upon him, flock to him again, as if he were
come from a strange Country, to welcome him home: They now offer their
Services with a Thousand Protestations of the sincerest Friendship to him, whom
a little before they denied to have a Drop of their Blood in his Veins: But his
Condition being now altered, though he was degraded at first by his Want, he is
restored to his Honor again by his Plenty, to the great satisfaction of his
Friends, who on a sudden are become his Courtiers, Slaves, and Creatures too,
in a manner, rather than his Equals, or Superiors: And since such great things
are done by Riches, who can blame Gentlemen, yea and Persons of an higher
Quality, for binding their Children, if they cannot allow them sufficient
Portions to Tradesmen, that by their own Industry they may get in time the only
thing Men are generally valued for; that is Money: For though upon daily
Experience we must confess it to be the ordinary occasion of Prodigality,
Luxury, Murder, Rebellion, Sedition, and generally of the horridest Crimes; yet
on the other hand it is no less certain, that the entire want of this necessary
Tool, makes often way for the very same sins and immoralities: So that a
moderate Fortune is the only thing to be wished and prayed for in this World,
lest we be either tempted to Wantonness, through a too great Plenty, or pressed
into Despair by the sting of a pinching Necessity.

ARTICLE XXVII.
1. Why Men change often their Opinions. 2. Some of the Dragoon'd Papists real
Converts, why, and how. 3. What had been the Event of the late King's
successful Attempts.

We ought to consider somewhat more particularly in this place, what I have but
slightly hinted at in another, how Men change often their Opinions, according
to the different appearances of their Interest: for how many have written
seriously for absolute Monarchy, who have proved afterward zealous promoters
of a Commonwealth, when it seemed more favorable to their Concerns; in so
much, that not a few have contradicted themselves, by answering those very
Arguments, which in another juncture of Affairs they proposed to the World, as
undeniable Truths. With what heat was not the Duke of York's Interest opposed
by some known Writers, who having better considered of the Matter, that is, of
their Interest, changed their tune so soon as they saw him in a posture to
serve their turns. It Is confessed on all hands, that Oliver Cromwell was both
an Usurper and a Tyrant, yet the same Pen, as I am informed, that wrote for
him, wrote afterward the deserved Praises of Charles the Second, the undoubted
Heir of the Crown. So true it is, that a present Interest representing to us
the worst of Objects by the fairest side, either gives us no time at all to
consult with our selves, if what we undertake be commendable or not, or causes
us to look upon all Reasons contrary to it self, as weak, unconcluding, and of
no weight, though formerly, when our Affairs were in another situation, we took
'em to be true Demonstrations. We have a considerable Instance of what I do
here affirm in a late Bishop, who though a Protestant, was so charmed by the
Favors he had received, and hoped to receive from King James, that he strained
his Parts to clear the Papists of Idolatry, by such a false Notion of this
heinous Crime, that none but a Man as interested as he was, could have ventured
to publish it: His best Body of Divinity, as he said once, a Coach and Six
Horses makes sometimes a greater impression upon a covetous Mind, than the
strongest Reasons of the ablest Divines, not supported by a Concomitant
Interest. Though I doubt not but that several of the French Hugonots have
complied in the late persecution against the severest Checks of their own
Conscience, yet I am of Opinion, that many of them likewise are real Converts
to the Popish Principles, because Interest by degrees blinds sometimes the
clearest Understandings, so as to cause Men not only to act, but also to think
quite contrary to the first Grounds they built their Faith upon. A Man thus
tempted to change his Religion, begins first to look upon the Arguments* of his
Adversaries, as not so absurd as he thought them to be; then after some Debate
with himself, he concludes them to be probable; and lastly, by the irresistible
Eloquence of Interest, he believes them to be true. It Is much after the same
manner, that Men turn not only Papists, but likewise Mahometans: For if Worldly
Concerns did not influence Men's Judgments so powerfully as really they do, how
comes it to pass, that the very Christians, if not so soon, at least very
often, a little after they are conquered by the Turks, turn zealous Mahometans,
and bigoted Renegado's; the chief Reason why Mahomet ordered his Religion to
be propagated by the Sword, being this, That he thought Temporal Interest would
draw greater Numbers to his side than any other Arguments whatsoever. Wherein
he was not much mistaken, since considering the duration of both Religions, the
higher and Divine Inducements to Christianism, have made fewer Converts than
the Temporal Advantages he proposed to his Followers, if it be true, as I
believe it to be, That the Mahometans are now much Superior in Number to the
Christians. I shall add upon this occasion, That I doubt not but if King James
had been successful in his Attempts, many, if not most of the English had
embraced Popery by Force at first, and perhaps at last by free Consent, and a
real Submission of their Judgment to enjoy peaceably those Advantages they
could not pretend to without changing their Principles, it being observed in
those days, that some professed Protestants, yea, and Gown'd ones too, seemed
inclinable to close in with Rome again, because their Interest told them, that
this was the shortest way for them to Preferment.

ARTICLE XXVIII.
1. The Necessity and Conditions of a Married Life. 2. Its Complete Happiness.
3. The French Marquess his Interested Marriage.

To add in this place some new Particulars relating to my Design, it is certain,
that there is no happier State of Life in the Catholic Church than that of
Marriage, it being the chief and only Remedy prescribed by the Spiritual
Physician against burning, though the Romanists will not allow their Priests
the use of it, and the great Supporter of Mankind, by a Social Life, and by a
free and reciprocal Communication of the Soul as well as of the Body; though
many things contribute to make up the Happiness of this State, as some
proportion in Age, Humor, and Quality, Conjugal Chastity, Moderation in the
use of Matrimony, a patient Temper, and capable of bearing with one another
Infirmities, Discretion, Wisdom, besides all the other Christian Virtues; yet a
competent Estate seems to be necessary to make the married Couple happy, yea,
and virtuous too, if such as are joined together in this State of Life, be
inclinable by their Education, or Sober Temper, to make good use of the
Blessings God has been pleased to bestow upon them, as being often thereby
freed from such occasions of Sin and Temptation, as prove sometimes a very hard
Trial to the strongest Virtue. But this very Money which I think so necessary
for the complete Happiness of a Married Life, brings along with it all kind
of Misery, if it be in the hands of those who being vitiously inclined, make it
the Instrument of their daily Crimes, and idle Courses, in Carding, Dicing,
Whoring, Drinking, there being no Trick, Cheat, or Shift that such Men will
scruple at to compass this necessary Tool to a bad Life, as well as to a good
one. The Story of the French Marquess is pretty well known, who having spent
his whole Estate in Gaiming, married at last the Executioner's Daughter,
because her Father could allow her a considerable Portion, which gave her
quality enough to become a Nobleman's Lady.

Et genus and formam Regina Pecunia donat. ARTICLE XXIX.
1. The Being of God known by its self, as a Self-evident Principle. 2. Several
Demonstrations of the Existence of God. 3. Why some Men endeavor to deny this
important Truth.

Interest does not only put Men upon odd Practices, but likewise upon very
unaccountable Speculations. I know nothing in Nature so demonstrable as the
Being of God, and whatever School-Divines teach to the contrary, I am
irresistibly inclined to contradict them, when they generally affirm this
Proposition, Deus est, God exists not to be a Self-evident Principle: For if
God is a necessary Being, as we all conceive him to be, then this very Idea
implies his actual Existency; or if a Being infinitely perfect be possible, as
all Christians say it is, then to be sure it really exists, because actual
Existency must of necessity be reckoned one, yea, and the very Foundation of
all his other Perfections. This unanswerable Demonstration to a Christian
Reader, may be propounded thus in a few words: A Being infinitely perfect,
implies no Contradiction; therefore it actually exists; the first Proposition
is agreed to on all hands among Christians, and cannot be denied by Atheists
themselves, upon any probable Grounds; the Inference was proved a little
before: but because in answer to the first Demonstration, the Atheists allow no
being to be necessary, I must close in with them, and endeavor their
Conviction, by an unanswerable Demonstration, though I confess it neither to be
a Priori, as the Schoolmen speak, or from the Cause, because there can be none
such, God being the First Cause of all things; nor a Posteriori, in the Rigor,
or from any Production of God; yet from an undeniable Falsehood, which must
needs ensue upon our allowing with the Atheists, this Principle, That all
things, without exception, are contingent; and it is in short this, That all
possible things might become impossible, if all things were contingent; which
no man of common Sense will grant: For let us suppose what is really possible,
if all things are contingent, that nothing actually is, since a contingent
Being is that which may be, or not be. Now in this case all possible things,
that is, all contingent things are impossible, because that is impossible which
has no Cause to bring it out of the bosom of nothing. But there is no Cause to
bring contingent things out of the bosom of nothing, if they once are not in
being; therefore they are then absolutely impossible. That there is no Cause to
bring contingent things out of the bosom of nothing, if they once are not in
being, it is clear from the supposition of nothing actually existing: For first,
grant to the Atheist all things to be contingent: And secondly, allow this
supposition not impossible, if all things are contingent, that nothing is
actually in being. Then to be sure there can be no cause to bring any thing out
of the bosom of nothing; that is, to produce any thing, because nothing can
act unless it have an actual foundation both in Essence and Existency, which is
not here allowed of, because we suppose nothing to exist; for since the Atheist
grants all things to be contingent, he must of necessity confess, that they may
not be; and in this case, as I have sufficiently proved, they are all
impossible. From the Premises it is clear, That unless we admit of a necessary
Being that is the Cause of all things we must confess against the clearest
evidence of Reason, That all things possible may become impossible, if all
things are contingent, Quod erat demonstrandum.

But because this Metaphysical way of reasoning is not fitted to a vulgar
Capacity, I shall endeavor to prove the Being of God, by such an easy and
obvious Argument, that I am concluded by it my self to believe, that there can
be no such thing as a downright Atheist, in the grossest sense of this word,
because all Mankind being Eyewitness of the regular Natural Motions, whither
in the Heavens, or in this Globe we dwell upon, the very dullest sort cannot
but know, that a constant Uniformity in Motion must of necessity proceed from
the overruling Direction of an Understanding Being, since no fortuitous Motion
can either be durable or regular: For if the Stars, for Instance, moved in
their respective Orbs by mere chance, and not by certain Laws prescribed to 'em
by the Author of Nature God himself, could any man be so unreasonable as to
think, that their rising, and their going down, their monthly, and yearly
motions, and all their other Phenomena's, or appearances, could prove so
constantly regular as we observe them to be? Would not those vast Celestial
Bodies, tumbling up and down those huge Orbs, without the concurrence of an
Understanding Being to direct them, fall often foul one upon another, and
represent to us every Day New Objects to look at, by their daily fortuitous
Combinations? Certainly, if nothing but chance govern this World, we must
believe that to be most false which we know by daily Experience to be most
true, that a Clock, or a Watch, is made by the fortuitous concourse of the
Spring, Chain, Wheels, etc. into that situation which is necessary to show the
Hours of the Day; That Stone, Timber, and other Materials tumbling luckily, but
fortuitously together, raised all the Cities and Stately Palaces of great
Princes, without any Architect or Overseer of the Work, that the Body of Man so
admirable for the Excellency of its Structure, is not the product of Art, but a
mere fortuitous Coalition of Atoms.

But though this visible World prove to us the Being of God, by as many
convincing Arguments as there are Creatures in the Universe; yet so
irresistible is the Impression of Interest over some men's minds, that if it
were possible, they would extinguish the inbred Light that points out to them
a Deity with the same Beams it sets before their Eyes the Visible Works of
its Almighty Power, since some endeavor to impose upon themselves the belief
of a fortuitous Coalition of the Atoms into such a Frame as we now observe in
the World, without taking notice of a Sovereign Being, as the true Cause of
this so orderly, and so wonderful a Structure, to that degree of Blindness and
Impiety, as to say in their Hearts, There is no God; Dixit impius in Cord suo
non est Deus. But to make use of the Scripture Phrase, it is impossible they
should say so in their Understanding, in intellectu, because whatever they seem
to say to the contrary, they cannot but judge by the obvious Regularity of the
Natural Motions, and yearly Productions, that there is a God; and how merciful
soever, a severe punisher of Sin, though they wish perhaps, there were no such
Being, that they may never be called to an account for their daily Sins and
heinous Misdemeanors, for cheating other men of their Goods and Estates,
without the least Scruple, their chief, and only Design in endeavoring thus to
blind themselves, being no other but to heap up by unlawful means, whatever may
contribute to their Satisfaction in this World, without any Check, if it were
possible, of their Conscience.

ARTICLE XXX.
1. The Justice of God asserted. 2. What the Desire of Eternal Happiness
implies. 3. Why some Men deny a future World's Existence.

That a future World's Existence is denied by some who are thoroughly convinced
of the Being of a God it is too evident, but not to every Vulgar Understanding,
upon what Grounds, though one would think they could give no rational account
why they flatly deny such an almost self-evident Truth: For since they allow
God to be Just, and to that degree, that no kind of Injustice can be laid to
his charge, they must of course acknowledge another Life after this, in which
the just and best sort of men are often oppressed, while the Wicked flourish,
and live in Plenty, adding to their Sins, as they add to their Treasures. We
must then, without doubt, expect Justice to be done sometime or other, both to
the former and to the latter, as well knowing God to be the Punisher of Sin, as
well as the Rewarder of Virtue, but neither could be true, without the Truth of
a future World, because it is certain, that Virtue is not always rewarded in
this Life, nor sin punished. The men we speak of in this place, must needs be
convinced of their judging contrary to their own Experience, if they do but
reflect upon the desire they find themselves pressd with of an Eternal
Happiness, which God, whom they allow to do nothing in vain, has planted in
their Hearts, in order to make them use the means he has prescribed for the
attainment of the same. Notwithstanding the irresistible Evidence of the
foregoing Reasons to all mankind, if laid open in every Particular, some deny
still the Being of a ^uture World, because it is, they think, their Interest so
to do, since if there be any such State after this Life, they may expect to
suffer in it, for their Crimes committed in this; not to mention, that the
belief of a future World would oblige them to make restitution in time of what
they had got together by injust means, as Cheating, Oppression, Usury, Simony,
and other such like Sins: So irresistible in some is the Power of Temporal
Interest, as to cause them not to believe, or at least, to doubt of this
fundamental Article of Religion, that they may pursue their Worldly and
Transient Concerns, without any Scruple, or Fear of Punishment.

ARTICLE XXXI.
1. Pretenses of such as admit of no Free Will. 2. The Consistency of God's
Foreknowledge of, and Sovereignty over Men's Actions, with the Freedom of Humane
Will. 3. Why so many follow the Predestinarian Principle.

It Is upon the same account, that so many fancy themselves Slaves, and deprived
of all Freedom of Will, yea, and seem to be sure of what they say, 1. From the
Foreknowledge of God. 2. From our Dependency upon him. Yet it is certain on the
other hand, that the Divine Prescience, or Foreknowledge, is not destructive
to our Liberty, though I deny not but that our Actions, because of God's
Foreknowledge, may be called, to use a School-Expression, Hypothetically, or
Consequentially necessary, as the Fall of a Man into a Precipice, is necessary
in the same sense, if I see him fall; in which Case it cannot be said, that my
looking on throws him headlong into the Ditch. This Vulgar Example may help us
to remove this not inconsiderable difficulty against an experienced and felt
Truth, as that of our being free, and not necessary Agents. As to what is used
to be said of the Inconsistency of our Freedom, in acting with our Dependency
upon God, it is but a very illusory and frivolous Objection: For though I be
supposed to act freely, it is certain, that this very Power of acting freely is
from God: Quid enim habes quod non accepisti, says the vulgate Edition of the
Bible somewhere, What have thou that thou have not received? Therefore it
cannot be said, that I do not depend upon God in acting, unless it be first
made out, that I have received this Power from some other Being. As then a
careful Father, giving money to his Son, gives him at the same time this
wholesome and Fatherly Advice: Though I leave you to your own Liberty, my
Intention is, that you should make a right Use of this Gold, and not throw it
away upon sinful Recreations, because I am resolved to punish you, if you apply
this Money to other Ends than I intended it for; and to reward you, if you
comply to my earnest and just Desires.

By what this Father says to his Son, we may conceive how God hehaves himself
toward us, in giving us the Power to do good and evil, but with a Design that
we should do good and not evil, lest we be severely punished for omitting what
we should have done, the former being intended, and not the latter, though we
be free to do either; else we could neither be said to deserve Praise for the
one, nor Punishment for the other. To conclude, we must either say, that God
could not create Man free; or in case he created him free, that he allowed him
the Power to do good and evil, and that he is, notwithstanding this allowance,
absolute Master of all his Actions, because he may hinder them when he pleases,
by either destroying or suspending the Power they spring from. As I am then of
Opinion, That some other Reason engages so many Christians to embrace this
immoral and dangerous Doctrine, so I believe it to be nothing else but a
certain kind of Interest. Though not a few, I confess, of a good Life and
Conversation, deny flatly the Freedom of Humane Will to do good or evil, yet
it is, I fancy, impossible they should owe their Goodness to this Predestinarian
Principle, because if once believed, it must set a man extremely at ease, and
make him wholly unconcerned in his Conscience, how unlawful soever the business
may be he goes about: For why should a man scruple at any thing, if it is not in
his Power not to do what he does. That I may be the better understood, I shall
state the Case thus: Suppose a man much stronger than my self, laying hold on
me, kills another man with my hand, am I guilty of the Murder, or he, who
makes use of my Arm to commit this Crime, in a manner irresistible on my side?
The Application of this Example is so easy, and so obvious to the meanest
Capacity, that I need not enlarge upon it: For, as no man having his Wits about
him, will think that I ought to suffer upon the account of the forementioned
Murder, which I could not hinder; so I cannot fancy my self liable to be
punished by the Laws of a Just God, because of my committing a Crime which I
could not possibly avoid. It Is true we kill noxious Animals, by reason of the
hurt they do, or may do to the Members of the Commonwealth; but yet we are not
so unreasonable as to think them guilty of Sin upon that account. If then we
follow the Predestinarian Principle, we must of course fancy our selves
guiltless, whatever Sin we commit, since we have no freedom to shun it. I
desire to have nothing to do with Men thus Principled, because if I do them a
good turn, I shall not be thanked for it; and they being acted in their deluded
Fancy, like mere. Machines and Slaves, rather than acting like Free and
Rational Men, will not scruple to do me an ill one upon occasion, because in
their Opinion they cannot help the doing of it: for whether they keep or break
the Commandments of God, this is never ascribed by them to choice, but always
to their irresistible Fate.

ARTICLE XXXII.
1. The Impression of the foregoing Arguments upon Men's Understandings. 2. The
Liberty of Adam, and of his Posterity. 3. The Benefit of the pretended Want of
Free Will.

Some are so puzzled by the foregoing Arguments, that they are forced to allow
us a true liberty of doing good and evil, and to confess upon all occasions,
That Man is, and always was a Free Agent; yet the Chief Freedom they seem to
aim at, is that of committing what Crime they please, without the least Check
of a Wounded Conscience, since at the same time they maintain all our Actions
to be Necessary, because, forsooth, they are Voluntary; as if a Horse, for
instance, in the more probable Opinion of his not being a mere piece of
Mechanism, were a Free Agent upon this account, That he goes on with all
imaginable inclination to eat up the Hay or Oats in his view. Such men ground
this dangerous Opinion upon this false Supposition, That we have lost the
Liberty that Adam enjoyed, and consequently, that we have no Freedom at all to
do good or evil, to obey or not obey: Which Mistake may easily be redressed, if
we consider, that Adam's Liberty consisted in this, That he had the Power to do
good and evil, to obey or not obey, with a greater Propensity of his Will, if I
may so say, toward the good than toward the evil; whereas we, through his
fault, are born with a greater inclination to evil than good, because of our
Original and Hereditary Corruption: But withal it is certain, that we are free
in the foresaid manner, to allow Teaching, Preaching, Advising, Commanding to
be of some use or other to Mankind, or for some end or other: For let men
pretend what they please, a real Necessity is inconsistent with the usefulness
either of Counsel or Command, as likewise with the Justice of him who punishes
me for what I could not avoid; as for instance, Is it reasonable that I should
be punished for committing a Fornication that I could not resist? And how could
I resist the Temptation, if I commit the Crime through an unavoidable
Necessity, as the Predestinarian Tribe teaches us admitting this selfevident
Contradiction, That whatever is done voluntarily is done freely, and yet
necessarily at the same time: Whereas the real Freedom, upon which depends all
the Morality or Immorality of our Actions is that, and no other, which excludes
all Necessity. To be short, our present Condition, notwithstanding the Fall of
Adam, is still this, that We can freely do good or evil; whereas the Elect in
Heaven can do no evil, and the Reprobates in Hell can do no good; the former
being upon that account most happy, and the latter most unhappy, while We are
between both, in a mere Capacity of being either, by the good or bad use of our
Free Will. But since it is so evident that we are free Agents, or real Actors
upon the Stage of this World, and not mere Machines, how comes it to pass, that
many, and those too of good Reputation in the World, for their good Life and
Behavior, are of a contrary Opinion? To this I answer, That whatever other
Rational Account those Gentlemen may give of themselves, as to this Particular
I shall venture to say, That they are chiefly pressed to embrace this Doctrine
by a Principle of Interest, because how averse soever we may suppose them to be
from Sin, yet I question much if they scruple the committing of it, when they
consider themselves destitute of all Freedom of Indifferency, and as necessary
Agents unable to suspend their own Actions upon a full Concourse of all the
required Conditions: For a man of Sense must needs think himself guiltless, in
case he commits Robbery, Fornication, or Adultery, if he once is persuaded,
that he was, I do not say forced, because we know the Sinner to be always
willing, but necessitated to commit such Crimes, as the Enemies of Free Will do
usually teach he is: Wherein they give either too little scope to their Reason,
or too great scope to their Conscience, by thus ridding themselves at once of
all its troublesome Checks.

ARTICLE XXXIII.
1. The Return of New Converts to Rome again. 2. And why. 3. The Power of
Interest.

The forementioned Doctrine against Free Will, if believed, may soon clear the
Scruples of some late Converts to the Church of Rome, who after they had lived
a while among us, went back to Egypt again; but they being generally of
another Opinion, must of necessity be misled by some other Principle: And this
sure can neither be the Weakness of the Protestant Arguments, nor the Strength
of the Popish ones, which they cannot but know to be groundless and
insufficient, as being built upon Two false Suppositions; viz. of the
Universality and Infallibility of the Church of Rome: The hardships then, I
fancy, they suffer among us, are sometimes so pinching, that it is not much to
be wondered at, if some of them resolve to turn Papists again rather than
starve. It Is true we should choose Death rather than conform to an Idolatrous
Worship; but as we are not sensible of our own strength so long as we live in
Plenty, it is easy for a man in the actual possession of Two or Three Thousand
Pounds of Yearly Revenue, to pronounce such grave Christian Sentences, while he
is not afraid to be ever put to the Trial, which perhaps would discover his
Weakness, as well as that of some Romish Converts. Nothing was so stout as St.
Peter, before he was tried, and till then he thought he could easily lay down
his Life for his Savior, whom yet he very Cowardly denied at the first
Challenge of a Servant-Maid. Nothing, I am confident, is so real as the
Conversion of most of them that come over to us from the Church of Rome,
because nothing can be so obvious as the Errors of that Church: But yet Humane
Frailty is so great, that considering on the one hand, our hardness to New
Converts, and on the other hand the fair Offers of their former Brethren,
either our Covetousness throws them into Despair, or the Temporal Advantages
proposed to 'em by the Church of Rome, prevail with them to choose rather to
live Hypocrites among their Old Friends the Papists, than starve in the
Profession of the Truth among Protestants.

Thus an inconsiderable Temporal Interest makes sometimes a stronger impression
upon men's minds, than the very Eternal Welfare of their Souls.

ARTICLE XXXIV.
1. That most Men act contrary to their Professed Principles. 2. The best
Popish Argument. 3. If it be lawful to use Violence, in order to force Men to
consider of our Reasons in matters of Religion.

It Is always upon some such account that most men, not to say all, without
Exception, act contrary to their own confessed Principles: For how many grant
upon all occasions, that no Violence is to be used in matters of Religion; that
nothing is so much a man's own as his Conscience; that God alone is to judge of
our Thoughts, and not Men; that no Humane Power can call us to an account for
our Thoughts, though it may punish us for our manifest and visible Deeds: yea,
the very Church of Rome it self did of old affirm, That she could not extend
her Power over men's inward Sentiments, Ecclesia non judicat de internis.
Nevertheless, she thought it at least her Interest, as certainly it is, though
not that of Jesus Christ, to usurp an Arbitrary Power over men's Thoughts, as
well as over their Bodies; else how could she think it lawful either to Dragoon
men into her Bosom, or to extort from them Confessions conformable to her
Doctrine, by the Antichristian Cruelty of her Tyrannical Inquisitions: But yet
if such as take the fittest measures to compass their Ends, are deservedly
reputed Wise and Prudent, we have no great reason to think the Papists so great
Fools as some call them: For since it is flatly against the clearest Evidence of
Sense and Reason to believe the Mysteries they generally teach; as for
Instance, the Mystery of Transubstantiation, or that the Pope of Rome is
Infallible; it had been no piece of Wisdom in them to have used Arguments in
order to convince us of such manifest Untruths: They knew very well that
nothing but the Faggot, Sword, or an unmerciful Inquisition, could force men to
an outward Profession of their belief of such strange Opinions. But I need not
enlarge upon this Subject, since the Papists themselves confess ingenuously,
and maintain openly the Lawfulness of Persecution upon the account of Religion;
and that men are not only to be drawn in by Argument, but likewise to be forced
into the Bosom of the Church by the Dint of the Sword. I cannot dissemble in
this place my hearty Grief and Concern that some Protestants likewise, who
pretending to Meekness, Clemency, and Tenderness, grant nothing to be more
Antichristian than the persecuting of Christians upon the account of their
persuasion, should allow of Force in matters of Religion, so far as may be
judged necessary to make men consider seriously of our Reasons, that at last,
after a thorough Conviction, they may embrace that which we think Truth, as if
it were not in reality all one, to force a man to change his Religion, and to
force him to a serious Examen of our Arguments; which, how weak soever, will, I
fancy, soon appear unanswerable Demonstrations to such as must suffer either
Poverty, Imprisonment, or Death it self, if they confess not themselves fully
Convicted. The French Persecution was no worse than this would be: For that
Prince, I mean Lewis XIV. never pretended more than to compel his Subjects to a
serious Consideration of the Chief Grounds of Popery, because he well knew,
that the weakest Argument, supported by the Dragooning Sword, would either
convince his Subjects, or at least convert them, so far as to make them
Hypocrites, which was perhaps all the success he could hope for by this Most
Christian method. I wonder then that men professing, upon all Occasions,
Meekness and Moderation, should still stand up for what is worst in Popery, the
Spirit of Persecution, as they really do when they maintain it to be lawful to
use Violence, in order to oblige men to consider of their Arguments, which how
weak soever, may gather a great deal of Strength from the Force used. But I
cease to be amazed at such strange Proceedings, when I consider how Natural
it is to all men to pursue eagerly what they think their real Interest: For as
we are all naturally proud, and passionate Lovers of Authority and Command, we
are easily persuaded, that we cannot compass better our ambitious designs than
by maintaining our assumed Power to force men to a serious consideration of the
Reasons we ground our Opinions upon, which is nothing else, if narrowly looked
into, but still a Claim to the Popish Infallibility, though we declare upon all
occasions our Abhorrence of such a groundless and Antichristian Principle.

ARTICLE XXXV.
1. The Jesuits zealous Defenders of the Sea of Rome. 2. And of such Princes as
can best protect them. 3. The Remissness of their Morals whence.

No Sect in the World ever pretended more to Infallibility than the Jesuits,
who generally hold it an Article of their Faith, That not only the General
Councils, but the Pope likewise, loquens ex Cathedra, is as Infallible, in some
manner, as God himself: How men of such Sense and Learning, as undoubtedly they
are in their own way, can be guilty of such a gross piece of Folly as this is,
few or none perhaps can better guess at than my self, as having been once
particularly acquainted with their Affairs. Since then it is to be supposed,
that designing men never act the Fools part but upon some wise account, we need
not wonder that the Jesuits having first seriously consulted together about the
matter, resolved to prove zealous and obstinate Defenders of that Article,
which would put the greatest Obligation upon the Pope, viz. of his being the
Infallible and Visible Oracle of the Universal Church; though they could not
but know the unreasonableness of this Tenet, and that they might as well
believe the Pope Almighty as Infallible. But however they were prevailed with
by a Principle of Interest and Self-preservation, to maintain this both
Antichristian and Atheistical Doctrine, because they being much younger than
most of the other Religious Orders, and upon several known Accounts hated by
them all, they prudently judged that it was impossible for them to withstand so
many powerful Enemies, unless they were supported by the supposed Vicar of
Christ the Bishop of Rome. To be sure then of the Pope's Protection, upon
occasion they not only declared him in their Schools, and preached him up in
their Pulpits, as Infallible, but by a Fourth Vow tied themselves so entirely
to his Service, that they are obliged upon Orders from the Pope to go whither,
and upon whatever Errand he pleases to command them.

If they thought it at their first appearing in the World, their Interest, and
think it still to close in with the Pope, they believe themselves no less
concerned now to stand up for the Princes, in whose Territories they live,
because they are abler to protect them than the Pope himself, their prudence
being particularly observable in this, that they are always on the strongest
side, which is so true, that the French Jesuits of old were usually called
Spaniards by the French Mob, because of their presumed Intrigues with the King
of Spain, the most powerful Prince then in Europe; yea, it is not long since the
very German Jesuits were generally thought inclinable to the French Interest,
though I am now informed, that they begin to look home again, because of the
growing Power of their immediate Master the Emperor.

The Remisness of the Moral Principles usually ascribed to them, is not so much
the Product of their real Sentiments, as of their private Interest: For
considering that too much Severity would hinder people to repair to them for
advice in doubtful Cases, they thought it was fit and necessary for their own
ends, to give as much scope as possibly they could to Humane Frailty, in order
to gain both the Esteem and Love of the people; wherein some of them succeeded
so well, that they were generally cried up for the only hearthealing
Physicians; yea, and called too by some in a Blasphemous manner, The Lambs of
God that take away the Sins of the World; because whatever perplexed Case was
proposed to 'em by their Votaries, they were sure to resolve it according to
their Inclinations, without any regard to the strict Prescriptions of the
Gospel, which they never failed to put that Sense upon they judged most
agreeable to their own secret Concerns. Thus they found out a Thousand Tricks
to elude the Obligation of restoring other Peoples Goods and Good Name, with
that unhappy success that neither Simony nor Usury were to be met with among
Dealers, because of the Jesuitical Maxims they had learned to excuse both upon
Occasion: But the World beginning to hearken to the more Gospel-like Doctrine
of the severer Jansenists, they found it of late their Advantage to write and
teach things conformable to the present Humor of the Age: For seeing men
inclining to a further Reformation, as being unwilling to be flattered in their
sinful ways, they judged it necessary for their private Ends to humor them by
a more Primitive Doctrine, according to the Advice of the Famous Louis Nyel,
one of their Provincials of the Province of Champagne, who was used to express
himself about the matter pretty odly thus: Puisque lemonde veult estre fouette
fouettons le: Since Men will be whipped, and severely dealt withal, let us not
spare them; that is, since Men begin to dislike our easier and looser Morals,
let us close in with them for our own ends, teaching and preaching such things
as may work the People into a belief of our being rigid Observers of the
strictest Gospel Maxims.

ARTICLE XXXVI.
1. The Jesuits Politics. 2. Their Specious Pretenses to Godliness. 3. The
Qualifications required in such as they admit into their Order.

As no People put a better Face upon their covetous Projects than the Jesuits,
so none are more admired by the bigoted Roman Catholics, who look upon them
as Men wholly consecrated to the Spiritual Good of Mankind, which indeed they
always pretend to in all their Undertakings; and to give the Devil his due, as
it cannot be denied but that there are a great number of private Men among
them, both Eminent for Virtue and Learning, so what I said before, and what I
am now to say, relates chiefly to the governing part, who build their Designs
upon other grounds than private Men usually do.

The Jesuits from their very first Foundation have had, it seems, a Design to
reap the Profit both of the very begging Orders, and of such as live upon their
own Yearly Revenue. Their Professed Houses, as they call them, enjoy all the
Benefit and Privileges of the Mendicant Orders, being maintained upon the
Public, or rather Private Benevolence, very plentifully, and without sending
about to gather it, after the manner of the Friars, receive upon call from
private hands enough to supply not only their Wants, but likewise their Luxury.
Their Colleges and Seminaries, on the contrary, are all well founded, though
not all equally rich, either by Princes or Private Men, or upon the Ruins of
the Benedictine Monks, a part of whose Estates they have got into their Hands,
both in France, Italy, and Germany, by their secret Intrigues at Court, because
they are thought more useful to the Public, upon the account of their
preaching, teaching, and breeding up every where the Citizens and Gentlemen's
Children gratis indeed, and for nothing in appearance, though they be well paid
for their pains, because they never accept of a College under Six or Seven
Hundred Pounds English Money Yearly, besides what they receive Quarterly in
such Colleges as take Pensioners, as Clermont in Paris, Pontamousson in
Lorrain, and other places.

But to give you some further Hints of what I was saying in the beginning of
this Article, of their covering all their Designs with the fairest pretenses to
Piety and Godliness, they pretend always to act not only for the Glory, but for
the greater Glory of God, this being the famed Motto of the Order, ad Majorem
Dei Gloriam: Though if we look narrowly into their real Projects, they aim more
at their own Glory than at the Glory and Honor of him they pretend only to
glorify, insomuch that they would not be called Loyolites, or Ignatians, from
Loyola or Ignatius, their first Patriarch and Founder, but the Society of
Jesus, forsooth, la Compagnie de Jesus; as if they were the only People in the
World that deserved this Title; Whereas none have perhaps less Right to it,
because of the insufferable Pride they are generally and deservedly too accused
of, being great Despisers of the Secular Clergy, and of all the other Religious
Orders, as looking upon themselves as the chief, if not the only Supporters of
the Church of Rome; though they are so far from appearing interested, and
covetous of Reward for what Service they do the Public, that they are obliged
to teach, preach, and say their Masses, without the least hopes of any Salary
for their pains; yet they do nothing for nothing, and expect to be considered
for their very Masses, not under the Notion of a Reward, but of an Alms either
given or promised before the Work is begun: Wherein their Condition is much
better than that of the Mendicant Friars, because the begging Tribe depend only
upon either public or private Charity, without any Yearly Revenue: Whereas the
subtler Jesuits have got the benefit of both, as I was saying before, their
Professed Houses being maintained by the public, and their Colleges upon
their own Stock and Fond. They pretend not indeed to take any Money with such
as they admit into their Society, yet they have always a special regard to One
of these Three following things in their Choice, either to Riches, Quality, or
great Parts: If their Proselyte be rich, let him be never so great a Blockhead,
they are sure to catch at him greedily; If he is of a Noble Extraction, and
well allied, they are likewise for his admittance, because of the support they
get by it from his powerful Friends; and if he is a Man of Great, Natural, or
Acquired Parts, they think him the fitter for their business, which is
generally Teaching, Preaching, and Intriguing in all Courts, and private
Families for their own Ends.

ARTICLE XXXVII.
1. The Aim of the Romish Zealots. 2. The pretended Zeal of Popish Princes. 3.
The French King's real Design in Dragooning his Subjects.

The Pope's Pretenses to Piety and Godliness, to the saving of Souls, and to
the greater Glory of God, are so plausible, that notwithstanding all that is
laid to his Charge by his Adversaries, we should still entertain a favorable
Opinion of his Goodness, if we knew not what he chiefly aimed at in all his
pretended Apostolical Undertakings. It Is not for nothing that he has erected
the College de propaganda, or rather de congreganda side, allowing a Yearly
Pension to all Secular Priests employed in the Conversion of Heretics:
Wherein, though some of them perhaps through a mistaken Zeal, intend nothing
else but the Good of Souls; yet sure I am the Governors of the Church of Rome
have a Temporal prospect upon the matter of recovering one day those vast
Revenues they have lost, by the withdrawing of so many Nations from the Popish
Yoke. I doubt not then but some silly ignorant Priests may fancy they do God
Service in doing their utmost Endeavors to convert Protestants to their
Principles; but the Conclaves aim in pushing them on to the Work, is the hopes
they still are in of recovering Peter's Pence again, and of enriching Rome once
more, as of old, with the Spoils of England. Now as Children follow commonly
the Example of their Fathers, the Popish Princes imitating exactly the Popes
Politics, endeavor likewise the Conversion of Mankind to their principles for
the same Ends. One would take the late Kings of Spain and Portugal for true
Apostles, to judge of them by their apparent Zeal to convert both Indies: The
King of Portugal wrote himself to Ignatius of Loyola, Patriarch of the Jesuits,
for some of his Society to convert the East Indies to the Christian Faith; and
he was so earnest upon the Matter, that he spared no Expenses to promote the
Roman Catholic Interest in those parts; And though the King of Spain, as the
Abler of the Two, did outdo him in this political Zeal, sending great numbers
of Churchmen, of all sorts, to Florida, to Mexico, to the Philippin Islands,
and other places conquered, or to be conquered by his Victorious Arms; Yet
Lewis the Fourteenth shows himself more zealous than either of them, by
Dragooning his Subjects into Popery. The Apostles themselves never dreamed of
his Method of converting Souls to the Christian Religion: the only way they
understood and practiced of making Proselytes, was that of persuasion, of
preaching, teaching, arguing, and exhorting. This Method is far more
efficacious; Turn ye must, or burn: The Dragooning Sword unties sooner the
Gordian Knots of Religious Mysteries than all the subtlest Arguments either of
Philosophers or Divines. This is a Secret, till of late, unknown, and how
Antichristian soever, the only that I can imagine, or contrive, to make all
Nations outwardly agree as to Matters of Religion.

If the simpler Mob be of Opinion, that the Princes I have mentioned, undertook
the Conversion of the Infidels, merely upon the account of Religion, I am sure
the wiser sort of Mankind will both think and say, That Interest, Ambition, and
Conquest, were their chief, if not only Inducements to such Religious
Enterprises, as they are so much commended for by those who either love to
flatter them, or are not clear sighted enough to see through the specious
pretenses of Designing Men. For it is certain, that the two first had in
prospect, as they have yet at this very day, the Conquest of the East and West
Indies: Which Attempt they thought would prove both easy, and without hazard,
if they could once engage the ignorant Indians to submit to an Implicit Faith,
and a blind Obedience to the Church of Rome; wherein they succeeded so well,
that the Emperor of Japan became, not without Reason, jealous of the great
numbers of the New Converts in his Dominions; and upon notice given him by the
Dutch of the Popish Princes real Design in sending so many Missionaries at so
great Charges to his Territories, and other Neighbour-Nations, he immediately
gave out his Orders for destroying all the Christians by Fire and Sword, upon
suspicion of a Plot set on foot by the Popish Kings against himself and his
Subjects. Now as for Lewis XIV. the very Papists themselves confess, that he is
no more concerned for Religion, whatever he may appear to be to the simpler
World, than if he pretended to none at all; and that all the noise he makes
about the converting of the Hugonots, comes from a secret Ambition of putting
himself in a posture to Master his Neighbors, by securing himself from such as
he looks upon, though without any Reason, as his most dangerous and Domestic
Enemies.

ARTICLE XXXVIII.
1. Why the Papists keep the People in Ignorance. 2. The Silence of the
Scripture about the Fundamental Principles of Popery. 3. Why the Church of Rome
allows not of the Common Use of Scripture.

It Is, one would think, an unaccountable thing, that the Papists will not allow
the Scripture to be translated into Vulgar Languages; Yea, nor the public
Prayers to be either read, or said in a known Tongue, since nothing seems to me
more directly contrary to their own Interest, than to keep the People in
Ignorance of the chief Matters relating to their own Religion, because so long
as they are in this condition, they may be easily carried away by the Wind of
any Doctrine, upon the first charitable instruction, or friendly invitation to
open their Eyes, and make use of their Reason, for the chief end God has
allowed it to Mankind; that is, the saving of our Souls: Whereas, while they
live in a state of Ignorance, they are in a mere Capacity to any thing, by
reason of their Want of that knowledge the Papists themselves could afford
them, if they spoke not to them from the very Altar in a strange and unknown
Tongue.

But what I wonder most at, is this, that they suffer the illiterate Men, and
silly Women to say their Prayers in Latin, which they understand not, as if the
Heart could be moved without the understanding be first illuminated. Whatever
may be the Effect of Ignorance in other cases, sure in this it can never be the
Mother of Devotion: For how can a Man pray heartily to God Almighty, when he
knows not whether what he says be Sense or Nonsense; or, for ought he knows of
the whole Matter, downright Blasphemy. That the Romanists should publish the
Scriptures in an unknown tongue, it is odd indeed, since they are written for
all Mankind; Yet not much to be wondered at, because they do not design them to
be read by the unlearned Tribe: But to allow the unlearned Mob to read, and say
Latin Prayers they understand not, is a thing they can hardly account for.
Nevertheless, since we know the Papists to be like the Children of this World,
wise in their Generation, and their Church to be a Politic, rather than a
Religious Body, we must of course conclude, that they do not commit such
palpable Irregularities, but upon a fair prospect of some very considerable
advantage for themselves: and this is chiefly the maintaining of the People in
their blind Obedience to the Authority of their Church; which, notwithstanding
all her pretenses to Infallibility, holds it to be both lawful and useful for
Men to make their Spiritual Exercises in an unknown Tongue, though this be such
a piece of blind Obedience, as would make us say to God in our daily Addresses;
we knew not what, since the imaginary general Intention of the Church, they
pretend to be sufficient in this case, could never supply the particular want
of Knowledge in what relates immediately to the good of our Souls.

Now how Antichristian soever you may judge it to be, to keep the Scriptures,
that are God's Letters Patents to all Mankind, from the common people; Yet the
Papists are obliged, through a principle of Self-preservation, to condemn the
common use of so dangerous a Book, as they call the Scripture. And I confess it
to be so for them, as mentioning no where the fundamental and distinguishing
Articles of Popery, the Infallibility, I mean, and Universality of the
particular Church of Rome, the Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into
the Body and Blood of Christ, that are now in Heaven, the Lawfulness of
Image Worship, Relick-Worship, of Prayers to the Saints, and for the delivery
of the Souls pretended to be in Purgatory, etc. If the people were made
sensible, that these things were not revealed in the Word of God, they would,
without any longer delay, shake off the insufferable Yoke of Popery, since they
might soon understand, by the daily perusal of the Holy Writ, that these, and
the like new coined Articles are mere humane Inventions, and not God's revealed
Word. The Papist then, I fancy, how foolish soever you may think him, acts
wisely, and according to the great Law of Self-preservation, in not allowing
the people to read the Scripture, because the common use of this Divine Book,
would prove the utter ruin of the Romish Church, for the Reason I just now
hinted at.

ARTICLE XXXIX.
1. Men generally more concerned for their own Reputation than for the Honor
of God. 2. A Young Lady severely used by her own Mother, and upon what account.
3. The late Prince of Conde's Reflection against the French Bishops.

Though Fathers and Mothers virtuously inclined, can hardly bear with the
irregular and sinful Actions of their Children; yet it is observable, that they
are much more concerned for some sins they commit, than for some others, though
perhaps more heinous and more grievous in their own Nature: As for instance,
How many take little or no notice of their Childrens Drinking, Swearing,
Gaiming, Stealing, etc. who nevertheless use them with the utmost Severity, if
they chance to commit such sins of frailty, as may occasion either disgrace or
shame to themselves or their Familes. This I can give you a sufficient proof of
by what I have once observed my self in the behavior of a very precise and
godly Lady toward the best of her own Daughters, though looked upon by her as
the very worst, because she had been overcome by the fair words, and reiterated
promises of a deceitful Lover. The Young Lady having lived till then in great
Reputation among her Neighbors, was thought a true Pattern of Virtue and
Modesty, by all that knew her; Whereas her Sisters were known to be guilty of
lying, drinking, of detracting of all Mankind; to say nothing of their
insufferable Vanity and Pride; of their Gaiming late and early, or rather whole
Nights and whole Days, and of many other immoral Exercises of that kind; for
which their godly Mother never so much as once checked them in good earnest,
though upon the first discovery of her Eldest Daughters Misfortune, she fell
upon her in such a fury, that had she not been rescued out of her hands, it was
generally believed she had murdered her.

You may easily think I design, by this short passage, to tell you, that such
as are mere pretenders to Virtue, mind always more their own Concerns than
those of God Almighty, whom yet they seem to honor so much with their lips, as
to check and condemn all such as make not so great a show of Godliness as they
upon all public occasions commonly do. The sins of the Sisters I was speaking
of, were sins indeed against God; but the Fault committed by the Ladies Eldest
Daughter, was something else, as being a disgrace, and a stain to the Family:
and that I fancy, this Old Lady was chiefly, if not only concerned for; or that
her Daughter, by this unhappy accident, had lost that which did best qualify
her for a rich, and honorable Match. What happened lately in France, is
somewhat akin to what I have been discoursing of, since it lays open to the
World such as are but seemingly concerned for nothing more than for the Honor
and Glory of God.

The Famous Moliere had written a Comedy, entitled, Tartuffee against Bigots,
Hypocrites, and all sorts of mere Pretenders to Religion; but with so little
applause from such as knew themselves to be guilty, that the Bishop of Autun,
the chief Man, as it was reported, aimed at in the Play, assisted by some of
his Brethren, complained to the French King of the Wrong done them by Moliere,
who having informed the Prince of Conde of their whole proceedings, gave his
Royal Highness occasion to say, That several Treatises had been dispersed up
and down the Kingdom, to introduce Atheism, which the Bishops took no notice
of, because there the Honor of God only was concerned; but that now they
appeared with a greater Zeal than was requisite against Tartuffee, because
their own Reputation seemed to lie at stake.

ARTICLE XL.
1. Interest the frequent Cause of Ingratitude. 2. King Charles the Second's
Behavior toward his best Friends. 3. Lewis the XIV. highly obliged by the
French Hugonots.

Such as forget, or reward not the good done 'em by their best Friends and
Benefactors, are generally thought either to be guilty of, or not to scruple
much at any other Crime, according to the old saying, Si ingratum dixeris omnia
dixeris: Yet the Power of Interest is so absolute, and so arbitrary, as to
cause Men sometimes not only to forget their true Friends, but likewise to
promote and enrich their greatest Enemies. What Obligation Charles the Second
had to the Cavalier Party in England, Scotland, and Ireland, it is too well
known to be told again in this place. How many, both Noblemen and Gentlemen,
stood up for him in the worst of Times, to the hazard and loss of their Lives
and Fortunes, suffering patiently, till he came home again, the greatest
Extremities that Oppression and Want could expose them to: Who had not thought
but that upon the Return of King Charles to England, they had been all nobly
rewarded for their past Services and Sufferings, for their constant loyalty,
and daily endeavors to set things again upon their first Foundation: And I
doubt not but King Charles II. had been very willing to gratify, and reward
too his distressed Subjects, had he not judged such a piece of Gratitude quite
contrary to his real Interest: For considering that such as stood up for his
Concerns, were so entirely consecrated to his Service, that no hard usage on
his side could break them off from their loyalty to the Royal line, he thought
he could use them as familiarly as he pleased; yea, and slight them too without
their taking much notice of it, provided they were now and then commended for
the constant performance of their Duty in the hardest times: But as for the
downright Rebels, and all such as opposed most his Interest, because they were
the richest Men in the Nation, and the most considerable, upon the account of
their Authority among the People, he very prudently closed in with them, as
being the surest props of his new settled Throne. So that whatever good Service
we do to our Friends, if they find it their Interest to make us no Returns for
our Kindness, we must not rely too much upon what we may reasonably expect from
them, and they ought to do for us.

But yet King Charles the Second dealt not so harshly with his real Friends, as
Lewis the Fourteenth with the French Hugonots, who having declared themselves
for his Right against the then Prince of Conde, caused the whole Kingdom of
France to take his part in opposition to the ambitious pretenses of that
dangerous Antagonist. Because every one is not particularly acquainted with the
Matter of Fact, I shall upon this occasion give you a particular and short
account of the whole passage, that the World may be thoroughly informed, how
injustly the French Protestants have been dealt withal by Lewis the Great: The
Prince of Conde considering first, That Lewis the Fourteenth was born near
Three and Twenty Years after Lewis the Thirteenth, his Father, was married, and
secondly, That this Prince had been always so sickly and weak, that some
doubted very much if he could be the true Father of Lewis XIV. Upon this
grounded suspicion, he immediately declared his Right to the Crown, as next
Heir; and accordingly marching with a powerful Army toward Paris, forced the
Cardinal, the Queen, and the Young King to fly as far as Amiens, before any of
the French Cities would take notice of him, till the Cardinal sent to the
Hugonots, to desire their assistance in such a dangerous Juncture as that was:
Who unanimously agreeing to give him all the Succors they could raise for his
Service, frightn'd the Prince back again without executing his Design.
Immediately upon the News of his Retreat, the strong Cities, that till then had
shut up their Gates, not only received the flying King, but furnishing him with
all Necessaries, enabled him to march back to Paris again with an Army, where
though opposed at first by Mademoiselle, he was at last admitted with great
shouts and acclamations of the People. Though this was such a singular piece of
Service, as deserved the greatest reward; yet when the King came to age, in a
great Council held in his presence, the through overthrow of the Hugonots was
fully resolved upon: Which so startled the King himself at first, that he told
plainly his Counselors, He had always been informed, That the Hugonots had
settled the Crown upon his Head, in opposition to the Prince of Conde's
aspiring Ambition: But it was immediately replied by the Council, That for that
very Reason he ought to leave no stone unturned to destroy 'em, because if they
had been not very long before powerful enough to settle the Crown upon his
Head, they were then able enough, if they pleased, to pull it off again.

ARTICLE XLI.
1. That Riches change Men's Tempers. 2. And why. 3. What the Papists used to
say of the New Converts in the late Reign.

It Is commonly said, That a change of Fortune for the better, alters a Man's
Humor and Temper; Honores mutant Mores. But it is not obvious to every common
Understanding, why it does so: For though it be generally true, That Men become
prouder by great Riches acquired, and Eminent Dignities conferred upon them, it
must be further inquired, what is the true Cause of this Pride, which renders
them so unsociable to such as formerly were their Equals and Companions? May
not I then be allowed to say, That their Pride being perhaps more affected than
real, it is chierly grounded upon Interest; which I make out in short thus: If
Men after they are promoted to great Dignities, whether Ecclesiastical or
Civil, behaved themselves toward their once familiar Acquaintances with the
same Exterior Humility and openness of Heart they were used to do before their
promotion, they would be forced, in a manner, to make them share in their
Estates likewise, as well as in their intimate Friendship: It Is then a piece of
prudence in them, according to the Political Maxims of Self-interest, to break
off all intimacy with their old, if poor, Friends, least they be solicited to
supply their Wants, to the lessening of what they themselves must spend in
Superfluities: And for this very Reason I am of Opinion, That the
unsociableness, if I may so speak, of most men under the Circumstances we are
discoursing of, comes directly from their greediness to keep what they have
got, lest by their Familiarity with their former Friends, they be obliged, in
point of Honor, not to let them want upon occasion: For it is generally
observed, That the ungratefulness of most men to their truest Friends, and
greatest Benefactors, is always to be ascribed to their unreasonable
Covetousness upon the sudden change of their Fortune, either because of their
great and necessary Expenses in a higher post, or upon the account of their new
ambitious projects they must lay up for, being never contented with their
present condition, how flourishing soever, because the more they have, the more
they covet; Quo plus sunt potae plus sitiuntur aquae. Upon this account we may
truly say, That all Men are equally poor, and in Want, because no man thinks he
has enough to answer his present occasions: So unsatisfied we still are with
the plentifullest Enjoyments of this World. Since then, in all our Attempts, we
pursue always our own Interest, notwithstanding our pretenses sometimes to the
contrary, we shall be reckoned to act like Politicians, if we mind what
particular advantage every man aims at, that so knowing what he may be gained
by, we may take our measures accordingly, for our own ends. This Maxim being
carefully observed by the late King, in preferring upon all occasions the New
Converts to confirm them in his Religion by the actual possession of that, the
very hopes of which had brought them over to it, gave occasion to the old Roman
Catholics to say, That the Kings Papists got all, but Gods Papists Nothing:
Meaning, that the New Converts were always gratified either by Pensions or
Employments: whereas such as were bred up Roman Catholics, though in want,
were commonly slighted, or seldom taken notice of, because 'twas thought that
the latter being Papists by principle, would not easily leave their Religion;
and that the former being only so through Interest, could not stay long in it
without a present and competent Reward.

ARTICLE XLII.
1. No true Image of God, and why. 2. God Visible in the Works of the Creation.
3. Why so seldom minded by Mankind.

Though there can be no true Image of God, because of the incomprehensible
Excellency of his Nature, yet we may be allowed to say, That he is visible, in
a manner, to a discerning Eye in the wonderful Works of the Creation: For who
can behold unconcernedly, in a bright Night, the Starry Heaven we are
surrounded with on all sides, and not think, at the same time of the
inconceivable Beauty of our Celestial Jerusalem, whose mere outside, or
Avenues, are so glorious and so delightful? Do not the orderly and constant
motions of the Planets speak aloud, to such as have Ears, the infinite Wisdom
of the Overseer? Is it possible to consider the incomparable Splendor of the
Sun in our Meridian, without remembering of him, qui lucem habitat
inaccessibilem; who inhabiteth an inaccessible light? But does not the
spreading Earth, while it shows us the Almighty Power of its Maker, as being
thrown into the midst of the Vortex, or Heaven we are enclosed in, without
either foundation or Pillar to support such an huge Mass, point us out with as
many Fingers as it produces Plants and living Creatures, the Power, Wisdom,
and Goodness of an invisible God? And can we, opening our Eyes, look upon the
orderly ebbing and flowing of the Ocean, without raising our Minds toward him,
who has set bounds to the Sea? To be short, we need not consult Books about the
Being of a God, nor read them, to be put in mind of him, the whole World being
a great Volume that we may and ought upon all occasions to peruse, in order to
discover the invisible things by such as are visible, and obvious to the
Corporal Eye. Since then, as I was saying before, nothing is so visible, in
some sense, as God himself in the Works of his Power; I must, in pursuance of
my Design, inquire in this place, why men have Eyes, and see not what they may
see, with the least attention, in every Object of their very Senses: Jupiter
est quodcunque vides Jovis omnia plena.

If we gaze a while at a great and stately Palace, beautified with whatever Art
and Wit can contrive, we call presently to mind either the Architect or the
Owner, admiring both the Skill of the one, and the Riches and Power of the
other, who could raise at his own Expenses such a stately Building: Now can we
imagine any Earthly Palace in the least comparable to the World it self, either
as to Beauty or Stateliness, the very Roof, if I may so speak, or the Concave
part of this large House, being an Object of an unspeakable Pleasure to a
discerning Eye, because of the wonderful Beauty of the fixed Stars, of their
huge bulk, how small soever in appearance, of their Regular Motions, and secret
Influences upon our Globe; yea, and upon all contingent Events likewise if
Judiciary Astrologers are to be hearkened to. I need not mention in this place
the Beauty of the Earth it self, in the infinite Variety of its parts, which
though not so glorious as the Celestial Bodies, are yet, if narrowly looked
into, no less surprising Objects.

But to come to a Conclusion upon the whole Matter, What is the True Reason why
beholding daily and hourly this vast and stately Palace, I mean the World we
live in, we scarce ever enquire either after the Maker or the Owner, who are
both in this Case one and the same, the Almighty and Glorious Creator of all
things, God himself? It Is easy to guess what I must answer to this Question,
not so much in order to follow out my design, as because of the undoubted Truth
of the Matter of Fact, That Temporal Interest ties our Hearts so strongly to
Earthly Things, that most men behave themselves no otherwise than if they
looked upon the very Fundamental Article of all true Religion, the Being of a
God, as a mere Politic Contrivance to frighten the simpler sort into Honesty
and Morality; Or if they are not thoroughly so guilty, considering how they
spend their whole life in Gaiming, Trading, Fighting, Eating, Sleeping and
Drinking, without having perhaps ever thought once seriously of a God, we have
Reason to think, that their whole Soul is so applied to their worldly concerns,
that they never remember of a Deity, unless perhaps when they take his Holy
Name in vain. The chief and only Reason then, why men live so many Years
without making that use of this Visible World 'twas chiefly designed for, is,
because, as the Scripture says somewhere, some are wholly taken up with the
Concerns of a married life; others are deeply engaged in Public or Private
Affairs, which they cannot clear themselves of; and all generally pursue their
own Temporal Happiness, or their own things so eagerly, that few or none raise
their Minds above the Objects of their Senses.

ARTICLE XLIII.
1. The chief Remedy against Burning. 2. The Vows of perpetual Chastity sinful.
3. Why imposed by the Church of Rome.

Since 'tit certain, That a married life is the Sovereign Remedy against what
the Scripture calls Burning, it may be worth our while to inquire, how it comes
to pass, That the Church of Rome neither allows her Priests nor her Nuns to
marry: For it being undeniable, that they may, and do burn as often, if not
oftener than others, why should they be forbid the use of the chief Remedy
prescribed by the Scripture it self against such an ordinary frailty? Sure they
cannot pretend to a greater Holiness, upon this account, than the rest of
Mankind, because the Vows of perpetual Chastity, or of never marrying, which is
the same thing in their Opinion, are really sinful, If it be a sin to put a
stop, as much as in us lies, to the propagation of Mankind, in a lawful way,
though chiefly designed by the Author of the Creation; or if it be a sin,
either to reject the very Remedy God himself, as our great Physician, has
ordered us against the violentest Temptation we can be liable to; that is,
against Burning; or to say against the express Words of the Holy Ghost, It Is
better to burn than marry. Now, though I willingly grant, That as he does well
who marries, so he may, in some Cases, do better who marries not; yet I
maintain, it is always better to marry than to make a Vow never to marry;
because such an act as this is the tying of our selves up from doing a lawful
thing, and in some cases necessary, under a no less pain than that of Eternal
Damnation: For when the Priests and Nuns, upon their admittance into the Order
they are enrolled in, pronounce these solemn Words, Voveo Castitatem perpetuam,
I vow and promise perpetual Chastity; They Equivalently say, That if ever they
marry, yea, were it to quench their Burning, they are in a state of Damnation,
for doing what the Scripture advises them to do against a pressing Temptation.
Since then it is clear from the Premises, to an unprejudiced mind, That the
forementioned Vow being unlawful, ought neither to be taken, nor kept if once
taken, undoubtedly some considerable Interest or other must oblige the Church
of Rome to impose upon her Children such an unnatural Yoke as this is; and I
know no other thing she can aim at in this case but worldly Grandeur, by
securing to her self the chief Defenders of her Authority, the Religious Orders
of all Colors, which as the Vows give Being to, so they likewise without them
cannot subsist: For whatever Money is given in with their Novices, as they
speak, may be recovered again, in case they make no Vows after a Year or Two's
Trial. If then we remember, that the Church of Rome aims always in all her
undertakings at worldly Greatness and Riches, we cannot but admire her Policy
as much as we ought to abhor her Wickedness, in taking this method to make her
self a Party, and a strong one too in every Corner of Christendom.

ARTICLE XLIV.
1. Grains of Allowance for lewd Women in Rome, and upon what account. 2. The
Courtisans banished Rome, and called home again. 3. A considerable Abuse
suffered in Amsterdam, and why.

Public Protection given to lewd and debauched Women, is such a piece of
Scandal, that Rome it self might be ashamed of it: But the least smell of Gain
out of any thing whatsoever, dulcis odor lucri, etc. being so sweet and
comforting, we need not wonder to see the Pope himself slight his own Good Name
and Reputation for a Yearly Revenue he gets by protecting such Women as give
themselves up to the public Lust. Though the Matter of Fact be very certain,
and no where doubted, yet because the manner is not so generally known, I shall
give you a true and short account of it upon this occasion: When Women are
resolved to turn themselves loose, they are obliged to make their appearance
before Two Public Notaries, or before Two Judges, in order to renounce
solemnly their Names, Families, and Reputation: Which being performed in the
usual manner, they are allowed a free Trade, provided first they live together
in certain noted places; provided, secondly, they wear something or other they
may be known by; and thirdly, that they fail not to pay every Year a certain
Sum into the Pope's Exchequer for their Freedom. The Romans chief Apology for
such an unchristian Toleration, is the pretense of shunning a greater Crime, I
do heartily abhor to name, as well as to think on, otherwise, they say,
unavoidable in that Climate, if the former Conveniences were not allowed of:
which, they add, is so true, that one of the Popes having banished all the
Courtesans, was not only forced to call them back to Rome again, upon his
Discovery of a greater and daily abomination, occasioned by their absence; but
likewise, that there might be nothing wanting on his side for putting a stop to
one sin, and promoting another, caused a considerable Sum of Money to be
distributed among them, to enable them to buy such things as might fit them the
better for the use they were designed for. So one only among the Popes
undertook to clear Rome of lewd Women, and, for ought I know, none will ever
attempt the like again, because of the Considerable and Yearly Benefit the
Apostolic Chamber gets by thus indulging Humane Frailty. It Is true, there is a
Monastery appointed for the use of the Repenting Courtisans: But through this
very pretended Zeal, we may easily discover a real Design of Gain and Interest:
For since it is certain, that the Pope's Revenues are Yearly bettered by the
multitude of the Courtisans, there could be no Contrivance so plausible, nor so
useful for the Pope's Design, as that of a Monastery, or Retreat for them in
their Old Days, when sin has left them, because Young Women considering, that
they can provide for themselves, with the help of the allowed Trade, during
their greener and flourishing Years; and that they are sure to be provided for
when Old Age comes on, in the Monastery designed for them, are undoubtedly
thereby encouraged to turn Courtisans, upon such a fair prospect of never
wanting neither Young nor Old, in case of a true or feigned Repentance.

But what I have said of Rome, I may likewise say of a very Reformed City,
Amsterdam; and that Interest obliges not only the Papists, but also the best
sort of Christians to connive sometimes at the greatest Crimes and Abuses. The
Musick-Houses, as they call them in Amsterdam, are allowed of by the
Magistrates all the Year round, because of the Money spent daily there, to the
great benefit of the City, by lewd Women, and such as come to meet them in
these places. As I could not but discover sometimes my particular concern to
see a Reformed City guilty almost of the same abomination we so often reproach
Rome with, I was told by an understanding Hollander, That the Toleration of the
forementioned Houses, how scandalous soever, was very prudently and politically
allowed of by the Magistrates of Amsterdam, upon this account, that the Pay
near of Twenty Thousand Seamen comes home to them that way again, it being
generally observed, that such Houses are most resorted to by idle Mariners, who
would spend the Money they have got in the States Service, in the
Neighbour-Cities, if their Debauchery was not connived at in Amsterdam.

ARTICLE XLV.
1. The Abuse of Godliness. 2. Good Advice against the treacherous Designs of
the deceitful. 3. The Seven Woes of the Gospel pronoun'd against Hypocrites.

Men commit not only all kind of Crimes for interest sake, but, which may seem
somewhat strange, become godly and virtuous for the same end; Godly, I say, at
least in appearance, as thinking that Piety which the Scripture says is useful
for all things, utilis ad omnia Pietas, may likewise be useful for the getting
of Money: Such men are always less concerned to do ill, than to do illlike,
because by the former they offend God only, whereas by the latter they commonly
give offense to men, whom they regard more than him they ought only to fear:
Upon this account it is that they are careful to avoid no sin but that of
Scandal, being ready, upon any advantage, to lie, cheat, and murder, to commit
Theft, Fornication, and Adultery, if they can but do it secretly: They are, I
fancy, of the Italians Opinion, That what is not known is not done; that is, as
good as not done, because it puts no stop to the promoting of their Interest so
long as hid, and kept from the knowledge of such as would be very loath to help
them either with their Purse or Credit, if they were informed of their secret
Life and Conversation. Since then the World is so deceitful, for our own
private measures we ought particularly to take notice of such as court us
unexpectedly, and at an extraordinary rate, with a show of Humility and
Modesty, beyond their Temper and Custom upon other occasions, because, to be
sure, they either intend to put a Cheat upon us, or to obtain from us, or by
our mediation, some particular favor. But those sort of Hypocrites are most of
all guilty, who under the specious pretense of Religion, cover their real
Designs of Interest and Conquest, as generally the Papists do, when pretending
to gain our Souls, they aim chiefly at our Goods and Estates, as may be easily
made out by whatever they have undertaken of moment, either at home or abroad;
and I wish I had no reason to say, That they are not imitated in this by some
of the Reformed part of the World, who tho they pretend not to Infallibility,
act nevertheless, as if they believed themselves infallible, in depriving,
either directly or indirectly, of their Estates all such as cannot in
Conscience conform to their way of Worship: Which gives us just grounds to
suspect, that this Temporal Concern is the chief thing they aim at,
notwithstanding all their fair pretenses to a thorough Reformation, to the
promoting of the Gospel, and of Saving Faith in Christ. It Is certainly against
such Pharisees, and mere pretenders to Holiness, that Christ pronounced with so
much Zeal and Eloquence, the Seven following Woes.

1. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23. 13.
Hypocrites; for ye shut up the kingdom of Heaven against men; for ye neither
go in your selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.

2. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye devour Widows houses,
and for pretense make long prayers: therefore ye shall receive the greater
damnation.

3. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye compass Sea and Land
to make one Proselite, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child
of Hell than your selves.

4. Woe unto you ye blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall swear by the Temple
it is nothing, but whoever shall swear by the Gold of the Temple, is a debtor.

5. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye pay the Tithe of
Mint, and Annise, and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the
Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith; these ought ye to have done, and not to leave
the other undone.

6. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye make clean the
outside of the Cup, and of the Platter; but within they are full of Extortion
and Excess.

7. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for you are like unto whited
Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead
men's bones, and of all uncleanness.

We have here Hypocrisy, and all its Designs of Interest laid open, with that
life and plainness, that I need not enlarge upon the Subject Matter of this
Article: I shall only add, That as the Ten Commandments are written in golden
Letters in every Church, to mind the Christians of their Duty, it were likewise
fit the Seven foregoing Woes should be set up in every Church, Kirk,
Field-Conventicle, and Meeting House, that both the Preachers and the Hearers
may remember, first, That it is neither long Prayers, groaning, weeping, nor
saying, Lord, Lord, that they are to be saved by, but a living Faith, a real
Virtue, and an unfeigned Repentance; and secondly, That as God is a true
Spirit, so he ought, and will be adored by all such as he lays claim to, in
Spirit and Truth.

ARTICLE XLVI.
1. Lewd Women. 2. Quack-Physicians. 3. Judiciary Astrologers.

Though it be clear, That all men pursue not the same particular Interest,
since some act for profit, others for pleasure, and others again by a principle
of Ambition, I do nevertheless incline to think, That most men, whatever may be
their pretenses to the contrary, aim at nothing more in all their projects,
than at the increase of their Treasures; that is, of their Money, because
without this necessary Tool they can neither pretend to honor, nor hope for
pleasure: Yea, those very Women that seem to have consecrated themselves wholly
to the unchaste Goddess Venus, or unlawful pleasure, are to be styled rather
Thieves than what they are commonly called, and such of them as either watch
their Prey in the Streets of great Cities, or live together in private Houses,
in order to follow their infamous Trade, ought to be looked upon as no better
than downright Robbers, because their chief design is to plunder, rob, and
drain men's Pockets, which they never fail to do by stealth, if they cannot do
it by consent.

There is another Tribe of Mankind that I must take notice of upon the same
account, or rather upon a worse, because they rob men daily of their Lives and
Estates: and these are the illiterate and Quack-Physicians, who neither
understanding Physic, nor perhaps being capable of understanding it, set up
every where for Doctors; Such only ought, and may be prosecuted without any
deserved Reflection against the Prosecutors, as if they designed an injust
Monopoly: But because men catch at any thing when there is a prospect of Gain,
no wonder if the Quacks finding so much encouragement from the credulous
simplicity of the unlearned Tribe, undertake the cure of most distempers,
without any real knowledge either of a good Remedy, or of a rational Method.
The like may be said of Judiciary Astrologers, who pretend to foresee the free
Determinations of Humane Will, in the different Situation or Aspect of the
Stars and Planets, their chief Design being to draw a Tribute from the ignorant
Mob flocking to 'em for Advice about things to come, which they know nothing
of, unless we allow them to be inspired Men, or real Prophets.

ARTICLE XLVII.
1. Crimes occasioned by Covetousness. 2. Spanish Cruelty. 3. English
Negligence.

Auri sacra fames! quid non mortalia cogis
Pectora?
Would one think, that men could lay so far aside the use of Reason for that of
Gold, as to be guilty of Treachery, Perjury, Murder, and whatever else may
attend Crimes of that kind: yet nothing more ordinary, not so much among Turks
and Pagans, as among Christians: What unheard of Cruelties were committed by
the Spaniards in the West Indies, it is well known all Europe over, though
Mariana, their best Historian, would take no notice of 'em, lest he should
either betray the horrible Treachery of his Countrymen, or himself to be an
unfaithful Historian: They had agreed with an Indian King, their Prisoner, to
give him his life and liberty, upon condition to put them in possession of his
greatest Treasures, within a certain time appointed; But so soon as he had
performed his promise in every particular, he was barbarously strangled by the
Order of the Spanish Governor, with a Million more before and after that time,
as it is reported by some of their own Authors, to the eternal Infamy of that
Nation, visibly punished ever since for such unparalled Cruelties that the
Indians were used to say, They desired not to go to Heaven, if the Spaniards
were to be met with there.

I am then much mistaken if a mere Zeal upon the account of Religion among
Popish Princes particularly, be not one of the Vulgar Errors, especially when I
consider, that at the very same time Lewis the Great was persecuting the
Hugonots in France, he helped the Protestants in Hungary with considerable Sums
against the Emperor, doing likewise his utmost Endeavors to engage the Turk
in a War against him, wherein he succeeded at last, as an Instrument in the
hand of God, to the ruin, in all appearance, of the Turkish Empire, and of his
own perhaps at last, when his measure is once filled up. The English
Protestants, I confess, have not murdered the poor Indians, after the Example
of the Spaniards, as being more inclined to mercy by their principles, than the
Papists; but yet to tell the truth of the matter, they commit daily a Crime in
the West Indies somewhat akin to Murder, by slighting, or hindering, as I am
informed, the Conversion of the Negroes, or their Indian Slaves, least to their
loss, they should enjoy the Privileges of Christian Liberty; which I conceive
to be a very shameful, if not a sinful neglect in such as profess the Christian
Religion: For though no Force is to be used but that of Argument, to bring men
over to our persuasion, yet since no Religion can promote true Holiness so much
as ours, we ought to use our endeavors to set our straggling Neighbors in that
way which we think so safe and secure for our selves: But yet if it happen,
that our Reasons, how strong soever, prevail not to their Conviction, as
appearing weak to them, we are to leave them to God and their own Conscience,
because it shall not be said to 'em at the last day, Go into Eternal Fire, for
doing against our Judgment, but for doing against their own, since that and
nothing else can be imputed either to them or to us as a sin.

ARTICLE XLVIII.
1. The Sabbath day profaned. 2. And by whom. 3. Women's Design in dressing
themselves upon the Sabbath day.

Whether we are to keep holy the Sabbath day, that is, Saturday, which God
himself seems to have pitched upon, or the Sunday, chosen by the Church, I
shall not debate, since the common practice of the Christian World, from the
very Primitive Times, silences me upon the matter: But the thing that I shall
enquire into here, is, why most people, especially Women, go to the place of
Prayer, the Church, upon a Sunday, as if they went to a Play, or to a solemn
meeting upon some profane or indifferent account: Yea, it is observable, That
most of them rise early in the morning upon Sundays, that they may have time
enough to set themselves out to the best advantage in their richest Apparel;
and if Spanish Wool, Spanish Papers, and Washes of all sorts, are made use of
by them at any time, it is particularly then when they are to make their
appearance in the Church or Congregation. I am then of Opinion, that it would
look more Primitive, if the Ladies came to Church adorned like Women professing
Godliness, in a comely and modest Dress; for I take it to be a great profanaion
of the Sabbath day, though little reflected on, and likewise of the very House
of God, the Church, to make such a Figure in it, as may either occasion an
inward Consent to sin in the weak beholders, or withdraw the attention they
ought to give to the Preacher. This practice of wearing costly Apparel on the
Sabbath day, though contrary to the Primitive Times, is still continued upon
the account of a prevailing Interest, which is, in short, this, That as not a
few show themselves in all their Glory in the Church, upon a secret Design of
ensnaring some of their Admirers for their own private ends; so others do it
upon a more honest account, That spreading their Nets after such an inviting
way, they may catch at last good and rich Husbands.

ARTICLE XLIX.
1. The Cheats of Vulgar Chemists. 2. The Three best Catholic Remedies. 3.
Method of little use against Chronical Distempers.

I always looked upon Chemistry as a most necessary and useful Study, though I
have but very little Veneration for the common Chemists, and such among them as
have neither the Skill nor the Honesty of the deservedly Famous Robert Boil,
of whose Chemical Preparations I can say upon my own Experience, That they are
the best that ever I tried in any other part of Europe: But the Fault I find
with the generality of the lower Tribe of Chemists, is this, That they all
pretend to Panacea's, to Catholic, or Universal Remedies, as Potable Gold,
Miraculous Liquors, Powders and Elixirs of all kinds and Names, in order to get
great Rates for what cost them but little or nothing, their Pains excepted: For
when the pretended Secret is discovered, it is sometimes found not to be so much
as Distilled, Calcined, or Chymically prepared: As it happened to Talbot's
Famous Febrifuge, thought at first in France some Extraordinary and Excellent
Chemical Preparation: Whereas it was known at last by what the French King's
first Physician published of it, in a French Treatise, to be nothing else but
the Jesuits Powder, sometimes taken in Substance, sometimes in a Tincture, with
several harmless Additions, to hide it the better from the Eyes of the Curious:
yet if all the Chemical Remedies, and pretended Panacea's were as powerful
against most Distempers, as the Peruvian Bark, if skilfully handled, is against
Agues, and intermitting Fevers, I should neither think the Praises commonly
given them, for Interest's sake, by designing men, too great, nor their Price,
whatever it were, unreasonable: But daily Experience teaches us, That
generally the common pretended Panacea's, are either mere harmless things,
whether simple or compounded, or at the best, but ordinary Remedies, under the
disguise of a Vehicle, of a peculiar Preparation or Mixture. Though I grant
indeed, That there are some Excellent, and scarce ever failing Remedies against
some particular Distempers; such I reckon to be the Powder made of the Peruvian
Bark, against Agues, Opium for allaying of Pain, the Solution of Seed-Pearl by
a Menstruum, neither Vrinous, Acid, nor Alcolisate, against Consumptions and
inward Decays, against Heats, Morphew, Wrinkles of the Face, etc. if outwardly
applied: Yet I do affirm, That because of the almost infinite Variety both of
Men's Tempers, and Distempers, we must confess, and upon daily Experience too,
That there is no Panacea, or Universal Remedy of all the Infirmities incident
to Humane Bodies yet stumbled upon; and that whoever pretends to such a rare
piece of Knowledge, designs, in all likelihood, to put a Cheat upon Mankind,
for Interest's sake: I should nevertheless be misunderstood, if I were thought
not to put a greater value, in some Cases, upon a good Remedy, than upon the
most rational Method, without such a help: For though Method in acute
Distempers be absolutely necessary, nevertheless against confirmed and
Chronical Infirmities, it is of little or no use without a good Tool: So that
all the Aphorisms, either of Hypocrate, or others, will avail but little to the
ablest Physician called to cure an old and inveterate Disease, without the
Knowledge of a good Specific, or of a Medicine known by Experience to be
prevalent in such Cases, if skilfully prepared and judiciously prescribed.

FINIS.

