Imprimatur,

December the 8th. 1685. Robert Midgley.

Painting Illustrated IN Three DIALLOGUES, Containing some Choice Observations
upon the ART. Together with THE LIVES Of the Most Eminent Painters, FROM
CIMABUE, to the time of RAPHAEL and MICHAEL ANGELO.

With an EXPLANATION of the Difficult Terms.

London, Printed by John Gain, for the Author, And are to be Sold by Walter
Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head, in St. Paul's Churchyard. And Jacob Tonson at
the Judges-Head in Chancery Lane: M.DC.LXXXVI.

Imprimatur,

December the 8th. 1685. Robert Midgley.
And Entered according to Order.
ERRATA.
EPistle Dedicatory, page 2. line 6. for Aliana, read Alliance. Preface, p. 2.
l. ult. f. Mary, r. Mark. p. 3. l. 2. f. Mary, r. Mark. p. 4. l. 3. f.
Inspiring, r. Aspiring. p. 19. l. 11. f. audici, r. and dici. In the Dialogues,
p. 8. l. 8. f. Centeres, r. Contours. p. 13. l. 2. f. sense, r. Sex. p. 19. l.
19. f. Centours, r. Contours. p. 60. l. 7. f. Pranitelles, r. Praxiteles. p.
120. l. 6. f. Anachronisaie's, r. Anachronisms. p. 153. f. Slanders by, r.
Standers by. p. 169. l. 16. f. Neptune, r. Neptunum. p. 228. f. Perch, r.
Petrarch. p. 261. l. 7. f. Pictor, r. Pictori. Ib. l. 9. f. Arts, r. Artis. l.
ult. f. onoriente, r. moriente. p. 272. l. 20. f. Centers, r. Contours. p. 281.
l. 9. f. Centers, r. Contours. p. 312. l 2. and 4. f. St. Mary, r. St. Mark. p.
326. l. 22. f. Hands, r. Heads.

Advertisment.
THe Whole Art of the STAGE, written by the Abbot Hedelin, at the Command of
Cardinal Richlieu, and newly Translated by the Author of this Book; is to be
Sold by Samuel Smith, at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM EARL OF DEVON, BARON CAVENDISH OF HARDWICK,
etc.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
MY LORD,
THE Liberal ARTS (amongst which, with the Greeks and Romans, I place Painting)
do so naturally depend upon the Countenance of Great Men, that without their
Protection, they seldom take Root enough to defend themselves against Envy and
Ignorance: Nor, on the other side, does Greatness it self, though never so
Luxuriant, either sit Easy in its present Enjoyments, or live Kindly in the
Memory of Posterity, without those Ornaments of its Power, the Arts and
Sciences. But this Aliana of Knowledge and Greatness, is always more
Conspicuous, where the Maecenas is not only a Lover, but a Judge of the
Beauties of Ingenious Productions: This being, where could I have sought a
Patron, but in your Lordship, for the Improvement of an Art, which makes one of
your chiefest Delights; and in the Knowledge of which, you show as much Skill
as the Artists themselves do in the Execution. Secret Beauties are the great
Charm of Life to Dilicate Souls; but they want nice Observers to be enjoyed;
and Pictures have that singular Privilege, that though they seem Legible
Books, yet they are perfect Hieroglyphics to the Vulgar, and are all alike to
them. It Is to remedy in some measure, this Misfortune of so noble an Art, that
I have taken the pains; your Lordship will see if you daign to look into this
Volume, which is Humbly Dedicated to you: The World, I am sure, will justify
my choice of a Patron, whatever they may do for the Book it self; for in your
Lordship, besides Nobleness of Birth, and Eminency of Fortune and Dignity,
there is an Innate Sweetness and Candor, accompanied with a Serenity of
Temper, and Firmness of Courage; which draw to you the Vows and Respects of
Mankind, and make Offerings of this Nature to be but just Tributes to so known
a Merit. I should hardly, after this, dare to mention my particular Obligations
to your Noble Family, could I hope for a more favorable Occasion of Expressing
that Gratitude which I owe: They were laid upon me, not only in my Infancy, but
even some days after my Birth; and so Generously contrived, that they are like
to last as long as I live: And therefore I reckon my Dependence to be a part of
my Being; and shall as soon forfeit the one as the other: I am only sorry that
Fortune concurs so little with my Wishes, as to have made me hitherto an
Useless Servant to your Lordship, whose particular Merit I have always as much
Admired, as others may do the Splendor of your Fortune; the Influence of both
will, I hope, be felt by this Noble Art of Painting; and I in my particular,
shall be continually studying how to express my Devotion to your Lordship's
Service, in a better Manner than by barely assuring, as I do now, that I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble, Obedient, and Obliged Servant, William
Aglionby.

The Preface.
IF the desire of perpetuating our Memorys to posterity, be one of the noblest
of our Affections here below, certainly those ARTS by which we attain that kind
of Immortality, do best deserve to be Cultivated by us. Therefore Historians
and Poets, who keep, as it were, the Registers of Fame, have always been
Courted by the Great and by the Good, as knowing that the Merit of their
Actions depended upon their Pens; but because those very Men through whose
Hands such Glorious Achievements were to pass, might either be led away with
Passion, or swayed with Prejudice, to make a false Representation of them to
the World. Providence yet kinder, gave us two Arts, which might express the
very Lines of the Face, the Air of the Countenance, and in it a great part of
the Mind of all those whom they should undertake to Represent; and these are,
Sculpture and Painting.

Michael Angelo, the famousest Sculptor of these Modern Ages, looking one day
earnestly upon a Statue of St. Mark made by Donatello, after having long
admired it, said at last, That if Saint. Mark were like that Statue, he would
have believed his Gospel upon his Physionomy, for it was the honestest Face
that ever was made. It Is hard to say, whether he commended the Artist, the
Saint, or the Art it self most by this Expression: But this Inference we may
make from it, That if the Faces of Heroes do express the Greatness of their
Minds, those Arts which perpetuate their Memory that way, are the truest of all
Records. This made Alexander so sollicitous, that none but Apelles should draw
his Picture: and caused Charles the Fifth to value himself, upon having sat
three times to Titian, as if he had obtained three Victories over Death and
Mortality. But there is in these Arts a Charm for the Survivours as well as for
the Dead: And who is there of a Virtuous MIND, or an Inspiring SOUL, who is not
infinitely pleased to contemplate the Looks, the Mien, the Air of those who
have done great things amongst Men: the Majesty of Alexander; the sharp
Quickness and piercing Selerity of Caesar; the Tranquil Magnanimity of Scipio;
the Beauty of Cleopatra, are still extant in their Statues and Medals to such a
degree, that none of the Curious would ever go about to give them another
Countenance than those that have been transmitted to us this way.

I shall not undertake to determine here, which of these two Arts deserves our
Admiration most: The one, makes Marble-Stone and Brass soft and tender: the
other, by a strange sort of Enchantment, makes a little Cloth and Colors show
Living Figures, that upon a flat Superficies seem Round, and deceives the Eye
into a Belief of Solids, while there is nothing but Lights and Shadows there:
But this I may say in favor of the Art of Painting, whose praises I am now to
Celebrate, That it certainly is of a greater Extent than Sculpture, and has an
Infiniter Latitude to delight us withal.

To see in one Piece the Beauty of the Heavens, the Verdant Glory of the Earth,
the Order and Symmetry of Palaces and Temples; the Softness, Warmth, Strength,
and Tenderness of Naked Figures, the Glorious Colors of Draperies and Dresses
of all kinds, the Liveliness of Animals; and above all, the Expression of our
Passions, Customs, Manners, Rites, Ceremonies, Sacred and Profane: All this, I
say, upon a piece of portative Cloth, easily carried, and as easily placed, is
a Charm; which no other Art can equal. And from this Idaea of the Art, we may
naturally derive a Consequence of the Admiration and Esteem due by us to the
Artist; he who at the same time is both Painter, Poet, Historian, Architect,
Anatomist, Mathematician, and Naturalist; he Records the Truth, Adorns the
Fable, Pleases the Fancy, Recreates the Eye, Touches the Soul; and in a word,
entertains you with Silent Instructions, which are neither guilty of Flattery,
nor Satyr; and which you may either give over, or repeat with new Delight as
often as you please.

If these Qualities do not sufficiently recommend the Owner of them to our
Esteem, I know not what can; and yet by a strange Fatality, we name the word
Painter, without reflecting upon his Art, and most dis-ingeniously, seem to
place him among the Mechanics, who has the best Title to all the Liberal Arts.

Antiquity did not so; and whoever shall read the Tenth Chapter of the
Thirty-fifth Book of Pliny; which is nothing else but an Encomium of this Art
and its Artists, will find, that Great Princes, and the most Digninified
Magistrates, thought Painters fit to be their Companions. Alexander was as
often found to be in Apelles's Painting-Room, as in his Palace; and to Oblige
him, parted with the Beautifullest of all his Mistresses, because he saw she
had Wounded Apelles's Heart: Demetrius chose rather to Raise the Siege of
Rhodes, than to ruin a Piece of Protogenes's, which was painted upon the place
where he could have best Annoyed the Town; and while his Camp was before it,
would often go to see Protogenes at Work, in a little Countrey-House he had
within the Precinct of the Camp: And to show the Breeding and Wit of the
Painter, as well as the Politeness of the Prince, I cannot omit the Answer
Protogenes gave Demetrius, when he asked how he durst continue to Work with so
much Tranquillity in the midst of the noise of Arms, and the Disorders of a
Camp? He Civilly replied, That the knew Demetrius had War with the Rhodians,
but he was sure he had none with the Liberal Arts.

But to come nearer our own Times; Francis the First, was so in Love with
Painters, that he got Italian Painters at any Rates, and obtained of Andrea del
Sarto, and Lionardo da Vinci, to Honor his Court with their Presence and
Works; as he did the latter, with visiting him when he lay a dying, and
suffering him to expire in his Arms. Charles the Fifth was so fond of Titian,
that he gave his very Courtiers some Jealousy about him; but he Cured them of
it, by telling them, That the Moments he gave to Titian, were to be well
managed, because he was not sure to have his Company always; whereas he was
sure of theirs, who were more the Attendants of his Fortune, than of his
Person. When he sent him any Present, which he did often and nobly, he always
accompanied it with this Compliment, That his Design was not to pay him for his
Work, which could have no Price: Which agrees very well with what Pliny says of
the Princes and Great Men of Antiquity, That they did not pay Pictures by
Sums, but by Heaps of Gold and Silver. In nummo Aureo mensura accepit, non
numero; says Pliny of Apelles: Ridolfi in the Life of Titian, reports, That one
day the same Emperor sitting for his Picture, it happened, that Titian let
fall one of his Pencils; which the Emperor presently took up, and gave him
again; which putting the Painter to the blush, and obliging him to make Excuses
for the trouble the Prince had taken; he was answered by him, That Titian
deserved to be Served by Caesar. Raphael del Urbin was so Acceptable to Pope
Leo the Tenth, who was a most Magnificent, Accomplished Prince, that he not
only made him of his Bedchamber, that he might have his Company the oftener;
but likewise had resolved to Create him Cardinal at his next Promotion; not
thinking the Sacred Purple it self a Reward above the Merits of Raphael's
Pencil: But the Death of Raphael prevented so Glorious an Acknowledgment of his
Deserts.

Rubens, in our days, after having been in Favor with most of the Great
Princes in Christendom, was at last chosen by the Infant Albert, and the
Infanta Isabella, to be their Ambassador at London; where his Talent for the
Great Affairs of State was no less admired than his Pencil, which has so richly
Adorned the Ceiling of one of the best Rooms in Europe, I mean, the
Banqueting House. And indeed, he could never have fallen into a Court that was
more disposed to acknowledge his Skill, than Ours was at that Time: King
Charles the First, of Sacred Memory, was not only the greatest Favourer, but
the truest Knower of all those Arts; and by his Countenance, the whole Court
gave themselves to those Refined Pleasures; there being hardly a Man of Great
Quality, that had not a Collection, either of Pictures or Antiques: Artists
flowed in upon us from all parts: And had not the Bloody-Principled Zealots,
who are Enemies to all the Innocent Pleasures of Life, under the pretext of a
Reformed Sanctity, destroyed both the Best of Kings, and the Noblest of Courts,
we might to this day have seen these Arts flourish amongst us; and
particularly, this of Painting, which was the Darling of that Virtuous Monarch:
He had once Enriched our Island with the noblest Collection that any Prince out
of Italy could boast of: but those Barbarous Rebels, whose Quarrel was as much
to Politeness and the Liberal Arts, as to Monarchy and Prelacy, dissipated and
destroyed the best part of it.

But with our late Blessed Monarch, King Charles the Second, all Arts seemed to
return from their Exile; and to his Sacred Memory we owe whatever Encouragement
they have received since; and it may be reckoned among his Faelicities and
ours, which were not few, that he did so; for by that means we have him, as it
were, yet Living among us, by that noble Statue of his, made by the best of
Modern Sculptors now living, I mean Mr. Grialin Gibbons.

I have often wondered, considering how much all Arts and Sciences are Improved
in these Northern Parts, and particularly with us, that we have never produced
an Historical Painter, Native of our own Soil; we have had a rare Architect,
who was Inigo Jones: the Banqueting House, the Portico of St. Paul's Church,
and the Piazza of Covent Garden, are three Pieces of his Doing, which in their
kind are hardly to be matched in Europe: We have likewise a Sculptor, who, if
he goes on as he has begun, will be a Northern Michael Angelo: But for a
Painter, we never had, as yet, any of Note, that was an English Man, that
pretended to History-Painting. I cannot attribute this to any thing but the
little Encouragement it meets with in this Nation; whose Genius more
particularly leads them to affect Face-Painting; and in that part we have had
some who have proved most Excellent Artists; as, Mr. Oliver, and Mr. Cooper,
the most Correct in Miniature; and in Oil, Dobson and Walker: And even at this
time, Mr. Riley, who undoubtedly deserves his Character of the first and best
Painter for Portraicts in our Age. But our Nobility and Gentry, except some
few, who have eminently showed their Kindness for this noble Art, they are
generally speaking, no Judges, and therefore can be no Promoters of an Art that
lies all in nice Observations.

To Remedy this therefore, I have undertaken this Work; which I have so
composed, as it may be read with Delight by any who are but Conversant with
Books or Pictures: The Design is, to make Painting Familiar and Easy to the
Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, and to enter them so far in the Knowledge
and Acquaintance of the Italian Painters, that they may converse with their
Works, and understand their different Characters. This I have done in three
Familiar Dialogues; in which I never make use of a hard Term of Art, but I
first explain it: and that nothing might be vvanting to make it easy, I have
also placed at the end of the Book an Alphabetical Explanation of all the hard
Words used in the Lives of those Painters that are here Sub-joyned.

The Lives are all taken out of Vasari: and for the Choice of them, I followed
the Course of the Arts Improvement, beginning with Cimabue, and going on with
all those who were, as it were, the Inventers and Perfecters of it by degrees,
till I came to the Age of Raphael and Michael Angelo. I design a Second Part;
which, besides some more refined Observations upon the Art it self, will
contain the Lives of all the Modern Painters of any Note, from the Time of the
Caraches to our Days, and an Account of its present State all Europe over.
After this, I hope our People of Quality will be sufficiently inflamed with the
Love of an Art which Rewards its Admirers with the greatest Pleasures
imaginable, Pleasures so Innocent and Irreproachable, that the severest Morals
cannot forbid the Enjoyment of them; Pleasures so Solid and Abounding, that
they are new every time they are repeated; and in a word, Pleasures that may be
made Useful even to the Covetous; for Pictures well bought, are Money put out
to Use.

I might here have a great Scope to Inveigh against those other Pleasures in
which this Nation places their greatest Felicity; whilst under the specious
names of Society and Hospitality, we Countenance the most Profuse Gluttony and
Exorbitant Drunkenness that the Sun sees: I might tell Gentlemen, That the Loss
of Time, the Ruin of their Fortunes, the Destruction of their Health, the
Various Tragical Accidents that attend Men who once a day loose their Reason,
are all things worthy their serious Reflection; and from which, the Love of the
Politer Arts would reclaim them. But I shall leave that Theme to our Divines,
and only sadly say with the Poet; Pudet haec Opprobia Nobis,
Audici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.


I cannot forbear adding to this little Reproof, an Observation that I have
made abroad; which is, That of all the Civilized Nations in Europe, we are the
only that want Curiosity for Artists; the Dutch in the midst of their Boggs and
ill Air, have their Houses full of Pictures, from the Highest to the Lowest;
the Germans are also Curious in their Collections; the French have as good as
can be had for Money; and that Art seems now to take Sanctuary there; and shall
we, while we have a Prince who has declared himself an Enemy to all our
Excesses, and a Patron of all Virtuous Undertakings, be the only People that
shall follow Gross Delights! I hope better of us; and that the Charm of these
Arts once well Comprehended, will, like Moses's Rod, eat up all the other,
though never so well Counterfited to be like Pleasures; while they are, indeed,
but so many Pains and Plagues.

The CONTENTS of this WORK.
FIrst Dialogue, Explaining the Art of Painting.

Second Dialogue, Relating the History of it, both Ancient and Modern.

Third Dialogue, How to know Good Pictures.

The LIVES are These.
Cimabue. Ghiotto. Lionardo da Vinci. Andrea del Sarto. Raphael D'Urbin.
Giorgione. Michael Angelo. Giulio Romano. Perino del Vaga. Titian. Donato, a
Sculptor.
An Explanation OF Some Terms of the ART of PAINTING.
Air.
IS properly taken for the Look of a Figure, and is used in this Manner, The
Air of the Heads of Young Women, or Grave Men, etc.

Antique.
This word Comprehends all the Works of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture
that have been made in the Time of the Ancient Greeks and Romans, from
Alexander the Great, to the Emperor Phocas; under whom the Goths Ravaged Italy.

Aptitude.
It comes from the Italian word Attitudine, and means the posture and action
that any Figure is represented in.

Cartoon.
It is taken for a Design made of many Sheets of Paper pasted together; in
which the whole Story to be painted in Fresco, is all drawn exactly, as it must
be upon the Wall in Colors: Great Painters never painting in Fresco, but they
make Cartoons first.

Coloring.
It Is one of the parts of Painting, by which the Objects to be painted receive
their Complexion, together with their True Lights and Shadows.

Chiaro-Scuro.
It is taken in two Senses: first, Painting in Chiaro-Scuro, is meant, when
there are only two Colors employed. Secondly, It is taken for the disposing of
the Lights and Shadows Skilfully; as when we say, A Painter understands well
the Chiaro-Scuro.

Contour.
The Contours of a Body, are the Lines that environ it, and make the
Superficies of it.

Design.
Has two Significations: First, As a part of Painting, it signifies the just
Measures, Proportions, and Outvvard Forms that a Body, imitated from Nature,
ought to havt. Secondly, It signifies the whole Composition of a piece of
Painting; as when we say, There is great Design in such a Piece.

Distemper.
A sort of Painting that implys the Colors mingled with Gumm. And the
difference between that and Miniature, is, that the one only uses the Point of
the Pencil, the other gives the Pencil its whole Liberty.

Drapery.
Is a General Word for all sorts of Clothing, with which Figures are Adorned:
So we say, Such a Painter disposes well the Foldings of his Drapery.

Figure.
Though this word be very General, and may be taken for any painted Object; yet
it is in Painting, generally taken for Humane Figures.

Fresco.
A sort of Painting, where the Colors are applied upon fresh Mortar, that they
may Incorporate with the Lime and Sand.

Festoon.
Is an Ornament of Flowers, employed in Borders and Decorations.

Grotesk.
Is properly the Painting that is found under Ground in the Ruins of Rome; but
it signifies more commonly a sort of Painting that expresses odd Figures of
Animals, Birds, Flowers, Leaves, or such like, mingled together in one Ornament
or Border.

Gruppo.
Is a Knot of Figures together, either in the middle or sides of a piece of
Painting. So Carache would not allow above three Gruppos, nor above twelve
Figures for any Piece.

History.
History-Painting is an Assembling of many Figures in one Piece, to Represent
any Action of Life, whether True or Fabulous, accompanied with all its
Ornaments of Landscape and Perspective.

Manner.
We call Manner the Habit of a Painter, not only of his Hand, but of his Mind;
that is, his way of expressing himself in the three principal Parts of
Painting, Design, Coloring, and Invention; it answers to Style in Authors; for
a Painter is known by his Manner, as an Author by his Style, or a Man's Hand by
his Writing.

Model.
Is any Object that a Painter works by, either after Nature, or otherwise; but
most commonly it signifies that which Sculptors, Painters, and Architects make
to Govern themselves by in their Design.

Nudity.
Signifies properly any Naked Figure of Man or Woman; but most commonly of
Woman; as when we say, It Is a Nudity, we mean the Figure of a Naked Woman.

Print.
Is the Impression of a Graven or Wooden Plate upon Paper or Silk, Representing
some Piece that it has been Graved after.

Relievo.
Is properly any Embossed Sculpture that rises from a flat Superficies. It is
said likewise of Painting, that it has a great Relievo, when it is strong, and
that the Figures appear round, and as it were, out of the Piece.

Mezzo-Relievo.
Is where the Figures rise, but not above half of them is seen, the rest being
supposed in the Marble or Wood.

Basso-Relievo,
Is, when the Figures are little more than Designed, and do rise but very
little above the Plain: Such are the Figures of the Ancients about their Cups
and other Vessels.

Shortning.
Is, when a Figure seems of greater quantity than really it is; as, if it seems
to be three foot long, when it is but one: Some call it Fore-Shortning.

Stucco-Work.
Is Figures of all sorts, made in a kind of Plaster, and employed to Adorn a
Room, either under the Cornishes, or round the Ceiling, or in Compartiments, or
Divisions.

Schizzo.
Is the first Design or Attempt of a Painter to Express his Thoughts upon any
Subject. The Schizzos are ordinarily reduced into Cartoons in Fresco Painting,
or Copyed and Enlarged in Oyl-Painting.

Tinto.
Is, when a thing is done only with one Color, and that generally Black.

DIALOGUES About PAINTING:
Between a Traveller and his Friend. Friend, THE extreme delight you take in
Pictures, is a Pleasure you have acquired abroad, for I remember before you
traveled, all Pictures were alike to you, and you used to laugh at the
distinction that some of your Friends did use to make of the Pieces of this and
the other Master, saying, it was nothing but Humor in them.


Traveller, What you say is very true, and when I reflect upon it, I cannot but
blush at my own Ignorance, or rather willful Stupidity, that deprived me of one
of the most Refined Pleasures of Life, a Pleasure as Lasting as Life it self,
full of Innocence and Variety, and so Entertaining, that, alone, it often
supplies the place of Company and Books; and when enjoyed in the company of
others, it improves by being shared, and grows greater by the number of its
Enjoyers, every one making some Observation, according to his Genius and
Inclination, which still Illustrates the whole.


Friend, I must confess I envy you this Pleasure extremely, for living, as we
do, in a Country where the severity of our Climate obliges us to be much within
Doors: Such a Pleasure as this ought to be Cherished, by all those who do not
place their Felicity, as too many of us do, in a Glass of Claret: And I own, I
would willingly be of your Society, but that there goes such a deal of knowledge
to judge of a good Picture, that I despair of ever being qualified that way,
being naturally not much given to take pains for any Pleasure.


Traveller, You are very much mistaken, every one naturally is so far judge of
Painting, as to observe something in a Picture, that is like to somewhat they
have observed in Nature, and that alone is capable of giving them delight, if
the thing be well represented; but those indeed who join to that Delight, the
particular knowledge of the manner how the Painter has managed his Lines, his
Colors, his Lights and Shades, and how he has disposed his Figures, and with
what Invention he has adorned his Story. They indeed, have more Pleasure, as
having in all this a greater scope for their Observations; and yet this, though
infinitely hard for the Painter to Execute, is but moderately difficult for the
Spectator to judge of it, requiring only a Superficial Knowledge of the first
Principles of the Art, and a constant Observation of the Manners of the
Different Artists, which is acquired by viewing their Works often, and
Conversing much amongst them.


Friend, That Superficial Knowledge of the Principles which you speak of, is
wrapped up in such a company of hard Words, and crabed Terms of Art, that a Man
must have a Dictionary to understand them, and a good Memory to retain them, or
else he will be at a loss.


Traveller, If he undertake this Task with Order and Method, it will prove
extreme easy; for by following each part of Painting in its proper Division,
he will come to the knowledge of the Terms of the Art insensibly.


Friend, Pray in the first place, give me a Definition of the Art of Painting,
that I may at once see what is aimed at by it, and performed.


Traveller, The Art of Painting, is the Art of Representing any Object by Lines
drawn upon a flat Superficies, which Lines are afterward covered with Colors,
and those Colors applied with a certain just distribution of Lights and
Shades, with a regard to the Rules of Symetry and Perspective; the whole
producing a Likeness, or true Idaea of the Subject intended.


Friend, This seems to embrace a great deal; for the words Symetry and
Perspective, imply a knowledge in Proportions and Distances, and that supposes
Geometry, in some measure, and Optics, all which require much Time to Study
them, and so I am still involved in perplexities of Art.


Traveller, It is true, that those Words seem to require some Knowledge of those
Arts in the Painter, but much less in the Spectator; for we may easily guess,
whether Symetry be observed, if, for Example, in a Humane Body, we see nothing
out of Proportion; as if an Arm or a Leg be not too long or short for its
Posture, or if the Posture its self be such as Nature allows of: And for
Perspective, we have only to observe whether the Objects represented to be at a
distance, do lessen in the Picture, as they would do naturally to the Eye, at
such and such distances; thus you see these are but small Difficulties.


Friend. Pray, would you not allow him to be a Painter, who should only Draw
the Objects he intended to represent in Black and White, or with bare Lines
upon Paper.


Traveller. Yes without doubt, if what he did were well Designed, for that is
the Groundwork of all Painting, and perhaps the most difficult thing in it.


Friend, What is it you call Design?


Traveller, Design is the Expressing with a Pen, or Pencil, or other
Instrument, the Likeness of any Object by its out Lines, or Contors; and he
that Understands and Mannages well these first Lines, working after Nature
still, and using extreme Diligence, and skill may with Practice and Judgment,
arrive to an Excellency in the Art.


Friend, Me thinks that should be no difficult Matter, for we see many whose
Inclination carys them to Draw any thing they see, and they perform it with
ease.


Traveller. I grant you, Inclination goes a great way in disposing the Hand,
but a strong Imagination only, will not carry a Painter through; For when he
compares his Work to Nature, he will soon find, that great Judgment is
requisite, as well as a Lively Fancy; and particularly when he comes to place
many Objects together in one Piece or Story, which are all to have a just
relation to one another. There he will find that not only the habit of the Hand
but the strength of the Mind is requisite; therefore all the Eminent Painters
that ever were, spent more time in Designing after the Life, and after the
Statues of the Ancients, then ever they did in learning how to color their
Works; that so they might be Masters of Design, and be able to place readily
every Object in its true situation.


Friend, Now you talk of Nature and Statues, I have heard Painters blamed for
working after both.


Traveller. It is very true, and justly; but less for working after Nature than
otherwise. Caravaggio a famous Painter is blamed for having merely imitated
Nature as he found her, without any correction of Forms. And Perugin, another
Painter is blamed for having wrought so much after Statues, that his Works
never had that lively easiness which accompanies Nature; and of this fault
Raphael his Scholar was a long time guilty, till he Reformed it by imitating
Nature.


Friend, How is it possible to err in imitating Nature?


Traveller, Though Nature be the Rule, yet Art has the Privilege of Perfecting
it; for you must know that there are few Objects made naturally so entirely
Beautiful as they might be, no one Man or Woman possesses all the Advantages of
Feature, Proportion and Color due to each Sense. Therefore the Ancients, when
they had any Great Work to do, upon which they would Value themselves did use
to take several of the Beautifullest Objects they designed to Paint, and out of
each of them, Draw what was most Perfect to make up One exquisite Figure; Thus
Zeuxis being employed by the Inhabitants of Crotona, a City of Calabria, to
make for their Temple of Juno, a Female Figure, Naked; He desired the Liberty
of seeing their Hansomest Virgins, out of whom he chose Five, from whose
several Excellencies he framed a most Perfect Figure, both in Features, Shape
and Coloring, calling it Helena. At last in the time of Alexander the Great,
all the Artists, both Painters and Sculptors, met and considered how to give
such Infallible Rules to their Art, as no Artist should be able to depart from
them without Erring; and to that end having examined all the Beauties of
Nature, and how each Part of a Humane Body ought to be, to make one
accomplished Model for Posterity to Govern themselves by: A Statue was made
according to those Rules by Polycletus, a famous Sculptor of that Age; and it
proved so admirable in all its Parts, that it was called, The Rule, and all
those that wrought afterward, imitated as near as they could the Proportions
of that Figure, and the Graces of it, as believing it was impossible for Art to
go beyond it.


Friend. Pray for which Sense was this Figure made?


Traveller. Tradition has not told us that, but it is very probable that the
thing having so well succeeded for one, was done for both, and carried on for
Children too, for we see the Ancients admirable in them all; witness the Venus
of Medicis at Rome, and the Hercules Aventinus.


Friend. Then you would have a Painter study these Figures of the Ancients to
use himself to those Proportions and Graces which are there Expressed, but how
can that be here with us where there are few such or none at all?


Traveller. I confess the want of them is a great hinderance to our Painters,
but we have so many Prints and Casts, the Best things of that kind, and those
so well done, that they may in a great measure supply the want of the
Originals; and this added to the study of Nature it self, will be a sufficient
Help to any one.


Friend, Would you have a Painter study nothing but Humane Figures?


Traveller, That being the most difficult in his Art, he must chiefly Study it:
But because no Story can be well Represented without Circumstances, therefore
he must Learn to Design every thing, as Trees, Houses, Water, Clothes, Animals,
and in short, all that falls under the notion of Visible Objects; so that by
that, you may guess how much Time he must spend in this one part of Painting,
to acquire that Readiness, Boldness, and Strength, to his Designs; that must
be, as it were, the Groundwork of all he does.


Friend, I have heard much of a difficulty in Designing, called, Shortning, for
which I have seen Painters much admired by those who pretend to understand
Painting: Pray what is Shortning?


Traveller. The Shortning of a Figure, is the making it appear of more
Quantity, than really it is; the Figure having neither the Length nor Depth
that it shows, but by the help of the Lights and Shades, and judicious
mannaging of the Out-lines, it appears what it is not; and this is much used in
Painting of Ceelings and Roofs, where the Figures being above the Eye, must be
most of them Shortened, to appear in their natural Situation. And it is a thing,
upon which great Painters have Valued themselves, as supposing a great Knowledge
of the Muscles and Bones of the Humane Body, and a great Skill in Designing.
Michael Angelo, amongst the Modern Painters, is the greatest Master in that
kind.


Friend, When a Painter has acquired any Excellency in Desinging, readily and
strongly; What has he to do next?


Traveller, That is not half his Work, for then he must begin to manage his
Colors, it being particularly by them, that he is to express the greatness of
his Art. It Is they that give, as it were, Life and Soul to all that he does;
without them, his Lines will be but Lines that are flat, and without a Body,
but the addition of Colors makes that appear round; and as it were out of the
Picture, which else would be plain and dull. It Is they that must deceive the
Eye, to the degree, to make Flesh appear warm and soft, and to give an Air of
Life, so as his Picture may seem almost to Breath and Move.


Friend, Did ever any Painter arrive to that Perfection you mention?


Traveller, Yes, several, both of the Ancient and Modern Painters. Zeuxis
Painted Grapes, so that the Birds flew at them to eat them. Apelles drew Horses
to such a likeness, that upon setting them before live Horses, the Live ones
Neighed, and began to kick at them, as being of their own kind. And amongst the
Modern Painters, Hannibal Carache, relates of himself, That going to see
Bassano at Venice, he went to take a Book off a Shelf, and found it to be the
Picture of one, so lively done, that he who was a Great Painter, was deceived
by it. The Flesh of Raphael's Picture is so Natural, that it seems to be Alive.
And so do Titians Pictures, who was the Greatest Master for Coloring that ever
was, having attained to imitate Humane Bodies in all the softness of Flesh, and
beauty of Skin and Complexion.


Friend, Wherein particularly lies the Art of Coloring?


Traveller. Beside the Mixture of Colors, such as may answer the Painter's
Aim, it lies in a certain Contention, as I may call it, between the Light and
the Shades, which by the means of Colors, are brought to Unite with each
other; and so to give that Roundness to the Figures, which the Italians call
Relievo, and for which we have no other Name: In this, if the Shadows are too
strong, the Piece is harsh and hard, if too weak, and there be too much Light,
it is flat. I, for my part, should like a Coloring rather something Brown, but
clear, than a bright gay one: But particularly, I think, that those fine Coral
Lips, and Cherry Cheeks, are to be Banished, as being far from Flesh and Blood.
It Is true, the Skins, or Complexions must vary, according to the Age and Sex of
the Person: An Old Woman requiring another Coloring than a fresh Young one.
But the Painter must particularly take Care, that there be nothing harsh to
offend the Eye, as that neither the Contours, or Out-Lines, be too strongly
Terminated, nor the Shadows too hard, nor such Colors placed by one another as
do not agree.


Friend, Is there any Rule for that?


Traveller, Some Observations there are, as those Figures which are placed on
the foremost Ground, or next the Eye, ought to have the greatest Strength, both
in their Lights and Shadows, and Clothed with a lively Drapery; Observing,
that as they lessen by distance, and are behind, to give both the Flesh and the
Drapery more faint and obscure Coloring. And this is called an Union in
Painting, which makes up an Harmony to the Eye, and causes the Whole to appear
one, and not two or three Pictures.


Friend. Then you think, the chiefest difficulty of Coloring, consists in the
Imitation of Humane Flesh, and giving the Tints or Complexions to each Age.


Traveller. There is a thing which the Italians call Morbidezza; The meaning of
which word, is to Express the Softness, and tender Liveliness of Flesh and
Blood, so as the Eye may almost invite the Hand to touch and feel it, as if it
were Alive; and this is the hardest thing to Compass in the whole Art of
Painting. And it is in this particular, that Titian, Corregio, and amongst the
more Modern, Rubens, and Vandike, do Excel.


Friend. I have heard, that in some Pictures of Raphael, the very Gloss of
Damask, and the Softness of Velvet, with the Luster of Gold, are so Expressed,
that you would take them to be Real, and not Painted: Is not that as hard to
do, as to imitate Flesh?


Traveller. No: Because those things are but the still Life, whereas there is a
Spirit in Flesh and Blood, which is hard to Represent. But a good Painter must
know how to do those Things you mention, and many more: As for Example, He must
know how to Imitate the Darkness of Night, the Brightness of Day, the Shining
and Glittering of Armor; the Greenness of Trees, the Dryness of Rocks. In a
word, All Fruits, Flowers, Animals, Buildings, so as that they all appear
Natural and Pleasing to the Eye. And he must not think as some do, that the
force of Coloring consists in employing of fine Colors, as fine lacks Ultra
Marine Greens, etc. For these indeed, are fine before they are wrought, but the
Painter's Skill is to work them judiciously, and with convenience to his
Subject.


Friend, I have heard Painters blamed for Finishing their Pieces too much: How
can that be?


Traveller. Very well: For an over Diligence in that kind, may come to make the
Picture look too like a Picture, and loose the freedom of Nature. And it was in
this, that Protogenes, who was, it may be, Superior to Apelles, in every part
of Painting; besides, was nevertheless Outdone by him, because Protogenes could
hardly ever give over Finishing a Piece. Whereas Apelles knew, when he had
wrought so much as would answer the Eye of the Spectator, and preserve the
Natural. This the Italians call, Working A la pittoresk, that is Boldly, and
according to the first Incitation of a Painters Genius. But this requires a
strong Judgment, or else it will appear to the Judicious, mere Dawbing.


Friend, I hear, you Travelers talk of Painting in Fresco, in Distemper, in
Oil, in Chiaro Scuro: pray, What is the meaning of all those Words?


Traveller, You must know, that the Italians have a Way of Painting their
Palaces, both within and without, upon the bear Walls; and before Oil Painting
came up, most Masters wrought that Way; and it is the most Masterly of all the
ways of Painting, because it is done upon a Wall newly Plaistered, and you must
Plaster no more, than what you can do in a Day; the Colors being to
Incorporate with the Mortar, and dry with it, and it cannot be Touched over
again, as all other Ways of Painting may: This is that they call Painting in
Fresco.


Friend, This must require a very Dexterous and quick Hand.


Traveller. Yes, and a good Judgment too; for the Colors will show otherwise
when they are Dry, than they did when they were Wet: Therefore there is great
Practice required in Mannaging them, but then this Way makes amends for its
Difficulties; for the longer it stands, it acquires still more Beauty and
Union, it resisting both Wind and Rain.


Friend, Pray what is Painting in Distemper?


Traveller, Painting in Distemper, is when either the Wall or Board you Paint
upon, is prepared with a certain Paste or Plaster, and then as you Work, you
temper your Colors still with a Liquor made of the Yolk of an Egg, beaten with
the Milk of a Figg Sprout, well ground together. This is a way of Painting,
used by Ancient Masters very much; and it is a very lasting Way, there being
yet things of Ghiotto's doing upon Boards, that have lasted upwards of Two
Hundred Years, and are still fresh and Beautiful. But since Oil Painting came
in, most have given over the way of Working in Distemper. Your Colors in this
way are all Minerals, whereas in Working in Fresco, they must be all Earths.


Friend, What is Oil Painting?


Traveller, The Secret of Oil Painting, consists in using Colors that are
Ground with Oil of Nut, or Linseed, and with these you paint upon a Cloth,
which has first been primed with drying Colors, such as Cerus, Red Oaker, and
Ombre, mingled together. This manner of painting, makes the Colors show more
Lively than any other, and seems to give your Picture more Vivacity and
Softness.


Friend, Can you Paint in Oil upon a Wall?


Traveller, Yes, you may upon a dry Wall, having first Evened it; and washed it
over with Boiled Oils, as long as it will drink any in, and when it is dry,
prime it as you do a Cloth. There is another Way of doing it too, by applying a
Paste or Plaster of a particular Composition, all over the Wall, then Washing
it over with Linseed Oil, then putting over that a Mixture of Pitch, Mastick,
and Varnish, boiled together, and applied with a great Brush, till it make a
Couch, fit to receive your priming, and afterward your Colors. Vassari gives
the Receipt of a particular Composition, which he used in the Great Dukes
Palace at Florence, and which is very lasting.


Friend, Did the Ancients use Oil Painting?


Traveller, It does not appear by any that have Writ upon that Subject, that
they did; And the Moderns were a great while, before they found it out. It was
Discovered by the Industry of a Flemish Painter, called, John of Bruges, who
being Vexed at the Suns ungluing some Pictures of his made upon Boards,
resolved to find out a Way of Painting upon Cloth; which he did Compass, and
was much Admired for it, in so much, that Antonio de Messina, a famous Painter
of his Time, came on purpose into Flanders, and Lived many Years with John of
Bruges, to learn the Secret. He afterward Settled at Venice, and there Taught
it several of his Friends; amongst the rest, to one Dominico Vinitiano, who
coming to Florence, to Paint the Chapel of the Portinari, brought this secret
with him; and had for chief Scholar, Andrea del Castagno. It has been the
greatest help to Painting imaginable. For before, it was hard to carry Pictures
from place to place, but now being done upon Cloth, they may be carefully
Rolled up, and carried all the World over.


Friend, Pray what is painting in Chiaro Scuro?


Traveller. It is a manner of Painting that comes nearer Design than Coloring,
it being first taken from the Imitation of the Statues of Marble, or of Bronze,
or other Stones, and it is much used upon the Outside, and Fronts of Great
Houses and Palaces, in Stories which seem to be of Marble, or Porphire, or any
other Stone the Painter thinks fit to Imitate.

This Way of Painting, which seldom employs above two Colors, may be done in
Fresco upon a Wall, which is the best Way; or upon Cloth, and then it is most
commonly employed for Designs of Triumphal Arches, and in Decorations of the
Stage for Plays, and other such Entertainments Vassary, gives the secret of
doing it either Way.


Friend, I find that by little and little, I shall penetrate into the secret of
this Art, if sometimes you will be as kind as you have been now; for what you
have Taught me already, is so clear, and easy, that I think I shall hardly
forget it; but I believe the Hardest is yet to come. But before I engage any
deeper in this Mystery, I would gladly be Informed of the History of Painting,
that is, of its Rise, Progress, Perfection, and Decay, both among the Ancient
Greeks and Romans, and amongst us Moderns.


Traveller. If you please, it shall be the Subject of our next Meeting; and I
do assure you, it will be very Instructive, and Diverting, and dispose you very
much to the Understanding the most refined Secrets of the Art, as well as the
Beauty of the several Pieces of the best Artists.


Friend. Pray let it be so, for I do expect great Variety, in a Narration,
which must run through so many Ages, and Discourse of so many Admirable Men.


THE HISTORY Of the ART of PAINTING.
DIALOGUE II.
Friend, I Am come to Summon you of your Promise; and you may see by my
Impatience, that you have already made me a Lover of the Art.


Traveller, I am glad to see it; for it is no small Pleasure to think, that we
are capable of procuring Pleasure to others, as I am sure I shall do to you,
when I have made you thoroughly capable of understanding the Beauty of an Art
that has been the Admiration of Antiquity, and is still the greatest Charm of
the most polite part of Mankind.


Friend, Pray who do you mean by that glorious Epithete.


Traveller, I mean chiefly the Italians, to whom none can deny the Privilege
of having been the Civilisers of Europe, since Painting, Sculpture,
Architecture, Music, Gardening, polite Conversation, and prudent Behavior
are, as I may call it, all of the Growth of their Country; and I mean, besides
all those in France, Spain, Germany, Low Countries, and England, who are Lovers
of those Arts, and endeavor to promote them in their own Nation.


Friend, I confess, they are all ravishing Entertainments, and infinitely to be
preferred before our other sensual Delights, which destroy our Health, and dull
our Minds; and I hope they are traveling apace this way. But now pray satisfy
my Curiosity about this Art of Painting, and let me know its whole History.


Traveller. To do that, I should begin with Adam, and so search down all along
thoroughly in Antiquity; but for want of Guides in such a Journey, I must set
forth at some more known Stage, and that I think must be Graece; though there
is great reason to suspect that the Egyptians had the Art long before them, as
they had most other Arts and Sciences since: Most of the great Philosophers of
Graece traveled to Egypt for their Learning, witness Thales, Pythagoras,
Democritus, Plato, and many others; and it is likely that the Artists might do
the same: but however the place where Painting first settled, was Corinth, or
Sicyone; there being some Dispute about those two Towns, because there happened
to be Eminent Masters at them both much about the same time, to wit, Cleanthes
at Corinth, and Telephanes at Sicyone; but the Art in both these places was but
in its Infancy; those Painters contenting themselves with drawing the out lines
of one Color, and shaddowing them within: Some time after, Cleophantus of
Corinth Invented Variety of Coloring; and that same Master came into Italy
with Demaratus, the Father of Tarquinius Priscus, King of the Romans.


Friend, Did Painting get so early into Italy?


Traveller. It Is a Dispute, whether it were not there first; for there was a
Temple in Ardea, a City near Rome, on which were Paintings, which were yet to
be seen in the Time of the Emperor Vespatian; which Tradition affirmed to be
Antienter than the Foundation of Rome; and by consequence, of an older Date
than the Time of Tarquinius Priscus, or his Father; and yet these Paintings
were so fresh and lively, that they seemed to have been Painted but the other
day.

But to return to the Greeks; it is probable, that Painting remained with them
a great while in its Infancy, since the first Painter of any Note, was above
three hundred Years after the Foundation of Rome, and that was Polygrotus of
Tasus, who first begun to draw Draperies in the Women's Pictures, and to dress
their Heads in different Fashions; he was likewise the first that ventured upon
Historical Pieces, having Painted the Temple at Delphos, and the great Portico
at Athens; which from the Variety of Pictures in it, was called, the Various.
Both these Pieces he did Gratis; which gained him the Love of all Graece to
that degree, that in a Public Assembly of the Amphictions, it was decreed,
that where ever he Traveled all over Graece, his Charges should be born by the
Public.

About thirty Years after him came Apollodorus the Athenian, who was Admirable
for the Beauty and Strength of his Figures; he was the Master of Zeuxis, who
carried Painting to its highest Perfection, and acquired to himself great
Riches, though he never sold any of his Pieces, but gave them all for nothing,
saying, That if they were to be duly valued, whole Kingdoms and Provinces could
not pay for them. He was besides so Magnificent in his Humor, that being at
the Olympian Games, which was the noblest Assembly of all Graece; he wore his
Name in Gold Letters upon his Cloak, that all might take notice of him. He drew
many Pieces, but his chief was an Athlete, or Champion of the Olympic Games;
with which he was so satisfied, that he wrote under it these words; It may be
Envyed,
But not Imitated.


His Concurrents in the Art were never the less great Masters; amongst them
were Timantes and Parrhasius; and with this last Zeuxis had many Contests, in
one of which he owned himself overdone; for having agreed each of them to draw
something for Mastery, Zeuxis drew Grapes so rarely done, that the Birds flew
and peck't at them; and thereupon he bidding Parrhasius show his Piece; was by
him presented with a Picture, with a Curtain before it; which Zeuxis going
hastily to draw, found that it was nothing but a Painted One, so well done,
that it had deceived him.

Parrhasius out did him likewise in Vanity, and boasting of his own Abilities,
pretending amongst other things, to be descended from Apollo, and to have
Conversation with the Gods; saying, that the Hercules he drew at Lindus, was
the same that used to appear to him in his Dreams; he was nevertheless overcome
publicly by Timantes at Samos, to his great Affliction; his particular
Character was, Well Finishing his Pieces.

Timantes, on the contrary, was of a sweet, modest Temper, and was Admirable in
the Expression of Passions; as appeared by his Famous Picture of the Sacrifice
of Iphigenia; where he drew so many different sorts of Sorrow upon the Faces of
the Spectators, according to the Concerns they had in that Tragical Piece of
Religion, that being at last come to Represent Agamemnon's Face, who was Father
to the Virgin, he found himself Exhausted, and not able to reach the Excess of
Grief that naturally must have been showed in his Countenance upon that
Occasion; and therefore he covered his Face with a part of his Garment; saving
thereby the Honor of his Art, and yet giving some Idea of the greatness of the
Father's Sorrow. His particular Talent lay, in giving more to understand by his
Pictures, than was really expressed in them; as he showed in the Picture of a
Polyphemus a sleep, in little; where to Intimate his Gigantick Proportion, he
feigned some Satyrs who were measuring the bigness of his Thumb.


Friend. Were all these Masters Graecians?


Traveller, No, some of them were Asiaticks; whence it came that Painting was
divided into two Schools, the Asiatick and the Greek; and I believe they
differed as much in their Manners as the Roman and the Lombard Schools do at
this day: But the Greek was likewise Subdivided into two Schools more, which
were called the Sycionian and the Attick; which I suppose, might differ as the
Florentine and the Roman. Eupompus, who was Contemporary to Zeuxis, was the
Author of this last Subdivision, and was a very Eminent Painter; his Chief
Scholar was Pamphilus the Macedonian, the first of that Nation who applied
himself to the Liberal Arts; having studied Geometry, without which, he used to
say, no Painter could Excel: He drew the Victory of the Athenians at Phliante,
and several other Excellent Pieces. He was likewise the first that taught his
Art for a Set Price; which was, a Talent in Ten Years for every one of his
Scholars.


Friend, How much was a Talent?


Traveller, There were Talents of several Countries, and several Values; but
Authors, when they mention Talents, do mean the Attick Talent; and that,
according to the best Calculation, was 190 l. English; which in Ten Years, was
not quite twenty Pound a Year. But this Custom which he brought up, was of
great Improvement to Painting; for after his Example, many Masters Set Up, to
Teach Young Gentlemen to Design.


Friend, Did the Gentry and Nobility Learn to Design?


Traveller, The Art it self was of that high Value among the Graecians, that
they thought it an Employment fit for none but Ingenious Minds and free
Spirits; and to that end, Slaves and Inferior Persons were forbid by the Laws
to apply themselves to it; insomuch, that it has been observed, that in the
whole Course of these Arts of Painting and Statuary, never any Slave was known
to Practice them. But to return to our History: Pamphilus was the Master of the
Famous Apelles, who surpassed all that ever went before him, and was outdone by
none that came after him; he flourished about the hundred and twelfth Olympiad;
which answers pretty well to the three hundred and twenty first Year of the
Foundation of Rome; he Painted more, as well as better than all his
Contemporaries; and wrote also diverse Volumes about the Secrets of the Art;
which were of exceeding Advantage to Posterity: His particular Talent lay in
hidden Graces, and in a certain taking pleasingness, which resulted from the
Whole; valuing himself particularly, upon knowing when to give over working
upon a Picture.

Protogenes was his Contemporary, and chief Concurrent in the Art; he lived in
the Island of Rhodes; and the Fame of his Works was such, that it drew Apelles
from Home, to go and see the Author of them.

Their first Interview was Remarkable, and past in this manner: Apelles being
Landed at Rhodes, went straight to Protogenes his Shop, or Painting-Room;
where, finding none but an Old Woman, and a Board newly Prim'd, and Prepared
for Painting, he, without saying any thing, drew a Line of Admirable Fineness
of one Color, and so went his way: Protogenes being come Home, the Old Woman
showed him the Line; which he guessed to be Apelles his Work; and taking his
Pencil, drew another over that, finer than Apelles's and of another Color;
telling the Old Woman, that if the Man came back that drew the first Line, she
should tell him, that he that drew the second, was the Man he looked for. In a
little time Apelles came, and seeing what Protogenes had done, took the Pencil
again, and with a Stroke of a third Color, divided those two Lines so
Subtlely, that they were perfectly distinguishable, and so went his way.
Protogenes coming Home a little after, and seeing what he had done, confessed
himself Vanquished; and presently ran to find out Apelles, whom he brought to
his own House. This very Piece, with these three Lines, and nothing else in it,
was afterward carried to Rome, and long Preserved among the Rarities of the
Imperial Palace.


Friend, This was a true Meeting of two great Artists, where Skill and
Ingeniousness were equally Eminent, and not Envy and Ill Manners, as our
Artists show one another.


Traveller. They were both of them well Bred, and used to the Company of
Persons of the best Quality: Apelles particularly, had his House always full of
them: Alexander the Great going often to see him Work, and not disdaining to
enter into Discourse with him. This Great Prince was so fond of his Works, and
so persuaded of their Immortality, that he Published an Edict, forbidding any
other Painter to attempt the Drawing of his Picture, as being desirous that the
Idea of his Person should be transmitted to Posterity by the most Skilful Hand
of his Age: How much he loved Apelles, may be guessed by the Nobleness of the
Present he made him; for having, by Alexander's Command, drawn the Naked
Picture of Campaspe, one of the most Beautiful Women of her Time, and Mistress
to that Great Prince, could not defend his Heart against such Charms, but fell
desperately in Love with her; which Alexander perceiving, very Generously
presented him with the Lady, thinking a Picture of his Hand to be a sufficient
Exchange for so great a Beauty: And it is to be presumed, that Apelles himself
was of no ordinary Merit, since the Lady went willingly to his Bed, and lived
with him all his Life in great Felicity. It Is thought, that a famous Piece of
his, called, the Venus Dionaea, was the Picture of that Lady.


Friend, I observe, great Painters have generally, either Handsome Wives, or
Beautiful Mistrisses, and they are for the most part, extremely sensible to
Beauty.


Travellour. How can they be otherwise? being such Judges as they are, of
Feature and Proportion; and having besides, so strong an Imagination, as they
must have, to excel in their Art. And Apelles did so strongly take the Idea of
those he Painted, that Physonomists and Fortune Tellers have often Practiced
their Art upon his Pictures with Success, foretelling what should befall the
Persons for whom they were made; and to add to the Excellency of his Art, he
had a Varnish, the Secret of which dyed with him, by which, he not only made
his Colors appear more lively, but also preserved his Pieces from all Injuries
of Time.


Friend, What were his most Famous Works?


Traveller, It Is hard to say; but if we may Judge by the Judgment of Augustus
Caesar, we must give the Prize to that Famous Venus coming out of the Sea;
which he Consecrated in the Temple of his Father Julius; and which, from her
Action, was called by the Greeks, Anadiomene, and was extremely Celebrated by
their Poets; a part of it being spoiled by Time, there was no Painter found
that would offer to mend it; so great was the Skill of Apelles, and the
Veneration that all Artists had for his Works.


Friend, Was there many of them preserved to the Time of the Romans?


Traveller. A great many; and for ought we know, might have lasted to our days,
if they could have escaped the Barbarity of those Nations that Ruined the Roman
Empire; for there were at Rome of his doing, Castor and Pollux, and the Picture
of Alexander, Triumphing with the Image of War, tied by the Hands to his
Chariot: and these were Consecrated in the Forum of Augustus. He had made many
Pictures of Alexander, and other Great Men, which were all preserved and valued
at a vast Rate by the Greeks and Romans.


Friend, Was there any thing left of Protogenes's doing?


Traveller. Very little, except at Athens, where he painted the Propyleum, or
Antiporch of the Temple of Minerva: but his most famous Piece was his Jalyssus,
which was Consecrated in the Temple of Peace in Rome: it is said, he spent Seven
Years about it, and Colored it over four times, that it might the better
resist the Injuries of Time.


Friend. What was Represented in this Picture?


Traveller, There has been great Dispute about that in Antiquity, and since;
some being of Opinion, that therein was Represented the City of Jalyssus, with
its Territory belonging to the Rhodians: But that seems improbable, because
that Cicero always compares the Jalyssus of Protogenes with the Venus of
Apelles; which would be very improper; if it were only a Town: it is therefore
more probable, that it was the Picture of the Hero Jalyssus, Founder of the
Town, and who was said to be Son to Apollo. Whatsoever it was, the Piece was so
Admired, that it Saved the City of Rhodes, when it was Besieged by Demetrius,
who could have Carried it, if he would have Fired a part of the Town where this
Picture was; but be chose rather to Raise the Siege, than to destroy so fine a
thing: Some say, that Protogenes was yet alive, and working in his
Countrey-House in the Suburbs of Rhodes, which were all Possessed by the Army of
Demetrius; who hearing that he worked on quietly, sent to him to know the
reason of so much Security amidst so much Danger: Protogenes made Answer, That
he knew his War was with the Rhodians, and not with the Arts: Which Answer so
pleased Demetrius, that he gave him a Guard, and went often, during the Siege,
to see him work. And thus you see, Art can protect its own Sons in the midst of
the greatest Dangers.


Friend, I think, I have read somewhere, that Protogenes was a great while
before his Pictures were understood by his Countrymen, insomuch that he was
very Poor, and his Works Sold for little or nothing.


Traveller, It Is very true, and he was beholding to the Generosity of Apelles
for his Fortune; for he seeing how little he was valued at Home, bought up a
good many of his Pieces; giving out, he intended to sell them again for his
own, and gave him a great Price for them; which the Rhodians hearing, entreated
him to let them have them; which he did, but made them pay well for them.

These four, Zeuxis, Parrhasius, Apelles, and Protogenes, were the four Famous
Painters of Graece, which has made me the more particular in speaking of their
Works, they having carried the Art to the highest pitch it was possible to
arrive to.


Friend. Then after their Time it Decayed, and grew every day less Famous.


Traveller. It remained in great Perfection for several Centuries; these great
Masters having made so many good Scholars, and left such Admirable Precepts
for the Art, that it was impossible it could be lost for a great while; nay,
some Improvements were made by Succeeding Masters in the Art of Coloring, and
making their Pictures of a greater Relievo than those Ancient Masters did. But
it will not be amiss, to name you succinctly some of the great Masters that
were, as it were, of the School of these Ancients; as likewise, to mention some
of their Works.

First, then Pausias of Sicione, was a Scholar of Pamphilus, as well as
Apelles, and seems to have been the first that began to Paint Walls and
Ceilings; for Apelles never Painted upon a Wall, but upon a Board, or some
portable Matter, that his Works might be less subject to Fire, and other
Injuries of Time: There were likewise several good Pieces of this Master
preserved at Rome; Lucullus gave two Talents for a Piece of his, of a Young
Woman making a Garland of Flowers; and there was likewise in Pompey's Theater a
Piece of his, of a Sacrifice of Oxen, much esteemed. This Town of Sicione
Furnished Rome with its greatest Rarities; for the Common Townhouse being run
in Debt, Pawned their Pictures; which were all, or most of them carried to Rome
by Scaurus the Edile, to Adorn the Magnificent Entertainment he made for the
People in the Forum Romanum, during his Magistracy.

Euphranor of Corinth was another Famous Master, who lived about the four
hundred and tenth Year of the Foundation of Rome; he gave a great Majesty to
his Figures, and was admirable in his Proportions; there was a Piece of his in
the Temple of Ephesus, Representing the Counterfeit Folly of Ulyssus, in which
he was Yoaking a Horse and an Ox together.

About the same time was Cyelias, whose Fame was such, that long after his
Death, a Piece of his, containing the Story of the Argonantes, was bought by
Hortensius, the Famous Roman Orator, Contemporary with Cicero; and he paid
forty four Talents for it; which is about eight thousand pound Sterling: He
built a Chapel on purpose for this Picture in his Villa at Tusculum.

Out of Euphranor's School came Nicias, who painted Women so rarely; Rome was
full of his Works, brought from Graece: his most Famous Piece was Homers Hell;
which he painted with such great Attention, that he would often ask his
Servants, during that Labor, whether he had Dined, or no? He was offered
seventy Talents by King Ptolomeus, which is above ten thousand pounds, for this
Piece; but he chose rather to Honor his own Country with it, and presented it
freely to the Town of Corinth. It seems, he was also an Admirable Statuary; for
Praniteles being asked, which of all his Statues he valued the most? made
answer, those which Nicias finished for him: so great a value he had for his
Skill and Judgment.

Not long after, there flourished in Athens one Metrodorus, a rare Philosopher,
and most excellent Painter; after that Paulus Emilius had Conquered Perseus
King of Macedon; being in Athens, he desired the Athenians to give him some one
of their most Learned Men to Breed up his Son; and they by one Accord named
Metrodorus for that Employment; with whom Paulus Emilius was Infinitely
Satisfied.


Friend. All this while, these are all Greek Masters; had the Romans none of
their own?


Traveller. Yes, and very famous Ones; witness that Fabius, who was Surnamed
Pictor, of one of the greatest Families in Rome; he painted the Templum Salutis
in Rome: they had likewise Paunius, who was both Poet and Painter, and painted
the Temple of Hercules in the Forum Boarium. Turpilius, a Roman Knight, painted
many things at Verona; and that which was very singular, and never practiced
but by himself, was, that he painted with his Left Hand. Atterius Labeo, who
had been Praetor, was famous for his Works in this kind. But to say the truth,
the Romans being a Warlike Nation, were most taken up that way, and the great
Men amongst them contented themselves with being able to Judge of Arts, and to
encourage them by their Riches, which they profusely laid out in Pieces of
Painting and Statuary: Thus Julius Caesar Consecrated in the Temple of Venus,
from whom his Family was derived, two Pieces, one an Ajax, another a Medaea;
both Admirable Figures. Augustus did the same; and in Imitation of him, all the
Great Men purchased the Works of the Greek Painters and Statuaries at any Rate;
insomuch that Graecia and Asia were almost deprived of all the best Originals,
which were brought to Rome, and there preserved, till several Accidents of
Fire, and the Invasion of Rome by the Barbarous Nations, consumed them;
insomuch that now there are but a few Pieces of ancient painting left. But I
hope we need not much regret that loss, when we shall reflect upon the
Admirable Works of our Modern Painters, who have arrived to that perfection in
the Art, which perhaps would astonish those Ancient Artists themselves, if they
could revive and see them.


Friend, Before you undertake to tell me the progress of the Art in these
Modern Times, pray inform me how long it lay buried in Oblivion?


Traveller. From the decay of the Roman Empire, and the Invasion of the Goths,
and other Barbarous Nations, it continued decaying, and was in a manner quite
lost, till within these four hundred Years, that it first revived in Tuscany.


Friend, Pray, what was the great reason of that Decay?


Traveller. Besides the Barbarity of the Times, in which Men were continually
employed in Wars, Rapines and Murders; the Zeal likewise of Christian Religion,
did not a little contribute to stifle the Ingenuity of the best Artists; for
after a long Contest with the Religion of the Gentiles, the Christian having
prevailed at last, the Bishops and Pastors of the Christian Assemblies
labored all they could to extinguish the very Memory of the Heathen Gods; and
therefore threw down all those wonderful Statues, Sculptures, Paintings, and
other Ornaments of their Temples; which they did not out of any hatred they had
to those Arts, but out of a Blind Zeal, to extinguish their Superstitious
Worship; by which, they nevertheless so crushed those Arts themselves, that for
many hundreds of Years they lay buried and neglected.


Friend, How came they at last to recover themselves?


Traveller, There remained in Graece some little footsteps of the Art; and from
thence it was, that about the Year 1250, there came some Painters, who could
hardly be called Masters, having scarce any more knowledge of the Art than just
to draw the Out-lines without either Grace or Proportion; the first Scholar
they made in Italy, was at Florence, and was called Cimabue; who being helped
by Nature, soon out did his Masters, and began to give some strength to his
Drawings, but still without any great Skill, as not understanding how to manage
his Lights. and Shadows, or indeed, how to Design truly; it being in those
days an unusual and unattempted thing to Draw after the Life.

His chief Scholar was Ghiotto, who was very Famous for his Time; he freed
Painting from that first Stiffness of the Greek Masters, and began to give some
Air to the Heads, and some Softness to the Coloring, with better Aptitudes to
his Figures, as also, some Looseness in his Drapery; nay, he attempted something
of Shortning and Perspective, though but imperfectly; he likewise began to show
in his Pieces some effects of the Passions of the Mind, such as Fear, Love,
Anger, Pity, etc. But he still was far from expressing the Liveliness of the
Eyes, the softness of Flesh, and the strength of the Muscles in Naked Figures,
as having seen nothing of that kind to direct him, or help him in this first
beginning of the Art.

After him Thaddeo Gaddi had something a better Coloring, and more Liveliness
in his Figures. Simon Sanese began to understand the Decorum of Composition:
and Stephano Scimmia with his Son Tomaso added some strength to their Drawings,
and perfected themselves in Perspective, but still keeping to the Manner of
Ghiotto; which was continued by Spinello, Arctino, Jacopo, Casentino, Antonio,
Venitiano, Andrea, Pisano, Nino, and several others, who still got ground a
little, but could not fall into that free manner of the Imitation of Nature
which Masaccio first attained to both in Sculpture and Painting, having quite
laid aside Ghiotto's way.


Friend, How long was it from the time of Cimabue to the time of Masaccio?


Traveller. About two hundred Years; all which time we may call the Infancy of
Painting; but Masaccio, by great Study and Application, having found out the
true way of placing his Figures upon a plain Superficies, with due Shortnings;
which all the other Masters before him had not understood; invented likewise an
easier way of drawing the Draperies with loose and natural Foldings; he also
attempted Naked Figures, and succeeded in them better than any before him; but
in Perspective he was admirable; there being yet extant in Florence a Piece of
his, where there are Houses drawn in Perspective, with so much Skill, as to
show both the Inside and Outside of them.

In his Time Sculpture was come to a great Improvement, chiefly by the
prodigious Genius of that great Architect and Sculptor, Philippo di Ser
Brunelesci; as also by his other Contemporaries, Donatello, Lorenzo, Ghiberti,
and several others; who having discovered some of the best Roman Antiquities,
and studied them carefully, had attained to a rare Boldness in Design, and
opened the way to the Painters to draw with more Exactness and Truth, as also,
to give more Sweetness to the Naked Figures of Women and Children; so that with
the help of several other Eminent Artists, Painting was come, as it were, to
its Adolescence or Youth, every thing being extremely mended; their Invention
being more Copious and Richer in Ornaments; their Drawings truer and nearer
Nature; their Coloring more Delightful; and in a word, the whole Manner of
Painting being altered from what it was in the Time of Ghiotto.


Friend. Pray, who were the great Painters of this Second AGE, as one may call
it?


Traveller. There were many, but chiefly these, Pietro della Francia, Lazaro
Vasari, Antonello da Messina, Andrea del Castagno, Dominico, Ghirlandaio,
Sandro, Botticello, Francesco, Francia, Andrea Mantegna; and many others.


Friend. These were all Florentines, as I take it; or at least, bred in the
Florentine School: Was there no other place in Italy that produced Artists of
the same kind at that time?


Traveller. Yes, at Venice, and all over Lombardy, there were several Painters
of Repute; at Venice particularly, the two Bellini were deservedly Famous; and
at Ferrara, Lorenza Costa, and Hercole Ferrarese; but still Painting kept, as
it were, in its Youth, alike in all places; and most of the Masters then
living, thought they had attained the Ne plus Ultra; whereas they were
infinitely short of that Skill which those of the Third Age, or, as I may call
it, the Virility or Manhood of Painting did arrive to.


Friend. Pray, what was wanting in their Works; for methinks, you have said
already, that they were truly Designed, and finely Colored; that they
understood Invention, and Composition; that they were not Ignorant in
Perspective, and the Art of Shortning their Figures: all which are the hardest
things in Painting.


Traveller. There wanted a Spirit and Life, which their Successors gave to
their Works; and particularly, an Easiness; which hides the pains and labor
that the Artist has been at; it being with Painting as with Poetry; where, the
greatest Art, is to conceal Art; that is, that the Spectator may think that
easy, which cost the Painter infinite Toil and Labor: They had not likewise,
that sweet Union of their Colors which was afterward found out, and first
attempted by Francia Bolognese, and Pietro Perugino; and so pleasing it was to
the Eye, that the People came in flocks to stair upon their Works, thinking it
impossible to do better; but they were soon undeceived by Leonardo da Vinci;
whom we must own as the Father of the Third Age of Painting, which we call the
Modern; and in him nothing was wanting; for besides strength of Design, and
true Drawing, he gave better Rules, more exact Measures, and was more profound
in the Art than any before him.


Friend, About what time did Leonardo da Vinci live? And who were his
Contemporaries?


Traveller. He flourished about two hundred Years ago, and had for
Contemporaries most of the rare Painters that the World has produced; which
were, Giorgione di Castle, Franco, Andrea del Sarto, Raphael del Urbino,
Antonio di Correggio, H. Parmigiano, Polidoro, Julio Romano, Perino del Vaga,
and Michael Angelo Buonaroti.


Friend. These are all famous Names, and known to all those who have ever heard
of Painting; therefore, I would fain be informed more particularly of their
Excellences.


Traveller. The best way for that, will be, to read their Lives, done by
Vasari; but in the mean time, to satisfy your Curiosity, I will say a little
of every one of them.

Giorgione was of the School of Venice, and the first that followed the Modern
Tuscan way; for having by chance seen some things of Leonardo da Vinci, with
that new way of strong Shadows, it pleased him so much, that he followed it all
his Life time, and imitated it prefectly in all his Oil Paintings: he drew all
after the Life, and had an excellent Coloring; by which means he gave a Spirit
to all he did; which had not been seen in any Lombard Painter before him; and
that was his particular Character; he was as great a Musician as he was a
Painter, and played admirably upon the Lute; he dyed Young, having got the
Plague of his Mistress, who having it upon her, admitted of his Embraces; of
which they both dyed.

Andrea del Sarto wrought with wonderful Diligence and Care, insomuch that his
Works are highly valued, and his Coloring was the sweetest in the World, but
there wants Strength and Spirit, which Andrea had not himself, being of a mild
timorous Nature, and distrustful of his own Capacity, as also setting very
little Value upon what he did; which made him live and die Poor and
Contemptible, not having got in all his life time much Money, except when he
was in France, in the Service of that King.

Raphael del Urbin was the greatest Painter that ever was; having made himself
a Manner out of the Study of the Ancients and the Moderns, and taken the best
out of both; he was admirable for the easiness of Invention, Richness, and
Order in his Composition, Nature herself was overcome by his Coloring, he was
Judicious beyond measure, and proper to his Aptitudes; in a word, he carried
Painting in its greatest Perfection, and has been outdone by none: His
particular Talent lay in Secret Graces, as Apelles's did among the Ancients.

Antonio di Correggio, among the Lombards, was an exquisite Artist; for without
ever having been out of his own Country, he attained to the greatest
difficulties of the Art; never did any Body handle Colors better, nor Paint
with a greater Relievo; but particularly, the tender Softness he gave his Naked
Figures, surpasses all Masters of his Time, and perhaps, all that ever were; he
worked most at Parma, retired, and little taken notice of, having a great
Family, and working hard to maintain them: Painting ows much to him; and
particularly, the manner of drawing Hair loose and natural; which no Painter
before him had attained to.

Francesco Muzzuoli, otherwise called, Il Parmigiano, was one of the rarest
among the Lombard Painters; Sweetness, Neatness, and Grace in his Figures, were
his Character, together with an art of making Landskips, and other Ornaments,
beyond any of his Time: and if he had not taken a Humor of Studying Chemistry,
and seeking the Philosopher's Stone, he would have been, perhaps. the most
excellent Painter of his Age.

Polidoro, from carrying Stone and Mortar in the Pope's Buildings, came to try
his Genius for Designing; and having made an Intimate Friendship with Maturino,
a Florentine, who was then working upon the new Lodgings in Fresco; he followed
his study so close, that they two undertook several Frontispeeces, and Outsides
of Palaces in Rome; and their Genius was so conformable, that their Work
seemed to proceed from the same Hand, though both of them worked together upon
the same Piece; their Invention was the richest, and Design the easiest that it
was possible to see; and to this day, they are the best School for Painters,
they having contributed to the Art as much as any; they painted most of the
best Roman Stories up and down Rome; but did them all with that great Judgment,
that to those who are conversant with the Customs and Dress of that Nation,
all seemed mighty proper and easy.

Julio Romano, was Raphael's Scholar, and his Beloved Scholar, none having so
well Imitated him either in Manner, Invention, Design, or Coloring; and he was
besides, pleasant in his Conversation, of a jovial, merry Humor, and
infinitely suiting with the sweetness of Raphael's Temper; no Body understood
Antiquity better, for he had extremely studied Trajan's Pillar, where all the
Roman Habits, Engines of War, Ensigns, Arms, etc. are rarely well Represented:
He was besides, an admirable Medallist, and spent much Money and Time in that
Study: his chief Works are at Mantua; where he lived the best part of his Life,
and dyed Rich, and in great Favor with the Duke of that Place.

Perino del Vaga came to Rome in Raphael's Time, and grew excellent by studying
his and Michael Angelo's Works; he was a bold and strong Designer, having
understood the Muscles in Naked Bodies as well as any of his time; he had a
particular Talent for Grottesk; of which kind there are many Pieces of his in
Rome; but his chief Works are at Genova in the Palace of Principe Doria; he
was a very universal Painter both in Fresco, Oil and Distemper, and first
taught the true working of Grottesks and Stucco Work.

Michael Angelo Buonaroti was the greatest Designer that ever was, having
studied Naked Bodies with great Care; but he aiming always at showing the most
difficult things of the Art, in the Contorsions of Members, and Convulsions of
the Muscles, Contractions of the Nerves, etc. His Painting is not so agreeable,
though much more profound and difficult than any other; his Manner was Fierce,
and almost Savage, having nothing of the Graces of Raphael, whose Naked Figures
are dilicate and tender, and more like Flesh and Blood, whereas Michael Angelo
does not distinguish the Sexes nor the Ages so well, but makes all alike
Musculous and Strong; and who sees one Naked Figure of his doing, may reckon he
has seen them all; his Coloring is nothing near so Natural as Raphael's; and
in a word, for all Vassari commends him above the Skies, he was a better
Sculptor than a Painter: One may say of Raphael and of him, that their
Characters were opposite, and both great Designers; the one endeavoring to
show the Difficulties of the Art, and the other aiming at Easiness; in which,
perhaps, there is as much Difficulty.


Friend. You have touched very handsomely upon the Characters of all these great
Artists, and have thereby raised a desire in me to read their Lives. But pray
Inform me yet a little further: Did Painting after their Time decay? Or, has it
since been Improved by more Modern Painters? For all those whom you have
mentioned, lived almost two hundred Years ago.


Traveller. I cannot say, it has Decayed, but it has rather Improved, till
within these few Years that it seems to be at a stand; and I fear, must Decay,
both for want of Encouragement, and because all things that have attained their
utmost Period, do generally decline, after they have been at a stand for some
time.


Friend. Pray, who were those that Succeeded Raphael and Michael Angelo, and
those other great Painters which you have mentioned.


Traveller. After the Death of Raphael and his Scholars (for, as for Michael
Angelo he made no School) Painting seemed to be Decaying; and for some Years,
there was hardly a Master of any Repute all over Italy. The two best at Rome
were Joseph Arpino and Michael Angelo da Caravaggio, but both guilty of great
Mistakes in their Art: the first followed purely his Fancy, or rather Humor,
which was neither founded upon Nature nor Art, but had for Ground a certain
Practical, Fantastical Idea which he had framed to himself. The other was a
pure Naturalist, Copying Nature without distinction or discretion; he
understood little of Composition or Decorum, but was an admirable Colourer.

But much about the same time, the Caraches of Bologna came to Rome, and the
two Brothers Painted together the famous Gallery of the Pallazzo Farneze:
Hannibal the Youngest, was much the greatest Master; though his Eldest Brother
Augustine was likewise admirable; they renewed Raphael's Manner; and Hannibal
particularly, had an admirable Genius to make proper to himself any Manner he
saw, as he did by Correggio, both as to his Coloring, Tenderness, and Motions
of the Figures; in a word, he was a most Accomplished Painter, both for Design,
Invention, Compofition, Coloring, and all parts of Painting; having a
Sovereign Genius, which made him Master of a great School of the best Painters
Italy has had.

Augustine his Elder Brother was an excellent Painter, and a rare Ingraver; He
far surpassed Hannibal himself in the Accomplishments of the Mind; for besides
his knowledge in Mathematics and Philosophy, he was an admirable Musician, and
a very good Poet in his own Language: He Founded the Academy of Design in
Bologna; in which, besides Designing after the Life, there was Taught Simmetry,
Perspective, the reason of the disposing the Shadows and Lights, Anatomy and
Architecture; and Discourses were made upon Stories and Fables, and the Manner
of Placing them, and the Art of Coloring them; insomuch that Painting was much
Improved by him.

He left a Natural Son, whose Name was Anthony, and who dyed about twenty four
Years Old; 'twas thought he would have gone beyond Hannibal himself, the little
that he has left behind him being of a bolder flight than any of the Carraches.

Lodovico Carrache, the Uncle, was he that first Instructed Hannibal, and was
an Eminent Painter, having studied the Manner of Correggio; he excelled in
Design and Coloring, and was chiefly Imitated by Guido Rheni; who, though a
Scholar of Hannibal's, yet thought the Sweetness and Coloring of Lodovico to
be preferred to Hannibal's; and indeed the Heads of Guido are not inferior to
those of Raphael himself.


Friend, Pray, who were the chief Scholars of this School of the Caraches?


Traveller. The most Remarkable were Guido Rheni, of whom I was speaking, Sixto
Badalocchi, Albano, Dominichino, Lanfranc.

Guido Rheni acquired both more Reputation and Riches than any of the School of
the Caraches, there being hardly a Prince in Europe that has not endeavored to
get some of his Pieces, which he sold at what Rates he pleased.

Sixto Badalocchi dyed Young, but was the best Designer of the whole School of
the Caraches.

Albano worked most in Little, but with a great Genius, and an admirable
Sweetness, having besides, all the Parts of an Excellent Painter.

Dominichino was one that took much Pains, and had not that happy Facility
which his other Contemporaries had, but he was very Profound in all the Parts
of Painting; insomuch, that bating the inimitable Graces of Guido, he seems to
outdo him in every thing else; and particularly, in greatness of Invention.

Cavaliero Lanfranc was another of the famous Disciples of Carache, and Painted
in Rome several things in Concurrence with Guido and Domenichino; he had a
great Fire, and a noble Manner of Design and Coloring, but not always so
Correct as he should be.

There was likewise one about the same time, or a little after, who seems to
have been his own Master, and to have been the Head of a School; and that is,

Pietro Berettini di Cortona, who was a most Accomplished Painter, and a great
Composer, much Facility in his Inventions, and a particular way of Clothing
his Figures, were his distinguishing Characters; but besides, he was Universal;
Painting all his Ornaments himself, and that to a great Perfection, as well in
Landscape as in Fruits, Flowers, Animals, etc. His Forms are very Correct, as
having studied all the Antiques of Rome better than any Painter of his Age,
there being scarce an Old Fragment left Un-Designed by him; his Drapery is a
little stiff, and that is his only fault.


Friend. Methinks, all this while, you have said nothing of some of the most
Famous Painters in the World, to wit, Titian, Tintoret, Paul Veronese, and the
Bassans.


Traveller. They are all of the Lombard School, and I designed to treat of them
by themselves, as indeed, they deserve; but in the mean time, since you have
mentioned them, I will give you a short Character of each of them.

Titian was the best Colourer, perhaps, that ever was; he Designed likewise
very well, but not very exactly; the Airs of his Heads for Women and Children
are admirable, and his Drapery loose and noble; his Portraits are all
Masterpieces, no man having ever carried Face-Painting so far; the Persons
that he has drawn having all the Life and Spirit as if they were alive; his
Landskips are the Truest, best Colored, and Strongest that ever were: He was
very Laborious, Copying with his own Hand all that he did for ten Years; that
he might thereby acquire a Facility: He lived to be a hundred Years Old within
one Year, and Painted to the last; but what he did at first and at last, is
easily distinguished from his other Works which he did in his Prime.

Paul Veronese, Disciple of Titian, Painted with grert Grace, and adorned his
Figures with Beautiful Draperies, but his Composition was gross, and Invention
poor, neither did he Design Correctly, his Coloring it exquisite.

Tintoret had a great Genius; and if he had had as much Patience as he had Fire
and Vivacity, he would have Excelled; but he is faulty in his Design, and his
Composition and Ornaments are mean, his Coloring is very good.

The two Bassans had but a poor Genius, confined to one Manner, and with little
Variety; but their Coloring is Admirable, and their Animals Designed Truly,
and with great Relievo; as for other Painting, they had neither Invention nor
Correction of Design.

And with them, I think, I may shut up my Account of the Italian Painters of
any great Fame.


Friend, Has there been no Painters of the first Rank out of Italy?


Traveller. Few or none, but some there have been, that had they seen Italy,
would certainly have been of the very first Rate; Others there are too, who
having seen that Country, have brought out of it a Manner and Coloring little
Inferior to the best Masters there; the first were Albert Durer and Holbins,
who were both Profound in the Art; they were Contemporaries to Raphael, and
would have puzzled him if they had lived at Rome, to shake off their Gothic
Manner; Raphael had Albert Durer in great Admiration, and used to hang his
Prints in his Chamber, and study them: Amongst those who have been in ITALY,
the two best are Rubens and Vandike.

Rubens had a great Genius, much Fire, and yet great Softness; he was Learned
in the Art, but without Correction in Design; his Coloring is equal to
Titian's, whose Works he chiefly Studied, and like him, followed Nature more
than the Antique; he has more Facility than Titian, more Truth and Profoundness
than Paul Veronese, and more Majesty and Repose than Tintoret: His Chief Study
was upon these three; out of whom he made himself a Manner beyond them all; and
such an one as has not been outdone by any.

The best of his Scholars was Vandike; who seems to have best understood his
Masters Rules and General Maxims; nay, he has even surpassed him in the
Dilicacy of Expressing true Flesh and Blood; particularly, in some small
Cabinet Pieces: Had he not spent so much time in Portraits, he might have been
a great History Painter; though he did not Design with great Correction.


THE HISTORY Of the ART of PAINTING.
DIALOGUE III. Teaching How to know Good Pictures.
Friend. I Have read with great pleasure the Lives of most of those Painters
whom we discoursed of at our last Meeting; and that Study has given me so muuh
Insight into the Art, that I must needs own, that a General Painter, such as
Raphael and some others were, is a most extraordinary sort of Man; it being
necessary he should not only have a Genius and Spirit infused from above, but
also, that he be fraught with all the best part of acquired Knowledge here
below; and I do no longer wonder now, that we have so few of such Transcendent
Artists.


Traveller. The World here in our Northern Climates has a Notion of Painters
little nobler than of Joyners and Carpenters, or any other Mechanic, thinking
that their Art is nothing but the daubing a few Colors upon a Cloth, and
believing that nothing more ought to be expected from them at best, but the
making a like Picture of any Bodies Face.

Which the most Ingenious amongst them perceiving, stop there; and though their
Genius would lead them further into the noble part of History Painting, they
check it, as useless to their Fortune, since they should have no Judges of
their Abilities, nor any proportionable Reward of their Undertakings. So that
till the Gentry of this Nation are better Judges of the Art, it is impossible we
should ever have an Historical Painter of our own, nor that any excellent
Forreigner should stay amongst us.


Friend, What you say is very true, and therefore I think it would be a good
work to inform us how we should Judge of Paintings, and distinguish the Good
from the Bad; as also, to teach us how to know the different Hands and Manners
of those great Masters already extant.


Traveller. To do that perfectly, would be a Work of great length, and perhaps,
engage me in the Secrets of the Art it self, to such a degree, as my Discourse
would be fit for none but Painters to read; therefore I shall not do that; but
if a few Rules of Common Sense and Obvious Notions will suffice, as I believe
they will, to make any one a Judge of Painting, I am content to give you that
sort of Observations.


Friend. Pray do, and in as easy Terms as you can, that I may Communicate what
I Learn, to those whom I design to gain over to this diverting Knowledge.


Traveller. I must then repeat to you what I told you at our first Meeting;
which is, That the Art of Painting has three Parts; which are, Design,
Coloring, and Invention; and under this third, is that which we call
Disposition; which is properly the Order in which all the Parts of the Story
are disposed, so as to produce one effect according to the Design of the
Painter; and that is the first Effect which a good Piece of History is to
produce in the Spectator; that is, if it be a Picture of a joyful Event, that
all that is in it be Gay and Smiling, to the very Landskips, Houses, Heavens,
Clothes, etc. And that all the Aptitudes tend to Mirth. The fame, if the Story
be Sad, or Solemn; and so for the rest. And a Piece that does not do this at
first sight, is most certainly faulty, though it be never so well Designed, or
never so well Colored; nay, though there be Learning and Invention in it; for
as a Play that is designed to make me Laugh, is most certainly an ill one if it
makes me Cry. So an Historical Piece that does not produce the Effect it is
designed for, cannot pretend to an Excellency, though it be never so finely
Painted.


Friend. But as one may be delighted with the Verses and Composition of an Ill
Play, so we may be pleased with the Design and Coloring of a Picture that is
ill Disposed.


Traveller, It Is true, but that is but an Imperfect Joy, and such an one as
reflects more upon the Artist, than if he had made an Attempt to please us by
Order, and had failed in his Design and Coloring. Such was the fault of one,
who being to draw the Story of Moses striking the Rock in the Desert to get
Water for the People of Israel, made a Rock indeed, and the People about it,
but drew the Landscape of a Country full of Pasture, and Beautifully Green and
Fertile; not considering that such Countries have no need of Miracles to
produce Water in them; without which they cannot be supposed Fertile: whereas
he should have drawn a Country, as indeed it was, Burnt up, Sandy, and Barren,
that the Miracle might have been both more necessary and greater: and though
this Country were never so finely done by him, yet that Error of Judgment
made the Piece Intolerable, and not to be looked upon without Indignation.

The next thing to be considered in an Historical Piece, is the Truth of the
Drawings, and the Correction of the Design, as Painters call it; that is,
whether they have chosen to imitate Nature in her most Beautiful Part; for
though a Painter be the Coppist of Nature, yet he must not take her
promiscuously. as he finds her, but have an Idea of all that is Fine and
Beautiful in an Object, and choose to Represent that, as the Ancients have done
so admirably in their Paintings and Statues: And it is in this part that most of
the Flemish Painters, even Rubens himself, have miscarryed, by making an ill
Choice of Nature; either because the Beautiful Natural is not the Product of
their Country, or because they have not seen the Antique, which is the
Correction of Nature by Art; for we may say that the Antique is but the best of
Nature; and therefore all that resembles the Antique, will carry that Character
along with it.


Friend, I remember, you reckoned it to me among the Faults of some Painters,
that they had studied too long upon the Statues of the Ancients; and that they
had indeed thereby acquired the Correction of Design you speak of; but they had
by the same means lost that Vivacity and Life which is in Nature, and which is
the true Grace of Painting.


Traveller. It Is very true, that a Painter may fall into that Error, by giving
himself up too much to the Antique; therefore he must know, that his Profession
is not tied up to that exact Imitation of it as the Sculptor's is, who must
never depart from that exact Regularity of Proportion which the Ancients have
settled in their Statues; but Painters Figures must be such as may seem rather
to have been Models for the Antique, than drawn from it; and a Painter that
never has studied it at all, will never arrive at that as Raphael, and the best
of the Lombard Painters have done; who seem to have made no other Use of the
Antique, than by that means to choose the most Beautiful of Nature.

There is another Caution to be observed too in this Choice of Forms, which is,
to keep a Judicious Aptitude to the Story; for if the Painter, for Example, is
to draw Sampson, he must not give him the Softness and Tenderness he would give
to Ganimedes; nay, there is a difference to be made in the very same Figure at
different times: and Hercules himself is to be made more Robust, fighting with
Anteus, than when he sits in Dejanira's Lap. But above all, the Painter must
observe an equal Air, so as not to make one part Musculous and Strong, and the
other Soft and Tender.

There is another thing to be considered likewise upon the viewing of any
Story; which is, whether the Painter has used that Variety which Nature her
self sets us a Pattern for, in not having made any one Face exactly like
another, nor hardly any one Shape or Make of either Man or Woman. Therefore the
Painter must also vary his Heads, his Bodies, his Aptitudes, and in a word, all
the Members of the Humane Body, or else his Piece will Cloy, and Satiate the
Eye.

As for the Remainder of what belongs properly to that part called Design; we
must consider if every Figure moves properly; as, if a Figure be to strike,
whether the Arm and all the Body show the vigor of such a Motion; and the same
if he is to Run or Dance; and therein consists one of the greatest Masteries of
the Art, and which requires some Knowledge in Anatomy, that the Muscles be
rightly expressed. As for Shortnings, they are things of great Difficulty, and
few understand the Beauty of them; which is, so to cheat the Eye, that a Figure
that in reality is not a Foot in length, shall seem to be five or six Foot
long; and this depends upon Optics, and is most in use in Ceilings and Vaults.


Friend. These are good Observations for Naked Figures; but few Pieces are all
of that sort, most being Clothed; and they say, that the Effect of Draperies
is of great Consequence to the Piece, and therefore to be managed with great
Art.


Traveller, It Is very true, it is one of the most difficult parts of Painting;
and the best Rule is, that your Drapery be in large Foldings, Noble and Simple,
not repeated too often, but following the Order of the Parts; and let them be
of Stuffs and Silks that are commonly worn, of beautiful Colors, but sweet,
and such as do not trench upon the Naked too harshly, and by that means they
will be of great Use for the Union of the Whole; either by reflecting the
Light, or giving such a Fund as is wanting for the other Colors to appear
better. They serve also to fill up any empty place in the Picture.

There is also a Judicious Choice to be made of Draperies, according to the
Quality of the Persons: Magistrates and Grave People must have Ample and Long
Robes; Country People and Soldiers must have Close, Short Draperies; Young
Maids and Women must have them Light, Thin, and Tender. They that follow the
Drapery of the Ancients in Statues, will always be Stiff, as Raphael was at
first, because that they used little Foldings, often repeated; which do best in
Marble or Brass. But Painters who have the Command of Colors, Lights, and
Shadows, may extend their Draperies, and let them fly as they please. Titian,
Paul Veronese, Tintoret, Rubens, and Vandike, have painted Drapery admirably;
and indeed the Lombard School have excelled in that and Coloring, as the Roman
and Florentine in Design and Nudity.


Friend. What is properly the Coloring of a Piece of Painting?


Traveller. It is the Art of employing the Colors proper to the Subject, with
a regard to the Lights and Shadows that are incident to the Story, either
according to the Truth of it, or to the Painter's Invention: and out of the
Management of these comes all the Strength, Relievo, and Roundness that the
Figures have: it is hard to give Positive Rules here, it depending much on
Practice; but the most General is, so to manage your Colors, Lights, and
Shadows, that the Bodies enlightened may appear by the Opposition of your
Shadows; which by that means may make the Eye rest with Pleasure upon them; and
also, that there be an imperceptible passage from your Shadows to your Lights.

It Is generally observed likewise to make the greatest Light fall upon the
middle of the Piece, where the principal Figures ought to be, and to lessen it
by degrees toward the sides till it loose it self. In gentle Shadows, avoid
strong Shadowings upon the Naked Members, least the black that is in them seems
to be part of the Flesh. But above all, there is a thing called by the
Italians, Il degra demento de Colori; which in English may be termed, The
diminishing of Colors: And it consists in making an Union and Concord between
the Colors in the foremost part of your Piece, and those that are behind, so
that they be all of one tenor, and not broke; and by this means every part
corresponds with another in your Picture, and makes up one Harmony to the Eye.

As for Face-Painting alone, it is to be managed another way, for there you
must do precisely what Nature shows you.

It Is true, that Beautiful Colors may be employed, but they must be such as
make not your Piece like a Picture, rather than like Nature it self; and
particularly, you must observe to express the true Temper as well as the true
Phisionomy of the Persoms that are Drawn; for it would be very absurd to give a
Smiling, Airy Countenance to a Melancholy Person; or, to make a Young, Lively
Woman, Heavy and Grave. It Is said of Apelles, that he expressed the Countenance
and true Air of the Persons he Drew, to so great a degree, that several
Physionomists did predict Events upon his Pictures to the Persons Drawn by him,
and that with true Success. If after that, you can give your Picture a great
Relievo, and make your Colors Represent the true Vivacity of Nature, you have
done your Work as to that part of Painting, which is no small one, being, next
to History, the most difficult to obtain; for though there be but little
Invention required, yet it is necessary to have a Solid Judgment and Lively
Fancy.


Friend. Pray, what is properly Invention in a Picture?


Traveller. Invention is the Manner of Expressing that Fable and Story which
the Painter has chosen for the Subject of his Piece; and may principally be
divided into Order and Decorum. By the first, the Painter places the parts of
his Subject properly, so as the Spectator may imagine that the thing did not
happen otherwise than as it is there Represented; and so as the whole Content
of the Story, though it embrace never so many Figures, make but one BODY,
Agreeing with its self in all its Parts.

For Example: Suppose a Painter to Represent the Story of the Jews gathering
Manna in the Desert; he must so order it, that the Persons employed in the
Piece do all do the same thing, though in different Aptitudes; and there must
appear in their Countenances the same Joy and Desire of this Heavenly Food; and
besides, he must Represent a Country proper, and give his Figures their
Draperies according to the Customs and Manners of the Nation he Represents: all
this Raphael has done in this very Story: and indeed, that part of Invention
was so great in him, that he seldom Designed a Story in his first SCHIZZOS,
that he did not do it four or five several ways, to choose at last the best.
But to do this, a Painter, besides a Fanciful, Flourishing Genius of his own,
must help himself by reading both History and Fable, and Conversing with Poets
and Men of Learning; but above all, the Painter must have a care that he pitch
not upon such an Invention as is beyond his Forces to perform.

Some Observations there are about the Number of Figures fit to be employed in
an Historical Piece. Hannibal Carrache was of Opinion, that a Piece that
contained above twelve Figures, could never be free from Confusion; and the
Reason that he used to give, was; first, That he thought that no Piece could be
well with more than three great Gruppos, or Knots of Figures: And Secondly,
That that Silence and Majesty which is necessary in Painting, is lost in that
Multitude and Crowd of Figures. But if your Subject be such as constrains you
to a Multitude, such as the Representation of a Battle, or of the Last Day of
Judgment, then you are likewise dispensed from that great Care of Finishing;
but must chiefly study Union, and the disposing of your Lights and Shadows. The
Painter must also take Care, that his Scene be known by his Piece at first
view, by some Ingenious Invention to express the Country: Such wos that of
Nealces a Greek Painter, who having Drawn a Sea Fight between the Egyptians
and the Persians; to express, that the Action happened at the Mouth of the
Nile, made an Ass drinking by the side of the River, and a Crocodile ready to
devour him; that being the proper Animal of that River.

The second part of Invention is Decorum; that is, that there be nothing Absurd
nor Discordant in the Piece: and in this part, the Lombard Painters are very
faulty; taking Liberties that move one almost to Laughter; Witness Titian
himself, who Drew Saint Margaret a Stride upon the Dragon: and most of the
Lombard Painters are subject to a certain Absurdity of Anachronisaie's Drawing.
For Example, our Savior upon the Cross, and Saint Francis and Saint Benedict
looking on, though they did not live till eight hundred Years after our
Savior's Passion. All Indecencies are likewise to be avoided: and Michael
Angelo does justly deserve to be Censured, in his great Picture of the Day of
Judgment, for having exposed to view in the Church it self, the secret parts of
Men and Women, and made Figures among the Blessed that kiss one another most
tenderly. Raphael on the contrary, was so great an Observer of Decorum, that
though his Subject led him to any Liberties of that kind, he would find a way
to keep to the Rules of Modesty: and indeed, he seems to have been Inspired for
the Heads of his Madonna's and Saints, it being impossible to imagine more
Noble Physionomies than he gives them; and withal, on Air of Pudour and
Sanctity that strikes the Spectator with Respect.


Friend, This puts me in mind of the moving part of Painting; which is, the
stirring of the Affections of the Spectator by the Expression of the Passions
in the Piece; and methinks this might well be called a part of Painting.


Traveller. It is Comprehended under that of Invention; and is indeed the most
difficult part of it, as depending entirely upon the Spirit and Genius of the
Painter, who can express things no otherwise than as he conceives them; and
from thence come the different Manners; or, as one may call them, Styles of
Painting; some Soft and Pleasing, others Terrible and Fierce, others Majestic,
others Low and Humble, as we see in the STYLE of POETS; and yet all Excellent
in their Kinds.


Friend. Pray, if you were to give your Judgment about those Painters whom you
esteem most universal, and whose Works were fittest to be Studied, whom would
you choose.


Traveller. I should begin with Raphael, whose Graces and Skill are beyond
Imitation, and can only be Admired till Heaven sends such another Genius down
to Advance the ART beyond what he brought it to: after him, I think that Giulio
Romano and Polidoro, with Perino del Vaga, may carry the Bell for Design and
Invention. For Beauty of Coloring, Correggio, Titian, and Parmigiano are,
without Contest, the most Inimitable Masters: Paul Veronese had a most Rapid
Genius, full of Fire and Invention, an Admirable Colourer, but not an exact
Designer, nor true Chooser of the best Forms for a Dark, Strong Manner,
somewhat Smoked, but very Learned: I think that Giorgione Pordenone and
Caravagio are Admirable: And in these Latter Times the Carraches seem to have
had all the Qualities together, being Excellent Designers, Admirable
Colourists, full of Graces, and of Great Skill in Managing their Lights and
Shadows. Insomuch that there is little Amendment to be expected in Painting,
after such ARTISTS.


Friend. You say nothing of Michael Angelo, Lionardo da Vinci, Poussin, and a
great many others.


Traveller. I have else where given their Characters; which because they are
not Universal, I do not here propose them for Patterns: Michael Angelo was a
mighty Designer, and that was all: Of Lionardo, who was Equal to him in every
thing, we have nothing left, or very little: As for Poussin, the so much
Admired Frenchman; his way was in Little for the most part; and some are of
Opinion he could not do in Great; or at least, he did not delight in it, having
done but two Pieces in all his Life time, that were as big as the Natural; his
Figures were generally of two or three Foot long; his Composition Orderly, his
Invention Florid; but particularly, he had a Talent for Expressing the
PASSIONS: which was most Admirable: His Coloring inclines more to the Antique
than to Nature. And he has left many Pieces unfinished. But take him altogether
in his Way, he is a Great MAN, but not of that first Rank of PAINTERS, whom all
ARTISTS must look upon as the Great Originals that Heaven has given to Mankind
to Imitate; and whose WORKS will not only be the SCHOOL, but the DELIGHT and
ADMIRATION of all After Ages, as long as Painting shall retain any Esteem
amongst Mankind.


The End of the Dialogues.
The LIFE of CIMABUE: A Florentin Painter.
THAT Deluge of Calamities which, for diverse hundreds of Years, had overwhelmed
Italy, had not only ruined all the public Fabrics and the product of the
Industry of the Ancients, but likewise so extinguished the Arts themselves that
there was not an Artificer in any kind left: when it pleased God that about the
year 1240, there was Born in Florence, Jean Cimabue who first Revived the Art
of Painting.

He was of the Family of the CIMABVE, in those days reputed Noble; and being a
promising Child, his Father sent him to School to the Monestry of Sancta Maria
Novella, where one of his Relations was professor of Grammar to the Novices of
that Convent. But he instead of minding his Book, used to spend all his time in
Drawing of Figures of Men, or Horses, or the like, upon Paper, or the backside
of his Books: Following thus the powerful dictates of Nature, which designed
him for another Profession, much about this time, those who Governed in
Florence, invited some Painters out of Greece, that the Art of Painting which
was totally Lost, might be Restored among the Italians; and the first work they
undertook, was the Chapel of the Gondi in Sancta Maria Novella, which they
Painted; the Front and Vault of it is now so Ruined by time, that the Work is
hardly to be discerned. Here Cimabue following his secret Inclination, used to
get from School and pass all day with those Painters, to see them work. So that
at last, his Father perceiving how fond he was of that Art, agreed with the
Greek Painters to take him to their Care, they judging that he was very likely
to succeed in the Profession. Accordingly in a short time he was so helped by
Nature, that he surpassed his Masters, both in Design and Coloring; for they
not at all attentive to Improve their Art, had contented themselves with a
plain flat manner; as we may see in those of their Works that have been
preserved to our time; but Cimabue though he imitated them, yet he had a much
freer way, as appears by his Works that remain. The chief of which are the back
of the great Altar in Santa Cecilia, and in Sancta Croce a Madonna, which is
yet fastened to a Pillar on the right hand of the Quire: After which he drew a
Saint Francis upon a Field of Gold; and which was new in those days, he drew
the Figure after the Life as well as he could, and round about in the Borders
all the Story of his Life in twenty Squares, full of little Figures, all upon a
Field of Gold.

After this, having undertaken a great Picture for the Monks of the Order of
Val-Ombrosa, in the Abbey of the Trinity in Florence, he showed in that Work
much more Diligence and Invention, and particularly in the Aptitude of a
Madonna, with her Son in her Arms, adorned by a number of Angels round about,
the whole upon a Field of Gold; which Piece was by the Monks, placed upon the
great Altar of the said Church, from whence being in process of time taken away
to make room for one of Alisso Baldovinetti, it was placed in one of the
Chapels on the left side of the Church.

After this, Working in Fresco at the Hospital of the Porcellana, in the middle
of the great Gate, he Drew on one side, the Figure of the Virgin Mary, and the
Angel Gabriel, and on the other our Savior, with Cleophas and Lucas, all of
them whole lengths; and in the Clothing he showed much more freedom and
strength than had yet been seen, leaving the old Fashioned way, which was full
of Lines and Porfils, and giving a softness not before known; for this hard
flat manner, was all that at first those Painters had attained to, and that not
by any Rules or Science, but by a certain Tradition, with which they contented
themselves, leaving it to one another, without ever dreaming of mending their
way of Designing, or that of their Coloring, or gracing their Pieces with any
sort of Invention.

By this time the Fame of Cimabue began to be so spread, that he was sent for
to many Remote places, and amongst the rest to Ascesi, a City of Vmbria, and
the place of the Birth of Saint Francis; there in the lower Church in company
of some of those Greek Painters, he Painted some of the Ceiling and the sides
of the Church, with the Stories of the Lives of our Savior and Saint Francis,
in all which he so far outdid the Greeks his Concurrents, that taking courage
he resolved to Paint by himself, and undertook the upper Church in Fresco:
There over the Quire, he Painted in four places diverse Stories of our Lady,
that is her Death, when her Soul is carried by Christ into Heaven upon a Throne
of Clouds, and when in the middle of a Quire of Angels, he puts the Crown upon
her Head, there being at her Feet great numbers of Saints of both Sexes; all
which now are almost consumed by Time. Then in the Five Partitions of the
Vault, or Ceiling, he Painted likewise many Stories.

In the first over the Quire, he Drew the four Evangelists bigger than the
Life, and that so well, that even to this day, the Skilful do acknowledge a good
Manner in them; the freshness of the coloring of the Flesh, showing still how
much Painting was beholding to Cimabue.

The second Partition, he filled with Golden Stars, upon a Field of Azure
Ultramarine.

In the third, He made in every Square, a Round, and in that a Figure, which
were in all four, to wit, Jesus Christ, the Blessed Virgin, Saint John Baptist,
and Saint Francis.

The fourth, He filled with Stars, as before.

And in the fifth, He Painted the four Doctors of the Church, and by each of
them, one of the first Founders of the Monastical Orders; a Work certainly,
that required great Pains and Diligence.

Having finished the Ceilings, he Painted the left side of the Church with
sixteen Stories; Eight out of the Old Testament, and Eight out of the New. Then
over against them, again he Drew sixteen Stories more, which were the chief
Actions of our Savior, and of the Blessed Virgin, ending with the Assumption
of our Lady, and the coming down of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles. All which
works besides, that they were of so great an Extent, were excellently well
Disposed, and with Judgment and Invention carried on; so that without doubt,
they must raise a great Admiration in the Men of those Times, who had never
seen any thing like them, and even in me, who saw them in the Year 1563, that
is above Two Hundred Years after they were made. They produced that Effect,
that I could not but wonder, how Cimabue, in so much Obscurity of the Art, had
been able to see so clear. Having finished these, he began to Paint the
remainder of the Church, from the Windows downwards, but being called away to
Florence, about some private Concerns, they were afterward Finished by
Ghiotto. One Observation I cannot omit, which is, That of all these Paintings,
those that have best preserved themselves are those of the Vaults and Ceilings,
as being least injured by the Dust, and other Accidents.

Being come back to Florence, he Painted for the Church of Sancta Maria
Novella, where he first went to School, a great piece of our Lady, which is
still to be seen between the Chapel of the Rucillai, and that of the Bardi di
Vernia, and was the biggest Picture that had yet been seen in those days. One
may perceive by the Angels that are drawn in it, that he had still the Greek
way of his first Masters, though bettered, and endeavoring at the Modern way
of Painting. It produced nevertheless, so much Wonder, in the people of those
Times, that it was carried from Cimabues House to the Church with Trumpets
before it, and in a solemn Procession, and he was highly Rewarded and Honored
by the City for it. There is a Tradition, that while Cimabue was doing this
Piece in a Garden, he had near the Gate of Saint Peter, that Charles of Anjou
King of Naples, came through Florence, where being Received with all possible
demonstrations of Honor, amongst other Entertainments, the Magistrates carried
him to see this Piece; and because no Body had yet seen it, all the Gentry of
Florence, both Men and Ladies, waited upon him thither, with so much
extraordinary Joy and Feasting, that the people changed the Name of the place,
and called it Borgo Allegry, as much as to say, the Merry Suburb; which Name it
has retained to this day, though it has since been enclosed in the City.

There are some Works of his likewise in Pisa, and amongst the rest one in the
Cloister of Sancta Francesco, near the Church Door in a corner. It Is a Story of
our Savior upon the Cross, with some Angels round about him, who seem to carry
certain Words with their Hands to the ear of a Madonna, who is all in Tears on
one side, and to Saint John the Evangelist on the other side; the words to the
Virgin are these, Mulier Ecce filius tuus: And to Saint John, Ecce Matter tua.
And then another Angel holds in his Hands these other Words, Ex illa hora
accepit eam Discipulus in suam. In all which we may observe, That Cimabue begun
to open the way to Invention by the means of Words, which though they were but
a poor contrivance, yet they showed that his Fancy was stirring and
endeavoring to express its self.

Having thus by means of his Works acquired to himself great Fame, and a good
Estate, he was at last joined in company with Arnolfo Lapi, a Man in those days
famons for Architecture. In the Fabric of Sancta Maria del. Fior in Florence,
in which Employment, being arrived to the Age of Sixty Years, he Died in the
Year 1300. having Resuscitated Painting as it were from the Dead. He left many
Disciples, and amongst the rest, Ghiotto, who proved an Excellent Master, and
Lived in the same House that his Master Cimabue had done in the Strada
Dellocomero.

Cimabue was Buried in Sancta Maria del Fiore. And we may say, That if he had
not been followed so close, and so much Outdone by his Scholar Ghiotto, his
Fame would have been much greater; as appears by these Verses of Dante:
Credette Simabue nella Pittura,
Tener lo campo e hora ha Ghiotto il Grido,
Si che la Fama di colui oscura.


Cimabue his Picture is yet to be seen, done by the Hand of Simon Sanese, in
the Chapel house of Sancta Maria Novella, made in Porfil, in the History of
Faith; in a Figure which has a Lean Face, a little Red Beard, in point with a
Capuche, or Monks Hood, upon his Head, after the fashion of those Times: And
the Figure next to him, is Simon Senese himself, who Drew his own Picture by
the means of two Looking Glasses.

I have nothing more to say of Cimabue, but only that in a little Book of
Designs, where I have some of all the Masters, since his time. I have likewise
two or three little Things of his in Red Minium, by which, though now adays
they may appear somewhat stiff, yet one may perceive by them, how much Painting
was beholden to him.

The LIFE of GHIOTTO A FLORENTINE: Both Painter, Sculptor, and Architect.
GHIOTTO was Born in the Year 1276. within Fourteen Miles of the City of
Florence, in the little Village of Vespignano, his Father's name was Bondone, a
plain Country Man. When he was about Ten years Old, his Father used to send him
out to keep Sheep, and while they were Feeding, he used to Draw something or
another upon the Sand: Finding in himself a strong Inclination for Design, one
day Cimabue, going for some Occasions of his own, from Florence to Vespignano,
found Ghiotto, who while his Sheep were Feeding, was drawing one of them after
the Life, upon a plain flat Stone, with another Stone, somewhat sharpened at
both ends; having never Learned the way of doing it from any, but from Nature.
Cimabue astonished, stood still, and having considered the Child and his Work,
he asked him, If he would go and Live with him at Florence? To which the Child
answered, That if his Father was willing, he would go with all his heart.
Whereupon he went to Bondone his Father, who was easily persuaded to give him
Ghiotto, as thinking it a preferment for the Child; so Cimabue took him along
with him to Florence, there being well Instructed by Cimabue, and helped by
Nature. He had not long applied himself to Designing, but he quite put down
that old flat Greek way, and becoming a strong Imitator of Nature, began to
revive that which has been since called the Modern Way of Painting: For he used
often to draw Men and Women by the Life; a thing that had not been Practiced in
Two hundred Years before, or at least, not with that Success and Skill that
Ghiotto had; as appears by some Things of that kind, which we have preserved to
this day. Amongst the rest, he Drew Dante Alighieri, the famous Poet of those
Times, and his Intimate Friend, as may be seen in that Chapel of the Palace of
the Podesta of Florence: In the same Chapel, is likewise the Picture of Ser
Brunetto Latini, Dantes Master, and of M. Coriso Donati, a noble Citizen, and
of great Renown in those Times.

Ghiotto's first public Works, were in the Chapel of the High Altar. In the
Abbey at Florence, in which he did many good things, but particularly, an
Annunciation of our Lady, by the Angel Gabriel, in which the Fear and Surprise
of the Virgin Mary, is expressed, she being so frighted, that she is ready
almost to run away. The Picture of the great Altar, is likewise of Ghiotto's
hand, and is preserved there, for the respect they bear to the Memory of so
great a Man. In Sancta Croce, there are likewise four Chapels, painted by him;
three between the Sacristy, and the great Chapel, and one on the other side
over against: The first is the Chapel of M. Ridolpho de Bardi, which is that
where the Bell-ropes are, and the Life of Saint Francis; at whose death, many
of his Moncks seem to express very much Grief. In the other Chapel, which
belongs to the Beruzzi, there are two Stories of the Life of Saint John
Baptist, to whom the Chapel is dedicated; and in them the dancing of Herodias,
with all the other Apparatus of a great Feast, which is very well and lively
designed: As likewise two other Stories of Saint John the Evangelist, are
Incomparable; to wit, that where he Resuscitates Drusiana, and when he is
himself, carried up to Heaven. In the third Chapel, which belongs to the
Family of the Giugni, and is likewise called, The Chapel of the Apostles; he
has Painted many Stories of their Martyrdom. And in the fourth, which is on the
other side of the Church, toward the North, which belongs to the Tolinghi, and
the Spinelli, and is Dedicated to our Lady; he painted the Story of her Birth,
her Marriage to Joseph, the Annunciation, the Adoration of the Magi, and when
our Lady offers her little Son to Simeon; which is one of the finest Things in
the whole Work. For besides the great Affection with which the Old Man seems to
receive our Savior, the Action of the Child is admirable; for being half
afraid, he turns to his Mother, and takes her about the Neck, as Children use
to do, at the sight of any new Object that frights them.

In the Chapel of the Baroncelli, in the same Church, there is a piece in
Distemper, of the Hand of Ghiotto, where the Crowning of our Lady in Heaven, is
expressed with infinite Labor, there being a very great number of several
Figures, and a Choire of Angels and Saints, most Elaborately done; and because
that in this Piece, he has written his Name and the Year, in Letters of Gold.
All Artists must needs have Ghiotto in the highest esteem, considering the
Beginnings he gave so long ago, to true Designing, and good Coloring. In the
same Church of Sancta Croce, are many other of his Works, and in the Refectory
Sacristy, and other places.

He Worked likewise in the Church Del Carmine, in the Chapel of Saint John
Baptist, the whole Life of that Saint divided in different pieces. In the
Palace of the Guelfes Party in Florence, there is likewise of his Hand, a
History of Faith in Fresco, most exceeding well Painted; and in it amongst the
rest, is the Picture of Pope Clement the 4th. who created the Magistrates of
the Guelfe Party, giving them his own Coat of Arms, which they keep to this day.

Having done these things in Florence, he was Invited to Astisa, a City in
Vmbria, where Cimabue had Painted before, by the then General of the
Franciscans, Fra. Gioranni Di Muro della Marca; there he undertook the upper
Church, and painted in it Sixteen Stories, of the Life and Gests of Saint
Francis, of each side of the Church; and to say truth, in this Work, he
acquired great Fame: For there is in it great Variety, not only of the Postures
and Aptitudes of the Figures, but likewise in the whole Composition; in which
he has showed himself a great Observer of Nature, as well as of the Dress and
Customs of those Times. And among the rest, there is a Story, where one being
very Thirsty, in whose Looks, the longing for Water shows it self, drinks
stooping at a Fountain, with wonderful Affection, in so much that one would
think it were a Live Figure. And indeed, in this whole Work, Ghiotto followed
Nature so close, that he deserves to be called Nature's Disciple; for the great
Order, Proportion, and Facility, that he has showed in it all along.

He painted likewise in the Church below, many things of the Life and
Glorification of Saint Francis; in all which he showed great Variety of
Invention, and amongst other things, drew his own Picture, rarely well, in one
of those Stories: And over the Door of the Sacristy, is a Saint Francis in
Fresco, who recieves the Stigmats upon his Knees, which is so Devout, and full
of Affection, that I take it to be the best thing that Ghiotto ever did.

Having finished his Painting at Astisa, he returned to Florence, where as soon
as he was Arrived; he undertook a piece to send to Pisa; it was the Story of
Saint Francis, in that horrible Desert of Vernia, where besides the Landscape of
Rocks and Trees, proper to that place; the Saint himself was placed in that
Rapture, of receiving the Stigmats, and in it showed a most fervent desire of
them, and a most zealous Love toward our Savior, who appears in the Air,
environed with Angels; and in the lower part of the Piece, are three Stories of
the same Saints Life most admirable! This Picture, which to this day, is kept
with great Veneration, in the Church Saint Francisco di Pisa, upon a Pilaster
near the great Altar: Was the occasion that the Pisans, having finished their
Fabric of the Campo Sancto, according to the design of Giovanni di Nicola, one
of their own Citizens, sent for Ghiotto, to Paint one part of the Inside of it;
That as on the Outside, it it was adorned with Marble and Sculpture, performed
with great Expense; covered with Lead on the Top, and within full of Statues
and Tombs of the Ancient, brought from many parts of the World, so that it
might be Adorned with the best Modern Painting on the Inside, by the best
Painter then Extant. Ghiotto therefore painted on one of the sides within, six
Stories of the Life of Job in Fresco; and because he considered, that on that
side where he was to Work, the Sea Wind did chiefly blow, which being moist,
was apt to make the Marble sweat, as it does in most of the Houses in Pisa,
which being mingled with a Salt, that comes out of the Stones, was apt to eat
up the Colors: He caused a Coat of Lime plaster and beaten Brick, mingled
together, to be laid on pettry thick every where, where he was to Work; and by
that means he has so well obtained his end, that the Pictures he made there,
are preserved to this day, and might have been much better kept, if the
negligence of those who should have taken care of them, had not let the wet
come to them in some places, which has made them scale and look black: Besides,
that it is the nature of Plaster, when mingled with Quicklime, to mould and
grow moist with time, and by consequence, must of necessity spoil the Colors,
though at first it seems to take well with them.

In those Stories of his, besides the Picture M. Farinata de Gliuberti, there
are many very fine Figures: As particularly, Some Country people, who bring Job
the ill news of the loss of some of his Flocks, and have the Countenance of Men
truly Afflicted for so great a Calamity: Likewise, there is the Figure of a
Servant, who stands by Job, as he is all full of Sores, and is forsaken by
every one, with a Fan in his Hand, to give him the comfort of a cool Air, and
drive away the Flies from his Sores, while with the other Hand he stops his
Nose because of the stench. This Figure has a mavelous Aptitude in all its
parts; and indeed, all the Figures of these Stories, both Men and Women, have
excellent Heads, and the Drapery is wrought with great Beauty and Softness.

It is no wonder therefore, if this Work spread his Fame far and near, in so
much that Pope Benedict the 9th. of Trevisi, sent into Tuscany, a Gentleman of
his Court, to see what sort of Man Ghiotto was, and to give him an account of
his Painting, having design to Employ him in Saint Peter's Church at Rome. This
Gentleman having staid some time at Sienna, and there informed himself what
Excellent Masters there were at Florence, in Painting and Music, came at last
to Florence; and going straight to Ghiotto's House, he found him at Work in his
Painting Rome. Having told him the Popes Intention, and how he designed to
Employ him: He desired of him, to send some piece of Design by him to his
Holiness. Ghiotto, who was a pleasant ready Man, took a sheet of White-paper,
and setting his Arm close to his Hip, to keep it steady, he with one stroke of
a Red-lead Pencil, drew a Circle so round, and so equal, that it was wonderful
to see it: Then presenting it to the Gentleman, he told him smiling, That there
was a piece of Design, which he might carry to his Holiness. Says the Courtier,
half angry, Shall I have nothing but this to show the Pope? That Is more than
enough, said Ghiotto, put it among the other Designs you have from other
Painters, and see whether it will not make it self known. The Gentleman seeing
he could get nothing else from him, left him in discontent, being half afraid
he had put a Jear upon him, and that he should be Laughed at, at his return to
Rome. However, being come, and showing the Pope all the other Designs, he
showed this also of Ghiotto's, telling the Pope how he had done it without
Compasses, or so much as stirring his Arm from his Side. The Pope, who
understood something of the Art, easily comprehended by this, how much Ghiotto
in strength of Design, did Excel all the other Painters of his Time; he
therefore sent for him to Rome, and there being extremely satisfied with his
Skill, he made him Paint Five Stories of the Life of Christ our Savior, in
Saint Peter's, and in the Sacristy the chief piece, all which were done by
Ghiotto, with so much diligence and care, that a more finished Work in
Distemper, never was performed by him. And the Pope rewarded him accordingly,
for besides many Favors he bestowed upon him, he presented him with Five
hundred Ducats of Gold, which for those days, was a Noble present.

While Ghiotto stayed at Rome, he contracted a great Friendship with Oderici de
Agobbio, an Excellent Master in Miniature, who was then Employed by the Pope to
paint a great many of Books, of the Library of the Popes Palace, in Miniature;
most which have since been lost, or have otherwise perished by Time. I have in
my Book of Collections of Ancient Designs, some pieces of this Oderico, who
indeed, was an Excellent Master, but yet Franco Bolognese, who Worked at the
same time for the Pope, was much beyond him; as may be seen likewise in my Book
of Collections, where there is amongst the rest, an admirable Eagle and a Lion,
that breaks a delicate Tree, all in Miniature.

The Pope having liked Ghiotto's Painting, ordered him to paint Stories of the
Old and New Testament, all round Saint Peter's: Whereupon to begin, he made the
Angel that is over the Organ, of Seven Palms high, as also many others, most of
which have been Ruined, when the Old Church of Saint Peter's came to receive New
Walls, and some likewise have been carried from the Old Church, and placed
under the Organ; as particularly a Modonna, which being painted upon the Wall,
was by the means of Irons and other Fastnings, taken out of the Wall entire,
and placed in a handsome conspicuous part of the House of Doctor Nicolo
Acciaivoli, a Florentine, and a great Lover of all the excellent pieces of Art:
He adorned this piece of Ghiotto's with rich Carvings, and Modern Pictures
round about it.

Of Ghiotto's Hand, is likewise the Ship of Musaick Work, which is over the
three Gates of the Portico, in the entrance to Saint Peter's: For besides the
strength of the Design, the Aptitude of the Apostles in different postures of
working against the Storm, is remarkable, and particularly the Sail of their
Ship, seems so filled with Wind, and has so much Relievo, that a true Sail can
scarce have more; and yet it is mighty difficult to make up of pieces of Glass
such an union of Lights and Shadows as is there, and which could hardly be
Equalled by the Skilfulest Pencil. There is besides upon a Rock, one that
Fishes with a Line, in whose looks the patience of that Sport is rarely well
Represented, together with the hopes of taking something at last.

Pope Benedict the 9th. being dead, Clement the 5tb. Succeeded him, and
Transferred the Papal Court to Avignon, whither likewise Ghiotto was obliged to
go: And being there, he not only did many things in Avignon, but in many places
in France, as well in Fresco, as Distemper. After some stay there, having
perfectly satisfied the Pope's Inclination, he was by him largely Rewarded, and
he returned to Florence full of Honor and Riches, carrying with him that
Pope's Picture, which he gave afterward to Taddeo Gaddi, his Scholar.

This Return of Ghiottos to his own Country, was in the Year 1316. but he was
soon called away again: For at the Instance of the Signori della Scala, he went
to Padoua, where in the Church, called the Sancto, newly built in those days,
he painted a Chapel most curiously. From thence he went to Verona, and painted
diverse Things in the Palace of Messer Cane della Scala; amongst the rest, the
Picture of that Lord. In his Return to Florence, he was obliged to take Ferrara
in his way, to obey the commands of the Lords of Este, for whom he did many
Things in that City: At the same time, Dante the famous Poet, hearing that
Ghiotto was at Ferrara, and being himself at Ravenna, where he was then in
Exile, wrought so with him, that he got him to Ravenna, where he painted in
Sancta Francisco, some Stories in Fresco, for the Signori di Polenta, and from
thence he went to Vrbino Arezzo, in both which places he wrought diverse Things,
and so Returned to Florence.

In the Year 1322. he was again Invited abroad by Castruccio Castrucani, Lord
of Luca, where in the Church of Saint Martin, he painted a Christ in the Air,
and with him the four Protectors of that City, Saint Peter, Saint Regolo, Saint
Martin, and Saint Paulin, who seem to recommend to our Savior a Pope and an
Emperor, which it is thought were Frederick of Bavaria, and Nicolas the 5th.
Antipope: At the same time, it is thought that Ghiotto gave the Design of the
Castle of Saint Fridiano, in the City of Luca, which is a most Impregnable
Fortress, it is otherwise called the Fortress Della Giusta.

After this, Robert King of Naples, writ to his Son, the King of Calabria, who
was then at Florence, that he should by all means send him Ghiotto to Naples,
because that having just then made an end of Building the Royal Nunnery of
Sancta Chiara, he desired the Church might be adorned with Pictures of
Ghiotto's Hand. He obeyed with joy the Summons of so great a Prince, and
painted diverse of the Chapels with Stories of the Old Testament, and some of
the New; particularly those out of the Revelations, are thought to be the
Invention of the Poet Dante, as also those very well Invented Stories of the
Church of Assisa, they having been Intimate Friends: And though it is true,
Dante died the Year before, yet it is possible that they might have Talked
together of those Stories of the Apocalypse.

But to return to Naples, Ghiotto painted in the Castello del Novo, many
Things, and chiefly the Chapel, where he so pleased the King, that very often
he used to go and sit by him when he was at Work; for Ghiotto was as pleasant
in his Conversation, and as ready in his Wit, as with his Pencil. One day, it
being very hot, the King said to him, If I were as you, Ghiotto, I would leave
off Working this hot Weather: And so would I, Sir, said Ghiotto, if I were as
you. Another time the King desired him to paint the people of his Kingdom
Emblematically; he drew an Ass with an old pack Saddle upon his Back, and
another new one before him, to which he was smelling, as liking it very well,
and upon both the Saddles, the Crown and Scepter. The King having desired him
to Explain what that Picture meant, he said, It was the Condition of his
people, who were always desirous of Novelty, and ready to change their old
Master for any new one. He painted likewise for the King a Hall, which was
afterward ruined by King Alphonso, in which were the Pictures of most of the
great Men of that Age, and amongst the rest his own.

In his Return from Naples to Rome, he stoped at Gaeta, and painted in the
Annuntiata, some Stories of the New Testament, which are now much spoiled by
Time; but yet not so, but that Ghiotto's own Picture is very distinguishable,
being near a very fine Crucifix of his doing.

Having staid some time at Rome, he was prevailed with by Signor Malatesta, who
was then Lord of Rimini, to go with him to Rimini, where in the Church of Saint
Francis, he Drew many Stories; all which were lost when the Church was new
Built by Sigismond Malatesta, but in the Cloister there remains yet the Story
of Beata Michellina, which for many Reasons, is one of the best Things that
Ghiotto ever did; for besides the Liveliness of the Heads, which are all
Miraculous, and the strength and force of the Drapery, which is Incomparable:
There is a young Woman as Beautiful as it is possible for a Woman to be, who to
free her self from the Calumny of Adultery, Swears upon a Book with a
stupendous Aptitude, having her Eyes fixed upon her Husband, who put her to
her Oath, because of a Black Child she was brought to Bed of, which he could
not believe was his; and as the Husband shows Distrust and Anger in his
Countenance, so does the Innocent Lady show Truth and Simplicity in hers, with
so much Piety in her Looks, as was enough to convince all the Slanders; by that
she was no Adulteress.

The shortnings likewise that are in another piece of this Story, where there
are a great number of poor People, are very Commendable, and much to be valued
by all Artists, since it is from them that we have the first Principles and
Manner of doing them, though they are not in that perfection which they have
since attained to. But above all the other Things that are in this Work, is the
Aptitude of the Saint her self, while she receives, from the Usurers she had
sold her Land too, the Money, which she orders immediately to be disbursed to
the poor; for in her there appears so much scorn ad unconcernment for Riches,
that the very sight of them seems to offend her; while on the other hand, the
very picture of Covetousness seems to be Represented in a Figure of one, who
looking toward a Notary, to make him sign the Writings, has at the same time
both his Hands upon the Money, expressing both his Greediness and Distrust: And
in the three Figures, that hold the Habit of Saint Francis in the Air, there is
much to be commended, particularly in the Drapery, the Foldings of which are so
easy and natural, that it must be confessed, that Ghiotto was Born to bring
Light to the Art, in all its parts. He drew in a Ship, which makes a piece of
this Work, Signor Malatesta, most wonderfully strong and lively, with many
other Figures of Seamen, all in proper Aptitudes; and there is a Figure
particularly remarkable in its action, for seeming to Talk with others, he puts
one Hand to his Face to spit into the Sea, and not offend those he Talks with;
and indeed this is altogether one of the best Things done by Ghiotto, who
accordingly received both great Rewards, and infinite Commendations from Signor
Malatesta.

Being Returned to Florence with great Riches, he wrought a Crucifix in a field
of Gold in Sancto Marco, and another of the same nature in Sancta Maria
Novella, in which last, Paccio Campana his Servant, wrought with him.

After this, in the Year 1327. Guido Tarlati da Pieta Mala, Bishop of Arezzo
being Dead, his Relations having a mind to Erect a sumpteous Monument for him,
as for one who in his time, had been the Head of the Gibeline Faction in
Tuscany: They writ to Ghiotto to make them the most Magnificent Design that he
could, and at the same time desired him to provide them a Sculpture of his own
choosing, of the best that were then in Italy: Ghiotto made the Design and sent
it them very courteously, and the Monument was Finished by it afterward.

The number of his Works is so great, that it is very hard to Enumerate them
all, but we cannot but mention a piece of his, in the Church of the Fratri
Humilianti of all Saints of Florence, it is in Distemper, and represents the
Death of our Lady, with the Apostles about her. Michael Angelo Bonaronti, used
to say, That the Aptitudes of this Story could not be better: And indeed, it is
Wonderful, that one who Learned the Art of himself, and without a Master,
almost, should have attained to such Excellency, as to be Admired by the
greatest Masters, Two hundred Years after.

In the Year 1334. on the 9th. of June, he undertook the Steeple of Sancta
Maria del Fiore, and having laid the Foundation very strong, Twenty Yards deep,
and of great Stones; the Work was continued according to his Design, which was
after the Gothic Manner of those days. All the Stories that were for the
Ornament of it, were designed by himself, the compass of the Tower at the
bottom, was a Hundred Yards, that is Twenty five Yards for every side, and it
was a Hundred and forty four Yards high; it was to have on the top a Pyramid
Fifty Yards high, but that being a piece of old Artichecture, all Modern
Architects have still been against the Finishing of it.

Lorenzo of Lione Ghiberti, has Writ, that Ghiotto did not only make the Model
for the Tower, but also made Models for the Sculpture, where diverse of the
Stories were done in Relievo, which Lorinzo says he saw: And it is not
Incredible, since Design and Invention are the parents of Sculpture as well as
Painting.

For this Work Ghiotto was made a Citizen of Florence, and Endowed with a
Hundred Florins of Gold yearly from the Public; which in those days was
considerable. He Lived not to see it Finished, and it was after his Death
pursued by Taddeo Gaddi. His death was in the Year 1336. and was much lamented
by his Countrymen, having had in his Lifetime the Esteem of all, and the
Friendship of most of the Excellent Men of the Age he Lived in: And amongst the
rest of Dante and Petrarch, who makes mention of him in his Will, and in a
Latin Epistle in the sixth Book of his Familiar ones, in these Words: Atque (ut
a veteribus ad nova ab Internis ad nostra transgrediar) duos ego Novi Pictores
egregios, nec formosos Jottum Florentinum Cirem. Cujus inter Modernos Fama est,
ingens and Simonem Senensem. He was Buried in Sancta Maria del Fiore, on the
Left Hand as you come into the Church, where there is a White Marble Stone in
Memory of him.

His Disciples were Taddeo Gaddi, who was his Godson, and Puciodi Capanna, both
Florentines; and we have many Works of the last, who had Extremely well
attained to Ghiotto's Manner.

The LIFE of LEONARDO DA VINCI, A Florentine Painter, and Sculptor.
IT may be seen by Leonardo Da Vinci, as much as by any other Example, that the
Celestial Influences do sometimes so Unite in one Subject, as to make all
that is performed by that Person, to seem almost Divine, and not acquired by any
Humane Industry: And indeed, the admirable Beauty of Leonardo's Body, the
infinite Graces of his Mind, and the exquisite Penitration with which in all
Sciences and Arts, he attained to the most difficult part of them with ease, do
show that he had from above, most extraordinary Gifts. The strength of his Mind
was always accompanied with a Dexterity, which alone would have made its Way
through the World; and he had besides, a Greatness and Magnanimity in him, more
befitting a Prince than a private Man. All which made him not only Beloved and
Esteemed in his Life time, but highly Renowned and Honored after his Death to
all Posterity.

He was Son of Piero da Vinci, and in the first beginning of his Education,
showed so strong an Inclination to all sorts of Learning, that had he
constantly pursued any one, he must have have been a Prodigy in that kind, but
he was so various, that that did very much hinder his Excelling. At his first
learning to cast Account, he used to puzzle his Master with Questions about
Arithmatick, and that in a few Months after he had first applied himself to it.
He next gave himself to Music, and particularly to play upon the Lute, in
which he grew so Excellent, which he would play Extempore, things that would
Charm all that heard him; and yet though he was so variously addicted, he still
followed Designing, and making of things in Relievo, as two Arts, that above
all others did please his Fancy, and fix his Application. His Father taking
more particular notice of this last Inclination, took one day some of his
Designs, and carrying them to Andrea del Verochio, a famous Painter, and his
intimate Friend, desired him to tell him Ingeniously, whether his Son Leonardo
was ever like to succeed in that Way?

Andrea was astonished at the sight of such bold Beginning, and exhorted his
Father to give him all sort of Encouragement in that Way: Upon which, his
Father ordered him to go constantly to Andrea's Painting-House, there to
Improve himself. Leonardo obeyed with joy, and not content with Designing
alone, he Exercised himself in all those Arts which are any ways depending upon
it, or useful to a Painter, or Statuary, such as Geometry, Architecture,
Perspective, etc. in all which he attained to a great perfection. He was
besides, the first that had thoughts of putting the River of Arno into a Chanel
from Pisa to Florence, Inventing all sorts of Mills, and other Machines, useful
for so great a Design. But because his chief profession was Painting, he spent
much time in Drawing by the Life, and often likewise in making Models of Earth,
and then Clothing them with fine Linen wet, with the greatest patience in the
World: He would Draw them upon Silk, or fine Linen, in Black and White, with
the point of his Pencil, that it was a most admirable thing to see them; some
of which I have in my Book of Designs. What he did upon Paper, was with so much
diligence and delicacy, that no Man ever came near him. I have a Head of his in
Chiaro Scuro, which is Divine, and shows with what singular strength he
Conceived, and with what admirable Dexterity he executed his Thoughts with the
Pencil. When he was weary of Painting, or Statuary, he used to busy himself in
finding out Ways how to Level Mountains with ease, or make Passages through
them, from one Valley to another; as also by Leavers, Strings, Pulleys, to
raise great Weights, and by other Machines to drain the Water from low places;
so that his Brains were perpetually employed, and of all these Things he made
Designs, many of which I have seen. And in them, he was so Curious, as
sometimes to Draw the whole Lying, or Coiling of a Cable, or other Ropes, so as
you might see the Winding of it from one end to the other; there is one of
these in a Print, and in the middle are these Words, Leonardo Vinci Academia.

He was so extreme diverting in Conversation, that he drew every Body after
him; and having, as we may say in comparison of others, Wrought but very
little, yet he Lived Splendidly, having always many Servants, and Horses; for
which last, he had a great Passion, and used to Draw them by the Life. He loved
all sorts of Animals indeed, and would often buy Birds alive out of their
Cages, only to let them go, and restore to them their lost Liberty. So great
was his native Bounty, and the sweetness of his Temper; in a word, no Man in
his Time, ever acted with so much Readiness, Vivacity, and Grace, which gave a
particular Character to all that he did; though in his Art he begun many
Things, but hardly Finished any, having conceived them with so much Perfection,
that his Hand afterward, could not follow the Idaea of his Mind.

After having Worked some time with Andrea del Verocchio, his Master employed
him in a piece of his Undertaking, of the Story of Saint John's Baptizing of
our Savior Christ, and in it Leonardo drew an Angel, that held some Clothes of
our Savior, which he Finished so well, that he put down all the other Figures
of Andrea, in so much, that scarce any thing but Leonardo's Angel, was taken
notice of. This so angered his Master, to be outdone by his own Scholar, and
a Young Man, that he never more would handle a Pencil, or Colors.

There being a very rich Tent of Gold and Silk of Tapistry Work to be made in
Flanders, for the King of Portugal; the Undertakers agreed with Leonardo, to
make the Cartoon. The Story being that of Adam and Eve, when they eat the
forbidden Fruit in Paradise. There he Drew in Charo Scuro, a delicious Meadow
of Plants and Flowers, full of variety of Animals, done with so much diligence
and patience, and so Natural, that none but so divine a Genius, could ever do
the like. Amongst the rest there is a Fig Tree, which besides the admirable
shortnings of its Leaves and Branches, is painted with such Care, that it would
astonish any one to consider, how 'twas possible for a Man to do a Thing with
so much patience. There is likewise a Palm Tree, which has its Branches so
Lively, and their Situation, and exact Simmetry so expressed, that none but
Leonardo's Genius, could ever compass it. The Cartoon being finished, was left
upon his Hands, the Tapistry Work not being gone on with, as was first
designed; and it is at this time in the House of Saint Octaviano de Medici, it
being presented to him not long ago, by Leonardo's Uncle.

One day, his Father, Ser Piero da Vinci, being at his Country House, was
desired by one of his Tenants, to get him a Buckler painted, which he had made
out of a Fig Tree, cut down in the Ground; Ser Piero took the Buckler, and the
fellow being very useful to him, in Fishing, Fowling, and other Country Sports,
he carried it to his Son, and desired him to Draw something or another upon it.
Leonardo seeing the Buckler ill shaped and crooked, straightened it and Polished
it, and then having carefully plaistered it over, he began to consider what he
should Draw there, that might Fright any one at first sight, like Medusas
Shield. To this end, he got together in a Room, where no Body came but himself,
a Collection of Serpents, Lizards, Crickets, Butterflies, Grasshoppers, and such
like Animals; from the assemblage of all which, strangely put together, he made
up an Animal most horrible to look too, who seemed to poison the Air with his
Breath; for he placed him in a kind of a dark Grotto, sending Fire out of his
Mouth, and Smoke out of his Nostrils, in so strange a manner, that it would
fright any one to see it. He took so much pains about it, that the stink of
those dead Creatures was intolerable in the Room, though not at all perceived
by Leonardo, so attentive he was upon his Work. The thing being finished, he
told his Father, that he might have the Buckler when he pleased. One Morning
then, Ser Pierc, his Father, came and knocked at the Door, and desired the
Buckler: Leonardo opened the Door, but desired him to stay a little: So
returning into the Room, and having placed the Buckler in an obscure Light,
upon his Painting Desk, he called in his Father; who not expecting any such
thing, was of a sudden struck with the Apparition of such a Monster, and
retired two or three steps back. Leonardo stopped him, and said, This Work I
see will answer its end, take it and carry it to whom you have promised it. The
thing appeared wonderful to his Father, who was extremely pleased with it, and
having secretly bought another Buckler, which he caused to be Painted with some
ordinary Invention, he kept Leonardo's, and gave the other to his Servant, who
took it so kindly, that he served him faithfully ever after.

Some Months after, Ser Piero, sold Leonardo's Buckler secretly in Florence, to
some foreign Merchants, for the Sum of a Hundred Ducats, who sold it to the
Duke of Milan for Three hundred.

Leonardo made likewise a most delicate Madonna, which Pope Clement the 7th.
used to keep in his Chamber; and amongst other Ornaments, of it, he had drawn a
Glass full of Water, with Flowers in it, where besides the lovelyness of the
Flowers, he had counterfeited drops of Water upon them, as delicate as the
Natural ones. He made also for Antonio Segni, his Intimate friend, a Neptune
upon a Stormy Sea, carried in his Chair, drawn by Sea Horses, with Whales, and
other Sea Monsters about him, and the Heads of some Sea Gods, most delicately
designed; and this Piece was by Fabio Segni, Son to Antonio, given to Messer
Gioranni Gaddi, with this Epygram, Pinxit Virgilius Neptune* pinxit Homerus,
Dum Maris undisoni per vada flectit equos,
Mente quidem vates illum conspexit uterque,
Vincius ast Oculis jureque vincit eos.
He took a fancy once to draw in Oil, a Head of a Medusa, with the strangest
dress of Serpents and Snakes, that it is possible to Imagine: But it being a
Work that required great time to Finish it, it had the fate of many of his
Things, and remained Imperfect; but as it is, it holds its place amongst the
chiefest Raritys of our Duke Cosimo; as also that of an Angel, who holding one
of his Arms in the Air, shows a shortning from the Shoulder to the Elbow; that
is most Masterly and strong. For Leonardo sought chiefly to give a great
Relievo to his Things, and for that Reason, made his Grounds and Shadows as
dark as possibly he could, seeking out the strongest Blacks of all kinds; so
that his Manner seemed almost a Night, rather than a Shadow made by the Light
of the Day.

When ever he saw any one of an odd Phisiognomy, either with strange Hair, or
Beard, he would have followed him a whole Day till he had so got the Idea of
him; that being come Home, he would Draw him as like, as if he sat to him. And
of this sort, there are many Heads, both of Men and Women; many of which, I
have in my Book of Designs: And amongst the rest, the Head of Americo Vespuci,
designed with a Coal, and is the Head of a fine Old Man. There is likewise,
that of Scaramuccia, Captain of the Gypsies. He begun likewise, the Story of
the Adoration of the Three Kings, where there are very good Heads; it remains
Imperfect, in the House of Signor Amerigo Benci.

It happened, that Lodovico Forta, being made Duke of Milan, in the Year 1494.
and he being a Prince that delighted extremely in Music, Leonardo was sent
for, to play upon the Lute before him. He was received with great Honor by the
Duke, and there in his Presence, he overcame all the Musicians that were come
from all parts to play before him. The Instrument he played upon, being likewise
the Work of his own Hands, and framed in the shape of a Horses Head, the best
part of it of Silver; but so shaped, that it yielded a sweeter and louder
Sound, than the ordinary Lutes. The Duke having relished his Conversation, and
found him most extremely Agreeable, and of so ready a Wit, that amongst other
things, he was the best maker of Extempore Verses, of any of his Time, was
pleased with him beyond Measure.

The first Work he did for the Duke in Painting, was a Nativity of our Savior;
which the Duke presented to the Emperor.

Then he undertook the Story of the last Supper, in the Convent of the
Dominicans, called, Sancta Maria delle Gratie, in Milan: In it he gave so much
Majesty and Gravity to the Heads of the Apostles, that he was forced to leave
our Savior's Unfinished; not being able to attain to the Expression of that
divine Greatness, which ought to be in the Image of the Son of God. But one
thing most Admirable was by him performed in this Piece, which was to express
in the Countenance of the Apostles, that Concern and Trouble which they were
in, to know which of them it was that should betray our Savior: And one may
discern in their different Looks, Love, Fear, and Anger, which were the
Passions naturally rising in their Breasts, upon the doubt raised in them by
our Savior's Words: And on the other side, in Jadas's Countenance, there
appears so much Falseness, Hatred, and Treachery, that it is wonderful. The
whole Work besides, is in all its parts, a Masterpiece of Incredible diligence;
for the very Cloth of the Table, is done with such Exactness, that Linen it
self, shows not better nor finer.

It Is said, that while Leonardo was Painting this piece, the Prior of the
Convent used to be very troublesome to him, in pressing him too Indiscreetly,
to make an end of it. For it seemed very strange to him, to see Leonardo come
sometimes, and be half a day together, doing nothing but look upon his Work, in
the posture of a Man in a Rapture; whereas he thought the Work might have gone
on all that while, as well as digging the Garden, or any other Labor used to
do. And finding Leonardo minded but little what he said to him, he made his
Complaints to the Duke, and that with so much heat, that the Duke sent for
Leonardo; and very Gently and Discreetly, put him in mind what the Prior's
Importunity had so often Solicited for in vain. Leonardo knowing the Duke to be
a Man of Judgment, and capable of hearing a Rational Account, was content to
Discourse with him about his Art (which he never had done with the Prior.) And
told him, that without doubt, his Highness could not but understand, that Men
of a great and extraordinary Genius in many Professions, but particularly in
his, did take more pains while they were Conceiving their Idaeas, than while
they were Executing of them: And that so it was with him, for he had yet two
Heads to Finish, the one of our Savior, for the Model of which, he had none
upon Earth, nor could hardly Imagine any that should represent all that Beauty,
Divine Graces, which were to appear in Divinity Incarnated. The other of Judas,
which gave him likewise great Trouble, it being hard for him to create in his
Mind, a Form that should express the Face of one, who after so many favors
received from his Lord and Creator, should yet have so wicked a mind as to
Betray him. But that for this last, he would endeavor to find some ill looked
fellow or another; and that however, when all things failed, he could take the
Prior's face, who had disturbed him so Impertinently. The Duke extremely
pleased with his Humor, fell a Laughing heartily, and told him, He was in the
right. And the Jest being come to the Prior's Ears, he was glad to let Leonardo
alone, and mind the other Affairs of his Convent. And Leonardo on his side,
finished Judas's Head so, as it appears, the Picture of Treachery it self; but
for our Saviors, it remains to this day Imperfect.

The Excellency of this Piece, struck the King of France with so much
Admiration, when he had taken Milan, that he resolved to have it Transported
into France; and sending for the ablest Ingeneers, he promised them a noble
Reward, and bid them spare for no Cost, that should be necessary to that
Effect. But it being painted upon a Stone Wall, the thing was thought
Impracticable by any Machine, or Contrivance whatsoever; and so Milan remained
in possession of this Noble piece of Work.

Leonardo Drew likewise in the same Refectory, the Pictures of the said
Lodovico, Duke of Milan, and Maximilian, his Eldest Son, and of Francis the
Second Son, who were since, both of them, Dukes of that place; and indeed, they
are most admirable Things.

Amongst other Projects, which Leonardo's Working Head put the Duke upon: One
was to make a Horse of Bronse, of prodigious Bigness, and upon it, to place the
Dukes Statue, of the same Mettle. And accordingly he begun it, but by reason of
its Vastness, found such difficulty in Casting it, that it remained Unfinished.
And some do Imagine, that his first design was never to bring it to Perfection,
as they say, he used to do with most of his Undertakings. But I think that they
wrong him, and that the Reason of his frequent Interruptions, and not Finishing
what he had begun, proceeded more from the unlimitted greatness of his Mind,
which conceived things above Humane performance, than from any unsteadiness of
his Resolutions in the pursuance of them: And indeed, they that have seen the
Model of Clay, made by him for this Statue, do own, that there could be nothing
more Great and Glorious. It remained to be seen, till Francis the 1st. took
Milan, and then among other disorders committed in the City, the Soldiers
broke it all to pieces.

He applied himself amongst other things, to a most particular Knowledge of the
Anatomy of Humane Bodies, being helped in this Study, by Marc-Antonio de la
Torre, an Excellent Physician, and professor of Philosophy in Padoua: Who
likewise made admirable use of the Hand of Leonardo, having got him to Design a
whole Book of Anatomy in Red Chalk. And there he first Drew all the Bones and
Joints, then added the Tendons and Muscles, having also made for each a
particular Discourse, in Letters written upside-down, with his Left Hand, so as
they cannot be Read any otherwise, but by a Glass. A great part of these papers
about Anatomy, do remain in the Hands of Francisco da Melzo, a Gentleman of
Milan, who in Leonardo's time, was a most delicate Youth, and was much beloved
by him; he keeps them as Sacred as Relics, as he does Leonardo's Picture
likewise.

There are yet in a Milaness Painter's hands, some Writings of Leonardo, which
Treat of Painting, and of the Way of Designing and Coloring; but Written as
the rest, in Characters made with his Left Hand, upside-down. This Painter
came, not long ago, to Florence to see me, being desirous to print this Work of
Leonardo's, and afterward he went upon this design to Rome; but I have had no
account how the thing succeeded.

But to return to Leonardo: In his Time, the King of France came to Milan,
where Leonardo for his Reception, being desired to do something Extraordinary,
made a great Lion, which by Springs, Walked of its self a good many paces to
meet the King, and then opening his Breast, showed it full of Flower-de-Luces.

Having during his stay at Milan, made some Scholars, amongst whom, was Salai,
whom he chose for his Beauty, and Taught him many Secrets of the Art, he
returned to Florence; there he found that Philippino, a famous Painter of that
place, had undertaken the Picture for the Great Altar of the Nuntiata, in the
Convent of the Frati de Servi; whereupon he declared, that he would willingly
do such a piece too: which Phillippino hearing, and being a very Gentile Man,
yielded his place to Leonardo. And the Monks desired Leonardo, that he might
the better attend the Work, to Lodge in their Convent, where they Entertained
him with his Family. He was a great while with them, before he could be
prevailed with to Work a stroke, but at last he made a Cartoon, and in it a
Madonna, a Saint Ann, and Christ; all which Figures being Finished, raised so
much Admiration in the whole City, that during the time of two or three days,
there was a continual Procession of Men and Women, to go and see them; every
one returning astonished, at the Mavelous Skill of Leonardo.

For in the Madonna's Face, there was all that Beautiful Innocence, that might
become a Virgin Mother of Christ; who having her Child in her Lap, showed an
humble Joy, for the Felicity she enjoyed in so Lovely an Infant, whom while she
regarded with Tenderness, a little Saint John Baptist, who was playing with a
Lamb, drew the Looks of his Mother Saint Ann, who with a Smile, expressed the
joy of her Heart, to see she had at last a Son, that was in his Infancy, a
Companion to the Savior of the World. But the Cartoon being made, Leonardo
forsook the Work, and the Monks entertained Philippino again, who died
likewise, before he could Finish his; and then the Cartoon was sent into France.

Leonardo likewise undertook the Picture of Mona Lisa, Wife to Francesco
Giocondo, and having Worked upon it four Years together, left it nevertheless
Unfinished. It is now in the King of France* his Palace in Fontainbleau;
whoever had a mind to see how well Art could imitate Nature, might have been
satisfied in looking upon this Head, for there were all the Minutest Things
represented to a Miracle. The Eyes had that Brightness and Water, that is
naturally in them; and the Hairs of the Eyebrows, which are extreme hard to do,
was so exactly painted, that one might see the Artist had made them to rise
from the Flesh, just as they do through the Pores; sometimes thicker, and
sometimes thinner. The Nose had all those little pits, which we see in plump
fresh Faces; and the Mouth was represented with all its finishings; the Rose
Color of the Lips ending by little and little, and uniting with the Flesh
Color of the Cheeks and Chin: The Neck was so strong and lively, that through
its delicate Whiteness, one would think, one saw the Veins, and beating of the
Arteries. In a word, this Piece was finished at a Rate, to make any Artist
afraid of ever attempting any thing like it. It Is said besides, That he never
made this lovely Lady sit for her Picture, but he had always some Body to Sing,
or play upon some Instrument, with some Buffoons to make Sport, and keep her in
good Humor, that the Picture might have nothing of that Pensiveness, which
very often spoils the Painters whole Design; and accordingly this had an Air of
Joy and Pleasantness, that rejoiced every one that saw it.

The Excellency of this, and other Works of this Noble Artist, made the whole
City at last, desirous to have some Considerable Piece of his doing, which
might Adorn the Public, and preserve the Memory of so great a Genius.
Therefore the Great Council-Hall being newly Rebuilt, and the Architecture of
it having been ordered by the Three famous Architects of those Days, Giulian of
Saint Gallo, Simon Pollaivoli, called Chronaca, and Michel Angelo Buonarotti.
It was by public Decree of the Council, Ordered, that Leonardo Da Vinci should
Paint it. Whereupon Piero Soderini, the then Gonfalaniero di Sustitia, agreed
with him about it.

Leonardo having chosen for his Painting-Room, a Hall of Sancta Maria Novella,
called, La Sala del Papa, begun a Cartoon there, and in it the Story of Niccolo
Pinccinino, General to Philip, Duke of Milan; there amongst other things, he
Drew a Troop of Horse, that Attacked a Foot Company, and put them to the Rout;
where you might see the Rage and Fury of the Combatants in their Faces, and all
their Actions: As also in the Horses themselves, two of which Rising an end,
had fastened upon the Pikes, and Foot Soldiers, one of which endeavoring with
his Back, to shove off a Horse that presses upon him, lays hold of the Ensign,
to get it out of the Hands of two others, who having each of them their Swords
drawn in one Hand, and their other upon the Ensign, try to defend it, against
that first; and another Old Soldier in a Red Cap, who seems to threaten with a
back blow, to cut off the Hands of those two, who had laid hold of the Ensign's
Staff, and who with the fiercest Aptitude imaginable, try to keep their hold.
There is besides, underneath the Horses Feet, two Figures shortened, who being
closed, and one upon another, do all that is possible, the one with his Arm
raised on high, and a Dagger in it, threatening present Death; and the other
striving with his Arms and Legs, to avoid it. Great also is the Variety of
dress, in which he has put his Figures with different Helmets, and other Arms;
but chiefly his Mastery is great in the forms and Colors of his Horses, which
Leonardo always made more Beautiful and Musculous, than any other Painter. The
only Fault of this piece was, that thinking to Work in Oil upon the Wall, he
made so gross a Mixture for his first Couch, that his Colors began to sink in,
which made him forsake the Work in that place.

Leonardo was of a very great Soul, and most Generous in all his Actions, not
capable of suffering himself to be lessened, as appeared. When going once, as
he used to do every Month, to receive his Allowance from the State, at the
House of the Gonfaloniero Piero Soderini; the Treasurer would have made him
take some of it in Rowls of Brass Farthings, and other such Money, which he
refused: Telling the Treasurer, who took it ill, That he was no Farthing
Painter. And when afterward, Piero Soderini himself, let fall some Words, as
if Leonardo had not dealt well with the State in his Bargain; he hearing of it,
got together by the means of his Friends, all the Money he had ever received
from the Public, and carried it to Soderini, who nevertheless, refused to
accept it.

At the Creation of Pope Leo, the 10th. he went to Rome with Duke Julian, of
Medici, who was very much delighted with all Philosophical Entertainments,
particularly those of Chimistry; in which kind, Leonardo likewise had many
fancyful Experiments. Such as to make a thin Composition of Wax, out of which
he made little Animals, into which Blowing, they flew through the Air, as long
as the Wind within them lasted.

Among other Capricious Amusements of his own Art, he bestowed the pains to fit
Wings to a live Lizard, found in the Garden of Belvedere, by the Gardener: The
Wings were made of the Scales of other Lizards, mingled with Quicksilver,
which made a strange Glittering and Shaking when the Lizard moved; then having
made him Horns, and a Beard, he kept him Tame in a Box, and used to fright his
Friends, with showing him of a sudden.

He used often likewise, to take Sheeps Guts, and cleanse them to that
Thinness, that they would lie in the palm of his Hand: In another Room hard by
his, he had placed a pair of Smiths Bellows, which putting into one end of the
Sheeps Gut, he would blow them up to that Bigness, that they who were in the
same Room, would be fained to get up into a Corner, the Guts appearing as
Transparent as Glass. And this Leonardo used to say, was the best Emblem of
Virtue, which while hid, lies in a little Room, but being once blowed up by
Fame, would fill the whole World. He had a Hundred of these Tricks. He busied
himself in the Knowledge of Perspective, and Looking Glasses: He endeavored
likewise, by Mixtures and Distillings, to find out the best Oils and Varnish,
to preserve Pictures after they were made, but in that he often succeeded ill;
as he did particularly in a Picture of a Madonna, with her Child in her Arms,
upon which he had bestowed infinite pains, to present it to Signor Baldassari
Turini, Datary to Leo the Tenth; it is now much spoiled.

It Is said, that being at Rome, and having undertaken a Piece for the Pope, he
began presently to fall a Distilling of Herbs and Oils for the Vernish: Which
being told to Leo the Tenth, he cried out, alas, This Man will do nothing, for
he begins at the wrong end.

There was a great Fewd between him and Michel Angelo Bonarti, in so much that
Michel Angelo left Florence upon it, and went to Rome; and Leonardo then also
went to France, where he was extremely well received by the King, who had
diverse things of his Doing, and amongst the rest, the Cartoon of the Saint
Anna, which he much desired might be Colored by him. Leonardo, according to
his Custom, amused the King with promises a great while, till at last he fell
Sick, and after many Months Indisposition, finding Death to draw near, he
desired to be Informed of the Duties of a Good Christian; after which, with
much show of Repentance for his Sins, he would needs rise out of his Bed to
receive the Eucharist; and while he was in that attempt, the King, who often
used to visit him, came in: Whereupon straining to show his Respect to the
King, he was taken with a fainting Fit, the forerunner of Death. In which, the
King himself held his Head, while he Expired in the Arms of so Great a Prince,
as the best time and place to give up a Soul so Divine as his was.

The Loss of Leonardo, was sensibly Regretted by all that knew him, no Artist
ever having Honored a Profession more than he did the Art of Painting. He
added to the manner of Coloring in Oil, which was found out before his Time, a
certain Darkness of Shadows, from whence the Moderns have learned to give great
Relievo to their Figures. We have of him likewise, a most perfect Anatomy of
Men and Horses. He would have Excelled in Statuary likewise, if he had pleased,
for the Three fine Statues made by Francesco Rustici, and placed upon the Gate
of Saint John's Church, are of Leonardo's Ordering, and as good for Design and
Casting, as any Modern ones we have.

He had for Disciple, Givoan Antonio Boltraffio, a Milaness, a Person very
understanding in the Art, who in the Year 1500. Painted in the Church of the
Misericordia at Bologna, a piece in Oil; where was our Lady, with her Son in
her Arms, Saint John Baptist, and Saint Sebastian, naked, and he that Caused it
to be made, Drawn after the Life, upon his Knees. In it he Writ his Name, and
added to it, Disciple of Leonardo Da Vinci; it is a fine Piece.

Marco Vgioni, was likewise his Scholar, who in Sancta Maria della Pace, Drew
the Death of the Virgin Mary, and the Wedding of Cana in Galilee.

The LIFE of ANDREA DEL SARTO, A Famous Florentine Painter.
AFter having Writ the Lives of diverse Great Painters, who Excelled, some in
Coloring, some in Design, and some in Invention, we are at last arrived to the
Life of Andrea del Sarto, a most Excellent Artist, in whom Nature and Art
Concurred, to show all that Painting can do, either in Design, Coloring, or
Invention. And to say truth, if Andrea had been of a Temper as bold as his
Judgment was profound, he would have been without any Equal in his Profession;
but a certain natural Timidity and Simplicity, with which he was endowed,
deprived him and his Works of that Strength and Boldness, which added to his
other Qualities in Painting, would have made him Sublime in every kind.

Andrea was Born in Florence, in the Year 1478. his Father was a Tailor, and
exercised that Calling to his Dying day, from whence Andrea took his Name, and
was called Del Sarte.

He was first bound Prentice to a Goldsmith, and in that profession, his chief
delight was Designing of something or another of his Trade, being much more
pleased to do that, than to handle either the Hammer, or the other Tools
belonging to it: Which being observed by John Barile, a Florentine Painter, but
an Ordinary one, he took the Child home with him, to Teach him the Art of
Painting. It is wonderful with what Application and Pleasure, Andrea followed
his Designing, though under so mean a Master, particularly in managing of his
Colors, which he did with so much Art, that all the Painters of the Town were
Surprised at it. Having stayed Three Years with John Barile, he seeing how
great an Artist Andrea was like to prove, talked of him with Pietro di Cosimo,
who at that time, was reputed one of the best Painters that Florence had.
Pietro took Andrea to be his Prentice, and he had not had him long, but he
conceived a great Kindness for him, seeing him so Ardent and Industrious, to
advance his Skill. For Andrea spent all his Hours of Leisure, and the
Holy Days, which other young Men gave to their Recreation, in Designing in the
Great Hall, called La Sala del Papa, where were the Cartoons of Michel Angelo,
and Leonardo da Vinci, and did Outdo all the other young Men, both Florentines
and Strangers, who were used to come to the same place. Amongst all those who
in great Numbers used to frequent that Hall, Andrea made a particular
Friendship with Francis Bigia, called Jl. Francia, and Andrea being weary of
Living with his Master, who was grown very Old, told Francia, that he had a
mind to take a Chamber to himself. Francia, who had the same Design, because
his Master, Mariotto Albertinelli, had given over the Trade, Concurred with
him, and they took a Room in the Piazza del Grano, dividing equally the Profit
of what they undertook, and each putting his Hand to the Work, while they
stayed there. Andrea painted in the Cloister of Saint John Baptist, Twelve
Stories of the Life of Saint John, which he acquired so much Reputation and
Fame by, that now beginning to be better known, he and his Friend, took a new
Lodging by the Convent of the Anuntiata. While they were there, an Old Friar of
the House hearing of Andrea's Commendations, which were in every Bodies Mouth,
he considered how to have his Ends of him, without any great Charge; and by
this time, Jl. Francia and he, being, of Friends, become Rivals in their
Profession. The Monk told Andrea, that he had now an Opportunity to make
himself known to the World, and gaining such Esteem, as he needed never after
to want Work; that his friend Francia had offered to do the thing, but that he
had so much kindness for him, that he should have the preference; and that he
counseled him not to stand upon any Price, for the Honor he would acquire in
so great a Work, would be Reward enough. Andrea, who was but poor Spirited, and
Simple, hearing that Francia was mentioned for the Work, presently closed with
the Friar, and agreed with him for Ten Crowns a Story, provided no Body else
should be concerned in the Work.

In a little time, he finished Three Stories of the Life of Saint Philip, the
Founder of the Order of the Servites; and in one of them he Drew some Gamesters
under a Tree. Who being reproved by Saint Philip, for Swearing and Blaspheming,
did but Laugh at his Admonitions, when on a sudden, a Thunderclap Killed two of
them, and frighted the others. In this piece, Andrea showed what Variety of
Invention he was capable of, for besides the frighted postures of the
Gamesters, he drew a Woman, who running out of her House, at the Noise of the
Thunder, appears so out of her self, that nothing can be more Natural. And he
also feigned a Horse broke loose at the same Noise, who Leaping and Bounding in
an extraordinary manner, expresses the disorder of the Whole, with much
Strength.

Having finished one side of the Cloister, and finding the Work too Laborious
for the price, he desired to be released of his Bargain, which the Friar was
loath to do; but at last did consent, provided Andrea painted two Stories more
at his Convenience, and he would allow him something a better Rate. The
Reputation he acquired by these Stories, presently brought him as much Work as
he could desire. And he made many Stories and Pictures of all kinds, both for
public, and for private Persons; which it would be too long to Enumerate here.
The profit and advantage he made by them, would have made him Live very
plentifully, had he not changed his Condition, by falling in Love with a young
Woman, who was then Married to another; but whose Husband dying soon after, she
became Andrea's Wife. From that time forward, he was very uneasy, both in his
Fortune and Humor, for besides the Encumbrance of a Married Life, he was often
disturbed with Jealousy, and his Wifes ill Humors; but to return to his Works.

The Company of the Scalzo, for whom he had made his first Work, of the Story
of Saint John Baptist, being desirous to have him finish the whole Life,
engaged him a new: He therefore made them two Stories more of the same Subject.
In the first, Saint John is Preaching to the Multitude, and shows in the Burnt
hew of his person, the Austerity of his Life, but particularly, the Air of his
Countenance, is full of Spirit and Zeal, the Variety of the Auditorys
attention, is no less well Expressed, by the astonishment at his Doctrine. But
he showed much more Skill in the second Story, where Saint John is Baptizing a
great Multitude of People, some whereof are putting off their Clothes, others
Naked in the Water, and all showing in their Aptitudes, a mavelous desire of
being cleansed from their Sins; every Figure being most perfectly managed, so
that though it be in Chiaro Scuro, they seem to be of Marble. It Is not to be
omitted, that while Andrea was about this piece, there came some prints of
Albert Durer, out of which Andrea took some Figures, and fitted them for his
manner; which though it is often done by good Masters, yet some took occasion
to think, that Andrea was wanting in the point of Invention.

He made likewise for a Merchant, a Friend of his, who often Traded into France
with Pictures; one of our Savior, Dead, and some Angels about him, in sad
compassionate Postures; and this piece did so generally please every Body, that
Andrea was prevailed upon to have it Cut, and Printed at Rome, by Agostino
Vinctiano, a good Graver: But the thing having miscarried in his Hands, so as
to lose much of its Beauty, he could never be persuaded afterward, to suffer
any of his Pictures to be Graved. The Original its self; was Sold to the King
of France, who was so pleased with it, that he Bespoke many things besides, of
his Doing; which with the persuasion of some Friends, made Andrea resolve to go
for France.

The King, Francis the First, having taken Order for his Journey, and advanced
Money to him at Florence; He was no sooner arrived at Court, but he Experienced
that Princes Liberality, before ever he began to Work. The first Picture he
made, was of the Dophin, who was then in Swaddling Clothes, being not above two
Months Old; the King liked it so well, that he presented him Three Hundred
Crowns in Gold. Next, he made the Picture of Charity, which was by that Prince
so Valued, that he Ordered a pension for Andrea, promising him any thing,
provided he would stay at Court; being much taken with the Quickness of his
Work, and the Easiness of his Humor. He went on therefore, doing many pieces
for the King and Court. When one day as he was Working upon a St. Jerome, for
the Queen Mother, he received Letters from his Wife from Florence, which made
him resolve upon his Return thither; pretending some Domestic Affairs, and
promising the King not only to come back, but also to bring his Wife with him,
and a choice Collection of Pictures and Sculptures. The King trusting him, gave
him Money for all those things, and Andrea took his Oath upon the Bible, to
Return in a few Months.

Being arrived at Florence, he enjoyed his fine Wife and his Friends, and for
several Months gave himself up wholly to pleasure: At last, having spent his
own Money, and the Kings too, he was nevertheless resolved to go back for
France; but the Entreaties and Tears of his Wife, had more power over him, than
his Honor or Oath, and so he Settled a new in Florence, being fallen from a
very Flourishing Condition, to a very Mean one. The King finding himself
Deceived, grew extreme Angry, and for many Years, would not look upon a
Florentine Painter with a good Eye; Threatening, that if ever Andrea del Sarto
fell into his Hands, he would use him as his Fault deserved.

While he was away, the Company of the Scalzo, had hired to Francia their
Cloister, and he had Finished in it, two Stories: But now hearing Andrea was
come back, they set him to Work again, and he painted four Stories more. In the
first, is Saint John taken Prisoner, and brought before Herod. In the second,
is the Supper, and Dancing of Herodias. In the third, is the Decolation of
Saint John, in which, the figure of the Hangman half Naked, is admirably
Designed. In the fourth, Herodias presents the Head of Saint John Baptist to
her Mother; and in this, there are some Figures in posture of Admiration, which
are Excellent. And these four Stories have been a long time the Study, and as I
may say, the School of the young Painters in Florence, both Natives and
Strangers.

In the Year 1523. the Plague being in Florence, and near it Andrea, by the
help of Antonio Brancacci, retired to Mugello, and there was set to Work by the
Nuns, of the Order of the Camaldoli, in their Church of Saint Peter. He had
carried his Wife and Children with him, and the Nuns made so much of his Wife,
that Andrea resolved to do his best to Oblige them: He therefore painted a
Piece of our Savior, Dead, and the Virgin Mary, Saint John the Evangelist, and
Mary Magdalen, Lamenting about the Dead Body: As also Saint Peter, and Saint
Paul, looking on. In all which, the Aptitudes are strangely well Executed, and
the whole finished to a Wonderful degree. And indeed, this Picture has made
that Nunnery more Famous, than all its other Ornaments, though it be a very
Magnificent Monastry.

The Plague being over, and Andrea returned to Florence, it happened that
Frederick the Second, Duke of Montova, passed through Florence, and saw there
in the Palace of Medicis, the Picture of Pope Leo the Tenth, in the middle of
Cardinal Gulian Medicis, who was then Clement the Seventh, and Cardinal Rosti.
The piece was done by Raphael, and an Admirable thing in its kind: Whereupon
the Duke took his time while he was at Rome, and Begged it of Pope Clement the
7th. who very graciously granted it to him, and sent Order to Octavian of
Medicis, to deliver it to the Duke's Order. Octavian, who was a great Lover of
all things of Art, was much troubled, that Florence should lose such a Rarity,
but however not daring to disobey the Pope's Commands, he made Answer, that the
Duke should have it; but desired he would be pleased to give him time to make a
New Frame to it, the Frame being Old, and out of Fashion. But he immediately
sent for Andrea, and telling him how the Case stood, said, He knew no Remedy,
but to Copy most diligently that of Raphael, and send the Copy to the Duke; and
that too, must be done with all the Secrecy imaginable. Andrea fell presently
to Work, and was to Exact and Careful in his Copy, that Octavian himself, who
understood Painting very well, could hardly tell one from the other. The
Painter having Counterfeited some Mould Spots, which were in the Original, to
the greatest Exactness that was possible: Having therefore hid the Original,
the Copy was sent to the Duke, who was extremely satisfied with it, and so far
from discovering the Cheat, that Gulio Romano, who was Raphael's Scholar, and
then Working for the Duke, was Deceived as well as himself; and would have
persisted in that Opinion, to his Dying day, if some Years after, Georgio
Vassari, who was a Creature of Octavian of Medicis, and had seen Andrea del
Sarto copy the Picture: Going to Mantua, and being there courteously
Entertained by Giulio, had not undeceived him. For amongst other Pictures,
Giulio showing him this as a piece of Raphael's, he told him he was mistaken:
To which Giulio replied, How, mistaken! As if I did not remember the very
Strokes that I my self Wrought in some part of it. To which Vasari replied, He
was still mistaken; and to convince him, showed him a little Mark on the Back,
which was made there on purpose by Andrea; because when the two Pictures were
together, they were apt to be mistaken one for the other. Giulio having seen
the Mark, was Astonished, but said at the same time, I Value it nevertheless,
but rather the more; it being a much rarer thing, to have a Great Painter
imitate the manner of another so Exactly, than to do great Things of his own.

About this time, Messer Baldo Magni of Prato, having a mind to have a good
Picture for the Church of the Madonna del Carcere: Amongst other Painters who
were mentioned to him, Andrea was the Man he most inclined too, but one Nicolo
Soggi Santonino, having many Friends, Messer Baldo was over persuaded to let
him have the Doing of it, though he had sent for Andrea: Who being arrived,
this Nicolo was so Impudent, as to offer to lay a Wager, that he would outdo
Andrea in any Subject. Andrea provoked beyond Measure, though naturally poor
Spirited enough, Replied, That he had a Prentice with him, who had not been
long a Painter, but he would lay of his side against Nicolo, scorning to Engage
himself in the Contest, as being like to reap little Honor by the Victory; and
so returned to Florence. In the mean time, one of the Servile Fathers, in
giving leave to a Lady, to permute a Vow she had made, had obliged her to cause
a Madonna to be made, in a part of their Convent: And the Father having the
disposing of the Money, spoke to Andrea to undertake it, though the price was
but small. He, who never stood for Money, said, he would. And Drew our Lady,
with her Son in her Arms, and a Saint Joseph, who leaning upon a Sack, looks
upon a Book, that is open before him. This Work, both for Design, Grace,
Coloring, and Relievo, shows him to have surpassed all former Painters to this
day; and is now visited by Strangers, under the famous Name of the Madonna del
Sacco, it is upon the Door of the Cloister of the Annuntiata, as you go into the
Church.

There wanted one Story to the Cloister, of the Company of the Scalzo,
therefore Andrea, who had much greatned his Manner, by observing the Figures
that Michel Angelo had begun, and almost Finished, for the Sacristi of Saint
Laurence, put a Hand to this last Story, which was the Birth of Saint John
Baptist; the Figures in it are of a greater Relievo, than any he ever made
before. And particularly, there is the figure of a Woman, who carries the New
Born Babe to the Bedside, where Saint Elizabeth receives it; that is an
Admirable figure. The figure of Zachariah likewise, who Writes his Sons Name
upon a piece of Paper, which he holds upon his Knee; is a most Lively thing. As
likewise, the figure of an Old Woman, who sitting by, seems to Laugh at the
Childbearing of Elizabeth, who was also an Old Woman.

About this time, John Baptista della Palla, having made an excellent
Collection of Sculptures and Pictures, to Adorn an Appartment for Francis the
first, which should be the Richest of that kind, that could be had, spared no
Cost to get the best things that were in Florence; and amongst the rest, he set
Andrea to Work, giving him hopes, that it would be a means to make him recover
the Kings favor, and return to his Service.

Andrea therefore made two Pictures, the one the Sacrifice of Abraham, the
Aptitudes and Coloring of which are Admirable; and particularly a Passage, or
Landscape, most exquisitely done, and proper to the Story. The other, the
Picture of Charity, with Three little Boys about her; but neither of these
Pictures came to the King's Hands, for Baptista della Palla, being taken
prisoner. Philippo Strozzi bought the first, and presented it to Alphonso
Davalos, Marquis Del Guasto, who placed it in the Isle of Sicilia, hard by
Naples, in a Palace that he had there. And the other was Bought of Andrea's
Wife, after her Husband's Death, by Dominico Conti, a Painter; who Sold it
again to Nicolo Antenori, who keeps it as a Rare piece, as indeed it is.

About this time, Octavian of Medicis, seeing how much Andrea had mended his
Manner of late, was desirous to have a piece of his Doing. And Andrea who was
much Obliged to him for many Favors, made him a Madonna, with her little Son
upon her Knees, who turns his Head toward a Saint John Baptist, who is held by
his Mother Saint Elizabeth; the whole Wrought with Incredible Art and
Diligence. The Picture being finished, and brought to Octavian of Medicis, he
liked it extremely; but it Being the time of the Siege of Florence, and he
being taken up with other Thoughts, desired Andrea to dispose of it to whom he
would: To which Andrea made no other Answer, then that it was made for him, and
that it should be his, or no Bodies; and accordingly refused all the Offers,
and Entreaties that were made to him by other people, though Octavian had
desired him to Sell it, and keep the Money for himself.

The Siege being over, and the Family of Medicis Settled in the Government,
Andrea carried his Picture once more to Signior Octaviano, who then took it
with Joy; and having given him twice the Value of it, thanked him over and
above: And this Picture is still in the Hands of his Lady.

During the Siege of Florence, some of the chief Commanders that were in the
Cities pay, having run away with the Moneys they had received, Order was given,
to have them Painted upon the Front of the Palace of the Podesta, and Andrea
was spoke to do it: He excused himself in public, and gave the doing of it to
one of his Prentices, called, Bernardo del Buda; but he privately every day
went in at a Hole made in the Wall, and came out again by Night, so that the
Work was by him so Finished, that the Persons designed to be Represented,
seemed to be there Alive. But afterward, by Order of the Government, they were
Wiped out, as well as some Eminent Citizens, who in that time had been declared
Rebels, and painted in the same manner by Andrea.

After the Siege, the Plague was discovered in the City, and Andrea, whether
out of Apprehension of it, or by some other Irregularity of Life, fell Sick;
where being forsaken by his own Wife, for fear of the plague, he Died no Body
knows how, and was Buried with little Ceremony, in the Church of the Serviles,
hard by his House.

He was but Two and Forty Years Old, and he continually had so Improved himself
to that Time, that it is to be thought, if he had Lived longer, he had still
added some new Improvement to the Art. He wanted nothing, but to have Worked
some time in Rome, to have made his Manner, which was Sweet and Free, Noble and
Great, by the viewing of the Antiquities that are there; the Study of which
alone, is that which gives Richness of Invention in Story, and Exactness in
Figures. But the Reason why he wanted that Accomplishment, was, because while
he was there, it was when Raphael had already made many Excellent Scholars,
young Men, of a fresher Date than Andrea, who found that it would cost him a
terrible deal of pains, to keep pace with them; therefore being naturally poor
Spirited, he thought it best to go back to Florence, where his Works were
already Admired, and Valued, as indeed they deserved, though he in his Lifetime
took so little for them; that they who have since Sold any of them, have had
three times the Value of their first Cost.

After his death, his Designs were in the Hands of Dominico Conti, one of his
Scholars, though none of the best; he had a great many, but all did not attain
to so great a degree of Skill, as some did. The best were Jacopo da Puntormo,
Andrea Ignazzella, who has painted a Country House, some where by Paris, much
after Andrea's manner. Il solos meo Pier Francisco di Jacopi di Sandro,
Francesco Salviati, and Georgio Vasari, the Author of these Lives, though he
Lived but a very little while with him: Jacopo del Conte Nannoccio, who is
still in France.

Dominico Conti, out of Gratitude, caused a Marble Effigies of his Master, to
be set up against a Pillar, in the Church of the Serviles, with this
Inscription:

ANDREA SARTIO,
Admirabilis Ingenii Pictori ac veteribus illis Omnium judicio Comparando,
Dominicus Contes Discipulos pro Laboribus in se Instituendo susceptis grati
animo posuit.

Vixit Annos XLIII. Ob. A. MDXXX.

The LIFE of RAPHAEL DEL URBIN, A Painter and Architect.
RAphael was Born in Vrbino, a known City of Italy, upon a Good Friday, in the
Year 1483. his Father's Name was Giovanni de Santi, a Painter of no very great
Reputation, but a Judicious and Discreet Man: And, who having himself been
Entered in an ill Way, and by a Master of the Old Manner, had yet so much
Knowledge, as to direct his Son in a better; finding him a very forward Child,
and much inclined to the Art, in so much, that even under his Institution, he
had so far profited, as to be very useful to his Father, in diverse pieces that
he Wrought in the State of Vrbin. But he as a kind Father, being very sensible
that Raphael could never attain to any great Skill by his Teaching, resolved to
find him out a better Master; and pitched upon Pietro Perugino, who had then
the Reputation of one of the most Excellent Masters of his Time. Pietro
accepted the offer made him of Raphael for his Scholar: And as soon as he saw
the great Beginnings he had already in the Art of Designing, and withal,
observed the sweetness of his Temper, and the modesty of his Behavior, he made
that Judgment of him, which since has been confirmed by Effects It Is a thing
worth Observing, that Raphael studying the Manner of Pietro Perugino, imitated
it so well in every thing, that his pieces could not be known from his Masters;
as appears to this day, by a piece in Oil, which he did for Madonna Magdalena
de Glioddi. In Saint Francesco of Perugia. it is an Assumption of our Lady, and
our Savior putting the Crown upon her Head; the Twelve Apostles are round
about the Sepulcher, admiring the Celestial Glory she is Adorned with. It Is
done with great Diligence, and they who are not very Skilful in knowing of
Manners, would easily believe, it were of Pietro Perugino's doing; and yet
without doubt, it is of Raphael's. Who painted likewise, two pieces in Citta di
Castello, the one a Crucifix, in the Dominican Church; in which, if he had not
Writ his Name, there is no Body that would believe it Raphael's, but rather
Pietro Perugino's. The other a Marriage of our Ladies, in which one may
particularly observe, how Raphael gains upon Perugino, and begins to Surpass
him. In this Piece, there is a Temple drawn with so delicate a Prospective,
that it is Wonderful to observe, what Difficulties and Niceties of Art, he
showed in it.

Having by this time, attained to some Reputation, he was called by his Friend
Pinturichio, who had undertaken the Painting of the Library of the Domo, at
Sienna, at the desire of Pope Pius the Second, who was Native of that place;
and Pinturichio, knowing Raphael to be a most Excellent Designer, was glad of
his Assistance, who accordingly made diverse of the Cartoons for that Work, but
did not continue, because he had a mind to go to Florence, to see the Cartoon
of Leonardo da Vinci, which he had made for the great Palace Hall; which had
made such a Noise in the World, that all the Lovers of Art, came far and near
to admire it. Particularly, Michel Angelo, having also at the same time, made
some Naked Figures in Competition with Leonardo, which were no less admirable.
Being come to Florence, and having admired those Works as Divine, the City
pleased him likewise so well, that he resolved to Live in it for some time.

There he presently contracted Friendship, not only with all the young Painters
of his Time, but also with many of the most Eminent Citizens, by whom he was
highly Honored and Caressed, particularly by Taddeo Taddei, who Lodged him in
his House, and made him constantly Eat at his Table: And Raphael, who was not
to be overcome in Courtesy, made two pieces for him, which have something more
of the Way of Perugino, than of that which he Studied since. He was Intimate
likewise with Lorenzo Nasi, for whom he made an Excellent Madonna; but it, in
the Fall of his House, which was Overthrown by an Earthquake, was all broken to
pieces; nevertheless, the pieces being Raked out of the Ruins, were put
together as well as might be, and are yet preserved by Baptista Nasi, a great
Lover of the Art, and Son and Heir to the said Lorenzo.

After this, Raphael's Father and Mother being both Dead, he was forced to go
to Vrbino, to look after his Domestic Affairs; and there he did some pieces
for Guidobaldo da Montefeltro, who was then Captain General of the Florentines;
and amongst the rest, a Picture of our Savior in the Garden, and the three
Apostles asleep at a distance: This piece is so perfectly Finished, that no
Miniature can be better. It was given by Signora Leonora, the Duke of Vrbin's
Wife, to Don Petro Quirini, and Don Paulo Justiniani, Venetians and Hermites of
the Camaldoli, and was by them placed as a Relick in the chief Room of the said
Hermitage.

From Vrbin he went to Perugia, where he Worked for the Nuns of Saint Antonino,
and made them a Picture, where according to the Simplicity of those Ladies, he
made our Savior Clothed, sitting in his Mothers Lap; and on one side of our
Lady, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, Saint Cecily, and Saint Katherine; to those two
Virgins, he gave the sweetest Countenances, with the finest Dress for their
Heads, a thing Rare in those Days. The whole Work is very much Esteemed, it
being one of the first in which Raphael began to change his Manner, since his
being at Florence,, so that now it differed as much from his Master Perugino's,
as if it had been two distinct Hands. After some stay at Perugia, he returned
to Florence again, and there fell to Studying very hard, both by the Old
Paintings of Mosaccio, and by the New ones of Leonardo, and Michel Angelo. He
Contracted a most particular Friendship with Fra. Bartholomeo di San Marco,
having his Coloring in great Esteem, and endeavoring to Imitate it; and in
Exchange, he Taught Fra. Bartholomeo, the manner of Working things in
Prospective, to which the Good Father was an absolute Stranger: But his Study
was again Interrupted, by the Importunity of some great Persons of Perugia, so
that he was forced to return to that place. He carried with him a Cartoon,
which he had done at Florence, at the Solicitation of the Signora Atalanta
Baglioni. The Story was the Burial of our Savior. In this piece, Raphael has
admirably Expressed the Grief of our Lady, who is fallen in a Swound, by the
Dead Corpse; and that of Saint John, who with his Hands crossed in each other,
and looks down with the saddest Countenance imaginable. And indeed, who ever
shall well consider the Diligence, Care, and Affection, with which this piece
is Finished, must be in a kind of Ravishment at the Air of the Figures, the
Beauty of the Drapery; and above all, a certain Sweetness that is spread all
through the Work.

There being about this time, many Artists of all kinds Employed at Rome, by
Pope Giulio the Second, Bramanto of Vrbino, amongst the rest being there, Writ
to Raphael, to whom he was something a Kin, to come to Rome, for that he had
spoke to the Pope of him. At his arrival, being very well received by the Pope,
he found him busied in Embellishing his Palace, and particularly, in Painting
his best Rooms in Fresco, by the Hands of the most famous Masters of that Time;
there was one Room quite finished by Pietro della Francesca; Luca di Cortona,
had very much forwarded a Facciata, or Frontice-piece of another. And Don
Pietro della Gasta, Abbot of Saint Clement of Arezzo, had begun another Story.
Likewise Bramantino of Milan, had made some Figures, which being done after the
Life, were extremely Valued. Raphael therefore took to himself the Chamber of
the Segnatura, and there begun a Story of the Divines agreeing, Philosophy and
Astrology, with Divinity; and in it are drawn all the Ancient Wise Men and
Philosophers, disputing in different Manners. By themselves there are some
Astrologers, who have made Figures upon Tables, and send them to the four
Evangelists, by certain Angels. But amongst the rest, is the Figure of
Diogenes, lying all along upon the Stairs, with his Dish in his Hand; which is
a very Contemplative figure, and much to be Commended, as well as the figures
of the Astrologers, whose Aptitude in Working, with their Compasses upon
Tables, is admirable. There is among other Figures, one of a Young Man, who
opening his Arms, and bending his Head on one side, seems to be in the act of
admiring; it is the Picture of Frederick the Second, Duke of Mantoua, who was
then in Rome. Raphael's own Picture is also there, next to Zoroaster's, who
holds a Caelestial Globe in his Hand; and the Mathematician, who seems so
attentive with his Compasses, is the Picture of Bramante, and so like him, that
he seems alive.

He adorned his Work with a most delicate Prospective, and such Variety of fine
Figures, of so delicate a Manner, that Pope Julio caused all that had been done
by other Masters, both Old and Modern, to be quite Demolished, to make room for
more of his. But Raphael spared some of the Work of Giovan, Antonio Sodoma, of
Vercelli, and made use of the Compartiments and Grotesks of it: And in the four
Rounds, he made four Figures, of some Signification to the Stories under them,
and turned each of them to its proper Story.

In the first, is a Woman, which is made to represent Knowledge, and on each
Hand a Goddess Cybele; she sits in a Chair, and is Represented with many
Breasts, with which the Ancients painted their Diana Polimasta. Her Clothes are
of four Colors, to Represent the four Elements; from her Head to her Waste, is
the Fire-Colour, and from her Waste downwards, the three others, the Water
being the last; and there are by her some young Children, very finely done.

In another Round toward the Window, which looks upon Belvedere, is
Represented Poesy, in the person of Polyhimnia, Crowned with Laurel, and with
an Air more than Mortal: She directs her Looks to Heaven, having two Youths by
her, who by their Vivacity, seem ready to receive her Commands; underneath
this, was the Story of Parnassus.

In the third Round, which is over the Story, where the Doctors of the Church
are ordering the Mass; there is represented Divinity with Books, and other
Ornaments about her, and likewise two Boys.

In the fourth Round, is Justice with her Balances, and a Sword, with two
Boys, as all the others.

He made likewise in the four Corners of the Vault, or Ceiling, four Stories,
but of lesser Figures, yet extremely well Designed, and delicately Colored;
and they are Adam's Eating the forbidden Fruit, which looks toward the Story
of Divinity underneath; near that of Astrology, there is that Art, which
places the fixed Stars and Planets, all in their proper Situation. Over the
Picture of Poesy, there is the Story of Marsias, who is tied to a Tree, and
Flead by Apollo; and over, the History of the giving the Civil and Canonical
Laws, there is the Story of Solomon's Judgment, when he Ordered the Child to be
cut in two.

Having finished the Vault, or Ceiling, we must now say, what were the Stories
painted underneath.

In that part which looks toward Belvedere, he drew the Mount Parnassus, with
the Fountain Helicon, and upon the Mountain made a Wood of Laurels, so Green
and Lively, that the very trembling of the Leaves by the gentle breath of Air
stirring about them, is almost perceptible; and in the Air, there fly about an
infinite number of Cupids, who gather Branches of Laurel, and having formed
them into Garlands and Wreaths, scatter them all about the Hill, which is
filled with Poets in different postures; some Sitting, some Standing, some
Writing, some Singing, and others Talking together by pairs, or more, as the
Painter thought fit to sort them. But the Figures are all so Lively and their
Actions so proper and Natural, that one would really think, the Workman
Inspired with some of that Divinity which the Poets lay claim too. These
Figures were all done after some Ancient Statues, or Models; and the Modern
Poets, who are there Represented, and were then Alive, and are all done after
the Life. There on one Side, you see Ovid, Virgil, Emius, Tibullus, Catullus,
Propertius, and Homer by himself, Singing of Verses, and having one at his
Feet, who Writes them down. Then in a Gruppo by themselves, are Apollo, and the
Nine Muses, with such Beauty in the Air of their Heads, that one may easily
know them to be the Divinities of Verse. On the other Side, is the Learned
Sappio, the most Divine Dante, Gentle Perch, and Amarous Boccaccio, with a
great many more of the Moderns; the whole Work being extremely well finished.

On another Wall in the same Room, he drew our Savior and the Virgin Mary,
Saint John Baptist, the Apostles, the Evangelists and Martyrs, all upon Clouds
in the Air, and above over them, God the Father, who sends the Holy Ghost over
a great number of Saints of all sorts. There are likewise, the four Doctors of
the Church, with Domenick Francis, Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure Scotus, Nicolas
di Lira Savanarola, and a great many Divines drawn, many after the Life: In the
Air are four Boys, who hold the four Evangelists. The Excellency of this
Picture is great, for as the Figures are all Sitting, and in the Air the
Shortnings are very Artificial; so as they slide away from the Eye by degrees,
just as if they were of true Relievo. Their Drapery likewise is very Curious,
both in the Foldings and Liveliness of Colors: The Air of our Savior's Head
is admirable, having in it all that Mildness and Pity, which was proper to the
Divinity, made Man.

And indeed, it was Raphael's particular Talent, to give the proper Air to his
Heads, as he has done here all along; making our Ladies Countenance Sweet and
Gentle, the Apostles Grave, but Honest and Plain, the Martyrs Zealous, and full
of Faith: But particularly, he showed great Art in the Heads of the Doctors of
the Church, who disputing two by two, or three by three, show in their
Countenances great Curiosity, and in their Actions an endeavor of discovering
the truth of all their Doubts.

On the other side of the Room by the Windows, he drew Justinian, giving his
Laws to the Doctors, who correct them; and over him, Temperance, Force, and
Prudence; and on the other hand he drew the Pope, giving the Decretals, or
Cannon Law; and in the person of the Pope, he drew Pope Julio, after the Life;
as also Jean, Cardinal of Medicis, who was afterward Pope Leo the Tenth;
Anthony Cardinal Dimonte, and Cardinal Alexander Farneze, who was also Pope, by
the Name of Paul the Third. The Pope remained extremely satisfied with this
Work; and that nothing might be wanting to set it out, he sent for Francis
Giovanni di Verona, who was famous for Carving in Wood, to make the Frames; who
not only did that, but also adorned the Room with most dilicate Doors and
Seats, which gave him great Favor with the Pope; and indeed, in that sort of
Work, there was never any that exceeded this Fra. Giovanni; as may be seen to
this day in a Sacrista in Verona, the place of his Birth, in the Church of
Sancta Maria in Organo.

But to return to Raphael: His Skill and Reputation increased so together, that
the Pope would needs have him undertake a second Chamber toward the Sala
Grande; but first, he drew the Pope's own Picture at length, so strong and
lively, that it astonished all those who saw it; and it is to this day
preserved in Sancta Maria del Popolo, together with a Nativity of his doing;
both these Pictures are showed only upon Holy Days.

All this while, though Raphael had acquired very great fame, and though he was
continually studying the best pieces of Antiquity in Rome, yet he had not
hitherto given any Greatness or Majesty to his Figures; his Manner, though
soft, yet being mean and low in expressing great things.

But it happened about this time, that Michael Angelo, who was painting the
Pope's Chapel, was forced to fly to Florence, for an Occasion that shall be
mentioned in his Life, and left with Bramante the Key of the Chapel; who being
an Intimate Friend of Raphael's, showed him the whole Work, that he might
comprehend Michael Angelo's Manner; which he did so strongly, that immediately
he went and did over again the Figure of the Prophet Isaiah, which he had
already finished in the Church of Saint Austin, and gave it that noble, great
Manner which most of the Works of Michael Angelo have; who being come back to
Rome, and having seen this Alteration of Raphael's Manner, imagined presently,
that Bramante had been false to him in his absence, to oblige his Friend
Raphael.

About this time, Augustine Chigi, a very Rich Merchant of Sienna, but Living in
Rome, and a great Admirer and Encourager of Artists, made Raphael draw that
famous Galataea in a Sea-Char, environed with Tritons and Sea-Nymphs, and Gods;
as is yet to be seen in his Palace of Transtevere: and being extremely
satisfied with that Work, which has an unimitable sweetness and nobleness in
it, he got him to undertake a Chapel for him in the Church of Sancta Maria
della Pace, on the Right Hand; and in it Raphael drew some Prophets and Sybils;
which are particularly esteemed among all the things he ever did; but he had
then seen Michael Angelo's Chapel, and had taken to that magnificent new way;
and in it likewise he showed a most dilicate and perfect Coloring, as appears
in the Women and Children; all which concurring together, made this Work be
valued for the best he ever did, and that from which he drew his greatest Fame,
both Dead and Alive.

After this, he went on with the Rooms of the Pope's Palace; where he painted
the Story of a Miracle that happened at Orvieto to a Priest, who being
Incredulous in the point of Transubstantiation, had the Host dissolved into
Blood before him, as he Celebrated Mass: In the person of the Priest, whose
Face is all red with Shame and Confusion, you may see the fright so strange an
Accident put him in, and the very trembling of his Hands is sensible to the
Lookers on; round about him, Raphael drew many Figures, some Serving Mass,
others at a distance, in different Postures and Aptitudes upon the hearing the
strangeness of the thing; and amongst the rest, there is a Woman with a Child
in her Arms, who being told the thing by another, expresses great wonder in her
Looks and Action, with a singular Womanish Behavior and Grace: On the other
hand he feigned Pope Julius to be present at this Miracle, and drew him, and
Cardinal St. Georgio, with many others of his Court; and in the empty part of a
Window, which was in his way, he painted a Staircase, with different Figures
upon it; so that it united with the rest of the Story, and made it one entire
piece. And in truth, it must be said of Raphael, that in the Invention and
Composition of any Story whatsoever, he exceeded all the Painters of his Time,
and had a clear and strong Imagination, as he showed in the same Room, in a
Story over against this: it is, when Saint Peter is kept by Herod's Soldiers
in the Prison; where the Architecture is so judicious and various, and yet so
proper for the place, that one must confess his Genius to be admirable, in
adapting his Inventions to the truth of the History, according to what is
delivered us in Writing; as here, the darkness and horror of the Prison, the
deep Sleep that oppresses the Soldiers, the splendor of the Angel at his
appearance, by which the Prison is so enlightened, that all that is in it is
distinguishable; there are all Beauties proper to the Story; as also, when
Saint Peter, freed from his Chains, goes out of the Prison in the company of
the Angel; for Saint Peter's Countenance, is that of a Man in a Dream; and in
the Guards without, there is a Surprise betwixt Sleeping and Waking, while one
of them with a Torch in his hand, endeavors to waken the rest; and by that
means, gives the necessary Light to the Piece, to see the Armor and Posture of
the Soldiers; and where that Light does not fall, the Painter has most
ingeniously made use of the Moon: all which being likewise painted within a
Window, the Facciata is still the more obscure; and the^^ by it happens, that
when any one looks upon the Picture, the Light strikes him in the Face, and the
true Light from without makes, as it were, a contest with the painted Light
within, and makes you see the very smoke of the Torch, and the splendor of the
Angel's Appearance so strong, that you can hardly persuade your self it is a
thing painted; the shadows of the Armor, the reflection and warmth of the other
Lights being painted with such a proper Gloominess, that it must be owned, he
is the Master of Masters in Coloring and Invention.

He drew likewise another Story about the attempt that Heliodorus made to Rob
the Temple of the Jews, in the Time of the High Priest Onias; where the furious
action of an invisible Horseman, waited upon by two on Foot; and striking
Heliodorus from his Horse, is remarkable; for his Followers not seeing those
that strike him, and wondering at his fall, are so surprised, that they let
slip out of their hands the Treasures and Riches of the Temple, which they had
already begun to plunder* at a distance, is the holy Priest Onias upon his
knees, with his Eyes and Hands lifted up to Heaven, expressing in his
Countenance the Joy, mingled with Grief and Compassion, that that action of
Violence, and the sudden Relief sent from Heaven, had produced in him; there
are besides, many of the multitude, who being got upon the Bases of the
Pillars, and holding by them, are in very uneasy postures, strongly attentive
to the Event of the Business, with various Expressions of Astonishment and Fear
in their Countenances.

This Work was so wonderful in all its parts, that to this day, the Cartoons
are had in the greatest esteem imaginable: and Signior Francisco Massini, a
Gentleman of Cesena, who without any Master, by his own Industry, has attained
to a great perfection in Painting; has amongst his rare Collection of Designs
and Relievoes, some Pieces of this Cartoon, and keeps them with the true
Veneration due to such Relics.

While Raphael was thus encouraged by the Pope, and astonishing on his side the
whole World with the noble productions of his Pencil, Death took away Giulius
the Second, the great Patron of all Arts: but Fortune, though envious in that,
yet was kind in his Successor Leo the Tenth; who ordered all the projects of
his Predecessor to be continued, being himself, both by Birth and Inclination,
a most Magnificent Prince: accordingly, Raphael pursuing his work, drew on
another side of the same Room, the coming of Attila to Rome, and his being met
at the foot of Monte Mario by Leo the Third, then Pope, who obliged him to
return back again only by the Gravity of his Aspect. In this place Raphael drew
Saint Peter and Saint Paul in the Air, with Swords drawn in their hands to
defend the Church, and they have in their Countenances and Actions that
Celestial Ardour with which Heaven inspires its Saints in defending the true
Religion: Attila, who is upon a dilicate black Horse, with white Feet, and a
Star in his Forehead, lifts up his Eyes, as frighted with the Vision, and seems
to turn away from it, and desire to be gone; in his Company are many Horsemen,
whose Horses are most rarely done, particularly, a Spotted Gennet, which is
mounted by a Figure, who shows all the Naked that may be, being Armed in some
places with Armor that resembles the Scales of Fishes, which he took from
Trajan's Column, where there are people Armed after this Fashion. He drew
likewise, after the Life, some Mace-Bearers that wait upon the Pope; and with
them, the whole Court of the Cardinals, and the Grooms that lead the Pope's
Horse, upon which he is Clothed in his Pontifical Habits; and under the person
of the Pope, he has Represented the then present Pontife Leo the Tenth, with
many of his Courtiers; all after the Life. And indeed, we may say of all other
Pictures, that they are Pictures; but of Raphael's, that they are Alive; the
very Flesh seems to be soft and tremble at the touch, and is full of spirit and
feeling: so that his Reputation in this particular, is beyond that of all that
ever were before, or since.

There is a Picture of the same Pope, with Cardinal Giulian of Medicis, and
Cardinal Rossi, where the Figures seem to be absolutely round; and out of the
Piece, the Velvet and Damask which the Pope wears, have both the softness and
shining which is proper to them, and the Ermines so natural, that they seem
real; in a word, there seems to be no Colors there, but all real Silk and
Gold; there is upon the Table a Parchment painted in Miniature, and a Silver
Bell; which are both finished beyond expression: but amongst the rest, there is
one of the Balls of the Pope's Chair, which being gilded, reflects the Light
upon the Pope's Shoulders and the Room, as if it were the real Sun Beams: In a
word, it is impossible for any Master to go beyond this. For this Piece the Pope
presented him richly; and it is yet to be seen in Florence, amongst that Duke's
Collections.

Raphael finding himself thus highly Rewarded and Esteemed, and having a
generous Spirit of his own, built a Palace to preserve his Memory to
Posterity, it is in Borgo a Novo; and Bramante, one of the best Architects in
his Time, made the Model of it in Cast Work.

About this time Albert Durer, a famous Flemish Painter, and an admirable
Ingraver of Prints, sent his Picture to Raphael; it was wove upon a Cloth, so
as to be seen alike on both sides the Cloth, he having taken the Lights from
the Cloth, and the Shadows from some Water Colors which that Cloth was wrought
with. The Picture was very much admired by Raphael; who in Return, sent Albert
several of his best Drawings; and being desirous to try Albert's way of Graving
in plates of Brass, he made Marc Antonio of Bologna apply himself entirely to
that Art; in which he proved so excellent, that afterward he was Raphael's
chief Graver; and most of the things we have of that kind, of Raphael's, are
done by him; who indeed surpassed Albert Durer himself; as appeared, when he
counterfeited the Story of the Passion of Christ, done by Albert, and put
Albert's Name to it, and it sold so well for the true one, that Albert Durer,
to prevent the Cheat, was fain to make a Journey from Flanders to Venice, and
there complain to the Government, Mark Antonio being at that time Resident
there; and yet he only obtained, that his Mark should not be counterfeited;
leaving liberty for any body to Imitate the rest, that could.

Mark Antonio's best things after Raphael, are, Lucretia killing her self, the
Judgment of Paris, the Massacre of the Innocents the Rape of Hellen, Sancta
Felicita boiled in Oil, and her Children Beheaded about her; Neptune, with
little Stories out of the Enerde about him; a Venus Embraced by a Cupid; God
Blessing the Seed of Abraham, where is a Maid with the two Children; the famous
Galataea of Ghigi; and in a word, most of the things painted by him in the
Pope's Palace. There were likewise two other famous Gravers that did many of
his things; to wit, Marco di Ravenna, and Agostiano Vinetiano, who marked his
Prints with this Mark* A. V. as the other did with Raphael's, thus, R. S.

After this, Raphael made for the Monks of Sancta Maria della Spasmo, in
Palermo, a Picture of our Savior's carrying his Cross; which is held as a most
miraculous piece: in it the Rage of his Crucifiers is expressed in their Actions
and Countenances, and our Savior lying under the Load of his Cross, all bathed
in Sweat and Blood, looks most passionately upon the three Mary's, who are in
Tears by him; there is likewise Saint Veronica, who with much Charity and
Compassion hold out her hands to wipe his Face with a clean Linen Cloth; and
behind, the Work is filled with Men on Horseback, and on Foot, who crowd out of
the Gates of Jerusalem to go and see the Execution. This piece was like to have
miscarryed, going home; for a most horrid Storm having broke the Ship in which
it was, upon a Rock, and all the Men and Goods perishing, this Picture being in
a Case, was carried by the Winds and Seas as far as the Coast of Genoa, and
there taken up and opened, and being admired, was by public Order disposed of,
it having not at all been spoiled, though it had lain so long in Salt Water;
the noise of this Accident came at last to the Ears of the Monks for whom the
Picture was made; and with much ado, by the Pope's Intercession, they obtained
from the State of Genoa an Order to have it restored, paying first the Charges
of those that had taken it up; which they did largely, and so sent it to Sea a
second time; where it had better Fortune, and arrived safe in Palermo, and is
no less famous there than Mount Aetna is in that Kingdom.

Amidst these Works for private persons, Raphael neglected not to carry on the
painting of the Pope's Palace, and in a little time he finished the Chamber
called, Di Torce Borgia; in which he had made on every side a Story: in one was
the burning of the Borgo Vecchio, in the Time of Saint Leo the Fourth; where he
puts it out with his Blessing alone, though all means had been tried to quench
it before, but in vain. In this Story the Painter has drawn all the Horror of
a Fire surprising people unprepared; some Women there are, who while they are
carrying Water to quench the Fire, are, by the Storm of Wind which then blew,
all disordered in their Hair and Cloths, and many of them blinded with Smoke,
so as not to know one another, or see what they are doing. In another place,
there is drawn an Old Decrepit Man upon the Back of a Young Man his Son, just
as Virgil describes Aenaeas and Anchises; and in the Figure of the Young Man,
is to be seen the Strength of his Body as well as the Courage of his Mind, and
the difficulty with which he struggles in holding the Old, Helpless Sick Man,
and avoiding at the same time the Flames and Ruin that are about him; on the
other side, upon the top of a House all on Fire, is a Lady naked in her Smock,
and holding a Child in her Arms, which she is trying to throw it to one below,
who holds out his Arms and a Blanket to receive the Child; and in both these
Figures, the fear of the Flames, mingled with that concern for their tender
Infant, are rarely expressed; nor is less admirable the Figure of a Woman, who
being all in an undress and disorder, frighted in her looks, drives before her
two or three little Children, whom she beats, to make them make have to avoid
the fury of the fire: there are some other Women, who falling down on their
knees before St. Leo, seem to beg of him to stop the fury of the fire; as he
does. The other Story is of the same St. Leo; where the Painter has drawn the
Port of Othia, surpised by a Navy of Turks, who had a design to make the Pope
Prisoner: there you may see the Christians assailing the Turk's Fleet, now got
to Sea, and taking several Ships, the Captives of which are Landed and set a
Shore, being dragged by their Beards into the presence of St. Leo, who is
represented by Leo the Tenth in his Pontifical Habits, between Cardinal Bibiena
and Cardinal Julian of Medicis, who was afterward Clement the Seventh.

The other two Stories are, the Sacred Inunction of King Francis the First, of
France, by this Pope Leo the Tenth, and the Crowning of him by the same; and in
them Raphael has drawn most of the Courtiers of both Princes, after the Life,
and according to the Dress they were then in; just by the King is a Child upon
his Knees, holding the Regal Crown, which is Hyppolito of Medicis; who was
since Cardinal, and Vicechancellour of the Church.

The Coeling of this Room was already painted by the hand of Pietro Perugino,
Raphael's Master; he forbore therefore, out of respect to him, to make any
Alterations in it, but suffered it to remain entire as it was. 'Twas hard for
Raphael to do all these things by his own hands; and therefore he was forced to
employ diverse excellent Workmen in all kinds; and he had Designers, not only
over all Italy, but as far as Graece; that nothing might be wanting that was
any ways useful or Ornamental to his Profession.

After this, he painted a Hall for the Pope; where having drawn in Terresta
some Figures of Saints and Apostles, he caused the rest of the Room to be
painted by Giovanni di Vdine his Scholar; whose Genius lay particularly in
drawing all sorts of Animals, beyond any Painter of his Time; he therefore drew
all those the Pope had at that time; as, a Cameleon, a Civet-Cat, an Elephant,
some Lions, Monkeys, Parrots, adorning the Intervals with Grottesks of all
kinds.

He adorned the Pope's Palace, not only with Painting, but also with
Architecture; having, after the death of Bramante, given a noble Design for the
great Staircase and Chambers, with much more Order and Ornament than Bramante
had invented, following in that the Magnificent Humor of that Pope, who spared
no Cost of that kind; therefore Raphael chose out diverse able Men in most
Professions, and assigned them their Tasks, setting Guiovanni di Vdine over the
Grotesks and Stucco Work; Giulio Romano had the overseeing of the Figures,
which were made most of them by Giovan Francesco il Bologna, Perino del Vaga,
Pellegrino da Modona, Vincensio da San Gimiano, Polidoro Caravagio, and many
others; and for the Carvings, he made Gian Barile do all those over the Doors,
and on the Ceiling.

He made many Pictures for Foreigners, and particularly, some for the King of
France; amongst which, that of the Battle of Saint Michael and the Devil, is
esteemed a most wonderful piece: in it he drew a great burnt Rock for the
Center of the Earth, out of the cleft of which came flashes of Fire and
Brimstone; and in the person of Lucifer, all scorched in his Members, you might
perceive all the Rage, Pride, and Spite that could be in a Soul that had lost
Empire and Peace, and was condemned to eternal pains and anguish: the Figure of
St. Michael, on the contray, is made with a Celestial Air, which expresses the
force with which he has overthrown Lucifer at his feet; the King of France sent
Raphael a noble Reward for this piece.

Raphael was in his Nature of a very amorous Complexion; for which reason, he
took much pleasure in drawing some of his Mistresses, and other handsome Women,
being always at the Ladies Command; which made many of his Friends likewise
have Complacency's for him in that kind something extraordinary; as that of
Signior Augustine Chighi, his great Friend; who having obtained of Raphael to
paint the Lodge in his Palace, he found that he did not much mind the Work, by
reason of a Mistress he there had, to whom he was continually going; whereupon
he made means to the Lady, and with much ado, obtained of her to come and stay
at his Palace, and keep Raphael company whilst he worked: by which means the
Lodge was finished to his Mind: he made all the Cartoons with his own hand, and
colored himself the best part of the Figures; in the Vault or Ceiling he drew
a Banquet of the Gods and Goddesses; and in them one may see many Habits taken
from the Ancients; and he made Giovanni da Vdine make a Border of Flowers,
Leaves, and Fruits in Festoons, most extremely fine.

After this, the Pope gave order for the richest Hangings of Silk and Gold that
it was possible to make, and ordered them to be made at Antwerp; to which place
the Cartoons were sent by Raphael, all drawn and colored by his own hand; and
by the Artists there so exquisitely imitated, that the Silk and Gold seem
Colors, and not Weaving; and indeed, it is an astonishing thing to see how the
very Hair and Beards of the Figures are as distinct and fine as the Life it
self; and the Houses, Landskips, Prospectives, all as Natural and Regular as
any Painter can make them: this Work cost the Pope seventy thousand Crowns, and
is still preserved in the Papal Chapel. Much about this time likewise he began
the great Hall above Stairs, where the Victories of Constantine are painted.

Having thus described most of the Works of this excellent Painter; before I
come to other particulars of his Life or Death, I think it may not be amiss, to
say something of his manner in painting.

At first, he imitated the manner of his Master Pietro Perugino, and mended it
much, both for Coloring, Invention, and Design; but coming afterward to see
the manner of Leonardo da Vinci, whose Heads, both of Men and Women had all the
Life and Spirit imaginable, and whose Figures had a particular Grace and
Motion, not expressed by any before him; Raphael became astonished, and
resolved to study Leonardo's manner; which he did with infinite pains and
diligence; and yet, in some things, was forced to come short of Leonardo; for
though in the Opinion of many, he out did him in a certain Sweetness and
Natural Facility, yet in strong Conceit, and a certain greatness of Design, he
could not reach him; nor indeed, hardly any Painter could come up to Leonardo
in that point; but Raphael came nearest him, particularly in the Graces of his
Coloring. This first manner of his, which he learned from his Master Pietro
Perugino, being little, mean, and of small Design, became in time a great
trouble to him; for it hindered him from Learning to draw Naked Figures, and
gave him great difficulty in all Shortenings, and such like Excellencies of the
Art, which he saw so rarely performed by Michael Angelo Buonaroti; and indeed,
any one besides himself would almost have despaired, as perceiving, that all
this while he had thrown away his time, and must now turn Scholar again, as he
did with admirable Patience and Ingenuity, studying Night and Day to arrive to
Michael Angelo's way; which was full of difficulty in all its parts, and this
in a time when his Hand and Head were almost settled upon another way, which he
had learned in his Youth, when Impressions are strongest.

When Raphael began first to change his manner, he had never studied Nudities
any otherwise than just to do them a little by the Life, which with the grace
he gave his Pictures, did pretty well; but he was an utter Stranger to Anatomy,
which teaches the lying of the Muscles under the Skin, and how they swell and
shorten in action, according to the different postures of the person; also, the
manner of their Insertion, and the Concatenation of the Bones and Joints; all
which he studied with great application, and became excellent in the knowledge
of whatever might make a rare Painter; yet perceiving too, that in this part of
painting, he should be forced to come short of Michael Angelo; and knowing,
that it is not Naked Figures alone, that give Reputation to a great Painter;
but, that Invention and Disposition were things that did enoble the Art as much
as any thing, he applied himself to them with great success, enriching his
Compositions with great variety of Prospectives, and new ways of dressing his
Figures; adding to this, most beautiful Heads of Men, Women, and Children; and
in a word, not being able to come up to Michael Angelo in one thing, he
resolved to be so universal in all the other parts of Painting, that few, or
none should be able to compare with him: he was not a little beholding to Fra.
Bartholomeo di San Marco; who having a good way of Painting, well founded in
Design, and accompanied with a pleasant Coloring; though sometimes he used too
strong Shadows to give his Figures a greater Relievo; Raphael took of his
manner so much, both for Design and Coloring, as he thought fit; and out of
it, and some other select Observations upon other Masters, he made to himself a
Manner; which was ever after called, Raphael's Manner* and the perfection of
which appeared in those Sybils and Prophets which he made in the Church of La
Pace: and if Raphael had stuck to this Manner of his, and had not still sought
to make it appear greater by the strength of Naked Figures, it had been often
more agreeable, and of greater Reputation to him; for even those Nudities of
his in the Chamber of Torre Borgia, are not exact; nor do those which were made
by him in the Palace of Augustine Chigi in Transtevere, please and satisfy a
Judicious Eye, because they want that Grace and Sweetness which was the proper
Character of Raphael; and besides, he only Designed them, but left the
Coloring to others; which Error of his he at last perceiving, resolved to do
something that should be all his own; and accordingly, did the Transfiguration
of Christ in the Church of S. Pietro Montorio; in which are all the parts of
good painting; and if he had not, out of a Humor, made use of Printers Black
in the Shadowings, which of its own Nature, becomes still blacker and blacker,
and spoils the other Colors with which it is mingled, I believe that Piece
would have been fresh and fine to this day; but that has so blackened it, that
it seems as it were Tinto.

I have made this Discourse at the end of Raphael's Life, to show how much
Care, Study, and Diligence he used, to attain to an Excellency; and likewise,
to give, as it were, an Advertisement to other Painters, that they should not
go about to force Nature in those things to which it does not strongly incline
them, least they loose their Labor, and be forced at last to desist with shame.

Now to return to the Life of Raphael. He had a great Intimacy with Cardinal
Bibiena; who was continually soliciting of him to Marry, and had a Niece of
his ready to bestow upon him: Raphael at first put him off gently, taking three
or four Years time to consider of it; at the end of which, the Cardinal still
soliciting him about it, and claiming, as it were, a promise from him; he
finding himself engaged in some measure, and loath to disoblige the Cardinal,
accepted of his proffered Niece; but so still, as not to come to an absolute
Conclusion; for besides the aversion he had naturally to a Married Life, he had
besides, another design, which made him seek all delays possible from entering
into so strong an Engagement: The thing was this; he having Served the Pope a
great while, and having a very considerable Sum due to him from the COURT, he
had diverse hints given him, that as soon as the Sala Grande he was now painting
should be Finished, the Pope would recompense his Pains and extraordinary
Capacity with a Cardinal's CAP: It being certain, that the Pope designed a
numerous Creation of Cardinals: amongst whom were some of less Merit than
Raphael. In this hope therefore, keeping Marriage at a distance, and following
secretly other amorous Delights, it happenened, that he committed once such an
Excess that way, that he came Home with a pretty high Fever; the Physicians
being called, and he concealing the true Cause of his Distemper, which they
feared, was an Inflammation, they ordered him to be Let Blood; whereas they
should have given him Cordials and Restauratives; the effect was, that he
sounded away; and immediately finding himself decay, he took care to send away
his Mistress out of his House, and provided handsomely for her; and then making
his WILL, he left all he had to Giulio Romano his Scholar, and to Gian
Francesco Florentino, otherwise called Il Fattor, together with a certain
Priest of Vrbino, who was Akin to him; making Signior Baltasar da Pescia the
Pope's Datary Executor of this his last Will and Testament: after this, having
Confessed himself very Penitently, and received the Sacrament, he yielded up
the Ghost on a Good Friday, in the Seven and Thirtieth Year of his Age, the
same day he was Born on.

The Pope, and all the Court were much concerned for his Loss; and indeed, we
may say, that it was the greatest that the Art of Painting ever received; it
having been ever since at a Stand, and rather in danger of declining, than in
hopes of advancing to a greater Perfection: He was so Courteous and Obliging to
all those of his Art, that if at any time any one had begged a Design of him,
whether he were his Acquaintance or no, he would leave all to serve him; which
made him be so Beloved, that when he went to Court, he was ordinarily attended
by fifty, or threescore of the best Artists of all kinds who followed him, to
show their Respects. And one thing he brought to pass, which I think, was never
done before nor since; which was, that all those Painters, and other Artists in
great Number, who worked under him, and in concurrence with one another, laid
aside all Envy and Jealousy, and lived in the greatest Union and Concord
imaginable; which proceeded from nothing so much as from that admirable Example
of Sweetness and Mildness that Raphael set them. In a word, he was not only the
Wonder, but the Delight of all Rome, who thought his Virtue beyond Reward, as
it was above all Imitation. He lived Great, died Bewailed, and Regretted by
every one.

The Famous Cardinal Bembo made this Epitaph for him.

Raphaeli sanctio Vrbinati Pictor; eminentissimo veterumque Aemulo, cujus
spirantes prope Imagines, si contemplere naturae, atque Arts faedus facile
inspexeris. Julii secundi, and Leonis decimi Pontificatus maximis Picturae and
Architecturae Operibus gloriam auxit. A. XXXVII Integer integros, quo die natus
est, eo esse desiit, Octavo Idii Aprilis, Anno MDXX.

Ille hic est Raphael timuit quo sospite vinci, Rerum magna Parens and
onoriente mori.

The LIFE of GIORGIONE DA CASELFRANCO. A VENETIAN PAINTER.
ABout the same time that Florence grew so Famous by the Works of Leonardo Da
Vinci, Venice received no small Ornament from a Native of that Country, to
wit, Giorgio of Castelfranco, who had the Surname of Giorgione given him. He
was Bred up in Venice, and first applied himself to Music; for which he had so
rare a Talent, that both for Singing and Playing upon the Lute, he was Famous,
and always invited to all Consorts, and Public Musick-Meetings. After this, he
applied himself to learn to Design; in which Nature gave him a great Facility;
and he in requital, studied her most, Designing every thing after the Life it
self; which made him not only outdo the two Bellini's then in Vogue, but stand
in Competition with those Tuscan Painters, that were the Authors of the Modern
way of Painting; some things of Leonardo da Vinci's doing being come to his
Hands, wherein there was a great Strength, particularly, an admirable
Management of the Shadowings; he was extremely delighted with that manner,
never forsaking it, but endeavoring to imitate and improve it in all his
Oyl-Paintings; from whence it proceeded, that all his Pieces had a Spirit and
Life, never expressed before in that Country; and adding to that a Beautiful
Coloring, he he was far beyond all the Lombard Painters.

His first Application was to Portraits, in which he succeeded admirably; and
particularly in that of the Great Gonsalvo, whom he drew by the Life, in
Armor, when he came to make a Visit to Agostino Barberigo, the Doge of Venice;
this Picture so pleased the Great Gonsalvo, that he took it with him into
Spain. Many more of his Pictures are spread over all Italy.

He was no less excellent in Painting in Fresco; and amongst the rest, there is
the Front of the Palace of Soranzo in the Piazza of San Baolo; in which,
besides many Stories done after the ordinary manner of Fresco Painting, there
is one done in Oil upon the Wall after the Fresco manner, which is very
singular; it has preserved it self against all the Wind and Rain, and is fresh
to this day, though it be exposed to the South Winds; which in moist Countries,
such as Venice is, are the most terrible Destroyers of Fresco Work, that can be.

About the Year 1504, there happened a great Fire near the Rialto, in which,
amongst other Buildings, the Fondaco, or Trading-House of the German Nation,
was quite burnt to the Ground: the Senate in a short time Rebuilt it more
Magnificent and Convenient than before; and Giorgione's Fame being great, he
was ordered to paint it in Fresco on the Outside. This Building standing in the
most frequented and populous part of the City, Giorgione thought he could not
choose a better place to show the Excellency of his Art; and therefore without
confining himself to any Set Story, he drew such Figures as should best suit
with that Design; therefore you see in some places the Figures of Women, in
others, those of Youths in various Aptitudes, with Lions Heads, Angels, Cupids,
and other such things by them; the meaning of which, none to this day could
ever understand, but the Figures are admirable in their kind.

The best piece of Oyl-painting of his doing, is of our Savior carrying his
Cross; where there is a Jew that pulls him; that is a most singular Figure:
this Piece is in the Church of San Rovo; and by the great Devotion that People
show to it, it is thought to do Miracles. He worked much out of Venice; as, at
Castelfranco, and in the Trivisano; and many Pieces of his were bought up, and
carried abroad to Foreign Parts, to show that Tuscany alone had not the prize
of Painting, but that other parts near the Alps, had their Share in that noble
Art.

About this time, Andrea di Verrochio being employed to make the Famous Horse
of Bronve, some Sculptors took occasion to praise Sculpture beyond Painting,
because that one might walk round a piece of Sculpture, and view it on all
sides with delight, whereas a piece of Painting could never represent but one
side of a Body at once: Giorgione having heard them out, said, that they were
extremely mistaken, and that he would undertake to do a Figure in Painting,
which should show the Fore and Hind Parts, and the two sides, without being put
to the trouble of going round about it, as Sculptors are to view a Statue. This
seemed an Undertaking beyond belief; but he thus brought it to pass.

He drew the Picture of a Young Man naked, showing his Back and Shoulders, and
having at his Feet a Fountain of clear Water, in which there appeared by
reflection, all his fore parts; on the left side of him he placed a bright
shining Armor, which he seemed to have put off, and in the glistering of that,
all the left Side was seen in Porfile; on his right Side he placed a great
Looking-Glass, which represented his right flam by its reflection,

This Piece was looked upon as a thing of a rare Invention, and seems to give
the prize to Painting, which can in one view represent much more than Sculpture
can.

He drew, amongst other Pictures, that of the famous Catharina Cornaro, Queen
of Cyprus, by whom the State of Venice long enjoyed, and do to this day lay
claim to that Crown. That Piece is in the Palace of Cornaro.

Giorgione being so rare a Painter, and so great a Musician, could not choose
but be Amorous; he fell most extremely in Love with a Young Beauty, who was no
less charmed with him; and while they were in the heat of their Enjoyments, the
Plague being then at Venice, she fell ill of it, but not thinking it was that
Disease, admitted Giorgione to her Bed, where the Infection seizing him, they
both died; he was but thirty four years old, when this fatal Accident took him
from his Friends, who could hardly comfort themselves for his loss. He left two
excellent Scollars, to wit, Sebastiano Vinetiano, who was afterward Frate del
Piombo at Rome; and Titian da Ladore; who not only equalled his Master, but
surpassed him infinitely.

The LIFE of Michael Angelo BUONAROTTI, A Painter, Sculptor, and Architect.
LOdovico di Lionardo Buonarotti Simone, was a Gentleman of the Country about
Florence, and the Father of Michael Angelo, who was born in the Year 1474;
being not very rich, and his other Children being put out Apprentices to
Trades, he designed his Eldest for a Scholar, and accordinly, sent him to
School; but the Child used to play Truant often, and spend his time in
Designing, finding in himself a most powerful Inclination that way; which his
Father endeavored to oppose, as thinking it below the dignity of his Family
(which was descended from the Earls of Canosu) to have one of his Children a
Painter: but at last, the strength of Nature prevailing against the Rules of
Prudence, he put Michael Angelo to Domenico Ghirlandai, who was then reputed
the best Painter in Florence.

He was then about fourteen, and in less than two years time, he followed the
Art with so great application, that his Master said, he was astonished at the
progress he made, as also at the boldness of his Pencil; for one day, a
Scholar of Ghirlandio's having drawn some Women clothed, out of a Work of the
said Master, and succeeded pretty well, according to the Design; Michael Angelo
took the paper, and making with a pen new Centers to the Figure that his Fellow
Scholar had drawn, not only mended his Drawing, but showed thereby some Faults
that were in his Master's Original; which boldness of a Youth of his Age,
argued a prodigious Genius for the Art.

Much about that time Lorenzo of Medicis, who was a mighty lover of Sculpture,
and used to lament, that there was not then one young promising Sculptor in
Florence, set up a kind of Academy in his Palace, for the Improvement of Youth
that way, and desired Guirlandaio, that if he had any of his Apprentices that
were hopeful Young Men, he would send them to him; accordingly, he sent him
Michael Angelo and Francesco Granaccio, as the most hopeful of his School.
There was an old Head of a Faun, or Satyr, which was made Laughing; and it
struck Michael Angelo's fancy so, that taking the Instruments that Sculptors
use, which he had never handled in his Life before, he fell to trying to
imitate that Head, and at last did it so perfectly well, that Lorenzo
astonished at the greatness of his Genius, commended him extraordinarily; and
observing, that he had added of his own Invention, to make the Faun show his
Teeth and part of his Tongue; he told him laughing, and with a Design to make
sport, that that was improper, for that Old Men, as that was, never had all
their Teeth; Michael Angelo thinking he was much in the right, went next day,
and broke a Tooth of the Satyr's, ordering the Gums likewise to look as if it
were fallen out, and then showed it to Lorenzo of Medicis, who laughed heartily
at Michael Angelo's Simplicity, but resoved to cherish his Talent, and
therefore sending for his Father, desired he would let him stay in his Family,
and he would take care of him; which his Father very readily granted.

He stayed there four Years, during which time, by the advice of Politian, a
great Virtuoso and Lover of Art, he undertook to Carve in Marble the Battle of
Hercules with the Centaurs; which he did so rarely, that to those who shall
consider it now, it will appear rather the Work of an intelligent well
practiced Master, than of a Young Student, as he was then. There is likewise a
Nostra Donna of Basso Relievo in Marble, done by him much about the same time,
with a design to imitate the Manner of Donatello; which he has done to a
Miracle; and this is the only Piece of Basso Relievo that ever he did, and is
therefore preserved with great Care in the Palace of Medicis.

Lorenzo being dead, and his Son Peter carrying himself Insolently in the
Government, great Revolutions followed, and the Family of Medicis was quite
driven out of Florence; which Michael Angelo foreseeing, and being afraid,
least his Dependence on that Family might be of fatal Consequence to him, had
withdrawn himself some Weeks before to Bologna, and thence to Venice; where
finding no Work, he returned to Bologna, in order to approach Florence, but
having forgot to take a Pass at his coming in, he was seized going out, and
Fined more Money than he was then worth, not being able to pay it, just as he
was going to Prison, one Signior Giovan Francesco Aldrovandi took pity of him,
paid the Money, and carried him home to his own house, where he staid a whole
Twelvemonth with him; during his stay he did but one piece of Work, which was,
to add to an old piece of Sculpture in MARBLE of the Sculpture of St. Dominick;
there being an Angel holding a Candlestick wanting, and another Figure of about
a Yard long; both which he supplied so well, that they are the two best Figures
in the whole Work, though it was done by Giovan Pisano and Nicolo de Larta,
Sculptors of great Fame.

After this he returned to Florence, and there made for Pier Francesco of
Medicis a Saint John; and a little after, for Baltaser del Milanese, a Cupid
sleeping; which being showed to Pier Francesco, he told Baltasar, that it might
pass for Autique, if it were buried under Ground a while, and made to look old;
Baltasar took the hint, and carried it to Rome, where he buried it in a Vigna,
having first broke the Arm of it; and so after some time had it dug up, and
sold it for Antique to the Cardinal San Giorgio for two hundred Crowns, sending
Michael Angelo only thirty for his pains. Others relate the thing otherwise;
but all agree, it was taken for Antique, and fell at last into the hands of
Duke Valentino, and he gave it the Marchioness of Montsua, where it still
remains. The Reputation that Michael Angelo got by it, was so great, that he
was sent for to Rome, and placed in the Family of Cardinal San Giorgio, where
nevertheless, he was a whole Year without Employment, the Cardinal
understanding but little of either Painting or Sculpture, but a Roman Gentleman
called Jacopo Galli understood his Merit better, and got him to make him a
Cupid of Marble, and by it a Figure of a Bacchus, who holds a Cup in his Right
Hand, and in his Left, a Tyger's Skin and a Bunch of Grapes, which a Young
Satyr trys to eat some of; in which Figures, Michael Angelo made, as it were, a
mixture of the Beauty of both Sexes, having given it the Cleanness of Limbs,
and Strength of the Men, and withal, the roundness and fleshiness of the Women,
which gave him the Bell above all Modern Artists of Rome and elsewhere.

His fame increasing every day with his Skill, the Cardinal of Rouen, who was
then Chief Minister of France, desiring to leave something at Rome that should
preserve his Memory there, bespoke Michael Angelo to make him a Picta, as it is
called in Italian; that is, our Lady with our Savior's Dead Body in her Lap:
he did it with so much Care, and finished it with such admirable Diligence,
that it is impossible to see any thing better in Marble; particularly, the Dead
Body of our Savior is so exquisitely formed, with all the Muscles, Veins, and
Nerves, and yet made so truly dead, that no Art in the World can go beyond it;
some blame him for having made the Virgin's Face too Young; but they do not
consider, that Virgins unspotted preserve their Freshness a great while; the
Drapery is the noblest and loosest in the World; which is one of the hardest
things in Sculpture. In Sum, he showed so much Art in this Piece, that,
contrary to his Custom, he put his Name to it; some say, he was provoked so to
do by some Lombard Artists, who being come to look upon it, one of them asked
the other whose Work it was, and the other made answer, that it was done by Il
Gobbo, a great Sculptor then living at Milan; which Michael Angelo
over-hearing, Carved his Name in a Girdle that goes about the Madonna's Breast.

About this time his Friends at Florence invited him back to undertake an odd
piece of Work, which was thus; a piece of Marble of about nine Yards high, had
been given to one Simon da Fiesola, who had begun a Giant in it, but with such
ill Success, that those that were to pay for it had laid it by as a thing
spoiled; but it being a fine piece of Marble, the Gonfaloniero Soderini had
proposed to Lionardo da Vinci and to Andrea Sansovini, an excellent Sculptor,
to do something with it; Andrea was willing, but said, they could not make a
Figure out of it without adding some pieces; which Michael Angelo hearing,
undertook to do it without putting any piece to it, whereupon it was delivered
to him.

He therefore began, and made a Model of Wax, and framed the Statue of David,
with a Sling in his hand; and then, having enclosed a place with Boards, he
fell to work upon the Marble, and would not suffer any Body to see what he did;
he had much ado to make it serve for his design, the first Sculptor having
spoiled it, so that he was forced to leave in the Extremities of his Figure,
some strokes of the former Chizzel; which nevertheless, did not any ways deform
it; after much Labor, having miraculously Created a new thing out of an old
deformed Carcass, there was much Contention among the Ingeneers of the City,
how to transport it to the place where it was to be set up; but at last,
Giulian of St. Gallo, and his Brother Antonio, were the Contrivers of a
Machine, in which it was carried suspended by Cables, and then raised by
degrees with Leavers, to the place it was to stand in; as soon as it was
uncovered, all the Town flocked to see it; and to say truth, it not only
surpasses all Modern Statues, but may come in competition with the Ancient
Greek and Roman ones; for as to exactness of Measure, Beauty of Shape and
Proportion, and dilicate Centers of the Legs, with a cleanness of all the
Limbs, nothing can outdo it; the Aptitude of its Posture, and the Air of the
Head are Divine: and in a word, after it* we may never desire to see any,
either Modern or Ancient, for there is all the Beauty in it that Art can give;
and yet to show how Artists must sometimes humor Great Men, who pretend to be
Judges, and are not; the Gonfaloniero Soderini found fault with the Nose, and
said it was too big; whereupon Michael Angelo, to please him, took a Chizzel in
one hand, and in the other a little Marble dust that lay upon the Scaffold by
him, and pretending to mend the Nose, struck three of four blows with the wrong
end of his Chizzel, and let the Dust fall by little and little, and then called
to the Gonfaloniero to ask him how he liked it; who told him, that that little
alteration had quite made it another thing; at which Michael Angelo laughed in
himself, for he had not touched it any ways to alter it. The Gonfaloniero paid
him four hundred Crowns down.

Having succeeded thus rarely in Sculpture, he nevertheless would not omit to
show his Excellency in Painting; and therefore, at the Request of Agnolo Doni,
a Florentine Citizen, and his Friend, he made him a Madonna upon her Knees,
holding of her little Son upon her Hands, and lifting of him to St. Joseph, who
seems to receive him: He has particularly expressed in the Eyes of the Madonna,
the tenderness of a Mother admiring the Beauty of her Child; and in the Looks
of Old Joseph, all the Respect and Devotion which he must have for a Child
which he knew to be Divinely Born: And in the Piece, at a distance, to show his
Art the more, he made several Naked Figures, some standing, others sitting, all
admirably Finished; and indeed, it is one of the best Oyl-Paintings he ever
did, he having worked but little that way.

The Picture being Finished, he sent it covered to Agnolo Doni, and withal, a
Note for seventy Crowns, to be paid down immediately; Agnolo thought it too
much to lay out in a Picture, and therefore sent him but forty; upon which
Michael Angelo sent back the Messenger, and required a hundred Crowns or the
Picture; Agnolo then was content to give him the other thirty, and sent them by
the Man that demanded a hundred; but Michael Angelo, to punish him for
Bargaining for so rare a Piece, sent the Money back, and demanded a hundred and
forty, which was the double of his first Price, or else the Picture: Agnolo,
who knew the true Value of it, immediately sent him all he desired, and glad he
had it so.

About that time, Lionardo da Vinci having done some Stories in the Chamber of
the Great Council, in the public Palace, the Gonfaloniero Piero Soderini
bargained with Michael Angelo to do one side of the same Room, and gave him for
his Subject the War with Pisa.

Michael Angelo being to Paint in concurrence with Lionardo, who was one of the
greatest Artists of the World, shut himself up, as his Manner was, and made a
Cartoon, in which he drew a world of Naked Figures, which he supposed to be
bathing themselves in the River Arno, and to belong to the Camp, which was hard
by; and at the same time there was an Allarm given, which made these Figures
all endeavor to get on their Clothes and Armor, in various postures; amongst
the rest, there was an Old Fellow who had a Garland of Ivy about his Head, and
was just come out of the Water, and trying to put on his Stockings, which by
reason of the Wetness of his Legs, were hard to pull on, and he being besides,
frighted with the noise of the Drums and Allarm, seemed to use all the Strength
of his Muscles and Nerves to make haste, making such a Face at the same time,
as showed that he was all over in action from the Head to the Toe; there were
besides, Gruppos of Horseman beginning the Fight, and others of Foot at a
distance coming on, some in the Shade lost, others in the Light strong and
vigorous, and all in great variety of Aptitudes: So that nothing could be
either better Designed, or more ingeniously Invented; and particularly, the
Shortnings were admirable and strong, beyond all that had yet appeared.

This Cartoon being afterward carried to a Room in the Palace called La Sala
del Papa has there been the Study of all the Painters of that Age, both Natives
of Florence and Foreigners; for Raphael del Vrbin, Francesco Granaccio, Andrea
del Sarto, Jacobo da Puntormo, Perin del Vaga, and several others, made their
Study of it: for which reason, it was at last removed to the Palace of
Medicis; and the great Liberty Strangers had to come to it, making it be less
watched, it was in the end, in the Sickness of the Duke Giulian of Medicis,
stole away by pieces; and some of it is yet to be seen in the House of S.
Vberto Strozzi at Mantoua.

About the Year 1504, Pope Julius the Second having suceeded Alexander the
Sixth, he sent to Florence for Michael Angelo, with a design to make him erect
a Stately Sepulchral Monument for himself: Accordingly, having sent him Money
for his Journey, he ordered him to go to the Quarries of Marble at Carrara, and
there to see the Stones cut out as he would have them. Michael Angelo spent
eight Months entire in that Employment, and sent so much Marble to Rome, as
filled half the great place before Saint Peter's.

The whole design of the Monument was to contain above forty Statues of Marble,
besides little Boys, Ornaments, and other Carvings; about the Corniches it was
to be, as it were, an I Will in the middle of a Chapel, so as it might be walked
all round, and considered from the Outside. Of this Work he finished four
Statues, and began eight more; which were never Finished, by reason of the
Pope's Death. Of all these, his Moses is the most Excellent; it is about five
Palms, of white Marble, in a sitting posture, leaning one hand upon the Tables
of the Law, and with the other stroking his Beard; the very Hairs of which are
expressed as if they were living Hairs; the rest of his Countenance is of the
greatest Majesty and Sweetness imaginable, the Drapery is Loose, Long, and
Noble; and in a word, the whole Figure is Exquisite beyond Imagination; the
Sculptor having expressed something of that Divinity which was in a Man that
conversed so familiarly with the DEITY it self.

It Is said, that while he was doing this Work, the rest of the Marble he had
bespoke at Carrata, came to Town, and that Michael Angelo being gone to
acquaint the Pope with it, and finding him busy, paid for the bringing the
Marble, out of his own Pocket, that the Workmen might be gone home who had
brought it; some time after he went again to the Palace to acquaint the Pope,
to whom he used to have very free access, that the Marble was come, and to
desire his Holiness to take order about the paying for it: it happened that
day, that the Pope was otherwise employed; and the Porter told him, he must
have Patience, for he had Orders not to let him in: a Courtier that stood by,
asked him if he knew him; to whom the Porter replied, that he knew him very
well, but must obey his Orders. This Answer, and the Affront angered Michael
Angelo so, that he told the Porter, that he should tell his Holiness, when he
asked for him next, he was gone about some other Affairs; and so without
further delay went home, and ordering his Servants to sell all his Furniture to
the Jews, and follow him to Florence; he took Post two hours after Sunset, and
rode that night to Poggi Bonzi, out of the Pope's Territories. There five
Courriers overtook him with LETTERS from the Pope, desiring his Return; to all
which he only made answer by a little Note, That he desired his Holiness to
excuse him, that he had driven him away from his Presence, and that the
faithful Service he had paid him did not deserve such Usage; and that
therefore his Holiness might provide himself of some other Artist in his room,
for he was resolved to Serve him no longer.

But he was no sooner arrived in Florence, but there came Letters from the Pope
to the Government of Florence, commanding them to send him back Michael Angelo
to Rome: which perseverance of the Pope in his Design, so frighted Michael
Angelo, that to avoid his Resentment, he began to hearken to some Franciscan
Friars, who had Commission from the Great Turk to entertain him in his Service,
he having at that time thoughts of making a Bridge over the Hellespont, from
Constantinople to Pera: but at last being over persuaded by the Gonfaloniero
Soderini, he resolved to go to the Pope, who was then at Bologna, and to ask
his Pardon; the Cardinal Soderini undertook to present him; but being
Indisposed, he delivered him to a Bishop of his Friends, who brought him to the
Pope. Michael Angelo fell upon his Knees; but the Pope looking scurvivily upon
him, said, Instead of coming to Us at Rome, We have been fain to meet you here
at Bologna. To which Michal Angelo replied, that he did humbly beg his Pardon,
and acknowledge his Error: the Bishop interposing, told his Holiness, that
such Fellows as he were not much to be minded, being ignorant in every thing of
the World but their own Art, and therefore might the sooner be excused. The
Pope grew angry at such an impertinent Intercession, and with a Switch he had
in his hand, touched the Bishop scornfully, and told him, he was more Ignorant,
and had less Manners than Michael Angelo, since he said that to him which he,
the Pope had not said: upon which the poor Bishop was turned out of the Room by
the Officers; and the Pope having passed his anger upon the Bishop, gave
Michael Angelo his Blessing, and bid him attend the Court.

After a little while the Pope commanded him to make a Statue of himself, of
about five Palms high, of Bronze; while he was doing it, the Pope came one day
as it was almost Finished, and considering the posture; which was, with one
hand up in a Commanding Manner, the Pope asked him whether he was Blessing, or
Cursing in that posture? And Michael Angelo answered, that he was intimating to
the people of Bologna, that they should persist in their Duty: then he asked
the Pope, whether he would have a Book in his Left Hand? To which he answered,
put a Sword there, for I understand but little of Books. The Pope left a
thousand Crowns behind him for the Finishing of it; which Michael Angelo did in
about sixteen Months; and it was set up over the Frontispiece of the Church of
San Petronio; but not long after, the City revolting to the Bentevoglio's, they
sold this Statue to the Duke of Ferrara, who Cast it into a great Gun, and
called it La Giulia; only the Head was saved, and kept in that Duke's Wardrobe.

Michael Angelo after this, being returned to Rome, found that the Pope by the
persuasion of Bramante, had laid aside the thoughts of continuing his
Sepulchral-Monument, as a thing of ill Omen; and was persuaded to have the
Vault of the Chapel painted by Michael Angelo; which Bramante did maliciously,
as knowing that it would prove a Work of great difficulty, and that Michael
Angelo was not very well practiced in the way of painting in Fresco; indeed, he
used all means possible to avoid the thing, and to engage Raphael del Vrbin in
it; but the Pope would take no Excuse: So he was fain to undertake it, and
agreed for the price of fiveteen thousand Crowns to finish it all; he sent to
Florence for several Workmen who were well practiced in the Manner of Fresco;
and having made the Cartoons, they began to paint them upon his Design: but
their Work not answering his Expectation, one day he shut the Door upon
himself, he put out all they had done, refusing to let them in, and likewise
keeping so close at home, that he could not be spoke with by them; whereupon
finding themselves abused, they returned to Florence. He being thus alone, took
infinite pains, and with great attention and labor, brought about half of it
to perfection, taking great care that none should see what he was doing; then
it was, that the Pope, who was naturally impatient, commanded it to be
uncovered, and all Rome flocked to see it; amongst the rest, Raphael del Vrbin,
admiring the Greatness of Michael Angelo's Manner, changed his own upon the
sight of it, and being an admirable Imitator of any thing he saw, drew those
Prophets and Sybils in the Church of La Pace; which are the best things he ever
did; Bramante upon that would fain have had the Pope have given the other half
of the Work to Raphael to finish; but the Pope would not injure Michael Angelo;
who therefore went on, and in about twenty Months brought the whole to
perfection, not having had any help of any kind, not so much as of a Boy to
grind his Colors for him.

There are in it many Stories, beginning from the Creation of the World to the
Flood; and then following on to most of the remarkable Stories of the Old
Testament, adorned besides with Sybils and Prophets, according to the
Compartments of the Vault. The Work in general is the extremest perfection of
the Art for Shortnings, diversity of Dresses, Airs of the Heads, and noble
Invention.

Giulio being dead, the Sepulcher was intermitted; though by his WILL he had
ordered his Executors to see it finished: However Michael Angelo went on
working upon some of the Statues at Florence; where he retired, and lived
during all the Pontificates of Leo the Tenth, and Adrian the Sixth, till
Clement the Seventh was made Pope, who being desirous to leave as much Fame
behind him as any of his Predecessors, sent for Michael Angelo to Rome, and
there contracted with him for finishing the Library of San Lorenzo at Florence,
together with the Sacristy of that Convent; it being the proper Foundation of
the Family of Medicis, and their Burying-place. Philippo Brundleschi had
already made the old Sacristy; therefore Michael Angelo made his of a new
Composite Order, full of Novelty and Variety, such as neither Ancient nor
Modern Architects never saw the like; for till then, they had gone on in a
slavish Manner of observing exactly Set Rules, which Michael Angelo broke
through; for which the Artists are beholding to him, he having, as it were,
broke their Chains though: Some have abused that Liberty, and too much followed
their own Capricio.

He made likewise in the same place, four Sepultures for four of the Family of
Medicis; two of which were the first Dukes, to wit, Giuliano and Lorenzo; about
their Sepulture he made four Statues, representing the Night, the Day, Aurora
and Crepusculum; which are such in their Aptitudes, and the Artifice of their
Centers, that if the Art of Sculpture were lost, it might be restored by the
sight of them; the Aurora particularly is the softest thing in the World.

The terrible Accident of the taking of Rome by Bourbon's Army, having come to
pass in Pope Clement's Time, the Florentines took that Occasion to Revolt from
the Medici's again, and drive them out of the City; whereupon a War ensuing,
the Government obliged Michael Angelo to Fortify a place called Mount Saint
Miniato, which Commanded the whole Town; but the Armies of the Pope and
Emperor having at last close Beleagured it, and no hopes of Succors
appearing, Michael Angelo began to consider of his Danger, and without any
further delay, stole out incognito by the way of that Mount San Miniato,
accompanied with Antonio Mini his Scholar, and Il Piloto a Goldsmiths, an
Intimate Friend of his, and what ready Money he had, and so got to Ferrara in
order to go to Venice. Being there, he made for the Doge Andrea Griti, the
Design of the great Bridge called, The Rialto, which passes over the great
Canal.

He had not stayed long at Venice, but he received most importunate and kind
Letters from his Friends at Florence, lamenting his absence, and begging of
him, if he had any Tenderness for his dear Country, to return, and help to
defend it. Which Letters so touched him, that with great danger of his Life, he
returned to Florence, and there by the help of his Art in defending the Place,
made it hold out some Months longer: But the Town being Surrendered, he was in
greater danger than before; for by the Pope's Order, he was sought for among
the Enemies of the House of Medicis. But having been concealed by a very good
Friend of his for several days, the Pope's Anger being over, he commanded that
no hurt should be done to him; but on the contrary, took him into his Service,
and gave him the usual Salary and Appointments he had before.

About this time the Pope having resolved to paint the sides of the Chapel of
Sixtus; of which Michael Angelo had already painted the Vault, he sent for him
to Rome, and ordered him to paint the Representation of the Last Day of
Judgment, that he might show in so great a Subject, all that it was possible
for him to do in the Excellency of Design. In Obedience to the Pope's Commands,
he began the Cartoon of the Judgment, but was much interrupted by the Agents of
the Duke of Vrbin, who charged him with sixteen thousand Crowns received for
the finishing of the Monument of Julius the Second, whose Nephew the Duke of
Vrbin was; and this business was a mighty trouble to Michael Angelo; for the
Duke, who was a high Spirited Prince, threatened no less than Death, if he
failed to perform his Contract. At last, by the Pope's Mediation the thing was
made up, and a new Agreement Signed; by which it was required of Michael
Angelo, to make only one of the four Sides which at first were to have Composed
this Monument, and that in it he should place six Statues of his own hand;
giving him leave withal, to work four Months in the Year for the Pope, either
at Florence or Rome, according as he should please to employ him.

About this time died Pope Clement, and Paul the Third, of the Family of the
Farneses, was chosen to Succeed him; and then it was that Michael Angelo
conceived hopes of being more Master of his Time, and resolved to finish the
Statues of the Monument of Julius the Second. But the Pope had no sooner taken
possession of his new Dignity, but he Courted Michael Angelo both with good
Words and Presents, to be his Servant, as he had been under the former
Pontificates. It was with great Reluctance that Michael Angelo yielded to these
Solicitations, and not till he had angered the Pope, by telling him, that he
was by Contract obliged to the Duke of Vrbin, and could not attend any other
Work till he had finished that; the Pope told him again, that for the Contract,
he would break it by his Authority; adding, that he had had above thirty years
a longing to have Michael Angelo in his Service, and that now that he was Pope,
he was resolved not to loose it; and accordingly, he prevailed with the Duke,
to submit to a new Agreement with Michael Angelo; by which he was obliged to
finish only three Statues with his own Hand, which were those of Rachel, Lea,
and Moses, and the others were to be made upon his Models by the best Sculptors
of the Age. This Agreement was performed on all sides; and Michael Angelo
engaged himself voluntarily to pay for the three Statues, consigning to that
purpose 1580. Crowns to the Bank of the Strozzi in Florence: and thus ended
that troublesome Affair. The Monument is to be seen in San Pietro in Vincola.

After this, he applied himself to the painting of the Chapel, according to
the Cartoons made in Pope Clement's Time. It will not be necessary to describe
here the Invention or Composition of this Story, because there are so many
Cutts, both great and small, of it in the World; but it will suffice to say,
that he chose that Subject as the hardest to succeed in, since it consists most
in showing the true proportions of the hardest of Subjects; which is, the
Humane Body Naked, and that in the most difficult Aptitudes, with the strongest
affections and passions in the World, full of the greatest variety imaginable.
In all which he has showed himself to be the greatest Master in the World, and
the true Inventer of that Great Manner; he has indeed, not so much minded the
beauty of the Colors, and other little Ornaments, but has kept to the
profoundness of the Art: to which none since have ever been able to arrive.

It Is said, that when he had almost finished this Work, that Pope, Paul the
Third, came one day to see it, and in his Company was, Messer Biagio di Cesena,
his Master of Ceremonies, whose Opinion the Pope having asked about the thing,
he being a Bigot, answered, that it was a most shameful thing, that in so
Sacred a place as a Chapel, there should be exposed to view such a number of
Naked Figures, some of them in most undecent postures; showing in both Sexes
those parts that ought to be concealed; and in a word, that it was a Work
fitter for a Bawdy House than for a Pope's Chapel. This displeased Michael
Angelo most extremely; and being resolved to be revenged as soon as ever the
Pope was gone, he fell to work, and drew this Messer Biagio by Memory, placing
him in Hell Naked, with a great Serpent fastened to his Natural Parts, and
environed with a Troop of Devils: The Picture was so like, that the Master of
the Ceremonies complained to the Pope; and finding there but small Redress,
applied himself to Michael Angelo, entreating him to reform that part of his
Piece: but all would not do, for he there remains to this day. This Piece being
finished, was the Admiration of all Rome, and is to this day the great
Masterpiece of the Art of Painting.

Pope Paul the Third having built a Chapel which was called by his Name, La
Paulina, ordered Michael Angelo to do the painting there: He painted two
Stories, one of the Conversion of Saint Paul; and another, of the Crucifixion
of Saint Peter: In both which his chief Intention was, to show the perfection
of the Art, there being neither Landscape, Trees, nor Houses, nor any other of
those Additional Ornaments, which he seemed to contemn, leaving them for meaner
Genius's than his own.

These two Works were the last he performed in Painting, being now seventy five
years old, and complaining extremely of the Fatigue he had endured in doing
them; owning withal, that Painting, and particularly, in Fresco, was not an Art
for Old Men.

About this time Antonio di San Gallo, who was the Architect for the Church of
Saint Peter's, being dead, those that had the Care of that Fabric, resolved to
put it into the Hands of Michael Angelo; who having considered San Gallo's
Model, said, that there might be made one of greater Majesty, Order, and
Convenience, and yet the Execution of it should cost three hundred thousand
Crowns less, and be done fifty years sooner; and accordingly, in a Fortnight,
he caused a New Model to be made, which cost but twenty five Crowns; whereas
San Gallo's had cost four thousand; whereby it appeared, that what he said, was
very true.

But it was not without great Opposition and Contradiction that he went through
with his Design; for having discharged all the Workmen concerned in San Gallo's
Time, they were continually finding fault with all that he did: Insomuch, that
at last he obtained an Order called a Motu Proprio from the Pope; by which he
was constituted absolute Master of that Fabric, with power to do and undo as
he thought fit, and commanded all Inferior Workmen and Officers to obey him in
every thing; and he, not to be behind hand with the Pope, had it inserted in
the Order, that he Served the Fabric for God's Sake, and without any Temporal
Advantage or Profit to himself, often refusing Money that the Pope sent him
upon that Account.

His chief aim in carrying on that Noble Pile, was to secure it from the
Designs of future Architects, that his own might not by envy or Presumption be
destroyed; therefore he was more careful to carry on the Foundations to a
certain height and length, such as could not well afterward, without vast
Charge and Danger to the whole Fabrike, be altered, than to finish exactly what
he might have done in his Time, if he could have been content to leave the rest
to the Management of those who were to come after him: Which has been a great
Happiness for that Fabric; which else would hardly ever have been finished,
the one still pulling down what the others had Erected; therefore he Dedicated,
as it were, the rest of his Life to this Work, doing nothing in Painting, and
but very little in Sculpture for ever after.

The Architect San Gallo had begun, and far advanced the Work of a Palace for
the Family of the Farneses; after his Death Michael Angelo took care of it, and
made that Noble Corniche without, so beautiful and various, that nothing,
either Ancient or Modern can outdo it: the rest of the Palace he enlarged and
beautified both within and without, to that degree, that it now passes for the
most Accomplished piece of Architecture that is in that kind.

Pope Paul the Third being dead, he was Succeeded by Julius the Third, who
continued Michael Angelo in the Business of Saint Peter's: but his Enemies
thinking that now, in a New Pontificate they might better Injure him, had
possessed the whole Congregation of Deputies concerned to Manage that Fabric,
that the Church would be so dark, that it would be useless: among these, the
Chief were the Cardinal Salviati, and Marcello Cervino, who was afterward
Pope, though but a few days; the Pope himself being something possessed against
him, was present at a great Meeting, in which he was ordered to appear; and
there his Holiness told him, that the Opinion of the Deputies was, that the
Church was likely to be very Dark, and without sufficient Light. Michael Angelo
said, he should be glad to hear the Deputies themselves upon that Subject; upon
which Cardinal Marcello spoke, and said, we are the Deputies, and are all of
Opinion, that by what appears of the Fabric, the Church must be obscure: My
Lord, said Michael Angelo, there are three Windows more contrived in the Vault
of the Church, which will make it light enough: You never told us that before,
replied the Cardinal: I confess I did not, said Michael Angelo, neither do I
intend, for the future, to acquaint your Lordship, or any of the Deputies with
any designs; it is enough, that I am trusted with the Fabric, as your Lordships
are with the Management of the Money; which is your Business to provide, and
mine to employ: then turning to the Pope, he said, Holy Father, you see what I
get by all my Care: if the pains I take do not help me in the other World, I do
but loose my Time in this. The Pope was well pleased to see that he had baffled
all his Adversaries, laid his hand upon his Shoulder, and said, make no doubt
but that you work for your SOUL and BODY too, and pray go on.

The next day he sent for him and Giorgio Vasari, who was his Scholar, and
then in that Pope's Service, to his Retirement, called, the Vigna Julia; where
he found the Pope sitting in the midst of twelve Cardinals, and was by him,
though much against his Will, forced to sit down amongst them, and talk with
them about his Vigna; the Care of which he also undertook, and brought it to
that Perfection it now has.

After this, being very old, and not able to stir much abroad, he did little
but continue the Fabric of San Peter's, of which he took care almost to his
dying day, for seventeen years together; having been employed by seven Popes,
and Courted by all the Great Princes of Christendom, for his Judgment and rare
Skill in those three Noble Arts of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture.

On the 17th. of February, in the Year 1563, having been for some time before
without stirring abroad, he paid the Tribute to Nature, being very sensible to
the last. His Will contained but three Lines, leaving his Soul to God, his Body
to the Earth, and all that he had to his nearest Relations. He was ninety years
of Age when he dyed, and preserved his Judgment and Memory to the last.

Few have Censured his Works with any success; but some more malicious, have
endeavored to blemish his Memory by the Imputation of Ill Nature, and
Covetuousness. Of both which it is easy to clear him. For the first, it must
be owned, he gave some Grounds for it by his Morosness to other Artists, his
Contemporaries, and to such whom he found impertinently pretending to Judge of
his Works: But I think, that might be very excusable in one of such
extraordinary Abilities, that he saw nothing that could contend with him,
reasonably in any of the things he excelled in: And yet there are Infinite
Designs of his which he freely gave away, and made for several Artists, at the
very first Request they made to him.

And as for his Covetuousness, the very things he gave away in his Life time,
of his Working, might have been sold for thousands of Crowns; which,
considering what pains he took to acquire what he had, may be sufficient to
clear him of that Imputation: But he was, besides, very Charitable, relieving
many poor people, and Marrying privately some poor Maids. But here we must not
omit his Generosity to Vrbino his Scholar and Servant; to whom one day he
said, If I die, Vrbino, what will become of thee? And Vrbino answered him, That
he would Serve some other Master. Alas! poor Wretch, said Michael Angelo, that
shall not be as long as I can help thee out, and immediately gave him two
thousand Crowns. Which was a Liberality more becoming a Great Prince than a
private Man, who got his Estate by the Sweat of his Brows.

He was pleasant enough in Conversation where he was free: and there are some
of his Sayings that deserve to be remembered. One day at Florence, some body
having asked his Opinion of the Statue of Saint Mary, made by Donatello; he
said, That if Saint Mary were like that Figure, he would easily have believed
all he said, for he never saw any Figure that had a more honest Look. Being
asked also, what he thought of the Brass Gates in Sculpture, made by Lorenzo
Ghiberti, at Saint Jean's Church; he said, They deserved to be the Gates of
Heaven. Going one day by Modena, and seeing some Statues of Earth Colored like
Marble, made by Antonio Bigarino, a Modenese Sculptor, he was charmed with the
Beauty of them, and said, If this Earth should become Marble, woe be to all the
Ancient Statues of Rome and Graece.

He was carried to Florence after his Death, and there Buried in San Piero
Maggiore, with a great Concourse of People; though without any precedent
Preparation, being Interred the very next day after the Body came to Town; but
all the Artists of the City waited upon him to his Grave: Some Months after he
had most Magnificent Obsequies performed for him in the Church of San Lorenzo.

He had for Scholars Jacobo Sansovino, Il Rosso, Il Puntormo, Daniel di
Volterra, and Giorgio Vasari, of Arezzo. He had no luck with those who lived
with him as Domestics; for Piero Vrbano of Pistoia, would never take any
pains, though he had a good Disposition toward the Art: And Antonio Mini took
pains, but had no Genius.

The LIFE of Giulio Romano; A PAINTER.
AMong all Raphael's Disciples, most of which proved great Artists, there was
none of them imitated him so perfectly both in Design, Invention, and
Coloring, as Giulio Romano; being universal and profoundly Learned in the Art,
and having acquired besides, a mighty Knowledge of Antiquity; his Genius
moreover was so conformable to Raphael's Humor, being always merry and
pleasant, without Offense, that Raphael loved him as if he had been his own
Son, and employed him above all his other Scholars in his Works of greatest
Importance; as, in the Pope's Appartments; the paintings of which are many of
them painted by Giulio after Raphael's Design; and particularly, the Stories of
the Creation of Adam; that of the Building the Ark; the Story of Pharaoh's
Daughter finding Moses by the Riverside; in which there is a most admirable
Landscape of Giulio's own Invention: he finished likewise good part of the
Stories that are painted in the Palace of Agostin Chigi; as likewise he drew
all but the Head of a Picture of the Vice-Queen of Naples, which Raphael sent
to Francis the First, and is yet kept at Fontainebleau. Raphael being an
admirable Architect, as well as Painter, Giulio took such delight in drawing
many of his Plots for Palaces and Churches, and other Buildings, that he at
last became a great Master that way: and Raphael being dead, and having made
Giulio Romano his Heir, together with Giovan Francesco, called, Il Fattor, upon
Condition, that they two should finish the Works that he left unfinished; they
very honorably performed his Will, and perfected the best part of them.

After this Cardinal Giulian Medicis, who was afterward Pope Clement the
Seventh, having pitched upon a Spot of Ground in Rome, under the Monte Mario;
where, besides a dilicate Prospect, there were Fountains and Wood, and a Plain,
which reaching all along the Tyber as far as Ponte Molle, had on both sides an
extent of Meadows almost as far as the Gate of Saint Peter; he resolved to
build a Palace on the top of this Ground, and to adorn it with most exquisite
Gardens, Woods, Fountains, Statues, etc. And gave Giulio Romano the Direction
of the whole Work; which he did with great Care, and built that Palace which
is now called La Vigna de Medici; the Front of it is Amphitheater-wise, with a
division of Nicks and Windows of the Jonick Order; so well understood, that
many believe it to have been first Designed by Raphael. The Inside is painted
by Giulio in many places.

Adrian Succeeded Leo the Tenth, who valuing neither Pictures, Statues, nor
Architecture, all the Artists of Rome were at their wits-end how to dispose of
themselves; but his Pontificate proved but short; and in his room, the same
Cardinal Giulian of Medicis was chosen, and took the Name of Clement the
Seventh: Giulio Romano, and all the Artists of Rome were overjoyed at his
Exaltation; which they took to be the Exaltation of all the fine Arts: and
accordingly, by this Pope's Order, they fell to work with Joy, to finish the
Hall of Constantine: in one of the sides Giulio drew Constantine, making a
Speech to his Soldiers; and in the Air there appears the Sign of the Cross,
with these words, In hoc Signo vinces. In the greatest side of the Room is a
Battle fought near Ponte Molle, where Constantine Routed Maxentius. Which Work,
by reason of the Dying and Wounded, and of the various and strange Aptitudes of
the Horse and Foot, who fight all in a Troop, is wonderful for Design, but the
Coloring is somewhat Faded, by reason of the Black; which Giulio used much in
his way of painting, and which has taken away the Beauty of many of his Pieces.
In the same Piece he chose for Landscape all that Country that is under Monte
Mario; and drew Maxentius drowning in the Tyber upon a dilicate Horse. In a
word, this Battle has been as it were the Model for most Works of that kind,
and have been done since; and in it Giulio showed how well he had studied
Trajan and Antonius's Pillars in Rome; for out of them he took the Habits,
Arms, Ensigns, and other things of War proper to the Romans.

The other side of the Room was adorned with the Story of Saint Sylvester's
Baptizing Constantine; and under the Figure of Pope Sylvester, he drew Clement
the Seventh; as also, among the Assistants he drew Il Cavalierino, who was then
his Favorite; and also Nicolo Vespucci, Knight of Rhodes.

Over the Chimney he drew the Church of Saint Peter in prospective, and the
Pope singing high Mass Pontifically; that is, with the Assistants of all the
Cardinals and Prelates of the Court. At the Pope's Feet is figured Constantine
upon his Knees, presenting of the City of Rome: Showing thereby, that
Constantine gave that City to the Church of Rome. In this piece there are
several Women upon their Knees, that look upon the Ceremony: which are
admirable Figures; he drew also in this piece his own picture, and Count
Baltasar Castiglione's, the Author of Il perfecto Cortigiano, who was an
Intimate Friend of Giulio's: And it happening at that time, that the said Count
was Ambassador from Frederick, Marquess of Mantoua; he received Orders from
the Marquess his Master to provide him the best Architect he could for his New
Palace; and particularly, recommended to him to get Giulio Romano, if
possible; the Count so plied Giulio with promises and entreaties, that at last
he consented to go, if he might have the Pope's leave; which being obtained,
they set out together, and Giulio was presented to the Marquess by the Count
himself; he was received with all demonstrations of Favor, and had immediately
a House provided for him, and a Table for himself, and Benedetto Pagni his
Scholar, as also for a Servant; the Marquess besides sent him several Else of
Velvet, Damask, and fine Cloth, to make himself Clothes to his mind.

A little after, hearing that Giulio had no Horses, he presented him with a
Favorite Horse of his, and bid him get up upon him, took him out of Town with
him to a certain place called Il Te, where he had some Lodgings and Stables in
the middle of a fine Meddow, where he bred his best Horses; there he showed him
the place, and told him that he would willingly have an Addition made to the
Building without spoiling the old Walls, intending it only for a place of
Recreation, to go now and then and Supp in. Giulio having heard the Marquess's
Design, fell immediately to work; and making use of the old Walls, he made the
great Hall which we see now at the Entrance, and the Chambers on each side of
it; all which he adorned with Pillars and Capitals of a Rustic Order: which so
pleased the Marquess, that he resolved to make it entirely of one Model; which
Giulio did in this Form. The Palace is square, and has within it a great green
Court, in which are four Entries cross-wise: the Appartments within are all
variously painted; the Ceiling of the great Hall is done in Fresco, with
several Stories; and on the Walls are drawn all the Marquesses best Horses, and
his Dogs of the same color, and the marks as the Horses; all which were
Designed after the Life by Giulio, but Colored by Benedetto Pagni his
Scholar, and Rinaldo Mantonano a painter; and indeed they are so well done,
that they seem alive. From this you come into a Room on one side of the
Palace, the Ceiling of which is divided into Compartments of Stucco-work,
gilded in some places, which make a square place; in which Giulio has drawn
Cupid espousing Psyche in the presence of Jupiter and all the other Gods; and
in this piece he has showed his utmost Skill, the Shortnings being all di Sorto
intu, or from below, so exquisite, that a Figure that is not a foot long, seems
to be above three in looking upon it from the ground. In the Octangles which
inviron the Ceiling, are drawn Stories of Psyche's Adversity while she was
persecuted by Venus: the Coloring is all of the same Hands, and in Oil.

Below on the sides of the Room, the remaining Stories of Psyche are in Fresco:
and are, Psyche in a Bath Bathed, and tended by little Cupids, who with most
proper Gestures wash her and wipe her dry. On the other Wall is a Banquet
prepared by Mercury, where the Graces adorn the Table with Flowers, while
Bacchus Silenus and the Bacchantes are by, singing and playing upon
Instruments; there is a Side-Board covered with Vines and Flowers in Festoons,
and on it three rows of drinking-Vessels of all sorts, so bright and shining
that they seem perfect Gold and Silver; not far from this Table is seen Psyche
her self waited upon by Women of great Beauty; while at a distance, Phoebus in
his Charr drawn by four Horses, comes to enlighten the Day; and Zephyrus naked
upon certain Clouds, blows in a Horn to make the Air sweet and pleasant round
about Psyche.

In another Corner of the Palace which answers to the Room where the Stories
of Psyche are painted, Giulio resolved to build an Apartment that should
correspond with the paintings he designed for it; and to that purpose, having
laid a very strong Foundation, because the place was Marshy, and made Walls
capable of bearing a double Vault; he made the Inside of gross Rustic Work,
the Stones whereof seemed to be put together by chance, and ready to fall out
of their places; and then he painted it with one of the oddest Fancies that it
was possible to imagine; and that is, the Story of Jupiter destroying the
Giants with Thunder and Lightning: In the middle of the Vault he drew Heaven,
and in it Jupiter in his Throne above the Clouds.

A little below he drew Jupiter again, thundering of the Giants, assisted by
Juno; the other Gods in various Aptitudes, most of them astonished, seem to fly
away, to avoid the Ruin and Disorder which is threatened from above; on the
sides of the Room are the Giants, some of which have whole Mountains and Rocks
whelmed over them, others seem to fly at a distance through a Grotto that is
made hollow, and others are struck down with the Ruins of Temples and Pillars
that fall upon them, making a great Slaughter of them; and upon the Chimney,
which is near these Walls that seem to hang as if they would fall, he drew
Pluto, with his Char drawn by fiery Horses, accompanied by Infernal Furies, and
seeming to fly to the Center of the Earth. By which Invention Giulio did not
depart from his Subject, and yet alluded to Fire; which was the properest
Ornament for the Chimney. It Is impossible to see a Story, either more boldly
Designed, or more capriciously Invented, the whole Composition hanging all
together without either Beginning or End; and being adorned with variety of odd
Landskips to such an Advantage, that the Room, which is not fifteen yards in
length, seems to be a vast Compass. All which shows the admirable Judgment of
Giulio; the Coloring is all of Rinaldo Montouano, and admirable; for in this
Piece he attained to a great perfection; insomuch, that had he lived, and not
dyed Young, he would have proved a most exquisite Painter.

While Giulio was thus employing his Talent for the Marquess's Service, the
River Po one year broke its Banks, and overflowed a good part of the City;
whereupon Giulio by the Command of the Marquess, caused all that low part of
the Town to be pulled down, and upon those Ruins be raised New Buildings,
whose Foundations were higher than the Water: But in so doing, he could not
but disoblige some Owners of Houses; who threatened Revenge: which coming to the
Prince's Ear, he declared, that whatsoever should be done to Giulio, he would
take as done to himself, and punish it accordingly. And indeed the Duke was so
in Love with the Virtues of Giulio, that he could hardly live without him;
which made him likewise love the place so well, that he built himself a House,
which he adorned with Stucco Work, and Antiquities he had brought from Rome:
And before he died, he had almost built the whole City a new, having enlarged
the Streets, and given the Design of most of the best Houses and Palaces, as
also of the Churches and other public Aedifices.

In the Duke's Palace within the City he made two noble Stair-Cases, a Lumaca;
and built new Appartments; in which he painted all the History of the Wars of
Troy: and in another Room, under the hands of the Twelve Roman Emperors,
painted by Titian, he made twelve Stories in Oil; he built likewise another
Palace for the Duke about five Miles from Mantua, called Marmirolo; which was
most commodiously contrived, and adorned with Paintings, not inferior to those
of the Palaces above mentioned.

Several of his best things have been published in prints by Giovan Baptista
Mantouano: the chief of which are these; A Surgeon putting Cupping-Glasses
upon a Woman's Shoulders: a Madonna Travailing to Egypt, where Joseph has the
Ass by the Halter, and some Angels pull down the Bows of a Date-Tree, that
Christ may gather the Fruit: a She-Wolf giving Suck to Romulus and Remus: Four
Stories of Pluto, Jupiter, and Neptune, dividing Heaven, Earth, and the Sea; a
great Design of a Prison; in which a number of Prisoners are put to the Rack in
several manners: The Meeting that Scipio and Hannibal had in the presence of
both their Armies upon the Banks of a River; and the Nativity of Saint John
Graved by Sebastiano da Reggio. Several other of his Designs have been Graved
in France and Flanders by good hands.

Giulio was so great a Designer, and did it with so much Ease, that none ever
Designed so much; he having made Horse-loads of Designs of one sort or other;
for being a most Universal Painter, and an Admirable Architect, no sort of
Design, came amiss to him; but he was particularly Learned in Antiquity,
understanding Medals most perfectly, and having a rare Collection of them.

After the Death of the Marquess Frederick, who had been made Duke by the
Emperor Charles the Fifth: Giulio was so concerned for the loss of so good a
Master, that he would have left Mantoua, if the Cardinal, Brother to the late
Duke, and who by reason of the young Age of his Nephews, had the Government of
that State, had not used all sorts of courteous ways to persuade him to stay;
and considering besides, that he was Married there, and had Houses, and all
sorts of Conveniences both in the Town and Country, fit for a Gentleman to
live in, resolved to yield to the Cardinals entreaties, and was by him employed
in the Re-building the Duomo of the Great Church, which he carried on a great
way.

Not long after Michael Angelo published his Judgment at Rome; and Vasari sent
to Giulio three Designs of the seven Mortal Sins, taken out of that Story of
the Judgment: which he receiving, it revived in him a desire of doing something
that should be as strong as that way of Michael Angelo; and for that reason he
chose the Story of our Savior's calling Peter and Andrew, and bidding them
leave their Nets, and turn Fishers of Men: Which Cartoon he finished with so
much diligence and force, that it was absolutely the best of all the things he
ever did; it was placed in a Chapel in the Palace, and painted by the Hand of
Ferino Guisoni, an excellent Painter, and one of Giulio's best Scholars.

About this time Antonio Sangallo, the chief Architect of Saint Peter's Church
in Rome, being dead, and the Super-Intendants of that Work being much puzzled
to find out a Man fit to carry it on according to the Order already begun; at
last they pitched upon Giulio Romano, and sent some of his Friends to him to
tempt him with great Offers; but all in vain: for though he of himself could
willingly have accepted such an Opportunity of returning so gloriously to his
own Country, yet two things hindered him; first, the Respect of the Cardinal of
Mantoua, who was no ways willing to let him go: and then the Consideration of
his Wife and Family, who were much against it: and yet it is thought he would
have struggled with these two Impediments, if at the same time he had not
fallen sick; of which Distemper, what with the Anxiety of seeing his desire of
returning to Rome frustrated, and the Strength of his Disease together, he dyed
in few days, being just fifty four years old, and leaving a Son and a Daughter,
and a good Estate to his Son, whom in honor of his Master he had named,
Raphael. He was Buried in the Church of Saint Barnabe, without any Monument at
present, but a Resolution to have one made for him; but his Son dying not long
after, and his Wife not being careful of the thing, it was never begun. His
Only Daughter and Heir Virginia, was Married in Mantoua to Signior Hercole
Malatesta.

Giulio was of a middle Stature, black Hair, an open jovial Countenance, with
black Eyes, Amorous in his Complexion, very well bred, Sober in his Diet, but
Sumptuous in his Clothes and way of Living. This Epitaph is upon his Tombstone.

Romanus moriens, secum tres Julius Arts,
Abstulit (haud mirum) quatuor unus erat.
The LIFE of PERINO DEL VAGA, A Florentine Painter.
THere was in the City of Florence, one Giovanni Buonacorsi, who in the Wars of
Charles the Eighth, King of France, engaged in his Service in Italy, and not
only spent his Fortune, but his Life in his Engagement with that Court. He had
had by a first Wife a Son; whose Mother dying of the Plague when the Child was
not above two Months Old, it was brought up for a while by a She-Goat; till the
Father going to Bologna, there Married a second Wife, who had lost her Husband
and Children by the Plague too; this Mother-in-Law took compassion of this
little Creature, and having Milk of her own, made an end of bringing it up. It
was called Piero, and by Diminutive, Pierino; and was by the Father, who went
into France to solicit some Reward for his Services, left in the Hands of
some Relations of his; who being weary of keeping it, did, after some years,
put it to serve an Apothecary; but the Child not liking that Trade, he was
taken for Apprentice by a certain ordinary Painter called Andrea de Ceri, from
his way of painting the Wax-Candles and Torches that used to be carried in
Procession upon certain days: But at last knowing that he was not able to
instruct the Child, who seemed Ingenious in any good Method of Painting, he put
him to Ridolfe, the Son of Domenico Ghirlandaio, one of the best Painters in
Italy; and there he so improved himself, that he outstripped all the Young Men,
his Fellow-Apprentices.

About that time there came to Florence a Countrey-Painter called Il Vaga, and
having seen the Manner of Perino, who was already well founded in Design, which
he himself wanted, he began to tempt him to go along with him into the
Country; promising him, that after a little working there, he would carry him
to Rome: at the mentioning of Rome, the Young Man opened his Ears, knowing that
place to be the true School of all Artists; and therefore told Il Vaga, that if
his two Masters would give him leave, he would go along with him; they both
consented, and Il Vaga with his new Companion went together to Tuscanella,
where Il Vaga had a great deal of Work to do; which he not only finished to the
content of those that employed him, but was still going on upon new work, till
Perino began to complain of Breach of Promise from him, for his not earrying
him to Rome: Il Vaga, though loath to leave his Business, which by the means of
Perino, grew considerable; yet considering that Perino might go without him,
resolved to be as good as his word; and accordingly, they both arrived at Rome,
where Il Vaga very honestly recommended him to all the Friends he had, and so
returned to Tuscanella.

Perino, who from this time forward, was called no otherwise than Perino del
Vaga, found himself nevertheless at no small loss how to prosecute his Studies;
for seeing every day the Works of the Ancients in Sculpture, and of those
famous Moderns, Raphael and Michael Angelo in Painting, he was inflamed with an
incredible desire of imitating them: but withal, considering his own Poverty
and mean condition, and how that to get Bread, he must work for the Shops of
ordinary Painters, sometimes for one, and sometimes for another, according as
they would employ him; he saw that would be a great hinderance to his desires
of growing. Eminent in his Art: but at last he found out the Expedient of
dividing his Week, and working three days for Bread, and three others for
Improvement, adding to these last the Holy Days and Sundays; all which he spent
in Designing all Remarkable things of both Ancient and Modern Artists: His
chief Study amongst the Modern, was the Chapel of Pope Sixtus, done by Michael
Angelo; and in a short time he grew the boldest Designer of all Rome,
understanding the Muscles and the difficulty of the Art in Naked Figures,
better than any of his Contemporaries. This made him be taken notice of by
Giulio Romano and Giovan Francesco, called Il Fattore, and both together
commended him to Raphael their Master, who having seen his Designing,
pronounced that he would one day be excellent in the Art: and as Raphael never
let slip the Occasion of retaining and helping forward any ingenious young
Artist; particularly when his humor and behavior was gentle and modest, as
Perino del Vaga's was, he presently employed him in the Appartments of the
Pope's Palace, which he was then adorning for Leo the Tenth: He had
constituted Master of the Stucco-Work and Grottesks one Giovanni da Vdine, the
rarest in that kind of any that has been either before or since, particular in
Animals, Fruits, and such like small Ornaments; and under him he employed
several Young Men, and according as they excelled and grew able, they were
advanced to greater Salaries; which proved a mighty School for Artists of all
kinds: Among these he placed Perino del Vaga, recommending him to Giovanni da
Vdine.

Perino seeing himself Master of that Opportunity he had so long sought, fell
to work with such diligence, that in a few Months he was reputed clearly the
best of all those Young Men who worked under Giovanni da Vdine, and may easily
this day be distinguished from the others at first Sight; for though the
Designs were all Raphael's, yet the manner of putting them in execution was
very different, according to the Genius and Skill of each Artist; and besides
Perino has a Beauty of Coloring which distinguishes him from all the rest.

What he did in the Pope's Palace, gave him great Reputation; but that was so
far from laying him asleep, and making him presumptiously rely upon the Skill
he had acquired, that on the contrary, he grew thereby more ardent and desirous
to attain to the great perfection he saw before his Eyes in his Master Raphael;
to whom he carried himself so submissively and respectfully, that Raphael, won
by his Behavior, loved him as if he had been his own Child.

The Great Hall called La Sala de Pontifici being ordered to be painted and
adorned with Stucco-Work, the doing of the Vault and Celing was committed
equally to Giovanni da Vdine, and Perino del Vaga; they divided the Ceiling
into seven Ovals, in which they painted the Seven Planets, drawn each of them
by the Animal that is appropriated to them by the Poets; as, Jupiter by his
Eagle, Venus by her Doves, etc. To which they added the Signs of the Zodiac,
with several others of the Heavenly Constellations; the most of which Figures
are of the hand of Perino. In the middle of the Vault or Ceiling is a Round, in
which are four Figures like four Victories, which hold the Pope's Crown and
Keys; which Figures being shortened most Masterly, are besides adorned with a
most beautiful, light Drapery, which discovers most gracefully so much of their
Naked Arms and Legs as is decent. This work was extremely liked by the Pope,
and the Contrivers of it rewarded according to the Magnificent Humor of that
Prince: But his Successor Adrian the Sixth being shortly after come to Rome,
all the Artists found themselves not only neglected and laid aside, but
despised and scorned; for he being a Flemming, and a Man of Severity, and
pedantick Learning, thought those more Refined Arts little better than Mortal
Sins: whereupon Raphael being dead, and all the other Artists dispersed, Perino
went to Florence, where he did several things, till the Plague drove him from
thence, and forced him to wander from place to place, and shift as well as he
could. But in the Year 1523, Clement the Seventh, of the House of Medicis,
being Created Pope, he recalled all the Artists that were left to Rome; and
amongst the first, Perino del Vaga; whose Reputation was so great, that the
Pope having cast his Eye on Giulio Romano and Giovan Francesco Il Fattore, as
Heirs of Raphael's Designs and Skill, to make them the chief Directors of all
that he should think fit to have done; they wisely foreseeing that Perino would
prove a shroad Competitor in their Art and Business, resolved to take him in;
and to that end they gave him Catherine, the Sister of Giovan Francesco for
Wife; tying him by this Bond of Affinity, to pursue the common Interest the
better. But they had not long worked together, when that great Calamity of the
Sack of Rome confounded all their Designs afresh. In that Misfortune Perino
was fain to run up and down with his Wife and a Child, carrying them from place
to place to save them from the Fury and Insolence of the Soldiers; and at
last, he himself was taken Prisoner, and forced to pay a Ransom, with such ill
usage into the bargain, that he had like to have run mad; at last the fury of
the Sack being a little over, he fell to working some odd little things; which
he sold as well as he could to the Spanish Commanders and Soldiers, living but
poorly: but it happening luckily, that Il Baviera, who had the managing of the
Prints of Raphael, escaped pretty well, and lost but little in the Storm; he
out of his Friendship to Perino, set him to work, to Design a good part of the
Stories, where the Gods transform themselves into other shapes to obtain the
end of their Amors: and these were Graved in Copper by Jacobo Caralgio, an
excellent Graver of that time, and one who has admirably followed the beauty of
the Contours of Perino's Figures.

But all this did but just keep Perino from starving, with little hopes of
better Times, the Pope and most of the Inhabitants of Rome being fled; when
Providence sent thither Nicolo Venitiano, a Servant of Prince Dorias, and a
rare Workman in Tapestry-work, who being an old Acquaintance of Perino's, and
seeing him in that misery, persuaded him to go with him to Genoa, promising him
to endeavor to bring him into Employment for his Master; who, he said, had a
design to have his whole Palace altered, and painted by some good hand. It was
not difficult for him to prevail with Perino, who having placed his Wife with
her Relations in Rome, set forward for Genoa with his Friend Nicolo. At his
Arrival he was most kindly entertained by the Prince, who thought himself
beholding to Fortune for driving such an Artist into his Arms. After some
Discourses had together about the Prince's Design, they resolved to make a New
Palace, which should be adorned with Stucco-Work paintings in Fresco, and
Oyl-paintings of all kinds; and because it was the Masterpiece of Perino del
Vaga, I will here describe the whole thing.

The Entrance into the Prince's Palace is a Marble Gate of the Dorick Order,
having on each side the Figures of two Women in Marble, who hold up the Arms of
the Dorias; the Figures are done by Sylvio of Fiesole, a bold and excellent
Sculptor; but the Gate and Palace are according to the Design and Models of
Perino del Vaga. Having passed the Entrance, you come into a kind of Hall, or
Landing-place, the Vault or Ceiling of which is adorned with Stucco-work,
mingled with paintings that represent several Men fighting in different
postures; all wrought with great Art and diligence. On the Left Hand is the
Staircase; than the which, nothing can be more Beautiful, for Grottesks,
Antiques, little Figures of Boys, Animals, and other things; all made with that
Richness of Invention and Judgment that his things used to be. On the top of
the Staircase you land in a dilicate Room, which has on each side a Marble
Door, and over the Door on each hand, two Figures of a Man and Woman turned
differently, to show the Fore and hind parts; the Vault divided into five
Arches, is wrought with Stucco-Work, mingled with Ovals of paintings; the sides
of the Room are painted down to the very ground with the pictures of the famous
Men of the House of Doria, some after the Antique, some after the Modern Dress,
all Armed, and over them is written in Letters of Gold these words; Magni Viri,
Maximi Duces, Optima fecere pro Patria.

In the first Room, which answers to one of the Marble Doors on the Left Hand,
the Ceiling is painted with the Story of the Storm that Aeneas was in at Sea,
in which there are Naked Figures, both dead and alive in various Aptitudes,
great numbers of Galleys and Vessels broken and over-set, the Sea most terribly
raging, in high billows, the Heavens obscured, and in a word, all the Aptitudes
of a Storm. This was the first Story that Perino did for the Prince; and it is
said, that while he was making his Cartoon, which he did at leisure, viewing
Genoa in the mean while, and diverting himself sometimes with his Friends, a
painter of Bologna, called Girolomo da Frevisi, who worked likewise in the
Prince's Palace, used to laugh at Perino's Delays, and making of Cartoons,
saying, that without all that ado, he had the perfection of the Art at his
Pencil's end: This being told Perino, he all of a sudden clapped his Cartoon to
the Ceiling, and opened the Room, that every body might come to see it; which
all Genoa did, and among the rest, this painter, who having viewed it, and seen
the strength of Design and greatness of the Manner, was so surprised, that
without saying a word, next day, he packed up all he had, and retired to
Bologna, leaving Perino to serve the Prince by himself.

In the other Room on the Right Hand, he made also pictures in Fresco in the
Ceiling, and in Stucco-Work he Represented the Story of Jupiter's destroying
the Giants by Thunder; where there are many fine Figures Naked, and bigger than
the Life; he made four Rooms more, all the Ceilings of which are adorned with
Stucco-Work, and mingled with paintings in Fresco, expressing the finest of
Ovids Fables; and indeed, one cannot imagine any thing better invented, nor
better Colored; for Perino was a great Master of Coloring in Fresco.

The four Rooms that answer to these on the other side the Palace, are
likewise adorned and painted in the same Manner, but done by his Men upon the
Designs he gave them, where many good painters have wrought; and particularly,
one Lucio Romano, who excelled in Grottesks and Stucco-Work. In a word, the
whole Palace, to the very Closets, is entirely adorned by his hand and Designs.

Having finished this Palace, the Prince was so extremely pleased with him,
that he made him make Designs for his Hangings, in which were represented the
Loves of Dido and Aeneas, and the best part of the Stories of the Eneides of
Virgil; likewise the Ornaments for the Poops of his Galleys, his Standards, or
Flags, his Cloths of State which he adorned his Galleys withal, were all
Designed by the same Hand. And now Perino might have reckoned upon being
settled in Genoa, if a Fancy had not taken him to choose Pisa rather for the
place to spend his Old Age in, that City pleasing him better; he therefore took
a House there, and sent for his Wife from Rome; but he had not been long there,
and begun some Work for the Duomo, which he was to have painted all with new
Designs; when on a sudden, the Remembrance of some Amors he had left at Genoa,
coming into his head, he left all, and returned thither: Prince Doria
entertained him with the same good Reception he had found before, and set him
to work; as many others of the Chief Citizens of Genoa did also; but the
Capricio to which Perino, as most great painters, was now and then subject,
took him again, and having some proposals made to him of returning to Rome, the
Memory of that place under the Glorious Pontificate of Leo the Tenth, running
likewise in his head, he accepted the proposal of his Friends, and went
thither; but he had soon reason to repent of his Folly; for he was not only
neglected by the Pope and Cardinal Farneze his Nephew, for many Months, but
likewise, he had like to have lost his Arm by a Humor that fell upon it, and
which cost him many hundreds of Crowns before it was Cured.

At last, Signior Pietro Massioni, having purchased a Chapel in the Church of
the Trinity; the Ceiling of which, and the chief-Altar piece were already done
by Giulio Romano; he agreed with Perino to paint the rest of the Chapel.
Having contrived an Ornament part of Grottesks, part painted, and part in Basso
Relievo: He drew two Stories; the one of the Piscina Probatica, with good
prospective in it; and the other, of the Resurrection of Lazarus; to these he
added the Stories of our Savior's Curing the Centurion's Daughter; his driving
the Changers out of the Temple; his Transfiguration, and another Story; and
upon the Pilasters, he drew four Figures of the four Prophets; which really are
as beautiful as it is possible for Figures to be; being most admirably
proportioned, and thoroughly finished; for he did all this Work with his own
Hand. After this, he did little in Rome: but the Pope took such notice of this
Work, that he ordered him a Pension of about six or seven pound a Month, only
to look after the Palace of the Pope, and that of the Casa Farneze: He being
now much subject to a Catarrhe, or Fluxion upon his Lungs, was forced to employ
others to carry on his Designs; which has very much injured them; as appears by
what he did in CASTLE Saint ANGELO, and other places.

It was Perino del Vaga's Misfortune, to have dissipated in Women and good
Cheer, the best part of what should have maintained him in his Old Age; of
which Error being now grown sensible, he to repair it, fell into another;
which was, to make himself cheap, by undertaking any little piece of Work for a
small Sum of ready Money; nay, often doing a world of things for the Pope's
Officers, only that they might not molest him in the little payments he now and
then got from Court; and they having found out his blind side, never let him
want Employment; besides which, his Time being continually taken up by
Sculptors, Gravers, Joyners, Embroiderers, Guilders, and such like Artists; all
which he was to oversee, and he being besides Infirm, he had no other Comfort,
but as often as he could, to get to the Tavern with a good Companion, and there
drown his Sorrows in a Glass of good Wine, that being a place he had much
frequented all his Life time; which, with some Disorders of Venus, brought him
to his end, at the Age of forty seven years: He was Buried in the Rotonda at
Rome, in the Chapel of Saint Joseph; where Josepho Lincio a Physician, and his
Intimate Friend and Son in Law, caused this Epitaph to be Graved.

Perino Bonacurtio Vagae, Florentino, qui Ingenio and Art singulari egregios
cum pictores multos tum plastas facile omnes superavit. Catherina Perini,
Conjugi; Lavina Bonacurtia, Parenti; Josephus Lincius, Socero charissimo and
optimo fecere. Vixit Annos quadraginti septem, Menses tres, Dies viginti unum:
Mortuus est Caland. Novembris, Anno Christi, 1547.

The LIFE of TITIANO DA LADORE, A PAINTER.
TItian was Born at Ladore, a little Town upon the River Piave, in the Year
1480; the Name of his Family was Vecelli, of the best of the place; about ten
years old, he was sent to an Uncle he had at Venice; who seeing him much
inclined to painting, placed him with Gian Bellino, a famous painter of those
days: The painters of Lombardy and those parts, had not any Statues or Works of
the Ancients to draw by; therefore to help themselves, they used to Design
after the Life, but in a Manner so flat and stiff, that their Works had little
or no Grace; and Titian learned this Manner first, and was a great Proficient
in it. But about the Year 1507, Giorgione being come to Venice, Titian admiring
his Manner, full of Strength, left his old Master's way, and imitated this new
one with so much success, that his pictures were often taken for Giorgione's;
which caused no small Emulation between them; particularly, when Giorgione
having undertaken one Front of the Fondaco di Tedeschi, the other was given to
Titian; for there he behaved himself so admirably, that one day, some Genlemen
of Venice meeting with Giorgione, and not knowing that any but himself was
employed in that work, they gave him joy of his good success, particularly on
that side toward the Merceria, telling him, that he had outdone that which
was toward the Canal Grande: which so vexed Giorgione, that before the work
was quite finished, he hid himself for several days in his House, and from that
time forwards renounced all Friendship and Acquaintance with Titian.

Such beginnings could promise no less than an extraordinary Success in the
Art; particularly, if Titian had added that great Skill of managing Colors,
the Study of Designing after the Antique; for want of which, his Works are
often defective in Correctness of Design: but however, the beauty of his
Coloring is unimitable, no Painter having ever been so rare a Colourer of the
Beauties of Nature in all kinds.

About this time Gian Bellino, Titian's Master, being dead, and having left a
Story unfinished in the Sala del gran Concilio; which is that, where the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa is upon his Knees before Pope Alexander, who puts
his Foot upon his Neck: Titian undertook to finish it; and having changed a
great deal of his Master's Design, he drew there by the Life many Senators, and
others of his Friends then living, using in that the Liberty of a Lombard
Painter; for it was not probable those Persons there drawn, could be present at
the passage of the Story there represented. This piece was so well liked, that
the Senate for a Reward, bestowed upon him an Office called La Senseria, of
about three hundred Crowns a year: which Office they always used to bestow upon
the best Painter of their City, upon condition, that he shall make the Doge's
Picture for the price of eight Crowns, to be paid by the Doge himself: Which
Picture is to be placed afterward in the Palace of St. Mary.

About the year 1514, Alphonso, Duke of Ferrara, sent for Titian to finish
likewise a Room which had been begun, and pretty well advanced by Gian Bellino:
there remained two pieces to be done; which Titian showed all the Skill he
could in: the one was a kind of Baccanat, or Dance, of Men and Women drunk and
singing, amongst which is one naked Woman asleep, of such exquisite Beauty,
that she seems to be alive: and in this piece Titian wrote his Name: the other
contains a great many Cupids and Boys in different Aptitudes, about an Altar
that has the Statue of Venus upon it.

Upon the Door of an Armory Titian drew likewise the picture of our Savior, to
whom a Jew is showing the piece of Caesar's Coin; which Head, and the pictures
mentioned before, are reputed by all Artists the best things that ever Titian
did; and he was accordingly, most liberally rewarded by the Duke of Ferrara.

Being returned to Venice, he drew his famous piece of Saint Peter Martyr in
the Church of S. Giovanni Epolo; there you may see the Saint something bigger
than the Life, fallen upon the Ground in a Wood, and attacked by a Soldier,
who has so wounded him in the Head, that the horror of Death is painted upon
his Face; while his Companion flying, shows as much Apprehension in his; in the
Air are two Angels environed with sudden Glory, which enlightens the Landscape;
which is most admirable: and indeed, this piece is the most Celebrated of any
he ever did, as being the best understood of all his Works.

In the Year 1530, Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, being come to
Bologna, Titian by the means of Pietro Aretino, his good Friend, was sent far
to draw the Emperor; of whom he made an Admirable picture, all in Armor, and
was rewarded with a present of a thousand Crowns: and not long after, being
returned to Venice, and having made there a most excellen piece of the
Annuntiation; for which Titian demanded five hundred Crowns; they for whom it
was made, refusing to come up to his price, he, by the advice of Aretin, sent
it as a Present to the Emperor, who sent him two thousand Crowns in Return.

Not long after, the same Emperor coming from Hungary, met Pope Clement the
Seventh at Bologna, and there he again sent for Titian, who again made his
picture, and that of Cardinal Hyppolito of Medicis: both which are preserved
among the Duke of Florence his Rarities. He drew likewise at the same time,
Alphonso Davalo's, Marquess Del Guasto, and his Friend Pietro Aretino: and here
he was brought to the presence of Frederick Gonzaga, Duke of Mantoua, whose
picture, and his Brother the Cardinal's he likewise made; the Duke carried him
to Mantoua; where he made the Heads of the Twelve Caesar's; under every one of
which Giulio Romano made afterward a Story.

In the Year 1546, he was invited to Rome by Cardinal Farnese; whose picture
and the Pope's, with that of Duke Octavio of Parma, he drew at length; and they
are admirable pieces. While he was at Rome, being one day visited by Michaeel
Angelo and Vassari, he showed them a Danae, a most dilicate Naked Figure for
Coloring and Tenderness, but not perfectly well Designed; which made Michael
Angelo say afterward, that if Titian had had his Beginning in the School of
Rome, he would have proved the greatest Painter of his Age; having a great
Genius, and much Spirit and Vivacity, but he wanted Correctness. He was highly
rewarded by the Pope for his pains, and returned well satisfied to Venice; but
something astonished at the Works he had seen of the Roman and Florentine
Painters.

He was now called upon once more to draw the Emperor, who was grown Old; and
he did it admirably, insomuch that the Emperor Knighted him, and assigned him
a Pension of two hundred Crowns a Year upon the Chamber of Naples. He made some
alteration in his Manner about this time, it being very different from what he
did when he was Young; for his first pictures are done with most incredible
diligence, so as they will bear being looked upon near, and yet show well at a
distance too; but the Works he did about this time, are so full of Strokes and
Spots, after a certain bold Manner, that they seem nothing near, but look very
well at a distance. Which Manner of his several Painters endeavoring to
imitate, have made very gross, course pieces. This way, though it seems easy,
is the most laborious of all; but it is made to hide the pains of the Artist.

To enumerate here all his Works, were endless; for there was hardly a person
of any Eminence in Italy, whose picture he did not do: he also made many pieces
for the King of Spain, Philip the Second: the chief of which is a Cena Domini
with the twelve Apostles, being a great piece of seven yards long, and most
extraordinary Beauty.

He worked with Vigor and Spirit till he was about threescore and six years
Old: but it is to be wished that he had given over then; for what he did
afterward was far short of those done before. He was of a most admirable
Constitution, having never been sick in all his Life time, and he never knew
any Disgraces of Fortune, but was always healthy, pleasant, and happy: his
House was the resort of all the Ingenious, and of the people of the best
Quality, he himself being extremely well Bred, and Courteous. His pictures were
paid at what Rates he pleased; so that he lived Easy and Rich: he has adorned
all Italy, and many other parts of Europe with his Works, which are
innumerable; and which was more singular, never had any Competitor in Venice,
either to give him Jealousy or Disturbance; and those few that pretended to
it, he easily overcame, having all the Nobility and Wits on his side; to some
of whom he taught his Art; as particularly, to a very fine Gentleman called
Gian Maria Verde Zotti, who had learned to do Landskips admirably under him;
and he has two of the best pieces of Titian's doing, to wit, an Apollo and a
Danae.

Though a great many did work under Titian, yet there were but few that
attained to any great Perfection: he that best imitated his Manner, was one
Paris Bondone, whom Titian was most afraid of, and turned him out of Doors when
he was but eighteen years Old, seeing how likely he was to Supplant him: He
nevertheless continued in Venice, and imitated, not ot only Titian's, but
Giorgione's way perfectly. The best piece of his doing, is a Story in the
School of Saint Mary, at St. Gian y Polos: it is, when a Fisherman presents the
Signoria of Venice with Saint Mary's Ring; there are very fine Buildings in
Prospective, round about which sits the whole Senate, with the Doge; and among
the Senators, there are a great many of them done by the Life, of extraordinary
Beauty: the piece is in Fresco, and got Paris Bondone great Reputation.

The LIFE of DONATO, A Florentine Sculptor.
DOnato, who was likewise called Donatello, and subscribed himself so in some
of his Works, was Born at Florence, in the Year 1303, and applying himself to
the Art of Designing, proved, not only a most excellent Sculptor and Statuary,
but likewise was very intelligent in Perspective, Architecture, and all manner
of Stucco-Work: His Works have so much Design, Truth, and Grace in them, that
they seem with reason, to be liker the best things of the Greeks and Romans,
than of any others: Which without difficuly, gives him the first Rank among the
Sculptors; he was the first that understood how to put Story in Use in Basso
Relievos; in which he showed so much Ease and Mastery, that he may be said to
have had the true understanding of that part of Sculpture. So that not only in
his Life time, but even in our Age, none have come near him in that kind.

Donato was brought up from a Child in the House of Ruberto Martelli, and for
the sweetness of his Temper, and the excellency of his Genius, was not only
always beloved by him, but also, by all that Noble Family.

He wrought many things while he was Young; but that which first made him
known, was the Annuntiation of the Angel to the Virgin Mary, all of Gray
Stone; which is upon the Altar in the Chapel of the Cavalcanti in Sancta
Croce in Florence. This he adorned with a Border of Grottesk-Work, adding to
it six boys, who hold Festoons of Flovvers, and seem to hang together out of
fear of falling from so high a place; but particularly, he shovved great Art in
the Figure of the Virgin, who something frighted with the sudden apparition
of the Angel, turns herself toward him with a fearful Modesty, and in her
Countenance is all that Humility and Gratitude which so great a Favor must
needs fill her with. The Drapery both of our Lady and the Angel, is made in
Masterly Foldings; in which Donato was already aiming at the great Art of the
Ancients, whose Foldings are so Skilful, that though they are made to hide the
Naked, yet they seem to discover it.

In the same Church; near the Story painted by Taddeo Gaddi, he made a Crucifix
of Wood, in which having taken an infinite deal of pains, and being pleased
with it as a rare thing, he shovved it to Philippo Bruneleschi, an Architect,
his Intimate Friend, desiring his Opinion of it; Philippo, whose Expectation
had been raised by the words of Donato, smiled a little at the sight of it,
finding it much below the Excellency Donato had given it; which being observed
by Donato, he begged of him, that he would, according to the Friendship that
was between them, tell him truly his Opinion of it: to which Philip, who was
very frank in his Nature, answered, that his Opinion was, that he had put upon
the Cross the Body of some Peasant, and not one like our Saviors, who it is
probable, was the most perfect, and finest shaped and proportioned of any that
ever was Born. Donato seeing himself smartly touched instead of Commendations,
which he expected, could not forbear replying, that it was not so easy to make
a Crucifix as to Judge of one; and that if Philippo had tried, he would then
think his Christ a Christ, and not a Peasant; therefore, said he, take a piece
of Wood, Philip, and try. Philip, without replying, let the Discourse fall;
and being come home, betook himself secretly to work a Crucifix, and in some
Months finished it, having strove to surpass Donato, that he might justify the
Judgment he had made of his. This done, one Morning he invited Donato to Dine
with him, who accepted the Invitation; and as they were going together, being
come to the old Marketplace, Philip bought some little things for Dinner, and
giving them to Donato, desired him to go before, and he would follow as soon as
had dispatched a little Business, which would be presently done: Donato did so,
and being come into the House, the first thing he saw in a low Room, was a
Crucifix placed in a very good Light; having considered it a while, he found it
so well finished, and perfect in all kinds, that being seized with
Astonishment, he opened his hand, and let fall the Apron where were the Eggs
and Fruit, continuing still his Admiration without minding them: upon which
Philip coming in, said smiling, What do you mean, Donato! What shall we have
for Dinner to day, now you have let it all fall upon the Ground? I for my part,
said Donato, have had my share already, but no more words; I must own that it
is thy Gift to make a Christ, mine to make a Peasant.

Donato made likewise in Saint John's Church in the same City, the Sepulture of
Pope John Coscia, who was Deposed from the Popedom by the Council at Constance:
Cosimo of Medicis, in whose House this Pope lived and died, caused Donato to
make this Tomb. He made the Figure of the dead Pope in Bronze, and the Statues
of Hope and Charity in Marble; and Michelozzo his Scholar made that of Faith.
Over against this Work in the same Church, is a Mary Magdalen of Wood, so
admirably well done, as being consumed with her Penance and Hardship, that she
appears nothing but Skin and Bone; and is a Masterpiece of Donato's. He worked
as much with his Brain as with his Hands; for he made his Figures so to the
Place and Light where they were to stand, that out of it they did not seem half
to Beautiful; whereas on the contrary, we see many other Artists, who make
things very fine in their Working-Rooms, which being removed from thence,
appear worse a great deal.

He made for the COMPANY of WEAVERS the Statue of Saint Mark the Evangelist,
and it was at first undertaken by him and Bruneleschi together; but at last, by
the consent of Bruneleschi, he finished it alone; this Figure was wrought with
so much Judgment, that being upon the Ground, and not placed where it was to
stand, it had like to have been refused by the Masters of the Company, for want
of Skill to understand its true Beauty: but Donato persuaded them at last, to
let him set it up, telling them, that he would take some more pains with it
when it was up, and did not doubt but to please them; accordingly, he made a
Scaffold, and covered the Figure for a Fortnight, as if he had been at work
about it; at the end of which time he opened it, and filled every body with
admiration at the Excellency of it.

He made likewise in the Front of Sancta Maria del Fiore, four Figures of about
five Palms high: two of which, made after the Life, are in the middle; and one
is Francesco Soderini, who was then a Young Man; and the other, Giovanni di
Barduccio Cherichini, Nicknamed Il Zuccone: and it being as fine a thing as any
Donato ever made, he was likewise so much pleased with it, that when he had a
mind to be believed in any thing he said, he would, instead of affirming it by
an Oath, say only, By the Love I bear to my Zuccone: and while he was working
of it, being often pleased with his success in that Statue, he would stand and
look upon it, and then say these words in Italian, Favella or su Favella, O ti
venga il caca sangue: Which is in English, Speak, a Plague take thee, speak.

For the Lords of the City of Florence, he made in Cast-Mettal, the Story of
Judith cutting off Holofernes's Head: and in the Looks of Judith it was easy
to see the greatness of her Mind, and the Assistance from above; as likewise in
the Air of Holofernes, oppressed with Wine, Sleep, and Death, the spreading of
a Faintness all over upon the decay of his Spirits, which made his Members look
weak and languish'd: The Basis likewise is a Balusted of Granite-Stone, of a
plain Order, but very graceful. Donato was so pleased with this piece, that he
wrote his Name under it in these words, Donatelli Opus: Which he had not done
yet to any other piece of his.

He made many things for the Family of Medicis: Cosimo of Medicis, who was then
the Head of that Family, employing him continually. It Is reported, that by the
Recommendation of Cosimo, he made a very fine head of Bronze for a
Genouese-Merchant, and made it very thin, and polished it, because it was to be
carried a good way: when it was finished, Donato and the Merchant not agreeing
about the Price, the thing was referred to Cosimo, who the better to view the
Head, placed it in his Court upon a Marble Balustead that looked down into the
Street; and desiring to make up the difference between them, he found the
Genouese far from Reason on his side; and arguing, that what he offered
already, would amount to above half a Florin a day for the time that Donato had
been about it; which he thought was enough for a man of his Sort. Donato at
this was transported with Anger, and turning to the Merchant, told him, that in
a minute he could spoil the work of a whole year; and thereupon struck the Head
so, as it fell over into the Street, and broke in twenty pieces. The Merchant
then repenting of his foolish Parcimony, offered him twice as much to make
another: but Donato obstinately refused it, telling him that Statues were not
to be bought by the Days-work, nor by the Pound, as other Merchandise. And
though Cosimo himself joined his Entreaties to the Merchant's, yet he could not
prevail with him to make another Head.

In the Family of the Martelli there are many Stories of Marble and Bronze of
his doing; but particularly, a Saint John of Marble, of three Palms high, and
perfectly finished by him: it was reputed by them so rare a piece, that it was
made a Fidei Commissum: so as it can never be Sold or Mortgaged by any of the
Family: And this they did to perpetuate the Memory of the mutual Kindness that
was between Donato and that Family, under whose Roof he had been Bred, and
learned his Profession.

Much about this time, the City of Venice having heard of the Fame of Donato,
sent for him to make something in the Honor of Guatema Lata, a Citizen of
Padoua: and accordingly, he made the Horse and the Figure upon it which is in
the place of Saint Antonio; where he equally Succeeded in expressing the
Courage and Boldness of the Rider, with the Fierceness and Mettle of the Horse.
And though the Figure be of Cast-Mettal, and large, yet in Motion, Design, Art,
Proportion, and Diligence, he appears equal to any of the Ancient Artificers,
and far surpassing all those of his Time, who were astonished at the greatness
of his Genius: the City of Padoua used all their Endeavors to make him their
Citizen, and oblige him to settle amongst them; which to obtain, they agreed
with him to make the Story of the Life of Saint Anthony, of Basso Relievo, upon
the Border of the great Altar: which he performed with such variety of
Composition, and such an abundance of Figures and Perspectives, that the
Masters of the ART do this day admire them.

While he was at Padoua, a Florentine Priest, who was Chaplain to a Nunnery,
desired him to make a Saint Sebastian of Wood for their Church; and at the same
time brought him an old, ill favored, misshapen thing, desiring him to make it
like that: which he endeavoring to do, to humor them, could not help
nevertheless, the showing some Mastery in it, though it were as like the old
one as possible. Many other Works he did at Padoua, where he was continually
admired and applauded; which made him resolve to return to Florence, saying,
That if he should stay any longer in a place where he heard nothing but high
Commendations of himself, he should forget all that he had ever learned;
therefore he would go home, that he might hear himself blamed sometimes; that
being the greatest Spur an Artist could have to Improvement.

Being returned to Florence, he wrought an Infinity of excellent things in all
kinds, both in Marble, Wood, Stone, and Bronze: the chief of which are in the
House of Medicis, and those of other of the Nobility. It may truly be said of
him, that he was the Father of Sculpture, being the first that brought the
Works of the Ancients in Repute, and sought them out where they lay neglected,
taking the pains to mend them and set them in order, as he did with his own
hand all.

In a word, Donato was so excellent in all the parts of a great Sculptor, that
he deserves the highest Commendations; and the rather, because in his time
there were very few Antiquities discovered. He was, as to his own Disposition,
the most Obliging and Generous that could be, not valuing Money in the least;
for he used to put that which he received into a little Basket, which hung
fixed to the Ceiling by a Pully; and there any of his Friends and Scholars
used to take what they wanted, without so much as acquainting him with it:
therefore when he grew Old, and not able to work, he was fain to accept of the
Generosity of Cosimo of Medicis, and other Friends. It Is said, that Cosimo
dying, recommended him to his Son Piero; who being very careful to execute his
Father's Will, bestowed a little Country Farm upon him, which he might very
well live out of: and Donato was overjoyed at it, thinking that now he was
provided for, and needed not to fear Starving: Starving; but for all that, he
did not keep it above a Year before he gave it back again to Piero by a public
Contract, saying, he would not loose his Quiet; which he must do if he kept it;
for every two or three days, the Farmer was at him for some Damage or
Reparations; sometimes the Wind had untiled the House, sometimes his Cattle was
pounded or died: To all which Donato not being used, resolved to be rid of him
and the Land together. Piero of Medicis laughed heartily at his Complaints, and
taking the Land again, assigned him a Rentcharge of the same value upon his
Bank at Florence; which was paid him every Week to his great Content: and so he
made an end quietly of his Old Age, in the eighty third year of his Life, and
in the Year 1466.

He was Buried in San Lorenzo, next to the Body of Cosimo di Medicis, being
very honorably Interred, and Accompanied to his Grave by all the Artists, and
the best part of the People of the City.

One thing I must not forget to tell of him in his last Sickness; which was,
that some of his Relations came about him, to persuade him to leave them a
little Country House and Land, of a very small Value, which he had near Prato,
telling him, he ought in that to gratify them, as being next a Kin to him:
Donato hearing them out, told them, that he was sorry he could not oblige them
in their Request, being resolved to bestow it upon the poor Countryman who
had always looked to it, and endured pains enough about it: Thinking that a
more reasonable Disposition, than to give it them for a Visit which they now
made him when he was a dying, to no other end than to get what they could out
of him.

As for all the things belonging to his Art, he distributed them among his
Scholars; the famousest of which were, Bertoldo, a Florentine Sculptor, Il
Rosellino Desideio, and Vellano di Padoua. And indeed, since his Death, who
ever has aimed at excelling in Relievo, must have studied his Works; the number
of which is so great, that no Artist ever wrought so much as he did; which was
a great happiness for Sculpture; the great variety of his undertakings being so
many Lessons of all kinds in that Profession; in which he showed both
Invention, Design, Practice, Judgment, Strength, Sweetness; and in a word, all
the parts of a Divine and Wonderful Artist.

FINIS.

