An Alarm TO THE OFFICERS and SOLDIERS OF THE ARMIES OF England, Scotland,
and Ireland.
Gentlemen, and Fellow Soldiers,
IT is an old and true saying, That Standers by do often see more than the
Gamester: And having been out of play for some time, I have perhaps discovered
more than many of your selves who do not dive in secrets of State, but are
content only to take care how you may receive the pay. I have been engaged in
one and the same Cause and Quarrel with you against the late King and his Sons,
during which time I observ^d very many miraculous providence of God in several
conflicts and bloody Battles, honored with eminent Victories, God owning an
Army which consisted of persons of low estate, condition, knowledge, or
education either in Politic or Military art; when on the other side, I saw
very numerous and potent Armies of the late King and his Sons (who consisted of
most of the Noble and Gentry of the three Nations, very expert both in
knowledge and education of that nature) to be by those despicable ones
absolutely vanquished, and thereupon the late King brought to Justice, and
hitherto all the endeavors of his Sons blasted and dis-appointed. If you
please to look back, and remember all those signal Victories and deliverances,
and what thereupon you promised and engaged to do for these poor afflicted
Nations, which in few words and substance was, that before you would suffer
your selves to be dis-banded or divided, you would see the Government of these
Nations established upon the just and secure fundamentals and constitutions of
freedom and safety to the people, in relation as they were Men and Christians,
and that in the ways of a Commonwealth and Free State Government, without a
King, single person, or House of Lords.

I shall not at this time mind how far you have gone astray from that
Engagement, seeing that most of you have repented and returned to your duties:
But I shall only by sounding this Alarm, endeavor to render you sensible of
the eminent danger which hangs over your heads, and of your best friends of the
three Nations: And in the first place tell you what the old and new enemies the
Cavaliers do now say of your proceeding and late actions. Secondly, what many
honest and sober people of the Presbyterian judgment think. Thirdly, What
danger your best friends scornfully called Commonwealth-men, and Fanatiques, do
foresee concerning the present transactions in the three Nations. And lastly,
my own observations and seasonable advice.

First, The Cavaliers do confidently affirm that your Generals late actions do
sufficiently demonstrate that the bottom of his intention tends only to bring
Charles Stuart to be King of these Nations, grounding the same upon several
reasons: As first (say they) did he not intend the same, he would never (after
so many Declarations and Protestations to be true to the Parliament which in
scorn they call the Rump) have the 11. of February last, sent them such an
imposing Letter, and thereupon (without any order from them) marched with their
Army to London, then esteemed and made by him (in destroying their Gates, etc.)
their implacable enemies, and at night suffered so many bone-fires and ringing
of Bells, and publicly drinking healths to the King and a free Parliament,
ro^^^ng and burning of Rumps, hearing and seeing his Masters in open street
declared Murderers and Rebels, and that in a most vile and dissolute manner,
and all this in the presence of the Army; a thing (say they) not to be
paralleld in any History of ages past, and besides, without Orders of his
Masters, quartered himself an Army amongst their Enemies till the 21 of the
said Month, during which time, he feasted daily at most of the Kings friends
and admitted them to him with great respects and affection, without returning
to White Hall, although several times invited thereunto by his Masters.

Secondly, (say they) that although by his Letters and verbal promises he had
engaged to them that in case they would effect what was contained in the said
Letter, he would be satisfied, and still be their servants (notwithstanding
which he was so far from performing the same, that although they had within the
the time by him limited fulfilled in all things what in that Letter was imposed
upon them, yet not regarding neither the said Letter, nor verbal promise, and
without acquainting (in the least) any of his Masters, who some of them had
ventured their all to secure him from being ruined by Lrmberts Army) your said
General (say they further) caused his Army upon the 21. of the said Month, to
march back to Westminster, and there admits the secluded Members to sit in the
Parliament House, most of whom he absolutely knew to be for the restoration of
Charles Stuart (who they call King, and again at night suffer Bone-fires and
ringing of Bells, and his said Masters, and others of their friends to be as
much, or more abused, and vilified, than they were upon the 11. at night of the
said Month; whereupon the Cavaliers do conclude (as being thereof assured) that
your said General in like manner would surprise them, and then bring in the
King upon a sudden, and then give the same reason for his so doing, as he did
after he had admitted the secluded Members, to wit, the reason of not
discovering the same, was because he knew they hated them, and would have
endeavored to hinder their admission in the House.

Thirdly, To demonstrate further (say they) that the said General will bring
their King, let any rational man consider, whether he can have any other
design, seeing he has suffered the said secluded Members to release Sir George
Booth and his party, and to discharge their Sequestrations, and to sit and vote
with them in Parliament: And besides, although he knows how several of the
said secluded Members have daily moved in the House against the Government of a
Free State, and for King, Lords, and Commons, and how they have in order
thereunto, voted the Covenant to be de novo printed, read, and set up in every
Church of the Nation, whereby they evidently acknowledge the late Kings
Posterity, yet he suffered the same as likewise to be maintained in the House
that none but Jesuits and Priests are for Free State Government. And to
evidence further, that the General is resolved upon that point, Observe (say
the Cavalier) who he causes to be imprisoned and released, put out, and put in
the Army; to wit, Commonwealth men imprisoned, and turned out of the Army and
Garrisons in the three Nations, and Royalists taken in Arms at Worcester fight
released, and several others of that stamp entrusted with eminent places in
Army and Garrisons in the three Nations.

And lastly, His countenancing the raising of the Militia of City and Country,
entrusting the management thereof to most of the Kings friends, the said
Militia being raised and formed to no other end than murder, to destroy the
Army, in whom (the Cavaliers say) the General cannot well confide in, as to
bring his designs to perfect maturity. And that the same was designed in
Scotland long since. Observe how peaceable they are there, and how the Irish
Army, have proceeded answerable to himself: And besides, say some of them
(being Officers of the late Kings Army) who had been with him since his coming
to London, and offered their service to him, which they said, he accepted, and
told them he would before it were long be in a capacity to give them
employment; much more of that nature, which for brevity sake I omit, only this
one thing more, which very much increases their hopes, and that is, say they,
what signifies the peaceable return of the Kings friends from their Exile, as
Alderman Bonch and many others, who had been so long fugitives, if the return
of the King was not likewise intended? And further what does signify that
proviso in that Act of dissolution concerning the Lords being a part of the
Parliament of England if there must be a Commonwealth?

As for the sober Presbyterians, they do of late begin to suspect the said
General, whom (say they) gives so much advantage to Charles Stuart, and to his
old and new rigid Cavaliers, who for certain truth are at this juncture of time
at work in arming themselves in all parts of the three Nations, and will upon a
sudden come like a flood upon you, and the rest of the engaged party in the
Nations, and so conquer all by force of Arms; and then what must or can be
expected to follow, but only absolute ruin, for undoubtedly (say they)
Charles Stuart will bring with him Archbishops, Bishops, and the rest of that
Hierarchy, and we shall then be accounted no other by them but Sectarians and
Phanatiques, and be in the same predicament, or worse for service, than those
who are so called; and say they, must not expect to be better used than they.
And besides, his Mother the Queen will come, which infallibly will bring with
her Jesuits, Priests, and Monks of all sorts, whereby Popery will (cum
privilegio) be again readmitted in the Nation; so that they consider, that if
the General and your selves do not speedily prevent the same, that the Cause so
much contended for, together with the interest of good people will sink, and be
utterly lost, and so your Harvest will end in chafe, and you, and them be
carried back through a red Sea of blood in the land of Bondage and misery,
there to serve and bear the heavy yoke of one who will not forget that which
has as well been acted against his late Father the King, as against himself;
it being the common talk of the Cavaliers that the Presbyterians brought his
Father to the Block, and the Independents cut off his Head.

As to your best friends which have bled with you, and prayed for you, and who
have been constant assertors of the cause and interest of the good people of
these Nations against Kingship, single persons, and house of Lords, they all of
one voice conclude, that (under God) there is no other Bulwork of defense
against the return of Monarchy but the Army, which now they see to be
absolutely designed for destruction by disbanding and reducing, or else what
means the new Militia now settled and entrusted in the hands of persons almost
all enemies to a Free State Government, several of the secluded Members both in
the House, and out of the House speaking it openly, as likewise several of the
Commissioners of City and Country which have been heard in their Cabals affirm,
that as soon as their Militiaes are settled, they will quickly break the Rogues,
meaning you, to whom they can scarce afford so good language; and moreover they
hope that the Supreme Authority being once devolved in the Council of State as
now it is, that the said Council will by subtle means and practices with the
General gain him to condescend to the disbanding most of you, to the end that
the intended new Parliament may be able (with more facility) to bring the
design now in hand to perfection, which in plain English is to bring Charles
Stuart to be King: And that which your said friends do thereupon apprehend to
follow in order to yours and theirs destruction is, First, if you can be
persuaded by your enemies to admit Charles to be King upon any conditions, then
rest assured that he will not want an Army, and specially such an one as
brought his Father to the Block, and kept him in Exile so many years; therefore
the first work will be to disband you, and so leave you to the mercy and
cruelty of those that by force you have subdued, who in revenge will (without
any doubt) take opportunity afterward to hang many of you, and banish others
as Rebels and Traitors, or at least cast you in noisome Dungeon, but that only
will not satisfy their cruelty, but be sure they will have all your estates
and destroy your Wives and Children, and persecute you, and, your friend unto
death, you may therefore (say they) with ease discern whether it be your
interest or security to bring the Nation back under the old bondage of Kings,
or else to maintain and defend a Commonwealths Government, the difference is
plain, the one will destroy you and your friends, and the other will protect
you both, and you will be sure under a Commonwealth not to want as long as any
of you shall live, nor your Wives and Children: And you will be sure also not
to become your enemies slaves.

Secondly, If you should be so fooled as to be persuaded to admit of the said
Charles to return upon any terms, then you will be reputed the most perfidious
Army that breaths, in breaking the engagements and promises you have made to
the contrary, and so render all the blood spilt, and treasure exhausted of no
effect; and thereupon give cause to the children unborn to curse such a
generation of men as then you would be reputed. But says your friends, If you
do withstand it, and leave the success to God, then you will have done your
parts as English men and Christians, and will in after Ages be esteemed
faithful Patriots, and Assertors of your Country Liberties, and consequently
of yourselves and posterities. And say they, when the late King had near a
hundred thousand men in Field and Garrison, you were not afraid, and whenever
you encountered with any part thereof, God strengthened your hearts and hands,
and gave you several Victories to the absolute overthrowing of them all in the
three Nations; therefore they wish you courage and blessing from on High, and
do heartily pray that God may go along with you in disappointing your enemies,
who as yet make no use of weapons, save of their venomous and lying tongues.

Thirdly, If you should be so deluded, as to admit the said Charles Stuart to
be King, then your friends desire you further to consider that besides the
foresaid ruin upon yourselves and them, what further ruin will attend the
three Nations by such admission: First, his late Fathers numerous debts which
he contracted in the War which he so violently prosecuted against the
Parliament from the year 1641. till his death, together with all the Arrears of
his Armies, and salaries of his Court-officers, and meneal servants, which
without doubt will amount to as much, or more, as the Parliament expended in
their defense in that War, must be paid and satisfied.

Secondly, The said Charles Stuarts own debts contracted here and in Scotland,
France and Flanders during the space of about seventeen years, with likewise
the salaries of his Court-officers, and meneal servants, together with the
Arrears of his Armies which he had in Scotland, and afterward at Worcester,
all which will be expected to be paid, and which without doubt will far exceed
the debts of his Father.

Thirdly, The Queen his Mother with the salaries of her Officers and servants,
besides her great Dowry and Arrears thereof must likewise be paid and satisfied.

Fourthly, All the debt of his Brother and Sister.

Fifthly, His Court, and theirs, with all dependences must be set up anew here,
furnished and maintained with all sorts of rich Furniture and Jewels, gold and
silver plate of all sorts, and all other utensils as glorious as ever his
Father.

Sixthly, Those Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and other of his, and
Fathers party, whose estates real and personal have been sold, and disposed by
Authority of Parliament, either must be restored, or satisfaction given them
for the same, but specially for the personal estate which can never be
returned. All which cost and charges, if duly considered, together with all
manner of debts owing by the said Family, and carefully calculated, must amount
to many Millions, so that if the Taxes, and other Impost now yearly paid in the
three Nations should be doubled for twenty years to come together, would not be
sufficient to satisfy, and answer the same.

Lastly, Whereas the Cavaliers do say, That if the Lands of the late King,
Queen, etc. and of their party should be restored, that it would answer a great
part of the said Court expenses, and satisfy those persons to which it is
answered, admitting the same could be effected, yet none of those debts could
thereby be satisfied, for it cannot be expected a possibility ever to settle
these three Nations upon any condition of a lasting peace, if there be any
ravilling and questioning the titles of those Lands sold and disposed by
Parliament, considering in what manner the Proprieties have been altered since
those sails or disposals either by buildings, enclosures and joynings their
Lands to them by Mortgages, Intails, and other settlements upon Marriages, and
otherwise, that the present occupier of most part thereof were never engaged in
the War having paid for the same fourteen, fifteen, and sixteen years purchase
in ready money, which if taken away, or restored, will kindle a more violent
fire of War in the three Nations, than the first.

And before I give you my advice, and so conclude, Give me leave to tell you my
particular observations, as one who daily is conversant with persons of diverse
judgments.

First, I have certain knowledge (and your selves, if not prevented will find
it too true) that the now Militia of London, do intend to bring in Charles
Stuart, one before they do it, as I have diverse times, and very lately heard
some of them boast, that they will serve you (who are quartered among them) as
the Danes were of old; that is, in the night in your beds, cut your throats;
and in immitation of that act, they make no question but the Country will
execute the like upon your fellows quartered with them: And truly I have heard
several of the Commissioners of the Country say as much.

Secondly, What means the Officers of the Militia when upon the Guard, to go
to Tavern and there drink the Kings health, etc.

Thirdly, If you do not stop your ears, you may as well as my self, understand
and take notice of the daily threatening of the Enemy when their King is come
what they will do to your selves and friends, but specially to those faithful
Patriots, which under God, have been a strong Bulwark against their raged fury,
their villainies committed and acted before your faces upon the 11. and 21. of
February at night in London, and afterward in most places of the Nation, may
serve to convince you that their sentences against you and them are already
pronounced, and want nothing but execution: If you do not withstand them
speedily, your and their estates are already disposed of, there wants but the
Kings coming to put them in actual possession. Have not you seen already a
Catalogue of the names of several faithful Patriots printed and published, and
cried upon the Exchange, and about the streets, in order to prepare the Rabble
to massacre them; there is no doubt to be made, but many of your selves and
other friends to the public Cause, are designed for a Sacrifice at their Kings
coming, some of you may have fair promises made of being pardoned and rewarded:
If you will sell, or rather betray the Cause and Liberties of your Country by
admitting him; but that you may not be decoyed or trappanned to trust your
Enemy upon any promise of that nature, let me relate a short, and very true
History of a Governor, who had been entrusted with the command of a strong
Frontier Garrison, and the Enemy who very much aimed at it, as being of great
advantage of entrance into the Country, caused some overture to be made to the
said Governor for the betraying the same into their hands; whereupon
conditions were agreed, by which the said Governor was not only to have a
great sum of money as a reward, but likewise was promised to be continued in
his Command, and otherwise nobly rewarded: the time being appointed for him to
deliver the said Garrison, the Enemy came, and according to agreement, the said
Governor opened the Gates, and gave entrance and possession to the Enemy, who
being possessed, in lieu of the reward promised, caused forthwith a Gallows to
be erected upon one of the Rampires, where the said Governor was brought, and
told by the chief of the Enemy, that he loved Treason, but hated the Traitor;
saying further, If the said Governor could not be faithful to his own Masters
for whom he had fought, how could he expect he should be to him against whom he
had so often ventured his life in several battles? And so caused him to be
hanged.

I shall leave the application to your selves, which undoubtedly will be your
case and reward, if you betray your trust and Country.

Now for conclusion, to save your selves and friends in the three Nations from
ruin take this short Advice.

First, Let all your Regiments, Troops and Companies have Rendezvouzes; and if
you do not camp in the Field, quarter close together, and not so far asunder as
now you do; for you know that a bundle of Arrows divided asunder are easier
broken than when bound together.

Secondly, In immitation of former time, when you and the cause of the Nation
was in as great danger as at present. And when many of your Officers had a hand
in combining yours, and the Nations destruction, and that the same Game was
then a playing which now is, you may remember what you then did at Newmarket
and Tripoly-Heath Rendezvouze, you were not afraid of the Threats or frowns of
any, but like brave resolute Englishmen, made there choice of some of your
faithful Officers and Soldiers to be your Agitators, and to keep
correspondency one with another, and rejected such as would then have betrayed
you; do so now, and speedily, more need now than ever.

Thirdly, When your Agitators are so nominated and appointed, let them consider
what is fit to be done, and presented to your superior Officers for their
concurrence, which I conceive must be to this, or the like effect: That is to
say, to frame an Engagement whereby you will engage one to another not to suffer
your selves to be disbanded, or divided, before such time as the Government of
the three Nations may be established upon so firm fundamentals of freedom and
safety, as thereby the Properties and Liberties of the people thereof, both as
men and Christians may be asserted and secured by their duly qualified
successive Representatives in Parliament assembled against and without a King,
single person, or House of Lords, and against all other the Enemies of the
Commonwealth, and in particular against the return of any of the Family, or
posterity of the late King James, or King Charles.

Now for encouragement to you in that blessed work, be assured you will have
Gods blessing, and for your aid and assistance, all the faithful of the three
Nations; and although your Enemies by their tongues seem very numerous and
bold, yet fear them not, for barking Curs never bites; nor indeed are they yet
in a capacity to hurt you, as soon as they understand, or hear any stirring
among you, their hearts faint, they are better at hunting and hawking, drinking
healths and damnations, cursing and whoring, than they are at fighting; you
have hitherto found them so, they are rather grown worse and more cowardly than
ever. It is seldom observed that an Enemy will ever stand before those that
have so often beaten and conquered them when they were many thousands in Field
and Garrisons, you did not fear them; therefore be confident Gods Omnipotency
is the same now and for ever, as at that time of calamity. It was, and you have
the self-same Cause, and I hope the same hearts and valor; and besides in the
eye of men far greater advantages by having all the Land and Sea Forces,
Garrisons, and Ammunitions of War of all sorts, which your Enemies have not,
all their noise and hopes will soon vanish. If you will no longer dally with
them, therefore stand to your Arms and be doing, or else you will never be able
to hinder and escape the Roaps that are now a Twisting, nor the Gallows that
are setting up for the Executions of you and your friends. Remember the
Proverb, Men Armed, are seldom harmed.

FINIS.

