THE AGREEMENT OF THE MAJOR, ALDERMEN, and Inhabitants of the Town of Tenby.
WE the Major, Aldermen, and inhabitants of the Town of Tenby, do hereby
humbly Declare, that we will be always obedient to the Kings Majesty's Royal
Commands, and will serve him with our Lives and Fortunes, and assist Him
against all Rebels and Rebellions whatsoever, and will submit to His Majesty's
authority now placed in the Right Honorable Richard Earl of Carbery, Lord
Lieutenant General of the Counties of Pembrock, Carmarthen, and Cardigan, the
Town and County of Haverfordwest, and the Towns of Pembrocke and Tenby, And
withal will heartily Contribute to His Majesty's service to the best of our
abilities; And we do farther declare and engage our selves upon the Faith of
Loyal Subjects, that we will not receive into our Towns any Garrison, Force,
or Person whatsoever sent or to be sent thither from any who now are or
hereafter shall be in Rebellion against His Majesty, under the name of the
forces of King and Parliament, but will dutifully receive and embrace all such
armed Forces and Garrisons as our said Lord Lieutenant General shall thither
send or Command for the safe guarding of the said Town for the use and service
of His sacred Majesty. For assurance whereof we have hereunto fixed our Common
Seal, and subscribed our names this thirtieth day of August. 1643.

Thomas Wyatt Major. David Hammond. Fran. Long. Rice Prickard. John Rogers.
Robert Brown. Richard Jewel. Walter Sherburne. Divid Palmer. Thomas Barret.
Rice Barrowe. Richard Wyatt. Griffeth Gibbon. John Barrow. John Sounder. Henry
Gibbs. Lewis Bishop. David Stowell. Thomas Stephens. William Record. John
Stone. John Poyer. Mich. Sutton. John Henton. Silvanus Grifsith. John Hammond.
Richard Williams. Nicholas Horsam. John Thomas. Phillip Davis. Rice Gitto.
Bartho. King.
Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1643.


